FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10279
25 January 1982

Translation

PHYSICAL METHODS FOR INVESTIGATING ICE AND SNOW

Ed. by

V.V. Bogorodskiy an'd V.A. Spitsyn

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreig--language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10279
25 January 1982

PHYSICAL METHODS FOR INVESTIGATING ICE AND SNOW

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDBNA LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTARKTICHESKIY NAUCHNO-
ISSLEDOVATEL'SKIY INSTITU'I‘. FIZICHESKIYE MBTODY ISSLEDOVANIYA L'DA I
SNEGA in Russian NO 326, 1975 pp 2-23, 51-54, 74-79, 90-93, 104-120,
143-146

[Annotation, table of contents and selected articles from collection
"Physical Methods for Investigating Ice and Snow", edited by

v.v. Bogorodskiy, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, and
V.A. Spitsyn, candidate of physical and mathematical sciences,
Gidrometeoizdat]

CONTENTS

Annotation.................................................................... 1
Table of Contents............................................................. 1

meace....................................................................... 4

Radiophyaical Methods for Investigating Ice and Snow
(v. v. Boprodskiy)l0.000IIOOOOOOOOOOCOOIOOI.IOGOOUOOOOIOOOIOQO'OOOO.II 6

Radar FM Signals Reflected Prom Ice Surfaces and Possibilities of
'lheir lbdellng
(A. n. Eabnmv. et 1). 13

Influence of Ice Structure on Its Radiation Characteristics in the SH?
Range
(A. Ye. Basharinuv. A. A. Kurakaya).... ..... .. ....... ................. 18

Remte Phasurement of Sea Ice 'lhickneaa by lhdar hthoda
(N. I. Fi'lkel'shteyn, ct al.)......................................... 21

Instrumntation for Investigating Spectral Reflection of Liquid Water
in the Wavelength «egion 1-50ﬂlﬂ
(H. A. Krorotnin) 25

Ice Behavior in High-Strength hpidly Varying Electmnayxetic Fields
(1.. B. Nekraaov)..... ................................................ 31

- a - [I - USSR - E FOUO]

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dynamics of Ice in Coastal Reginns According to Data From Side-booking
Radar Survey From Aircraft
(5. “a maev. Y“. A. mtbmov)ooooooooo00000000000..eeoooooeoeooeeoeooe

(bservations of Sea Surface Temperature Using a Radiation met-meter
From an Ice Reconnaissance Aircraft
(A. I. Paramov, et a1.)..............................................

Study of Dynamics of Glaciers Using laser mfomgnph
(I. H. Belomwa' et 81.)...0.......0.0...O....IOOIDOOCUOOIOOOOOOOOOOIO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35

(.1.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Text] Annotation. This collection of articles includes materials from a scientific
Hymposium organized by the Order of Lenin Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research
Institute and the Interdepartmental Commission on Study of Antarctica, Earth Sci-
ences Section, Presidium, USSR Academy of Sciences, held in Leningrad, 1-5 October
1973. The articles by Soviet and foreign scientists reflect the results of investi-
gations of recent years in the following directions: 1. Electromagnetic methods for
investigating snow and ice, active and passive radar observations of ice and snow
surfaces. 2. Optical methods for investigating snow, ice and water. Dynamic and
static methods for investigating the dynamic properties of ice and snow.

Contents Original page

Prefacaeeo-oanoneooooooeeooooooooel.ooooOeoeoooeseeslsoooooeoeooooooolsou-00v.to 7

Bogorodskiy, V. V., "Radiophysical Methods for Investigating Ice and Snow"...... 9

Bnbayev, A. 8., Logachev, V. P., Parfent‘yev, V. N., Pedorov, V. A. and Shemo-
manova, G. P., "Radar FM Signals Reflected From Ice Surfaces and Possibilities
of Their Monitoriig"......................................................... 17

unsharlnov, A. Ye. and Kursknya, A. A., "Influence of Ice Structure on Its
Radiation Characteristics in the 88? Range".................................. 21

Bogorodskiy, V. V., Trepov, c. V. and Pedorov, B. A., "Radio Have Propagation in

claciErS".........................o.......oo.....ooo..oooocoooo.............. 2‘

Bogorodskiy, V. V. and Tripol'nikov, V. P., "Radio Echo Sounding of Sea Ice"... 29

Bogorodskiy, V. V., Kozlov, A. I. and Tuchkov, L. T., "Emissivity of Ice, Land
and Sea Surfaces Simulated by Layeredmlnhomogeneous Structures"............... 32

Clough. J. V., "Measurements of Reflected Signals in Radio Echo Sounding in a
Large Range of An‘_".‘$".oos IOOOODIIOOOOIOO...0......OCCOUOUOCCCOCCOUOCC.'0'... 39

Clnnnh. J. N., "Depolarization of Reflected Radio Signals"...................... 45

Fiskel'shteyn. M. l., Kuta;ev, V. A., Glushnev, V. G. and Lazarev, E. 1.,
Remote Measurement of Sea Ice Thickness by Radar Hethods".................... 51

Zhgbrovskiy, A. K.. Strakhovskiy, G. H., Nedostayev, V. i. and Stebin, V. 1..
Electric Properties of Ice Formed in Vacuum and Their Interrelationship to

n "
StruCtufe canoecocoon...scocooneonssososooneooooosoooooosesosocc'eeeooecee'oes 55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vershinin, S. A., Kopaygorodskiy, Ye. H., Panov, V. v. and snvayshteyn, z. 1.,
"Ice Pressure on Separately Standing Supports According to Labratory and

In Situ Tests".....u.....o.....o...u........o.............n...o...........ao 59

Davis, H. and Hunis, R., "Correlation Between the Salinity of Sea Ice and
Extinction of Light With Wavelength 6328 A"................................... 66

Gaytskhoki, B. Ya., "Optical Characteristics of Some Varieties of Natural Ice“.. 71

Kropotkin, H. A., "Instrumentation for Investigating Spectral Reflection
of Liquid Water in Region of Wavelengths From 1 to SOPLm"..................... 74

Petera, V., "0n Study of the Process of Charge Formation on the Phase Discontin-
uity Directed Toward a Freezing 10'3 Molar Solution of Sodium Chloride"....... 80

Nekrasov, L. 8., "Ice Behavior in a Highly Variable High-Strength Electromagnetic

Fieldusosoooooosssssoooooossooooooossoso.ooooooosloooooIssoooooooooooooooooooo 9°

Volod'ko, B. V., Yakupov, V. S., Akhmcdzyanov, E. N., Kalinin, V. H., Papitash-
vili, V. 0. and Sereda, G. A.. "Magnetic Survey of Reformed Vein Ice"......... 94

Hel'nikov, V. P. and Snegirev, A. H., "Low-Frequency Polarization of Ice and
Frozen Coarsely Disperse Fomt1°n3nsoosooosoooooooooscooooooooosooooosooooooo 99

Losev, S. H. and Gorbunov, Yu. A., "Dynamics of Ice in Coastal Regions According
to Data From Side-Looking Radar Survey From Aircraft"........................ 106

Paramonov. A. 1., Corbunov, Yu. A. and Losev, S. H., "Observation of Sea Surface
Temperature Using a Radiation Thermometer Prom an Ice Rec:nnaisssnce

Aircraft"oossoosOoooooooooosassso.osootooo'ooooooooooooosoosooooooooooosooooo 11‘

Cavrilo, V. P. and Gusev, A. V., "Use of Acoustic Methods for Investigating

Show and Icenossstooosso...our.osooooIoooooooooooooosooooo-oosoooooososvooooo 121

Bogorodskiy, V. V., Smirnov, G. Ye. and Smirnov, S. A., "Absorption and
Scattering of Acoustic Waves by Sea Ice"..................................... 128

Grubnik, N. A. and Kudryavtsev, 0. V., "One Nethod for Measuring Sound Atten-
ution in Natural ICe.'OICOOOOOOIIOID0.00000IUOOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIOOOOIOIIIOO 135

Smirnov, V. N. and Lin'kov, Ye. H., "Seismic and Tiltmeter Methods for
Investigating the Ice Cover"................................................. 137

Belousova, I. H., Ivanov. I. P. and Firsov, N. 6., "Study of Dynamics of
Glaciers Using Laser Deformograph"........................................... 143

- 2 -

IN)I1DFFICIAI.lEﬂ5(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Panov, V. V.. Panyusnkin, A. v., Sinochkin, Yu. D. and Shvayshteyn, Z. 1.,
“Experimental Study of Ice Adhesion Under Laboratory and In Situ Conditions".

Grubnik, N. A., Fomin, V. I. and Shemyakin, A. 8.. "Study of the Process of
Destruction of an Ice Layer".................................................

Vuori, A. F., "Mechanical Properties of Snow as a Construction Material".......

Dolgin, I. M., Bryazgin, N. N. and Petrov, L. 8., "Snow Cover of the Arctic"...

Avdyushin. S. 1., Bsrabanshchikov, R. M., Kogan, R. M., Kulagin. Yu. M.,
Nazarov, I. M., Fridman, Sh. D. and Yudkevich, I. 8., "Method for Measuring
Moisture Reserves in the Snow Cover Using Cosmic Radiation"..................

Abul', 6., "Methods for Measuring the Strength Characteristics of Natural and

Processed Snow ..............................................................

Buzuyev, A. Ya., "Statistical Evaluation of Spatial Distribution of the
Principal Parameters of the Ice Cover".......................................

Korzhavin, K. N. and Ivchenko, A. 8., "Investigation of Mechanical Properties
of Fresh-Hater Ice With Slow Changes in Load"................................

Zaretskiy, Yu. K., Fish. A. M.. Cavrilo, V. P. and Gusev, A. V., "Problems in
Short-Term Creep of Ice and Kinetics of Formation of Microfissures"..........

Ryvlin, A. Ya., "In Situ Investigations of Physicomechanical Properties of

Ice Cover ooooosooooeoooeooeooooooooooooooooooooooooooeooooooooooooooooooooeo

Kheysin. D. Ye., Likhomanov, V. A. and Kurdyunov, V. A., "Determination of
Specific Energy of Destruction and Contact Pressures With Impact of Solid

“Ody 0n [Ce ooooooooono...Ioooooooooooooooooneoo-oooooooooo-ooooo-ooooeooooo'

Hogorodskiy, V. V.. Cuvrilo, V. P. and Polyakov. A. P., "Radiohydroacoustic
Method for Using Mesoscale Characteristics of Dynamics of Sea Ice" ...........

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

167

155

157

165

171

176

187

193

197

205

210

219
FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

PREFACE

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDENA LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTARKTICHESKIY NAUCHNO-ISSLEDOVAIEL'-

SKIY INSTITUT. FIZICHESKIYE HBTODY ISSLEDOVANIYA L'DA I SNEGA in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 7-8 '

[Unsigned article]

[Text] This collection of articles contains studies devoted to physical methods for
the investigation of ice and snow. It can now be assumed that a new direction has
already been formed in glaciology -- the physics of ice.

Taking into account the increasing interest in physical methods for investigating
ice, the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute and the Interdepart-
mental Commission on Study of Antarctica organized a special symposium which was
held in October 1973 at Leningrad. Host of the reports presented at the symposium
were finalized in the form of articles which have been published in this collection
of articles.

The articles presented in the collection reflect the results of investigations of
recent years in the following directions:

1. Electromagnetic methods for investigating snow and ice. Active and passive radar
of ice and snow covers.
2. Optical methods for investigating snow, ice and water.

3. Dynamic and static methods for investigating the mechanical properties of ice
and snow.

Many of the articﬂas are devoted to the results and methods for investigating the
mechanics-acoustical properties of ice and snow. The importance of further investi-
gations in this direction is demonstrated, especially determination of the charac-
teristics of internal friction. the coefficients of absorption, viscosity, velocity
ies of propagation of wave processes, reflecting and scattering properties in a
broad range of amplitudes of deformations and frequencies of elastic and visco-
elastic oscillations (seisnic range, infralow-frequency, acoustic and ultrasonic
frequencies -10'2-106Hz).

Recently investigations have been initiated of dynamic phenomena and the stressed
state of the ice covers of different ocean areas by seismoacoustic methods and also
methods based on the use of lasers.

IND! OIWHCIAI.IHNE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The studies made in these three directions reflected new results of investigations
which are a considerable contribution to the physics of ice. These results bring
considerably closer the solution of highly important physicotechnirnl problems
related to artificial modification of ice and snow (radar observation or sea ice,
problems of ice destruction, evaluation of the stressed states of the ice covers
by the laser and seismoacoustic method, remote determination of large moisture re-
serves in the snow cover, etc.).

COPYRIGHT: Arkticheskiy i antarkticheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut
(AANII). 1975

5

FOR‘0F11CIA1.IEHE(NVLY
FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(MULY

RADIOPHYSICAL METHODS FOR INVESTIGAIINC ICE AHD SNOW

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDENA LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTARKTICHBSKIY NAUCHNO-ISSLEDOVATSL'-
SKIY INSTITUT. PIZICHESKIYE HETODY ISSLEDOVANIYA L'DA I SNEGA in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 9-16

[Article by V. V. Bogorodskiy]

[Text] Ice. one of the physical bodies occurring most widely over the surface of
our planet, is an example of a proton dielectric, a viscoelastic body, capable
with a relatively small change in external conditions of changing its micro- and
nacrostructure. electric and mechanical properties.

Continental and mountain glaciers are sources of pure water and the principal water
resources for irrigation in arid regions. The glaciers and ice covers to a consid-
erable degree are regulators of weather and climate. At the same time, glaciers and
ice covers on-the seas are features creating dangerous natural phenomena.

The shelf of arctic seas and regions of permafrost in Siberia constitute rich ware-
houses of natural resources. Their exploitation is determined by the possibility of
overcoming of the ice, that is, its destruction. or use as a material. Both these
aspects lead to the need for studying all the properties of ice and snow. The diver—
aity of problems favored the formation of an independent direction in ice investiga-
tions (not only as a substance, but also as a geophysical feature), ice physics.

The physics of ice as a science has already attained considerable successes in the
study of the atomic-molecular structure of ice, the behavior of protons in hydrogen
bonds and lattice dynamics. This has been facilitated by the work of Professor
Granicher (Switzerland) and Doctor "all (Canada). Important investigations have been
carried out for studying the growth of ice crystals and their orientation by N. P.
Cherepanov and P. A. Shumskiy (USSR), Doctor Hobbs and Doctor Kitcham (United
States).

However, in ice physics there are a number of problems which until now have only
been formulated. From our point of view such important problems include the ther-
moelectric effect of ice, potential jump at the boundary of development of phases
and precipitation of impurities during the growth of ice crystals from a melt and
solution. The investigation of the processes of thermoelectricity and potential
jump, to be sure, in the long run will lead to an evaluation of the possibility of
using the energy of the discussed phenomena. At the present time quantitative

6

iiﬂlfﬂﬁﬂK1A1.USB(lVLY
FOR OFFKJAL.USEGDNLY

estimates are already being given for the thermoelectric potential gradient and the
potential gradient at the ice-water discontinuity, attaining several tens of volts.
Primary laboratory investigations show that these phenomena are in fact singular
natural generators of electric energy.

Investigations of the influence of impurities on ice structure are very interesting.
It has been established that exceedingly small quantities of impurities (F, HP) in

virtually every case bring fresh-water ice close in its properties to sea ice. Pene-
trating between the crystals, in many cases they give a complex structure with vari-

able salinity and the presence of small volumes of saline water. Such a structure
is the subject of intensive study by physicists: it is responsible for the mechan-
ical and electrical properties of ice. A comprehension of the physical principles
of the growth of crystals in the presence of impurities is of great importance in
developing reliable methods for obtaining drinking water from the sea by means of

its freezing. The problems of atomic-molecular physics of ice were discussed more
completely in [4].

In this article we examine some problems related to study of the electromagnetic
characteristics of snow and ice (including the optical and mechanical properties of
snow and ice and dynamics of the ice covers).

The availability of these data makes it possible to solve a number of seriOus prac-
tical problems: creation of radio equipment for sounding ice covers, study of the
functional dependence of the mechanical characteristics of ice, conditions for the
transfer of radiant energy through ice covers, measurement of the rate of movement
of ice covers and evaluation of their stressed state.

Electromagnetic Characteristics of Ice and Radio Probing of Ice Covers

During recent years specialists in the USSR, United States, Denmark, Canada and

Japan have carried out extensive laboratory and field investigations of the elec-
tromagnetic characteristics 6 and tg 5 of glacier, fresh-water and sea ice in a

broad range of frequencies from 100 Hz, including optical.

The generalization and analysis of theoretical and experimental data on electromag-
netic characteristics made it possible to create reliable radio apparatus for study
of the structure (tr'cknoss. layering, inhomogeneity) and state (mean effective
temperature) of euro, moderure and warn glaciers. Using radio apparatus created

in Great Britain, Denmark, bSSR and the United States and installed on different
carriers, new possibilities appeared for the study of the ice shields of Antarctica,
Greenland, the Arctic and other glaciers of our planet.

An important conclusion drawn as a result of radio measurements is a new idea con-
cerning the thickness of glaciers and the structure of Antarctic relief beneath the
ice. Figure 1 shows that the relief of Antarctica beneath the ice in not smoothed

(for example, in the zone of the Soviet investigations), as was speculated before,

but instead has abrupt dropoffs and mountains with sharp peaks. Radar makes it pos-
sible to refine maps of Antarctic relief. It is interesting that a detailed radar
survey of the polygons also revealed a very great diversity of relief. Interesting
results from radar probing of this type were obtained by researchers at the Scott

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Institute (Cambridge) and the Professor Gudmandsun Laboratory (Denmark).

Table l
Electromagnetic Characteristics of Some Media
Medium Velocity. m/P-sec Specific ab- Measurement
sorption f - conditions
30 HR:
Cold glaciers 169 0.065 at -60°C
169 0.025 at -10°C
Harm glaciers 169 0.05 at -l°C
169 0.035 at -5°c
Perennial permafrost 110 1-8 at -5°C
0.4-2.5 at -lS°C
Fresh water bodies 33 0.5-2.5 --
Sandy ground 170 0.05 dry
55 2 moisture con-
tent 301
Sea pack ice 150 1-2 at -20°C
thickness
2-9 m
Young sea ice 100 3-5 at -20°C
thickness 0.9-

1 m

A more complex cycle of measurements of the electromagnetic characteristics of sea
ice in the SH? range led to the solution of an equally important problem - the
fundamental possibility of remote measurement of thickness of drifting sea ice. In
the USSR this problem was solved by the scientific personnel of the Arctic and Ant-
arctic Scientific Research Institute and the Institute of Civil Aviation Engineers
(Riga). At the same time this same problem was solved by researchers in the United
States, Canada and Denmark.

Radio sounding of glaciers and sea ice was facilitated to a considerable degree by
radio sounding of highly absorbing media: desert sands for the detection of water-
bearing layers, fresh-water bodies and permafrost.

Table 1 gives the electromagnetic characteristics of highly absorbing media. They
show that it is possible to employ radio apparatus for sounding these media.

Fluctuations of Radio Signals in Probing of Ice Covers. Depolarization of Radio
Haves in Glaciers

The nonuniformity of ice covers and the complex structure of the underlying bed
change the amplitude, phase, shape of envelope, lag and polarization of the stud-
ied radio signals. A statistical analysis of the random process of change in the

signal amplitude. which is determined by the different influence of scattering on
the surface of the glacier and its bed, is of interest in estimating the rate of
its movement. A mass of data on fluctuations of amplitudes made it possible to

8

It”!(ﬂﬁﬂ(1Al.USE(NULY
compute the autocorrclation radius and demonstrate its direct dependence on the
radiated frequency.

 

Fig. 1. Profiles of relief under ice along radio sounding profiles. In upper left
corner -- vertical scale.

Figure 2 illustrates the fluctuations of signals reflected by the glacier bed for

frequencies of 440, 213 and 60 Mllz. These frequencies correspond to autocorrela-
tiun radii of 0.8, 2 6 and 6.1 m respectively. The frequency dependence of the
autocorrelation radius of t.- :tuations of amplitudes can be used in measuring the
rate of movement of glaciers in any regions of Antarctica.

In the USSR much work has been done on studying the phenomenon of depolarization
of electromagnetic waves during their vertical propagation in a glacier. Similar
investigations are being made by Clough (in the United States). Our studies indi-
cated that one of the principal reasons for depolarization is double refraction.

Ice Optics
Recently extensive use has been made of optical methods for investigating ice.

This has been dictated by the timeliness of those scientific and practical problems
which they make it possible to solve. Investigations of the interaction of optical

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FCH!()FFIC1AI.II§EZ(NNLY

radiation with ice are being carried out in a wide range of wavelengths, including
both the visible and IR parts of the spectrum. Infrared spectroscopy of ice made

it possible to take a considerable step forward in the study of its molecular struc-
ture and to reveal a great diversity of structural forms.

U a
w

0.9

0 a
0..

0.7

     

. _-_.__..__._._.+__ ..

C

3 a

 

Fig. 2. Distribution of amplitudes of reflected signals for frequencies 660 MHz
(a), 213 "Hz (b) and 60 HE: (C).

The problem of radiation transfer through the snow and ice cover of water areas is
acquiring particular importance. The energy penetrating through the ice is consid-
erably attenuated and greatly changes the character of the underwater light field,
and accordingly, biological activity and the conditions for the use of different
optical systems for underiCe visibility and other problems.

It should be noted that an estimate of the total attenuation of optical radiation
during transmission through the ice involves great difficulties. The scattering in-

dicatrices for ice are very diverse. They are indicative of the complex scattering
prOperties of ice structure.

Mechanical Characteristics of Ice and Stressed State of Ice Covers. Movement of
Glaciers

10

F03‘0FFNJA1.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The study of the mechanical properties of ice and snow is an important problem
which is now being solved by the scientists of Canada, USSR, United States, Great
Britain and Japan. The increased interest in this problem is obvious: in the study
or exploitation of polar territories and ocean areas it is necessary to improve
the types of transportation and either destroy the ice or use it as a construction
material. In both aspects the success is determined by a knowledge of the mechan-
ical characteristics of the ice and snow obtained by dynamic and static methods.

A study of the mechanical properties of ice in combination with the packing of

its macrocrystalline struccure made it possible to estimate the strength charac-
teristics of sea and fresh-water ice freezing under different hydrometeorological
conditions.

The acoustic method for studying the mechanical characteristics of ice has been
found to be promising. This method. not destroying the investigated medium, makes
it possible to make measurements in individual crystals, blocks and the ice cover.
The mechanical characteristics obtained by an acoustic method made it possible to
develop a method for predicting their distribution in the thickness of the ice
cover, knowing the air temperature.

At the present time for further progress in this field it is necessary to have
new theoretical models reflecting the state of ice in response to rapid and slow
effects and taking into accOunt the thermal oscillations of atoms and molecules,
and also the developing changes in the structure of the bonds among them during
deformation.

An equally important problem is study of the stressed state of ice covers. At the
Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute specialists are developing two
directions toward its solution: study of the sound emission of deforming ice and
use of special Doppler laser systems. Similar work is being carried out by Profes—
sor Bentley in the United States. The principal aspect of this problem is a deter-
mination of the numerical values of the developing pressures and their quantita-
tive and qualitative correlation with hydrometeorological conditions. Information
of this character would facilitate prediction of the stressed state of ice and es-
pecially the moments of its destruction. However, this problem is considerably
complicated by the strong dependence of the physical properties of ice on many
factors, the Strong 'ariability of the thickness of drifting ice, the absence

of satisfactory noueis for .rediction of macroscale deformations and the drift of
ice on the basis of the measured hydrometeorological parameters. The intensity of
the acoustic emission and the parameters of the acoustic signals radiated during
the deformation of ice can be a key to solution of the problem.

It has now been established that the amplitudes of the oscillations. the spectral
composition of waves, their velocity, duration of pulses and their repetition
rate are objective criteria determining the general character of stages of the
stressed state. It was also found that this information is carried by oscilla-
tions with a broad spectrum of frequencies from 10’2 to 106 Hz. However, there

is also a definite selectivity: at the temperatures of critical stresses the maxi-
mum of the acOustic emission spectrum for ice falls in the band 100—400 Hz. The
first in situ experiments revealed the good prospects of the acoustic method for
determining the stressed state of the ice cover. The correlation coefficient be-

tween the regis:ered acoustic emission and air temperature fluctuation was about
0.8 [1, 2].

ll

FOI.OFIWC1Al.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of lasers also makes it possible to make estimates of the stressed state

of ice covers. The preliminary experiments carried out on the ice of Lake Ladoga in
the winter of 1972 made it possible to obtain the numerical values of stresses in
the ice [3]. The physical basis for estimating stressed state by this method is

the possibility of determining the deformation of ice under the influence of some
factors. The Doppler laser method applicable to this problem shows that the deter-
mined deformation, multiplied by the dynamic modulus, leads to an evaluation of

the stressed state. The study of glacier movement is a timely problem for whose
solution there is a good theoretical basis [5, 6].

Some progress has also been noted in the experimental investigation of glacier
movement: the basis for this progress is laser Doppler systems, the scattering

properties of the glacier bed and a detailed radio survey of oriented polygons.

The Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute, in collaboration with the
State Optical Institute imeni Acadeudcian S. I. Vavilov, has developed special
laser systems known as deformographs; these have undergone testing in Antarctica.
These tests revealed that laser apparatus with a high degree of accuracy can
register the absolute and relative rates of glacier movement.

At the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute experiments have begun
on study of the movement of glaciers relative to irregularities of the bed under
the ice. We already have qualitative confirmations of a partial realization of this
idea. The essence of the method is a repeated (with a definite time interval) de-
tailed radin survey of the relief under the ice in polygons whose coordinates were
determined with a high accuracy. A survey of these polygons repeated after a year
demonstrated the presence of a complex displacement of the glacier.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Bogorodskiy, V. V. and Cavrilo, V. P., "Physical Methods for Investigating the
Stressed State of the Ice Cover," TRUDY AANII (Transactions of the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute), Vol 316, pp 59—69, 1974.

2. Bogorodskiy, V. V., Cavrilo, V. P. and Gusev, A. V., "Acoustic Effects in the
Friction of Ice," TRUDY AANII, Vol 324, pp 97-103, 1975.

3. Bogorodskiy, V. V., Cavrilo, V. P. and Ivanov, I. P., "Use of the Doppler Effect
in Lasers for Investigating the Stressed State of Ice," TRUDY AANII, Vol 324,
pp 114-117, 1975.

4. FIZIKA L'DA. OBZOR DOKLADOV HEZHDUNARODNOGO SIMPOZIUHA P0 PIZIKB L'DA, SOSTOYAV-
SHEGOSYA 9-14 SENTYABRYA 1968 V HYUNKHENE (Ice Physics. Review of Reports at the
International Symposium on Ice Physics Held at Munich 9-14 September 1968), Len-
ingrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1973, 154 pages.

5. Shumskiy, P. A., DINAMICHESKAYA CLYATSIOLOCIYA (Dynamic Glaciology), Moscow,
Izd—vo AN SSSR, 1970, 200 pages.

6. Budd, w. P., THE DYNAMICS OF ICE MASSES, issued by the Antarctic Division, De-
partment of Supply, Melbourne, 1969, 216 pages.

COPYRIGHT: Arkticheskiy i antarkticheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut
(AANII), 1975

12
Itﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NNLY
FOR OF‘ICIAI.IEIB(HVLY

RADAR FM SIGNALS REFLECTED FLOR ICE SURFACES AND POSSIBILITIES OF THEIR MODELING

Leningrad mum. ORDENA LENINA mncussxn I mmrmmsxn NAUCHNO-ISSLEDOVATBL'~
sxnl msn'ru-r. PIZICHBSKIYE mom 1351.31»vaer L'DA I SNEGA in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 17-20

[Article by A. B. Babayev. V. P. Logachev, V. N. Parfent'yev, V. A. Pedorov and
G. P. Shelomanova]

[Text] This article gives some results of experimental investigations of the phys-
ical properties of ice surfaces and the radio signals reflected from them. Experi-
mental investigations of the rangefinder signal were made with smooth and humnocky
ice of different salinity with a thickness of about 2 m.

In rangefinding it is important that saline sea ice at its lower edge has a trans-
itional unconsolidated layer attenuating the reflection of the sounding signal. A
source of radiosignal loss is also the unevenness of both edges of the ice layer.
with a roughness parameter greater than 0.2 the periodicity of change in the mirror
reflection coefficient Kfo, characteristic of the layer, disappears and Kfo becomes
a random value [1].

In the course of making the experiment, on the basis of the measurements computa-
tions are made of the specific effective area of reflection for ice with different
degrees of unevenness of the edges. The computations were made using the formula

. .,(."'f)." ’.’.’_'_"'_2_ "-v (1)
" ' "3.11.33.“ ‘75.".

where H is the range; 99 is the angle of surface irradiation; D is the antenna am-
plification factor; A is the radiation wavelength; Aﬁ,AY is the width of the
antenna directional diagram in the orthogonal planes; Prec is the power received
in the antenna; P0 is the radiated power.

Figure 1 shows the dependence of <7 on the angle of irradiation of ice surfaces.
The accuracy in measurements is (l. 2.0 db). Using the proportional relationship
[K “I . _.._-._’I((e_ ._ .__. 51- _ (2)
' re I M ‘l ‘ I I: h- ‘-‘ '
ml .2 ( - )I ml l- l

 

 

where Kfo is the mirror reflection coefficient, Urefl is the amplitude of the re-
flected signal, C75 is the standard deviation of height of the irregularity, we
obtained the values for saline ice and ice with low salinity.

13

FORlOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL.US£1DNLY

The results of the computations are given in Table 1. from which it can be seen

that K50 for ice with a low salinity is approximately twice as great as Kf for
sea ice. It can be postulated that this increase in the reflection coeffic ent

occurs due to reflection from the lower edge of the ice layer with a low salinity
content.

Table l
Coefficients of Hirror Reflection as Function of Type of Surface
Type of surface Sea water Fresh water Sea ice Fresh ice Asphalt
Ahzdh o o 0.3 o o
Kfo 0.85 0.78 0.35 0.68 0.49

 

.30 ._._ ._ .'...__. __l.-_

00 10 50 ”(P

Fig. 1. Dependence of specific effective area of reflection (76 of different sur-
faces. (1 -- ice cover with presence of small hummocks on surface; 2) same with
large hummocks; 3) smooth surface of fresh-water ice; 6) snow field; 5) smooth
water surface); 6) dependence of U1 and u2 on angle of irradiation (p0.

An investigation of the accuracy characteristics of rangefinders operating in the

centimeter range indicntes that they all give exaggerated readings in the case of
measurement over an ice layer. An analysis of structure of the reflected signal

revealed that there are two maxima in the signal spectrum corresponding to reflec-
tion from the upper and lower edges of the ice layer.

The ratio U1/Uz(<P) with a change in the angle of irradiation of the ice layer is

of interest. The experimental curve U1/U2(<p) is also shown in Fig. 1 (ice with a
low salinity, Zlﬂic - 2 m). The figure shows that with a change in the irradia-

tion angle y7the relationship of the signals from the two edges changes to a

14

FOR!0FFKJA1.USE(MULY
considerable degree. The mechanism of this change can be attributed to the dif-
ferent angles of refraction at the discontinuity of the two media and signal scat-
tering on the uneven boundaries of the layer.

The results of the experiment cited above indicate that the accuracy of the read-
ings of the rangefinders over a layered ice surface deteriorates. In addition, the
experiment revealed that anomalous phenomena at the time of radio signal reflection

from the ice layer can he used in obtaining information from the reflecting sur-
face.

The problem of reflection from a layer with uneven discontinuities is complex and

for the time being no rigorous solution has been obtained. For this reason for the
special problems of radar observation of ice it is desirable to use a model based

on representation of the layer in the form of a set of independent elementary re-
flectors distributed in space.

The basis of the model considered below is the results of experimental investiga-
tions of the operation of frequency rangefinders in the centimeter range and some
results which were mentioned above. The radio signal reflected from the ice layer
can be written in the form of the equation

MU) $212314". v. II). (3)
h 9 II .
where 69, $0, H are the spherical coordinates of the spatial position of elementary
reflectors. Assuming the antenna diagrams to be axisymmetric and the reflecting

medium to be isotropic with respect to azimuth 9’, the signal at the output of the
balanced mixer can be determined using the formula

um) :33519. H, l)cos|'b(8, II, 1) Hm, ”)I. (1.)

all

where y’(€9» H) is the equiprobahle initial random phase. After the necessary com-
putations it is possible to obtain the time-averaged correlation function of this
signal [1,2]

b= bl " .vs‘ 1 §3 9.1! -s2=-. F...
l a l mu. x) .1..7,I)(+°.II)...|£.( )m . (5)

where 2‘49, H) is dcpendc.r on the type of modulating function; D2(6. II) is the
dispersion of an elementar~ signal.

The averaged energy spectrum of the signal of beats in this case is written in the
form of the equation

3:777)- :Egmw, m 3'“; IzF..)E.(”. II).
I

all

(6)
in the case of a pencil-beam antenna the broadening of the spectrum will occur only

due to the thickness of the reflecting layer. The factor 02(69, H) includes the nor-

malizvd function f(é;, H) characterizing the reflecting properties of the ice. In
the case of n pencil-beam antenna

It". In mun“, m. (7)
15

IN)R<OFF1(1A1.IISEZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For ice with a low salinity and fresh ice in the centimeter range the function
f 6 (H), as demonstrated by the experiment, is approximated well by the expression

f..(ll)---/\.3(Il - H.) maul-412). (a)

where (3 (z) is a delta function; A1, A2 are coefficients dependent on the electro-
physical parameters of the reflecting layer of ice.

with expression (8) taken into account, the readings of the frequency rangefinder
in the case of narrow antenna directional diagrams can be written in the form

E_4_.l/I-F.-Il. I

”F T— ""f;_7_/‘1'T."_inT‘+T‘ZT_uV‘___X
I II. (9)
X "4&4. an.|__:'_._ ..

 

f

where Eice is the mean value of the dielectric constant in the thickness of the
ice; PM is the modulation frequency; A f is the frequency deviation; c is the
speed of light.

For practical computations a major role is played by the values of the electrophys-
ical parameters of ice in the SH? range. He used the results of measurement of

£1“ and tg51ce obtained by a. 1'. Kapitkin.

All the experimental results and computations cited above indicate that rangefinder
FM apparatus can be used with some modernization for determining the parameters of
the ice layer, for example, its thickness AHice' A simplified block diagram of one
of the possible methods for processing the rangefinder signal for determining the
thickness of the ice layer should contain an envelope detector and a unit for meas-
uring the mean modulation of signal frequency, averaged for the period, at the out-
put of the envelope detector.

With expressions (6) and (8) taken into account, it can be shown that the mean mod-

ulation of signal frequency, averaged for the period, at the detector output in the

(zse of a narrow antenna directional diagram is proportional to the ice thickness
Hice‘

In conclusion we should note the following facts:

1. The results of experimental investigations of the reflecting properties of ice
surfaces make it possible to find new methods for obtaining information on the re-

flecting surfaces.
2. It is fundamentally possible to determine the thickness of a thin ice layer on
the basis of use of radio rangefinding FM apparatus.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Zubkovich, S. 6., STATISTICHESKIYE KHARAKTERISTIKI RADIOSIGNALOV, OTRAZHENNYKH
0T ZEMNOY POVERKHNOSTI (Statistical Characteristics of Radio Signals Reflect-
ed From the Earth's Surface), Moscow, "Sovctskoye Radio," 1968, 223 pages.

Tsvetnov, V. V., "Statistical Properties of Radar Signals From Extended Surfaces
in Systems With Internal Coherence," TR. MAI (Transactions of the Moscow Avia-
tion Institute), 30 1. pp 5-26, 1966.

ZOPYRIGH‘I': Arktichcskiy i antarkticheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut
(AANII), 1975

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFIICIAI.US£|MNLY

INFLUENCE 0? ICE STRUCTURE 0N ITS RADIATION CHARACTERISTICS IN THE SHF RANGE

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDENA LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTARKTICHBSKIY NAUCHNO-ISSLEDOVATBL'-
SKIY INSTITUT. PIZICHESKIYE HBTODY ISSLEDOVANIYA L'DA I SNEGA in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 21-23

[Article by A. Ye. Basharinov and A. A. Kurskaya]

[Text] Experimental investigations of radiothermal radiation of sea and continental
ice carried out in the Soviet Union and the United States have revealed the spec-
tral characteristics associated with the nature of ice, its age, degree of salinity
and microstructure [1-4]. In this article we describe the influence exerted on

the SH? radiation characteristics of sea ice by the effects of scattering on air
bubbles and small inhomogeneities.

The microstructure of sea ice experiences changes dependent on the conditions of
ice formation and age. Young ice with a thickness of the layer of several deci-
meters has increased moisture content and salinity. with an increase in ice age

the moisture and salinity content decrease. In the upper layers of the perennial ice
there is an increased content of air bubbles. With a strong degree of porosity the
air content increases to 100 cm3/kg.

According to data from measurements made on the artificial earth satellite "Cosmos-
243" over the Antarctic zone, in the region of perennial ice there is an apprec-
iable decrease in radiobrightness temperature for the short-wave parts of the range.
Figure 1 shows experimental data for the spectral dependences of the degree of
blackness for young and perennial ice obtained in processing the results of observ-
ations cited in [1, a]. The transfer of radiation in the upper layers of perennial
sea ice is accompanied by the effects of scattering on inhomogeneities of the diel-
ectric constant. The emissivity of ice formations is determined by the value of the
dielectric constant and the thickness of the ice layer [2].

The effect of the influence of internal scatterings, dependent on the relationship
of the sizes of the inhomogeneities, wavelength and degree of ice porosity, is re-
flected in the form of the spectrum of radiobrightness temperatures and on the
angular characteristics of the radiation field. The degree of blackness of the
emitting layer of ice, with internal scatterings taken into account, is evaluated
using the expression

p I -|R.-I-Px(‘ 'R.)l- (1)

18

FOI‘OFFICIAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where R 5 is the reflection coefficient at the boundary of the ice layer, determin-
ed without allowance for internal acatterings; Pﬁis a coefficient characterizing
the fraction of the power scattered on inhomogeneities: ‘Piceu - R9) is a coef-
ficient characterizing the fraction of the power scattered in the upper half-space.

 

—,-— -——'——.__'_____'_._.
o I a a 1 1.:-

Pig. 1. Couputed and experimental spectral dependences of degree of blackness for
"young" and "old" ice obtained in processing the results of observations on the
"Cosmos-243" artificial earth satellite and from "Convair—990."

with allowance for the effects of single scattering from randomly distributed small
inhomogeneities the mean value of the coefficient of reflection from an elementary
volume is determined by summation of the partial scattering fields

6." -12:lr—1—g-w 6-, (2)

where 0'1 is the scattering section of the inhomogeneities; dN/dV is the spatial
density of the lnhonngen ltles.

The mean value of the l"‘fj“‘.l.lon coefficient from a layer with a depth correspond-

ing to the skin layer is determined using the formula .m

1"“ '—()‘)’Il-
['9 - elem(enLary)] P W

where Q elem} - 'A/Z’Jl ﬂ tgd is the depth of the skin layer.

is the depth of the skin layer.

The spectral dependence of the scattering section, determined by the relationship
a! the sizes of the inhormgeneities and the wavelength, is manifested in the form of
.1 decrease in the degree of blackness with a shortening of the wavelength.

Model computations of the spectral dependence of the degree of blackness of the ice

cover were carried out taking into account the contribution of the effects of scat-
tering on bubble inhomogeneities of :~ spherical form on the assumption of a

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJI‘OF1WCIA1.IISEZ(NNLY

uniformity of the structure of the upper layer to a depth of 30-60 cm. A comparison
of the computed and experinental values of the spectrum of the degree of blackness
for long-term sea ice makes it possible to evaluate the degree of porosity of ice
samples (see Fig. 1). Thus, an evaluation of the content of air inclusions for the
sounded ice fields gives 30-50 cm3/kg with a mean diameter of the bubbles of about
1 mm. The difference in the SH? spectral characteristics of one-year and perennial
ice can be used in the diagnosis of sea ice.

1.

3.

[is

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Basharinov, A. Ye., Gurvich, A. 8., Yegorov, S. T., Zhukov. V. I. and Kurskaya,
A. A., "Results of Observation of Thermal Radio Emission of the Earth's Surface
According to Data of the Experiment on the ABS 'Cosmos-243'," KOSMICHESKIYE
ISSLEDOVANIYA (Space Research), Vol IX, No 2, pp 268-279, 1971.

Tuchkov, L. T.. YESTESTVENNYYE SHUMOVYYE IZLUCHENIYA V RADIOKANALAKH (Natural
Noise Radiations in Radio Channels), Moscow, "Sovetskoye Radio," 1968, 152
pages.

Tuchkov, L. T., Basharinov, A. Ye., Kolosov, M. A. and Kurskaya, A. A., "Ther-
mal Radio Emission of the Ice Cover in the SH? Range," TRUDY GGO (Transactions
of the Main Geophysical Observatory), No 222, pp 159-161, 1968.

Hilheit, T., Nordberg, N., Blinn, J.. et a1., "Aircraft Measurements of Micro-

wave Emission From Arctic Sea Ice," REMOTE SENSING OF ENVIRONMENT, No 2, pp
25-28, 1972.

COPYRIGHT: Arkticheskiy i antarkticheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut

(AANII), 1975

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢M‘LY

REMOTE MEASUREMENT OF SEA ICE THICKNESS BY RADAR METHODS

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDENA LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTARKTICHESKIY NAUCHNO-ISSLEDOVATEL'-
SKIY INSTITUT. FIZICHESKIYE HETODY ISSLEDOVANIYA L'DA I SNBGA in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 51-56

[Article by M. I. Finkel'shteyn, V. A. Kutev, V. G. Gluahnev and E. I. Lazarev]

[Text] Introduction. The radar method, based on measurement of the time interval
between separately observed signals reflected from the ice boundaries, is widely
used in measuring the thickness of glaciers, for example, in Antarctica [1]. Due
to the successes of nanosecond pulsed apparatus and the technique for the process-
ing of signals the method can be applied to thinner sea ice whose thickness usual-
ly does not exceed 2 m. However, a great attenuation occurs in this case.

In order to compute the ratio of the amplitudes of signals reflected from the boun-
daries of sea ice it is possible to use the data of J. Addison [7], which are con-
firmed by our radar sounding of sea ice. There is a definite "frequency window"
lying in the meter and partially in the short~wave wavelength ranges [6].

Method of Individual Radio Pulses

A radio pulse is characterized by the presence of at least several, for example,
three periods of high-frequency oscillations, so that the minimum activity is
'Lumin = 3/f, where f is the frequency of high-frequency oscillations. This cor-
responds to the minimum thickness of the homogeneous layer of ice hicemin -
Vice13u in/Z' where Vice - _ he] eice is the velocity of radio wave propagation
in ice Te ice is the complva dielectric constant).

Table 1 gives the limiting hicemin values and the ratio r of the bottom/top ampli-
tudes [2]. The salinity of ice was selected so as to be characteristic for sea
ice of the corresponding thickness (ice temperature -30°C).

The table shows that of the three frequencies only for f - 40 MHz is the ratio of
the bottom/top amplitudes acceptable for measurement from the point of view of
resolution of signals with a limited ice thickness. However, in this case hicemin
= 5.9 m. With higher frequencies the bottom/top ratio SQ 0.1. which makes the
process of measurement of the time interval between two reflected pulses, being
at the limit of resolution. virtually impossible. Only a frequency f - 300 MHz
makes a resolution of 0.8 m acceptable for practical purposes, but in order to

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHI¢JFFICJAl.lEﬂE(N§LV

ensure measurements there must be an increase in the r ratio by two orders of
magnitude, for which the salinity of ice must be approximately three times less.

Table 1

Dependence of Resolution and hicemin Value on Frequency of Sounding Signal

f, MHz 13am“. nanosec 5.2 hicemin' “‘ r

60 75 1-1.5 5.9 0.38
100 30 5-6 2 0.1
300 10 12-13 0.8 0.03

Method for Shock Excitation of Antenna

In 1960 J. Cook proposed the use of a monopulse in the form of one period of a
high-frequency oscillation for ensuring the contradictory requirements of use of
the above-mentioned frequency window and maintenance of the necessary resolution
[8]. The shock excitation of an antenna was proposed in order to obtain a mono-
pulse. It should be noted that the optimum shape of a pulse from the point of
view of the best resolution in the case of shock excitation differs from a monob
pulse [3].

This method was checked by N. Meyer, using horn antennas having a frequency band
from 150 MHz to 600 HR: [10]. In our experiments (in 1969 from a beacon ano in
1970 from aboard a helicopter) the shock excitation method was used by us in up-
paratus for the shaping of short radio pulses. Using wind-band vibrator antenxas
it was possible to obtain radio pulses with a duration of 6, 12, 20 nanoseconds
corresponding to the central frequencies 440, 300, 140 MHz. In addition, using
more low-frequency antennas with a central frequency of 70 MHz it was possible

to obtain pulses with a duration of 40 nanoseconds. In addition to measurement of
ice thickness, the inverse problem was solved: determination of the ice parameters
from the ratio of the amplitudes of the signals and the time interval between
them [4].

These experiments confirmed the possibility of using the method for fresh-water
and slightly saline ice and its inapplicability for highly saline sea ice. This
is associated witha strungnonuniformity of the frequency characteristic of real
antennas, especially in the low-frequency region, which leads to the "ringing"
phenomenon. This was mentioned by S. Evans as an important technical problem [9].

Videoinpulae Method (Method of Shock Excitation With Correction)

He proposed and from aboard a helicopter (1971) and aircraft (1972. 1973) made
practical use of a method for the compensation of ringing based on the use in the
receiving channel of narrow-band channels for the multiple frequencies P, 2F,...,

“P, which jointly with the frequency characteristic of the antenna form a uniform
comblike filter [5]. The signal with which a particular comblike filter is matched
is a packet of video pulses with the repetition rate P. Measurements can be made
from one of the pulses in the packet.

22

FOR OFFIC1A1.USEIMNLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

at,»
nanosec

Fig. 1. Dependence of true thickness of ice hue on time interval between pulse
maxim At. 1) 81cc = 6.5-139/00, twater - -22 - -36°C; 2) 1.5-2.5°/oo, twntcr ' '8-
-18°C; 3) perennial ice.

Our experiments revealed the possibility of measuring the thickness of sea ice be—
ginning with 50-60 ca. 'The presence of an adequate stability of the lean velocity
of radio wave propagation in ice of different thickness was demonstrated for sev-
eral gradations of the state of ice (Fig. 1). For one-year sea ice at an air tem-
perature tair -20°C and a mean ice salinity S - 4.5-l3°/oo the velocity of radio
wave propagation in the ice is 2.3 times less than in the air. With a decrease in
salinity this ratio decreases to 2 or more to the known value 1.79 for fresh ice.
An increase in air temperature ‘air above -20°C exerts a considerable influence on
the attenuation of radio waves in ice. In this case for young highly saline ice and
perennial ice the s‘gnal do- a not attain the lower layers, which makes it difficult
to determine the velocity 0' radio waves in the ice and also calibration when meas-
uring the thickness of such ice.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. lmgorodakiy, V. V., PIZICHESKIYE METOD‘I ISSLEDOVANIYA LBDNIKOV (Physical Meth-
ods for Investigating Glaciers), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat, pp 3-211, 1968.

2. Mendel'son, V. l... Kozlov, A. I. and Finkel'shteyn, M. 1., "Investigation of
Some Electrodynaulc Models of Ice in Radar Sounding -Prob1ems," IZV. AN SSSR:
FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA, V01 VIII, No lo, pp 396-602, 1972.

'J. Finkel'shteyn, H. 1., "Optimum Shape of Pulse in Radar Sounding of Sea Ice,"
RADIOTEKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA (Radio Engineering and Electronics), Vol 25, XV,
No 12. pp 2468-2672, 1970.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI‘OITHCIAI.US£10NLN

a. Pinkel'ehteyn, M. I.and Glushnev, V. 6., "Some Electrophysical Characteris-
tics of Sea Ice Measured by Radar Sounding in the Meter Wavelength Range,"
DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 203. No 3,
pp 577-580, 1972.

5. Finkel'shteyn, M. I. and Kutev, V. A., "Sounding of Sea Ice Using a Series of
Videopulses," RADIUI'EKHNIKA I ELEKTRO'NIKA, Vol XVII. No 10, pp 2107-2112, 1972.

6. Pinkel'shteyn, M. 1., Kozlov, A. I. and Mendel'son. V. L., "Modeling of Reflec-

tion of Radio Waves From Sea Ice," RADIOTEKNNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, Vol XV, No
11, pp 2282-2288, 1970.

7. Addison, J. R., "Electrical Properties of Saline Ice," J. OF APPLIED PHYS.,
V01 60, No 8, pp 3105-3116, 1969.

8. Cook, J. 0., "Proposed Monocycle Pulse Very-High-Erequency Radar for Airborne
Ice and Snow Measurement," TRANS. AMER. TEE. P 1 (Connun. and Electronics),
Vbl 79, No 51, p 588, 1960.

9. Evans, 8.. "Progress Report on Radio Echo Sounding," THE POLAR RECORD. Vol 13,
No 85, pp 613-420, 1966.

10. Meyer, M. A., "Remote Sensing of Ice and Snow Thickness." PROC. OF THE FOURTH
SYMPOSIUM 0F REMOTE SENSING OF ENVIRONMENT, The University of Michigan, pp 183-
192, 1966.

COPYRIGHT: Arkticheskiy i antarktlcheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut
(AANII), 1975

20

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NNLY
INSTRUMENTATION FOR INVESTIGATING SPECTRAL REFLECTION 0F LIQUID WATER IN THE
WAVELENGTH REGION 1-50}Lm

Leningrad mum. 01mm LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I mammmsm wcrmo-xssmoovmstn
sum msrrwr. nzmussxm mow Issunovmnm Um I swam in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 74-79

[Article by H. A. Kropotkin]

[Text] Remote sensing methods, based on use of radiations in the IR range, are
now being used more and more extensively in measuring the temperature of a water
surface. In interpreting the results obtained by remote sensing methods it is
necessary to know such optical characteristics of the water surface as the coef-
ficients of spectral reflection, spectral and integral radiation in the visible

and especially in the IR part of the spectrum, and also the dependence of the
optical parameters of water on such factors as salinity and temperature.

Investigations for study of the reflection of liquid water in the IR range have al-
ready been carried out over the course of several decades. During recent years the
reflection properties of liquid water are being investigated especially intensive-
ly. Work on investigation of the reflective properties of liquid water has also
been carried out at the Department of Principles of Electrovacuum Technology at

the Leningrad Electrotechnical Institute.

In this article we describe instrumentation used at the Leningrad Electrotechnical
Institute for measuring the spectral coefficients of reflection of liquid water

in the wavelength ruage fro" 1 to SOFLm [2. 3] and give some results of the inves—
tigations made.

The study of the spectral reflection of liquid water is complicated by the fact
that, first of all, the coefficients of reflection of liquid water, especially
In the case of small angles of incidence, in the IR range are small, and second,
the surface of the liquid water does not remain plane due to vibrations of the
ground. Accordingly, sometimes reflection at the air-liquid water discontinuity
is not investigated, but instead at a dielectric—water discontinuity. The coef-
[icients of reflection of the latter are then determined by computations. In ex-
perimental respects such a method is very convenient, but due to the absence of
nnterials transparent in the IR region and insoluble in water, such a method can

be used only in the region of wavelengths less than lZ-lSle.

At the Leningrad Electrotechnical Institute the investigation of the spectral re—
Election of liquid water has been accomplished using instrumentation in which a
mirror hemisphere is used for focusing the radiation reflected by the water.

25

FOR‘OFIICIAI.IISE:(NNLY
IN)Ii0FFIC1Al.USIZ(H§LY

Due to the use of this hemisphere there is a considerable reduction in the harmful
influence of ground vibration.

In the wavelength region up to ZOPLm the measurements were made with an attachment
to a standard single-ray IR spectrometer, whose optical diagram is shown as Fig. 1.
in this attachment the cell with the water to be investigated and the radiation
detector are situated under the mirror hemisphere at an identical distance from
the center of the hemisphere in the plane of its great circle. The plane mirror

H4 can be rotated. When making measurements of reflected radiation this mirror
directs monochromatic radiation onto the water surface to be investigated. The
reflected radiation is focused by the mirror hemisphere onto a radiation detector.

When measuring the incident radiation the mirror M4 is turned into a second posi-
tion, in which it directs the radiation directly onto the detector. Thus, if the
reflection coefficient of the mirror surfacing of the hemisphere is known, by
means of this attachment it is possible to measure the absolute reflection coef-

ficient of water.

The reflection coefficient of the mirror surfacing of the hemisphere was determined
with an accuracy to #11 by measuring the reflection coefficient of a plane mirror
which was sprayed simultaneously with the hemisphere. The possibility of measuring
the absolute reflection coefficient is an important advantage of this measurement
method since in the measurement of the relative reflection coefficient it is neces-
sary to use a comparison mirror. In this procedure it is necessary to take into ac-
count the difference in the character of the polarization of the radiation re-
flected by the water and comparison mirror, especially with angles of incidence
close to the Brewster angle.

As the radiation detector use was made of a radiation thermoelement with a window
RRS = S. In measurements in the wavelength region up to 10y.m the recording in-
strument was an H 195/2 multilimit galvanometer. in parallel with which a 1.7-
hilohm resistor was connected. The response of the measurement system could there-
fore be varied: it was maximum when measuring reflected energy and 10 times less

when measuring incident energy. With measurements in the wavelength region 12-20
Ilm, where the source energy is small, the galvanometer was replaced by a d-c am-

plifier and an EFF-09 automatic recorder.

In the wavelength zone from 20 to 50p.m the measurement of spectral reflection of
liquid water was accomplished using an apparatus consisting of a long-wave single-
ray IR spectrometer designed using a Pfund autocollimation scheme in which the
dispersing element used was interchangeable diffraction gratings and an optical
system focusing the monochromatic radiation either on the sample or on the detec-
tor. The optical system and the diffraction gratings are situated under the mirror
hemisphere. The switching of the ray from the sample to the detector is accomplish-

ed using the rotatable spherical mirror.

The source in this apparatus is a globar (lamp); the detector is a radiation ther-
moelement with a KRS-S window operating in combination with a d-c amplifier and an

EPP-09 electronic automatic recorder. In order to suppress the scattered short-wave
radiation the optical system of the monochromator has two fluorite reflecting fil-

ters and a transmission filter of smoked polyethylene. In addition. in the measure-
ments use was made of a cutting slide of sodium fluoride. All the enumerated

26

FORIOFTTCIAI.USEGMVLY
measures made it possible to reduce the level of scattered interfering short-wave
rudiat ion to 1-22.

Q00.
0,0.
0.0.

0.01 ‘

 

-—r--—---- -—r"‘ - - ---r‘ ——----l,--

I}; ‘I no no G) P”

Fig. 2. Reflection spectrum of liquid water.

During the measurements the water was poured into a special cell which was divided
into a number of sections by several horizontal and vertical partitions. The water

layer over the upper horizontal partition was 1.5 mm. Adjustment was accomplished
by use of a flat mirror whose reflecting surface was placed at the level of the

upper section of the cell. Upon completion of adjustment the mirror is removed and
the cell is filled to the edges with water.

In all the measurements a convergent beam of rays with an angle at the vertex in
the plane of incidence of 5° was incident on the investigated surface. The angle
of incidence for the central ray of this beam was 17°. The nonparallel nature of

the incident beam is a source of additional errors, but with a change in the angle
27
FOR 0F!1CLALI1§E(NULY
FOIUOFFKJAI.US£|DNIN

of incidence in the range tS' it is possible to assume that the change in the co-
efficient of reflection of water as a function of the angle of incidence is lin-
ear; therefore, the error in determining the reflection coefficient, caused by the
nonparallel nature of the incident beam, is small. According to our estimate it is
not greater than 11.

The nonlinearity of the radiation detector, d-c amplifier and electronic potentio-
meter can exert a substantial influence on measurement accuracy. The influence of
nonlinearity of the thermoelectric detector in this case is insignificant since
the measurements are made twice at each wavelength: for incident and reflected

radiation. From this point of view the presence of some selectivity of the thermo-
element is also unimportant.

The nonlinearity of the d-c amplifier (an prov-1s was used for this purpose) was

caused by the nonuniformity of illumination and response over the surface of the
photoelements. If prior to each measurement a zero position of the boundary between

the light and shadow is set strictly in the middle of the second stage grids, the
FEOU is linear with an accuracy to 1%. In order to decrease the influence of nonlin-
earity of the EFF-09 electronic potentiometer on the measurement accuracy, in this
work use was made of a specially selected automatic recorder the nonlinearity of
whose scale did not exceed 21.

Thus, it is extremely difficult to make a precise evaluation of the error possible
when determining the absolute values of the reflection coefficients. It is evi-
dently a value not greater than 4-51. The checking of the reproducibility of the
results indicated that in the case of repeated measurements the scatter of the de-
termined values does not exceed 2.51.

Figure 2 shows the reflection spectrum of distilled water (curve 1) which we ob-
tained using the described apparatus. As a comparison, this same figure shows the
reflection spectra of water obtained by other researchers. Curve 2 was taken from
[7], curve 3 -- from {8], and curve a - from [9]. Curve 5 was computed from the
values of the optical constants of liquid water cited in [1].

Figure 2 shows that the reflection spectrum of liquid water which we obtained is
characterized by-the selective reflection bands at 2.93 and 6.1+Lm, and also at
46 and GBPLm. A somewhat greater value of the reflection coefficient in the re-
gion of wavelengths less than lZ’Lm is attributable to the fact that the data of
other authors were obtained with lesser angles of incidence (curves 2, 3 with

a normal angle of incidence, and curve 4 with an angle of incidence 10°). In the
more long-range spectral region our results also satisfactorily agree with the
results of other authors. The selective reflection bands which we discovered at
44 and hBilm agree well with the absorption bands in the spectrum of liquid water
obtained by N. c. Yaroslavakiy and A. Ye. Stanevich [5]. True, in a later publica-
tion dealing with the investigation of the transmission of liquid water in the
long-wave IR spectral region [6] the mentioned bands are absent. In [6] the ab-

sorption spectrum was determined using a two-component spectrometer. The authors
of this article assume that the bands discovered by N. G. Yaroslavskiy and A. Ye.
Stanevich were caused by the absorption of the water vapor present in the volume
of the spectrometer. However, the DIKS-l used by N. G. Yaroslavskiy and A. Ye.
Stanevich was of the vacuum type, so that this cause is improbable.

28

FOR OITICJAI.lEﬂE(N§LY
The described apparatus can also be used in studying the reflection spectra of
snow and ice. However, in an investigation of snow and ice in order to preserve
the natural state of their surface it is necessary to use special refrigeration

apparatus. For this purpose it is convenient to use miniaturized semiconductor

condensers produced by our industry. In the case of use of refrigeration apparatus
it is difficult to ensure a small distance between the investigated sample and the

radiation detector. If a mirror hemisphere is used, this distance cannot be great
since its increase is linked to a sharp increase in aberration of the hemispher-
ical mirror. There is a particularly strong increase in aberration in the case

of a diffuse or mixed character of reflection from the investigated object, such
as snow.

In the case of considerable aberrations of the optical system in order to measure
the entire reflected flux it is necessary to have an indicator with a large re-
ceiving area. Such an indicator has a low sensitivity.

it can be shown that a mirror semiellipsoid (half of a mirror whose surface is
formed by the rotation of the ellipse about the semi-major axis) has considerably
lesser aberrations. With the use of a mirror seniellipsoid for measuring the re-
flection coefficients a sample is placed in one of its foci. This sample is ir-
radiated thr0ugh an aperture in the upper part of the semiellipsoid, whereas the
radiation detector is placed in its other focus.

In the Department of the Principles of Electrovacuum Technology at the Leningrad
Electrotechnical Institute a new variant of an attachment has been developed for
the IR spectrometer. Here a mirror hemisphere is used in place of a mirror semi-
cllipsoid [4]. Work is also being done on replacing the mirror semiellipsoid in the
apparatus intended for measuring the reflection coefficients in the region of
wavelengths 20-50P.m.

The described apparatus is now being used at the present time at the Leningrad
Electrutechnical Institute for studying the influence of salinity and temperature
on the spectral reflection of water, and also for investigating the optical prop-
erties of snow and ice in the IR range.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Zolotarev, V. M., Mikhug'nv, B. A., Al'perovich, L. I. and Popova, S. 1., "Dis-
persion and Absorption of Liquid Hater in the IR and Radiowave Spectral Re-
gions," OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA (Optics and Spectroscopy), Vyp 27, No 5, pp
790-795, 1969.

2. Kroputkin, N. A. and Kozyrev, B. P., "Determination of the Spectral Coefficients
of Reflection of Bulk Haterials in the Wavelength Region 0.7-15P.m." IZV.
VYSSHIKH UCHEBHYKH ZAVEDENIY: FIZIKA (News of Higher Institutes of Education:
Physics), No 3, pp 27-29, 1965.

3. Krupotkin, N. A. and Kozyrev, B. P., "Apparatus for Investigating Spectral Re-
floctinn of Scattering Haterials in the Long-Wave IR Part of the Spectrum,"
IZV. VYSSHIKH UCHEBNYKN ZAVEDENIY-PRIBOROSTROYENIYE (News of Higher Institutes
or Education: Instrument Making), No 6, pp 123-130, 1963.

29

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NHLY
4.

S.

6.

7.

8.

9.

FOI‘OFWHJAI.USE(MNLY

Kropotkin, H. A., Kutilina, N. B. and Sheveleva, T. Yu., "Apparatus for Hess-
uring the Transmission and Reflection Coefficients of Scattering Materials
in the Wavelength Region From 1 to 20P"’" IZV. LBTI (News of the Leningrad

Electrotechnical Institute), No 161, pp 110-116, 1975.

Stanevich, A. Ye. and Yaroslavakiy, N. 6., "Absorption of Liquid Water in the
Long-Have Region of the IR Spectrum." OPTIKA I SPEKTROSKOPIYA (Optics and
Spectroscopy), No 10, pp 278-281, 1961.

Draequert, D. A., Stone, N. H., Hillians, D. and Curnutte, 3., ”Far IR Spec-
trum of Liquid Hater," J. OPT. SOC. AMER., Vol 56, No 1, pp 64-69, 1966.

Pontier. L. and Dechanbenoy, C., "Determination des constantes optiques de
l'eau liquide entre 1 et 40 aka. Application an caICul de son pouvoir reflec-
teur et de son enissivite," ANN. GEOPHYS., Vol 22, No A, pp 633-641, 1966.

Rush, A. N., Williams. D. and Querry, M. 8.. "Optical Constants 0E Hater in
the Infrared," J. OPT. SOC. AHER., Vol 61, No 7, pp 895-903. 1971.

Querry, H. R., Curnutte, 8.. and Williams. 0., "Refractive Index of Hater in
the Infrared." J. 0PT. SOC. AMBR., Vol 59. No 10, pp 1299-1305, 1969.

COPYRIGHT: Arkticheskiy i nntarkricheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy inatitut

(AANII), 1975

30

FOI'OFFNJAI.USE(HUUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ICE BEHAVIOR IN HIGH-STRENGTH RAPIDLY VARYING ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDENA LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTARKTICHESKIY NABCHNO-ISSLEDOVATEL'-
SKIY INSTITUT. FIZICHESKIYB HETODY ISSLEDOVANIYA L'DA I SNEGA in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 90-93

[Article by L. B. Nekrasov]

[Text] Theoretical and experimental investigations of recent years indicate the ex-
istence of a fluid or quasifluid water film on the ice surface. The hypothesis of
existence of a thin water film on the ice surface at temperatures below its melting
point was expressed for the first time by Faraday in 1860 in [6]. The matter of

the energetically stable existence of a water film on an ice surface at negative
temperatures was the subject of a discussion between Faraday, Thomson and Tyndall
[5]. The hypothesis of a quasifluid film on the ice surface was further developed
by Weyl, who attempted to explain the existence of film water on the ice surface
on the basis of the concept of an impaired structure of the surface layers of
solids.

There are now experimental data [7, 8] indirectly confirming the presence of a
water film on the basis of measurement of the tensile strength and shearing
strength of ice, especially that frozen on a plate of stainless steel and optical
quartz. Experiments for studying shearing strength gave values which could be
expected if one accepts the hypothesis of the existence of a quasifluid layer be-
tween the ice and the surface of these materials.

Dilatation experime'ts give rise to fractures in the ice mass. There were no frac-
tures of the material (quar‘- plate) at the ice-surface contact. The author pos-
rulates that the factor responsible for this is surface tension forces in the

quasifluid layer existing between the ice surface and the plate.

The existence of a fluid film on the ice surface is indicated by investigations
of nuclear magnetic resonance, making it possible to obtain information on the
degree of mobility of molecules. Due to the inadequate response of the nuclear
magnetic resonance method dat:1were obtained [3] confirming the existence of film
water only in highly disperse ice (hoarfrost on the walls of a Dewar vessel with

liquid nitrogen).

These data once again confirm the widely held opinion that the adsorbed state of
water in the form of a quasifluid film is a comnnn property of the disperse

state of matter. Nevertheless, nuclear magnetic resonance data do not give a con-
vincing answer to the question as to whether there is a water film in monolithic

31

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORiOFﬁKJAl.USE(M€LY

Semicrystallinc ice - the most interesting case for practical purposes.

Studies for inveStigation of the adhesion properties of ice, in our opinion, make
the problem of the existence of a quasifluid film in monolithic ice still more de—
batable. He made an attempt at experimental confirmation of the fact of existence
of film water in semicrystalline ice on the basis of its behavior in highly vari-
able high-strength electromagnetic fields.

It is well known that ice, especially pure ice, being a good dielectric, is vir-
tually not heated in highly variable fields even of a very high strength. How-
ever, as indicated by our experiments carried out in the Problems Laboratory of
Destruction of Rocks by Powerful Electromagnetic Fields of the Leningrad Mining
'nstitute, semicrvstallinc ice at negative temperatures is extremely effectively
destroyed in a high-strength HF electromagnetic field.

The experiments were carried out with strongly mincralized ice (prepared from sea
water), ice with slight mineralization (distillate) and ice prepared from chem-
ically pure water (subjected to anion-cation purification and degassing). The
destruction of ice in all cases developed approximately identically: after 1.5-2
sec from the time of exposure to an electromagnetic field (E - 4 KV/cm; f = 60.68
MHz) the ice (weakly mineralized) loses its optical and mechanical homogeneity:

after 3-4 sec poorly distinguishable inclusions of volume water and voids appear
in the sample: after 7-8 sec there is a stage of intensive fracturing of the

sample, ending with complete disintegration into individual crystals.

As is well known, dielectric heating is determined by the loss factor £5" - 8'
tgb. The value of this characteristic for quasifluid films at the ice surface is
n0t mentioned in the literature. However, there is basis for assuming that the
value of the loss factor 8 " for film water at the ice surface must not differ
greatly from the adsorbed water on other substances at the corresponding tempera-
tures and frequencies. We will compare 6." for the ice and water adsorbed on sil-
ica gel at negative temperatures and also for ice and volume water at positive tem-
peratures.

For adsorbed water at frequencies of hundreds of HR: at a temperature to -70°c
tg.6 - 5-10"2 and 8 ' - 4 [1]; £' is slightly dependent on frequency and temper-
ature [2]. At frequencies of about 2 MHz and with a temperature of about -30°C
tg,6 - 0.3 [2]. There are far more data on the electric properties of volume water
and ice. Since the rate of dielectric heating is dependent primarily on the fac-
tor of losses of the heated material and on field frequency, it is desirable to
examine the behavior of volume water in high-frequency fields in dependence on
these characteristics. Source [4] gives the dependence of £3 tg 6 f - E "f on
field frequency for volume water and ice in a broad frequency range.

The value 5 "f for water in the range of high and especially superhigh frequencies
greatly exceeds this same value for ice. For example, at a frequency of 2375 M“:
(the frequency of industrial technological apparatus) this value for water is 3.6-
1010 whereas for ice (with t - 20'C) it is equal to only 4.3-106.

He will compare the electric characteristics of ice, film and volume water at nega-
tive and positive temperatures. It was demonstrated in [1] that at a frequency of
213 MHz tg 6 for ice is (4.2-7)-10", whereas the dielectric constant is 3.2.

32

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY
In other words, the loss factor 8" for ice at a frequency of 213 MHz is equal to
1.3-10'3. For adsorbed water at negative temperatures at this same frequency 6"-
2-10‘1, for volume water at positive temperatures -£"- 2.4.

Scaled to the value 8' tg 6 f (determining the capacity of the material to absorb
HF energy) for ice, film water (at a temperature corresponding to the temperature
of ice) and volume water (as a temperature close to 0°C) we obtain the values
3.2-105; 4.3-107 and 5.l~10 . Thus. the intensity of absorption of the HP energy
by the film water at a frequency of 213 MHz exceeds by two orders of magnitude

(to be more precise, by a factor of 111) the intensity of absorption of HP energy
by ice at this same frequency.

The intensity of absorption of HF energy by volume water in comparison with ice is
still greater (by a factor of 160). In the light of these data the behavior of the
polycrystalline ice in rapidly variable high-strength fields can be explained in

the following way. Under the influence of a high-frequency field on the ice the
absorption of energy OCCurs for the most part at the surface and at the boundaries
of the grains. As a result. the liquid layer will increase and the mechanical
Strength of the ice will decrease. From the moment of appearance of the volume water
the process of ice destruction will be accelerated still more (avalanchelike pro-
cess). With some critical thickness of the water layers between the individual
crystals the ice monolith breaks apart under its own weight.

For highly mineralized ice it is also possible to give other explanations of the
behavior of ice in an electromagnetic field. The admixtures dissolved in the water
at the time of phase transitions are squeezed toward the boundaries of the crystals
and can be the source of local losses leading to the fracturing of the ice without
melting in its entire mass.

However, such a mechanism can scarcely explain the similar pattern of behavior of
ice prepared from distilled water. In any case, for ice which is virtually conr
pletely deprived of chemical admixtures, the explanation of the observed pattern
of destruction is obviously different. Evidently. the only possible source of in-
creased dielectric losses in the semicrystalline ice may be film water, whose

E ' and cg 3 parameters, according to available data, are much greater than for
ice.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

i. ﬂognrodskiy, V. V. and Fedorov, B. A., "Radar Sounding of Glaciers," ZHURN.
TEKHN. FIZ. (Journal of Technical Physics), Vol 37, Ho 4, pp 781-788, 1967.

2. Zhilenkov, I. V., "Debye Dispersion of Adsorbed Water at Low Temperatures,"
12V. AN SSSR: OKhN (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences: Division of Chem-
ical Sciences), No 2, pp 232-236, 1957.

3. Kvlivldze. V. 1., Kiselev, V. F. and Ushakova, L. A., "Existence of a Quasi—
rlutd Film on an Ice Surface," DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports of the USSR Academy
of Scivnrus), No 191(5). pp 1088-1090, 1970.

33

FOI,OF?1(JAI.lﬂﬂE(NHLY
5.

FOR UI'I'ILIAI. Dbl; ONLY

Nekrasov, L. B. and Ivanov, V. 6., "Destruction of Ice in Strong HF Electromag-
netic Fields," FIZIKO-TBKHNICHESKIYE PROBLEMY RAZRABOTKI POLEZNYKH ISKOPAYEMYKH

(Physicotechnical Problems in Mineral Output), No 5, pp 26-28, 1971.

Ushakova, L. A., Kvlividze, V. I. and Sklyankin, A. A., "Surface Properties of
Snow and the Hetamorphisn Process," GIDROLOGIYA SUSHI. GLYAISIOLOGIYA. ITOGI
NAUKI (Hydrology of the Land. Glaciology. Results of Science), Moscow, Izd-vo
AN SSSR, pp 9-39, 1968. ‘

Faraday, H., "Note on Regelation," PROC. ROY. SOC. LONDON, No 10, p 440, 1860.

Jelllnek, H. H. 0., "Liquid-like Layer on Ice," J. APPL. PHYS., No 32, p 1793,
1961.

Jellinek, H. H. 6., "Liquid-like (Transition) Layer on Ice," J. COLL. AND INTER-
FACE SCI., No 25, pp 192-205, 1967.

COPYRIGHT: Arkticheskiy 1 antarkticheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'ekiy institut

(AANII), 1975

36

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEIHVLY
DYNAMICS OF ICE IN COASTAL REGIONS ACCORDING TO DATA FROM SIDE-LOOKING RADAR
SURVEY PROM AIRCRAFT

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDENA LBNINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTARKIICHESKIY NAUCHNO—ISSLEDOVATEL'-

SKIY INSTITUT. FIZICHESKIYE MBTODY ISSLEDOVANIYA L'DA I SNEGA in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 104-113

[Article by S. H. Losev and Yu. A. Gorbunov]

[Text] Among the new noncontact methods for investigating the ice cover which have
come into practical use during the last decade is a side-looking radar survey from
an aircraft [1, 3, 5, 7]. In this article the emphasis is on those possibilities
which are afforded by a radar image in a study of the drift of ice and some pheno-
mena associated with it.

Experience in work with the films of an electronic photorecording unit of a side-
looking radar station convinces us that they contain much important information

which can be used successfully for a deeper investigation of the kinematics and
dynamics of the ice cover.

The materials from surveys with a side-looking radar in arctic seas during the per—
iod from 1968 through 1972 were used by us in investigating the following problems:
influence of the land on the forming of drift in the coastal regions, spatial vari-
ability of the field of velocity of ice movement. mobility of ice fields relative

to one another and their rotation, compression and thinning of the continuous drift-
ing ice.

Much of the materials usnd lure were obtained in ice aerial reconnaissance. The sur-
veys were carried out both along individual flight alines and along parallel runs
with coverage of a considerable area of the sea. The time interval between observa-
tions in one and the same region for the most part was two days.

A knowledge of the peculiarities of ice drift in the coastal regions is of great
importance for ensuring navigation and also for the designing and operation of
different kinds of hydraulic structures. However, there have been no effective
methods for investigating the patterns of movement of ice under the real conditions
prevailing in arctic seas with simultaneous coverage of quite extensive zones. In
turn, attempts at an analytical solution of the problem of ice cover drift have

not always been successful due to the difficulties in correct allowance for

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ€]Al.lEﬂi(ﬂULY

influence of the land. In this respect the data obtained using a side—looking radar
can give much which is highly valuable for both practical work and for theory.

The material which we had at our disposal made it possible to analyze several
schemes of the fields of velocity of drift of packed ice in the neighborhood of
the islands. It was established that as a result of the transfer of the normal
pressure forces in the ice cover on the drift side of the islands there is forma-
tion of zones of compression within which the normal drift component vn decreases
with approach to the shore.

As the extent of the nondrift zone of influence of the island we will use the dis-
tance Lf in the direction of the general drift from the point where a decrease in
velocities to the central part of the island begins. Then the extent of the zone
of influence of the island can be expressed by the value

L:
h,

wherellis the section of the island along the normal to Lf. According to the col-
lected data this ratio was close to 5 (Table 1).

Table 1
Characteristics of Field of Ice Drift Velocity on Drift Side of Island (Summertime)

Measurement Length of Section of vmax, Extent of Extent of Lf/h LO/h

series island, km island along km/day zone of zone of
normal to fixed ice island
drift h, km Lo, km influence
Lf, km “
1 11.1 9.6 11.8 8.1 50.6 5.25 0.8b
2 12.0 12.0 10.5 11.1 58.1 4.84 0.92
3 14.5 11.5 14.7 10.8 61.4 5.34 0.94
mean 5.15 0.90

The change in the component V“ in the direction of the general drift as a function
of distance to the shore L is characterized by a regularity which in general form
can be represented by the equation

731“” (‘1'?)-

”mu

where Vnmax is the normal component of drift velocity at the bOundary of the zone of

influence of the island; L2 is the distance from the shore to the boundary of this
zone.

Directly near the island on the drift side there is formation of a zone of fixed

ice in the form of a wedge directed toward the drift and giving the island a stream-
lined shape. In sumner the ratio of the length of the wedge Lo, measured from the
section h, to the value of the section itself on the average is equal to 0.9. In
winter as a result of freezing together of the ice the wedge can be more elongated.
According to data from one of the surveys made during this period the Lo/h value

was 1.51.

36

FINICNHWC]AI.[ERE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the approaches to the wedge the drift divided and the ice, bending around the
island on both sides, again converges on the opposite side. The zone of open pack
in: developing beyond the island disappears at a distance from 0.6 to 2h. The zone
of influence of the island on the field of velocity of movement of the ice on the
sheltered side is approximately half as great as on the drift side. The increase
in velocity beyond the island ceases on the average at a distance of 2.5 h (Table
2).

Table 2

Characteristics of Field of Ice Drift Velocity on Sheltered Side of Island (Sumner)

Measurement Length of Section of island Extent of zone Lb/ h
series island, km along noraal to of influence
drift h, In: of island 1.1,,
km
7 12.0 12.0 32.0 2.67
3 14.5 11.5 32.0 2.78
4 37.0 26.0 62.0 2.38
5 22.0 16.5 35.5 2.15
mean 2.50
v

 
 
 
   
    

3.... Winter

.20

   

' 'Tﬁ—r—ﬁ'ﬂ 1"'| ‘l 'r'
(I lumIJOGOWWVONOOIOOIIOI I30

Fig. 1. Change in drift velocity components of packed ice as function of distance
to shore. 1) normal component; 2) tangential component.

The use of films for the photorecording unit in a study of ice drift in straits be-
tween two islands or between an island and the mainland made it possible to estab-
lish that the formation of zones of compression and fixed ice on the drift side of
LIIL' islands creates the effect of an "increase" in the length of the strait. For

this reason the zone of increase in the velocity of ice mvement at the entry into

n strait is 1.2-2 times longer than the zone of decrease in velocity at the exit
From the strait. The profiles of the velocity of the tangential component of drift

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIIICHHNCJAI.USEIMNLY

across the central part of the strait and between the zone of compression and
the shore of the mainland to all practical purposes are similar to one another.

It is known from observations that the shore exerts a different influence on the
normal and tangential drift components. However, traditional methods for the study
of ice drift under real conditions_(radio beacons, DARMS stations, drifting ata-
tions) have not given simultaneous data for a detailed spatial analysis of change
of these components. Surveys made using the side-looking radar make it possible to
carry out such an analysis. '

Figure 1 shows the change in ice drift velocity components for ice with a continuity
of 9-10 units. The surveys were made in winter. In this case at a distance of 130-
140 km from the land, where the drift components for all practical purposes no

longer changed, the general direction of ice movement was at an angle ,6- 23' to
the boundary of the shore ice (the width of the shore ice was about 15 km).

It follows from the cited data that with approach to the shore the tangential com-
ponent v1 first increases, whereas the vn component decreases. This is attributable
to the fact that in this sector the value of the drift velocity vectors virtually
does not change. At the same time, they rotate and in direction they gradually
approach the direction of the shore ice boundary.

At a distance of 40—45 km from the fixed ice the influence of boundary zone friction
begins to be reflected. Within its limits the v1 values intensively decrease and at

the boundary of the shore ice this component is only 0.4 of its maximum value.

The normal drift component vn within the limits of the boundary zone is usually less
than the VL component. In the immediate neighborhood of the shore or shore ice in a

zone with a width of 10-15 km it is close to zero. Beyond the limits of the boundary
zone the relationship between the v1 and vn values can be different and be determin-
ed completely by the value of the 5 angle.

In summer the change in the ice drift components in general is characterized by the
same regularities. This is indicated by the data obtained in the neighborhood of
the islands. However, the width of the boundary zone in the presence of packed ice
during this period decreases to 10-15 km. The reaction of the normal-drift compon-
ent to the influence of the shore is transmitted within the region of the ice cover
the same, evidently, as over shorter distances. At this time we have not been able

to obtain any specific data on this problem.

The drift of the ice cover is accompanied by relative movements of the floes. The
intensity of movement of the floes relative to one another has already been invest-
igated on the basis of an aerial photographic survey with averaging of velocity dur-
ing time intervals of about one hour [2. 6]. Using films from the photorecording
unit we analyzed the velocities of relative movement of the ice with time averaging
of two days. The mobility of the floes was examined in the direction of the mean

drift and along the normal to it. For this we used the mean square values of the
longitudinal v'L and transverse v'n deviations of the velocity vector of each flee
from the vector of mean ice drift velocity. The areas of the zones for which the
drift was averaged were 600-800 kmz. It follows from these results that the

38

FOI‘OFENJAI.USE(NVLY
INJRIOFFICJAI.IISEZCNVLV

relative displacements of the floes along the general drift increase with an in-
crease in the mean "elocity modulus v for movement of the ice cover (Table 3).

Table 3
Mean Square Values of Longitudinal Deviations 3'1 of Ice Drift Velocity Vector, in
km/day

Ice continuity, Mean ice drift velocity, km/day
units

7-9 9-11 11-13 13-15 15-17
6-6 1.81 2.43 2.69 2.98 3.56
7 1.20 1.55 1.72 2.06 2.35
8-10 0.62 0.74 0.86 1.11 1.30

The dependence of the V'L value on'the 3 and C parameters is entirely satisfactor-
ily approximated by the expression

17.40.41 -—0,037C)17.

The mean square values of the transverse displacements of floes V'n also increase
with an acceleration of the general movement of the ice cover (Table 4). At the

same time it is impossible to note any significant influence_pf ice continuity with
its change from 4 to 9-10 units. In general, the deviations v'n are comparable with
the longitudinal deviations of the drift velocity vectors for packed ice.

The mean deviation between V'n and V is 0.102.

It should be noted that in a coastal zone with a width of 15-20 km the fluctuations
of the drift velocity vector are greater than in the more seaward zone. For ex-
ample, with an ice continuity of 6-6 units the longitudinal deviations exceed the
values cited in Table 2 on the average by a factor of 1.5. The values of the trans-
verse deviations near the shore increase by a factor of 2-3.

Table 4

Mean Square Values of Transverse Deviations 7'“ of Ice Drift Velocity Vector. kmdday

3, Ian/day V _, Ian/day 7, Ian/day V'n, Ian/day
7-9 0.78 13-15 1.21
9-11 1.13 15-17 1.73
11—13 1.10 17-19 1.95

A joint analysis of the deviations 3}_and v'n makes it possible to establish a change
in the nature of the distribution of the velocity vectors for movement of floes rela-
tive to the mean vector with an increase in continuity of the ice cover. It was found
that in open pack ice the longitudinal displacements of the floes predominate over
the transverse displacements, that is, v'n/v'1<:l (Fig. 2). With an ice continuity

of about 8 units the deviations on the average become equal. In more continuous ice
the transverse displacements of the floes are greater than the longitudinal dis-
placements. The dependence of the ratio v'n/vfgon ice continuity is determined ap—
proximately using the formula 0- I

I

a; ' Tie—7.712117.“

39
F03¢Nﬂﬂl1Al.USE(MVBY
FOR OHMJAI. USE ONLY

  

units

TT‘1—T'TT1'0 °-°"

Fig. 2. Change in ratio Vh'/31' as function of ice continuity (in units).

ellipses of scattering of the deviations v), and v'n. If the resultant drift is di-
rected in the direction of any obstacle (toward the shore or zone of stranded ice),
limiting the movements of the ice cover, the longer axis of the ellipse of scatter-
ing rotates relative to the mean velocity vector, tending to be oriented along the
general direction of the obstacle. The very same occurs in the case of drift of
open pack ice in the direction of the ice mass. For example, with a direction of
the mean velocity vector at an angle of 50° to the boundary of the ice mass the
greater axis of the ellipse was deflected from this b0undary by only 15', that is,
it was turned relative to the mean drift by 35°. In the ice mass itself, near its
boundary, with a similar direction of the resultant movement of the ice, the el-
lipses of scattering were also oriented along the boundary of the pack ice.

It was established earlier on the basis of materials from an aerial photographic
survey that with the drift of open pack ice, uniformly distributed in space, and in
the absence of obstacles the greater axis of the ellipses is usually deflected from
the direction of the averaged drift by not more than 10° [4). Now it has been found
that in the presence of an ice continuity gradient the displacement of the floes
relative to the mean velocity vector occurs differently. The velocity vectors are
distributed in such a way that there is a predominance of drift fluctuations in

the region of lesser ice continuity. Evidently. this peculiarity is attributable

to internal processes transpiring in the ice cover as a result of both contact and
hydrodynamic interaction of ice [6].

0n the basis of materials from a radar survey it is possible to investigate the spa-
tial variability of the field of ice drift velocity. As a characteristic of the

correlation between the velocities of ice movement at individual points in the
drift field we computed the normalized spatial correlation functions:

40

IN)! OIWWCJAI.IISIECNVLY
FORGDFFKJAL.USE10NLN

‘ '
7-7- 12!.” (1'0". (Ll + l)

RU); -_..___‘__

where v'(L1) and v'(L1+ l) are the deviations from the mean drift velocity at the
points L1 and L1 + 1; I is the interval in which the correlation function was de—
termined;o“2, is the dispersion of drift velocity.

In computations we used a scheme of ice drift taking in an area of about 110,000
km2 and averaged during a time interval of two days. The analysis was made in the
direction of the general drift and along the normal to it.

The values of the mean velocity of ice movement and the standard deviations along
the general drift were ggual to v - 9.2 km/day; 03,- 0.02 km/day, and along the
normal to the drift -- v - 9.6 km/day; C7; - 2.90 km/day.

RI”

 

Fig. 3. Normalized spatial correlation functions of drift velocity of pack ice. 1)
along direction of general drift; 2) along normal to general drift.

It can be seen from Fig. 3. which shows the results of computations, that the dif-
ference in the normalized correlation functions in the directions mentioned above
is extremely signifi-ant. A substantial linear correlation between the drift velo-
cities ncross the movement 1:. ice (with R(L)< 0.5) is observed at points distant
from one another by not more than 18 km, whereas along the drift this distance in-
creases to 39 km. The first intersection of the axis of distances with the curve
of the correlation function along the normal to the drift is observed with l = 35
km. The correlation function along the direction of drift attains zero with Q - 75
km. Thus, the mean values of the maximum size of the structural formations of the
field of drift velocity in the direction of ice movement and along the normal to
it differ by a factor of appruximately 2. This means that the structural forma-
tions of drift velocity, that is, zones of increased and decreased velocities of
ice movement, have an elliptical shape and are drawn out in the direction of the
general movement of ice.

One of the peculiarities of ice drift is rotation of flees during their translation-

al movement. The floes can rotate both as a reSult of random interactions between
them and under the influence of the general nonuniformity of the field of velocity

61

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
I‘ll OIIWCJAL.USIZ(HVLY

of ice movement. It is evident that the rotation of large ice fields for the most
part is attributable to the nonuniformity of drift and to a lesser degree is de-
pendent on random factors. For a clarification of this circumstance we analyzed

the rotation of 65 ice fields measuring from 2 to 8 km with an ice continuity of
U-lO units, making use of electronic photoregistry films. The velocity of rotation
of the floes was compared with the local transverse drift velocity gradient in the
sector of movement of each field. It was discovered that there is a direct correla-
tion between these values, that is, with an increase in the absolute value of the
transverse drift gradient the intensity of rotation of floss also increases. This
dependence is expressed approximately by the equation

‘)

. III'
‘3"5 - «Tum
where the transverse drift velocity gradient av/an is expressed in km/day / km,
and the velocity of rotation u)- in degrees per day.

A study of deformation of the ice surface is of great importance, that is, an inves-
tigation of the compressions and dilatations arising in it. For a quantitative
evaluation of these phenomena we used the change in area ASS of a "surface ele-
ment," discriminated from the characteristic points on individual floes. Since the
electronic photoregistry films make it possible to establish the relative position
of the floes at the times of the first and second surveys, it is also possible to
determine the deformation.A S of the contour during the interval between observa-
tions (it. The intensity of deformation is expressed most simply by the relative
change in the area of a surface element in a unit time

. s, .5.
""117-

where 81 and 52 are the areas of the contour during the first and second surveys.
The relative deformation value is identical to the divergence of the ice drift velo-
city field.

A total of 134 Hrvalues were obtained by the described method using data from summer
surveys of pack ice. Seventy of these were with a plus sign and 64 were with a minus.
In the computations for the most part we discriminated rectangular contours. The
areas of the figures on the average were 100-120 kmz. It was established as a result
of a careful analysis of the materials that the deformation of figures of such a
scale is determined by the changes of both the ve10city and direction of drift.

The mean positive p.value was +0.142; the mean negative value was -0.l36; the mean
for the entire sample was +0.009: the standard deviation was 0.186. The extreme
p.values were +0.95 and -0.38. The curve of y distribution is characterized by a
positive asymmetry and a positive excess. The totality of these data makes it pos-
sible to assume that in the studied situation the deformations of the surface of
the continuous ice cover during compression were manifested less intensively than
during dilatation.

Spatially the P-values were not distributed unsystematically, but form individual
zones with positive and negative values. In such zones during the period between

surveys there were dilatations or compressions of the ice respectively. The zones
of compression, elongated along the normal to the general drift, alternate with

42

FIHICHHHCIAI.IEIE(HVLY
FINICHﬂﬂCJAl.USE(MVLY

zones of dilatation. The width of the first on the average is 30 km; the width of
the second on the average is 60 km. The maximum negative}; values were observed
on the drift side of the islands, that is, in zones of intensive decrease in the
velocity of ice movement. The maximum positive y.values were observed at the en-
trances to straits. where. on the other hand, the velocity increases were consid-
erable. In zones of positiveil values it was usually possible to observe the form-
ing of channels or chains of leads.

In this article we have by no means examined all the aspects of use of side-looking
radar for study of the dynamics of the ice cover in the coastal regions of arctic
seas. Nevertheless, we hope that the results cited here will be indicative of the
possibilities of a multisided application of this method, which is not dependent

on such factors as the illumination of the underlying surface and visibility. At
the same time, we assume that the method requires further development, which evi-
dently must be directed both along the lines of technical improvement of the radar
system and along the lines of broad automation of the procedures of processing and
analysis of the collected data.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. Corbunov, Yu. A. and Losev, S. M.. "Use of the Side-Looking 'Toros' Radar Set
for Investigating Ice Drift," TRUDY AANII (Transactions of the Arctic and Ant-
arctic Scientific Research Institute), Vol 316, pp 153-162, 1976.

2. Corbunov, Yu. A. and Timokhov, L. A., "Investigation of the Dynamics of Ice,"

IZV. AN SSSR: SERIYA FIZIKA ATMOSPERY I OKEANA (News of the USSR Academy of
Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 6, No 10, pp 1086—1091,
1968.

3. Glushkov, V., et a1., ”New Means for Obtaining Ice Information," MORSKOY PLOT
(Navy), No 9. pp 27-28, 1910.

a. Losev, S. H., “Statistical Analysis of Relative Mobility of Ice Cover," TRUDY
AANII, Vol 307, pp 28—40, 1973.

S. Loshchilov, V. S. and Voyovodin, V. A., "Determination of Ice Cover Drift Ele-
ments and Movemc-ts of thu Ice Edge Using the 'Toros' Airborne Side-Looking
Radar Set," VROBLEMS ARIFTKI I ANTARKTIKI (Problems of the Arctic and Antarc-
tic), No 40, pp 23-30, .372.

6. Timokhov, L. A., "Dynamics of the Ice Cover and Changes in Its Continuity,"
TRUDY AANII, Vol 257, pp 125-134, 1967.

7. Johnson, J. D. and Farmer, L. 0., "Use of Side-Looking Airborne Radar for Sea
Ice Identification," J. GEOPHYS. RES., Vol 76, No 9, pp 2138-2155, 1971.

COPYRIGHT: Arktlcheskiy i antarkticheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut
(AANII), 1975

43

FORIDFFKJAI.USE(H‘LV
INJI‘OFINCIAI.IEHE(HULY

OBSERVATIONS OP SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE USING A RADIATION THERHOHBTER FROM AN
ICE RBCONNAISSARCE AIRCRAFT

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDEHA LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTRRKTICHESKIY NAUCHNO—ISSLEDOVATEL'-

3x11 INSTITUT. rrzrcussxxvs unroov ISSLEDONANIYA L'DA 1 such in Russian No 326,
1975 pp 114-120

[Article by A. I. Paramonov, Yu. A. Gorbunov and S. H. Losev]

[Text] During August-September 1973 in the eastern region of the Arctic for the
first time specialists made regular observations of the temperature of the sea
surface using a radiation thermometer. The following problems were solved: deter-
mination of the possibility of measuring the temperature of the sea surface in
leads amidst thin and scattered ice, the collection of data on the temperature of
the surface of ice of different age, evaluation of the accuracy of observations,
perfection of the method for aerial temperature surveys frou an ice reconnaissance

aircraft.
The following apparatus was used in carrying out surveys

Precise Radiation Thermometer, Model PRT-S. Barnes Engineering Co., United States

Range of measured temperatures, °c -20 - +75
Accuracy, '6 0.5
Response, °C 0.1
Inertia, sec 0.5
working range of ambient temperatures, °c -20 - +60
Working range of wavelengths. Pm B-lb
Angle of View, degrees 2

Electronic Automatic Recording Potentiometer, Model KSP-a, USSR

Range of measured voltages, mV 0-10
Rate of run of carriage along entire scale, sec 2.5
Input resistance, ohms 1000
Rate of motion of registry tape, mn/hour 20, 60, 240, 720, 1800,
5400 and same values x 10
Accuracy, 2 of entire scale 0.5
Ah

FOI‘OPFK]AI.USE¢MVLY
FOI‘OFEK]AL.U§E(NVLY

Electronic Automatically Recording Potentiometer (Ankersmit), Model SP-65V, Riken
Denshi Co., Japan)

Range of measured voltages 0-5 mV, 0-10 aV to 10 V on
fixed and variable scales
Rate of run of carriage along entire scale,

sec 1.0
Accuracy, z of entire scale 0.5
Rate of motion of registry tape, mm/hour 75, 150, 300
nn/min 10, 15, 30, 60, 120, 240, 480

Converter of voltage from 27 V d-c current to 220 V 50 Hz a-c current, voltage
converter type P0-300, power 600-700 H

Model of IR Thermometer Developed in REVT Laboratory at Leningrad Electrotechnical
Institute imeni V. I. Ul'yanov (Lenin) in Portable Variant

Range of measured temperatures, °C -50 - +100
Accuracy, °C 0.5
Response, °C 0.2
Inertia, sec 2.0
Working range of ambient temperatures, °c -50 - +50
Working range of wavelengths,}im 2.5-40
Angle of View, degrees 5.0

The checking of the working state of the apparatus was accomplished in the Radio-
physical Research Section of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute
in Leningrad and at the observatory of the Pevek Administration of the Hydrometeor-
olosical Service in Pevek. In carrying out the observations the apparatus was in-
stalled aboard an 11-14 aircraft which carried out ice reconnaissance in the east-
ern region of the Arctic. Methodological studies for checking the accuracy of tem-

perature measurements were carried out during the time of flights for ice recon-
naissance and temperature Surveys during the period 14 August - 28 September.

Such studies were carried out, in particular, on the Kolyma River, in the neighbor-
hood of Chcrskiy station, where simultaneously with measurements with a radiation
thermometer from a motor boat a mercury thermometer was used in measuring the tem-
perature of the watt: surfa c layer in the river. The discrepancy in water tempera-
ture measurements did not e:-eed 0.2° (Table 1).

During the period of aerial temperature surveys it was also possible twice to carry
out joint observations from aboard the expeditionary ship "Hayak." [The oceanograph-
ic expedition of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute aboard the
expeditionary ship "Mayak" was headed by A. V. Chireykin.] Water temperature at the
surface and at the horizons 0.5, l, 2 and 5 m was measured from shipboard. In both
cases the water temperature in the upper S-m layer was virtually identical. Meteor—
ulogical observations were made simultaneously (Table 2).

The difference in data obtained when measuring water temperature at the sea surface

with a PRT—S thermometer and the data obtained on the "Hayak" ship in the first
case was 0.1 and in the second case 0.4° (see Table 1). An aerial temperature sur-
vey of the ice-free sea surface was made on 22 September. The aircraft flight path

65

FOIIOF11C1A1.USB{DNLN
FOI10FFIJAI.USE10NLY

duplicated the standard hydrological runs made from the ship "Kayak."
Table 1

Temperature of Sea Surface According to Heasurements at Polar Stations, "Hayak" Ship
and From Aircraft With PRT-S Radiation Thermometer

Date Region Temperature
PRT-S polar station or
ship
IS/August Cape Vankarem 2.6; 2.4; 2.1 0.5
Kolyuchin Island 2.1; 1.6; 2.3 0.8
Ayon Island 2.5 1.8
Ambarchik Bay 11.0 9.3
20/August Ayon Island 1.2 0.6
Chetyrekhstolbovoy 3.2 2.3
Kolyma River. Cherskiy 11.0 10.9
30/August Chukotskoye More
("Mayak") 1.0; 1.0 0.9
3l/August Kolyma River, Cherskiy 8.0 7.8
l7/Scptember Kolyma River, Cherskiy 1.8 1.9
21/September Kolyma River, Cherskiy 2.2 2.0
22/September Chukotskoye More 1.7; 1.4; 1.5; 1.4 1.1

"myakﬂ
Table 2

Meteorological Conditions According to Observational Data Obtained From Aboard the
"Hayak" at Time of Joint Work With Aircraft

Date Air temperature, Relative hunid- Wind State of
°C ity. 2 direction velo- sea, units
city,
m/aec
30/Aug 3.6 95 S 8 2
22/Sep 1.8 93 W 3 3

Figure 1 presents the results of observations obtained using the PRT-S and a ship
on one such section with an extent of about 200 miles. The expeditionary ship
"Kayak" occupied oceanological stations each 30 miles. Readings on the hand indi-
cator were made on the average each 6.5 miles of flight. Registry on the tape of
a KSP-4 potentiometer was uninterrupted.

The substantial difference in the data obtained from aboard the ship and using the
PRT in individual segments of the profile is attributable to the fact that the ob-
servations were made at different times. Due to the considerable time required for
running the profile (19-28 September) and the great distance between stations the
ship data have a smoothed character. The observational data obtained using the

46

FOIioFFKJAl.USEGNVLY
INJR¢OFFIC1AI.tEﬂi(MVLY

radiation thermometer indicate a more complex structure of the temperature field.

Itc
. a

 

Fig. 1. Change in water temperature at sea Surface along standard profile. 1) ob-
servational data obtained from aboard "Mayak" ship; 2) discrete readings on hand
indicator of IR radiometer; 3) continuous registry on potentiometer tape.

Aircraft sorties were made to polar stations for checking the accuracy of readings
of the radiation thermometer. At the time of aircraft approach to the station
simultaneous measurements were made of water temperature at the sea surface on the
hand indicator of the radiometer and by the polar station observer. The results of
measurements of water temperature are commmnicated by the polar stations to the
aircraft. The radiometer measurements had to be made precisely at the time of air-
craft flight over the position of polar station observations. This was difficult
to achieve. Taking into account that in the coastal regions the horizontal temper-
ature gradients of -he water are usually considerable, great discrepancies in the
readings of the radiometer '-d polar station (see Table l) are entirely natural.

During the execution of ice reconnaissance leads were encountered on almost every
flight; these were covered with young ice. If the young ice had the age stage of
ice slush or ice crust or older, the radiometer measured the temperature of the
surface of this ice. If ice needles were observed in the lead, it could be assumed
that the temperature at the surface of the lead has the freezing temperature of
water. In this case the radiometer readings were compared with the freezing tem-
perature of water with the mean long-term salinity value for this region.

An analysis of the results of aerial temperature surveys and methodological studies

reveals that the instruments used meet the principal requirements of operation on
board aircraft under arctic conditions. The PRT-S precise radiation thermometer has

47

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
I'm UH‘ILIAL USE URL!

good operational qualities, 3 high stability. insignificant inertia and stable
reading. During the entire operating period the error in measurements with this
radiometer did not exceed the value indicated in the certificate.

Among the shortcomings of the PRT-S we should include the complexity of the cir-
cuitry and the great number of highly sensitive elements, which results in a high
cost of the instrument and lowers its reliability. With respect to design a rad-
tion thermometer has an inadequate strength of the plugs and contacts and an inad-
equate hermetic sealing. During the time of operation of the PRT-S radiometer

there was one failure in its operation as a result of increased vibration and entry
of moisture from the air into the optical head. This led to disruption of the con-
tacts of the sensing elements. In general, however, the results of the work con-
firmed the accuracy of its measurements. This made possible extensive use of the
PRT-S radiometer for the collection of important information on temperature of the

sea surface. The collected data were used in the scientific-operational support
of sea operations.

Q

'.° 1 and 2
4 In 2

, r--1
2
.3 u
4 '2' 2
'5
a .9. ' °
. l—‘
3 a

m
n
-n
"°______ __.n i_L__'__n |__1 ____,
b ‘ 5 ‘ 6
l
.___-_J——m——I—_——_h—
o u 9 3 -- min

t3 8.0 v.0 ~-

Fig. 2. Fragment of record of surface temperature of ice cover on 28 September 1973.
l) slush ice; 2) dark ice crust; 3) light ice crust; A) one-year ice; 5) field of
perennial ice.

During the flights specialists also made tests of a model of an IR thermometer devel-
oped in the REVT laboratory of the Leningrad Electrotechnical Institute in a port-
able variant. A peculiarity of this instrument is the simplicity of the circuitry,
low cost, strength and reliability in operation. The inadequacies include an

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USEioNLY

increased zero drift and a broad transmission band of the optical filters.

The xsp-a and Ankersmit potentiometers met the requirements of aerial temperature
surveys.

In addition to measurements of the water temperature at the sea surface, the radia-
tion thermometer registered the surface temperature of the ice cover. The measure-
ments which were made confirmed the idea expressed in [2] that the temperature of
ice of different age is different (Pig. 2). Such a difference is a result of a de-
crease in the heat flow from the water to the upper surface of the ice with an in-
crease in its thickness. In autumn and in winter at negative air temperatures the
young ice is invariably warmer than the perennial ice. This fact is of unquestion-
able interest and merits the closest attention in further investigations. Such in-
vestigations will afford a possibility for study of the peculiarities of heat ex-
change between the ocean and the atmosphere through the ice cover over a consider-
able area. At the same time, the temperature contrast at the ice surface, depend-
ing on its thickness, will make it possible to solve the inverse problem: use of

IR apparatus for determining ice of different age. However, at present there are
still no data for any generalizations along these lines. For this reason the col-
lection of data on temperature of the ice cover must be continued. For an objective
interpretation of ice and preparation of new standards on the basis of data from

IR apparatus it is desirable that such observations be supplemented by an aerial
photographic survey along the flight route.

In addition, it is important to clarify how the nature of the correlation between
the thermal contrast and ice age changes with transition of air temperature from
nega:ive to positive values and also whether there is a sufficiently clear depend-
ence between these characteristics in summer, when the its surface is covered by a
thin water film and patches of snow. The value of the observations is increased if
the measurements with the radiometer are supplemented by direct measurements of tem-
perature of the ice surface by highly sensitive contact sensors. Such data are nec-
essary for experimental determination of the optical characteristics of the ice
cover surface.

In order to draw final conclusions concerning the correspondence between the temper-
ature of the thin film and the temperature of the sea surface layer it is necessary
to carry out special nethodniogical investigations similar to the investigations
described in [1]. They also hould include parallel measurements with a radiometer
and the contact sensors of the expeditionary ship. It is particularly important

to carry out such work in leads where there is thin or scattered ice since under
these conditions the effect of wind mixing is lessened and as a result of the thawu
ing of ice the stability of the water surface layer is increased. The organization
of such observations will also make possible a more precise determination of the
influence of state of the atmosphere on radiometer readings.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Vinogradov, V. V., "Some Results of Measurements of Water Temperature Distribu-
tion in the Surface Layer of the Northern Part of the Atlantic Ocean," TRUDY

OKEANOGRAFICMESKOGO INSTITUTA (Transactions of the Oceanographic Institute), No
100, pp 38-46, 1970.

49

FOR OFFICIAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Galkina. A. I. and Spitsyn, V. A., ”Measurement of Surface Temperature of Hater,
Snow and Ice by :1 Radiation Thermometer," TRUDY MNII (Transactions of the Arc-
tic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute), Vol 295, pp 66-68, 1970.

COPYRIGHT; Arkticheskiy i antarkticheekiy nauchno-iasledovatel'skiy institut
(AARII), 1975

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STUDY OF DYNAMICS OF GLACIERS USING LASER DEPOMGRAPR

Leningrad TRUDY. ORDENA LENINA ARKTICHESKIY I ANTARKTICIESKIY NAUGHNO-ISSLEDOVATBL'-
SKIY INSTITUT. FIZICHESKIYE HETODY ISSLBDOVANIYA L'DA I SNEGA in Russian "0 326,
1975 pp 143-146

[Article by I. M. Belousova, I. P. Ivanov and N. c. Firsov]

[Text] This article is a discussion of some characteristics of a laser deformgraph
and also the results of investigations which were obtained using this instrument
on glaciers in the neighborhood of Miruyy station in Antarctica.

The fundamental possibility of creating such an instrument was mentioned in [1,3].

Laboratory and field investigations carried out using'a laboratory model of the in-
strument in Antarctica, on the ice of Lake Ladoga and on the glaciers of the Cauc-

aSus mde it possible to formulate the following requirements on individual instru-
ment blocks.

1. Its laser should be: a) single-frequency, since only in this case is the modula-
tion intensity of the output radiation not dependent on the distances to the inves-
tigated object; b) single-anode, which ensures the necessary modulation intensity
and makes it possible to avoid intermode beats [2]; c) stable with respect to radi-
ation frequency, with adherence to the following condition:

A” No <°LeE£/L.

where ALeff is the ‘Ieasured shift, L is the distance to the measured object, AV is
the change in the frequency r‘1? laser radiation, as a result of system instability.
V0 is the laser radiation rrequency.

2. The Optical system of the instrument must include receiving and transmitting
telescopes which are selected from the condition of full use of laser radiation
with reflection from the investigated object.

3. The registry system must include a photomultiplier (PRU), amplifier and spectrum
analyzer, upon which special requirements are not .‘nposed.

Our laboratory investigations made it possible to determine the limits of the rates
of movement of the object to be determined, which with respect to the upper limit

are determined by the width of the resonance line of the laser and are 1-2 MHz
(0.6 m/sec), and which with respect to the lower limit are determined by the width

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OFI1C1A1.USI2(NQLY

of the generation line, whose theoretical width is determined by the specific con-
ditions of the experiment and is a value about 10'3 H2. Under natural conditions it
is dependent on thermal deformations, the microphone effect, fluctuations of the
atmOSphere on the radiation path.

In addition, by means of laboratory investigations it was possible to determine
absolute sensitivity to the shift. whose minimum value in the case of use of a
laser with a three-mirror resonator (unmatched) is 0.002,,tm.

Field tests of a model of the instrument in Antarctica in the neighborhood of Holo-
dezhnaya station during the period of operation of the 15th Soviet Antarctic Exped-
ition [4] indicated that the instrument could perform in severe climatic situations
and also that it is possible to determine the rate of movement of objects at dis-
tances from 380 m. One of the important conclusions from this study was that the
atmosphere over the glacier cover in Antarctica is exceedingly favorable for the
carrying out of this type of interferometer measurements. As a result of what has
been presented above, we designed and fabricated a laser deformograph.

Laser Dcformograph Operating Principle

The laser radiation is directed through the forming optical system to a reflector
mounted on the investigated glacier. and being reflected from it, returns to the
instrument. The beats arising in the laser are registered by a photodetector; their
frequency is determined by the recording apparatus. The instrument consists of
three blocks: reflector, recording apparatus together with a power source for the
entire apparatus, laser with a photodetector and with the optical system. The in-
strument uses a specially developed single-frequency ().- 6328 A) helium-neodymium

laser with frequency stabilization which is created by control of the resonator by
an error signal shaped using a neon absorbing cell in a magnetic field and a
doubly refracting prism.

The laser deformograph is intended for operation at distances up to 1.5 km. The
very sane 20x telescope is used as the transmitting and receiving optical system.
The reflector, whose diameter is 200 mm, is a set of triple high-quality prisms
(i"-3"). For a methodological comparison, and also for operation with internal
frequency stabilization, a Michelson interferometer is incorporated in the in-
strument. By means of an eyepiece fitted directly into the instrument the laser
radiation is visually directed to the reflector. The system operates in a mis-
matched coupled resonator so that the fraction of light returned to the laser is
small and the intensity of this radiation is modulated in conformity to a sinusoidal
law. The period of modulation of the radiation corresponds to the Doppler fre-
quency, related to the movement of the object by the formula

1" Vienna"

8h

 

 

[OTP = refl] Al=e cos(2v-§-l-r?),

wherezl I is the change in laser intensity; ‘Vb is the frequency of laser radiation;
v is the rate of movement of the object; c is the speed of light; I is the length of
the resonator; a is the distance to the object; Rrefl is the coefficient of reflec-

tion within the resonator; R0 - l - To is the coefficient of reflection of the re-
flector.

52

FOR10FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
Pravda Coast

 

Fig. 1. Diagram of investigated region.

Calibration was accomplished by means of a specially developed simulator of move-
ment based on thermal expansion. By means of the simulator the translational move-

ment along a guide with rates from 0.5rlm/82c to lOO’Lm/sec is communicated to the
triple prism reflector.

This instrument was tested in operation during the seasonal period of the 18th
Soviet Antarctic Expedition in Antarctica in the neighborhood of Hirnyy station.
The first step was to determine the instrument's effective range, that is, a deter-
m'nation of the maximum distance at which laser radiation does not lose its coher-
ence property. It was discovered that with the passage of radiation through a layer
of the atmosphere with a thickness up to 2 km the coherence of the radiation is not

impaired. Measurements of atmospheric transparency were made for radiation with
A - 6328 A.

Atmospheric transparency was determined at different times of day during the period
from 20 January t..ough 20 June 1973. A correlation was found between atmospheric
transparency for 2.- 6328 A and the meteorological range of visibility. It can be
concluded from these experiments that atmospheric transparency is very high and
virtually all the laser rad.‘tion passes through the atmosphere, that is, there is
confirmation for the conclusion drawn during the period of operation of the 15th
Soviet Antarctic Expedition that the atmosphere over the Antarctic glacier is very
favorable for interferometer measurements of this kind. An outlying camp for study
of movement of the glacier cover was organized in the neighborhood of the small
hill of the Winds (Sopka Vetrov) (Fig. l). The instrument was set up directly in
the tent on bare rock, together with apparatus for adjusting and checking individ-
ual instrument components. All the apparatus was supplied current from a gasolene-
powered generator. The rates of movement of different points on Lhe 813618 were
determined (distant up to 1 km from the rocks).

The registered oscillograms were used in computing the rate of movement of some
point on the glacier during the time of observation; this varied in the range from
0.5PLm/sec to 1.2}im/sec. in some cases it can be seen from the oscillograms that

53

POI! omcm. USE ONLY
IN)! 0F1NCIAI.USIZCMVLY

the rate of movement of this point on the glacier is not constant even during the
observation time, that is, during a time of about 10 sec.

Thus, the laser deformograph, successfully undergoing tests under field conditions
in Antarctica, makes it possible to obtain new data on the movement of the glacier
cover and undoubtedly in the future it can be used in solving many glaciological
problems.

1.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Belousova, I.H., Bogorodskiy. V. V. and Ivanov, I. P.. "Measurement of the Rate
of Movement and Deformation of Glaciers Using Doppler Systems," TEZISY DOKLADOV
NA XV GENERAL'NOY ASSAHBLEYE HGGS (Summaries of Reports at the Fifteenth General
Assembly of IQSY), Moscow, 1971, 47 pages.

Belousova, I.H.. Danilov, 0. B. and Lyubimov, V. V., "Intermodal Beats in the
Low-Frequency Spectral Region," ZHURN. TEKHN. FIZ., No 6, p 1134, 1967.

Belousova, I.M., Bogorodskiy, V. V., Danilov, 0. B. and Ivanov, I. P., "Investi-
gation of the Dynamics of Movement of Glaciers Using a Laser," DOKLADY AN SSSR
(Reports of the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 199, No 5, pp 1055-1057, 1970.

Ivanov, I. P. and Chudakov, V. 1., "Possibility of Determining the Rate of Hove-
ment of Glaciers Using the Doppler Effect in a Laser," INFORM. BYULL. 5A2
(Information Bulletin of the Soviet Antarctic Expedition), No 8, pp 143~146,
1973.

COPYRIGHT: Arkticheskiy i antarkticheskiy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut

5303
C80:

(AANII), 1975

- END -
8144/0319

54
FOR'OFFKJA1.USE(MULY