FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10097
4 November 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 64/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0115 L/10097
4 November 1981

JAPAN REPORT

(POUO 64/81)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Expert on the Current Political Issues
(Takao Ivani; USHIO, Aug. Sep 81).................................. 1

L0? Split Predicted
Nikaido's Maneuver Examined

Koneito Reverses Policy on Security Treaty. SD?
(”5' 16 Oct 81)....0...I.DIOOOIOOOOOOOVOOOOIOOOOODOOOOIOOOOOOOI. 15

Japan-PLO Relations Reviewed
(Minoru Hirano; nu: DAILY YOHIURI, 18 Oct 81).................... 17

'AKAHATA' Editorial Supports 'Arsfst Visit
(JPS, 12 Oct 81)~sosossossssssoooosssoososooosooossooooooooooocoo 19

Issue of Northern Territories Analyzed
(Tekuo Hayashi; MAINIGI DAILY NEWS, 11 Oct 81) 21

Government Reform Have Been Watered Down
(Teruo Tsutsumi; 1H8 JAPAN noonomc JOURNAL, 13 Oct 81).......... 23

'HAINIGII' (hides Japan Socialist Party
(Hideo mumka; mNImI DAILY ms, 13 oct 81)ssssoooooosocsoss 25

JSP's 'Disgraceful' Situation in Tokyo
(Takehiko Takahashiz MAINIGII DAILY NEWS, 16 Oct 81)............. 27

'JAPAN TIMES' on Suzuki's 'Hesdache'
(Minoru Shinizu; 'IHE JAPAN IDES, 22 Oct 81)..................... 29

Hiyamoto Addresses JCP Activist Conference
(JPS, 80c:- 81)....OOOOIOOIIOOOOOOOOIOOODOIIOO0.00000IOOIOOOIOI'. 33

- a - [III - ASIA - 11]. F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK OFFICIAL USE UNL!

Hiyanoto Addresses Anttnuclesr Dally
(Jps, 22 Oct 81)....OIOOOIIOO...0.000.0.0.0030'COUOOOCCOCOCOOOIOC

mirty-Year U.S.-Japan Security System Reviaed
(aluo Kom’ M8 81)....00000000000.0.IO.DIOCOOOOOOIOODOOOOODOOOO

Reforn Panel at Odds with Governmnt Over Tax Increase
(”MI EVENING “ms. 19 0C: 81)....OD.OI.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOO

Briefs
Reforn Plan Poll

MILITARY

Interviews with Japanese Defense Experts Reported
(mnlm DAILY ms, Variom date.)..O...DDOOOOOOIOOOOIOOIOOOOO

Japan Needs 'Rejection' Power. Hananichi Inoki Interview
Defense Sharing Politically, Hichio Royann Interview
Will To Resist. Hirooni Kurisu Interview

Wisdos To Face Reality, Yonosuke Nagai Interview

Keep No-Nuke Policy, Saburo Kugai Interview

8 CONOKIC

Financial Difficulties of Maruzen Oil Cowany Discussed
(Akihiko mdt‘; mmmsm. 15 sep 81)....esssessssssssass-see

SCIENCE AND TBOINOLOGY

Steady Progress Seen in Biotechnology
(Ioshihiko Katsuro; SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI, 3 Oct 81)...............

Recent Export Deals. Inquiries Fro- USSR Discmsed
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN, various dates)...........................

Butadiene Plant

Large Welding Robots
Bulldozer:

Dump Trucks

Wire Rope

Dunp Truck Order to Isuzu
Anticorrosive Agent
Trailer Trucks

Defense Indmtry Predicted To Grow Rapidly
(“lam KWO SHIHUN’ 16 sep 81)....000000000000000.0ouoOOOOOOO

Development of Linear mtor Car Updated
(Yasushi Ariga; SHIICAN ORU ‘l‘OSHI, 4 Sep 81).....................

Diversified werations of Kobe Steel Described
(Yoshio m13h1;sﬂmm OR" MRI, a sep 81)....OODIOOOOOOOOOOOOO

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35

37

69

51

57

70

78

86

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIODOGICAL

EXPERT ON THE CURRENT POLITICAL ISSUES
LDP Split Predicted
Tokyo USHIO in Japanese Aug 81 pp 136-137
[Article by Takao Iwami, Hainichi Shimbun reporter]
[Text] Points to Consider in Predicting the Life of the Suzuki Cabinet

The political world is rather active this summer. After Prime Minister Suzuki re-
turned from his European visit, the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly campaign went into
its final phase. Early in July, the interim report of the Second Extraordinary
Administration Study Conmdttee was published and the dispute over administrative

reform became more pronounced because of this.

In July, there was the Ottawa Summit. Without the resting time usual during sum-
mer vacations, the government is likely to keep moving at a rapid tempo. "Ad-
ministrative reform" and "defense" will play the major surface roles in this
changing situation. But the durability of the Suzuki government will he discussed
with the same frequency.

Talk of Suzuki's reelection, which once seemed certain, has not been heard much
recently. Predictions of a short duration for the government has emerged, but
there is no telling yet what will happen. There are many unknown factors such as
how well Suzuki will carry out administrative reform, how he will get through the
reshuffling of personnel expected in the party and the cabinet in November, and
who the successor would be if the life of this cabinet is cut short.

All that is certain is that Suzuki is facing a crisis after one year in charge
of the government. It is difficult to tell which way the wind will blow with the
information at hand.

The major newspaper opinion polls for the first part and middle of June showed

the following results with respect to the Suzuki government. Asahi showed 36 per-
cent supporting and 39 percent not supporting and Yomiuri showed 37.6 percent
supporting and 62 percent not supporting, both newspapers giving the caution
signal of the rate of lack of support moving ahead of the rate of support. In

the Hainichi, the supporters just barely had the edge, 33 percent to 31 percent.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All three polls agreed in showing a growing trend of non-support. The uproar sur-
roanding former Foreign Minister Ito's resignation and 'Teischauer shock" are pro-
bably the causes of the lack of confidence in Suzuki. however, the changes in num-
bers are not large enough to predict the fate of the government.

Along with the debate over the future of the Suzuki government, another thing
that must be considered is how to interpret the movements inside the LDP.

Attention should be paid to the recent stocktaking with respect to the "40-day
battle," the serious political battle between former prime ministers Ohirs and
Pukuda which shook the L0? in October and November the year before last.

Yohei Kano, the former representative of the Shin Jiyu Club which supported Ohira
in the Rukuda-Ohira battle, recently said this. "The internal split in the LDP

was advancing and itswes definitely an opportunity to end the single-party leader-
ship system of the LDP.

"Because the opposition parties had been in the position of perpetual opposition,
they were unable to take advantage of that valuable opportunity and they let the
chance slip by. We were the only ones who swung our bat and there were only four
of us. The chance was lost and the LDP returned to their absolute majority of
Diet seats. However, it continued to be unstable internally and there definitely
will be a second and a third chance. After letting such a good pitch go by, the

other opposition parties must be thinking to themselves, "Darn it, we should have
swung.

'1hat was shown by the recent movements of the moderate parties. They may have

come to a dead end themselves. Of course, that kind of opportunity would not re-
sult in an upset with just one hit. But if it recurs, a more definite move will
take place. Even if they failed that time, they can probably meet the ball squarely
the next time around.

"I was very disappointed last time, but I did not despair or give up hope. We

have only been organized as a party for 5 years. The Social Democrats have worked
as an opposition party for 22 years and the Komeito for A? years, so there were
differences in sensitivity on that occasion. what is important from now on is to
continue being alert and reacting quickly. The LDP sits there like the Great Buddha
of Nara but it is now engaged in the big job of changing a system built up over

56 years. They do not at all think that they can do this in 3 years or 5 years.
They must work persistently over a long period of time. After making one try,

they must begin preparing for the next effort."

It is not yet clear what really happened on the occasion spoken of by Keno. 0n
the surface it seems that the abnormal situation, in which both Ohirs and Fukuda
named themselves as the leader, ended when the four members of an opposition party,
including Kono, voted for Ohirs. But this was only an irregular alliance between
conservatives. Behind the scenes, there was frantic maneuvering for alliances
between parties. Both Ohirs and Fukuda acted with the idea of forming a new

party with a coalition between conservative and moderate parties.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Political Restructuring Announced by Tanaka

Some statements about that event have gradually surged. For example, the recent
statements of former prime ministers Fukuda and Tanaka printed in the snow ASAHI
come close to telling the real story.

F’irst, Pukuds replied as follows to an interview in the 5 June issue.

Question: "I have heard that there were people aroutId you who maneuvered to form
a new party."

Pukuda: "There was such a move. According to those people-—I don't know if they
succeeded or notnthey made some overtures in the direction of the Social Democrats
and the Komeito."

Question: "Did you ever think it would be all right to go along with that?"

Fukuda: "No, I didn't. Because I believe that I myself, represent the mainstream
of the L0? and also the mainstream of Japan. I could not move so lightly to split
the party."

Question: "In that respect. you are different from former Prime Minister Riki
who acted together with you."

Fukuda: "Hell, I don't think that Mr. Niki seriously planned to split the party.
But some such thing may have flitted in and out of his mind."

In short. Fukuda admits that the Pukuda-Hiki—Nakaaone alliance carried out some
maneuvering for a new party including the Social Democratic Party and the Kmito
on the assumption that a catastrophe was in the offing because of the (hairs-Fukuds
standoff. What about the Ohirs-Tanaka side? Tanaka spoke as follows two weeks
later in the 19 June issue.

Question: "Fukuda admits that in the middle of the "30-day battle' there was a
movement among the anti-mainstream factions to split the party into two parts."

Tanaka: "This happened right in broad daylight. I suppose it was some sort of
daydream. He have to think that. Because if they ever thought of doing it again.
the results would be terrible."

Question: "Is it true that Hr. Ohirs thought of joining together with the Komeito
as a countermeasure."

Tanaka: "It is a fact that Mr. Ohirs thought this deep down inside. He thought
that it was improper to run a government with one party relying on power alone.

In that he was somewhat different from me. At the end of the Kishi administration.
when the Ikeda cabinet was being formed, the Diet was besieged and there was an
argument that the LDP should retire. Hr Ohirs seriously proposed this. I asked.
'How can you run the Japanese government with such a weak-knead sttitude‘l'

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: "So, did Mr. Ohira plan to retire after the loss in the general election
the year before last?"

Tanaka: "No. not that time. he did not think of the LDP as one party. Down
deep he thought that those with the same policy ideas should join together and
that it would be all right to divide the party into two. But that time. the oppo-
nents were unable to act."

Putting these two statements together, we get a scenario where the "loo-day battle"
stopped jmt short of. a party split and a sudden restructuring of the political
landscape.

The response of the Komsito and Democratic Socialist Party is not known, but it
was apparently not as simple as the usual view of mire-Komsito and Pukuda-Social
Democrat alliances. Both parties made contact with Pukuda and Ohira but neither

party could make a decision. The Shin Jiyu Club, which was amller and more flex-
ible, went with Ohira.

Hill more events like the "60-day battle" occur as predicted by Keno? In the same
interview. Tanaka made a statement with great import.

Question: "Hill such a daydream occur again in the future?"
Tanaka: "A daydream will not occur. It will be done resolutely and in the open."

Question: "If a restructuring of the political system is carried out boldly, in
the open, what kinds of battles and alliances do you think will occur?"

Tanaka: "There probably will be a political restructuring. It will occur when,

in connection with such things as the Rieschauer statement and the La Reque state-
ment, we reconsider, together with the people, the true state of the Japan-U. 8.
Mutual Security Treaty. And when we really make an attempt to break down the min-
istries. The kind of administrative reform I am thinking of is a reduction in the
total number of personnel. Create twice the present number of bureau chiefs,

three times the number of section managers, 10 times the number of subsection mana-
gers, and cut the total number of personnel in half. In other words, change the
present pyramidal structure to a trapezoid. The party that agrees with this is the
Democratic Socialist Party."

Question: "The Democratic Socialist Party also agrees on the defense issue."

Tanaka: Yes. the Denocratic Socialist Party agrees on defense too. The Komeito
agrees on domestic affairs."

On this occasion, why did Tanaka repeatedly mention the Democratic Socialist Party?
was he strategically trying to give the impression of an emphasis on the Democratic
Socialist Party because of the frequent razors of a close connection between Tanaka
and the Romeito? Or has he seriously begun to think of the Democratic Socialist
Party as a possible partner. his true intentions are unknown.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Split Between Status Quo Faction and Reform Faction

The thing that should be noted, rather than how much distance there is between
Tanaka and the Social Democrats or the Komeito, is the fact that Tanaka clearly
stated that there "will be" a restructuring of the political system related to the
issues of the security treaty and defense and administrative reform. There is some
logical contradiction with his previous criticism of Ohira's coalition idea. How-
ever, we must pay attention when the powerful man who controls the largest faction
in the LDP says there will be a restructuring.

It is not clear whether the Tanaka statement indicates that the tendency toward a
split in the LDP is growing stronger or whether it assumes a coalition between
the LDP and the Democratic Socialist Party and the Komeito. Judging from the
drift of the statement, it seems to imply the former.

If that is the case, Kono's prediction of another "40-day battle" is not Just a
premonition. There may be a real possibility.

The Democratic Socialist Party is making an urgent appeal to other moderate par-
ties, because it believes the internal conflict in the LDP will become acute
within the year. According to party chairman Sasaki, "The Suzuki cabinet will
probably be badly shaken after the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly election."

Permanent adviaor Kasuga has his eye on the possibility of an internal conflict.
"There will certainly be voices inside the LDP who will question whether the LDP
government is satisfactory under such conditions." As a presupposition, he seems
to think that a political battle over Suzuki's successor is imminent. Any past
strategies for restructuring including those taken during the "bOoday battle,"
were all carried out concurrently with changes in the LDP government. Battles for
political authority within the LDP are the best opportunities for inducing and es-
calating disturbances from the vantage point of the opposition parties, who are
hoping for a political restructuring.

In line with Kono's statement, many of the Democratic Socialist Party members re-
flected on the "60-day battle" as follows. "He threw away the chance of a life-
time. If we had sprung into action at that time, there would have been a violent
upheaval in the political situation. The double election where the LDP won a huge
victory would not have taken place and the Democratic Socialist Party could have
participated in the government.” The Komeito has so far refrained from making a
statement. All of the moderate parties are ready to move energetically and not
lose the opportunity the next time that troubles mount up inside the LDP.

However, how much of a foundation is there within the LDP for carrying out a politi-
cal restructuring in connection with "mutual security and defense?" One source of
information is a poll of LB? Dietmen on the three anti-nuclear principles. An

ASAHI SHIMBUN poll was taken, dividing the Diet members into hawks (98 Diet members
comprising the Asian Problems Research Council) and doves (67 Diet members belong-
ing to the Asian and African Problems Research Council and the International Par-
liamentarian Arms Reduction Committee). "The results were as follows. (1) Less

than half of the hawks but 64 percent of the doves though that the present government

FOR OF?WC1AI.USE{JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

policy of maintaining the three anti-nuclear principles is satisfactory. (2)
28 percent of the hawks but only 16 percent of the doves felt that "port calls and
transit" should be excluded from the requirement of prior consultation."

Viewed by faction, the Suzuki and Komotn factions both favor maintenance of the
status quo. the Pukuda. Nakesone. and Nakagawa group are strongly in favor of re-
vising the three principles: and the Tsnaka faction is close to the average posi-
tion of the entire party.

The HAINICIII interviewed 103 officials connected with security and foreign policy
organs. Only 12 (28 percent) of them were in favor of maintaining the status quo.
31 (72 percent) were in favor of revision. This is just the reverse of the 61 per-
cent of the entire party (according to a HAINICHI poll) in favor of the status quo.
we can see that the idea of revision is concentrated among the group of Dietmen
connected with security and foreign affiars which includes many hawks.

In a joint meeting of related coaIIittees, research groups. and special col-ittees
of the LDP held right in the midst of the Reischauer statement uproar (2 June),
the revisionist doctrine appeared again as follows. (1) It is cot-Ion knowledge
that U. S. warships carrying nuclear weapons stop at Japanese ports and pass
through Japanese territorial waters. The government's reply is a lie. (2) The
three anti-nuclear principles should be revised now. (3) A welcome party should
be given for the Midway which is protecting Japanese sea lanes.

This three-way internal division of the 1.1)? into hawks, doves, and moderates

should become much sharper in the coming debate over nuclear policy. The recent
flareup of the constitutional revision debate also split into three camps—one

for the status quo, one for revision. and a third for an independent moderate posi-
tion.

However. when faced with the specific choice of "what to do about port calls and
transit." it is expected that the moderate faction will not be able to maintain

its position and the three-way division will gradually polarize into two opposing
camps. There is no data from a poll asking Diet mesbers about both the three anti-
nuclear principles and the constitutional problem at the same time. however, it

is likely that the 1.1)? would be divided into two widely opposing groupsnone for
the status quo and one for revision.

Hill the Opposition Parties l-‘oment Internal Disturbances?

Previously. there have been two tendencies in the LDP concerning security and
foreign policy. At the tine of the Mutual Security Treaty renewal 21 years ago,
there was a positive and a negative faction. However, because there was no other
political party with the ability to govern, the matter was ended with the resigna-
tion of the Kishi cabinet while the split remained hidden inside the party. If
the party had been unified in support of the treaty renewal, Kishi may have been
able to hold his ground in spite of fierce outside resistance. Even though the
resignation was made in response to outside action. it was strongly urged fron
inside the party as well.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe ofncw. use 9”.“

Then on the occasion of the normalization of relations between Japan and China,

the party was again divided into a group promoting the normalization and a group
advocating caution. Normalization was just barely made possible by the great re-
versal in international diplomacy when the United States moved closer to China.

The exertion of outside pressure, expressed in the terms "based on the understand-
ing of the United States," was a big factor. Inside the party, Tanaks's political
power was effectively utilized. This was just after Tanaka had acquired power by
force of numbers. We should not forget the effect of the new government's momentum
and the support given by the opposition parties.

If the cautious faction led by Fukuda had continued to resist (and a plan to leave
the party and form a new party was considered at the time). a split may have oc-
curred. However, it was apparent that they would fall into the position of a minor-
ity party. In the end, in the midst of situational changes, the conflict was kept
inside the party just as it was at the time of the security treaty renewal.

After the normalization of relations between Japan and China, Hr. Ohira, the foreign
minister at the time, made this public statement. "The inside of the LDP is like
oil and water. Eventually, there will probably be a split over policy." This
analysis of the LDP could have been behind Ohira's coalition idea. And it seems
that Ohira's prediction has begun to take on the look of reality.

There may not be an upheaval this year as the Social Democrats hope. It would
seem that Kono's statement that "They do not at all think they can do it in 3 years
or 5 years" is more on target. At any rate, it is certain that the split in the
LDP has grown to the point where it cannot be healed simple by internal adjustment.

This can be said because the LDP would almost certainly have split during the
"60-day battle" if either the Democratic Socialist Party or the Romeito, or both,
had been able to make a commitment.

Both Ohira and Fukuda extended an invitation to both parties. This was hindered
mainly by the vacillstion and calculating of the two parties. However, the re-
aistance of both parties in relation to at least this issue is weakening. After
repeated experiments, the ability of the opposition parties to respond has become
more sophisticated and they are even making moves to initiate internal trouble in
the LDP.

Even so, there is still a deep-seated fear that a party split would lead to tragic
results and a desire for self-protection, a desire to continue in the position of
siding with the ruling party. 80 without a strong stimulus. a sudden change is
unlikely. There is no way to know whether the political battle to determine Su-
zuki‘s successor will become the occasion for such an event. However, there is
certainly a movement, growing much stronger than before, to turn it into such an
occasion.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ro_n 0F__ng_IM-_u§2..2m .

____— . . _.. ‘

Nikaido's Haneuver Examined
Tokyo USHIO in Japanese Sep 81 pp 236-2101

[Article by Takso stmi, HAINICHI 83mm! reporter]
[Text] what Has the influence of Tanslta's Arrest?

He can still recall the intense heat of the stnner 5 years ago. On the morning

of 27 July, 1976, a special edition of the “ADVICE! ssnmuu appeared with the fol-
lowing lead-in. "The symbol of money politics. former prime minister lakuei Tanaka.
has finally been arrested. The Special Investigation Depath of the Tokyo Dis-
trict Public Prosecutors Office, which has been investigating the Lockheed Incident,
issued a sumons to former prime minister Kakuei Tameka (SD—meder of the House
of Representatives. Niigats Third District—at 7:26 AM on the 27th. After inves-
tigation. Tanaka was arrested on suspicion of violating the Toraiy: Exchange Law

at 8:53 AM of the same day. On suspicion of receiving 500 million yen from Marn-
beni with receipts made out for pieces and peanuts...."

The headlines of all the newspapers were lurid. "The World Is Shocked.” “The

Political world in Panic." "Rotten Smell from Honey Politics." "LDP Threshing
About in Storm."

The title of the HAINICHI editorial for the next day, the 28th. was "The Problem
of Tanaka's Arrest and the Conservative Position." It said, "This tells us that
we must conduct an overall accounting and examination of postwar politics. The
1.0? has had its central core shot out. How can it cope with this situation?

The future fate of the party will depend on the manner of its response. Determina-
tion and effort by the LDP. as well as the other political parties and people in
power. is required for a major cleanup of present politics. The Tanaka arrest
should be taken as an opportunity for political reform."

The ASAHI editorial was entitled "The 'Tanaka Arrest' and the Corruption of Power."
It argued as follows. "The party custom by which the politician with the largest
faction of Diet meters gets the highest position of power, the party custom of
using money to build up a private army for this purpose. the practice of neglecting
organization with roots among the people and depending on corporate contributions-
all these practices are now under indictment. This problem camot be entirely
attributed to ranaka as an individual. He can say that certain elements of a
conservative crisis have been growing stronger over a number of years and have come
to the surface in the shocking form of the Tanaka arrest. A radical reform of

the L0? is urgently needed to eliminate the odious connection between money and
politics."

There seemed to be a premonition of the approach of a big ground swell that would
cause the audible crumbling of the old order. Also. coming 30 years after the war,
there was the intimation of an end point in time.

The powerful Kakuei Tanaka, who had just resigned from his post as prime minister
had been arrested for a crime co-itted during his term as prime minister. Fur-
thermore. Tanaka was the most powerful leader of the Liberal Democratic Party
which had dominated most of postwar Japanese politics. Not only did he have the
negative image of a politician who attained power by financial influence. he
seemed to represent the hasty. hard-driving rebuilding of postwar Japan.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For better or worse, the image of postwar Japan was concentrated in this rare type
of leader, Tanaka. The reason that Tanaka's popularity does not decrease even
after the time he has spent in the position of an accused criminal, must lie in the
uncanny resemblance between the Tenelta personality and the personality of postwar
Japan, frantically grasping for economic success.

It is for this reason that Tanaka's becoming a criminal made a deeper impression
than the fact of receiving a 500 million yen bribe of which he is accused. Just
as the MIMIC!!! editorial stated, the central core of the LDP "has been shot
away." And as the ASA!!! editorial stated, above and beyond Tanaka the individual,
the nature of the entire system that has supported the LDP should have been under
indictment. It seemed that the LDP was faced with a crucial decision of travelling

the same road to destruction or radically reforming the party from the inside.
Why Has Political Reform Become Impossible?

But what happened? 5 years have passed quickly since that suuner. The LDP has
continued to hold power without changing a bit from the time when the Lockheed
scandal was exposed. It has even secured a safe majority. "as the impression of
coming to a turning point that we felt 5 years ago simply an illusion? In the

5 years since the Tanaka arrest the ruling power has gone from Niki to Pukuds to
Ohira to Suzuki. In the last period of the Niki government (September 1976) and
of the Ohira government (October 1979), the LDP came close to splitting but in
both cases this was caused by political infighting within the party rather than
by a conflict over party reform.

As a result, tired of the wear and tear of political battling, the party took
short rest periods under Pukuda and then under Suzuki. However, these were only
brief periods of waiting for the next round of political battles, and the present
movements in the LDP include the same political infighting. I do not mean to di-
rectly criticize the fighting for political power. These battles are probably in-
evitable, but along with these political squabbles, the LDP, involved as it was
in the Lockheed scandal, should have made a serious atteapt at political reform.

However, none of these governments did anything in spite of the slogans they pro-
pounded. The "logic of numbers," by which the faction with the largest number of
Dietmen gained the most power, continued to have top priority. The system under
which all sorts of things are justified by numbers remained unchanged. Any po-
litical cleanup or reform was totally buried under the "logic of numbers."

The only difference with the past is that the function of the "logic of nulbers"
is somewhat changed. The Tanaka faction has superiority of numbers, but it cannot
wield power directly, so it must content itself with the position of kingmaker.
The three governments of Fukuda, Ohira, and Suzuki were created only with the ap-
proval of the Tanaka faction and they crumbled when they ran into Tanaha's veto

power .

Putting it another way, without the "consent of Tanaka," no new policy of politi-
cal reform can be undertaken. The situation night change if a powerful faction or
man came along who could take power without the support of the Tanaka faction.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But right now, there is no such strong opposing power and the real situation is
that any faction aiming at power must be sensitive to Tsnaka's feelings. A

Tanaks faction leader has this to say about daily political operation as well as
political power conflicts.

"If a problem arises. it is always the Tanaka faction that goes into action. The
other factions make a lot of noise but we get things done in a straightforward ef-
ficient way. That means Noboru Takeshita. Shin Kanemaru, Tshao Kameoka, Tatsuo
Ozawa, and all the rest of us. When anything happens, we all get together. We
act naturally. supported by the conservative mainstream awareness that there is no
one but us who can get things done. hr. Tsnaka, who is directing us, has a deep-
lying, strong sense of responsibility and a sense of the nation characteristic of
himself. Even thouyl he is accused of a crime, he is the only leader in the LI)?
and in Japan who can take action to solve difficult problems. There are others
implicated in the same SOOmillion-yen scandal who the party will have nothing to
do with.

This is not necessarily an exaggeration. The Tanaka faction has frequently mo-
bilized its army-corps style energy and responsiveness. This has not only had
the positive aspect of a problem-solving capability. It has been applied to all
areas such as the runner of carrying out political reform.

If we look only at the one year since Suzuki took power, we see that the special
comittee for aircraft import study, which served as a stage for pursuing the scan-
dals related to aircraft, was susnarily abolished, and the ethics comittee which
Prime Minister Suzuki proMsed to establish in its place has somehow disappeared.
There is no proof that all of this was done at the Tanaka faction's instigation but
there is no doubt that it reflects their desires.

However, it is obvious that the political reform of the LDP must start from the
"Tanaka problem." As the HAIRICHI and ASA!!! editorials cited earlier stated, the
Tanaka arrest is more than a problem related to Tenska as an individual. It is
heavily linked to defects within the LI)? and the political system itself. All
politicians, including those of the opposition parties, should have thought deeply
about how to cope with the Tanaka problem and continued to experience inner dis-
cord during the last 5 years. The Tanaka problem is the problem of every indivi-
dual politician. Everyone Itnows that Tanaka was not the only one to mix money
and politics. Every politician to one degree or another is tainted with the prac-
tice of using financial influence in the political sphere. In order to reform
this system, it is first necessary to deal with the Tsnaka problem or else cover

up everything and let it go. Everyone knows that they must choose one or the other
course.

But what has happened? Everyone has fallen silent. The opposition parties are
no exception. They vscillate before "our own Kakuei Tanaka" and cannot cope with
the "Tanska problem" which stands in front of them. Everything moves at Tanaks's
discretion.

The situation has been turned upside down. A political reform cannot possibly
take place unless the criminal defendant Tenaka decides to undertake a reform.
This is the most difficult part of the "Tanaka problem."

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF?1C]AI.USE|)NLY

The Background of Nikaido's Appeal for Restoration of Honor

The Tanaka faction has expanded its power even further since last year. Recently,
it contains 105 Dietmen from both the upper and lower houses. Tenaka himself says,
"There are even more. There are probably about 130. That will become apparent in
the next election" (19 June SHUKAN ASAHI interview). So more will probably be added.
This phenomenon could not have been imagined 5 years ago. when Tanaka was arres-
ted, some people left the Tanaka faction. It was a common sense view that it
would decline. why did the opposite occur? Tanaka says, with great confidence,
"It is because they trust me. I believe it is because of very strong friendship
and complete trust. This should not be overlooked. If it were not for that,

they would not go along with someone on his way to hell. The wife and children

of a person going to the gallows have nothing to hope for. But I think that a
person in a public position would not join Iy group unless he had confidence in
me" (from the same interview).

however, the secret of the expansion of the Tenaka faction is not that simple. It
cannot be singled out as this or that end is probably a gravitational pull result-
ing from many factors. In any case, it continues to expand steadily. He should
not forget that this increases the Taneka faction's power of intimidation and
leads to further expansion.

Recently, the Tanaka faction has begun to move toward taking over political power
rather than just having a kingmaking function based on its large numbers. At
least, it has taken such a pose. In the fifth year after Taneka's arrest, this
is a momentous change. This appeared in extreme for: in the appeal for restora-
tion of honor by Susumu Nikaido (chairmen of the party executive council). Ni-
kaido is an influential man who is in a position representing the Tanaka faction.
If the faction were to put up a candidate for party president, the faction has
prettly well reached internal agreement that it would be Nikaido. However, as
everyone knows, Nikaido is still seen as one of the "gray officials" in the Lock-
heed incident. Even though he was able to attain one of the three party leader-
ship positions, it is said that there is a barrier to his even taking a cabinet
position. Therefore, proof of innocence is a prerequisite to actually, making
Nikeido the prime minister.

However, this is not a simple matter. According to the data submitted to the
aouee of Representatives Special Secret Lockheed Research Committee by the Minis-
try of Justice and the Public Prosecutors Office on 2 November, 1976, Nikaido was
involved with the "30-unit receipt" in the lockheed incident. In the first part
of November 1972, when he was serving as Tenaka's Chief Cabinet Secretary, he
received 5 million yen in cash from Hiroshi Ito, senior executive managing direc-
tor of Marubeni (at the time). This was compensation for acting to get the Tris-
tar aircraft accepted. However. his official authority could not be proven and he
was not indicted. At the same hearing, Nikaido and five other "gray officials"
took 10 minutes each to defend themselves. Nikaido entirely denied the truth of
all accusations. Since then he has used every available opportunity to appeal for
a restoration of his honor. Even when ﬂori and Nadao were serving as speakers of
the House of Representatives, he asked for "an opportunity to defend myself."

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORGDFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

The appeal he has submitted to present Speaker of the House Fukuda has the same
content. (1) My identification as a "gray official" is due to one-sided informa-
tion. I did not accept any money. (2) The parliamentary procedures which, in
spite of this, one-sidedly announced my name in public at the Lockheed special
committee hearing in November 1976 infringed on my personal rights and honor.

(3) Because a similar case, not just related to myself, msv arise in the future,
the Diet should reevaluate the status of government investigations in the light

of human rights and the constitution. (6) I would also like to have some action
taken concerning myself.

There are three reasons behind Nikaido's present action. Piret, considering the
gradual emergence of a cabinet restructuring and post-Suzuki movement expected
toward the end of the year, Tanaka and the Tanaka faction are planning to recover
power both in name and in fact. As a beginning, they want to put Nikaido in the
cabinet or nominate Nikaido for party president. Restoration of honor is an es-
sential step for this purpose. Second, the conditions are right for the side
receiving the appeal. The LDP has a stable majority in the Diet so the resistance
of the opposition parties can be stopped. The Speaker of the House of Represen-
tatives. Hsjime Pukuda, who holds the key to the handling of this matter, is close
to Tanaka and joined together with Nikaido 5 years ago to dump Niki. Hototoshi
Yamashita. chairman of the Standing Committee for house management, is also a
leader of the Tanaka faction. Suzuki, waiting in the background, with the pre-
diction of a short life for his cabinet circulating around. must be worried about

how the Tanaka faction will proceed as he sees that conditions are just right for
them.

Third, the judgment on the All Nippon Airways route in the Lockheed trial has been
delayed because of the sudden death of the presiding judge. The Tanaka faction is
reported to be certain of the innocence of the defendant, former Transport Minis-

ter Tomisaburo Hashimoto. The Tanaka faction thought that if Bashimoto were exon-
erated, it would have the same effect as proof of Niksido's innocence. Since the

judgment expected this spring has been postponed a year, it will not coincide well
with political moves, so some other action must be taken.

The 'Tanaka Problem' Is Not Just the Assessment of an Individual

On 14 July, in the midst of the controversy surrounding Nikaido's appeal, the
prosecutor's final statement was presented against Bashimoto and others involved
in the All Nippon Airways route.

Furthermore, in this statement, the Public Prosecutors Office mentioned Nikaido's
name ten times. In the part concerning the 5 million yen gift to Hashimoto, they
clearly stated the following as a related fact that could be affirmed by evidence.
"Also, former senior executive managing director of Haurbeni, Hiroshi Ito,

handed a package containing 5 million yen in cash to Susumn Nikaido in the Chief
Cabinet Secretary's official residence."

In the opening statement at the first public trial 6 and 1/2 years ago, the Public
Prosecutors Office did not use Nikaido's name, although he had received funds from

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?1C1AL.US£GJNLY

Lockheed along with Hashimoto and others, because they had come up against the wall
of "official authority" and could not prosecute him for the crime. The fact that
they used his name in the closing statement probably indicates confidence on the
part of the Prosecutors Office. At the same time, it renewed the impression of
"grayness" that had been fading in the public mind. However on the same day.
Nikaido submitted another statement to Speaker Pukuda. It asked for the proper
handling of the following three issues: (1) method for restoring honor to persons
who rights have been infringed by the conducting of government investigations,

(2) the issue of the legal concept of not punishing only because of suspicion and
the actual practice in Diet politics of implying suspicion to get results in gov-
ernment investigations. and (3) the problem of investigating the truth or false-
hood of government reports relating to the Criminal Procedure Code, Article 47.
The previous appeal focused on washing Niksido‘s own dirty clothes. Perhaps be-
cause of the prosecutor's closing statement and consideration of the protest from
the opposition parties who are to help the LDP regain power, the present statement

presents more general problems of the status of government investigations and the
legislative system.

Speaker Fukuda accepted the statement and asked questions of House Management Com-
mittee Chairman Yamashita. It will be formally taken up by the committee on

4 August with no reference to Nikaido's individual problem. So it seems that the
statement will be entered into the House Management Committee minutes as a refer-
ence document. Nikaido's apparent aim is to have an "assertion of innocence"
entered into a public document of the Diet to cancel out the "recognition of sus-
picion" in the minutes of the special Lockheed committee. Right now, the Socialist
Party is totally opposed to entering the statement in the minutes. Even if it is
entered, the "suspicion of grayness" indicated by the prosecutor's closing state-
ment will not he reduced by an argument about the facts. In fact, it will have

the opposite effect in the public eye, giving the impression of an attempt to blur
the suspicion.

However, the political world aoves by a different logic than ordinary society. If
the problem of the Nikaido statement is settled as planned, the voices within the
LDP protesting the appointment of Nikaido to a cabinet position may disappear. In
spite of being tainted underneath with the shock of 5 years ago, the "Tanaka prob~
lem" has followed the course described here. People are seeking Tanaka's support
by word and deed but there is no criticism of Tanaka to be heard anywhere.

The Marubeni route part of the Lockheed trial is proceeding separately and grad-
ually approaching the climax. The entire political world is holding its breath,
waiting to see what the effects of the judgment will be.

Tanaka is completely confident about the judgment in this trial. "There is no
possibility of a bad result. It will be settled this year (Does this mean the
conclusion of the trial?). I believe it will be settled. I am being tormented
from an idealistic position for a lack of discretion. You (the media) have de-
cided I am a bad guy. Please don't give me a hard time. There are a lot of people
who think that Mr. Tanaka is a good guy. There really are" (SHUKAN ASAHI inter-
View).

.13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, the "Teneka problem" goes beyond whether Tanaka is a good guy or a bad
guy. It is the larger issue of how Japanese democracy can survive s scandal like

that of the Tsnsks arrest which has never been experienced before.

Looking back with this in nind, we can see the lest 5 years as retrogreseiwe ra-
ther than just a blank. It is not difficult to understand the secret of Tanaks's
rising popularity inside and outside political circles. There are certainly great
expectations of Tsnaka as a leader. And one cannot deny that Tsnaka is a very
able and charismatic politician. However, the "Tanaka problem" Inst be considered
separately from all such personal evaluation. In this fifth sun-er, the humidity
is getting worse.

COPYRIGHT: Ushio Shuppanshe 1981

9651
cs0: «105/251

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

KOHBITO REVERSES POLICY ON SECURITY TREATY, SDF
0H161065 Tokyo JPS in English 0913 GMT 16 Oct 81

[Text] Tokyo, 16 Oct (JPS)--The Komei Party on October 14 held an enlarged
central executive committee meeting and decided on a draft basic policy and an
action program, both of which are to be submitted to the 19th congress in
December.

On these draft resolutions of the Komei Party, the October 16 issue of

AKAHATA carried an editorial entitled "Elaboration of the Komei Party Line of
Following the LDP Policy."

The draft resolutions of the Konei Party to be presented to its congress
indicate that the Komei Party has arrived at the final stage of elaboration

of the pro-LOP policy which has been promoted over the past years: the Kohei
Party has turned rightward in its policy toward the security treaty and the
self-defense forces, and also turned to the line of propping up the Chen Tu-hwan
regime in its policy toward the Korean Peninsula.

The important point of the Konei Party's draft resolutions is that the resolutions
actively evaluated the Japan-v.8. security treaty for the first time in the party's
basic policy, saying that the treaty is playing a deterrent role in maintaining
Japan's security to some extent. The Komei Party has also approved that the
self-defense forces are 'honstitutional," saying that the SDP "have many elements
to meet the Konei Party-proposed capability of preserving the territory.

It was not long ago that the Komei Party criticized the Japan-v.8. security treaty
for being '3 dangerous military alliance which involves Japan in a war which

has no relation with Japan and involves the country in the u.s. strategy toward
Asia" (basic policy, 1978). The party also charged that "under the nilitary
alliance system called Japan-0.5. security treaty, the 50? are completely enrolled
in the U.S. nuclear strategy and are going to make clear that they will bear

a part of defense," stressing "there is a strong suspicion that the 50? are
unconstitutional."

The Komei Party has made a turn-about in its policy.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Konci Party is alleging the policy change is a "realistic response to a
change in the international situation." There is no irresponsible attitude

of a political party other than [that of] the Konei Party. which, on the pre-
text of a "change in the international situations" at one time says that the
SDF are "unconatitutional" and at another says that they are "constitutional."
The party also says at one time that the Japan-0.8. security treaty is a

"dangerous military alliance," which will involve Japan into war, and at another
says that it plays a "deterrent role."

CSO: 4120/37

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

JAPAN-PLO RELATIONS REV IEWED

Tokyo THE DAILY YOMIIIRI in English 18 Oct 81 p 3

[Behind the Scene column by Minoru Hirano: "A 'Succcss' with Arafat?"]

(Text!

The Foreign Ministry summarised Wed~
nesday's talks between Prime Minister Bu-
zuki and Foreign Minister Sonoda on one
side and PhD leader Yasser Araiat as tol—
lows:
0 Araiot was iniormed of Japan’s long-

standing position on the Mideast issue:
it recognizes the Palestinians' right to seli-
determination and israei's right to exist.
0 Ararat took a negative position on rec-

ognition ol Israel's right to exist but
agreed to Saudi Arabia's eight~point pro~
pissal for Middle East peace which virtual-
ly recognizes Israel's right to exist

in other words. Japan elicited a ﬂexible
attitude from the P10 without yieldinc
on its basic position as a member oi the
Western camp. So it means a sums to:
Japanese diplomacy.

The government of any country naturally
desires to publicise as a success anything
which it accomplishes. The desire of the
Foreign Mlnistry is quite understandable
on this occasion because the scheduled
visit to Japan by Egyptian president An-
war Sadat. intended to counterbalance the
visit by Ararat. did not materialize because
at Sadat's assassination and the outcome
of the PLO leader's visit to Japan is at-
tracting world attention.

Hovlcvcr. some observers cynically say
the Foreign Ministry was excessively elat-
ed. sell-complacent and naive.

To the PLO. the purpose or Aralat's visit
to Japan is to make Japan recognise the
P10. in consideration of Japanese sensi-
tivitics, Ararat refrained from criticising
Sadat or bitterly censuring the US and
employed a diplomacy or smiles toward
every person he net. But will he show the
same (ace in Hanoi and Moscow. his mt

stops? We should watch the rum moves
hereafter.

rest of the world interpret
“'13th Japan? How will Japan.
after the meetings or its top leaders wiht‘h
Antat. approachtheuawhichhasa a

' 1
On that mm W
mt How much diliennoa-is than be-

tween Japan's strength at that time ant

- . 7
maps" mm a. m w
iery. mm wee-mun! ""

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070012-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

i.

Arolat. one top Foreign Ministry man
said he would advise the US to ndlnit the
no to the Middle East peace talks. Atter
Artist's departure, however. the one!“
said he had no intention to oﬂor this ed-
vice at the North-south malt in Mexico

ithenovetrongiynruethemtoedndt
themwthepemtunltvmﬂn
the impression that Jon-n is din. too
much-with the no end upon-vs rele-
tiom will he eonred.
neumeomwnnidhehedno-ideeot
what Japan should do {or the Middle nut
utter (may; visit. Hie reel feeling must
_ be a ieeiiu of relief. The Jamaa-
' eminent bu recovered from the shock it
received upon the emulation of Met.
The visit by Artist ended without eny
incident.

The Foreign Ministry enlouue its dip-
lomacy ionrd the P10 u e moeea, but
this elnted feeling is mixed with this tool-
in: of relief.

COPYRIGHT: THE DAILY YOHIURI 1981
C80: 4120/39

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070012-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

'AKAHATA' EITORIAL SUPPORTS 'ARAFA’I VISIT

OWlZO935 Tokyo JPS in Emliah 0858 GMT 12 Oct 81

[Text] Tokyo, 12 Oct (JPS)--AKAHATA of October 12 carried an editorial entitled
"0n the Occasion of Chairman 'Arafat's Visit to Japan," the gist of which follows:

"From the viewpoint of defending peace and the self-determination of nations,
the Japanese Communist Party [JCP], as the party which has supported the
Palestinian people's cause for self-determination, expresses welcome of his
visit to Japan, and its hope that genuine mutual understanding and friendship
between the Japanese people and the Palestinian people will be deepened.

"To reach the goal of the Palestinian people's cause of self-determination is of
important significance not only in the cutting of the root cause of ordeals of
the Palestinian people, but also in the promotion of the peace of the Middle
East and the world.

'%s were indicated by all events 'which have happened since the Camp David
agreement,'neither peace nor 'stability' came to the Middle East. This clearly
indicates again that there will be no solution of Middle East problems and the
realization of peace unless the Palestinian people's determination and their
national rights are respected.

'The JCP pointed out in its 12th party congress in 1973 that 'total withdrawal
of Israeli troops from the occupied territories and the solution of the issues
of Palestinian residents in accordance with their determination and their
national interests' are the 'basis of political solution.‘

'Mowever, the successive Liberal-Democratic Party [LDP] governments have
actively participated in the 0.5. imperialist policy of ruling the Middle East.
In particular, during the past years, the 0.8. alleged that the Middle East
and Persian Gulf areas have “vital interests' of it, and concentrated its
interventionist and aggressive policy in these areas. In this situation,

the Japanese Government has not only approved the sending of 0.5. Armed Forces
stationed in Japan to the Middle East, and has gone so far as to pledge to
increase military share of surrounding seas of the Far East, which makes
favorable condition of the sending of the 0.8. 7th Fleet.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Of late, the LDP government is making gesture of 'understanding' of the demand
of the Palestinian people for self-determination because of the need of Mideast
011. However, it does not exceed the framework of conventional Mideast policy.
which is subordinated to the u.s.

'Thls is reflected in recent serial remarks given by government top officials.
who said, 'we do not recognize the Palestine Liberation Organization' and 've
do not give diplomatic privilege.’

'Ve point out that the Japanese Government policy toward the Middle East_in
subordination to the U.S. will inevitably meet severe criticism by the peoples
of the Middle East.

"The JCP held talks with the PLO leadership in 1975 and issued the joint
statement. In this statement the JCP expressed solidarity with the Palestinian
people in the struggle for the cause of building a democratic and independent
state, the PLO expressed the solidarity with the Japanese people in the struggle
for an independent and democratic Japan. The development of mutual support is

also included in the statement.

'mvailing itself of the occasion of Chairman 'Arafat's visit to Japan. the JCP
expresses its hope again that his visit to Japan will become the opportunity

of deepening of mutual understanding in true sense and that of the development

of solidarity based on the respect for mutual independence," the AKAHATA editorial
concluded.

Chairman Yasir 'Arafat is to meet Tetsuzo Fuwa, secretariat chief of the JCP,
0n the occasion of the meeting with party heads.

COPYRIGHT: THE JAPAN TIMES 1981

C50: 4120/37

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Viewed from the historical
standpoint. Secondly. the
Japanese mm main
taine that althou Japan gave
u Its not to the
“ " h thes'an Francisco
Peace Tmtyi which went hto
effect in w m2. Mr!

Japan abandoned to the San
Francisco Peace Treaty."
Several scholars on In-
ternattonal law In Joan have

adoptedtﬂam.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070012-7

COPYRIGHT:

(:50:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070012-7

oi Sophia University entitled
"Oblivion by Society." The
essay. viewed iron: the stand-
point above. is highly
suggestive. in a nutshell. the
proiesaorsaysasiollows:

"A column in the evening
edition oi the Yomiori Shimhnn.
dated May 27. I956. reported to
the iollowlng etiect: At a
meeting held between Foreign
Minister hiamoru Shigemltsu
and diplomatic elders on May
24.. iorrner Prime Minister
Shigeru Yoshida stated that
‘aithougi Japan gave up the
Kurile islands raider the San
Francisco Peace Treaty. it has
not abandoned Kmashiri and
Etoroiu islands.‘ Young
Foreign Ministry oilicials upon
hearing his remark criticized
him uniavorably saying that
'his memory has certainly
declined.‘ Because. at the time
when the National Diet was
deliberating on the peace
treaty. Yoshtda as prime
minister instructed the director
oi the Foreign Ministry‘s
'l‘reaty Bureau it reply in the
Diet that 'itunashlri and
Etoroiu islands are included in
the Kurlle islands to he abarv

4120/39

FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

donedbyJapan.‘

"Worse still. compared with
thedeellneoithem ciao
individual. tall: at
memory oiaociay as a
The reoonition oi the
which was the hastsior making
tun oi Yoshida's declining
memory is behg passed into
oblivion bypmpietoda'yjjihis
aver-y gravapuﬁm.’ ‘

The ”meeting htgeen
Foreign lihister mnemltso
and diplomatic elders." which
the essay reierred to. was held
in lSSGwhenthelhelilatoysma
cabinet was conducting
diplomatic negotiatims with
the Soviet Union tor the
restoration oi diplomatic
relations. lost elders in
diplomatic circles inchidhig
Yoshidawereoitheopinionth:
"the Japanese mm
ahouldnotiiltbasatisﬂadwith
the return at Habomai and
Shikotan islands alone; it
stiouidpushthrmnsdemand
tor the return at Kunadihi and
Eioroin islandsalso."

lnthoaedaysthevlewcalllng
tor “a package return at the
sarcasm“:

op
hackmttnt‘ll' was pelican
impossible tor the ilatoyama

M‘lINIGlI DAILY NEWS 1981

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.512! S 3252 2.! 52089.95." 2:: 5‘2

=
—

ss- 2223313.
3.5535» 1... 8 = 3s 32x! 6 35.3
8: 3:833 3 :8 88—5. or.
3.950.. §§£.a=3=5
0283.9... 2 as 8 .8 83:35: 8
:5 £053 .235 $805 2.... 28.81:. o.
43.53.33 .9. 9.5.2... £053 3.?
3&8 a. 28323. . .
R 503255....18303883
235. 951g :33... 23.8% 32. n

3% 3:? o. sort. 3 .6. $5an 8
:33 3.58: .285 .33 as 825
.533 3:5... 808;: nag—l. 83:28
233 02.8.3 .53 93.. .85. £8: :3
5 92 :5 0303333 yes—1:323
183%..aﬁiﬂogngwrngn
58 333:.
3%.3.=:§.w.§8
13.0 8. 2 =3 :9. .3. 3. again 9..—
ca 2.83. 3.2.3 I: 8 3.. =98. ~8» on:
.2. Sup-3803,33 3.332.153
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000400070012-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

present a more perfect reform bill next year.
we are not averse to letting it have additional
time. If past experiences are any glide. how-
ever. such bill has little chance of coming
into helm. A great number of aeriou prot>
lems. including outright abolition and
merger of certain goverrmem ofﬁces and
agencies, eliminating deficits troubling the
Japanese National Railways and the National
Health Insurance System and reworking of
the current unfair tax systems etc. will he
left untended

Even in the face of such evertttnllty. the
conservative government of the Liberal
Democratic Partyseexnstoheassu'edof
cmtinued existeme. Sadat's assassination is
widely ascribed to the whim of the pent-up
dissatisfaction ractiru the Egyptian society.
In Japan. dissatisfaction of the weaker ale-
monts of the society apparently will never
reach such a bursting point. One reason. of
course. is the comparatively affluent life the
Japanese people are now enjoying. If the
nation fails to seriously face up to the un-
healthy nature of the present “equilibriun in
«Imuilihriumﬁ‘ lam-over. there will he noend
to the comical existeme of an extra tigh-
gradc hi-fi stereo set in a "rabbit hutch" and
a shiny sportscnr coming out of a miserable

dcadend.
ITI'IIuI Tsufxttnli is a Nthon Kelrol deputy

political editor. I

COPYRIGHT: 1981 The Nihon Keizai shinbun, Inc.

cso: 4120/39

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070012-7
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

l Text}
SuelniroNisniohasdled w “7‘”!
Several years ago i met 30% ”gnaw“ $3;

Tatsuo Morita (who was work. Millennium Nubia
education minister under set I, .8 “mm with in
prime minim TQM KI“ [atel- m. m 'm M
yama and "“08” Asnldal {mofmmnymh‘mm
1° minim W “M’s to their um mm mm
WWW”- himsellhadtohulldaielornh
Martin "99" said: “Shim ownexiletmmtnenartyaction.
Yoshlda represents Japan's _
postwar conservatism. and W‘NWIMNWHW
Nisliio tlle retormism." i was ‘18! to PM! Politics been-e
stmclibytnelorceandtheair “W'NWWKMM
ot rinality mu: men he an "a" Melamine
W: railbed. Japr' socialist
Alter m, and of ear. movements can nursing
Nisnio gin ol tormmg I tore . W W
Socialist Party and moved to '10! ’Mtsm. mma
realize m, (3 betore untenable because these
siantially the creator oi the mm'mhﬁﬂh
Socialist Party. lie was tile My"! 0! the uny- “utt-
backbone oi the party. lie was ‘5'" 6°“ M "“1 “I! “36'
chic! cabinet secretary in “mu "0 'W 0‘ “DD-
mwar Japan‘s only socialist ‘31 W” “m "I! W
government. which was headed which mitten! "km 'and
y su Kn yam. in that “mm” m Mine:
positi he actually managed
apan s pom {or minute a? "Puberml: liter 0!
Unlike today’s chief cabinet - Mem-
socretaries. Ntsblo was a mm “'00! MIN!» lint l
quasiprime minister. “m "1809 ill I that “the. l
\‘nsnida laid the rails in: :lsollgzeemtl‘ﬂﬂcimm
Japan's postwar mmtive im. an) not we
politics. Nistiio tool: up the about him is Whether lie pan
pickax to lay the rails tor the “happy"ul _ ' a. ’
iociatist Party. Morita. 1 He was I: M

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.12.43. Eli—E— .‘mlw. .5
=55 =8 33 82:2. 9...;
.23 2». 3:2. .93. .53
£28 8. 2.2. .085» 19..
£3.23. 3 7.5.8 ea 933
me. E 293:» so... 2..
25.3. n23. 2° 15%.. 5a
uu_.a.3m§8§u:&.

.26 moan—E 33 you 3:2.
3 :83 @5538 9. 83.82:
E 383. = g .5: :5
23.75:. 15.2.3 2:.
3.3.9.5.». 1.9 :8 533».
$3 «Sign 8 :8 85$. .2.
:3 Va. 23 19.65.

5 5535 28:5. ~
Baa—$3.6 2.. 3} a a
.555 .28. 3 2.9.8 3
i... :5 62.5.3 8 «can 2.
Ea 5a is so 1925» 8
2.2.8 91:89 E .a so 5.

:58.» D. .7. 3913

35

2.2...
Sun.

8&3

«SE.
:23
2:2. _
a 6.
BE:
.88 m

I...

2x. __
83!.
555
>255
r. s
88.5 $832... .33.
«82... . 289.. 45:92.
.362. .. egg a... S:
8.3: 33 «.38... .3 a...
30.33.138.255?
:32. :28 .5 29. an...
83 3.... g .86 can...
§§§.§n§§.
858.5383. .

3830 9.5.8.38

5.8938552?
3233.3. 2. 58:8 8:.
_

ill-r... - 15:23.:— 35::
.. .u 3:22. 5.. So 565.
.38.. 2... 08:5 .85.. 5..
.8222. 3.3.5.. .u... .58.. :8
2.2.528. .58.. 838......
.5 32.2. 8.53.88 8.... ..
3...... .8 o. :8 832.3.
9.2522. n. a 8.838 to?
3.: 8» 2.38.. as 8...
83:85:53.5...

>33... :8 85.. :88 o.
3232......43 503.32
0.2.0.. .3... .65... 3%...
.2... 5.25 8 5a .33..
52.8. .26 .3 53...... 2...
8.. V. .3... 5. 5:33..
.25... ._._.n 5.28. .52... c
5.... .83 again.

0. :5 .m 53.5» 9. So
3.5.32.2... 335...?
3:32.. .o .3 59233.. >.
:8 .2... 9. 3.53.3. g.
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGI CAL

'JAPAN 'rmas' on suzuxl's 'Hl-‘ADACHE'
014251217 Tokyo nu: JAPAN TIM-IS in English 22 Oct 81 p 12

["Politics Today--and Tomorrow" column by Minoru Shimizu: "New 'ﬂeadache' for
Suzuki"]

[Text] Although the Diet has yet to reach the halfway mark in its discussions
of the bills related to administrative reform. on which Prime Minister Zenko
Suzuki is staking his political life, most members of the ruling party have
recently started focusing their attention on a different issue.

This issue is the reshuffle of cabinet members and party executives scheduled
to take place at the end of November following the close of the extraordinary
Diet session.

The reason why the Diet members of the Liberal-Democratic Party (LDP) have

already turned their attention to the November reshuffle is that the
administrative reform debates are proceeding smoothly and there are good prospects
that the related bills will pass the current Diet.

According to observers, Prime Minister Suzuki himself is now confident of being
able to weather the Diet session. However, he reportedly told his sides that
he is extremely worried about next month's cabinet reshuffle.

Observers interpret the fact that Suzuki is now making the cabinet reshuffle
his main concern as meaning that he is no longer worried about the current
progress of business in the Diet.

Prime Minister Suzuki, who unexpectedly took over the government in July last
year, has substantially maintained the same cabinet and party executive
lineup since the start of his administration. According to past practice,

a cabinet reshuffle has taken place roughly once every year, which means that
most members of the present cabinet have been in office several months longer
than usual (although there have been changes in foreign affairs, health and
welfare, and home affairs ministers).

Strengthen Position

As the power to appoint ministers rests with the prime minister, paat prime
ministers have endeavored to manipulate the party and thereby stabilize and

29

FINICNﬂﬂ(IAl.0551NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strengthen their position within the party by taking advantage of cabinet
reshuffles. Prime Minister Susuki is no exception and has told his aides that

"consideration of a person's merits will probably depend on his activities
in the current Diet."

One reason why the Diet debates on the administrative reform bills are progressing
according to the government and LB? schedule is that LDP Diet members hoping
for cabinet posts are actively cooperating in the Diet proceedings. In other

words, they have taken the prime minister's words at their face value and are
acting accordingly.

However, former Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka once said: "Depending on how they
are carried out, cabinet reshuffles can sometimes shorten the life of an
administration instead of lengthening it. This is because, in carrying out

a reshuffle, one may make many enemies instead of increasing the number of
one's supporters."

Only Twenty Cabinet Posts

Excluding the prime minister, there are only 20 cabinet posts. Thus, Tanaka
implied that, although the few lucky persons who were appointed to the cabinet
could be relied upon to support and cooperate with the prime minister, there
would probably be a far greater number disappointed in their hopes and these
might well harbor resentment toward the prime minister.

Observers say that when the prime minister lacks strong leadership, a personnel
reshuffle further exposes his deficiency of political power. Looking back on
Suzuki's political performance over the past year and several months, one cannot
say that he is a prime minister possessing strong political leadership.

Accordingly, the personnel reshuffle that Suzuki plans to carry out in November
is fraught with many difficult problems. Unless he is able to solve these
problems when reshuffling his cabinet, his administration is likely to become

more unstable than before.

Following is a brief rundown on some of these problems.

1. Is the present mainstream group setup based on the Suzuki, Tanaka and
Fukuda factions to be maintained?

2. Hhat is to be done about the top three party executive posts, especially
that of secretary-general?

3. Should he retain Yasuhiro Nakasone, director general of the Administrative
Management Agency, and Toshio Komoto, director general of the Economic Planning
Agency, both of whom are powerful candidates for the premiership in succession
to Suzuki?

4. What should he do with Foreign Minister Sunao Sonoda and Finance Minister
Michio Hatanabe?

30

FOR 0F11C1Al.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Should the number of cabinet posts allotted to the Tanaka faction, the
largest of the LDP factions with 104 members, be increased from four to five?
And how should he deal with Susumu Nikaido, chairman of the LDP's Executive
Council and the Tanaka faction's representative?

6. How should he treat Kiichi Miyazawa, chief cabinet secretary, and
Rokusuke Tanaka, minister of international trade and industry, who, though
executives of the Suzuki faction, are on bad terms with the prime minister?

All these problems being interrelated, they cannot be handled separately, which
makes the whole business very ticklish and complicated.

Matter of Nikaido

Let us consider, for instance, the matter of how Nikaido should be treated.

The Tanaka faction wants to run one of its members in the party presidential
election in autumn next year and is considering Nikaido, the faction's
representative, as its candidate. Because Nikaido has been regarded as one

of the "gray officials" involved in the Lockheed scandal, both he and the Tanaka
faction as a whole have been doing their utmost to dispel this image.

This unfavorable image was said to have become much diluted when Nikaido became
chairman of the Executive Council at the start of the Suzuki administration,
but his supporters hope to erase it altogether in the forthcoming cabinet
reshuffle. Thus, Nikaido is hoping to get the post of party secretary-general
with the powerful backing of the so-called "Tanaka corps." In the event that
this proves difficult, he intends to ask to be kept in his present executive
council post or to be given the position of foreign minister.

The Fukuda faction, which also belongs to the mainstream group, is not likely
to agree to Nikaido's appointment to the post of secretary-general. The

present secretary-general, Yoshio Sakurauchi, is a member of the Nakasone
faction.

Suzuki himself would probably prefer to appoint a secretary-general from his own
faction rather than Nikaido in order to see himself safely through the remainder
of his term as party president until next autumn when he aims to stand for
reelection.

Post of Foreign Minister

Nikaldo has made frequent trips to the United States and Europe during the past
year or so and has shown strong interest in international affairs. Accordingly,
he is attracted to the post of foreign minister. If he is given this folio,

it will mean changing places with Foreign Minister Sonoda, with whom Prime
Minister Suzuki has a close relationship. Sonoda wants to keep his present
position or to be given one of the three top party posts.

If Nikaido fails to get the sort of post he wants, the large Tanaka faction would
no doubt turn against Prime Minister Suzuki. Suzuki needs the cooperation of the
Tnnaka faction to ensure the stability of his administration, but if in order

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to retain its support, he gives Nikaido a post which would put him in an
advantageous position he runs the risk of having Nikaido compete against him

in the presidential race next year, thereby jeopardizing his chances of
reelection.

The Nikaido question is related to problems 1, 2. b and 5 listed above.

Prime Minister Suzuki hopes to carry out the November reshuffle in such a way
as to enable him to gain reelection in the LDP presidential race next year.

On the other hand. there has arisen an opinion in some quarters of the LDP
that he has no chance of reelection. And some members of groups supporting
rival candidates for the next premiership are planning loves to obstruct
Suzuki's reelection by taking advantage of the forthcoming reshuffle. Against
this background the cabinet reshuffle is likely to prove a major headache for
the prime minister.

COPYRIGHT: Th! JAPAN TIMES 1981

C50: 6120/37

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFN]AI.USEZONL¥

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

MIYAHOTO ADDRESSES JCP ACTIVIST CONFERENCE
0H08ll37 Tokyo JPS in English 0855 GMT 8 Oct 81

[Text] Tokyo, 8 Oct JPS--Kenji Hiyamoto, Presidium chairman of the Japanese

Communist Party, gave an introductory speech to the party activist conference
opened on October 5 at Izu Party Study Hall. Shizuoka Prefecture.

In his speech, Hiyamoto referred to the present international situation. The
gist of which follows:

An unlimited arms race between military blocs is continuously developing, which
was pointed out in its document 'for true peace communism.‘ and in the JCP
letters to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. On October 2, 0.8. President
Reagan announced a new plan for nuclear arms buildup. In the meantime, Soviet
Foreign Minister Gromyko gave a speech in the United Nations, in which he

proposed a declaration of prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. The
proposal itself is good.

But as a whole the Gromyko speech is the repetition of the conventional stand-
point. The important point is that, despite the old tune in the whole of his
speech. why he had to propose a declaration of banning the use of nuclear
weapons. Against the background of his speech, there was a JCP letter of
refutation dated September 6, in the wake of the 7th plenum of the JCP CC,
rebuffing the former letter of refutation addressed to the JCP by the CPSU.

In the JCP letter of September 4, we pointed out the fact that the Soviet Union
failed to claim a total ban on nuclear weapons in the 'peaee program' called for
by the CPSU, and abstained from voting in the United Nations on the proposals
for signing of an agreement for prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons.

In this situation, it has become more and more significant to widely spread,
both internally and internationally, the view expressed in the JCP's 'for

a true peace program.’ ’ . .
What is characteristic in this situation is the great upsurge of the movement

in Europe against the development of nuclear weapons. The movement is developing
all over Europe, against the development so far of 88-20 missiles by the

Soviet Union and the planned deployment of new Pershing II missiles by NATO,

as well as other steps. It is characteristic that the movement is developing

as self-reliant movements. in which the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free
zones is being eagerly called for.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In West Germany. the German Federation of Trade Unions (DGB) affiliating

8 million workers is carrying on a signature collection movement for a total
ban on nuclear weapons. The British Labor Party decided in its conference

in September that the next labor-party goverment will carry the clear-cut
policy of renunciation of nuclear weapons. To the L'UNITA festival of the
Italian Comunist Party, Hs. Kurokawa, A-bomb victim, was invited, and many
impressive episodes were heard on her visit. This is an important advance
in the solidarity between the Japanese movanent against A and H bombs and the
European movement.

In these circumstances, the international significance of the Japanese movement
against A and H bombs had increased. The movement is now developing toward the
2nd special session for disarmament, United Nations General Assably. What

is important in this connection is to strengthen public opinion and movement
for a total ban on nuclear weapons, a ban on the use of nuclear weapons and
dissolution of military blocs--the con-ton flag of peace in the world, not
letting the movement end as a mere petition movement. This is the fundamental
goal of this movement.

The important significance of our policy on war and peace, and on the right of
nations to self-determination, which have been set up by the 15th party congress,
and a series of recent articles, have been proved by practice. Now, it is

very important to propagate in this country, too, the view expressed in the
document of the JCP 'for a true peace program.‘

COPYRIGHT: THE JAPAN TIMES 1981

C80: 4120/37

310

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

MIYAmTO ADDRESSES ANTINUCLEAR RALLY
OHZZIO3S Tokyo JPS in English 0903 GMT 22 Oct 81

[Text] Tokyo Oct 22 JPS--Japanese Communist Party Presidium chairman Kenji
Miyamoto said, "Future rests with progressive unity," and emphasized by
saying, "Let's make this historic rally a step toward advance.” This is the

speech given by him at the central rally of the October 21 united action.
His speech follows (gist):

"Today's internal and international situation indicates that how important it
is to struggle against arms expansion and the reactionary administrative reform
line by the ad hoc comission, and for the abrogation of the Japan-U.s. security
treaty. In this sense, the following two points are questioned as a touchstone
of the progressive forces: unity of actions on the basis of the above-said
purposes: whether do they favor or not favor arns expansion and the abrogation
of the security treaty. In this sense. I express my sincere calls for genuine
unity of actions. while upholding the correct objectives."

After refe: ring to the two features of the reactionary administrative reform line,
Hiyamoto said, "The reactionary administrative reform line is very dangerous.
Let's confirm definitely that a resolute opposition to this line is an

urgent task in the struggle for the defense of peace and democracy of Japan,

and the living of the Japanese people.

"I call on again the Socialist Party of Japan to come back at an early date to
the tradition that we have so far maintained to go on struggling together with us."

On the issue of nuclear weapons, the JCP Presidiun chairman said, "In the United
Nations, the United States and Japan belong to the minority group, no more than
20 percent of all U.N. member countries. In Europe the movement calling for

the total ban on nuclear weapons, and opposing to nuclear weapons is spreading
like a storm. One feature of this movement is that Japanese peace activists. such
as buddhists. and men of religion are standing at the forefront of peace searches
in Europe, and woman Hibakusha Hachiyo Kurokawa took part in the festival of
L'lINITA of the Italian Connunist Party. Thus, the voices of the Japanese movaent
against A and H bombs is growing stronger throughout the world.

35

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"though the Liberal-Dmcratic Party wants to carry on Ital-administration as it
pleases by utilizing anti-commist forces, the Japanese people will surely
unmask them and splitters [as received], because the Japanese people are very
wise. Let's try to be more successful in defeating the LDP totally in the calling

elect ion uh ile spreading solidarity . "

C50: 4120/37

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

THIRTY-YEAR U.S.-JAPAN SECURITY SYSTEM REVIMD

Tokyo CHUO KORON in Japanese Aug 81 pp 72-83

[Special report: "Japan Hithin the 0.8. Military Strategy" discussed by: Toshio
Kimura, LDP Lower House Diet member, and Yonosuke Nagai, professor, Tokyo
Institute of Technology]

[Text] The enforcement of President Reagan's policy of "peace based
on strength" can possibly result in the payment of a big price, that
of aggravating the relationship existing between Japan, the United
States and the West European countries. Now is the time for Japan
and the West European countries to forthrightly seek from the

United States a revision of its world policy.

30 Years To Reach "U.s.-Japan Alliance"

Editorial staff: This year marks the 30th anniversary of the San Francisco
Peace Treaty. The U.s.-Japan Security Treaty, too, has reached its 30th anniver-
sary if dated back to the signing of the old treaty, and it is 21 years old if
counted iron the revision of the existing treaty. But following the Reagan-
Suzuki U.s.-Japan sumit conference. such occurrences as the nuclear weapon
delivery statement by former Ambassador to Japan Reischauer and America's strong
demand for a larger share of defense responsibilities for Japan have occurred
like scheduled events, and the defense debate is spiritedly carried on. It can
be said that the U.S.-Japan security system, with the 30th anniversary as the
juncture, has reached a turning point.

Today we have Mr Kimura, who has held such prominent government posts as minister
of foreign affairs and chief cabinet secretary and who has been deeply involved
in international politics, especially on U.s.-Japsn relations, and Mr Nagai,

who in the New Year issue of our CRUD KORON publication contributed "The Defense
Theory of a State in Moratorium, " which contained his unique proposal on Japan's
posture regarding its defense, to discuss such topics as the international
situation, defense, foreign diplomacy, etc, as they affect U.S.-Japan relations.

Kimura: It can be said that, for the mat pert, after World War II Japan walked
hand in hand with the U.S.-Japan,Security Treaty, but each country had its own
knotty problems. The security treaty of the 1950's was said to be an extension

.37 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the occupation by the allied forces. Japan was under America's paternalistic
protection. The security treaty of the 1960's was characterized by Japan
continuing without change to assume the subordinate role to the United States
in politics, but on the Other hand. in economics Japan chose its growth pattern
in order to advance, taking advantage of America's kindness. From the Korean
War to the Vietnaa Var, Anerica considered that based on world strategy.
especially Asian strategy, Japan woald naturally follow 0.8. policy, which Japan
did without coaplaining. But economically America was mgnanimous to Japan by
allowing it without objection to rise to economic prosperity at will from the
Korean and Vietnaa special procurement.

But in approaching the 1970 decade. America's international position militarily
and economically underwent a relative decline. In comparison, Japan's national
power economically became stronger gradually. and it finally reached the state

of becoming America's rival. As a result. the first discord to occur was the
U.S.-Japan textile issue. Politically a situation arose in which it was Japan's
turn to seek demands from the United States. This was the Okinawa reversion talks.
At that time, because America was undergoing a transition iron the standpoint of
world strategy. the demand for Okinawa's "nuclear withdrawal and reversion with
full sovereignty" were granted, but after that, with the decline in authority of
the white House which began with the watergate scandal during the Nixon administra-
tion and the consequences of the Vietnam Her. America was beset by confusion and
instability both econoaically and socially. It was in this context that changes
in the structure between Japan and the United States that had been concluded in the

Japan-0.5. Security Treaty began to surface.

And since it was clear that Japan, which had now achieved the status of an
economic superpower. could not surge back with military power because of consti-
tutional limitations, the United States and the West European countries strongly
demanded that Japan make international contributions corresponding to its
economic power and to further exert influential political power based on its
economic strength. These demands were given impetus with the Soviet invasion 0‘2
Afghanistan in late 197°.

Nagai: Hr Kimura has lucidly accounted for the changes by decades, and how time
has flown; 30 years ago if the old security treaty is dated to 1951 and 21

years ago when counted back to the origin of the existing security treaty. The
generations born in the postwar period now constitute 55 percent of the entire
population, and the generations which experienced war are now in the linority.
Even those born during the 21 years since the inception of the existing treaty
constitute one-third of the entire population. In other words, the hard facts
are that the generations which consider the security treaty to be a given framework
or inconsequential have increased, and the generations which considered the
security treaty to be like a heterogeneous "rockbed" forced upon the people which
must be met with resistance are now the considerably older generations.

Kimura: So we are now the minority. (laughter)

Nagai: During that period, the U.S.-Japan ties broke away from a leader-subordin-
ate relationship between two countries to become gradually one of parity within a

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mutually dependent relationship among many nations. By era, the occupation from
1945 to 1951 was a leader-subordinate relationship. George Kennan said that the
uniqueness of the U.S.-Japan relationship lay in the "intimate unnaturalness" of
its birth. but if I may venture a vulgar description, the U.S.-Japan relationship
was a rape; in other words, it was a unique relationship that sprang out of a
violent force called war. From 1952 to 1960, it was freedom from the occupation
in form, but still Japan suffered from the consequences of being under the
unilateral, old U.S.-Japan security treaty system. To achieve independence in the
true sense of the word, Japan had to experience a kind of "fomlity test,"

which was the 1960 security treaty riots.

The 10-year period from 1961 to 1970, as Mr Kimra pointed out, was characterized
by the readjustment of U.S.-Japan relations centered around economics under the
security treaty system. Then the era from 1971 to 1980 was said to be the period
when the U.S.-Japan partnership was formed. Prime Minister Ohira visited the
United States in May 1980 and for the first time in a public speech, he mentioned
in the Rose Room at the White House that "Japan will asstme responsibility as a
member of the alliance." It is a fact that the word "alliance" was used explicitly.
Currently, use of the word "alliance" in the U.S.-Japan joint statement is being
questioned, but the fact is that former Prime Minister Ohira had already used it.

Kimura: That's right.

Nagai: Just about that time, the hostage recovery operation in Iran had failed
and former President Carter was in a miserable state, and so former Prime
Minister Ohira's statement must have made him feel as if he had gained a million
supporters. On top of this and at the same time, the decision on a policy that,
in effect, Japan would not purchase Iran's oil, like it or not, became a
tremendous encouragement to America, for it meant rendering indirect support to
ally America whose strength had relatively declined. It would be safe to say
that a new era. that of a U.S.-Japan alliance relationship, emerged as the
turning point in 1980.

Kimura: That is true.

Nagai: At present three problems are lagging in U.S.-Japan relations. In the
security treaty, as a result of Japan's defeat, the Pacific zone came under the
total control of America. and this means that even as a regional power, Japan
has not yet gained its independence. In politics, as syﬂolized by the use of
the word "alliance," Japan is on the verge of reaching equal status similar

to that accorded to NATO countries. Prequent mention is aade of the "bilateralism"
within NATO as against the "unilateralism" of the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty, but
as Mr Phillip Trezise and others have emphasized, NATO in reality is based on
“unilateralism,” as with Japan. And the U.S.-Japan econoaic relationship is a
trading relationship similar to vertical specialization that is akin to an
advanced industrial country versus a developing country relationship. In other
words. it is a reverse arrangement from the military affairs standpoint. because
Japan purchases farm products and raw materials from America and exports
industrial goods. That these areas in military affairs, politics and economics
are lagging rather seriously can only mean that the problems hereafter are
already loaded.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the Midst of the Deteate Tide

Kimura: The security treaty of the 1950's was without doubt in an era of 0.8.
paternalistic protection. Japan was manned only by an infantile Self Defense
Force which could only assume a supplementary role to the American military
power. Finally in 1960, even though in form only, Japan became an equal
partner. Symbolic of this status was the prior consultation system. Although
Japan finally attained a position of independence with regard to the security
treaty, its true strength was not compatible. Thus, even with the Vietnam

War, Japan could only perform in a supplementary role, as in the past. The
Okinawa reversion, too, was accomplished under similar conditions, and the nuclear
problem which became controversial with Reischauer's recent statement originated
there.

But with the drawing up of the 1970 security treaty after the end of the 10-year
fixed period. independence was added on, so that either party can call for
discontinuance on a year's prior notification; in other words, Japan unilaterally
can dissolve the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty. Although this feature was an
eyeopening change, surprisingly itcame about with hardly any public attention.

Nagai: At that time, a segment of the hawk group, who were absolute advocates of
the security treaty, clamored for a change to automatic renewal.

Kimura: True. There were various unstable factors in the Asian region in the
1960's, but peace once again reigned in Asia with the end of the Vietnam war.
In its place came the oil shock. Because of this oil shock, the central issue

became, not the instability of military affairs, but instability of world
economics. Born out of this background was the summit conference of the leaders
of the seven advanced countries. Security treaty problems were downplayed in
the 1970's, and the move toward international economic cooperation to cope with
the disorder of world economic became the priority subject, with the summit as
the focal point.

Nagai: The prominence of the U.S.-Japan-west European relationship is a mani-
festation of the move toward cooperation.

Kimura: with the growth of Japan's national strength, the international mutual
dependence relationship has become increasingly stronger, but confusion in
international currency was to occur. Problems that could not be solved only by
Japan and the United States were to arise, and the trilateral relationship of
Japan, the United States and Vest European countries was to assume importance.
Within this framework, discussions on the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty have been
relegated and a comparatively tranquil time has prevailed.

Nagai: True. A product of the cold war, the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty passed
through a major turning point in 1968 and 1969, and its character underwent a
major change in the 1970's.

Kimura: The three events characterizing international politics of the 1970's were
the termination of the Vietnam War, the friendly overtures between the United

States and the PRC, and U.S.-USSR detente centering on SALT.

b0

FOR‘OFTWCJAI.USEGDNL¥
Nagai: Because the world trend of detente followed one course, that phase of the
security treaty which revolved around the military affairs issue took a back seat.
With the occurrence of the oil shock in October 1973. coordination of the economic
mutual dependence relationship among the various advanced industrial countries
was thrus; to the fore.

Kimura: Any priority matter in international economics has characteristic of
inevitably becoming a global issue [sic].

Nagai: The period of transition from Prime Minister Sato to Prime Minister Tanaka
was a major turning point in Japanese diplomacy. involving the return of Okinawa,
the textile issue and the Japan-PRC normalization of diplomatic relations, but at
the same time it became the watershed in postwar international politics. In'
substance, the major turning point occurred in 1968 and 1969. That America's
Vietnam policy was a fabrication was exposed with the Tet offensive in January
1968, a part of the gold conversion system of the seven-nation gold pool was
stopped in mid—January and suspicion was cast on the IMP. On 31 March the halt in
bombing of North Vietnam occurred, President Johnson made his statement declining
the presidential candidacy, a major change in Vietnam policy, and following this
came the beginning of the big change in America's Asian policy. The Soviet Army's
occupation of Prague came in August. The announcement of the "Brezhnev Doctrine"
occurred in November, making it clearly known that parity of relations between
socialist countries was impossible. and USSR-PRC relations quickly entered a

state of tension. Hith the worsening of the USSR-PRC confrontation and as a
strategy against the Soviet Union, the Foreign Ministry in Peking sent its first
overture for U.S.-PRC rapprochement to the United States.

Then in 1969. a military skirmish between the PRC and the USSR occurred at
Damanskiy Island in March, and Brezhnev's Asian collective security plan was
unveiled. And as symbolized by the announcement of the "Guam Doctrine" by
President Nixon a month later, the East-West detente elsewhere related to the
development of Soviet strategy to contain the PRC.

At the real core of the big change in American world policy was the setting up

of an international atmosphere so as to effect an honorable withdrawal from
Vietnam. As long as the United States clung to the policy of containi'g communism.
the withdrawal from Vietnam would be an admission of defeat, but if it could be
thought of as a step toward a new peace structure, then it would be a positive
act. Q

However, this Kissinger plan was laid on the premise that the South Vietnamese
Government would last for S or 6 years after the withdrawal of the 0.8. military.
Unfortunately, the Watergate scandal occurred and the South Vietnam Government,
contrary to expectations. collapsed in l and 1/2 years. To make matters worse,
in Africa, the Cuban volunteer army cantrolled Angola, and in a 5-year period
between 1975 to 1980. pro-Soviet governments were established in seven countries.
The Americans had an extravagant expectation that with detente the Soviets would
exercise self-restraint in the aggrandizenent of the Third Horld. Utilizing
this "recognition gap" in detente. the USSR unilaterally expanded its sphere of

influence over Third World countries. The impression conveyed to the United

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(NﬂﬂC1ALlﬁﬂEONlY

States and Western nations was that the finishing touch was the Soviet military
intervention in Afghanistan.

Formulation of Third world Policy Is Japan-0.8. Task

Ironically. the 1973 oil shock created tremendous confusion in international
economics. and leaders of the various countries were totally engaged with domestic
problems and lacked the time to study East-Rest relations. Meanwhile. the Soviets
looked askance at the confusion of the Western nations and hastened the buildup
of their military strength. '

This was the time when the trend toward racial self-determination in the Third
world gained momentum, and despite the mushrooming of the struggles for racial
freedom beginning in Africa, America still adhered to the outmoded suzerainty
concept in branding racial freedom movements as being anti-establishment, and its
Third World policy was one of blocking these movements. The Soviets took
advantage of these opportunities. Brzezinski. the special assistant on national
security affairs during the Carter administration. a hardliner against the USSR
but possessing a superficial knowledge of Third Horld affairs, on relinquishing
office stated that the Soviet gains in the Third Hbrld were not based on direct
Soviet attacks into the Third world, but that the matter was simply the ripeness
of time and that the Soviets had adroitly ridden the crest of the racial freedom
movement to reap the benefits.

th didn't the United States sense this matter much earlier? By being absorbed
only with the Bast-west cold war and neglecting the gravity of the North-South
problem, America brought about heavily disadvantageOus results in Soviet relations,
Middle Eastern relations and Central and South American relations.

Nagai: Exactly. Brzezinski stated that at this rate the United States might be
forced to isolate itself from the world.

Kimura: The balance of East-West relations altered greatly just when attention

0n the security treaty had been relegated during the 1970's, which was the

decade of confusion in international economies. In late 1979, when world economics
had just about reached a level of normalcy. came the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
which caused the United States, in shocked amazement and anger at the Soviet
threat, to resolutely call on its allies. The destiny that must be pursued
hereafter by the security treaty of the 1980's is already rooted in this problem.

Nagai: Not since the double punch shock of the "loss of China" and the "Soviet
success in nuclear test explosions" during the Korean War served as catalysts
in consolidating American public opinion has anything affected American public
opinion as deeply as the Soviet military invasion of Afghanistan and the Iran
hostage affair. And so Reagan won with the support of American public opinion
seeking a "tough America."

The Reagan administration's Third Horld policy is still nebulous. The speech by
Secretary of State Haig at the recent Japan-U.S.-Hest Europe committee dinner

which I attended, contrary to expectations, dwelt on "human rights diplomacy."

42

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The foundation of American diplomacy has been based consistently on protection of
human rights, patterned after the Declaration of Independence. Except that the
mistake of Carter's diplomacy--a1though not mentioned specifically-~occurred in
not having clarified the relationship between America's "national benefit" and
"human rights." With this remark, Secretary of State haig clearly separated the
concepts of totalitarianism and authoritarianism. defining totalitarianism as
that system which suppresses fundamental human rights and naming the communist
governments led by the USSR as embodying that system. Against that are the allied
countries, which may be suppressing human rights temporarily because of circum-
stances. but which pursue the democratic system of values. This is defined as
authoritarianism. his speech covered the indiscriminate application of the
universal concept of human rights, and he called it a mistake to turn an
authoritarian state over to the enemy.

America's basic dilemma was fully expressed in Secretary of State Haig's strained
speech. When differentiating between "friend" and "foe" in the many Third World
countries which are complex and involved, the "standards" must conform to the
traditional basic values of America. But after the collapse of the cold war
measure of anticommunist or procommunist positions, if ignoring the issue based
on the theory of Kissinger's power politics or utilizing the measure of "human
rights" is considered unreasonable, then how else can the division be accom-
plished? America had a most vigorous diplomatic policy when it had its "cold
war consenSus," which was the strange combination of two originally incompatible
ideas, namely the anticommunist crusading moral principle and power politics.
Herein are the contradictions and concern of American diplomacy now assumed by
the Reagan government.

If the Reagan government should set forth a strong diplomatic policy toward the
USSR while still plagued with the basic dilenmms, it will unavoidably be forced
to pay a big price, which will be the worsening of relations with Vest Europe
and Japan. This is the fundamentally different point when the period of the
Korean War is considered.

Kimura: You mentioned the Reagan administration undergoing suffering. but I
believe that the suffering will begin now. To suffer, there must be a serious
followup to a policy. but at present the Reagan administration lacks any policy.
It has a stance only. There is loud talk of Soviet threats, but like Dulles'
diplomacy, there is only a stance of confrontation.

I believe that the Reagan administration will begin to suffer only when its
confrontation stance. which is dependent on military strength, meets head-on with
the complex reality of international affairs hereafter.

Nagai: You are absolutely right.

Kimura: At this point let me dwell on the "U.S.-Japan joint statement" issued
during Prime Minister Suzuki's visit to the United States. Setting aside the
minor issues, what I am most concerned about is: besides flaunting a stance of
"peace based on strength" centering on military power and dealing with the
Reagan administration which does not have a positive policy, what, if anything,
did he discuss? Oozing out from the "U.S.-Japan joint statement" is the

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military security guarantee phase of cooperation between Japan and the United
States to cope with Soviet threats. And because this was expressed as an
"alliance relationship," serious criticism resulted. what Japan should be working
out with the Reagan administration is world strategy, including peace strategy,
but the result was only a discussion of superficial issues.

Prime Minister Suzuki Shauld Apply Lessons Gained Prom European Trip

Kimura: I have a strong interest on the Middle East issue at this time and I
cannot help but be concerned about paragraph four, on the Middle East issue, in
the "joint statement." It is said that Japan recognizes America's efforts to
stabilize the Persian Gulf region and this has resulted in large gains to various
countries. including Japan. but this sort of Middle East undertaking is a big
mistake. Even former Secretary of State Vance has said that American should be
more conscious of the various lessons that were to be learned from Secretary

of State Haig's visit to the various countries of the Middle East. In other
words, the thinking that to achieve stability in the Middle East the top priority
should be given to deterrence of Soviet advances is a big mistake. As can be
seen from the Israeli attack on Iraq's atomic reactors, in order to achieve total
peace in the Middle East, of importance is the settlement of the Israel-Arab
issue and the Palestinian problem, which is an aggravated manifestation of that
issue. and America must realize that the crucial point in checking Soviet
advances into the Middle East in the future lies in the long-range settlement of
the Israel-Arab issue.

why didn't Prime Minister Suzuki discuss these topics with U.S. officials?

Nagni: I agree. Regarding the "U.S.-Japan joint statement," Poregin Ministry
officials have variously engaged in self-praise, but I am doubtful. For instance,
they have stated that Japan shares the central values with the Western allied
countries. but I wonder if this is true. I doubt whether the central values
which the Japanese people think of in the bottom of their hearts and the central
values thought of by the United States and West European countries are in
complete agreement.

Has the Soviet threat theory truly been boiled down? A large gap exists between
Heat European countries and America as to the stance taken against the USSR.

For example. a clear contrast exists between Prime Minister Schmidt of West
Germany and the Reagan administration on the anti-USSR image. Even on the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, West Germany is c0ncerned about its historical
background and has a considerably different interpretation than the United
States.

Kimura: On that point I believe that the trip to the various European countries
offered tremendous lessons to Prime Minister Suzuki.

Nagai: I also had high hopes regarding the prime minister's trip to Europe.
Heard frequently among some Japanese are the arguments that U.S.-Hest European
relations are smoother than U.S.-Japanese relations because Japan alone is
"unique" or that Japan runs counter to "commonsense practices of the world" in
its views on the USSR and on defense. Some people judge that for the first time

64

FOI:0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFTCIAL USEICMNLY

Japan is marching abreast with the "commonsense practices of the world" with the
recent "u.s.-Japsn joint statement," but I believe that this is wrong.

Kimura: Yes, in that cantext.

Nagai: The issue of defense for the Persian Gulf region which Mr Kimura mentioned
is the biggest f0cal point for us in the Western alliance. But the Reagan
administration lacks a coordinated policy to deal with the issue. Although the
truly basic issue is the Palestinian problem, in a sense America began to
entertain an optimistic hope with the Iranian revolution and the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan. In other words, by emphasizing the Soviet military
threat and the newly emerged Islamic fundamentalist threat, America has the
superficial hope of possibly switching the basic points of contention from the
issue of Arab-Israeli confrontation. There was the danger of this erroneous
hope distorting America's Middle East policy during the 1980's. This illusion
was dispelled in an instant with the Iran-Iraq war and the Israeli bombing of
Iraq's nuclear reactors.

Kimura: I am sure America could not help but be concerned about its errors in
Middle East policy. During Secretary of State Haig's visit to the various Middle
Eastern countries, the six cauntries along the Persian Gulf region, in a round-
about way, rejected u.s. military advances. Even Oman, which previously had
agreed to offer military bases to the United States, changed its attitude. This
was a big blow to America. The six gulf countries expressed their positions
clearly, that establishment of bases by America will only invite trauble by
provoking Soviet advances. Also, King Musayn of Jordan directly told Secretary
of State Haig that America's Middle East strategy is mistaken and that Middle
East peace cannot be achieved without settling the Palestinian problem.

However, the Reagan administration's Middle East policy has not yet been firmed
up. Not only the Middle East policy but also its policy on foreign diplomacy
has not been firmed up. If this delay in formulation is attributable to the
simple, short-circuit type Reagan foreign diplomacy which was advocated during
the election campaign, then I believe it would be desirable for it to undergo
revision in the light of reality.

Therefore, the priority political theme of the Ottawa summit scheduled for 20
and 21 July should be Japan and the West European countries in concert offering
frank counsel and urging revision of America's world strategy. not only Middle
East policy but also Soviet relations. In that respect, Prime Minister Suzuki's
European trip should lead to significant contributions. Will he express his
views? Mere is the test case on whether Prime Minister Suzuki can make judgments
on diplomacy.

Nagai: For instance, a concrete issue affecting Europe is that of war zone
nuclear weapons, that is. the introduction of the Pershing II [tanks] and cruise
missiles. The NATO countries are not necessarily in total agreement on these two
subjects. when NATO decided on the introduction of the Pershing II and cruise
missiles in December 1979, West Germany approved conditionally. In other words.

NATO and the USSR negotiated to mutually reduce war zone nuclear weapons; and
if the USSR did not cease the buildup of 88-20 medium-range missiles and Backfire

45'

FOI.0F11C1A1.IEHE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strategic bombers, the installation of war zone nuclear weapons by 1983 was
unavoidable; thus, the introduction of war zone nuclear weapons became a measure
for arms control negotiations with the Soviets. The basic stance of paving the
way for talks on strategic arms limitation and strengthening the negotiating
position with the Soviets reflects the basic attitude of the West European
cOuntries; already in countries like Denmark, Belgium and Holland, the introduction
of war zone nuclear weapons is linked with Reagan's diplomatic policy, and this

has become an internal political issue. He should not allow this sort of misjudg-
ment in Japan.

Kimura: I agree.
Use of Bypass Diplomacy

Kimura: I have no objection to the use of the expression "alliance relationship
between Japan and the United States." I do not dispute the fact that the 0.3.-
Japan relationship is the main axis of Japan's foreign diplomacy. This is the
main route, but from the standpoint of Japan's geopolitical position as well as
for political and economic reasons, Japan is not fated to have an identical
world strategy with America. And because the West European countries are fated
in a similar manner to Japan, if anything, Japan's fate lies in cooperation with
West Europe.

Nagai: West European strategists, when encountered. are unanimous in calling for
Japan-Heat European cooperation to serve as a brake against runaway 0.5. action.

Kimura: In that respect, the main route should be opened, but a bypass route
should be maintained for Japan's diplomatic strategy hereafter. Japan should have
a deeper alignment with West Europe by taking a common position on Soviet relations
and Third World diplomacy utilizing the bypass route. And shouldn't Japan inform
America that Japan's position differs from that of America?

Nagai: I have emphasized "circuitous strategy" from way back. Japan must
formulate a new strategy by considering the presence of the West European
countries. The trouble with U.S.-Europe relations in the 1960's was caused by
De Gaulle of France. The principal in the U.s.-European confrontation in the
1970's was West Germany. As the nucleus of NATO, West Germany harbors a deep
feeling of rivalry with the United States. There is a confrontation on security.
let alone on economic problems. The deep-seated fear is West Germany's
geopolitical position, that the country used as a battleground means its anni-
hilation. Japan and west Germany literally have stakedtheirsurvival as a race.
They must unavoidably maintain the balance of detente and deterrence as the
priority. I hope Prime Minister Suzuki has this sort of awareness.

The Wisdom of a Confident, Good Japan
Editorial staff: In the event, hereafter when Japan asserts itself in
international society, with a unique national state of affairs of being saddled

with Article 9 of the constitution and called an economic superpower, how will
things be interpreted and what sort of influence can it exert?

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nagai: When other countries refer to Japan as a "unique nation," there are two
definitions. One is based on discrimination. when a Frenchman stresses the
uniqueness of Japan by describing a Japanese to be a working bee living in a
rabbit's cage, the discrimination factor is the inference of "an outsider" in an
international society.

Ontheother hand, recently several countries, principally America, have come to
emphasize the superiority of Japan. This is a reflection on their evaluation of
Japan's high productivity, tough foreign competitiveness and advanced governability.
In other words, the expression has the character of an "excuse" made by advanced
industrial nations after they have fallen back relatively from Japan. Just as a
paper-thin difference exists between a "genius" and an "eccentric," the expression
connotes that Japan is not average and that comparisons should be avoided. This
psychology prevails in the hit movie "Shogun.“

This "very unique ability and quality syndrome" is most seriously applied to the
"free ride" argument as relates to Article 9 of the constitution. The excuse is
that Japan achieved economic prosperity today because of a cheap defense policy.
This sort of criticism by America began to be heard from around the time of the
textile negotiations. This was the sort of excuse made by a nation whose
confidence in its strength collapses when competing fairly in a free market
system, and which in defeat accuses the rival of engaging in unfair practices.

Kimura: As to problems confronting Japan, there is the delivery argument in the
"three non-nuclear principles." The problem is whether America is of the same
understanding since a second party is involved, and it is felt that developments
will occur.

The revision of the constitution is strictly an internal issue and therefore it

is ridiculous to consider a foreign country's desires for the total revision of
Article 9. I believe revision is proper if the national consensus is for approving
a constitutional revision, but in the present political climate, revision is
impossible. If the national consensus is that Article 9 approves the present

Self Defense Forces, then there's hardly any meaning in the fact that the subject
occupies 0.9 percent or 1.1 percent of the gross national product.

Nagai: You are so right, and not only on the issue of Article 9, but also on the
issue of economic prosperity; in defeat, Japan could rely only on human resources,
from among the ashes; that is. it started off only with quality manpower. Out of
this, as a matter of course, emerged the principle of respecting man's life and
dignity. As a result of building up a system of cooperation between management
and workers with a will to live and of not treating apprentices or workers like
tools or devices. as the neoclassical economists would say, an economic system
harmonizing free competition and stabilized order was naturally established. This
system includes Japan's cultural idiosyncracies fused with modern practices for
the realization of universal principles that even Westerners could comprehend.

I agree with Mr Kimura on his views on Article 9 of the constitution. that the
presence of the Self Defense Forces and a security treaty with regard to Article
9 of the constitution, from the standpoint of a shyster's legal interpretation,

47

FOR 0F11C1AI.USEi)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

would be logically contradictory. But the fact that these have been harmonized
from a high-level political viewpoint is a reflection of the superior political
wisdom of the Japanese people. From a Western viewpoint, supporting Article 9

of the constitution, building an economic superpower, refusing nuclear arms and
equipping with light armaments, may be lacking in logical consistency. But the
Japanese people have this instinctive feeling that this way of life is sensible.

As for the Japanese idiosyncracies which have been fused into principles for
universal acceptance, Japan can and must express them and have them understood
in a language that even westerners can understand.

This is personal. but my book "Defense Theory of a State in Moratorium" has been
translated into English. Prof David Riesmsn, formerly of Harvard University,
read and showed my book to well-known columnist Joseph Kraft, who occasionally
visits Harvard. Riesman wrote that he had asked Kraft to explain the format

[of the book] so that with wide coverage Americans would understand Japan's
position. I believe that Japan in clear language should make Hestern people
understand that, although at a glance the Japanese way of life may appear
peculiar. it has foresight and universality from a long-range view.

Kimura: In summary. the 1960 security treaty was strictly between Japan and

the United States. The scale of the security treaty of the 1970's broadened to
include Asia. And finally in the 1980's, the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty lies in
the midst of world relations. Taken as a whole, it can be so described. Japan's
diplomatic route hereafter must staunchly follow the main axis of Japan-0.5.
relations in support of the Japan-0.8. Security Treaty. Although Japan has

been nurtured by the longstanding Japan-v.8. relations, at this time the concerned
diplomatic offices should resolutely discard the practice of relying on America
for an overview of the world.

Japan is now on the threshhold of drawing up its own plans for world strategy
and of instituting them with its resourcefulness and effort. I am concerned
and fearful that if the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty of the 1980's should be
continued without effort and in the form of the recent "U.s.-Japan joint
statement," then Japan's diplomatic route will not only run smack against a big
wall, but the possibility exists of U.S.-Japan relations becoming imperiled.

COPYRIGHT: Chuo Koronsha. 1981

9510
CSO: 6105/255

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REFORM PANEL AT ODDS “11'“ GOVERNMENT OVER TAX INCREASE

Tokyo ASAIII EVENING NEWS in English 19 Oct 81 p 1

[Text]

.‘0 PYRlCllT :

L'Stl:

«1220/39

the Extraordinary Admin-
islnlive Research Council is
at odds with the Finance
Minittry over recommenda-
tions the council is to make
nest summer on administrative
returns. and has strongly urged
Prime Minitter Zenito Suzuki
to change hit policy of going
along with the ministry. it has
been learned.

The council. the Govern-
ment's advisory body on atl-
mittislt’alivc felorm. ix dia-
satixtietl became. though It
Wants a tax cut to he made
after lrscal 198.1. the Govern-
merit and the ruling Liberal-
Democratic Party are increas-
ingly in favor of tax increases.
including the introduction of
a large-scale indirect tax. The
counctl is also unhany be-
came the Finance lnistry
has rejected the council's pro-
posal that it should study
financial reform. such as ways
to correct the glaring in.
equine: in the taxation sys-
tern.

‘lhc conflict springs from
diftcrcnt views of things.
Sim-ti views administrative
rctorm as a means of rebuild-
ing the deficit-ridden state
ﬁnances. but the council takes
the stand that the aim should
be small government. and
that the beneﬁts from small
government should he fun-
nelctl to the people in the
form of a tart cut.

ASAIII l-IVENII‘K} NEWS 1981

109

The council ha oonve _d
its regret over Suzuki's ' t
statentents on the tax issue
to Government and L0?
leaders. including the Premier.
Finance Minister Mlehio
Watanahe. Yssnhlro Naka-
sene. directer-pneral of the
Administrative Management
Agency. and Shintaro Abe.

cseasetldttmg' then-"vb“
efforts are to he made for
thereeenstruetionofthsstate

Suzuki's remarks In the cur-
rent Diet sedan have always
left room or tax irtcreaaen
In informal talks wlth the
council late last month over
the recommendations the
council is to make next surn-
rner. officials of the Finance
Minbtry talked as if the
panel‘s mi-ion had ended
when it resented its first
report earlier this year.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

they support the administrative reform favored by the Suzuki govern-eat. On
the other hand, 18 percent answered they were opposed while 62 percent said they
were indifferent to the government's program. To the question "Are you satisfied
with Prime Minister Suzuki's approach to reforn?" Porty~one percent said they
were not very satisfied while 24 percent said they were dissatisfied. As a
result. a majority of 65 percent expressed dissatisfaction with the prelier's
idea of administrative reform. Only 3 percent stated they were satisfied. Of
those who expressed dissatisfaction. people in their 20 'a accounted for 75 per-
cent and those in their 30's, 73 percent. Meanwhile, on the question of wage
increases for public workers, 6!. percent said that an increase should be
restrained. Even among those who support the Socialist Party 69 percent said

between Sept. 25 and 27 involving 5,601 persons over twenty years of age across
the nation. A total of 4,325 persons. or 77 percent. answered the poll.
[Text] [OWOBlOS7 Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY was in English 7 Oct 81 p 1]

C80: 4120/37

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MILITARY

Hill OFFICIAL lISlrf ONLY

INTERVIEWS WITH JAPANESE DEFENSE BXI’ER'IS REPORTH)

Japan Needs 'Rejcction' Power

'l'oltvu .‘iAiNiClll DAILY NEWS in Fugllsh 6 Oct 81 p 3

llniet'vl-u with .‘Ltsamichl Inukl,

Sm'urlty, date and place not given:

I'll-xi. I

Editor: s nole— At an unprecedented intently. debates are
heard on the old but always controversial point: Japan’s

for a greater military poteritisl while others

militan role.
Some argue

In i’Ot‘ a smaller military rule.

Andthequest

ion is: How should Japan appropriately act in

pursuit oi its securitystraiegy"

lnaneilort togetamersonthtssubiect. theMainlcthally
News starts a series at hiterviews with live prominent
Japanesedeienseexperts

Masamiehi lnoki is iormer
superintendent oi the Japanese
ih-icme Academy. lie now
hearts the Research institute tor
l’eaceand Security.

Regarding the Soviet threat.

tnoti said that the deﬁnition oi
Utt‘ threat lies in the extent to

which we actually leel it. In an
interview. lnoltl wenton:

“i believe the United States
still overwhelmingly tops the
Soviet Union in terms oi
strategic missiles and naval
pmi'er Overall. the American
military edge over the Soviets is
basically intact.

"Moscow is well aware ot the
ravages at World War ii and
steers clear of conirontntion
uith the us. yet on its own
snurity. the Soviets follow the
"300 percent" security concept.
Moscow has. thereiore. a
propensity to till any militsrv

51

head of Research Institute for Peace and
"Japan Needs 'Rejcctton' Power"]

 
   
   
    
 
 
 

vacuum zones it tests exist
arounduienalioo.

The Soviets are lun-
damentslly pnident. They will
never land on Hokkaido or
litigate as long as Japan
maintains rejection' power.

"Japan should correct ﬁve
week points—Anttsir. anti
submarine. sen sweeping. reel
support and repudiation oi
landing iorce. in reality. the
Sell-Deleon Forces tacit the
ability toendure actual war."

lnokt stressed that the
strengthening oi the live
military tieids should net pose a
threat to other countries. ad-
ding that the buildup should be
etiective only tor detense
pnrpm.

Touching on the Japan- US
Security Treaty. inoltisnldthst
the many. in a sense. mines

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
{I‘luc I I‘ll. .oh . no Ci luau-U
=8: 3:. 33.3.. «3.23 to
t... 8... .Siogugs
2. 35833.... .8338.
:5.» S: 58. is so 250
as = E... 338 3:82. 5
«82. .3 2.95. 3 :85
23.8.. $888 8 8.. 8... 2
8:89 _ .3 8. 8w...“ 5..
”38.8 a Sana—£38 cm.
53...? 83.5.. e5. :23
man :8... SE B 2.. 2:. 3..
0.83.83 :5 ..==3§§. 2

scary-£835...
:93... 52:3 38 3a

.7255. a... 59...!» 5.... r. 1'.»
Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NB!

[interview with Mich 10

and place nor. given:

[Text]

Michio Royama is a political
science professor at Sophia
t.lochl) University in Tokyo.

Concerning the Soviet Union's
muscle-flexing worldwide.
itoyama said. “The accelerated
buildup oi Soviet naval power is
to counter the American in-
tervening power tor trouble
spots in Third World modes.
The Soviets may raise an oi»
iection to this thinking. Ilut
MoScow's message to
Washington behind the Soviet
military buildup is clear. That
to. ‘we have as much military
power to interiere anywhere ill
the world as the Americans.‘

"i am not going to share the
View that Moscow aims to
ideologically dominate the
world with its communist
ideology. Such a view is
meaningless. the same as the
view that America is spreading
its breed ot democracy all over
the vmrld.

"t'oncerning the Afghan
crisis. Moscow regarded the
country as one ol its satellite
sltllt‘s. Although in a vague
pon-rpiion. America viewed
Alghunistanasamuntryoutside
oi Sui-let influence. in a wise.
Alﬁiittltatiln is a 'gray zone'
where it is hard to disarm
which superpouer is exr-rting
its inﬂuence. " he went on.

lioyama also said that it the
US. had attached a greater
importance to Alghanistnn Its.
reaction to Soviet interference
would have been much tougher.

"Moscow is not so naive and
simple as to more its forces
arrow the border to places

Royalna, professor at; S
"Defense Sharing Politic

Hut "Fl-It'll“. VSF "VIN

Defense Sharing Politically

S in English 7 Oct 81 p 3

where its inﬂuenoetsveatand
iragiie."heexpiained.

TouchingontheSoviet threat
in the Far East. Royama said
that in haste terms. military
power is intended tor menacing
and destroying opponents.
addingthatltlsquttenatmlto
think it a power in «naively
built up. the opponent will take
it asathreat.

However. he said. it is too
early toeoocludethat theSoviet
Union is building up its Far
East torces to take her
itokkaidosomeday.

"Should Moscow attack
Japan's northemrnon island.
the result mild he more
drastic than the Kremlin an-
ticipates." he said. "loot
probably. Moscow amid he
dragged into confrontation the
West."

The pmteaaor aaidmtiiamlle
Japan depends on ri-
can nuclear umbrella tor its
security. the Japanese
government is trying to dilute
the "simiiticance oi the um-
brella" by publicly relish; to
allow N-armed US. wamhhs to
call at Japanese ports or pose
thmrthapaneae waters.

Big Contradiction

"This is a his contradiction
At the root of the couradictton
is a lack oi Japan‘s loogterm
security scenario." he opined.
"I must admit that Japan is tell
tolhemereyotthetl.8.htlle
matting oi the security-
strategy." ‘

"Thus. the creation oi our
own independent security

COPYRIGHT: MAINit'lll DAILY NEWS 198]

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ophia (Jocji) University, date
ally"]

strategy aiiould be our priority
task.” he went on. “Theo. we
can pursue strategy most
auitable tor us. We moat learn
iron: the way European
countries deal-with the us. in
aecurIOn tyaiialra."

the ioint Japaneae and
American detain role. Plot.
Royatna said that mm by the
tact that Japan is a global

economic power depuideot on
foreign countries tor raw

America's deieose buildup
request."heconttnued
“liyideaistoacaledownthe
Gt'o'und Sell-Defense Force
because i believe there is no
ammo...“
and
other tandhaaed hardware."
the professor said. “We should
also cut back the lumber ot

peraotliei. instead. our naval
and air torus should he

Pool. Royama added that
“surplus" ground troops should
heauitabroadoohauerleiiei
“mum
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”111 To Resist
Tokyo MAINICtli DAILY NEWS in English 8 Oct 81 p 3

[Interview wt ch Hirooml Kurisu. former chairman of Joint Staff Council at
JSDF. date and place not given: "A Strong "111 To Resist"]

[ Fox: I

lliroomt Kurtsu is former KttrteowmbomaJhat "Tbeee missiles should a
chairman of the Joint Stall the Soviet Union would tahe necessarily be nucleai
Council of the Japanese Seli- drosttc octionshontoa segues powered. but must have a
Detense i-‘orees. crisie threaten its very mratestriitingpotrer." Kurt:

Commenting on the Soviet existetitie. wow that the ttttl ‘ W. “it is vital that Japa
throat. Kurisu said that it is a problem or the moon Pol-nit Md show the $0th Union
remote possibility that the crisis will not til Inter "I: that the tonne: ls capable o
Soviet Union will first use cateenty ot a "Mend-death shitting Vladivostok."
nuclear bombs against Japan. timblethM-. _ 'l‘otlctdng on the America:
He said. “it a global crisas CW: “PI" “We aquatic Japan's Stepped-up
erupts. part ot the Soviet Far Policy. Km “til "lit the deluxe role. the Itlflner top
East divisions will be deployed policy m prlmlrlly he 80? nitmothoemidthat
againstJapanaitbouat mostot based on the principle thet Japan is laced with a lamen-
the Soviet tome are placed an Japan will never tetnpt the table dilution conceals; the
theatcrt againstChinalﬂ Soviets to attach Japan. “We delenaepotiey.

"What is worth thtnktntt mtBt mate the Soviets realize um Japan 1m . long-
about is how many war thatahigbprtoetnttst be paid range may. may, the
machines the Soviets antenna! tor the invasion ot a actuary." government otten ho to
to mobilize 'qttalttattvely hewenton.“Wemnstthowthat outside pressure (or more
against Japan.” KW said. both "t9 Japanese Mole and delensehttttlaa‘l‘hlubooldbe
"in tact. the Soviet Union has the Sell-Deleon Force; would muted“
built up its Far East torce nothesitatetorectstinvaslon at an"; of all. up“ should.
enough to invade 00¢ WY alicosts." have in m delenee strategy
Ilokkaldolltl'm‘hehmm IttIIeSOVIetsmtttIly aware beiore listening to the
main island. at theJ ' Am .

determinant). "It” The at
in concrete terms: he ‘tmtl they dnotllunehanattack seem at Japan's solid will to
on. the soviet Far East t-orce easily)!“ defend itself. ”hint! ates
hastn§inlt°tl WNW“! 55" "Buicaﬂy the Sell-Del the Reagan administration
or 33-20 missiles to cover Po - ““9 M m molt tionolthe
Japan. The Soviets on; also “names "I” W training solid. long range detense
deploying "long-range" oir- limited it ”3"" within stretegy will help ease
mill to reach Japan. hurtsu "Th “it” lty, bewenton. Wanioa'8lrrttltiotL
memo. "' "m" "‘° “W ’"I‘heSoaietstmuldbeuldto

"Thisdoesnot mean that the measum ‘° “9“ "If? all teemthatlean Bhttldlngttp
Soviet Union to bound to stoee “9% WM“ tort-es without a lion; will to
military operations against EomtIytmoortauntoenoi m m .m .0 m i,
Japan. FromtheSovtetUnion's that "epoch-making" military mu
domestic problems. it is technologies shonlti be

unlikely that the Soviets will developed. Kill'lsu indicated,
launch an attack on Japan." he Mitt: that Japan Md, tor.
cxptalned._ "the Kremlin is :zggnle. htlevdelot; "E"
ri pod with increasing as a ea 0 at er
gompestir problems. For Soviet (Whittier. The weapons. thong.
loaders. it is now the time to bonedim luminance:

a
ti ten their grip on internal MOMM'ﬂuﬂmeuhbesald
platens and to remit: the 0' ”'0 Willem oi musing
satdliteoountries." mimics «ti-ole of
“mam “° "t are:
Sovietadventum.

ii’YthJl'I’: MAINitmt DAILY Nms 1981
54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
t‘onosuke Nagai is a political
Science prolchor at the Tokyo
institute 0! Technology.

On Japan‘s option tor light
armament. i’rot. Nagai said
that the Sorrel military buildup
ix overestimated although the
Sowets have actually
strengthened their nuclear
tort-es in the Far East.

"We cannot overlook the tact
that seven proMoscow regimes
have been established in in-
dnchinese and Airican coun-
tries once i975." Nagai went

long-term and tactically shitrl~
term view points. "

-' ‘he Soviets are keenly
aware of Jaixm's vast economic
health anti highly advanced
technological assets." tlte
prniereor said "From the long-
teim viewpoint. Japan s‘llnuld
maintain ecotwmic ties with the
Smiei l'nmn Japan Should not
arm itsz-lt it ith nuclear heavens
because Japan has no Other
altt-niaiive httt to rely on the
American nut-tear umbrella "

\‘et l’rnt. Kauai stress-«l that
we must tttxt'uss Japan's
military.- rule from a Short-tenn
viewpoint -in view at the Soviet
prqiensity to take advantage of
vulnerable spots in the worm.

"-VOW. the question is hon tie
hnuld deal with the new

iluuimn arising from
intern-H‘s shirt or its naval
mt t'l' lmm the Western Paciﬁc
l the Middle East." "0
’lilili‘kl'd. “To till the miliiurv

area. I think Japan Md b-
crease its air and naval

capabilitiet.“

"Our.“ﬂbln should be tuity

utilized so that we can har~
monize the nonnuclear-potlcy
with the "teeter-lite" situation
that some American nucleon
armed warships are calling at
Japanese ports or

ti’YlilCil'l': MAINICHI DA [LY NEWS 1981

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eel
Jm'shigmeriloienthi .
the bigger diplomatic
power

contribute to the overall
securityotthelVest.“heutd

. "Japan's dedication to acts:
poor
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Keep [lo-Nuke Policy

Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEWS In English 10 Oct 81 p 3

[Interview with Saivuro Kugai,

given: "Keep Japan's tic-Nuke Policy"]

[Text]

haburo Kuuai is a critic oi
militaryatiairs.

Commenting on the .lapa-
nose-US "Alliance." Kugai
itiltl the Mainichi that the
present bilateral military
relationship in" not be changed
radically In the immediate
luture. despite the Suzuki-
Reagan communique in May
stressing a new. stronger
"alliance."

"But we should acknowledge
that a new piicnomuion is
surtaetnu in the relationship."
Kauai went on. “In tact. more
and more American military
leaders are trying to shit! the
direction oi the alliance.

"Traditionally. there have
been two expectations among
(\lllt'l'lcal'l leaders on Japan's
military role." he explained.
"(in one hand. some American
leaders favor a nuclear~tree
Japan. only armed with small-
.simi conventional weapons
tit-cause Japan's might as an
u'otmtnir giant. would be a
potential military threat to
America. They insist that
Japan shoulder more oi the
burden oi supporting the
.\ ntertcan torces in Japan."

Kugai went on to say. "Oh the
other hand. other American
leaders share the View that
Japan should be heavily armed
with nonuucicar team. This
view is supported by President
Reagan."

The noted military attairs
analyst remarked that America
wants to place China under its
nuclear umbrella In the belief
that the communist giant Is no

longer a hostile but friendly

developing calmly. Even no. he

went on. the us. will not build
militarybasestnChine.
tear?“
t . camels Japan to
play a larger role as a corn-
munication base for its unclear
umbrella network "it all yes
well. America will be able to
derby strategic. theater lid
tactical nuclear matter in and
arotdeapan"
Touching further on the
“madam-in

expectations on Japan's 1r-
mament with nonnuctear
weapons in its grand dean of
establishing an America-Japan-
China axis against the Soviet
Union. the military com
mentatorexrtained.

"It will he inevitable tor the
us. to press Japan to hotlo'up
its heavy armament in the
future." he predicted. “More-
over. Washington will ask
Tokyo to formally allow the

introduction otnuciur weapons
into Japan."

COPYRIGHT: Mlﬂltilll DAILY NEWS I981

C80: It i 20/38

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m1]. itary affairs analyst ,

date and place not

nwuctear strategies at
ashhgionndloequm
must establish its own in

m
whichiuiiniiartottiatadopted
byttATOcntw-iee.

"We can mderstand the
European tear that the
deployment at American

weapons would mean
Elite or :ath' “tor most
propane ease unclear
var. limited or other-wise."
Kugal said.."llore and more
Eorwensandhmericusare
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES 0P HARUZEN OIL COMPANY DISCUSSED
Tokyo EKONOHISUTO in Japanese 15 Sep 81 pp 32-36

[Article by Akihiko Morita: "Maruzen Oil Company: 20 Years of Poor Management
and Bankruptcy; Going Behind the Restructuring Plan")

[Text] "If the company's debt reaches 50 million yen per day, the management will
turn pale and run around seeking help. However, if the debt reaches 200 or 300
million yen per day there is nothing to do but stand and fight."

These words were spoken by oil company presidents in the hot month of July.

Despite the talk of fighting, the action actually taken by the oil industry was to
ask the politicians and the government to help save the industry.

The top management of the domestic oil companies made the rounds of the Diet and
MITI seeking the establishment of a “standard amount" for oil product selling
prices. At the time. the following memorandum appeared in one company's internal
documents .

"A big cause of the present crisis in management is the fact that when the prices
of oil products should have been raised. the government stepped in improperly and

held them down in consideration of the spring labor offensive and consumer price
increases.

"Therefore. we are requesting the establishment of a 'standard amount' based on
the Petroleum Industry Law only as an 'emergency escape messure.’

"Since MIT! officials have failed to act, we would like you (Diet members) to press
strongly for the establishment of a standard amount as soon as possible" (quoted
from original).

30 Vessels Drifting

The troubles of the oil industry basically stem from a worldwide oil glut. When the
second 011 shock occurred after the uprising in Iran. the price of crude oil quickly
tripled. This resulted in worldwide cutbacks in consumption and conversion to

alternative energy sources. Because of this worldwide stagnation, the demand
decreased steadily.

757

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In response. OPEC all production dropped from 30 million barrels a day 2 years ago
to 2.2 million barrels a day recently. However, one informed view is that "there
is an excess supply of 6 million barrels a day in the free world" (0.8. petroleum
journal).

This excessive supply has spread across the ocean to Japan. At present. all domestic

petroleum tanks are full, so about 30 tankers full of petroleum are circling around
in the seas near Japan.

when the Iran-Iraq war erupted last fall, the oil companies descended on the
oil-producing countries and made large oil purchasing agreements out of fear
concerning future supply problems. However, there was far more decrease in
consumption than expected. It would have been all right if the companies could have
cancelled these agreements or postponed the transactions. However, the oil-producing
countries threatened them with a $6 per barrel penalty for cancelling agreements,

and they were afraid of the effect on the future stability of the oil supply if
trouble arose between them and the oil-producing countries now. Therefore, it was
actually impossible at the last moment to prevent the oversupply of crude oil.

This oil glut led to an excess supply of products, causing gasoline price wars at the
gas stations. the end point of the distribution system, and made it impossible to
shift the crude oil price hike onto product prices.

A drop in the yen market added to the problem. Therefore, a medium-sized oil
company was going into the red at the rate of 200 or 300 million yen per day and
the industry raised the white flag, going to the government for help.

In Showa Oil's interim financial statement announced at the end of August for the
first half (January—June) of this year, the recurring losses were 32.8 billion yen,
a tremendous loss equivalent to five times the total capital. According to industry
sources. the recurring losses for the September interim settlement, estimated at an
exchange rate of 230 yen to the dollar, were 100 billion yen for Idemitsu Oil, 80
billion yen for Haruzen Oil, and 50 billion yen for Mitsubishi Oil.

Avoidance of Horst Possible Situation

Is the future of the industry completely dark then? Recently, there has been a change
in the situation.

HIT! has made a number of moves since July as evergency measures to save the oil
industry. A guided 15-percent reduction in production has produced results and a
rise in the price of oil products has rapidly taken effect. Also, the foreign
exchange rate. which had dipped as low as 267 yen to the dollar, came back to the
neighborhood of 230 yen. With a favorable balance of international payments, the
yen is expected to continue to be high in value.

'Wpoking at the 36 oil refining and distributing companies, the exchange profit of
500 billion yen in the first half of 1980 shrank to 300 billion yen in the second
half. and turned into a loss in the first half of this year. Looking at the cycle
of these changes in the exchange rate, we can expect a return to black figures in
the last half, so the real problem is the restoration of profit," according to the

speculation of an influential bank executive.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a reflection of this change in the current of events. HITI and the Petroleum
Council, a HIT! advisory body, are very likely to postpone the establishment of a
standard amount for petroleum product selling prices. The operating crisis that
enveloped the entire petroleum industry has not passed yet, but in the present
situation, the yen can be expected to remain strong, to some extent, and it seems
that the worst problems will be eliminated.

The company which has been hardest pressed during this oil industry crisis is
Maruzen Oil. However, looking only at the first half of this year, the entire
industry, including foreign ventures, failed to break even. and among domestic
companies, Idemitsu went furthest into the red. Therefore, when asked why Haruzen
should be singled out for special treatment, company executives evasively complain
that the company was made a scapegoat.

it is a fact that the "Haruzen Oil management crisis" was extensively used in
publicizing the industry crisis. However, there is also sufficient reason for
Maruzen to receive special treatment. First, in the settlement of March 1980,
Maruzen reported recurring losses of 28.8 billion yen, its worst ever, while the
industry as a whole was well in the black. The only other company to register
recurring losses was Daikyo Oil. at 1.9 billion yen. During the same period, Nippon
011 was 103.7 billion yen in the black and Mitsubishi Oil (a joint venture with
foreign capital of the same size) had profits of 11.4 billion yen. This displayed
Maruzen's weakness clearly.

Second. a stronger impression of a management crisis was given to the public when
President Sanae Honda, formerly of HITI, gave up his post at the end of March to
Vice President Hasahiko Shima. formerly of Sanwa Bank.

The proposal for autonomous restructuring announced by Haruzen Oil on 23 July was
made up of six items, including the following: 1) reduction of over 1,000 employees
(actually 1.200); 2) liquidation of 60 billion yen in assets. including the Osaka
headquarters building; 3) separation of two small-scale refineries. Shimotsu
("akayama Prefecture) and Hatsuyama (Ehime Prefecture), into new companies; and

a) efforts to reduce the purchase price of crude oil.

The main point of this plan for rebuilding is to leave the Chiba and Sakai refineries,
which are comparatively the most advanced of Maruzen's refineries, and reduce

volume drastically by making the inefficient Shimotau and Hatsuyama refineries into
separate companies.

The 1981 equipment plan submitted to HITI by the company called for reducing the
capability of the Shimotsu and Hatsuyama refineries and increasing the equipment
capacity of the efficient Chiba refinery. The restructuring plan carried this one
step further. making more reductions, including personnel, by making the Shimotsu
and Hatsuyama refineries into separate companies.

1he Sanwa Bank is taking the lead in building a financial support system for the
restructuring of Maruzen 011. In August. Sanwa. the Industrial Bank of Japan, the
Loni-Term Credit Bank of Japan, and Tokyo Trust Bank cooperatively made an initial
loan of 30 billion yen. In September, 16 banks, including Tokyo Bank, Daiwa Bank,
Nihom Shoken Trust Bank, Sumitomo Bank, Taiyo-Kobe Bank, and a number of other
trust banks will make another cooperative loan.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Doubts About Rebuilding

However, the group of banks providing financial support are not necessarily satisfied
with the company's restructuring plan. The biggest doubt the banks have about the
plan is whether separation of the Shimotsy and Hatsuyama refineries will actually
lead to an overall reduction in the size of the main body of Harusen Oil.

A more detailed restructuring proposal presented to the major banks in August says
that. of the Shimotsy refineries. the west refinery with the atmospheric distillation
facility (topper) will be retained as a part of Haruzen Oil and the east refinery
will be organized as a separate company (100 percent capitalization by Haruzen Oil)
with capital of 2 billion yen. Initially, 200 employees in the west refinery will
not be included in the personnel reduction. The separate company will be a blending
plant for lubricating oil and will use the same number of personnel. So of the
present 650 employees, 150 will be eliminated.

The west refinery which will remain a part of Haruzen has topper and vacuum equipment
and. [or the time being. it will supply the base oil for lubricating oil to the east
plant. A probable view is that the real aim is to prepare for the time when the
entire industry will have to abandon plant and equipment. Rumor has it that it may
be transformed into a government oil storage base in the future. However, these
developments are not yet public and they will probably come up in the second phase

of the restructuring plan.

A tie-up with Fuji Kosan. which is putting an effort into lubricating oil, is being
considered for the Shimotsu plant which is to become a separate company. Nippon
Mining Company built lubrication base oil facilities in a join investment with
Naruzen at the company's Hizushima plant. In a collateral arrangement, Haruzen has
the right to build the same facilities at the Shimotsy plant after 10 years. However,
all the Shimotsy facilities may be abandoned. If this right were taken over by

Fuji Kosan's Kainan plant (in Shimotsy). it would have the merit of expanding the
company's plant and equipment and the Shimotsy plant would be able to obtain a base
oil supply from Fuji Kosan. Right now there is no process being made in discussions
on a business and capital tie-up between Haruzen Oil and Fuji Kosan, but if an
agreement is reached, Fuji Kosan could put up 30 to 60 percent of the capital for the
separate company in Shimotsy.

The policy for the Matsuyama refinery, on the other hand, it to tie up with other
petroleum companies and make it a distribution center for petroleum products.

This refinery, in the western part of Hatsuyama city. faces the Iyo Sea. There are
139 tanks, including tanks for crude oil, intermediates, and finished products,
situated on a 530.000-square-meter site. The thinking is that if this were leased as
a tank yard, there would be no problems even if it were made into a separate company.
However. if it is made into a tank yard. half of the present 500 employees would

not be necessary. The plan is to eliminate one-third of the employees for the time
being and make the plant a separate company (totally capitalized by Maruzen Oil)

with capital of 5 billion yen next spring.

At this point, the idea of moving the petrochemical facilities at the Matsuyama
refinery to the Chiba refinery is also under study. Another problem in what to do
with the topper. which has a daily production of 30,000 barrels. In addition, the
suggestion has arisen of building the pilot plant for heavy oil cracking. now under
development by a joint industry association, at the Hatauysma refinery with a
cooperative investment. 60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEIONLY

Personnel Reduction the Key

If both these refineries are made into separate companies in this way, the main
body of Maruzen Oil will be somewhat lightened. However. can it be reborn as a
company that can compete among the domestic oil companies?

A person in charge of auditing at a major bank says: "If Shimotsy and Hatsuyama are
made into separate companies, the main office will be able to squeeze out 25 billion
yen in transfer profits (separation profits). This is not a plan for restructing

in any real sense, but under the circumstances, there is no alternative, is there?"

From the point of view of the banks offering financial support, approximately

80 billion yen of the total loans to Maruzen Oil are bing differentiated from
ordinary operating funds and inventory funds and being loaned in cooperative loan as
loss funding. This figure of 80 billion yen is the amount of the previous period
(1980) losses of 23.8 billion yen and the first-half losses for this year minus the
sale income for the Osaka head office building, the Nagoya building, securities, and
company housing.

Furthemore, according to the preliminary calculations of bank sources, Haruzen Oil
would have to eliminate a structural recurring debt of 25 billion yen in order to
become a competitor among the domestic oil companies.

In the restructuring plan, 7 billion yen would be released by eliminating 1,200
employees. and the repayment of loans through sale of bank stocks and real estate
would lighten the interest burden by 3 billion yen. This would reduce the structural
debt by a total of 10 billion yen. The remaining 15 billion yen would be made up
through positive policies such as (1) cutting premiums with crude oil purchases and
(2) increasing the production rate of profitable oils like gasoline and naphtha and
intermediates like fuel oil.

The idea is that by increasing the extraction of the "white" products, gasoline and
naphtha. refining efficiency can be improved by distributing production between

the FCC (fluid contact cracking equipment) at the Sakai refinery and heavy oil direct
dcsulfurization facilities at the Chiba refinery. These facilities were made use of
rather late compared to those of other companies and a huge investment was required.
Because there is a large remaining debt and a high debt ratio for long-term
borrowings, these facilities have been a drag on Haruzen's financial condition.
However. they are expected to have an important role in strengthening the company's
position as the ratio of heavy oil increases throughout the world.

Will this sccnario for restructuring play out smoothly?

Many problems have been pointed out. The biggest problem is the elimination of 1,200
employees. something that has never been done on such a scale in the history of

the industry. Of this number. 300 have already been sent to work for dealers, so

the remaining 900 must now be dealt with.

The company is setting up a system for job changes and retirement, including (1)
establishment of workplace development programs, (2) sending personnel overseas for

technological cooperation, (3) sending personnel to dealerships, (a) moving personnel
development companies. and (5) a special retirement system. There have been requests

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPINC1AI.USHE(NVLY

for personnel from over 100 companies. including major companies, for workplace

development programs. The company hopes that if this goes well, it can find a large
number of new positions for its people.

However, if we look at the special retirement system under which middle-aged and

older employees can volunteer for retirement and receive a larger retirement allowance.
we find that there are few takers. Most of the employees are awaiting developments
with an eye fixed on the future of the company and trends in the industry.

The company has a long history of overseas technical cooperation, sending technicians
to Algeria and Iraq. However. it is questionable whether as many people can be

sent there as called for in the restructuring plan. In any case. the success in
disposing of employees is the key to the success of the restructuring plan.

The next problem is increased production of profitable petroleum products. This is
an area in which every oil company is implementing its own business strategy and
there is a questiOn of how well sales will go.

Mistakes of Past Presidents

looking back. we can see that a management crisis has kept recurring in Haruzen Oil
for the last 20 years. Each time. an industry reorganization debate centering
around Maruzen Oil has received extensive coverage by the media.

The first crisis took place in 1963. Kanji Nada, the president at the time. carried
out excessively aggressive operations and came face to face with a funding problem.
At that time. Haruzen Oil was about even with Idemitsu Kosan and was rushing to
expand its market share and catch up with and pass the industry leader, Nippon Oil
The company was based in the Kansai region but it built a refinery in Chiba, to
move into the Kanot region. as well as moving into petrochemicals. In addition

to the equipment investment for this rapid expansion of refining facilities. Hsruzen
also purchased ultralarge tankers. hired large numbers of new employees, and made
political contributions. The domestic sales war caused by the liberalization of
crude oil imports in 1962 pushed Haruzen into a business failure.

That time. Haurzen was bailed out be financial aid (stock acquisitions and an
American bank loan) from an independent American oil company, Union Oil. Then Kazuo
Hiyamori. who had been a vicepresident of Sanwa Bank. became president in 1964.
Miyamori's administration lasted 12 years, including the period of the first oil
shock. During this time. almost nothing was done to make substantial improvements.
In fact, it would not be an exxaggeration to say that the continuation of the
aggressive management of the "ads period created the situation Haruzen Oil finds
itself in today.

lbwever, the weakness that did not surface during the expansion of the high growth
period appeared after the oil shock. In 1975. there was a recurring loss of 26.1
billion yen and Maruzen faced a second business pinch. but no decisive measures
were taken. The only measures taken for settlement in 1975 were to sell b4 oil
storage sites to Maruzen Distribution Service, a wholly owned subsidiary. The
income from the sale. more than 20 billion yen, was posted as special profits to
patch over the red figures. It is no wonder that a bank source made the following
criticism: "The managers who came in for restructuring continued to avoid taking
any significant measures."

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One reason for the delay in rationalization was that the construction plan for a new
refinery near the ocean in Bungo Taksds in Oita Prefecture was carried over after the
oil shock. The excess personnel in the Shimotsy and Hatsuyama refineries were
held in readiness as "personnel to be moved to the new refinery in the future."

However, demand did not grow after the oil shock and the Oita refinery plan was
abolished.

Sanae Honda, formerly of HITI. became the next president in 1976. He proclaimed
"through efficient management." but he did not take any special action. In the end,
the only thing he accomplished was a merger with Kansai Oil in 1979.

Honda had a poor reputation in the industry and in the company. "There were many
accions not befitting a manager, such as being caught in the H fund fraud in 1979 and
writing the memos he wrote. At the same time, he did not have the political ability

to introduce DD crude oil from Suadi Arabia like President Hiroshi Ohori of Kyodo
011 did." '

Looking at the troubled history of Hsruzen Oil this way. we see an undercurrent of
laxity in the company. In the present crisis, this can no longer be tolerated.

Oil is a strategic product that is absolutely essential to the national economy.
There is always the presumptuous attitude that "when there is trouble, the
government will help us out." However, compared to the other materials industries,
which have been overprotected by the government. the oil industry has been treated
like an outcast. The reason for this is that the main part of the industry is made
up of affiliates of the majors which are backed by foreign capital. So there has
been a strategic consideration that the prosperity of the oil industry ultimately
futtens the companies with foreign capitalization. Now that the economy has slowed
down and economic phenomena have taken on the aspect of a zero sum game, large
profits for the oil industry mean losses downstream in the petrochemical industry.

Many observers take this acerbic view: "HITI talks as if it desires a restructuring
of the oil industry, but it has not actually done anything to strengthen the oil
industry. Its real intention is probably to carry it just far enough to keep the
company from falling apart.

MITI's previous plan to build a Japanese major around Kyodo Oil fell through because
of the change in the oil situation, and it does not seem likely that it has new plans
for such restructuring.

But how long can it just leave the oil industry alone in the present situation which
fluctuates with each wave of change in the currency exchange market?

As we have seen, a government policy for restructuring the industry was hoped for in
the restructuring of Maruzen Oil, and such a policy was involved as a subplot. It is
too soon to tell whether the Hsruzen Oil crisis will lead to a restructuring of the
oil industry. However, it would be safe to say the such a tendency has already
started behind the scenes.

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Shimbunsha 1981

9651
C50: 4105/265 53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TEOlNOIDGY

STEADY PROGRESS SEEN IN 8101301100ch
Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI in Japanese 3 Oct 81 pp 84-87
lProfile of Hayashibars Biochemistry Laboratories by Toshihiko Katsm’o]

[Excerpts] Biotechnology (the industrial use of life sciences) is a field of intense
world competition for a huge market. Europe and the 0.3. have taken the lead in

this field, but Japan is finally catchingup. and has now produced results not inferior
to those of Europe and the ".8.

Biotechnology. technology which puts life sciences to various industrial uses. is
in the limelight as innovative technology which will dominate the next century.

Biotechnology can be roughly classified into (1) techniques for rearrangement of
genetic material. (2) cell fusion technology. (3) technology for mass cultivation
of cells. and (lo) bioreactor (industrial organism reaction) tecllnology. Such tech-
nology can be used by growing numbers of industries. including parmaceuticals. food.
wines and liquors. and chemicals.

Consequently, huge markets are expected when practical application is made of such
technology. According to the technology report recently issued by the Ministry

of International Trade and Technology. in 20 years the scale of this market is to
be from 4.2 to 6.8 trillion yen.

Fierce development conpetition aired at this huge market has unfolded among the
companies involved--not to mention research institutions--in Japan and abroad. But

at present. venture enterprises of Europe and the 0.8. have a great lead over Japa-
nese rorces.

In Japan. on the other hand. a few companies like Japan Hicrobiochemistry of Hatsu-
note in Nagano prefecture have begun to appear. But Japan differs from Europe and
the 0.8. in its business climate and in links between scientists and industrial circles.

and so far no outstanding companies have surged; venture capital has not been skill-
fully mobilized in this regard.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Technology is Key, even with Little Capital

The fermentation sector is closely related to biotechnology. and there are those
within that industry who say there is almost no gap with Europe and Japan in the

technological capacity accumulated over the years. but so far this has not been
reflected in accomplishments.

At present. Japanese coapaaies are obtaining teclmology through tie-ups with European
and [1.8. ventures and technologically strong firme--Green cross with CRI and Genex.
Hitsui Toatsu Chemicals with Genex. Sumitomo Chemical with Britains' Helcam.

[phonetic] Tskeda Chemical Industries with Roach. and Hochida Pharmaceutical with
6.1). Saar [phonetic].

There are a few points in this field. however. on which it can be said research
and development are relatively advanced. One example is hitsubishi Life Science
Laboratory. a subsidiary of Mitsubishi Chemical Industries. of its more than 100
researchers. about 70 hold doctorates. and almost all are engaged in biotechnology
research in some form. It was established some 10 years ago. and has continued
to carry our basic research. but this year research began to shift in the direction

of practical application. At the end of last year it had seven patents related
to genetics.

This laboratory has put its efforts into gene splicing and cell fusion. The ultimate
goal is application to chemical responses processes, but at present it is aiming
only at the fields of drugs and foods. This spring the laboratory. together with
Mitsubishi Chemical Industries. developed an optical system for checking immunity
which has already been submitted to the Hinsitry of Health and Welfare. And in
September it entered a franchise arrangement with Bybritech Co. of the u.s. for

sale of monochlor antibodies (reagents). This isa beginning for the development

of reagents and medicines through cell fusion. The laboratory is also said to have
established technology for using colon bacilli to produce physiologically active
substances. and to have applied for a patent.

This research is not a venture of the European and 0.3. type. but is a matter of
using low capital and superior researchers to carry out biotechnological develop-
ment. The sane is true of Yuei Phamceuticals and Hayashibara Biochemistry Labora-
tories.

Yuei is a drug firm located in Osaka which primarily manufactures and sells nutrient
tonics. Sales exceed 5 billion yen. It is a small business with about 350 enployees.
but 110 of these are researchers. Researchers have been sent to work under Dr. Keiichi
Itakura (City of Hope Medical Center in the 11.5.), an international authority on
genetic research. Nine of his students lead the conpany's research. They have
succeeded in using genetic combination tecl'lnology to synthesize interferon and secretin.
a duodenal hormone.

llayshibara in the Lead
Hayashibara Biochemistry Laboratories (1 million yen capital) has established tech-
nology for mass production of interferon. which had been a bottleneck. and it is

now one of the world's leading producers. It is now doing research on a physioactive
substance (rhenocaine), and is in the forefront of the biotechnology field.

65-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂayashibara Biochemical Laboratories was established in 1970 as the independent
research arm of Hayashibara Corp. (100 million yen capital). which is located in
Okayama city. Reserach is done at corporation: headquarters and at the chemical
laboratory; the two have a total of 110 researchers. For the past four or five
years research costs have been at a high level-13 or 16 percent of sales-and the
two companies have 3,000 patents in the fields of food. chemicals and medicine.

Prior to the mass production of interferon. the cowany was hardly known outside
Okayama. but now it is well known overseas because of its patents.

In 1881 the prominent llayashibara family of Okayama started in the business of pro-
ducing glucose frommalt. The Hayashibara grow now consists of two public service

companies. and twelve subsidiaries in the food. chemical. real estate. distribution
and leisure sectors. The annual turnover of the group as a whole is about 30 billion

yen, and there are 600 employees.

In the early 1960s the company moved from its original concentration on glucose
toward new products and ndew tectmology. and since then it has adopted the strategy
of relying on its patents.

Since it happened that starch was handled in the manufacture of glucose. the cowany
accumulated microbiological technology. By applying this. the comany became involved
in research in (l) starches. (2) nutrient cultures. and (3) organic synthesis.

The achievements began with development of oxysacchsride glucose in 1965. followed
by a new method for production of high purity mltose as an injection medium in
1968 (turned over to Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co.). a coupling sugar sweetener which

does not cause tooth decay in 1972. and a nonpolluting plastic puller [phonetic]
in 1973. Development of interferon using hamsters was achieved in 1980.

The interferon developed by Hayaahibara Biochemistry is the alpha type. and the
use of hamsters in production is a unique method which opened the way to mass pro-
duction. Patent applications have been filed in 22 countries.

In this mthod. human lmhocytes are first put directly into the hamster's body--
rather than a tank culture—for propagation. Then the lymhocytes which have been
produced are extracted, an agent to stimulate interferon (sender [phonetic] virus)

is introduced. and the product is separated and refined. About five weeks is required
from introduction of the agent to final manufacture.

Using this method it is possible to extract from several tens of thousands of units
to several hundreds of millions of units of interferon per animal. Hith the old
tank culture method. fetal lumph must be used. and only about three million units
can be produced. Horeover. when this fetal lymh is the high-quality product of
the Cibco Company. .it costs a full 11,000 yen per 100 cc. With the hamster method,
however, the cost per million units is about 2.000 yen. and it may be possible to
reduce the cost to 500 yen or below.

The Fujisaki Laboratory began production in January of this year. and reached an
annual production level of 300 billion units by this June. It raised about 10.000

hamsters--3,000 to 6.000 for making interferon and the rest for breeding and the
production of physioactive substances.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Payashibara Group

(leisure)

Kvnto Station Hotel

Wyﬁto Century Hotel

Natinnal Park Desaki Develn- ent

igland Sea Iiima Development

      
  
   
   

(public service)

Ha as ihara Cno--rat1ve

(R0801 rch , Z‘rnr'uct i an)

*eysorschwidt (1.69r.)

 

I
: {”0chida thrm. Cka ema Fuseum of Arts
> tsuka Pharm.
l: r“
'- gl_‘L."19teur :,1h, ("15)
in" H"
gﬁ,el8 Hauashihsra Corp.
fl“; ﬂ? (headquarters)
L2 0‘ I h
5' 5| (fnnd, drugs, chemIcals)

      
 

  
  

  

(distributinn real
estate

Hayes :bara Trading
Taiyn Industrial

Taiyo Transport
Showa warehouses

Okayama Cenrra n

"1y1s‘11hnra Pinc'teM‘qrrv
I.'Ih"“1!:‘!‘i‘.‘5 (1-inc‘1w-ﬁstry)

 
  
  

   
 

n-uj I Riki 3.11: ‘r'lt‘ﬁry

     
    

Ninpen fhwrnscnsitive
:ichnt Lnbnrwfnry
(riaacnt s nrhasis)

   
 

        
   

 
  

 

 
 

*ujita Lahnrwrﬁry

    

”itsubhsbi Fonds
(c~n'ect*nns)

          

  

(knynwa Plant No. l

kayawa f11nc 30. 2
I

”wrasue letnée

'tsvk1 Pharmnéeurical

67-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Following up Interferon

In April of this year Hayashibara Laboratories linked up with Hochida Pharmaceutical
and Otsuka Pharmaceutical as part of the move into medicines. With the exception
of a drug exported to Pasteur Laboratories for clinical use against rabies. the
companies carry out safety testing jointly for all products. This testing will
continue through the end of this year, and doctors' groups are being formed for
clinical testing of high dosages on people early next year.

A commercial product to treat such things as chronic hepatitus and herpes should

be possible in about two years. and work will be done on an anticancer agent during
the period. It is also possible that interferon will be purified in space through

a link-up with West Germany's Hesserschmidt Co.

The company has invested about 1 billion yen in ordertoopen a clinic next year,

and laboratory facilities will be expanded in November. The size of the room where
hamsters are raised will be increased by 1502 and a new testing room will be provided.
The number of hamsters will grow to 20,000 or more. The expansion is to be completed
by next summer, and will enable production of 600 billion units of interferon per
year.

At present Hayashibara is providing interferon to the Hochida and Otsuka companies
at no charge, and when it is sold as a commercial medicine the know-how will be
turned over to the two companies in return for a technology fee. Hayashibara has
no intentions of selling the medicine itself. and at that point it will stop dealing
with alpha interferon.

As for the other types of interferon. the company "has done experimental work with
gamma interferon, but has not considered beta. The emphasis is shifting to rehnocaine

(a physioactive substance) instead." (Director Nasaji Kurimoto of the Pujisaki
Laboratory)

This rhenocaine will be Hayashibara's most important project after interferon. Kuri-
moto says, "If it were just a matter of increasing the amount of interferon produced,
it would be enough to raise the yield per hamster." Considerable numbers of hamsters
will be used for mass production of substances formed by cell fusion. and the present
expansion of facilities is aimed largely at development of rhenocaine.

"There are no concrete plans to get started" on gene splicing at present. (Executive
Director Yashusi Hayashibara) Gene splicing methods involve 100 percent protein
and might well cause problems in making rhenocaine, a variety of glycoprotein.

Moreover. a combination of cell fusion technology and the mass production technology
using hamsters will permit production of various glycoprotein hormones in quantity.

Moreover, if the cell fusion method is applied to genes which produce physioactive
substances in lymphocytes in the present hamster method, it will be possible to
produce interferon and various hormones simultaneously.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such methods have already been established for production of a number of organic
substances, including the production of hunn corpus luteun hormones and hunm
epithelial growth factor; patent applications have been filed in Japan and overseas.

It appears that a physioactive substance with an effect against tumrs has been
discovered.

Japanese biotechnology is still in its infancy. We have fallen behind Europe and
the U.S. in the field of genetic engineering but while Bayashibara Biochemistry
Laboratories is not a pure venture company, it is a world leader in cell fusion
and culture technology, and is a central presence in the "take off" of the bio-
technology industry.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1981

9601
C50: 4106/12

59,

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

RECENT EXPORT DEALS, INQUIRIES FROM USSR DISCUSSED
Butadiene Plant
Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 7 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] According to a disclosure by a government source, the government and the
Export—Import Bank of Japan have given consent in principle to apply a bank loan
from the Export-Import Bank of Japan to the butadiene plant business talks (total
of 30 billion yen) involving the Mitsubishi Heavy Industries-Niasho Iwai group
and the Toyo Engineering (TEc)-Hitsui 6 Co group. with this consent, both groups
submitted the final price estinate to the Soviet Union. and serious negotiations
have started. As a credit offer for exports to the Soviet Union, previously a
supplier's credit (credit offered to export firms) was applied, for the first time
since the economic sanction. for the export of large-diaaeter steel pipe by the
iron and steel manufacturers. However, the application of a large bank loan
decided on in principle at this time was the first big step toward the relaxation
of Japan's credit offer for exports to the Soviet Union. The business world is
hopeful that plant exports to the Soviet Union will eventually get back on the
right track.

Japan's plant exports to the Soviet Union. which involve export credit offers from
the government and the Export-Import Bank. have been steadily dipping for the

last couple of years. The Nippon Steel Corporation-Ammco (U.S.) alliance
unofficially had reached agreenent to accept an order for an electro-agnetic steel_
plant for the total sum of 80 billion yen. and had received the consent of the
Export-Import Bank to apply the bank loan. However, due to the ban on the

export of high technology to the Soviet Union imposed by the U.S. Government.

the technology export permission was not granted. and the order was after all not
accepted. Since the ban, business deals concerning large plant exports to the
Soviet Union have disappeared, and there vars only one or two cases of small
proposals anounting to less than 2 billion yen per case in PY-BO.

The butadiene plant will be built in Sverdlovsk, to the west of Moscow. It will
be a large plant comprised of two units of installations which can annually
produce 900,000 tons per unit. It is to be used for the manufacture of

synthetic rubber. The business talks involve cospetition among four rivals-two
Japanese groups. Eurotacnica of Italy and Procon of France. The butadiene
manufacturing process of each grOup will use the process developed by Hoodly

70

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HNLY
FOR 0F11C1AL.USE(MVLY

of America. In this respect, it was pointed out that there was a possibility of
conflicting with the high technology export ban to the Soviet Union imposed by the
USA. However. because of the following perceptions, the issue of the butadiene
plant export has rapidly surfaced as a highly realizable business talk: 1) The
Nissho Iwai-Mitsubishi Heavy Industries team has the experience of exporting a
butadiene plant using a Hoodly system to the Soviet Union in 1972. 2) This
butadiene plant export will not be caught by the export ban possibly to be

issued by COCOM (committee for control of exports to the communist bloc), since

it looks like it will require another year before the discussion can be held at

a COCOM table to review the export of large chemical plants to the Soviet Union.

The final price submitted by each group was said to be within the 27-30 billion
yen range. One report indicates that the Soviet Union is leaning toward sending
the order to Japan because of its experience in exporting such plants.

In any case. the bank loan promised this time prescribes a 5-year life and an
annual 8-percent interest rate, which is in line with the official export credit
guidelines of OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). It is
quite certain that the Soviet Union will ask for a reduction of the interest rate.
and haggling over financial conditions is anticipated at the negotiating table.
Also, it is reported that France decided on an export credit offer which broke

the guidelines for the Yamhurg project for the development of natural gas-an
8-year credit after a 3-year grace period at an annual rate of 7.8 percent. This
reminds us that there still remains a possibility that a European manufacturer
might snatch away the desired order, depending upon the financial conditions.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Large Welding Robots
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHTMBUM in Japanese 8 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] Shin-Meiwa Industry (president. Shinji Tamagawa) received orders for four
large welding robots and six wire strippers (roller feed type terminal setting)
from the Soviet Union one after another. Hith these robots. so far a total of 12
robots have been exported to the Soviet Union since 1977. This is the first
large export (total sum of 70 million yen) of wire strippers. and it is expected
L0 be delivered by the end of November.

The welding robots contracted for export at this time are three large models--
THZOOD model with a work weight of 2 tons. followed by the PU150 series. one

of which was purchased from the display at the "All-Soviet Holding Exhibition"
held in Leningrad. In the Soviet Union. recently a trend to incorporate robots
positively in production lines has been gathering momentun, and the welding robots
ordered this time are expected to be distributed to a factory concerned with

heavy electrical machinery.

The order of six wire strippers bound for the Soviet National Automobile Industry
Export-Import Corporation was confirmed at this time following the sale of one
wire stripper at the Electrical Appliance Manufacturing Machinery Exhibition

held in Moscow last year. The stripper is the most advanced electrically

71

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

controlled machine that can totally automatically cut wires, strip wires on both
edges and set terminals. At present. the Altos (American wire stripper is popular
in the Soviet Union and Europe. however, Shin-Meiwa, which ranks first in realized
domestic sales, is anxiously planning to expand exports in the future.

COPYRIGHT: Mikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Bulldozers
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SMIMBUM in Japanese 12 Aug 81 p 7

[Text] Caterpillar Mitsubishi announced on the 11th an export contract of 600
bulldozers worth approximately 7 billion yen with the Soviet National Tractor
Export-Import Corporation. This contract is based upon the Third Far East Forest
Resource Development Project of Japan-USSR cooperation (generically called the

KS project). According to the project, our country exports the construction
machinery necessary to develop the forests in Siberia and imports timber from

that area. Since last March, when the basic contract was concluded, business talks
concerning the export of construction machinery have been pushed forward between
the Soviet and Japanese construction machine companies and trading firms involving
the gigantic total sum of 23 billion yen. Following the contract by Caterpillar
Mitsubishi at this time, it looks like many more companies can gain export
contracts one after another.

What will be exported by Caterpillar Mitsubishi is the AT0 model bulldozer, a
middle-class model with the following specifications: 62 horsepower output and

7.5 tons gross tonage. In consideration of its use in an extremely cold area,
Siberia, the specifications call for a frozen land excavating function equipped
with a straight ripper. The present contract was mediated by Mitsubishi 6 Co,

and the delivery date is set for February 1982. Caterpillar Mitsubishi established
a record of exporting a total of some 1,900 bulldozers to the Soviet Union,

headed by approximately 1,700 units exported through the first and second xs
projects. Now, 400 bulldozers will be newly added to the record.

Inquiries have been received from USSR regarding related machinery in association
with the third KS project for a total of some 7,500 vehicles, including 1,500
bulldozers, 2,000 timber transporting machines. and SOD-1,000 forklifts and truck
cranes. The economic sanctions against the Soviet Union which started with the
Afghanistan problem have been eased since around this spring, and business talks,
following the mood of political sensitivity, are rapidly developing into a concrete
stage of negotiations. As for the construction industry. which suffers froa a
continuous stagnation in demand. it is becoming more interested in the outcome

of the deals following the case of Caterpillar Mitsubishi.

COPYRIGHT: Mihon Keizsi Shimbunsha 1981
Dump Trucks
Tokyo NIMON KOGYO SHIMBUM in Japanese 16 Aug 81 p 5

[Text] According to a related source, the Soviet National Machine Export-Import
Corporation (Machino Import) has approached the Japanese truck industry to hold

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
business talks regarding the purchase of 120-150 large 8-ton carrying capacity
dump trucks. This deal is based upon the Third Siberia Forest Resource Development
Cooperation. and the dump trucks will be used by the Soviet Union to cut and
transport timber in Siberia. This is the first time in 3 years. since the second
agreement (1975-1978). that a large quantity of dump trucks will be discussed.
Isuzu Motors (president. Toshio Okamoto) and Hino Motors (president, Seiji
Arakawa), two Japanese companies, disclosed their interest in the deal, and are
competing fiercely for the order. The conclusion of the competition is predicted
to be near at hand.

The Third Forest Resource Development Cooperation Project of Japan and the USSR
follows in the footsteps of the second project. which was completed in 1978. The
basic contract was signed in March of this year. The agencies involved are the
Timber Commuttee (chairman. Ryoichi Kawai) of the Japan-USSR Economic Commission
from Japan, and the Foreign Trade Hinistry (Director for Administration Bolin) and
the Ministry of Timber and Woodwork Industry (Deputy Minister Stupunez) from the
USSR. The framework of the deal is as follows: 1) Japan will supply machinery,
equipment and materials worth approximately 200 billion yen to the Soviet Union
through the bank-loan system for 5 years, from 1981-1985. 2) In return, the
Soviet Union will supply 12 million square meters of timber and 1.26 million
square meters of lumber for 6 years. from 1981-1986.

Preceding this business deal. the Export-Import Bank of Japan and the Foreign
Trade Bank of the USSR agreed on the matter relating to the granting of the
bank loan to facilitate the project. and the protocol was signed in December of
last year.

The business talks which the Soviet Union initiated at this time in regard to the
purchase of dump trucks surfaced as a result of its intent to procure dump trucks
from Japan based upon the Third Siberia Forest Resource Development Project. A
related source says that the Soviet Union is planning to purchase 120-150 8-ton
carrying capacity vehicles as the first part of a dump truck order.

Speaking of trucks exported from Japan to the Soviet Union, the automobile
industry remembers that Isuzu Motors has a history of exporting a large quantity
of vehicles-~53 trucks for the First Siberia Forest Resource Development
Cooperation and 1,245 trucks for the second cooperation.

However, truck exports to the Soviet Union have been stagnant for the past few
years. maintaining a low level of transactions--23 trucks in all last year from
four companies--Toyota, Mitsubishi. Isuzu and Nissan Deisel--and 55 vehicles
including passenger cars during the first half of this year (January-June).

Furthermore. the majority of those vehicles were not exactly exported to the
Soviet Union. but were purchased for use by the Japanese Embassy. mass communi-
cation and business related employees stationed in the Soviet Union. Therefore.
this will be the first deal in a long time concerning a large quantity of dump
trucks to be exported to the Soviet Union. In addition. since it is a time when
all truck makers have been forced to engage in difficult business operations due
to the cooling of domestic demand, they are eager to win the order. Isuzu

73

FOR 0F?1CJAI.USE‘ONL¥
ltﬂIOFFKJAl.USE(MVLV

Hotors and Hino Motors, which have already announced their candidacy, are firmly
determined not to yield even a single step in confronting the challenge for the
deal.

Incidentally, as a link in the chain of this Third Siberia Forest Resource
Development Cooperation, Caterpillar Mitsubishi has just concluded a contract
to sell 400 bulldozers to the Soviet Union.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

Hire Rope
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 24 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] The Third Siberia Forest Development Project entails prospective inquiries
for some hundreds of tons of orders to the Japanese wire rope industry. A

related source says that the Soviet Union has begun to send unofficial preliminary
inquiries to Japanese manufacturers which are members of the Japan Hire Rope
Industrial Association. The wire rope industry is presently in a slump not only
due to the sluggish domestic demand but also due to the predictable attack of
imports from overseas makers such as Koryo Steel of Korea, which submitted an
application for JIS standardization to the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry. The business inquiries free the Soviet Union are a welcome and
promising break opening the door for the depressed industry to find new export
markets.

The wire rope market is estimated to do a business of over 100,000 tons a year.
During the last seweral years, the domestic demand has been in a slump, which
has been responsible for Toyo Seiko's extensive rationalization of business
operations. Even recently, Teikoku Sangyo, a major manufacturer in the Kansai
region, took action to reduce its employees by soliciting applicants for retire-

ment .

The slump in domestic demand partially stems from the depression in public
construction works. The discontinuation of exports to China, which used to

reach an annual average of 30,000 tons, is also a factor that has worsened the
situation. Also. the issue of dumping in the USA was raised, and the industry is

obliged to exercise self-restraint.

In dI-midst of this, the inquiries from the Soviet Union are encouraging expecta-
tions for business possibilities. For the Third Siberia Forest Development
Project, Japanese makers recently received orders for some hundred bulldozers,
and currently negotiations involving over 1,000 large dump trucks for export are
about to enter the final stage.

A related source estimates that the wire rope import quote that the Soviet Union
has in mind is at the $10 million level, but it may be increased as necessary.
Some estimates go as high as several 10,000 tons in terms of the final scale.

Ks Industry will represent Japanese interests in actual business transactions.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbun 1981

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dump Truck Order to Isuzu
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 25 Aug 81 p 6

[Text] Isuzu Motors (president, Toshio Okamoto) has disclosed the receipt of an
informal order totalling approximately 1.6 billion yen from the Soviet Union.
consisting of 260 8-ton carrying capacity dump trucks and repair parts, and has
announced that the formal contract will be signed soon.

This export deal of dump trucks to the Soviet Uhion blossomed from the inquiries
made on the premise that the vehicles would be used for the comprehensive
development of the forest resources in the Far East and the area along the 8am
railroad to be undertaken by the Soviet Union as a link in the chain of the Third
Siberia Forest Resource Development Cooperation Project, the basic contract of
which was concluded between Japan and the Soviet Union in March this year.

In response to the inquiries, the Japanese truck industry took a positive attitude.
since the business talks to export dump trucks to the Soviet Union occurred for
the first time in 3 years. after the completion of the Second Siberia Forest
Resource Development Project in 1978. Isuzu Motors and Hino Motors. which
announced their interest in getting in on the deal, fought for the orders up to
the last moment.

The competition has just ended. with the decision given to Isuzu Motors. which
came out ahead of Nine Motors. The order, anounting to a total of some 1.6
billion yen. is for 240 "TD 50 Model" 8-ton carrying capacity dump trucks and
repair parts. They are to be shipped starting from the end of this year to the
beginning of next year. With this victory, the company is expected to conclude

a formal contract soon with the Soviet National Machinery Export-Import Corporation
(Machino Import) .

As reasons which led Isuzu to succeed in getting the order. the following points
can be noted: a past record of exporting nearly 300 dump trucks to the Soviet
Union and a maintenance edge over the other contender from the beginning to the
end of the negotiations.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunshs 1981
Anticorrosive Agent

Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 14 Aug 81 p 7

[Text] 0n the l3th, the Fujikura Cable Horks disclosed that it had received an
inquiry regarding the purchase of a large quantity of anticorrosive agent to be
used for natural gas pipelines from the Soviet Union. Sample unufactured goods
have already been sent to the Soviet Union and are being tested for performance.
"He might be able to sign the contract even before the end of this year." said
the company (executive director. Teijiro Uchida). The Soviet Union is asking for
a long-tern 5—year contract. and this large-scale deal is estimated to involve an
order for a total of 30 billion yen.

7S

POR‘OFHKJAI.USE(HULY
FORiOFIﬂCJAL.USEI(NULY

The negotiations are being handled through the Ministry of Gas Industry of the
USSR. The Soviet Union is the largest natural gas producing nation. holding
one—third the world's reserves, 29 trillion cubic meters. According to the 11th
Major Fuel Production 5-Year Plan starting in 1981, it is projected that 640
billion cubic meters will be newly developed. This has promoted activities
relating to the building of pipelines, which rapidly raised the demand for an
anticorrosive agent for the pipelines. The government eabsrked on purchasing the
agent from overseas makers.

In the past, the Soviet Union not only bought anticorrosive materials from Nitto
Electric Industry. the top manufacturer in this field in Japan, but also from
tape manufacturers in America. However, this time, the choice fell speedily upon
Fujikura Cable Works possibly because, from one point of View, it became difficult
to import from the United States after President Regan'a expression of opposition
to the "Ysmburg Project." a pipeline construction plan that stretches 4,400 km,
from western Siberia to western Europe.

Fujikura Cable Horks only entered the field of various anticorrosive materials

in July last year by utilizing its experience gained in electric cable insulation
technology. The company delivered some tens of meters of special polyethylene
tape samples that prevent rust. dust and moisture from adhering to pipe surfaces
to the Soviet Ministry of Gas Industry. Those samples are being tested for aging
characteristics to see whether they can endure use in Siberia, where the
temperature drops down to minus 60°C.

The sample test final results will be ready before the end of August. According
to the message that came to Fujikura Cable Horks recently, "the Soviet Union gave
high scores in evaluating the quality of the product in the areas of tsckiness,
electric characteristics, water-resistant properties and bacteria-resistant
properties of the snticorrosive agent." (Machinery, Equipment and Electric
Material Business Department)

Because of this favorable news, it is likely that an export contract will be
concluded with the Soviet Union as early as this autumn, or before the end of
the year at the latest. The Soviet Ministry of Gas Industry reportedly will
purchase anticorrosive tape worth approximately 6 billion yen each year
within the period of the 11th 5-Year Plan, and deals are expected even for the
12th plan and thereafter.

0n the basis of the progress of the transactions with the Soviet Union, Pujikura
Cable works has begun to reinforce the production system of anticorrosive agents
such as anticorrosive tapes. The company is constructingaproduction line in
this field at an equipment investment of 300 million yen in the Numazu plant,
Shizuoka, known as a base of manufacture for power cables, aluminum wires and
rubber wires. and is aiming to open the line for operation in September. Also,
Fujikura is planning to promote aggressive sales activities for the export of
anticorrosiv: tapes to be used for oil pipelines in the Middle East with this
export to the Soviet Union as a breakthrough.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbun 1981

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Trailer Trucks
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SNIHBUN in Japanese 19 Aug 81 p 2

[Text] Komatsu Ltd (president, Ryoichi Kawai) and Nissan Diesel Motor (president,
Takashige Hatauyama) announced on the 18th that they received an order for 800
timber trailer trucks for the Third Siberia Forest Resource Development Project fro:
the Soviet National Automobile Export-Import Corporation of the Soviet Government.
The trailer trucks will be shipped from the end of this year to the first half

of the next year. The total amount of the order received was worth approximately
8 billion yen.

The trailer truck that successfully attracted the large order is called the

"KM 121'" and was developed by the two cowanies specifically for use in Siberia,
so the performance of the vehicle will not be degraded in the minus loO‘C weather.
Nissan Diesel was in charge of the body and Komatsu the engine. The carrying
capacity of the trailer truck is 27 tons.

The Third Siberia Resource Development Agreement is a joint project of Japan and
the Soviet Union, under which Japan purchases timber from Siberia and the Soviet
Union procures machinery and equipment necessary for development. In 6 years,
Japan plans to buy 12 million cubic meters of timber and 1.2!- million cubic
meters of lumber, while the Soviet Union plans to buy machinery and equipment
worth 35 billion yen. As the first machine export, Caterpillar Mitsubishi
canfirmcd an order for (.00 bulldozers fro- the Soviet Union, and the order
received by the two companies at this time was the second of the orders to cone.

Incidentally, the two companies have an actual record of delivering a total of
approximately 5.000 timber trailer trucks for the first project (1969-1973) and
the second project (1975-1978).

Three trading firms are handling this deal-~Harubeni, Mitsui & Co, and Nissho
lwai.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha

891.0
CSO: 4105/2310

-77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DEFENSE INDUSTRY PREDICTED TO GROW RAPIDLY
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 16 Sep 81 p 9

[Text] weapons Industry To Become a l-Trillion-Yen Business;
Defense Industry to Grow Rapidly Due to Arms Race

Japan has been strongly urged by the United States to share the
defense burden in a joint response to the threat of Soviet
military expansion. The effort to increase Japanese military
strength is proceeding at a rapid pace. The LDP and the
financial sector say that "the strengthening of national
defense is a much higher priority political problem than
financial reconstruction," and accordinsIY. the increase in
defense spending is treated as a special category outside

of the range of administrative reform. The Self Defense
Forces, which have a limited defense function. are the illegi-
timate offspring of the San Francisco peace treaty which set
up the postwar Japanese political establishment. Now that

30 years have passed since the organisation of the Self
Defense Forces. Japan has begun to move down the road from
being4asmall military power to being a strong non-nuclear
military power. Recently the weapons industry, which backs up
national defense, has begun to get a solid foothold in the
industrial sector even though the volume produced is still
small compared to the actual capacity of Japan as a great
economic power. The equipment purchases of the Defense Agency,
equivalent to the annual sales of the Japanese weapons indus-
try, amounted to 550 billion yen in 1981. The Defense Agency's
procurement for next year will amount to 956.5 billion yen.
very close to the l-trillion-yen mark. The annual equipment
budget of 500 billion yen is on the same scale as the annual
sales of ice cream. Compared to the huge business of the 0.8.
military-industrial complex. this is still a small industry.
However, because of the 0.8. demand to accelerate the increase
scheduled in the defense guidelines. the government has
adopted a military expansion policy, making additional weapons
orders by incurring an unbudgeted national treasury debt of 2.2
trillion yen. So it seems certain that the Japanese arms

78

FOR OFI1C1AI.USEIDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

industry will become a l-trillion-yen industry in the next year

or two. Therefore, we have investigated the active market strate-
gies of the arms industries for large transactions involving the
leading products of this l-trillion-vyen business. These include
the next-period BADGE system, new medium-range training aircraft,
the missile which will succeed the Nike missile, and new tank
development. The 1980's are being called "the arms industry era,"
and the Japanese weapons business is rapidly building up its tech-
nical capacity and performnce.

BADGE X

The competition over the BADGE X (next-period air defense warning control system)
has officially just begun. However, it would not he an exaggeration to say that
the last phase is already completed.

The Defense Agency had planned to submit performance requirements for BADGE X to
six domestic companies with system design capabilities—Fujitsu, Hitachi Ltd,
Nippon Electric, Mitsubishi Electric. Toshiba Corp, and Oki Electric Industry--
on 7 August. The performance requirements list is a document explaining the
performance which the Defense Agency is seeking for BADGE it.

However, the Defense Agency received a report on the morning of the 7th of c-
tie-up between Mitsubishi Electric and Nippon Electric and a large six-company
association including Toshiba, Oki Electric. and Nippon Avionics (joint venture
between Nippon Electric and the Hughes company of the United States). Therefore,

it only delivered the performance requirements to three compsnies--Nippon Electric,
Fujitsu, and Hitachi.

The six-company association came as a shock to the Defense Agency, but the
e.ctraordinsry effort put into the business negotiations was even more of a
surprise to Fujitsu and Hitachi. These two companies have new presidents,

Tnkuma Yamsoto and Katsunari Mita, both of whom graduated in the same class

from the nusber two Engineering Department of Tokyo University. And both companies

are focusing their entire efforts on BADGE x as a good means for entry into the
defense industry.

Fujitsu Chairman Daisuke iiobayashi could say no more than "I was shocked when I
heard the news." chairman Kobayashi has taken co-and on the front line of sales
for many years. He judged that a large group had made the decision on the six-
conpany association and he could not hide his dumbfounded response to the
brilliant maneuvering of Mitsubishi Electric and Nippon Electric. Fujitsu is the
number one Japanese computer company. Even though it is somewhat behind Nippon
Electric in the type of communications equipment necessary for BADGE x, it has
sufficient technical capacity. In becoming the number one company in Japan, it
merged and s1 igned itself with other companies in the computer industry in a
restructuring and second restructuring of the industry, using every trick in the
book. It had placed great hopes on the BADGE X business and feels badly beaten
by the expert maneuvering of its rivals.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An industry source says that Takashi Abe, nunber one sales department manager at
Mitsubishi Electric, the person thought to be behind this maneuver, "is telling
his men to fasten their helnet straps." putting a total effort into preparation of
the proposal.

The great warrior of the electronics industry. President Tadahiro Sekimto of
Nippon Electric, laughs that "(If we were to lose out) it would. be like letting a
visitor get a hole in one." He thinks that he will beat Fujitsu and Hitachi
easily and that this transaction is, in reality, already settled.

Objectively, it say be said that the technological capacity of Fujitsu and
Hitachi is not at all inferior to that of the allied army. lbwever, they have
had hardly any success in past expenditures for defense. In the amounts of
procurement by company for 1980 (announced by the Defense Agency). the first
three positions were taken by heavy equipment companies, headed by Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries. Mitsubishi Electric, Toshiba, and Nippon Electric are lined
up abreast in positions four. five, and six. The allied army definitely has the
advantage of position. In addition, it has the participation of Hughes, which
has received orders for 20 BADGE systems and has 12 systems in operation.

20 Top Arms Production Companies in 1980

 

Rank Company Name No of Amount Percentage of
Item (million Total Annual
yen} Procurement
1 Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 183 234,541 210.61
2 Ishikawajima Harima Heavy
Industries 66 108,479 11.10
3 Kawasaki Heavy Industries 106 81,198 8.5
la Mitsubishi Electric 185 72,386 7.6
5 Toshiba Corporation 208 32,906 3.1.
6 Nippon Electric 289 22,313 2.3
7 C. Itoh Aviation 63 14,046 1.5
8 Nippon Oil 212 12,907 1.10
9 Japan Steel Works 30 12,270 1.3
10 Sumitomo Shipbuilding and
Machinery 4 12,043 1.3
11 Komatsu Ltd 105 12,026 1.3
12 Hitachi Shipbuilding and
Engineering 29 11 .613 1 .2
13 Tokyo Precision Instrument 77 9,396 1.0
14 Hitachi Ltd 49 8,927 0.9
15 Maruzen Oil 181 7,935 0.8
16 Oki Electric Industry 118. 7,753 0.8
17 Shinneiwa Industry 18 7,299 0.8
18 Mitsubishi Corporation 25 6,945 0.7
19 Daikin Kogyo 63 6,76lo 0.7
20 Shimadzu Seisnkusho _82 6,714 0.7
Total 2.020 688,257 72.1
80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

So are Hitachi and Fujitsu left totally without hope? Chairman Kobayashi has
given up, but Tomio Tanstsugu, former chairman of the Arms Industry Association,
says: "He must consolidate the strength of all the companies in order to build a
good system." He speaks as if he were trying to find a way for the two companies
to participate. This is because the problem has become complicated under the
fierce competition of the major companies, and the industry feels strongly that
anything that would allow the interference of politicians should be avoided at all
costs. Indeed, in the BADGE competition 18 years ago, three groups-GE, Toshiba,
and Mitsui and Co; Litton, Mitsubishi Electric, Fujitsu, and Nissho Iwai; and
Hughes, Nippon Electric, and C. Itoh--fought a hard battle. There was even a
suicide in the Defense Agency. Related individuals say that "it (the 'black
mist' incident) occurred because the previous aircraft was inputted." They seem to
be thinking that because the next BADGE system will be domestic, they will not,

or do not want to.do the same thing again.

At any rate, this battle will be officially decided by next summer, when the
approximate budget proposal is prepared for I983. The cost of the system is
reported to be approximately 200 billion yen.

MTX: Industrial Policy Intended To Avoid Oligopoly; Technology of Kawasaki Heavy
Industries Adopted

In the competition for the new medium-range training aircraft (er), which will
cost a total of 350 billion yen, Kawasaki Heavy Industries was chosen as the
general contractor. It will begin joint development together with Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries and Fuji Heavy Industries. The battle for general contracting

of the MTX was expected to he a one-on-one fight between Fuji and Kawasaki which
had been doing research on it since the late 1960's. However, before the decision
was made, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries came in with its fighter aircraft technology,
and it became a fierce three-way battle. In the end, the nod went to Kawasaki,
which had proposed a midsection wing structure using its technology for joining
composite materials. However, it was a case of fisherman's luck due to an
industrial policy decision to reject the oligopoly of Mitsubishi and helped by
Fuji's overeagerness in the technological area. The Defense Agency's Technical
Research and Development Institute plans to carry out the development togethe‘ with
the three companies, starting production of a practical aircraft in 1988.

The Defense Agency has undertaken this development to.replace its obsolete T-l and
T-33 jet training aircraft and has set the target date for 1988, when the T-33

will be retired. The objective of the Defense Agency is to produce the entire
aircraft, including the jet engine, domestically. The engine, an XPJ small turbo
fan jet engine, is already being developed by Ishikawajima Harima Heavy Industries.
The Defense Agency is positing a capacity for the MTX similar to the P-86, the

main fighter used in the Korean Wsr--a speed of Mach 0.9 and a climbing rate above
the sea of 3,000 meters per second. Also, the landing speed will be reduced by 10
percent to make it easier to handle.

The MTX is a medium-range training craft, but it is seen by European countries as
an important light attack plane. They conduct high-level battle tactics
training in the medium~range training plane and then deploy the pilots for actual

81

INJR 0FFKJA¢.US£‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combat. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries had not been interested in a medium-range
training aircraft. but it became excited about becoming the general contractor for
the MIX "because it became clear that it was a high-level training aircraft which
could substitute for the T-Z" (Yoshio Sasaki, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
director).

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries received the highest evaluation for its performance
requirements proposal, but it was excluded in order to avoid oligopoly and because
it overemphasized battle functions. The Defense Agency gave high marks in tech-
nology to Kawasaki Heavy Industries because of its midsection wing system.
Previously a support structure was necessary for the midsection wing system which
ate into the fuselage and greatly limited the space available for other equipment.
However. Kawasaki used a composite material for most of the parts and applied F-lS
adhesive technology for attaching the wings. The middle wing system is stable and
makes many kinds of training possible. That is supposedly why it won the "heart"
of the Defense Agency.

New Tanks: Reevaluation Starts With Armor Material; Concentration of Electronics
Technology; Objective of Building World's Strongest Tank

Equipment plans have given priority to the Air and Maritime Self Defense Forces,
but the research and development for new tanks necessary for defense on land in
the 1990's is finally getting underway. The plan calls for upgrading everything,
beginning with materials. Features will include heavy and accurate firepower
with the use of guided shells (CLBG), quick maneuverability like that of the
Ushiwskamaru, and very strong armor. It will be built in a style similar to the
node] 74 tank and, with a concentration of electronics equipment such as automatic
aiming and loading devices, it will be the world's strongest tank.

The plan for the new tank will be formalized as model 88, and only a few

features have been made public. However, it will be a heavy tank with guns having
a maximum diameter of 120 urn Of course, its destructive power will be greater
than that of the 74 tank with its 105 mm guns. However, the main reason for using
120 mm guns was the use of CLBG. when CLBG shells are fired from 120 mm guns
toward the objective. their path can be corrected on the basis of the reflection
of a laser beam aimed at the enemy tank by ordinary troops in order to make
accurate hits.

0f the three functions--mobility, firepower, and defense-~the next function to
attract attention after firepower is defense. All countries are competing to
strengthen tank armor because of claims that tanks are powerless against improved
antitank missiles. In the Japanese model 88, as well, methods will be adobted to
prevent the penetration of shells, such as developing new steels to upgrade the
armor material and inserting a layer of ceramic material between two layers of
RUDY.

In addition, new functions not seen in the model 74 will be used to avoid enemy
attack. Tank gun sights use infrared light and lasers. A major feature of the
new tank is an ability to instantly sense these aiming lights and move quickly
to avoid them.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This Ushiwakamaru-like maneuverability is due to an increase in horsepower per
unit of weight. Hhile model 74 had only 20 horsepower, the 88 will have about 30
horsepower. Therefore, there will be no sacrifice in cruising distance. The 88,
like the 74, will be able to travel about 300 kilometers. Japan is an island
country divided by mountains, so it is not suited to tank warfare. Therefore.
tanks with a capacity for long distance operation are not necessary for defenaiVe
purposes. Even in Hokkaido, which borders on the Soviet Union, the usual distance

between major cities is only ab0ut 100 kilometers, so there is little necessity
for increasing the cruising distance.

After Nike: 1.5-Trillion-Yen Project; Leaning Toward Patriot; Largest Production
Ever

In the competition between the Patriot and Nike-Phoenix for the next surface-to-air
missile (SAM-x), it is certain that the Patriot will be adopted by the Air Self
Defense Forces in charge of regional air defense and the Ground Self Defense

Forces in charge of war zone air defense. The Nike-Phoenix was presented
aggressively to the Defense Agency by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries as a domestic
SAM. However. in consideration of the facts that (l) the Patriot was the newest
SAM already completed and (2) the United States had requested adoption of the
Patriot for standardization of weapons, the Defense Agency has allocated about

0.3 billion yen for Patriot research costs in the estimated budget request for
1982.

The Air Self Defense Forces are planning to use the SAM to replace the obsolete
Nike J. The type of missile to be used was to be officially determined in March,
but the decision was postponed because of other big projects like the new BADGE

system and the new medium-range training aircraft (MT!) and very large purchases
like the P-15 and P-3C.

The business competition for the post-Nike missile will amount to more than 1.5
trillion yen. It will be the biggest defense manufacturing project ever undertaken
in Japan. Mitsubishi Electric is recommending the Patriot, developed by Raytheon
of the United States. Its brother company. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. has come
up with a plan for domestic production of the Nike-Phoenix in conjunction with
Hughes and McDonnel Douglas (both of the United States).

The Nike-Phoenix also received the support of those in favor of domestic production
so there was an even contest. However. the Ground Self Defense Forces had
undertaken a strengthening of field air defense and had decided internally to

use the Patriot in four of its eight anti-aircraft artillery groups. The Patriot
has a wide range of applications and can be used from a distant location. These
features gave it precedence over the improved Hawk. Also, in the U.S.-Japan
working level talks in Hawaii held in June. the United States made a strong
request for adoption of the Patriot and a slight shift appeared in the power
relationship between it and the Nike-Phoenix. The Defense Agency has not yet made
an official decision on the post-Hike missile. However. it has allocated 0.3
billion yen for research on the Patriot in the budget request for 1983. The
United States has taken a policy of not providing information until a purchase
decision is made. So it is expected that the Defense Agency will soon state its
intention to adopt the Patriot.

83

FOR 0FFKJAJ.[EHE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

U.S.-Japan Joint Research: Bound by 'Three Principles'; HITI Cautious; United
States Aiming at Light Technology

The issue of military assistance to the United States in the form of Japanese
technology. assumed to be chiefly in the field of electronics, came out of the
talks between Director General Omura of the Defense Agency and 0.8. Secretary of
Defense Caspar Heinberger. Partly because of a confused government response, the
issue seemed to have quieted down. But now, Hiroshi Weds. Equipment Bureau chief
of the Defense Agency, the person seen as holding the key to this problem, is
visiting the United States. On the 18th, he will exchange views with important
officials of the 0.8. Department of Defense on this same problem. so it has
reemerged as a hot issue between Japan and the United States. HIT! is cautious,
as before. because of the three antinuclear principles. Related industries are
also urging caution. Leaders of the electronics industry are saying: 'ﬁhe
advanced technology that we have worked so hard to develop will flow back."

However, there is a growing tendency toward a positive response by the government,
especially in the Defense Agency, which is under pressure to share the defense
burden. This complicated problem has emerged from conflicts between the Japan-U.S.
military alliance and the Japan-0.8. electronics technology war. It is likely to
be a disturbing factor in the relationship between the two countries for some

time.

The issue of U.S.-Japan joint military development in the electronics field,
which sprang out of the June talks between Omura and Veinberger. is not yet clear
in its entire scope. Nevertheless, it is quite clear that the United States is
asking our country to submit its applied advanced technology, chiefly in
electronics. and private sector technology at that. Since the proposal came out
of the American government's recent pressure on Japan to share the defense burden,
the Defense Agency and other government departments immediately gave a positive
reaction and the problem quickly became the object of debate. It is believed
that the idea of buying off part of the Japanese share of the defense burden with
military technological assistance is behind the favorable approach of the Defense
Agency.

However, there is strong opposition within the government. HITI is bound by the
three principles opposing weapons trade, and has shown a very negative response.
Minister of International Trade and Industry Tanska expounded a doctrine of
caution on various occasions immediately after the proposal was made. In the
previous session of the Diet. he was persistently attacked by the opposition
parties over the Horita Hagane problem, and the bitter experience of facing that
barrage seems to have made him more cautious in handling the present problem.
Moreover, the "administrative reform Diet,‘ which will determine the fate of the
Suzuki cabinet, is close at hand. The ministry has judged that the Suzuki
cabinet may be in danger if the administrative reform Diet Is overshadowed by
this technology export problem.

This discrepancy in opinions within the government is one reason the problem
quieted down quickly after the initial flareup.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTNCJAL.USEINNLY

However, the general consensus of related sources is that the nilitary electronics
technology sought by the United States is light (optoelectronics) and LS! (large-
scale integrated circuit) technology. Light technology is being rapidly developed.
chiefly in the communications field. and LSI technology is making rapid progress

in the consumer electronics field. In some areas, they have reached a higher
standard than in the United States.

The reaction of the targeted industry, the electronics industry. is complex. At
first there was a tendency to take up the challenge. As one electronics industry
leader put it: "The inevitable has happened. It is time to reevaluate the three
principles of armament." However, gradually, a cautious approach, keeping in
mind the rivalry with the United States. has become more common. "It would not
do for the United States to come for our advanced technology with empty hands."

However. under the idea of sharing the defense burden, it is a fact that the
favorable approach is gaining strength in the Defense Agency and the financial
sector.

It is certain that the government will move to deal with this problem without
touching on the three principles concerning weapons.

In any case. it will probably take quite a bit of time to solve the problem of
providing America with Japanese electronics technology for military use, caught
between the U.s.-Japan electronics technology competition and the U.S.-Japan
military alliance.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun 1981

9651
C80: 4105/26?

85

FOR 0FFNJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DEVELOPMENT OF LINEAR MOTOR CAR UPDATED
Tokyo SHUKAN ORU TOSHI in Japanese No 45% 4 Sep 81 pp 78-80
[Article by Yasushi Ariga]

[Text] The "linear motor car" (or "magnetic lift train") makes use of magnetic
repulsion and attraction to run (fly?) along over the surface. Tests of this operation
are to be conducted in the Hiyazaki prefecture city of Hyuga, at the Japan National
Railways (JNR) Hiyazaki Floating Railroad Test Center.

The unmanned magnetic lift test vehicle "Ml-500" recorded speeds of 504 km/h on
22 December 1979 and 517 km/h on the 23rd, surpassing the goal of 500 km/h. At this

speed, Tokyo and Osaka would be only an hour apart.

This may be an overstatement, but there is no limit to the speed of the linear motor
car. 700 or even 1000 km/h is possible. But that would require an inmense
expenditure of horsepower, since there would be a sharp increase in wind resistance
to the train. Therefore, JNR, with an eye to economic factors, set 500 km/h as a
practical goal for speed.

This is the same speed as that of Japan's YS-ll passenger plane; to achieve this

speed on the ground is indeed revolutionary. Moreover. if it is possible to run the
linear motor car in a vacuum tunnel, sire resistance will disappear and speed of 1,000
or even 3.000 km/h may be possible. It has been suggested that if this method were
used in the U.s., it would be possible to cross the continent from Los Angelea to

New York in 21 minutes. At a speed of 20,000 km/h it would be literally a "bullet
train."

And so JNR, which has built the world's fastest railroad, took the next step and
began development and operational testing of a manned test vehicle. This test
vehicle is called the "HLU 001" (see photo). In addition to being manned, it differs
from the Hl-SOO in the shape of its guideway (see diagram).

The guideway has been changed from an inverted "T" shape to a "U” shape. The change
has already been made along 5 km of the 7 km test track.

This means a change on the arrangement of coils and superconductive magnets on the
guideway and the car. The "U" shape is more logical, and can be expected to form

the basis for operational linear motor care when they make their appearance. For
that reason I will describe the characteristics of this method.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First I will explain the principle of "railroads." A "railroad" is. generally
speaking. a mode of conveyance which does not require a steering device. In place

of a steering wheel, facilities are designed to guide the vehicle over the ground.
Rails and guidewsys are such facilities.

It is thus easy to provide safe. high-speed transportation. Human operators. will do.
or automation is possible. Trains can be controlled from a central location. and
mass transportation can be provided economically. Three functions are necessary for
running cars on this railroad: (1) cars must move in both directions; (2) they

must be guided along the path: and (3) there must be means to propel and to stop the
cars.

For an ordinary railroad. these functions are performed by the rail and wheels. But

at sl‘eds above 300 or 350 km/h. the friction between wheel and rail diminishes and
the locomotive loses traction. Forward motion stops.

In the case of the linear motor car. the three functions are performed by the
attraction and repulsion of magnets on the car chassis and the guideway; speed and
grade do not constitute limits. Because the car floats above the surface, the only
noise pollution is the sound of the car passing through the air. There is no wear
on the ear or the guideway. so maintenance is simple and durability is great.

These are the merits of the magnetic lift method.

The magnetic lift method is one type of list. The air cushion method is another.
in which pressurized air is used for functions (1) and (2).

For the past few dozen years JNR has been steadily accumulating the results of

magnetic lift development. and its technological level is now highest in the world.

Of course there are two types of magnetic lift: the repulsion type and the attraction.
JNR had adopted inductive repulsion. which is the mainstream of the repulsion type.
Through the cooperation of Toshiba Corp., Hitachi Ltd.. and Mitsubishi Electric

Corp., the car chassis was fitted with small. light. superconductive magnets.

This is a characteristic not seen elsewhere.

A cross-section of the "U“ shapred guideway shows a flat portion in contact with

the ground and vertical portions on both sides. The flat portion has two rows of
independent lift coils running at fixed intervals in the direction of travel.

As superconductive magnets skim along the lift coils, current is applied to the lift
coils and they become magnets. Because the magnetized coils and the superconductive
magnets repel each other. the superconductive magnets are pushed up and the car
floats about 10 cm up.

There is little lift at speeds of 50 to 100 km/h and it is necessary to run on
lowered auxiliary support wheels.

If the lifted car drops too much the magnetic repulsion increases and it is pushed
up. And conversely. if it goes up too much the repulsion is lessened and gravity

brings the car down. In other words. a stable float is maintained without a
control device to control the lift height.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because the strength of the current flow through the lift coils corresponds to the
speed of the car. the car floats higher at high speeds and sinks lower at low
speeds. It is also possible to change the amount of lift by adjusting the strength
of the magnets fixed to the car. JNR has established 10 cm as its average lift.

If there is that much margin, it will not matter if there is 8:12 unevenness in

the way the ground coils are lined up. It also makes maintenance easier.

incidentally, the coils consist of a number of turns of aluminum wire encased in a
polymer. The term "superconductivity" refers to the drop of electrical resistance
to zero when alloys like niob-titanium are cooled to nearly -273' (absolute zero).
Superconductive magnets are created by immersing coils made of such alloys in liquid
helium at -269° C. Because the coil has no electrical resistance, an electrical
charge will continue to flow almost perpetually with no voltage loss. it is just
like a superconductive permanent magnet.

And so how is the car propelled at ultrahigh speeds? The linear motot provices
the motive force.

In an ordinary alternating current motor. there is a rotating portion (rotor) and
a fixed portion {strator) with an outside power supply. The outer surface of the
rotor. which is supported on a shaft. is separated from the inner surface of the
surrounding stator by a fixed gap. If these cylindrical Outer and inner surfaces
are spread out flat, the result is the linear motor, an arrangement in which the
fixed gap is maintained but movement is linear.

If one of these surfaces is fixed to the ground and the other is attached to the car
and power moving in a straight line makes the car go. There is no need for the
traditional gears and wheels.

Linear motors can be roughly classified as linear synchronous motors (LSM) and
linear induction motors (L1H).

The world‘s lift-type railway systems are divided into two groups: inductive
repulsion (ED) lift combined with LSH propulsion and magnetic attraction (EH) lift
combined with L1H propulsion. JNR. using superconductive magnets. is at the head
of the first group.

The side walls of the guideway are also equipped with coils lined up in the direction
of travel at such a height that they interact with the poles of the superconductive
magnets attached to the car. The coils are connected and serve as the stator of the
LSH. In technical terms, the stator is the primary element, which receives outside

power.

On the sides of the car are superconductive magnets arranged with north and south
poles alternating, so as to interact with the primary elements. These correspond
to the rotor of the LSH. it can thus be seen that the superconductive magnets on
the car have two functions: To lift the car and to guide and propel it.

The train is driven by automatically detecting its position and speed in the control
center and controlling the current (and its frequency) supplied to the drive coils on

the walls of the guideway. In this way the drive coils work with the north and
south poles of the cars' superconductive magnets to generate the magnetism which

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON”

propels the train. Power is supplied only to the drive coils required by the lcncth
and speed of the train. and waste is eliminated.

This motor has the advantage that when the brakes are applied, the generation of
electricity is damped and the train's kinetic energy is recovered as electricity
energy. Moreover, cars which draw power from Outside throug a contact device like
u pentagraph are limited to a speed of about 300 km/h, but there is no limit on the
speed of a synchronous motor with its primary element in the guideway.

JNR is now conducting operational tests of the HLU 001 with several connected cars,
which is one step closer to commercial operation. About 23 billion yen has been
invested in development so far. but it is not known how much time and additional
investment will be required by remaining technical problems before manned trials
nuterialize. But when that happens. it is expected that trillions of yen will be
invested in construction. cars and facilities for what will be over 30 percent

of the new trunk lines.

The ED/LSM method used by JNR is an ideal system in which the lift setup on the
train is simple and no power collector is needed. the train is lighter and thus
performs better. and maintenance costs are kept to a minimum. It has also been
pointed out that the ground facilities are more complex and costlier than for the
EMILIM method.

But such a comparison is completely in error. The EMILIM method is limited to a
speed of 350 km/h; 500 km/h would be impossible. And although ground facilities
are said to be complex and costly. this evaluation does not include the element of
wear: durability in the ED/LSM method is almost permanent.

At present the new trunk lines and the airlines compete on equal footing. and even
if the fare on the linear motor car were higher than for air travel. the cost-
performance superiority from time saved by boarding in the heart of the city would
attract a large volume of passengers.

in other words. the HD/LSM method will kill two birds with one stone. That is. it
will relieve the increasing congestion of the new trunk lines, and at the same

time it will give JNR the strategic victory of taking passengers away from airlines.
Photo, p 79: Full scale test car ”MLU 001"

Diagram. p 80: "h‘U 001" lift and propulsion

(a) car chassis (c) side wall
(b) superinductive magnets (f) lift coils
(c) guideway (g) drive coils

(d) flat portion

COPYRIGHT: Shuknn Oru Tnshi I981

9601
C80: 4105/258

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SC IENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DIVERSIFIED OPERATIONS 0F KOBE STEEL DESCRIBED
Tokyo SHUKAN ORU TOSHI in Japanese No 451 4 Sep 81 pp 60-65

[Article by Yoshio Onishi. assistant chief editor: "Next Star Among Major
Corporations; Technology Nix; Flowering of 'COmposite Technology Business'
for Kobe Steel")

[Text] An executive managing director of Kobe Steel said the following with
deep feeling: "Our company has made a specialty of 'diversified operationa,‘
including both metal materials and machine engineering. But to tell the truth,
until the last few years. our various divisions were scattered and we were not
able to obtain the real benefits from diversification. However, beginning a
few years ago, the seeds of technology sowed over the last 20 years have begun
to sprout. On this basis, we are about to see a great flowering in diversified
operations."

These words are backed by confidence in the rapidly growing machine engineer-
ing division and the expansion of the growth areas of industrial robots and
titanium products. Moreover. this statement contains regret for Kobe Steel's
continuous backseat position in the shaft furnace industry, where it has not
obtained a place in the sun. '

Kobe Steel is commonly thought of as "the fifth son in the shaft furnace indus-
try." It has been a small-scale "fifth son," with the specialty of "wire rod
and bat steel" accorded to it in the shadow of Nippon Steel, the eldest son
reigning over the industry.

Indeed, the sales of Kobe Steel's steel division in 1980 were 663 billion yen,
one-fifth of Nippon Steel's, and crude steel production was one-fourth that of
the larger company. In product composition, the specialties of the top four
companies differ--"Nippon Steel and Kawasaki Steel in plate" and "Nippon Kokan
and Sumitono Metals in tube“--but they are fully developed, all-round steel
producers, handling plate, tube, drawn steel (formed steel, bars, and wire).
In contrast, Kobe Steel does not handle formed steel or pipe.

Put positively, you could say it is an individualistic steel maker. Put nega-
tively. it is an incomplete steel company.

90

FOR OFFICIAL l-‘SF. ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kobe Steel's steel division does not handle steel pipe, and steel pipe has
turned into a gold nine during the worldwide boom in drilling for oil and
natural gas. It was also slow in utilizing the "effects of rationalization"
which became an income source for all companies under the steel recession
which followed the oil shock. The continuous casting rate is considered the
best indicator of effective rationalization. Until recently, Kobe Steel's
rate was no higher than 25 percent.

of course, Kobe Steel was not just loafing with respect to the continuous
casting rate. The continuous casting rate at the Kakogawa steel mill, its
major steel plate mill, reached 70 percent of the industry average after in-
troducing continuous bloom and slab facilities in 1980. In 2 or 3 years, it
will introduce another continuous slab casting facility and plans to reach
90 percent of the industry average. The Kakogawa steel mill generates 90
percent of its own electricity. It is the top steel nill in Japan in the
area of oil conservation.

The problem for Kobe Steel is to introduce continuous casting of bar steel
and wire rod. The bar and wire made by Kobe Steel is a high-quality product
made from special steels such as carbon steel or steel alloys. It is a type
of steel that is very difficult to cast continuously. Kobe Steel overcame
this difficulty recently by installing two sets of continuous bloom casting
facilities for special steel at the Kobe mill. However, the continuous cast-
ing rate at the Kobe steel mill remains at 40 percent. Therefore, the present
continuous casting rate for the entire company, including the Kakogawa works,
is only 50 percent. the lowest of the five companies in the shaft furnace in—
dustry. This is the negative side of having high-quality wire and bar steel
as major products.

However, it has led to progress in developing continuous casting technology,
especially continuous casting technology for special steels and has made
possible the additional benefit of continuous casting equipment sales to
Sanyo Specialty Steel, another manufacturer of special steels (bearing steel).

Good Showing by Engineering

While Kobe Steel continues its hard fight as the "fifth son" in the shaft
furnace steel industry. it has blossomed tremendously in other areas. Plant
engineering orders last year came to a little less than 250 billion yen. It
was the largest order amount for a single year for any company in Japan. It
was even higher than such plant manufacturers as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
and Ishikawajima Harhma or engineering companies such as Chiyoda Chemical
Engineering and Construction.

Beginning with a bar and wire rod rolling mill for Libya (170 billion yen), it
continued with successful bidding for such projects as cement plants in Indo-
nesia and Jordan and a polypropylene plant in Singapore. There are many large-
scale projects coming up such as an LNG plant for Algeria (60 billion yen), a
reduction steel mill (joint project with Nippon Kokan) in Egypt, an expansion
of the Qatar reduction steel mill, and a plant for pelletiaing (preliminary
processing of ore), a secret weapon. The outstanding definite orders through

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the end of September reach 400 billion yen. At this rate, it will not be
impossible to reach 500 billion yen in outstanding orders.

Nippon Steel ran into difficulty with the Shanghai Baoshan steel plant and
successively failed to get orders for Soviet electromagnetic steel plate
equipment, Romanian steel making equipment, and the Teikoku Sekiyu oil rig
off the Joban coast. In contrast, Kobe Steel has had steady success.

The shaft furnace companies went into the engineering business with great
fanfare, but the only company which has made a reputable profit is the "fifth
son," Kobe Steel.

”It is not necessarily a good policy to have too many outstanding orders. As
far as we are concerned, it is sufficient to have 100 billion in sales per
half—year and outstanding orders for three to four half-year periods (300 to
400 billion yen)" (Vice President Hori). The company is quite free from
pressure. Beginning in the first half of 1982, when this pace is reached,
the income of the engineering division will climb steeply, producing net
profits of several billion yen per half. This net profit is calculated on an
annual basis to cover the 10 billion yen needed to pay a 10 percent dividend
for Kobe Steel .

As far as the plant engineering division of Kobe Steel is concerned, it is
the earliest and most conservative among the five shaft furnace companies.
Its plant department was established in 1954, 15 years before Nippon Steel
established an engineering business. The engineering knowhow accumulated in
the 20 plus years since then has grown enormously. It crytsallized in the
success of the Qatar reduction steel mill (total amount of order; 170 billion
yen). The Qatar steel mill is the combined result of the diversified opera-
tion of machinery and steel making technology adopted by Kobe Steel. The
Qatar success was the jumping off point for today's rapid growth in plant

engineering.

Kobe Steel's specialty areas in steel making engineering are reduction steel
making, milling of bar steel and wire rod, and oxygen plants. Other special—
ties include fertilizer and cement plants. All of these plants are necessary

for developing countries to build up their industrial base.

Nippon Steel specializes in the most advanced unified steel production plants
and steel plate facilities for export to the advanced countries. Kobe Steel.
on the other hand, has established a style of providing services for develop-
ing countries from preliminary studies to operating knowhow after the plant is
completed. It has the knowhow to provide plants which match the resources,
technological capacity, andlabor capacity of the developing countries. It is
quite different from companies like Nippon Steel, which are experiencing fail-
ure in exporting the most advanced steel plants to "developing countries" like

China .

Kobe Steel can offer many other kinds of growth plants outside its specialties--
for example, chemical plants, extreme low temperature LNG plants, pelletizing
plants, and cast and forged steel mills. It will expand its plant orders with
plant designs which match the circumstances of the country to which the plant

1' ex rted.
a po 92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One project which bears watching in the plant engineering business is the
lignite gasification 50-ton test plant (largest for Japan) which will be con-
structed beginning this fall in the state of Victoria in Australia. If this
plant operates on a commercial scale, the plant business could easily exceed
1 trillion yen. In addition, there are undeniable merits in technological
acquisition for Kobe Steel to be derived from this high technology plant with
its concentration of the latest technology. For example, the cast parts used
in the coal degasification reactor are huge pieces of steel with walls 250 mm
thick and a weight of over 50 tons. The technology for fabricating and weld-
ing them will be a new one for Kobe Steel.

Hidden Group of Top Products

Kobe Steel has many important products which are surprisingly unknown, perhaps
because of its conspicuous steel division which accounts for 60 percent of
sales or because they are obscured in the image of a heterogeneous mixture of
products produced by the publicity given to "diversified operations." Some of
the top products are shown in the accompanying chart.

In the steel field, Kobe has a SO—percent share of the domestic welding rod
business. This makes it tops in the world in this area and provides a stable
source of income. It also has the top position in Japan for carbon steel, which
is used in auto making. In nonsteel divisions, it is at the top in high tech-
nology and advanced fields such as copper tubing for use in coolers, material
for aluminum cans. rolled titanium and titanium condensing pipe, and zircon
alloy pipe for use hxnuclear fuel rods.

In the machinery and cast and forged steel area, it is in first place in elec-
tric shovels, cranes, rock crushers, crankshafts and propellers for use in
ships. large—diameter ball valves, and painting robots. It is also in the top
class in cutting tools and iron powder for powder metallurgy. One of its hid-
den top products related to electronics is an aluminum alloy material for
memory disks.

Some of the items attracting the most notice among this wide variety of pro-
duct groups are the industrial robots, titanium products, and products related
to aircraft and defense which combine titanium and cast and forged steel.

Most of the industrial robots produced are painting robots, in which Kobe has
almost a SO-percent market share in Japan. It has a monopoly on deliveries to
Nissan and Honda. It is now negotiating on deliveries to Toyota. Last year

it began selling arc—welding robots developed jointly by the machine division
and the welding division. The prototype of the processing robot for cutting

and machining castings, developed autonomously, is completed and awaiting sales
on the open market. The next development will be assembly robots and intelli-
gent robots. The company is ranging its forces to start with the robots which
are most widely used and is moving into a period of substantial shipment. Robot
sales for last year were about 3 billion yen. They should exceed 10 billion yen
in 1983, and are expected to begin contributing to profits in the next period.
The total orders for the last 6 years have been in the range of 100. They

broke the 100 mark in 1980, and a rapid expansion is expected, passing the 200
mark in 1981, the 300 mark in 182, and the 600 mark in 1983.

93.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Business Composition Diagram forRobe Steel Co Ltd

9.
10.

 

11. Plant engineering
Steel 12. Kobe Steel Co Ltd
Machinery 13. Copper processing
Welding rods 14. Metals
Steel stock 15. Titanium
Environmental machinery 16. Zirconium
Petroleum and chemical equipment 17. Special alloys
Diamond and rubber equipment 18. Tools
Construction equipment _ 19. Cast and forged steel
Manufacturing equipment 20. Robots
Light rolled aluminum 21. Cast and forged steel. tools

Kobe Steel's Products With a Leading Market Share

Steel, Welding Rods

SC steel (structural carbon steel)

Nonmagnetic steel plate (for use in nuclear fusion reactors)
Welding rods

Powdered high-speed steel

Iron powder for powder metcllurgy

Aluminum, Rolled Copper Products. Titanium

Memory disk material (aluminum alloy)

Copper tubing for coolers. light pressed products for railroad cars
Pipe covered with zircon alloy

Processed titanium products (forged products, rolled stock, pipe)

Machinery, Plants

Electric shovels, painting robots, rock crushers, oxygen plants,
cranes, tire equipment, automatic welding machines. compressors

9b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cast and Forged Steel

Crankshafts and propellers for ships, large—diameter hall valves

Another growth area is titanium products. The previous period sales of 12.1
billion dollars will grow to 20 billion yen in the next period. Kobe Steel's
titanium business consists of purchasing the raw material, sponge titanium,
from Osaka titanium, melting it down, and processing it into rolled, cast. and
forged products. The processing capacity is 6,000 tons. the best in Japan, and
is in full operation. Forty percent of the products'are exported for use in

aircraft, nuclear electricity-generating equipment, and sea water desaliniza-
tion equipment.

Kobe Steel has the world's leading aircraft manufacturers as customers. The
0.8. 3-1 strategic bomber program, which will require a large volume of titan-

ium, may start up again. The company has built up a route for expanding sales
if sponge titanium can be obtained.

There was an inquiry last year from Boeing for a 5-year transaction beginning
in 1982 for 12,000 tons of aircraft materials including titanium alloys, worth
100 billion yen. Unfortunately, Kobe had to refuse because of difficulty in
obtaining the sponge titanium.

Kobe Steel has the nonferrous metals essential for aircraft such as titanium,
aluminum, zirconium, and copper and the alloy technology to process them.

Also, it has completed an 8,000-ton aluminum forging press in the Nagoya plant.
The 8,000-ton forging press in the Takasago plant has already been used exten-
sively for forged parts for ships, and it will be very useful in this field
also. Kobe Steel is ready for battle in all areas from materials to process-
ing. It is not necessary to emphasize its great potential strength not only
for commercial aircraft. but also for defense-related items such as fighters,
bombers, and warships.

Becoming a Total Plant Manufacturer

Kobe Steel's total sales in 1981 are expected to expand to 1.2 trillion yen.
However, the recurring profit will fall to 30 billion yen (previous period;
45.9 billion yen) and net profit will drop to 18 billion yen (previous period;
25.6 billion yen).

The steel division is greatly curtailing production because of the reduced pro-
duction cost burden and high raw material costs. The aluminum rolling division
has been forced to take a loss because of a poor market and a slump in volume.
This has caused a large reduction in profits.

However, even with this business slowdown, Kobe Steel is steadily moving ahead

with the conversion of its operations. The previous composition was 60 percent
steel, 20 percent rolled light metal, and 20 percent machinery and engineering.
In this period, steel will fall below 60 percent, and machinery and engineering
will rise to around 30 percent of sales.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The steel division can only be expected to grow at the same rate as the economy,
but the machinery and engineering division could exceed this. Company strategy
is aiming in this direction.

The steel division will require an investment during the wt 5 years in the
range of 199 billion yen per year, combining a recovery investment for delayed
rationalization and labor saving along with a renovation investment. Also, the
steel division will be made more profitable by making even better quality bar
steel and wire rods, steel plate with high tensile strength. and improved steel
plate with surface treatment such as zinc plating.

Meanwhile, the results of the plan to emphasize machinery and engineering will
appear in 1981. The level of profit is expected to exceed that of 1979, the
highest for any period so far.

President Takakichi Takahashi says: "In the future, we will build up strength
as a total plant maker. If our potential capacity as a diversified operation
is correctly evaluated, we expect our stock price to reach the price of a steel
stock plus alpha."

Kobe Steel is beginning to change from its old position as a "fifth son" com-
pany to that of an advanced "technology mix" company on the strength of its
growth area, machine engineering.

Interview: President 'i‘akakichi Takahashi

Our company has two sides--manufacturing of materials like steel and total
plant engineering. In the future, our strength as a total plant maker will
grow. If our potential strength as a total plant maker is correctly evaluated,
we expect our stock price to reach the price of a steel stock plus alpha.

In our steel division, we would like to devote a total effort to rationaliza-
tion of facilities and technological development so that we can take pride in
the Kobe reputation for drawn steel and respond to our users' needs for high-
grade, high-quality steel. Also, we will increase our development of such
items as high tensile strength plate, both thick and thin, and surface—treated
steel plate and maintain solid technological competitiveness as a unified major
manufacturer. In addition, we will make an equipment investment of more than
100 billion yen per year in order to maintain overall cost competitiveness by
introducing alternative energy sources, energy-saving measures, and continuous
manufacturing processes.

We established an engineering division last year. It has performed well and
we have been able to secure the largest amount of orders in the engineering
industry, starting with the Libyan steel plant.

From now on, we will continue to develop new processes in all fields, especially
steel, nonferrous metals, and welding rods. We are pro ding to develop new

products through an organic combination of the operating knowhow and hardware
technology of our machine division in related fields for such items as robots,

96-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mold presses, pipe setters, and continuous casting equipment. He will carry
out vigorous technological development with interdiviaion cooperation and
improve the quality of our diversified operations.

In 1980 we reached 1.1 trillion yen in sales, becoming a l-trillion-yen company.
He would like to make it to 2 trillion yen by 1985. concentrating on increasing
our machinery and engineering sales. I am sure that our income base will be
greatly strengthened by supplying large plants, improving the competitiveness
of our nonferrous metals division, and increasing the earning power of our
older divisions such as steel and welding rods.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Oru Toshi 1981

9651

C80: 4105/257 “D

.97 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY