APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100030063-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030053-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRs L/8350
22 lmarch 1979

TRANSMTIONS 0N JAPAN
. (FOUO 8/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030053-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGllT MUS AND REGUIATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOR BE RESTRICTED FOROEFICIAI. USE ONLY.
IIMIOOIMNIC DATA |- hm No.
m" ans L/ 8350
ll

TRANSLATIONS ON JAPAN, (P000 8/79)

9. Potion-in; Ouaaiulioo amo aad Minn

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

I). Spoaouia‘ (Mania-doc Name a“ Macao

Ac above

It. Mutua-

Thc report contains pros. and radio coverage on political, economic. military.
aociological. aciontific cud technological developments.

. my “I and urn-mt Aaalyau.
JAPAN

Political and Sociological
Hilitary

Economic

Science and Technology

In Menilmc/Opn-Eucd Tana

In. COSATl'icH/Gtoup SC. SD. SK, 15c. 160. 181. 19?. 223
It. Anal-balm Sure-cu

For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

 

.
'0.- Iﬂlbu "but Vito-tarot nub-9"
son. otucm use out!

JPRS Ia/8350
23 March 19'.

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN

(2000 8/79).
Courems

POLH'ICAL AND socmmam

'BEKAI' Anslyses Future Course on chin Government
(Tune 1mm; sum, m 79)

Defense Officials View Joint Naval Operations with United States
(mum: mm, 8 Mn- 79)

Diet Dissolution Within the Year 'Ihnvoidnble'
(Tokehiko Tenneshi; MUNICH DAILY ms, 21 m 79)

Bum-ts To Stutiy Manuel-cue Conce s '
(amen: mm unis, Feb 79

SD? Planes Gen Fire when Attacked
(mm mm m, 8 m n) osoeeseoooeosoooeseseseeoe

J8? Ails To Prevent Centrist-Conservative Coalition
(ASA!!! mm was, 7 no: 79)

woumu' on Criticism of Ohirs's Econanic Policies
(mitorinl; m mm moon, n lhr 79)

Briers
mkndn Denies Retiring

ECWC

Donestic Economic Activities Should Be Btpnnded
(Editorial; mnucm mm was, 13 m 79)

Government Approves Joint Economic Developsent of Siberia
(mm: W, 20 Jan 79)

Jenn 'i’o Pin-thei- bu kchsnge Restrictions
(men may ms, 2 m- 79)
FOR OFI’ICIM. USE ONLY

commas (Continued)

Labor In kpected To Danna More Money
(Editorial; mm mm nuts, 23 m 79)

Doubts Linger on m Procurement
(Mo whim: MINICRI MIL! ms, 29 Ebb 79) ..

'mmcn' Editorial Raps 0.3. for It: Demnd on an
(Editorial; mom DAILY nuts, 1 Mu- 79)

Shipp Pins Plan mammal China Sailings
”mm“, 10“ 79) 0.0.0nlooooooooooc

Top Mineumn View PRC Contract anwnoiou
(m mm rm, 7 us: 79)

Briefs
Surplul m n. on

SOIﬂiCB AND W!

Nuclear My Policy Places naphosia on Future
(Editorial; wumcn: mm ms, 7 Feb 79)

—b-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'SEKAI' ANALYZES FUTURE COURSE OF OHIRA GOVERNMENT
Tokyo SEKAI in Japanese Feb 79 pp 266-268

[Krticle by Tagao Iwami: "Politics '79: The Future Course of Ohira's
Ship of State:/

15er§7 Support - 62 percent

The popularity of a prime minister at the outset of his political power is
governed greatly by his character. According to a survey by the ASA“!
SHINBUN right after the formation of the Ohira cabinet, support for the

new government was 62 percent, which is high compared to the administrations
of Kishi and fukuda at their outset. which had 33 percent and 28 percent
respectively. end low compared to lkeda's 51 percent, Sato's 67 percent.
Tanaka's 62 percent and Hiki's 65 percent. This figure is probably quite
fitting for Ohira. who is unobtrusive. lacking in forcefulness and does not
inspire too many expectations. but at the same time has a personality that
manifests no sense of insecurity.

In Ohira's case. he did not have the media campsign'that applauded Kakuei
Tanaha as "the emerging leader of the masses." or the "low posture" ploy

of haysto Ikeda that developed in the turbulent period following the 0.5.-
Japan Security Treaty struggle of 1960. On the other hand. he is far

removed from the villainous image surrouding Takes Fukuda after he frantically
sought to bring down the Niki government. and has begun his administration

on a safe. even keel. For an operation by Ohira. who has established

himself as a coiner of new-phrases. the lackluster slogan "Trust and
Consensus“ characterizes the uneventful change in administration that took
place in an atmosphere of economic uncertainty.

If no force a comparison. Ohira's debut resembles a transfer of power that

is close to the fixed path followed from Ikeda to Eisaku Sato. Also.‘

“After Fukuda. Ohira" became the common opinion in government circles quite
early; what remained was merely the timing of the succession. This also
closely resembles the point that party members of the same cliques participated
in the struggle in the form of "patrons." i.e.. Ichiro Kuwano for Sato,

and Yasuhiro Nakasone for Ohira.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if Ohira has any strong point. it is that he gained control by an election
based on direct participation in voting (primary election of prime minister
candidates) by party members and supporters numbering 1.500.000. The election
was carried out experimentally by the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and

freed the election from the conventional backroom. financially backed power
struggle (general election of prime minister) carried out by members of the
Diet. Moreover. in this event. the general consensus of "Fukuda in first
place" was upset. with the tables turned in favor of Ohira's victory.

While Takeo Niki and Takeo Fukuda both gained power through very obscure
means. Ohira was able to make clear his qualifications for prime minister
by "number of votes" and was able to get by without being stigmatized by
financial power.

This good fortune is considered to have increased his support by several
percentage points. even if we subtract the negative image he got from receiv-
ing the full support of "Lockheed" Tanaka.

"Relatively a Dove"

Last year, on 18 December only a few days after Ohira assumed the post of
prime minister. there was an incident in which he was attacked by rightwing
extremists at the entrance to his official residence. but this had the effect
of further strengthening his image as "Ohira the Dove" which was the target
of the rightwingers. There was also the aspect that already. in the Ohira-
Fukuda struggle. Fukuda was repeatedly marked as a "hawk“ and Ohira as a
"dove." and with Nakasone's ultra-hawkish declarations. the criticisms of
Ohira made Ohira's position appear more dove-ish than necessary.

The criteria for distinguishing hawk from dove now have some obscure aspects.
but since Ohira entered politics (first elected to the lower house in
October 1952). if we look back at his political behavoir over what amounts
to almost 30 years. we cannot say definitely that he has been a dove, but
that he has pursued a conservative. orthodox path that cannot be termed
either dove or hawk. There are some LDP members of the Diet who say "Fukuda
is on the right. Hiki on the left. and Ohira and Naksaone in the middle"

but compared to Pukuda and Nakasone. Ohira. relatively speaking. can probably
be called a dove.

The Trademark of Ohira's Politics

If we further analyze the merit of Ohira's politics as thus defined. we can
say that he is more a dove in style than a dove in policy matters.

In his first news conference after assuming the post of prime minister

(8 December) Ohira was asked about the direction of his government. to which
he replied "He must not have a government that merely depends on power. I
consider of utmost importance a government that unites with the people and
shares their bitter medicine. Secondly. we must frown on a government that

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

disaeainetes optimistic dreams among the people. At the same time. I don't
want the people to have excessive expectations from the government. I wish
to say that if both understand each other it is possible to have a fruitful
governsent." he added. "He have just about reached a consensus on a free
market economy and a framework for guaranteeing security. I wish to expand
the framework of this consensus. follow and respect the maturing situation
and steer the helm of government on a course that does not deviate from this.
In so doing. we can naturally avoid those conflicts that leave no room for

coapromise. The people have also natured politically. The government should
not fall behind in this respect."

In this statement the basic concepts of Ohira‘s politics are rather clearly
spelled out. Previously. Ohira criticised Fukuda's politics as bent on
power. But what Ohira is aiming at is a principle of “tempered dialog" which
is the opposite of an oppressive authoritarianism. The ideology of partial
alliances that has already become the trademark of Ohira's politics is a
concept of the same type, is a technique for running the Diet based on
thorough discussion with the opposition. and can be called a practicial
method of dealing with the opposition. when evenly matched with it. in which.

under certain conditions, a temporary alliance is formed with a particular
opposition party.

"While Looking Below"

A similar nuance also appeared openly in his views on defining the rate of
econoaic growth that he gave at his first press conference. Unlike Fukuda.
who continued to adhere to achieving a growth rate objective. Ohire coamented.
"To establish a level of economic activity is a method followed in every
country and each has had its own reasons. However. the macro and micro levels
have become separated and follow their own courses. It becomes a problem of
which course to follow: to walk while looking down or while looking up.
Whether dealing with depression or unemployment problems. shouldn't we be
looking downward in considerable measure, seriously considering mieroeconomic
c0untermeasures and then as a result attempt to determine what the growth
rate should be? Isn't it a fact that to preestablish a rate of growth and
take all sorts of steps to achieve it is an approach that. in the midst of
instability of economic conditions at home and abroad. does not follow reality?"
Whether we call it an ideology of "microism." of "looking downward." or a
caurse of following dialog. it is dove-ish as a political technique. Ohirs
claims. "just as my face is different from that of Prime Minister Pukuds. my
political methods also differ somewhat. Fukuda practiced politics that were
faithful to his own character. and I will practice what suits my own nature."
and he appears to be consciously gaining reputation for an image that is the
reverse of Fukuda's politics. which gave the authoritative impression of a
macro ideology.

UBAKNESSES

However, a weakness of Ohirs's dove-ish methods is that they are remote from
a reformist administration and tend to maintain the status quo. In the debate
about emergency legislative action. Ohira's position was negativistic. i.e.,

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it was not opposed in principle but suggested that matters could be solved
under existing regulations concerning the Self-Defense Forces. It is fully
possible to imagine that when faced with difficulties. the Ohira administra-
tion will adopt an evasive posture, and symptons of this are already in
evidence. With regard to problems which require bold changes and revisions.
such as correcting the unfair tax system and administrative reforms. which
call for considerable energy and leadership. the reaction of the new adminis-
tration has been sluggish. Ohira'e philosophy is "making haste slowly," but
such procedures become associated with roundabout politics. and if they serve
to slow down the ability to move forward an administrative problems. Ohira's
government is sure to and up lacking in attractiveness.

Among the items mentioned as policy objectives there have been more than a
few notable ones, but one that especially merits attention is the rural
cities concept. It is described only abstractly in his 1 December press
conference immediately after assuming the position of prime minister: "The
policies which have been carried out at present during the fluctuation of
the high growth rate period have necessarily been haphazard. Now the high
growth period is over. the large movement of the population into the cities
has ended and has partially resulted in a U-turn. It is now time to recon-
sider the dispostion of past policy and to work towards creating comfortable
living space in the regional areas." This contains Ohira's idea for the
reconstruction of Japan. and the idea of locally-based power forms its
nucleus.

If, as the concept is given to us. limitations are placed on the administrative
power that is now centrally concentrated, its functions are entrusted to

local regions. The responsibilities for taxation, public works, welfare.
education and culture are distributed on a large scale to local autonomous
bodies, and regional cities of 200,000 to 300,000 people given a high level

of autonomy are distributed throughout the country. This will be establish-

ing a revolutionary goal and be the forerunner of a "period of regionalimf'
based on conservatism.

However. at present we can only say that it is unknown whether the Ohira
administration happens to have the powerful political leadership necessary
to make such a grand scheme materialize, and that if it fails it will become
a minus to the administration.

A Long Administration?

The distinctiveness and direction of the Ohira administration have not yet
clearly emerged. but regarding its life, there has from the beginning been
talk of its lasting a long time. The reasons for anticipating a long term
include: (1) he is the last of the "Big four" (Niki, Tansks, Fukuda, Ohira)
and has no strong rivals; (2) Ohira has excellent political techniques for
avoiding crises; and (3) by the time of the next general elections 2 years
hence, it will be necessary to "digest" three nationwide elections, including

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a unitifed regional election. and elections to both houses of the Diet.

but the L0? is expected to put up a good fight. riding on the wave of a
revival of conservatisa. end if they do. this will have the effect of laying
the groundwork for Ohira's reelection.

Hhether or not it will last for a long period. at any rate the chances are
great that he will have power for two terns. or 6 years. However. while he
seeas to be blessed with the chances for a long administration. it is diffi-
cult to say that Ohira's power within the L0? is all that stable. Although
at present one cannot find any factions that have declared open opposition
to Ohira, it is also certain the conditions exist for an anti-Ohira flareup
within the party.

The first factor to cause a union against Ohira would be the deep relationship
with the Tanaka faction that supports Ohira's power. and clues to this became

apparent in the personnel shakaup that occurred when Ohira set out to form
his new adninistation.

Ohira's personnel affairs were forced to a dangerous start as he was pressed
to sake a change in the selection of the pivotal post of secretary general.
It was thought in the beginning that the highest cadre in the Ohira faction.
Yoshiyuki Suzuki. naturally would assume the secretary generalship. but
first the Fukuda faction rejected him. giving the reason that "Suzuki is a
personality that is very close to Kauai Tanaka." and as result of the Nakasone
and Niki factions behaving in the same vein. the trend for development of

s Fukuda-Nakasone-Hiki alliance against Ohira and Tanaka grew stronger.
Moreover. the "Suzuki Rejection" brought about various ripple effects

inside and outside of the L0? and Ohira. who was now in a dilemma. had to
drop Suzuki and switch to Kuniyoshi Saito, an unexpected person.

"or of the Young and the Old

The first personnel setback shows that the undercurrent against Ohira and
Tanaka is quite deep. The Tanaka faction, which was a driving force in the
election of Ohira. naturally insisted on Suzuki for secretary general.
exercising their strong voice. but they realized from conditions within

the party that it was futile and consented to a switch away from Suzuki.

This lends testiaony to the fact that factions had. to this extent. developed
in the party which would not permit the Tanaka faction to have its own

way.

With Ohira being the last of the "Big Four" to come up to bat. the faction
situation within the LDP has entered a period of reshuffling. Aside free
Ohira's ruling faction and the Tanaka faction which continues to maintain
controlling power. the changing of hands in the Fukuda and Niki factions is
continuing and the situation inside the Nakasone faction is not stable. In
other words. this is a chance for a rejuvenation of the leadership stratum
of the LDP. and a pattern has become evident here and there of a conflict
between the young and the old.

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From now on. movements of the new power groups of Toshio Kawsmoto (Hiki
faction). Shintaro Abe (Fukuda faction). Ichiroo Nakogawa (Seirankai).
Kiichi Hiyazawa (Ohira faction). and Tokusaburo Kosaka (no faction) will
become active. which will probably bring about a change in alinemants
including all the intermediate factions. In the presence of such fludity
it is apparently s fact that Tanaka. while becoming alarmed at anti-Tansks
feelings within the party. is seriously planning a strategy for a return
to power.

"The Rsvivor of Conservatism"

Despite the appearance of tranquility witnin Ohira's LDP. under the surface

we should be able to discern an increase in dissatisfaction growing daily.

In particular, we can say that it is inevitable that the hawkish political
forces formed from the Kishi-Fukuda-Abe-Nakagawa groups will move to establish
goal posts in 1979-80 and consolidate forces in order to strengthen their
posture of confrontation against the Ohirs regime on the issues of diplomacy
and defense.

He can say that the period will soon begin when "Ohirs the dove" will be
faced with the serious choice of either pursuing the dove faction line or
following the path of harmonizing the party through compromise. Secretary
Yano of the Komeito has not concealed his reservations and distrust of

Ohirs. saying that the opposition parties will join together and "it is clear
that the posture which on first appearance is that of a dove will eventually
reveal its true colors out of deference to the hawks within the party."

Since this also is symptomatic of the dilemma in Ohira's power. the path of
the new administration is not an even one. Ohirs has taken over the role

as "Revivor of Conservatism" that fukuda was unable to play out and it is
certain that he embraces the aabition to strengthen the foundation for a

long term of office. his weathering the storm of the unified local elections
in April is one milestone for this. But if Ohirs attempts the trick of
trying to win by leaving his political posture vague. this will probably
prove to be the dangerous bet that it is.

COPYRIGHT: Iwanami Shoten 1979

6093
C50: 6105

6
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL ‘

DEFENSE OFFICIALS VIE" JOINT NAVAL OPERATIONS HIT" UNITED STATES
Tokyo YOHIURI SHTNBUN in Japanese 8 Her 79 Ezrning Edition p 2 ON

[Text] Director General of the Defence Agency Yamashite. testifying before
the House of Representatives Budget Committee on 7 March. declared that
"our country is barred from engaging in a collective act for self-defense.
When it exercises the right of self-defense. it will always be on an indi-
vidual basis." Yaaashita was explaining the administration's position
regarding the conduct of joint operations between the Japanese Maritime
Self-defense Force [HSDP] and the 0.5. Navy based on the "Guidelines for
Japan-0.3. defense cooperation" (agreed on by the Japanese end U.S. ace rn-
ments on 28 November 1978).

Elaborating further on the subject, Hera. chief of the Defense Bureau of the
Defense Agency, told the committee: 1) That in the event of an armed
attack on our country, HSDP ships will independently attack enemy submarines
spotted in our waters regardless of the presence of 0.8. warships in the
vicinity; and 2) That if 0.5. warships should happen to be in the vicinity
during such an attack. and if enemy submarines are destroyed in such attacks.
as a result the 0.5. ships. too. would be protected but the action of the
HSDF ships itself is within the bound of the individual self-defense right.

The testimonies by Yameahita and ﬂare expressed the administration's view
that Japan would expect U.S. warships to go along with HSDF ships and join
in the attack on enemy submarines (or other warships) under such circum-
stances on the basis of the Japan-v.5. Security Treaty. They revealed a
firm line that "even in the event of an individual exercise of the self-
defense right by our country. it is possible for Japanese and 0.8. warships
to launch joint operations against the same target."

Their testimonies were in reply to questions raised by Iwao Teramae of the
JCP. Teramae. noting a joint exercise held in mid-February near Okinawa.
by HSDF ships and a group of U.S. war vessels. including aircraft carrier
"Midway" of the 7th Fleet, maintained that "the Japanese and 0.5. ships

7
ran orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

in the exercise took tlm formation at jointly providing protection for the
USS Midway. The '3uidelinss for Japan-0.5. defense cooperation‘ also
refer to joint operations between HSDF ships and 0.5. warships." He than
asked the question "Does not such protection given 0.5. warships by "$0?
ship» constitute a collective exercise of self-defense rights?"

In the past. the government had avoided to use an expression which might
be interpreted as implying direct "military operations" in Diet testimonies
daaling with Japan-0.5. joint operations based on Article 5 of the Japan-

0.5. Security Treaty. particularly s joint action involving Japanese and
v.5. warships.

COPYRlGﬂT: Youiuri Shinbunsha 1979

C50: 5105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DIET DISSOLUTION 91mm THE YEAR 'UNAVOIDABLB'
Tokyo HAINICﬂI DAILY NM in English 21 Pub 79 p 3

[Negatecho Doings colun by Tekehiko Tekehsshi: "clooey Atnosphere
Centering on Tsllt of Diet Dissolution")

(Text! The investigstion of the truth in the McDonnell Douglss end
Gun-sen ceees hes pessed one peek with the swing of witnesses for
two days by the budget co-ittee of the house of Repressntstives.

Following the testinony of the witnesses, the budget couittee hes
decided to seek en sppreissl of the hendwiting on the so-celled “Keifu
Hence" involving Iiechiro Ksitu, vice president of Nissho-lwei Co. end to
prosecute Kunio Arieori, forner employee of Nissho-lwsi, for refusing to
testify. The Diet deliberstions on the McDonnell bougles end Gru-sn
cases are likely to contime briskly.

To what extent will the heDonnell Dougles end Crux-en ceses effect the
political situetion? This is e big problem. Prise liinister lieseyoshi
ohm hes steted thet, depending on how this problee develops, he will
"nssune politicsl responsibility."

This has led to the sudden eppeerence of a theory thet the llouse of
Representstives night be dissolved. The co-onsense interpretetion of
"tslting responsibility" is to resign. but thet does not see- to be whet

the prine minister is ssying. whet he will seek is "judgment enew by
the people."

This is because he hes only recently assumed the preniership as the
result of the party presidential election. It is unlikely, it is ssid,

that he will teke politicsl responsibility and resign over e csse thet
does not involve his: directly.

9
ton omcm. use ONLY
FOR ONICIAL USE ONLY

Good Reasons

Nevertheless, there are certain factors that nske it elnost imperative to
dissolve the House of Representatives and hold a general election before
nutunn. Along then are:

i. “this autum will nark the passage of three years since the last general
election of the house of Representatives. According to past examles, the
tine for a Diet dissolution seens to be ripening.

2. A general excise tax is scheduled to be introduced next year. lhere
is strong opposition to this. it would be nore advantageous for the
Liberel-Denoeratic Party to hold a general election before the introduction
of this tax.

3. The House of Counsellors election will take place natt year. Prine
Minister ohira once had the idea thst holding the elections of the House
0‘ Counsellors and the House of Representatives simultaneously would be a
good policy for the 1.1:? but there is sons doubt whether this is possible
iron the constitutional standpoint. If in order to avoid this, the House
of Representatives election were to be held after that of the liousc of
Counsellors, that would come i-ediately before the LDP presidential
election. Opposition is likely to arise from within the party.

6. when doustic and international conditions are taken into consideration,
there is a strong likelihood of the political situation beconing more
unfavorable for the goverment and the LDP next year when coapared with
this year. it would be better to hold a general election before the
situation aggravates.

Tenaks's Urging

In addition, an influential nether of the LDP (belonging to an antinainstrean
faction) has this to say: "The verdict in the first trial of the Lockheed
case is likely to be handed down next spring. There is strong possibility
that toner Prise Hinistar Kokuei Tanalta, who is Ohirs's powerful supporter,
will be found guilty. ‘l'anaka is likely to urge ohira strongly to hold a
general election before such a ‘guilty’ verdict is handed down. Therefore,

a dissolution of the House of Representatives and general election within
this year, particularly in autuln, will be unavoidable."

This is Tanaks's personal reason. But when one thinks of the relationship
between Tanaka and Ohira. and the solidarity of the ranch (action within
the LDP, there is every possibility of this becoming the key in the decision
to dissolve the House of Representatives.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

both the Ohire and Mode factione have already eat up headquartere for
election counter-eaeuree. The Tanaka faction hee also recently decided
to eeteblieh an election tounterneaeuree co-ittee. Sueum hikaido has
been aelected ae the their-an of that committee. with Noboru rakeehita
ee vice chainen and Teteuo Oeewa ae eecretary general.

It wee Zenko Suzuki of the Ohira faction who firet broeched the eubject
of a Diet dieeolution. (Prine Minieter Ohire wanted to appoint Suzuki

ea chief cebinet eecretary but thie wee not realized due to oppoeition
by the Fukuda faction).

Reaction to the Suzuki etete-ent wee eo greet that the Ohire faction it
trying to deny it by declaring that "an eeeygoing nood exiete within the
faction that the Ohire edlinietration will be of long duration. It wee
in order to pull the faction together that Suzuki epohe ae he did. Prine
Hinietcr Ohira ie not neceeearily thinking about a Diet dieeolution."

it is generally eeid that a general election too aoon after the unified
local electiona in April would be unfavorable for the LDP. If a eix-
month interin can be regarded ea being euiteble, the atrong poeeibility

exiete of a dieeolution being carried out during the extraordinary Diet
seeeion thie caning eutulm.

At the use tine, depending on how the McDonnell Douglae and 6mm ceee
develope, it ney not be poeeible to weit until then. After the cloee of
the Tokyo Suit, the political world will probably enter an urgency

period in which there ie no telling when a Diet dieeolution night auddenly
take place.

(The writer ie an edvieer to the Heinichi Newepapere and for-er chief
editorial writer).

COPYRIGHT: Heinichi Daily Newe, 1979

(:50: 1.120

1.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

EXPERTS TO STUDY BUREAUCEATIC CONCEPTS
Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY "ENS in English 26 Feb 79

[Text] Prine Hinister Haaoyoshi Ohira will organise nine brain trusts of
some 200 scholars and officials by April to give shape to the political
vision of "a nation of garden cities" and "an era of culture" which he
stressed last month in his first policy speech as prime ninister.

Ohira's approach contrasts with that of his predecessor, Takeo Pukuda, who
answered the question, 'Nho is your brain trust?" by saying, 'iwself."

Ohira's plan may come iron the advice of those close to him that the new
prime ninister must slough off conventional bureaucratic concepts as an era
of high econonic growth gives way to an age of low growth.

Ohira is expected to stress efficient use of fresh minds to strip government
policies of conservative bureaucratic ideas.

The third such brain trust, "the group to study living concerns in a
pluralizcd society," established Hedncsday, holds its first meeting Saturday.

Headed by Chikio ﬂayashi, chief of the Education Ministry’s statistical
research center, is conposcd of 19 experts including sociologists, psychol-
ogists and statisticians who will mainly study ways to translate statistics
on social trends into policies for Ohira.

'Whe group to study a plan for garden cities," headed by Tadao Unezao,
director of the National Ethnology Museum, and "the group to study overseas
economic policies," headed by Prof. Tadao Uchica of Tokyo University, have
already started research into their themes.

All the brain trusters graduated from university during 1955-19“ or are
persons of equal age.

ohirn evidently feared that free discussions night br impossible if all
group nembers were of senior stature.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the «election, tlw prime ninieter'e olden nlen rnnnitlorml keeping n
ImImu-e hulwun thu manua- oi the intellectuals and tho reelien of the
ottlciele.

By the middle of Horch. two nore groupeuone to etudy the proeotion of whet
ohire celle "pen-Pecific eooperetion" end the other to etudy veye to come).-
idete "the foundetion of the fully" ere to etert their reeeerch.

Beeidee theee five groupe. four nore ere to be orgenized. One of then ie
"the group to etudy en ere of culture."

The other three ere "the group to etudy economic unegenent in the era of
culture" end "the group to etudy generel eecurity" with will teke e new
look et the economic eide of hie fundenentel concept. end "the group to

etudy the developnent of technology" to eat-line the future of the oceene
and neturel reeourcee.

”The group to etudy the oversees econonic policiee“ ie to coeplete en urgent
report on Jenn-0.8. econonic reletione by the end of March, end enother
report on e Tokyo eunit conference by the end of Hey.

The other eeven groupe plen to coeplete their reports in June next yeer.
Thoee cloee to the print ninieter plen to have the min eel-bore of eech

group perticipete in the ectivitiee of the other to edjuet diecueeione end
conclusione.

Ohire'e posture of trying to lieten to the breed opinione of knwledgeeble
people would eeen to have populer eppeel.

But the "life cycle plen" of forner Priee Hinieter Tekeo Niki end "e blue-
print to reiee ueetul citizens (or the Zlet century" by former Prime Hinieter
Teheo Fukude ended up in enoke.

In any case, it will teke quite e long tine for the 200 brein truet newborn
to obtein reeulte.

COPYRIGHT: Helnichi Deily News, l979

C50: “20

13
ron orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SD? PLANES CAN FIRE “HE“ ATTACKED
Tokyo ASAHI EVENING "ENS in English 8 Her 79 p 3 0"

[Text] Self-defense forces' planes can. under the SD? law. use arse when

attacked by foreign planes that invade the Japanese territorial sky, accord-
ing to the govern-ant.

Answering questions in the house of Representatives' budget connittee on
Tuesday. senior officials of the cabinet legislation bureau and the defense
agency said that the use of arna in such a situation can be considered a
"necessary neaaure" as stipulated in Article 86 of the SD? Law. The
article deals with steps to be taken in the event of an aerial invasion.

Yukihisa Yoshida, a nenber of the Denocratic Socialist Party. questioned
the legal basis of the defense agency's instructions that the use of area
was one of four steps to be taken in the event of such an attack.

In reply. Atsuyuki Sesa. a defense agency counsellor. said that the ”neces-
sary measures" stipulated in Article 86 of the SD? Law neans the SOP planes
that have scranbled are required to lead any foreign planes which violate
Japanese airspace to a nearby airport or to lead then out of Japanese air-
space as promptly as possible.

But. Sass continued. if the foreign planes should forcibly resist orders.
the SDF planes are entitled to use area.

Hideo Sansda. director of the cabinet legislation bureau. supported Saaa's
opinion.

The government had previously not had a uniform opinion on whether these was
a legal basis for the use of arns by $0? planes in the event of an attack.

hirooni Kurisu, a for-er chief of staff of the 50?. was forced to resign
last year after remarking that nenbers of the SDP night be forced to take

1k
!03 OPPICIAL USE ONLY
M OIPICIAI. US! ONLY

nuprnlognl action in tho event of A national «nonsency dun to tho inade—
quacy of the 80? Law. H. was thought to have beau referring to a case
in which 80? planes Horn attacked by invading planes.

COPYRIGHT: ASMII BVEIIIN NEWS

650: 6120

15
m onxcw. us: om:
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICM.

JSP AIMS 'ro PREVENT CBITRIST-CONSBRVATIVE COALITION
Tokyo ASMII EVENING news in Englieh 7 Her 79 p 3 00

[Text] Ichio Aeukate. chair-nan of the Japan Socieliet Party. eeid on Monday
that he would adhere to the policy of preventing e coalition between the
conaervetivee end the niddle-of-the-road forcee.

Speaking at e neeting of the Foreign Correspondenta' Club of Jepan in Tokyo.
Aeuketo criticized the Clean Goverment Party (Koeaito) and the Denocratic
Socialiet Party for revealing their intention of approving the govern-ent-
propoeed budget draft for thin year if "minor" changer were made.

Even though thie atep did not bring about any agreeeent along the ruling
Liberal-Denocratic Party and the two oppoeition partiea. it in a latter
of grave importance which night create a new trend in politice here.

he eaid.

The two opposition pertiee were in danger of neglecting the people's die-
aatiefection with the govern-ant draft budget by agreeing to such a compro-
niee. according to Aauketa.

In order to prevent the recurrence of auch an inatanco. Aaukata eaid the
JSP. as a No l oppoeition party. would etrive to reinforce a joint oppoei-

tion front.

Aaukete eaid he would try to form a joint oppoeition front on every najor
policy ieaue and to torn auch a front with at many oppoaition partiea ao
poeaible. he etreaeed that hie party would beheve ea "an honorable

opposition party“ until it cooee to power.

On the Chineoe-Vietnaneee border diepute. Aaukata aaid he thought China
violated ita five-point peace principle which it has long eepoueed.

COPYRIGR‘I': ASAHI EVENING NEWS

(:50: 4120

16
roe onrcw. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOG ICAI.

'YOHIURI' 0N CRITICISM 0F OHIM'S ECONMIC POLICIES
Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 11 Mar 79 p 2 0"
[Editorial: "Japan Under Attack")

[Text) The implementation of Prime Hiniater Ohira'a econonic policies has
been criticized as contradicting Japan's pronise at the Bonn summit of
industrial nations last July. but judging from the recent atmosphere at
the provisional co-ittee of the International lionetary Fund (IMF). such
criticism seems to he easing, though voices can still be heard calling on
Japan to open its doors to specific imports.

The Japanese economy represents one-eighth of the entire global econony.
toning second in site after that of the United States.

Former Premier ‘i‘alteo Fukuda was very eager to fulfill this country‘s respon-
sibilities in the world economy, notably through his precise to achieve a
7-percent economic growth rate. but he ovarreached himself with this
pronise. and Ohirs had to withdraw from this position after he became

prine minister.

Need To check Inflation

Ohirs not only wanted to employ a different political style from that of his
predecessor. but he also needed to bolster the def icit-ridden state revenues
and prevent a recurrence of inflation.

Foreign countries, however, seemed to think he intended to renege on the
promise of international cooperation made at the Bonn su-nit and Ohirs had
to take several measures to e'liainate such a misunderstanding. with
apparent success as the m provisional conittee seems to he weakening
its criticism of Japan.

The sembera of the cmittee. however. were primarily concerned at the pros-
pects of oil price hikes in the aftermath of the Iranian revolution and
their effects on the world economy.

1?
roa onrcm. us; our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In such conditions. Japan's economic policies are sure to appear more appro-
priete, though more criticism can be expected at the coming Japan-0.3. and
Tokyo summits.

Pressures To Open the Market

While Japan's economic policies can be considered fairly successful, rhere
is still the problem of the pressure on Japan from not only the advanced
nations of Europe and the United States but also the developing countries
to open the Japanese market to a degree worthy of an economic power.

Given the slow tempo of the talks currently under way with the United States.
it is quite possible that the 0.8. Congress will pass a bill imposing a
surcharge on Japanese products, which will severely damage U.S.-Japan
relations even though President Carter is expected to veto it.

Premier Ohira has frequently said that Japan-U.S. relations are the mainstay
of his diplomatic policies, but his words and conduct regarding economic
liberalization are. nevertheless. greatly lacking in clarity and decisive-
ness.

Ohira must realize the differences between a panel of international econo-
mists. who have cool heads and a respect for economic rationality, and

the u.s. Congress. whose member: must pay heed to their electorate and so
are (orced to attack Japan for the enormous trade imbalance in the latter's
favor.

COPYRIGHT: Th5 DAILY YOHIURI

650: £120

18
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0?PICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

BRIEFS

FUKUDA DENIES RETIRING--Porner Prime Minister Taken Pukuda Monday aeenad to
suggest that he uould run in the presidential election of the Liberal-
Denocratic Party scheduled for next year. At a meeting held in a downtown
hotel in Tokyo the sane day. Pukuda said the LDP needs to be reformed.
Referring to last year‘s election for the party presidency. he said he did
not think he had been defeated by Prine Minister Hasayoshi Ohira in the
prisary election. he explained that he stepped down free a run-off in the
election partly because he vished to avoid splitting the party. Pukuds
enphatically stated that he had not retired fron political life. Observers
say this indicates that Fukuda say run in next yrsr's LDP presidential race
if circumstances pernit. Pukuda said that he hac tackled the issue of party
refers and that in order to be effective in this matter he would willingly
disbsnd his party. if so doing was required. Pukuia called for the aboli-
tion of party factions. the increase of party neubership, placing party
finances on a firm basis and the realization of a party presidential
election with participation of all party nenbers and associates. Pukuda's
crit icisn against factions in his party at the Nonday neeting folloved his
implicit criticisn against Prise Minister Ohira for his passive attitude
toward an effort to that and. which he nade at his faction seating on

20 February. [Text] [Tokyo ASAHI EVENING KENS in English 28 Feb 79 p 3 OH]

CSO: £120

19
ron onxcxlu. use ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. "8! ONLY

ECONWIC

DWESTIC BCOWIC ACTIVITXBS SROULD 3E EXPANDED
Tokyo MINICHI DAILY news in English 13 Mar 79 p 2 0|!
[Editoriah "Adjusting to Econasic Upturn"]

[Text] Preliminary data published last week by the Economic Planning Agency
showed that the gross nstional product for the October-November 1978 period
rose at an appreciable rate of 1.7 percent in real terms from the previous
quarter, or an annual rate of 7 percent.

The fourth-quarter gain--a manifestation of rapidly progressing economic
recovery since in or around last November--indicetes that the nation's
economy has finally come out of the long recession.

Despite the encouraging fourth-quarter economic picture, the general view
indicates the economy for fiscal 1978 as a whole will grow by 5.8 percent

at best, from the preceding year following rises of 1.0 percent and 0.8 per-
cent. respectively. in the April-June and July-September quarters of last
year.

The 5.8-percent rise. if it is to be so. falls short of growth targets the
goverment intended to attain in the current fiscal year. Japan "inter-
nationally pledged" 7 percent growth at first. then the government revised
the goal downward to 6 percent late last year.

what appears to be government inadequacy in setting growth goals may derive
from its efforts to avoid international criticism for low growth, but it
may invite even harsher criticism from other countries. Notwithstanding.
it must be said that the economic outlook has obviously turned for the
better.

This is because demand in the private sector has become stronger. though
belatedly, as the prime mover for sustained recovery. In fiscal 1976 and
1977, increased exports alone. and increased exports and greater government
spending for public works projects combined, acted as the prime movers of
the economy, respectively.

20
FOR OFFICIAL US! 0111.!
Under the prevailing circumstances, policy emphasis is now shifted to how
to expand domestic demand on a steady basis.

However, in step with the growing domestic demand, the nation‘s wholesale
prices, which had remained steady until last October, kept rising for
a consecutive months since November.

Bank of Japan Governor Teiichiro Horinaga is reportedly in favor 0! intro-
ducing a policy to stabilize commodity prices, in preference to one that
puts emphasis on economic recovery. The government, on its part. has made
known its intention of pursuing a policy that has a duel purpose: popping
up the economy while stabilizing prices.

It appears reasonable for the Bank of Japan to seek a price stabilization
policy. if the economy is heading for sustained recove:y, because it is

the bank's duty to stabilize the value of the currency. On this score.

it seems the government‘s plan to seek economic recovery and price stabiliza-
tion simultaneously requires that precise and detailed measures be worked out.

Of the 0.9 percent wholesale price rise in February, increases in imported
crude oil prices and overseas commodity prices, especially for nonferrous
metals. and the recent drop in the yen's value against the dollar accounted

for 0.6 percent. The remaining 0.3 percent was due mainly to domestic price
increases.

As an immediate step, the government is strongly urged to seek discontinua-
tion of some antirecession cartels-—csrtels which were approved as "emergency
measures" to prop up the economy.

The government is also urged to make greater efforts to remove possible
causes of inflation in the arena of speculative investments, such as the
real estate field, through tightened monetary policies.

Also. it is urged to place under stricter observation the price movements
of some imported agricultural and fishery products, like coffee and tuna
fish. which have seen import price declines that are not reflected in
lower domestic prices.

As for the "earlier-than-schedule" investments in the public works sector,
a government step aimed at bolstering a sagging economy. the government is
urged to adopt flexible policies, which include delays in fund allocation,
if domestic demand continues to be strong.

He are now of the opinion that the government should make greater efforts to
expand domestic economic activities, while keeping prices at bay, as it appears
that the current price management policy is appropriate for the majority of
commodities.

COPYRIGNT: Hninichi Daily News, 1979

C50: 6120
21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIM. USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

COVBRNHENT APPROVES JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF SIBBRM
Tokyo YOHIURI SHIEBUN in Japanese 20 Jan 79 p 2

[Tesé7 Since the conclusion of the Sino-Japanese Treaty of Peace and

hairy. the greatest task facing the government has been to improve relations
with the Soviet Union. The government has decided upon its basic course of
action on this issue and "will adopt substantive policies to maintain balance
between the Pan and Soviet Union by responding decisively to Soviet requests
for cooperation in the economic sector." This decision was made in connec-
tion with the approach to be taken in Prise Minister Ohira's first speech

on administrative policy to be given on 25 January. Sources very close to
the prime minister are saying. "Actual improvement in relations in the
economic sector will certainly have a favorable effect on Japanese-Soviet
political and diplomatic relations.” These sources suggested that Japan
will take a fairly positive attitude toward Siberian development projects
which the Soviet side will propose in the executive meeting of the Joint
Japanese-Soviet 2conomic Commission which opens in Tokyo on 25 February.

The Ohirs cabinet's position is that if Japanese-Soviet relations improve
steadily and Premier Kosygin's visit to Japan can be realized. then. from

a long-range perspective. it might be possible to conclude a Japanese~Soviet
long-term trade agreement.

The question of Japanese-Soviet economic cooperation directed mainly at
Siberian development had become deadlocked because of the stringent conditions
advanced by the Soviet side. in addition. the Chinese side had been pro-
posing large-scale projects. one after another. such as construction of the
Shanghai Baoshan steel plant. since the conclusion of the Sine-Japanese

peace treaty. Consequently. the question of Japanese-Soviet economic coopera-
tion had paled as an issue. As a result, relations between Japan and the
Soviet Union have been less then ideal on the economic front as well as on

the political front.

however. because of the shock of normalxaed Sine-American relations and the
rapidly changing situation in Camboida. even people within the Japanese
(bvernment are of the opinion that from the viewpoint cf stability in South-

east Asia. it is necessary to take another look at the one-sided tilt
toward the PRC.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

Further-ore. in a conversation on 16 January. Foreign Hinister Sonoda
ndaoniahed Chinese Albasssdor to Japan Fu nao about any joint Sine-Japanese
action on the Caabodian dispute by telling his that "Japan will decide its
opposition to hegelony in accordance with its own independent foreign policy."
The Soviet side announced that it wolcoaed this action. This was the first
thing since conclusion of the Sine-Japanese treaty about which the Soviet

side expressed political or diplomatic appreciation after saying that they
would consistently 'watch for specific actions in Japan's relations with

the Soviet Union." Pros the standpoint of restoring Japanese-Soviet relations.

which have cooled since the Japan-PRC t;caty. one can say that this develop-en:
provided hopeful material.

At this time. however. there is a thorny territorial issue pending between
Japan and the Soviet Union and. in addition. consideration lust be given to
avoidance of throwing cold water on the friendly relations with China which
haVe been developing rapidly. Therefore. the governaent decided to eaphasise
building up economic relations for the present.

in response. business circles say that they are ready to cooperate as far

as possible with the Japanese Govern-cat's policy. and that they are favorably
inpressed with the fact that the Soviet side is not only sending its largest
delegation to date to the executive aeeting of the Joint Japanese-Soviet
Econoaic Commission. but is also loving to prepare and propose new large-scale
projects in addition to previously proposed projects such as the Nakhodha-
Vrangel harbor expansion and construction of a paper pulp couple: at
Khabarovsk. etc. Accordingly. the key to future iapreveaent in Japanese-
Soviet relations lies in the sort of new projects the Soviet side will

present at this tins. and the Soviet side is said to be seriously intent

upon rolling back the advances ssde by the Chinese.

COPYRIGRT: Yoaiuri Shinbunsha 1979

9111
650: £105

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

ECONOMIC

JAPAN T0 FURTHER EASE EXCHANGE RESTRICTIONS
Tokyo HAINICNI DAILY NENS in English 2 Her 79 p 5 ON

[Text] The Japanese Govern-cut and the bank of Japan are sowing toward A
series of nsasures to ease foreign exchange restrictions which represent
a considerable degree of turnabout in monetary policy regarding the yen's
exchange iste. Some of the changes nay seen technical or sinor but they
are of significance.

One has to do with the bonds sold for yen in the Tokyo capitol market by
foreign governments and international agencies. (Sears. Roebuck will be
the first foreign business firn to float a bond issue here. in April).

The present regulations require that the foreign issuer convert the yen
proceeds from the bonds into dollars or other foreign currencies for
repatriation within one week. This period would be extended to one south.

The Japanese authorities permit and encourage the flotation of foreign bond
issues as one way of reducing Japan's top-heavy payments surpluses.

The longer period scans the exit of the funds nay be delayed and push
back in tine the denand for dollars in the Tokyo foreign exchange nsrket.

The practical effect for the foreign issuer is that it has more tine leeway
in selecting what it calculates would be the tine of the sost favorable
exchange rate.

The first foreign bond issue to receive the benefit of the new longer
period is likely to be the hrszilinn Government's issue of )0 billion yen
in into February.

A slnilor change will also be node on :rn loans by Jepsnese banks to
borrowers abroad.

The new monetary policy will also help the foreign banks in Japan, whose
chief source of funds for lending out here is the step accounts with their
parent banks abrosd.

2“
FOR OFIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O??lCIAL USE ONLY

Through the swap accounts. the foreign banks in Japan get foreign-currency
funds. usually Eurodollars or Asiadollars. which they convert into yen.

To check a heavy inflow of dollars from this source which would push up
the yen's exchange rate. the finance ainistry and the Bank of Japan place
ceilings on the swap accountr The total ceilings are now about $3.3
billion. and these will be raised shortly by $600 to 9700 aillion.

The Japanese Foreign Exchange Banks will get a siailar break. They borrow
Eurodollars heavily which they convert into yen for lending out in Japan.
but the ceilings on such borrowing have ..en virtually frozen since 1970.

The increase is expected to be around $200 to $100 aillion. s relatively
saall sun but nevertheless an increase.

Finally. the exchange restrictions on incoaing short-tern funds of foreign
Individuals and business fires other than *.nks were lifted last Saturday.

These were applied in November l977 as seasures to check foreign specula-
tion in the yen. when a reserve rate of 100 percent was applied on in-
creases in "free yen" nonresident accounts (yen freely convertible into
foreign exchange) and a prohibition placed on nonresident purchase of
Japanese bonds with less than five years and a south to go to aaturity.

8onresidents were also excluded earlier free buying short-tern governsant
M‘QS .

The chief illediate reasons for the new lessures are the easing of the
yen against the dollar since last Nave-her and the likelihood that the
relaxing or reeoval of the restrictions poses no danger of another sudden
rise in the yen's exchange rate.

The govern-ant is also drafting a new foreign exchange and trade law that
would scrap anny of the present controls. which have been the target of
sb-rp criticise from abroad. 2:1 1: taking vJaALU: aauauaoLtdLKVu steps. of
which the aeasores described here are part. by way of prellainary action.

basically. however. the big factor is the change in thinking of the authori-
ties about the yen's exchange aarhet.

in the past two years when the yen was rising steeply and relentlessly.
they. as well as test of business and the public. thought that the higher

yen would deal crippling blows to Japan‘s exports and produce a general
deflationary effect on the econoay.

As the yen rose. the governaent was constantly holding crisis conferences

to get in esergency isports. reduce the trade surplus and stop the climb
in the yen.

25
FOR OFFICIﬁk USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL "SB OIL?

The bank of Japan poured out vaat cues of yen to buy up billione of
doiinra in a vain effort to check the yen'e riee.

As setters turned out. nothing terrible happened. The export industry
shoved eeexing capacity to adapt to the higher yen. and poet exports
nenufaeturea plan and operate on a yen-dollar exchange rate of 180 yen.

The authoritiee have also found that the higher yen. by making the cost
of imported fuel and entertain cheaper in teree of yen. has been and is
the moat powerful factor in holding down doeeetie inflation. The higher
yen. in ehort. it good. not bed. for the economy.

Inflation in now the big worry for the policy eakera. end the higher yen
la their eoat effective inflation fighter.

Aieo. it ie the biggeat factor in holding down exports. if finally etart-

ing to gee the peyeente eurplue down to more manageable else that ehould
help ease trouble abroad.

The bank of Japan in new eeliing dollars in the Tokyo foreign exchange
market to keep the yen atrong ngainat the dollar. The yen-dollar exchange
rate [not Friday vae about 201 yen. and the target band would see. to be
in the 190 yen to 200 yen range.

COPYRIGHT: Heinichi Daily Revs. 1979

C30: 6120

26
ron orncm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-l ONLY

ECONOMIC

|J\lltlit IS EXPECTED Til DI'HAND mar: HONEY
'l‘ultyn MAlNltii'l DAILY NEWS in English 2;! Feb 79 p 2
liztliturinl: "itnuincsa Trend nntl 'Shnntn"'l

l'I't-xtl A iavorable business trend and unexpectedly
better earnings by busineu itrms are likely to
become two new elements in the annual "spring labor
oiiensive" or "Shunto." The management-labor
disputes will center on whether or not the workers can
enjoy a larger part oi the pie.

it is generally believed that labor cannot expect a
higherpay raise than the previous yearbecause oi the
uniovorable employment trend. What is diiierent
irom last year. however. is that business companies
have accumulated larger earnings this year..

Except ior such industries in a slump as shipv
building and shipping. many industrial iirms have
completed their adjustment to the low-growth
economy and have succeeded in gaining larger
earnings. in the March settlement oi accounts. these
companies which are listed In the major section oi the
Tokyo Stoclr Exchange are expected to report In-
creased esrnings and protits.

Under such circumstances. labor is expected to
demand more money by making an upward revision
oi its original pay raise demand plan. Mitsuo
Tomiaulra. secretary general oi the General Council
oi Trade Unions oi Japan «Sohyol has said that the
council would instnict aiiiliated unions to revise their
pay raise demand twoorthree percent upward.

Management. while admitting a restoration in the
business mend and higher earnings. is still cautious
and is likely to reject the labor demand. A typical
view oi the management is that “the top priority must
be given to strengthen the iinanciai strength oi
companies which has been sapped by the recession.
An easygoing pay raise would invite inﬂation and
uniavorably siiect the employment situation."

2:7
run OFFICIAL use ONLY
(lil'YKICIiT:

CS":

d120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in particular. ‘i‘aitesht Sahurada. chairman oi the
Employers Association at Japan iNibiteiren) ex-
pressed a grim view on the spring labor oiicnsive at a
recent press conierenee. Alter summer this year.
business itrms will have to iace higher costs due to an
increase at the oil price and lose their ability to pay

higher wages. hesaid.

Sakurada "emphasized that only low-geand
management Wain the present level at em-
pioyment.

Saiturads's view represents a general “theory oi
business itrms" but somewhat contradicts
Nikkeiren's view that the pay raise must be im-
plemented "in proportion to the business iirms’
earnings" and "within the limits oi the business
itrms."

We can point out that labor has apparently sup
ported an idea at tow-geared management as an
"emergency shelter." it must be remembered that
low-geared management carried out by larger
companies has resulted in an uniavorabie em-
ployment situation. i-'Iiiei=iaily among the middle
aged people. The public has criticized such a con-
tradiction.

it is true that the survival oi business itrms is
essential tor the maintenance oi employment. it is
also true that those business itrms cannot survive
wilboutastabie society.

We can understand iabor's demand tor higher
wages by taking advantage at the iavorabie business
trend but we want labor to remember that the trend
has taken place under the low-growth economy and
that wecannot expect another high economic growth.

Labor must taite into account the hiites oi crude
oil. commodity goods prices and public utility isres
which may invite another stagnation. as is pointed
out by management.

in our opinion. labor should not devote its whole
energytothewagehihebutshouidworitoutother
measures which will improve the general living
standards at worlters and also expanded cm-
pioymcnt. in other words. labor can demand an ex-
tension oi the retirement age. shorter working hours
or iuli implementation oi the ﬁve-day weelt system.

Such measures must be worked out jointly by
management and labor. They must taite advantage oi
thecurrent iavorable business trend in establishinga
mammal-labor negotiations iormuia on wages.

Mainichi Daily News, [979

Ln

FOR OFFICIAL USﬁ ONLY
ECONOMIC

mums LINCI'ZR 0N N'lT l’RtXilIRHHHNT

FOR OFFICIAL "Kl-Z ONLY

’I‘ultyu MINICIII DAILY NEWS ht English 28 Feb 79 p 5

Mn tclv lty Tnlttto ()ulttyman, Staff urttcrl

I'I't'xl I

thlitaotveuattetrtctionihe
tween Japan and the United
StatealtNIooon‘telemohtnd
Teleohooe Pubic W
tNT‘l') opens no lie
procanmnta to totelan
W moment
MM? 0r ll It tut
anothet' aeaoemat toe the
ymusmm~

The Jananeae new In
tnteattnonootnolyttuwtththe
us. demand hr opening on

annual! ttetn attitudea
towattt NIT which has been
(tantieallydetenanaluhiiytll

tattae quietly by ope-In!
mullet. m M US. this
week. Pot that m the

suiceIatelastyeat. theh‘ﬂ'

WWWM
thewtnte attack meet (at the
United States In mutation
itaelattttsthauaoantsaetosed
ninthet

M
Tu 0.8 B W the N"
innit- at 3 hence to tract:
09"! "tr allrut'd ' tllN‘tl

Japanese mutt" in Us eﬂotts
lotedttytheitatledeﬂette with
Japan.

The N11 tune came to the
lone In connection wtth the
Tokyo Round ntttttiiateraltatttt
negotiations In which it was
advocated that met"
nanotaetuma ahooid he
allowed to compete with
dune-sue manutaettwen in the
”WWW“.
coma-y.

Governmental We
whymnaotoahttneatmnt
each year. Anti In the Tokyo
tutu mutation it has been
amen that ii We!
mm I” he made
onen tom taanotaetoren.
and 2) the open tennm should
be conducted without
dlaetttnlaatlon and wtth easy-
totallowntooedoten.

ﬂowem. when It comes to
anoitcatton ot the agreed

purchases trout torelxn
mutations

At the Tokyo tum talks.
Japan and the United States
have tented between then: all
the dtiieteneea on tutu m-
thn umeuniorod-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uctn and vet on but not yet on
novernmcntniproniremem

Jopan propooee at the
meetingthnt the governmental
“Mauritius:
centraipovernmentotnotrami
W M W
muthmeououittnmmlorome
ﬂﬁmlliirnnyear.

The United Stolen has
rnnlntoined that anan ohonltt
open up all the governmental
ottlceurttioneocietntnnbertnn
rorne no and the
amounts thouin be bonded to
about moo mlllionJltMti
mmtonnyeor.

The 0.3 otienett to male

Wei procu'ernent oi
mtltﬂmtiiionayuronn

theﬂoropeanComntulty tome
Slnwmlilan

mm

Since N1? is I nubile cor-
poration under the umervlrion
oi the httuetry ot Port: nnti
Telecommunications and its
annualprnctnementnnmupto
a m on: billion yen
motto mtiltmi or on. the
handllnnotlt'l'rmionavlhl-o
other public corpornllonr.
became the hotteet inane he
lveenJapmnnntheuthlch
has very competitive. M
technology communication
eouipmentinntniry.

lnvievotthelopelrlenirone
balance and the the ot N11
Winds. the 0.8 is
pro-sum Japan to yieln The
Uis.hnsbeennpticitly critical
oi the anoneae economic
management tor its liability to
anpnn'stronerurpltnondto
attnln n 1-percent real
economic worth in this ﬁscal
year. US President Jimmy
r'arterhoscautioneo Japanese
Prime Minieter hlauyoshi
Ohm twice by pcrnennity
written letters since the latter
cnnretopoverlmoccj.

Thus. the Japanese merri-
ment reels rulnernbte and
obtinrd to ncoomoate the us

)0

demand in order to ovoid tur-
ther complication ot the
blloteraieoonomicnlottono.

(it the lift proalemenln
ubﬂlt too billion yen moon
million). purchnuo trom
toreipn communlcniion
equipment monutacturert
emotni to a meow 3.000
mllitonyenttts ntiliionioroe.
Thinlabecnunell‘l'l‘huyotrom
overreumanutacturertvhntit
cannot obtain irom authentic
communication equipment
munttncturorn

A: it line no marrﬂacttuinc
plant or itrovn. MT. lbw ita
eetobllohrnent. hna been
WWW
trom nomeoiic Mower!
inner door onlinhorntim trorn
it I. n on It has been very
reluctant to tube in the
knockers on the door tor n
nornberotrenanu.

N‘I'l’nteiotahttutiiatibey
western European countries
allotr their rm tpooto.
telephone anti telep‘aph con
porotionoi. both governmental
and private. to new New
tlcniprocorementmethonrann
ore nemonnln; to mate
telecommunications nervtcer
no exception to the ‘I‘ohyo
itoundaaeernent

Even American telephone
and Telegraph thﬂx‘l‘i. the
largent American telecom-
minimum-him
lies the Win. arm
Water: Electric miner ite
wing. proctim an almont
WNW”.
pnrticuiorly boy Western

N'I'l' h tire very mourned
about the outline: or its
proprietry htormntion ob
rained in resenrch and
development in the event ot
tree. open moron arm

The Telecom-

municntion system oonntittler
a heyrtmle or motion“ interest
antinationnineotﬂyoumen.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill OFFICIAL "SF. ONLY

Tnc Telecommunication
ayatent is an extremely nont-
ntex. litanty ieennolony-
intensive. lulu system
rewiring strict utiliy am
pieces of equipment to
minttnlnesystentstrowieaand
whine reliability. For this
reason. ntxlna oi iorcinn

hulohetninitnlanil.

Anditmwuio
be M. anectilcotton
requirements necolne

vottanlnonsandnroeedaree

ninnlnoinnttcated

To ensure eontntnent
reliabiliiyrronlreannotcnneits
at theWinntacittitea
and it will be virtually tin-
noaaible to carry cu m
Inspections oi Medicine
tacilttteaoialttnantdorreintnr
event oi onen bidding

Systems maintenance
requires lonuernt. stable
“only 0‘ more! com-
ponents and ports tor
renlacenients. minus ex-
WM and so on. Delivery
duys could nontoer nysienu
maintenance.

And onen bidding

222-22
22

i

won
them

On top oi these.
rainer cold treatment to
alumnusmmo

222
=2

M
m

31

sponsored export mission.
connreaanten. and ranking
Commerce Department oi-
ltcinlswttovtslieuaoudurtnn
the last at: months or an N11
eatabllsnrd itsetl minnow

oorne treat the W
"indication" to soueeae
oarachnitnn oi ranking N‘l'l'
otﬂceniosotneﬁoonoooiea
mmmm.

concentration ot telecon-
anonicatioo anonratas and
snow We“
in Praldent Cam’s none
siaieoiGnerua

Moreover. such meter
switching annaraius
anon-lecturers as NBC.
Fujitsu. Ottt Electric and
iitioeni are also wonder

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030053-9

FUR lII-‘l'll'Ml. "RI-I thl.Y

develop us on W
computer "om" to: data
communlcatlm. Fullm. NET.
and llllacltl parlklpatcd u the
ptolact. haacllttlna both
lWMlW.

and IBM ta madlly matting
marathon lot mm It:
on data commutation
unmmmwvmm
888 (Satelllte Banana
Sydana). _ _

At any rate. the Japan!
met-nun ls platinum to ac-
eamudate tho 0.8. demand
bymatluNTl‘opaawtoM
actual ol lta Who-yea

“MW.

But then cud mat» the
ledﬂuthathlddhatuaetm
andactnalwdaaatuaotm.

- mlllytaa ll» rule m at
mulaaan'amdewﬂu
alth the 05 Thus. NTI’ may
well hat-one W symbol at
tumuxmmaam

la the bllatetal ttade

.. muons. am an m a
mummw
tau year an m atattm as
compute: and Illa tanll
mm law minions
at «an mm. but. and
leather

ln thls llﬂt. the latest MT
m mold be mudmd as a
step at the mate. aun
looming tnpllcattm Ina! the
NT? tau: would not be the last
cmmmowmum
dtaatically slashes Japan's
trad: sat-ﬂu Mott the 9mm-
umtlslet mm the (15. la
swag. What. that. vtll man
out”

(tnl'Yltltill‘l': Phlnlclnl Daily News. I979

CS": 6' 20

32
ml: omcw. usr: omx

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00860R000100030063-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030053-9

ECONOMIC

FOR (ll'l-‘ICIAI. llSl’. ONLY

'MlﬂlCill‘ EDITORIAL MR3 0.5. FOR m; DEMAND 0" m

Tokyo wimcm mm mm in English 1 Mar 79 p 2

li-hlituriul:

[Text I

"Knocking on 'Cloncil Doors

Japan-v.8. egottations on whether the Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation iN‘l'l'i
ahould open its doors wider to ionign-made
telecommunication products and equipment. 0.8.-
made in particular. are under way In Washington.

Past taiira in the Tokyo Round oi multilateral
trade negotiations in Geneva dealt with the Japanese
government's purchase oi more ioreign products and
equipment in general. not only purchase by N'rr.

Siliaequently. however. attention was iocused
primarily on NTT's closed policy toward ioreign
products. a policy regarded by ioreign countries as
symbolic oi the closed nature oi the Japanese market
an a whole.

it maybetruethattheJapaneaemarltetisnotas
widely open as aome iorelgn countries wish. This is
especially so in the sectors oi agricultural products
and international iinancing.

As has been repeatedly emphasized at past in-
ternational conierences. recognition oi the economic

interdependence among countries has signiilcantly
increased.

in this content. Japan's economic structure. built
with what may be called "an lslander's way oi
thinking. should undergo constant review and im-
provement.

However. the improvement oi Japan's economic
structureandtbetssueoiii‘ﬂf'a _ .
of forum products should be dealt as two dii-
ferene uattera.

33
mn nrricm. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00860R000100030063-9
l-‘0t( OFFICIAL UM: ONLY

This is because N‘i‘T's doors are closed even to
many domestic time when It comes to purchasing.
Socalled N'ﬂ‘ “Inmiiy member" Iirms are Iavored.

Admittedly. N‘l'I‘ may find numerous advantages
In giving orders only to Its Inmiiy member com-
panies. such as in regard to product quality control
and dependable delivery dates. However. on the other
side ot the coin. N‘I'I"s procurement “through
negotiated contracts" with t-ts iamily member Iirms
tends to invite undeslred results because the Iavored
firms may become tax in some respects. Ieeilng that
they areprotectedby N'n‘.

We are oi the opinion that the procurement oi
products and equipment by public corporations
shoud be made through open tenders.

In past Japan-0.8. trade negotiations. Japan's
liberalisation of Imports oi color Iilms. reduction oi
tariiis on computers. and Increased import quotas
ior bee! and oranges have become. one after another.
major subjects oI discussion.

The us. has insisted. at various times. that each
oi these items demonstrates the diii’iculty American
products have In penetrating the Japanese market.
And now We procurement policy is a primary
subject ot negotiations with the us. But we must
point out that. untilre the abovementioned items.
telecommunications equipment is or high strategic.
value.

It is hard for us to approve of the American policy
of demanding that Japan compromise on one item
aiter another. placing Japan tn the role oi a scapegoat
In trade negotiations. ‘

Meanwhile. we fear that the Japanese govern-
ment may open the doors oi N11 to Ioreign products
without iustiiication, merely out oi political con-
siderations and to make the June Tokyo summit
meeting of advanced democracies a success.

We believe it Is imperative and essential tor the
public corporations to look iarther atield in procuring
products and equipment. and to be ready to accept
them It they have advantages in cost and eillciency.

We want the government to come up with ap-
propriate policies to rectiiy the Japan-US. trade
Imbalance — the biggest Issue pending between the
two nations - Irorn an overall viewpoint.

A policy review in this regard. for government
otltces. and agencies and public corporations in ad-
dition to NTI‘. on the purchase oi Ioreign products
would beasteptowardthtsend.JapanlagsIarbahind
Emopeancotmtriesandthe U.S. inthissector.

3h
EOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We niao no urgent mod to improve. inrougn
druiic momma. the nation'a distribution ayaiem.
which was many because of its highly complicated
ail-nettle. and pmduct inspection standards. Above
all, we can for steady governinent etioris to build up a
sound economic structure (or Japan.

lciui Daily News, 1979

35
FOR orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

EdwNOMlC

SHIPPING FIRMS PLAN EXPERIMENTAL CHINA SAILINGS
Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY REVS in English 10 War 79 p 5 09

[Text] Japanese shipping firms plan to conduct cargoline service in the
Japan-China route on an experimental basis from May to prepars for start
of regular service possibly in the latter half of next year.

lhis was revealed Thursday by Moiol Sagan. a director of Daiichi Chuo Kisan
Kaisha who visited China recently as leader of a mission of the Japan-China

Shipping Transportation Council. The connril is made up of 67 shipping
firms.

Chinese shipping lines have been conducting test cargoliner sailings on the
Shanghai-Yokohina and Shanghai-Osaka-Knhv routes since October 1977 and on
the Shanghai-Ho) i-llagcya and Shanghai-\'-kohana-Kobe routes since last
October.

Nagao said his mission reached agreement with Chinese authorities on oililsr
zest sailings to be made by Japanese shipping lines from Yokohana or Kobe

to such chiense ports as Shanghai. Tianjin and Chingdno. Four sailings
monthly will he made to Tianjin and Chingdao and two monthly to Shanghai.

Ships of the b.000- to 5.500-ton cl1<s -wnod by Showa Shipping Coupsny and

10 other shipping firms will leave Jipa» at the end of every Ionth. The first
ship in scheduled to leave la:e in X33.

Japanuac and Chinese shippinr lines alt Idy are engaged in service on the
Japan-China reute on s trhu. ' h-ve under the Japan-China shipping sgrssssnt
concluded in 1973.

A tornl of 16.2 million tons of cargo ewre transported both ways in l977
with Japanese trsnpers hauling £8 percent and Chinese ships 52 percent.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News, I979

C50: 6120

36
run OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

ECONOMIC

1701’ DUSINBSSHEN VIEW PRC CONTRACT SUSPENSIONS

Tokyo TI!!! DAILY YWIURI in English 7 Her 79 p S W

lTextl ‘l'hree prominent Japanese businessmen gave their interpretations last
week of what motivated Beijing's "surprise" suspension of expensive plant
purchases it contracted with Japanese business interests in December 1978.

Sumio ﬂora. ear-president and now top adviser to the Bank of Tokyo. told the
press: "it is all too clear that Beijing has come to face the need to
reconsider its current ambitious economic modernisation program because it
is in a difficult economic dile-sa."

lle identified the “lens as China's inability to pay for massive plant and
equipment imports and its new need for money for its armed conflict with
Vietnam.

Chins seems to have decided to “beer so great an economic burden (of war)
taht it could no longer carry on its economic reconstruction drive at the
tremendous tempo seen in the pest.” liars said. he could hardly visualise
on end to the controversial China-Vietnam war in a reasonably short period
of time. he added.

Yugoro Komatsu, a top adviser to Kobe Steel Ltd. and former vice minister
of International Trade. shrugged off in his statement to the press explana-
tions that seek to dissociate the effects of China's military clash with
Vietnam from the program of its economic modernization program.

To try to deny such connections between the war and that program is "totally
unreasonable." he emphasized. "Even before the war broke out, we had been
uneasy as to how BeiJizgcould pay for its massive plant purchases from
Japan. the United States and advanced nations and still attain its economic
modernization program at the great speed it indicated." he recalled.

Slnigeo Negano. president of the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
recalling that "the United States spent no less than $50 billion a year at

37
re: ontcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a certain stage of the Vietnam war," reasoned that Beijing finds it "inevit-

able to reexamine how Iuch of its money could be allocated to lta econonic
reconstruction progrss" in face of the war with Vietnsn.

Nagano said he preferred to think Beijing has atarted to reexenine the
priorities along its nulerous economic modernization projects. He disaissed

the possibility of it being a bargaining tactic to beat down the pricea of
such contracts.

Incidentally. Nagano bleaed the Japanese business con-unity itself for the

serious coasercisl ispact on Japan iron the abrupt contract suspension
by China.

"They have been just too elated over the China trade been when they should
have been careful enough to study every trade deal with china fro- three

angles: material supply. availability of technology and solvency of the
partner." he esphasixsd.

In this connection. Here said all Japanese businesssen faced with the new

dcvelopscnt should be thoughtful enough to offer to Beijing whatever coopera-

tion they could in reviewing the contracts if such reexamination is neces-
sary.

COPYRIGHT: TﬂE DAILY YOHIURI

C80: blZO

38
FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

BCONMIC

BRIEPS

SURPLUS MUST be CUT-dank oi Japan Governor Teiichiro Horinaga eeid Japan
nuat continue ita afforta to reduce ita current account aurplua to a
reaaonable level. he told nova-en upon returning iron an laternetional
Monetary Fund (tar) interiu co—ittee neetin; Sunday night that Japan did
not cone under harah criticien for ita trade and econoeic policiee. Sane
tee-here of the co-ittae urged Japan to take additional neaaurua to reflate
ite economy. but others aaid it would not be good to preaaure a aurplua
country. with large budget daficita. to correct its balance of pay-cote
dlurquilibriu in a short period of tine. horinaga said. He aaid eoat
nenbers appreciated the efforta being nade by the Japanaao Govern-ant to
pull ita cconony out of the receaaion while trying to avoid a resurgence
of inflation. However. Japan Iuat continue to lake a great effort to
reduce the aurplue through a nmbar of neaeuree. such an the opening [of]
ita market wider to inporta. Horinega eaid. [Text] [Tokyo rue DAILY YNIURI
in Engliah 13 liar 79 p I. 09]

C50: 6120

39
ran orncm. us: 0qu
l-‘Gl OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCI BNCE AND taulnuwm

NUCLEAR ENERGY POLICY PLACES EKPIIASIS on WI'URE

Tokyo MAINICIII MILY NBHS tn l-anl‘ah 7 Feb 79 p 2

“XIII lurid]:

th‘Xl I

"Japan-0.5. Nuclear Talks”)

Based on the Nuclear Nonpmllteratlon Act whlch
went Into sheet In the United States In March last
year. Japanese and Amerlcan otIIcIaIs have held
prellmlnary tallts In Tokyo on the possthte revIslon ot
the Japanotl.s. Atomlc Energy Agreement.

What attracted our attentlon. In connectlon with
tuture Japanese nuclear energy problems was
"trouble“ at the spent nuclear tuel treatment IacIlIIy
at Total Mura. Agreement was reached In September
1977 that to to” tonsot plutonIum would be extracted
over a two-year perIod at the IacIlIty.

Japan's nuclear potlcy aIrns at eIIectIve use 0!
urantum resources through the eatabltshment or a
long-range nuclear tuel cycle. As a III-st step. the
Total Mura IacIIIty began trlnt operatIons In Sep-
tember 1977. In August l97tt. operatlons were
suspended due toa maltunctlon In the tubeot a steam
generator. Operattons cannot be resumed ttntll after
October thts year.

Such a delay In resumptton wtll cause a post-
ponement ot the establtshment ot the nuclear ruel
cycle. and at the same tlme hamper the start at co-
proceastng expertrnents. Japan earIIcr promised that
It would sumet a report on the experlmcnt to the
Internattonal Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluatlon con-
Ierence. whtch wIlI come to an end In the comtng tall.
We hope that the Japanese government and the
AtomIc Energy Commtsslon will clarity thetr vIews
onthtsspecIIIc problem.
commrrr:

(2310:

1612.0

A revision bill on nuclear reactors. and rclatcd
lows. are expected to be approved during the current
Diet session. The bill calls for entrusting civilian
companies with some refueling business. But. without
experiments. the construction of a second
reprocessing facility which would have seven times
the capacity of the first one. is hardly feasible.

The United States. based on the Nuclear Non.
proliferation Agreement. has proposed the conclusion
of a nuclear energy agreement apparently aimed at
turtherinlensllying regulations.

it is expected that the United States will ash
Japan to strengthen protective. measures regarding
nuclear materials and to conclude pn agreement on
enrichment 0! nuclear materials offered by the
UnitedStates

Japan has not accepted the US. proposal for
revising the agreement. but judging from talks
between the United States and European countries
and results of lNPCIeonferences. we believe that
Japan will eventually have to accept the proposal.
Here again. the attitudes of the Japanese govern-
ment and the Atomlc'snergy Commission must be
clarified. '

in recent talks in Tokyo. the United States
called for an agreement on the problems of storing
00!!! nuclear fuel. The United States said that an
internationally agreed site must be chosen. on the
earth. for the storage of spent nuclear fuel. This
proposal was in line with American policy on
nuclear nonproliferation. Japan has little space
suitable for the storage of radioactive waste. it
must be remembered that this question has also
attracted public attention in Austria and Switzero
land. if Japan accepts the concept of international
storage. Japan will lose its "independence" in this
respect.

Regarding this. the white paper on nuclear
energy in fiscal me made modest reference to

arch works on geological features and-lomattons
in span. ltalsotouched on smallscaie eap'erlments
ol disposal safety evaluation. Contrary to such
lukewarm attitudes. we notice some "tor-ward-
looltlng" policies on the possible domestic production
of fast breeder reactors.

We want to point out here that Japan's nuclear

eoeropollcy placesemphasisonthe hiture. noten
thecurrentsttuation.

minichl [buy News 1979
3'0
‘61
1'“! OFFICIAL USE OﬁLY