FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10332
18 February 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 11/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lm
18 Februa:

JAPAN REPORT
(POUO 11/82)

CONTENTS
POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAI.

Formation of New Suzuki Goverment Probed
(YOMIURI SHIMBUN. various dates)............................

SCIENCE AND TERNOIDGY

Recent J apan-Camunist Bloc Business Deals Reported
(NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN. 5 Dec 81)...........................

Soviet Robot Trade Fair
FMS Export to Bulgaria

u.s. , Japanese Semiconductor Industries Compared
(Hirmhi Self: DENSHI GIJUTSU' NOV 81) eee-eecosseeeeeeos-eee

Ajinomoto's Biotechnological MD Activities Described
(Kazuaki Taya: SHUKAN BIRION, 6 NW 81)eeeeeoeeeeeoeeeeeeoee

-a- [III-ASIA-lll

FOP ﬂl-‘ln'lﬁal llﬁl’n‘ ﬂMV
INJR OFF1C1AL USIICﬂdLY

POLITICAL am SOCIOLOGICAL

FORMATION OF NEW SUZUKI GOVBRMBNT PROBE)

Tokyo YOHIURI SHIHBUN in Japanese 2, 3, a, 6, 8 Dec 81
(Article: ”Examination of 1981 Cabinet Reshuffle"]

[2 Dec 81 p 2]

[Text] "111 Prime Minister Suzuki be reelected or will there be a new president of
the party? The reorganization of the cabinet and appointment of party officials
point toward the_"Liberal Democratic Party's Showdown in 1982" which will take
place 1 year hence. The reorganization and appointments give the impression of a
victory for the Tanaka forces symbolized by the advent of Mr Nikaido as secretary
general of the party. However, even in the'case of these personnel assignments,
which give the impression of a revival of the "Kakuei government," the outcome of
the moves is left to be seen later on. The verdict on the A11 Japan Airlines
connection in the Lockheed incident is scheduled for the beginning of the new year.
The critical stage has arrived for administrative and fiscal reforms. Haves will
be made by Nakesone (director general of the Administrative Management Agency),
Komoto (director general of the Economic Planning Agency) and new leaders. It is
safe to assume that, as Pukuda (the former prime minister) points out, there are
"signs of general turmoil" in the political situation. He shall try to trace and
examine the reorganization of the cabinet and the appointments to party posts which
contain the seeds of future developments.

"There.were those who said to stand firm and there were telephone calls which celled
me a fool or said I was tainted. I regard both as incentives for which I am
grateful...."

These words of Hr Nikaido, who had put in 5 years of loyal service since being
branded as a suspect official in the Lockheed incident in the Diet in November 1976.
What emotions might have been in his heart as he went into the first press confer-
ence given by the newly appointed top officials of the Liberal Democratic Party

just after 1230 on 30 November at Liberal Democratic Party headquarters, there was
no way of knowing. at least not from his face, which showed no concern and suppressed
all emotion.

Kakuei Tanaka (the former prime minister) greeted the day in very fine spirits.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“The newspapers say that Mr Suzuki (the prime minister) is craftier than Ohira (the
previous prime minister) was and this is completely right."

"Mr Suzuki and Mr Nikaido are identical. Whichever is prime minister, it would be
the same. (With Nikaido as secretary general) the rails are laid for Suzuki's re-
election, and therefore this government will last a long time."

Tanaka reportedly fired off one comment after another in his characteristic gravelly
voice to a group of visiting Diet members, which included (former minister of inter-
national trade and industry) Hasumi Esaki who had been a candidate for the post of
foreign minister.

At justNabout the same time that Nikaido was bathing in the camera lights at the
much publicized press conference, another "suspect official," (former vice chairman
of the Policy Affairs Research Council) Mutsuki Kato, before being persuaded of

Mr Fukuda's wishes by (Hikari Fukita) (former private secretary to Nobusuke Kishi),
had, in a nearby office of the Fukuda faction been on the point of drowning himself
in tears of remorse in despair of getting a cabinet position.

This is‘a contrast between "light" and "dark" demonstrated by Nikaido and Kato.
It may be possible to say that this contrast has given us a glimpse of the real
nature of the Suzuki government as a system of balancing devices.

n

The backing of strength is with Tanaka, who is supported by a force of 106 persons;'
this is not to say that Fukuda's strength compares unfavorably. Nevertheless,

although there is talk of a balance between Fukuda and Tanaka, this is probably no
more than a typical pretext by Suzuki, who is trying to maintain harmony in the
party and also to secure the ruling power.

The statement (by an executive in the Suzuki faction) that "of course the strength
and number of the Tanaka faction would be important if we were looking toward re-
election" serves as evidence.

There was also a self-confident statement of feeling (from an executive of the
Tanaka faction) who said: "What did Mr Fukuda do at the time of the 60-day dispute
or when the motion of nonconfidence in the cabinet was passed last year? From

Hr Suzuki's standpoint the difference between Tanaka and Fukuda is self-evident."

At 9:30 that morning. Fukuda had a final session on the Kate question with Suzuki,

who had come to pay a courtesy call at Fukuda's private residnece at Nozawa in
Tokyo .

Fukuda said: "What happened to Mr Kato's receiving a post in the cabinet? There
was, I believe a request made earlier."

Suzuki answered: "I want to put that off this time as far as the cabinet is con-
cerned.. I will give him a party post."

Fukuda replied: "As far as the question of being suspect is concerned, I an un-

convinced by the idea that the post of secretary general of the party is open but
a position in the cabinet is not."

FOR OFFICIAL USE "NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suzuki said: "The party and the cabinet are different."

There is pressure built up in connection with the handling of Nikaido and Kate.
Furthermore, the way Suzuki has acted in regard to the handling of suspect officials,
where public opinion is severely critical, can be described, as even Tanaka says.

in the single word, "crafty." By cutting off only Kato, Suzuki has emphasized the
issue.

Looking only at the superficial phenomena, it might seem as though "there are cracks
in the Suzuki-Tanaka-Pukuda arrangement" and that "Fukuda has dropped out of the
mainstream." However, Fukuda is a man of great experience who led his own govern-
ment and. as Tanaka's rival, kept the Liberal Democratic Party internally divided

in two for many years. He knows very well where the heart of the three factions
making up the power called the Suzuki system is to be found.

One day in late September, Pukuda expressed the following views to a close associate
who visited his private residence.

"With his eye on reelection, Mr Suzuki will probably increase his old leaning toward
Tanaka. It is safe to assume that he will also prepare his forces for the coming
storm (judgment in the Lockheed case, etc) and ask for Nikaido as secretary general
of the party. Nikaido is a straightforward person and it will not matter that he 0
becomes secretary general. 'Balance' will be the problem."

Mr Nikaido becomes secretary general by a quick, clean decision with no particular
opposition within the party,while a heartbroken Mr Fukuda has been made to play a
profitlesa role, that of seeming to have argued for inclusion of Kato in the cabinet
while preaching political reform.

Later that day, fa. from the whirlwind blowing around the prime minister's residence
and the uproar in the Diet, Mr Pukuda was riding through the middle of town in the
gathering dusk. He assumed the pose, arms folded and eyes closed, which he always
assumes when thinking about things, and began to listen. Reportedly, what he heard
was the following radio news commentary discussing the reorganization.

"Prime Minister Suzuki's personnel actions which put Mr Nikaido of the Tanaka fac-
tion into a vital party post are unconvincing to former Prime Minister Fukuda, who
had made a scene over inclusion of Mr Kate in the cabinet. It can probably be
said that everything in the reorganization went Mr 1anaka's way."

[3 Dec 81 p 2]

[Text] In the final analysis. Nikaido's assumption of office as secretary general
of the Liberal Democratic Party, to which (former Prime Minister) Pukuda acquiesed.
had been (former Prime Minister) Tanaka's objective from the start. when did the
prime minister resolve to play this dangerous card and through what process did
Fukuda and Tanaka come to a tacit understanding regarding Nikaido?

0n the morning of 17 October, during the (Shichikendo) festival which was held at
the former residence of Shigeru Yoshida at Ciao in Kanagawa, Tanaka, who apparently
had arrived early and had to wait for Suzuki who came late, disappeared with Suzuki
into one of the rooms of the Yoshida residence.

FOR 0FT1C1AL.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The two men are-said to have sat beside one another on a sofa and to have eaten
candy while they talked. The conversation lasted about 10 minutes.

Tanaka said: "' am willing to cooperate with you on your reelection."

Suzuki said: "I would be much indebted to you.“

Tanaka said: "However, I would like you to do something appropriate for Nikaido."
Suzuki answered: "That is no cause for concern. Please. leave it to me."

Tanaka was in good spirits. That evening he spoke to the leading people of his
faction who had come to his home at Mejiro in Tokyo. "It isfdccided that Nikaido
will be secretary general. Next year. with Nikaido, we will be prepared for the
election. Then, the year after next, there will be the double election for both
houses of the Diet."

The first one to catch on to the "plot" in this talk between Suzuki and Tanaka was
"sharp-eared Rokusan"--(Chairman) Rokusuke Tanaka (of the Liberal Democratic Party's
Polich Affairs Research Council) who belongs to the Suzuki factions. At the time,
Rokusuke Tanaka observed: “It seems to have been a very important consultation.
Even Kakuei Tanaka spoke freely.“

The Tanaka faction, having made it definite that "Nikaido would be secretary general,"
turned around and began a diversionary tactic by spreading the false report that "it
would be fine for Nikaido to remain in the position of chairman of the Executive
Council; the question is one of having four new people in the cabinet."

The decision on the All Japan Airlines connection in the Lockheed incident was
coming up. Then, the verdict on Tanaka would be given around November of next
year. Finally. the prized post of secretary general had been captured to protect
the party and the faction from a whirlwind of confusion. Even with great reserve,
one could probably say this was very much to be expected.

Tanaka is said to have first talked about "Secretary General Nikaido" on the evening
of 11 November at a meeting with (former Director General of the Defense Agency)
Shin Kanemaru. (former Minister of Finance) Niboru Takeshita and (former Minister
of Health and Welfare) Tatsuo Ozaws.

Pukuda tended early toward the thinking: "If the secretary general is to come from
the Tanaka faction, Kanemaru would be best, but if that is not possible it will have
to be Nikaido; we will not fight." However, Fukuda tried to avoid expressing this
attitude in public.

This was probably because Fukuda had the faint expectation that "Suzuki might act-
ually intend to favor Tanaka, who is saddled with the Lockheed affair, and might
play the Nikaido card" (sources close to Fukuds). Puknda repeatedly held talks
about political reform and elimination of the concentration of power. Possibly
because of misreadings of Fukuda's mind, false rumors circulated within the Liberal
Democratic Party to the effect that "Fukuda seems opposed to Nikaido" and "Fukuda
wants Abe or Kanemaru" for Minister of International Trade and Industry.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 25 November. after (Director General of the AdministrntIVc Management Agency)
Nakasone, (Director General of the Economic Planning Agency) Komoto, (Director
General of the Science and Technology Agency) Nakagswa and others in the party had
been convinced to accept Nikaido, a messenger came from Fukuda to the camp of
Kanemaru, who was both friendly and a leading official in the Tanaka faction.

"Mr Fukuda considers that Mr Kanemaru would be ideal as secretary general; but he
is not opposed to Mr Nikaido for that post."

It seems that, from the start, Pukuda did not have Abe in mind. Kane-aru declined
politely as follows: "Thank you very much for your attitude. However, there is
a question of seniority involved in the matter. The stability of the faction will
be upset if Mr Nikaido is not chosen."

The messenger then reported Fukuda's wishes to Nikaido.

It will have to be Nikaido; we will not oppose Tanaka again. This "harmonious"
reaction on Pukuda's part at this time is not necessarily complete acceptance of
the status quo.

Looking at the undercurrent of "great confusion on the earth," of which Mr Pukuda
speaks, one has a lingering sense of the fact that he alone has not stained his hands
in any way in the playing of the Nikaido trump card, which could have good or bad
consequences.

It is not without reason that the Tanaka side is wary. They say: "In the future
Fukuda must be watched."

[3 Dec 81 p 2]

{Text} There are two keys to understanding the secrets in the heart of (former
Prime Minister) Takeo Fukuda which eluded those who had expected the old fight be-
tween Pukuda and Tanska to flare up again. One is the idea of "dealing with all
internal and external situations with the whole party as one entity" which Mr Pukuda
never tires of repeating. The other is the long-cherished desire for a "restora-
tion" of Fukuda which is still at work deep inside the political world.

(Director General) Ichiro Nakagawa (of the Science and Technology Agency) analyzes,
as follows, Fukuda's attitude in accepting Nikaido as secretary general of the
Liberal Democratic Party:

"He is tired of fighting. In the 40-day contest the year before last and at the
time of (then) Prime Minister Ohira's death. Fukuda provoked the fight. Mr Fukuda
is probably tired."

Mr Nakagawa himself seems to have had a secret blueprint in the early stages of the
drama of this reorganization. According to people connected with him, the blue-
print was this:

"If the Tanaka faction proposes Nikaido as secretary general, the Fukuda faction
will push Shintaro Abe for Minister of International Trade and Industry as a rival
candidate. The two will cancel one another out and (former Director General of the
Defense Agency) Kanemaru. who is a leading official in the Tanaka faction, will
rise quickly to the surface.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nakagawa approached Fukuda and Kanemaru, the person selected, with this concept.
However, Kanemaru, having learned from experience in friction with (former Prime

Minister) Kakuei Tanaka, did not go along with the idea, and Fukuda reportedly
only laughed.‘

Last year at the time of the elections to both upper and lower houses of the Diet
which were complicated by the passage of the resolution of nonconfidence in the
cabinet and the sudden death of Prime Minister Ohira, there was a conspiracy among
Fukuda, (former Prime Minister) Takeo Miki, (Director General of the Economic
Planning Agency) Toshio Komoto, Nakagawa and Abe.

It is said that with the idea of a new party organization this conspiracy had gone
as far as primately deciding on a lineup which would have had "Knmoto as president,
Abe as vice president, and Nakagawa as secretary general." Fukuda and Niki had been
expected to hold posts as advisers. However, this plan, too, which went to the

very last moment, was utterly destroyed by a word from cautious Mr Fukuda.

Fukuda said at one point: ”It would be awkward to fight. Please wait until Mr Ohira
has been dead for 49 days." It is safe to say that in these words there was already
an original image of Mr Fukuda's psychology in not opposing Nikaido to the point of
engaging the Tanaka forces in a fight.

Despite repeated disavowals by Fukuda, the argument for his restoration is deep
rooted and does not go away. The more Suzuki and (former Foreign Minister) Sunao
Sonoda commit blunders in foreign affairs, the sharper the jabs from sympathizers
(former Prime Minister) Nobusuke Kishi and Fukuda. "He will have a post-Suzuki
transition from Tanaka to Fukuda." "Suzuki seems to intend to keep going. He will
have to learn his place." (Kishi)

(Chairman Rokusuke) Tanaka (of the Policy Affairs Research Council). who is a
member of the Suzuki faction but is also close to Kishi, has given warning signals
about these symptoms and has urged Suzuki to be careful. He has told Suzuki:

"(Mr Fukuda) is very interested). He will be dangerous next year."

while Kanemaru is a leading member of the Tanaka faction, he is a person whose
sympathies are more with Fukuda than with Suzuki. He certainly senses this whirl—
wind of speculation which surrounds Fukuda and, on 7 November, finding himself
sharing a seat with Fukuda on the Bullet Train, he pressed for information.

Kanemaru said: "There is someone who came to me and said that Suzuki is bad for
Japanese-American and Japanese-Korean relations and that you would be the best in
these areas. What this person says...."

Fukuda said: "Japanese-American and Japanese-Korean relations are worrisome and
this cannot be helped. However, at this time the whole party should work as one
rather than create a commotion."

Kanemaru'a decision at this point in time was" "That is not what he wants." How—
ever, there is a year left before the party president's term expires next November.
But what if the political situation were to be convulsed by difficult problems in

foreign affairs and the verdict in the Lockheed affair, Suzuki were to falter and,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

on top of that, moves by Komoto and (Director General) Yasuhiro Nakasone (of the
Administrative Management Agency), who are aiming at a post-Suzuki government, were
suddenly to be compounded? There would be no basis for nipping a restoration of
Fukuda in the bud.

What would the largest force in the party do then about its obligation(?) to Fukuda.
who quietly allowed Nikaido to become secretary general? The choice which Fukuda
make in these personnel assignments contains many possibilities.

Miki, once Pukuda's staunch friend. is now thinking very hard: "So, Fukuda made
no move. Then there is something fishy."

[6 Dec 81 p 2]

[Text] Did (Prime Minister) Suzuki’s heart ever waiver after he had settled with
(former Prime Minister) Tanaka on 16 October (at the Suzuki-Tanaka talk at
(Shichikendo) that Nikaido was to be secretary general of the Liberal Democratic
Party? It is probably correct to think that Suzuki did waiver.

This would have been during the period following the shocking testimony of Enomoto's
former wife (26 October) regarding the Lockheed affair and the Oaano verdict, which
left a premonition of a conviction in Tanaka's first trial.

"That is distressing,” said (former Minister of Health and Helfare) Kunikichi Saito,
a leading member of the Suzuki faction. If Saito was nervous about what (former
Prime Minister) Fukuda's side would do, the fact was substantiated when speculation
circulated from those around the chief cabinet secretary, Miyasawa, who said: "The
prime minister is worried about public opinion." and "now Nikaido is finished."

Fortunately for Suzuki, Fukuda was in Beijing just at the time Enomoto's former wife
appeared in court as a witness.

The situation was right for blocking Nikaido but, besides being absent, Fukuda had
no means of breaking through the common front presented by Suzuki and Tanaka.
Suzuki, who sensed that, public opinion aside, the spirit of opposition to Nikaido
inside the party was extremely weak, suddenly became bullish.

In mid-November, he had the following conversation with an old friend who had come
to visit at his home in Tokyo.

The friend: ”There are too many problems involved in using Nikaido. The judgment
on the All Japan Airlines connection with the Lockheed affair and the verdict on
Tanaka will probably take place next year. Can you get through that difficult
situation with Nikaido at the forefront of the party?

Suzuki, facing to the side, said nothing.

The friend: "Would you, as prime minister looking for reelection, not be hurt.
too?"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suzuki: "It is all right. Nikaido has suffered as he has (because of the ques-
tion of being suspect in the Lockheed affair). Is that not enough?"

Suzuki's firm resolve was in time comunicated to Fukuda, of course, as well as
those such as (former Prime Minister) Niki and (Director General of the Science and
Technology Agency) Nakagawa who are inclined toward rebellion.

For Suzuki, then, was the selection of Nikaido a matter of accepting, without
recourse, an order thrust upon him by Tanaka? 0n the evening of 21 November a
leading member of the Suzuki faction talked about the situation in this regard.

"From the prime minister's point of View. the big problem is the existence of the
Fukuda-Tanaka situation. MoreoVer, Fukuda wants very much to return to power. On

the other hand, the Tanaka faction has its hands full with the Lockheed affair. In

such a case, was the best policy not to aim at reelection by promoting Nikaido for
the secretary general's position? Nakasone and Komoto are not considerations."

This is not the only thing in the picture. In Nikaido, Suzuki will have a powerful
weapon who is close to (Chairman of the Koneito) Yoshikatsu Takeiri and (Chairman of
the Democratic Socialist Party) Ryosaku Sssaki and who can talk frankly with them

about a political reorganization which would include the Liberal Democratic Party
and political centriats.

The roots of plans of this kind of Liberal Democrats and centrists go deep. (Former
Prime Minister) Ohira and Suzuki both participated in this plan with Nikaido in the
past. Bearing in mind the difficulties of the past, the 40-day struggle and the
passage of the resolution and nonconfidence in the cabinet, might Suzuki not have
confidently played the trump card of making Nikaido secretary general. with the idea
of getting sufficiently in step with Tanaka and then also drawing the political
center into his camp to stabilize the political situation?

If this were accomplished, the chances for Fukuda's coming back would be dead, and
even on the brink of a breakdown in the party, danger could be avoided.

Nikaido does not try to say a lot about contacts with the political center; he
merely says: "We live in the same Japanese economy, so....”

On 27 November, (former Prime Minister) Nobusuke Kichi, who is close to Fukuda,
erupted in criticism of Suzuki, who had moved ahead with a bold strategy for reelec-
tion with Nikaido as his trump card in the post of secretary general.

"why make personnel changes? I do not understand the reasons. It is fine to re-
place (previous Poreign Minister) Sonoda because his thinking is not in agreement
with Suzuki's or if there is some other purpose, but...."

"So Suzuki is still at it. Next year he will have been in office 2 and 1/2 years.
That has to be considered unexpected good luck."

It may be that Suzuki, who has looked not only within his party but also among the
political centrists, is the one who clearly sees into the mysteries of the current
era.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[8 Dec 81 p 2]

[Text] It was 1 pm on the afternoon of 29 November, the day before the reorganiza-
tion of the cabinet. (Chairman of the Liberal Democratic Party's Policy Affairs
Research Council) Rokusuke Tanaka was watching the television program Amateur
Singers on the Air, when his telephone rang.

"Is that you, Rokusan? I want to ask you to be chairman of the Policy Affairs
Research Council this time."

Then, on the other end of the line, Prime Minister Suzuki explained the schedule
of the Liberal Democratic Party's Executive Council which would decide upon the
three new people for the party's top posts. Rokusuke Tsnsks, however, could not
hold back a flood of tears and was in no condition to hear any more of what Suzuki
was saying.

"I will remain in my post (as Minister of International Trade and Industry) or I
will take the post of chairman of the Policy Affairs Research Council or, at worst,
chief cabinet secretary. Just watch!"

"I, too, am a politician. whether at Shiroyama or at Tawarasaks, when the time
comes to act, (like Saigo Takamori) I will act."

Tanaka had not stopped making public statements, but it is safe to say that he had
had a series of uneasy days filled with equal parts of confidence and anxiety while
his rivals in the Suzuki faction, Chief Cabinet Secretary (Kiicki) Miyazawa and his
uncle (Minister of Education Meiji) Ogaws, even tried to hold him in check by say-
ing" "Rokuauke will neither remain in his post nor get one of the three top party
positions. The most he will get is chairmanship of the Diet Policy Committee."

Disorder in the Suzuki faction, both in terms of "disarray" and in terms of the
rivalry among Miyazawa, Ogawa and Tanaka, had been the laughing stock of the other
faction. It had been so serious that there had been such speculation as the remark:
"Rokusukie has been bragging that Ohira was a threat to (Maeo) and Suzuki was a
threat to Ohira; this is a tradition (of the Suzuki faction)."

Suzuki was crafty enough to read the undercurrents within the party and successfully
carry off personnel assignments in which, just as he intended, he boxed in the new
leaders, not to mention Nakasone and Komoto, by pushing through the appointment of
Nikaido as secretary general of the party. The confusion on his own doorstep, which
is in contrast to his success, can only be called strange.

However, for Tanaka, "a new leader who started late" (a senior without a faction),
this was a critical juncture. If he were at this point to be left without a post,
he could be forced to dissolve the "New Generation Research Society" which he had
formed by drawing together middle level and younger members since he attained the
rank of Minister of International Trade and Industry.

On 25 November, he went by himself to Suzuki to plead.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l lSI-I ONLY

(Rokusuke) Tanaks: “Today I have come on my own behalf. You have never seemed more
distant than at this time. I have never said about Mr Hiyazaws or Mr Ogawa that
they should have no posts at all. Is it no: abusive for them to be saying this?"

Suzuki: "I understand, Rokusan. I will not do anything bad."

They talked about shared memories of the days of the Ohira cabinet and about topics
which had been current when the Suzuki government was formed; according to people
close to the two men: "It was a conversation in which they shared the joys and
sorrows of life."

Has this direct appeal by Tanaka effective or was Suzuki overwhelmed by the strength
of the "Rokusuke faction" (Ogawa's term) which was ready to bolt from his fold if
ignored?

Whatever may be the correct answer, on the evening of 25 November, Suzuki held a
l and 1/2 hour telephone consultation with his chief lieutenant, (former Minister
of Health and welfare) Kunikichi Saito, and in the classic sense of the tail
wagging the dog, the selection of Tanaka as one of the three top party officials
was made (as Saito said) "for the sake of peace and solidarity in the faction and
for the purpose of being the party president's faction once again."

It can probably be said that Tanaka's ability to act and his sense of anticipation
on the battlefield bore fruit; Suzuki's choices for the post of chairman of the
Policy Affairs Research Council were reportedly Hiyazawa first and Ogawa second.

The aftershocks continue even after the reorganization of the cabinet. 0n the
afternoon of 2 December, senior members of the faction, Iwazo Kaneko, (Naganori)
Koyama and Ippei Kaneko gathered in the Suzuki faction's office and joined together
in censuring Saito. They said: "Assigning personnel along the Saito-Rokusuke
line is no good." "At this rate, the Suzuki faction will end up being taken over
by the Tanaka faction." (Note: Saito and (Rokusuke) Tanaka are close to former
Prime Minister Tanaka.)

Thus went the "30-day struggle" (former Prime Minister Fukuda's term) over personnel
selections which befell the Suzuki faction. There is no proof that the situation
will be settled later on when the faction approaches the moment of truth in the
issue of Suzuki's reelection. This, in a sense, is a posture symbolic of the
Liberal Democratic Party, shaken by the emergence of new leaders.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1981

9111
C80: 4105/37

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

RECENT JAPAN-COMMUNIST BLOC BUSINESS DEALS REPORTED
Soviet Robot Trade Fair
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 5 Dec 81 p 6

[Text] The Soviet government has recently determined to hold an "International
Industrial Robot Fair" this coming October in Leningrad, and has strongly urged
attendance upon various Japanese industrial robot makers. Originally. it planned
to hold a "Japanese Industrial Robot Pair" in Moscow, but this idea was modified
and changed to a fair with participation from countries all over the world. This
will be the largest scale robot exhibition ever held in the communist sphere.
Japan's robot makers see the prospects of concluding large scale deals as excel-
lent, and are ready to accept the invitation with enthusiasm.

The planned Soviet robot fair will be held for 10 days, from 18-27 October 1981.
Exhibits are expected to include manipulators and higher level robots, PMS (flex-
ible manufacturing system) and CAD (computer aided design) systems which use
robots, and related components and jigs and tools. Varieties of robots comprise
the whole range from welding and painting robots to transporting, assembly, and
inspecting robots. Additionally, displays of "specialty robots" for the mining,
civil engineering and construction. agriculture. and transportation industries
are also requested. There is a particularly great interest in intelligent robots.

Japan's robot makers were previously informed by the Soviets through the Japan
Industrial Robot Manufacturers Association (Yoshio Ando, president) that the
Soviets are going to sponsor the "Japanese Industrial Robot Fair" and they wish
as many Japanese companies as possible will attend. Now, the Soviets have con-
siderably expanded this undertaking beyond the original proposal,'and formally
requested the association to participate. The Soviets have invited participation
by 36 Japanese robot makers. including Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Yasukawa Elec-
tric Manufacturing Company, Hitachi, Ltd, and Fujitsu Fanuc, and have appended a
list of items they would like displayed.

The Japan Industrial Robot Manufacturers Association is polling its members as to
whether they plan to attend. As it is expected that the number of participating
firms will be large, the association will ask the Japan External Trade Organiza-
tion (JETRO) to be a point of contact and take necessary procedures for the ex-
hibits. The association is planning to ascertain by the end of this year as to
how many firms will attend the fair and to inform the Soviet government of this
next spring.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan is, literally, the "robot kingdom," possessing about 70 percent of the
world's robots. Consequently, the Soviet government has taken note of this robot
technology, and has proposed technological exchanges with Mitsubishi Heavy Indus-
tries. However, so far as the export of robots is concerned, only Kawasaki Heavy
Industries has once delivered a large number of robots for automobile factories.
After that there are only isolated examples of the export of a small number of
robots. The probability seems high to the Japanese firms that, since this is an
untouched market, the fair to be held in Leningrad next fall will be an oppor-
tunity to inaugurate export deals with the USSR with one effort.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizsi Shimbunsha 1981
FMS Export to Bulgaria
Tokyo NIKKEI SANCYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 5 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] The first large export deal for an FMS (flexible manufacturing system),
which might be called the manufacturing system of the future. has come to Japan
from Bulgaria. According to industry sources, the Bulgarian Ministry of Elec-
tronic Machine Manufacturing has made a purchase inquiry with Hitachi Seiki Com-
pany, Ltd, a major maker of manufacturing machinery, about a large scale FMS cen-
tered on 30 MC (manufacturing center), a compound manufacturing machine, and in-
cluding automatic conveyors, computer systems, and so on. Hitachi Seiki's aim

is to win the contract for the first large scale FMS plant transaction by relying
on the cooperation of Fujitsu Fanuc, Ltd, in the field of automatic conveyors,
centered on NC (numerically controlled) devices and industrial robots.

The Bulgarian Ministry of Electrical Machine Manufacturing intends to install this
FMS in a computer component factory in Sofia. Hitachi Seiki is sending a technical
report, including a blue print and a system layout, concurrent with negotiations
involving a visit to Bulgaria by company president Idegawa Kinroku. They are going
to work out the details of the price and conditions of payment in future, but when
the contract is made it is expected that the value of the order will be around

3 billion yen. According to machine tool industry sources, there have been several
deals for small scale FMS centered on two or three MC, but this is the first large
scale system of this sort. The distinctive feature of the FMS is that once in-
formation concerning 1 day's manufacturing processes is entered in the computer,
instructions are issued for each product with the mere push of a button and 24

hour production completely without workers is possible.

FMS systems have gained popularity in Japan after the completion in January of
this year by Fujitsu Fanuc of its Fuji plant (Yamanashi Prefecture), the pioneer
in all the world of mass production of robots, and Japan leads the world in the

FMS field.
The Bulgarian government intends to construct a model FMS factory, hoping to up-
grade production through rationalization of and increase of energy-saving measures

at factories, and has come to make an inquiry with Hitachi Seiki, which exported
five MC to Bulgaria in the past.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«7

However, hitashi Seiki does not have an automatic conveyor system, nor a computer
system which has industrial robots as its essential system. In contrast, Fujitsu
Fanuc is strong in computer technology, which is at the heart of NC. and robot
technology and, moreover. in the autumn of last year established in Sofia in equal
partnership with the Bulgarian government "Fanuc-machinex" and established systems
for servicing of NC devices already in place.

Because of this Hitachi Seiki is determined to obtain the full backing of Fujitsu
Panuc and, president Idegawa Kinroku will soon begin top level talks with presi-
dent Inaba Seiuemon aimed at a structure for a joint order.

FMS: A production system for automatic production on one line of small quantities
of varied items, combining industrial robots based on computers and NC production
machines.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

9898
C80: 4106/33

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR UI'I'ILIAI. Ubl: ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S., JAPANESE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRIES COMPARED

Tokyo DENSHI GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 23 Nos 12 and 13, Nov 81
[Article by Hiroshi Semi]

[No 12 pp 78-80]

[Text] Recently, the strength of the Japanese electronics industry has become
embarrassingly evident. For example, you can see it in the report recently issued
by the McIntosh Company (Table 1).

According to the report, in the world trade market dealing with electronic products
in the eighties, only the United States and Japan are on the plus side. that is,
have an excess of exports, while the European nations and other free world coun-
tries are on the minus side. that is, have an excess of imports. Another point
that draws attention is that the balance of the United States, which is on the
plus side, is showing a downward trend. That implies that the margin of favorable
trade balance is yearly being shaved off.

That probably leaves only Japan to continue to enjoy the "spring of life" and to
be merry in the world market. Japan alone is predicted to continue to have excess
exports in the coming 10 years as far as international trade in electronic products
is concerned.

0n the international market, only the made-in-Japan electronic products are on top,
far above others in the spotlight. The results of this solo performance are plain-
ly foreseeable. Various international disputes involving preeminent Japan are
likely to be invited.

The disputes are expected to be highly visible, especially between Japan and the
United States, the two countries with a favorable international trade balance. It
is a matter of course that a strong Japan should be taxed for its success. That
shows not only how the United States but all other countries in the world appre-
ciate the operation of Japanese industries and have great expectations of us.

On the other hand, the myth of Japanese operations that support a strong Japan
particularly attracts the interest of Europe and America. Giving a clear defini-
tion from a very limited field of vision, what attracts them is the secret of our
industrial productivity which spews out a mass of good, reliable products exactly
as planned and scheduled. Is it also the mystery of the actual production lines
which makes the renowned productivity possible that interests them?

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKﬂAl.USEGDNLY

(6)

“I 1"?) VOI.

 

Figure 1. Trade Balance of Electronics Products (l981-l99l)-l980 0.8. dollars

Key:
1. 1 billion dollars 4. West European nations
2. United States 5. Other free world countries
3. Japan 6. Source: McIntosh

Businessmen, engineers and even working operators frequently visit Japanese corpo-
rations with irresistible fascination and keen interest to elucidate the secret
and mystery of Japan. What they learn or hear,at the host companies is no more
than a total quality control system (TQC) and QC circle activities thriving at the
working level. These systems are not particularly new to the visitors, and when
you think of it. they originated in Europe and America. Initially, we imported
the idea. When they understand these basics, they feel relieved for the time be-
ing.

Japan does not have any undisclosed mystery or secret. It does only what it is
expected to do to bring forth “high quality" products. Thus. the visitors analyze
to convince themselves.

However, when they go back to their own countries, they are suddenly at a loss.

It is not that difficult to restore and implement the various systems practiced

in Japan in their own companies. But they notice that an important point has been
overlooked when they actually try to implement the systems. They discover that
they failed to understand the root of the success of the total participation sys-
tem extensively practiced in Japan. It appears that the Japanese side is partial—
ly responsible for this. That is. we do not teach them the spiritual aspect of
the matter that supports the success of various participation systems in Japan.

To be more accurate, there are few people who can handle the teaching to that err

tent.
15

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urn-luau. use ONLY

Giving another example, here is a story that illustrates these problems. Some

250 Japanese companies have already advanced into the United States and employ
almost 50,000 Americans. If the Japanese business operations are as great as has
been said, at least the majority of the Japanese companies that have advanced into
the United States should be making products equal to the level of products pro—
duced in the mother country and be operating with a comfortable profit. However,
as far as I know. the majority of the Japanese companies there have, on the con-
trary, encountered problems and are busy trying to straighten them out.

Probably. the foundations or climates that support the business operations in the
United States and in Japan are different at many points. That is the question
being raised in the minds of the people who visited Japanese corporations and re-
turned to their own countries. If it is true that there is a large difference,
an absolute difference, in foundations between Japan and the United States, than
it is appropriate to think that this difference accounts for the high quality and
reliability of the Japanese products.

It is impossible to give an all-round profound analysis and solution in this
limited space relating to the reasons why Japanese electronic products have reach-
ed a level of excellence far above all others in the world. That must be left to
another opportunity for discussion.

At this time, however, the discussion wil1 be focused on a comparative analysis
of Japan and the United States in the semiconductor industries which support the
electronics industry in association with the above described sense of problems.

In order to facilitate the understanding of the readers, the discussion was divided
into 11 points of view for convenience (Table 1).

Status

As is well known, the American semiconductor business dominates over 65 percent of
the world market today. That figure was estimated to have been over 80 percent

10 years ago. In contrast, the Japanese camp holds about 22 to 24 percent of the
market share.

The European business hold is less than 10 percent. and the rest is claimed by the
semiconductor business of each nation spread out over the free world. However,
these enterprises in one way or another have introduced technology from American,
Japanese or European businesses. It is unquestionable that the United States ac-
tually presides over the world market.

Incidentally, the size of the world market today is approximately 3.5 trillion yen
in terms of annual average, slightly over the sales realized by Japan's Toyota
Motor Company alone.

Industrial Structure
There is a great difference between Japanese and American semiconductor industrial
structures. This stems from the difference in the developmental process in which

the semiconductor industry in each country was created and raised. In a word, it
is the threefold structure of America versus the onefold-plus structure of Japan.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The threefold structure of the United States can be observed by looking at a’"'
vertical section of the 0.5. semiconductor industry. The onefold plus structure
of Japan is also conceived on the same basis. A comparative analysis can be made
disregarding the impact on the activities and structures of foreign affiliates
residing in each country. ,.

The threefold structure of the United States is supported by a strong base. It

is a strong system house. i.e., a group of makers independently manufacture goods,
as represented by IBM and Western Electric. These corporations are called inhouse
makers. The power of inhouse makers has been steadily organized in recent years.
This is because the major electric makers which were compelled to retreat from the
semiconductor industry in the past have returned again.

The means of reentry can be the purchase of an existing semiconductor business or
capital participation. GE and Hestinghouae are typical examples. French oil
capital, Schlumberger, and the greatest of the American military industries, Unit-

ed chhnology. accomplished their entry into the semiconductor industry by pur-

chase.

such as Pairchild and Hostech [phonetic].

The companies they bought out were competent semiconductor corporations

It looks like "bring semiconductor development and production ability to the com—
pany" will become the password of the world's big corporations.

Table 1.

1. Status
2. Industrial structure
3. Business operation

4. Main constituents

5. Technology

6. Production

7. Quality

. Competition
Product

was
s

10. Business strategy

11. Role of government

United States

almost 652

threefold

profit oriented

(cost reduction)

primarily specialty
makers

(venture business)

pride of originator

(IHA idea)

design/technology
innovation

(stressing mass
production)

principle of passing
inspection

offensive to defensive
strong in microcomputers
for military industry

one step ahead in multi-
nationalization
frequent bolstering

17

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

Comparison of Japan-U.S. Semiconductor Industries

Japan

in excess of 202
onefold-plus
market oriented
(market share)
general electric machinery
and communication machinery
makers
(consistent system house)
sense of new establishment

perfection of fabrication
technology
(stressing vield)

perfectionisu

defensive to offensive
strong in memories and IC
for civilian use

heading for multinationali-
zation

protection and nurturing
I'UK Utl‘lLlAL USE ONLY

[No 13 pp 73-75]

[Text] The second layer of the industrial structure (continued) is the companies
which deal with outside sales, generically called merchant makers. They are head-
ed by Texas Instruments (TI) and include National Semiconductor, Intel and Ad-
vanced Hicrodevice which all have a main office in Silicon Valley, and Motorola

which maintains major production activities in Arizona, otherwise known as Silicon
Desert.

In the past several months. the merchant makers have been kept busy reviewing the
long- and mediuurterm growth strategies of their own companies. In 1981, the
shipped commodities of the American semiconductor business was minus 5-10 percent,
compared to the previous year (in terms of money). This is due to the unexpectedly
long-lasting slump. However, this is expected to get on the track of mild recovery
in 1982, leading to a big growth in 1983 and 1984....

Up until the beginning of autumn last year, it was predicted that 1982 would be
the year of a demand boom (see December 1980 issue-American Semiconductor Indus-
try in Recession). As the American business condition hits a second bottom, the

prevailing opinion now predicts that the next demand peak will arrive later in
1983.

What gives a headache to the top management of the semiconductor business is how
to tackle the promised market growth. The factors that cause the headache can be
boiled down to two items.

One is the procurement problem to meet plant and equipment expansion. In order

to procure sufficient funds, it is necessary to earn profits that make the pro-
curement feasible. From this aspect, it must cut off unprofitable sectors that
pull down some industry grOups and products that do not grow as expected in the
near future. Then, it must concentrate on the product groups considered real win-
ners and continue to invest in plant and equipment at the proper time.

Another problem is the shortage of engineers, which is becoming more serious every
year. Even if management can cope with this problem, the product battlefront must
be organized and the resource of engineers in one's own company must be effective-
ly utilized, when it is self—evident that the business has expanded out of con-
trol.

Funds, manpower and profit ratio and growth of products in the near future must
be balanced. As a result, once in a while decisions that surprise the industry
are made and announced by the leaders of the semiconductor business. A good exam-
ple is the recent retreat of TI and National Semiconductor from the magnetic bub-
ble memory business. This decision was made as a result of reallocating opera-
tional resources preponderantly in order to pursue the promising silicon tech-
nology.

The third layer is composed of venture business groups characteristic of the
American semiconductor industry. Today's Intel and National Semiconductor also

started originally as venture businesses. Venture businesses flirting with ven-
ture capitalists are pushed up into a full fledged business in no time.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such a business climate or foundation is never found in the semiconductor indus-
try of Japan. Many Japanese versions of venture business companies have been
raised in the software field of the computer industry. However, the people and
institutions that serve the function of the American venture capitalists are ab-
sent. This absence is deeply felt when one appreciates the role played by the'
venture capitalists who are very active in Silicon Valley. .
Concerning the role of the capitalists who continue their activities with the
valley as their base of action. several characteristics can be pointed out.-~The
most important characteristic is that almost all of them have had experience in
operating a high technology business with their own hands at one time or another
in the past. Also, they participate as one of the managers in the business for
which they have raised the funds.

Capitalists with these qualifications can hardly be found in Japan. A "onefold-
plus structure" pattern characteristic of Japan is quite a contrast to the pattern
of the United States. The Japanese semiconductor business is predominantly run
by companies which are characterized as general electric machinery and communica-
tions machinery makers or as general home electric businesses. Part of the semi-
conductor products are always consumed in the company itself. They may be regard-
ed as a group of businesses which combine the corporations in the first and second
layers of the American semiconductor business structure. Furthermore, many of
them are "big businesses."

The "plus pattern" comes from the fact that a very limited number of semiconductor
specialty makers are part of a circle dependent on these big corporations.

In recent years, the number of so-called inhouse makers has increased. but the
scale is not as large as the traditional American inhouse makers such as 13! and
GE.

Business Operation

There has existed a basic ideal or strategic difference between Japanese and Amer-
ican business operations. American business has primarily been profit oriented,
while our business has been market share oriented. In the American market, free
and fair competition has been unfolded under the banner of reduction of cost. In
contrast, the origin of our business has been the improvement of the market share.

These differences in strategy or basic attitude are closely related to the back-
grounds from which the semiconductor industries emerged and the form of the
progress in both Japan and the United States. In the United States, which was
the revolutionist of the world's semiconductor industry, the military market was
enormous at first, but the dependence on it was greatly reduced, for example, in
the seventies as far as IC is concerned.

In the United States, where the market was developed for military use with the
backup of the Pentagon (Department of Defense), a tremendous number of corpora-
tions entered into the business with the expansion of the civilian market. This
phenomenon of participation was given further impetus by the basic climate of the
American business operation favoring freedom of occupation and traits that en-
courage a free and independent spirit (pioneer spirit that challenged the frOn-
tier).

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urn-luau. use UNLY

Naturally, the competition became more ruthless with the increase in the number of
companies entering the industry. "Price" was unquestionably the bottom line for
acquiring the position of ruler in the market where the competition was intense.
0n the other hand. a habit of stressing "profit" for every quarter term, charac-
teristic of American business, stubbornly remained.

The outcome is obvious. Feverish pressure was applied to reduce the cost. Cost
reduction was pursued in relation to the "product quality" demanded by the cus;
tomers. Maybe because of this, the basic theme of quality control was strictly
narrowed down to the principle of passing inspection.

Severe price competition required creation and expansion of the market. As a re-
sult of the drastic reduction in the IC price in a short period, new markets were
opened. Also, the markets expanded at an unexpected speed. Meanwhile, the com-
petition cost many victims in the early 1970's, which meant a retreat of many
large corporations from semiconductor production.

Japanese business operations, starting late, are different in many ways from the
phenomena seen in the American market. Unlike the United States, where nearly 200
semiconductor companies fought for a market share, the big corporations took the
lead from the start in Japan. No one rushed into the semiconductor industry dream-
ing of a bonanza.

Centered around competition with a sidelong glance at other companies, the competi-
tion was unfolded primarily stressing product quality to catch up with others.
Various inventions and efforts were constantly being made to lose no time in catch-
ing up to the level of the forerunner, the United States. Greatly helpful was the
attitude of American business, which generously disclosed technologies to a consid-
erable extent as long as patent fees and knowhow fees were paid.

What the Japanese corporations, which were the late starter, aimed at was perfect
product quality. In the beginning, the cost was high, but this was absorbed by
the demand from within the company. Through efforts to eliminate the immense
patent fees, noteworthy patents of one's own company were originated.

A vehement price battle has developed in the course of time. The battle is waged
on two fronts, one against American corporations and the other against domestic

corporations.

Setting aside the IC's consumed within the company, a seemingly contradictory de—
mand for "inexpensive and good products" had to be accommodated in the Japanese
market structure, where the civilian market ratio was comparatively high. The
solution to satisfy these two demands came down very roughly to two points. One
was the insatiable automation of the manufacturing process, and the other was the
catch-up attitude with everyone taking part, the pursuit of TQC (total quality con-
trol) in today's terminology.

The essence of operating with a sidelong glance is the principle of not being de-
feated by other companies in equipment investment and technology development. The
greatest parameter to judge the result of the competition is the fluctuation of
the so-called market share. The complete industrial statistics of Japan relate
the cruel fact of the market share of one's own company.

a

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF?1C1AL.US£IDNLN

Main Constituents .-_

The following main constituents played different roles in the stage of industrial
development in the United States. The main constituents that created the semi-
conductor industry were the world's predominant research institute,_Be11 Labgratory
and the Western Electric group. ".H,

The credit for the mass production of the technology developed can be given to
semiconductor specialty makers which started from venture businesses. Several
technological developments were required before the semiconductor business'coufd
be shaped into an industry and get into smooth running order.

Aside from Bell and the Western group, technological development in the initial
period was explored by large corporations such as GE and RCA. Except for the
period of foundation consolidation, venture businesses with TI and Fairchild in
the center served as the driving force to promote technical innovation. Espe-
cially noteworthy were the Kirby patent of TI and the Planer patent of Pairchild.

The main actors in the Japanese industry were general electric machinery and comr
munication machinery makers from the very beginning. It was these corporations
that promoted research and development and started mass production. A specialized
developmental pattern as seen in the United States is totally absent. It cannot
be denied that the tailing type Japanese business operation benefited in various
ways from the difference in the main constituents as described above.

Technology

The idea that penetrates most into the American semiconductor industry is the
acute sense of being the original manufacturer, the pride that the invention was
made there. That sometimes rebounds as an unexpectedly arrogant attitude toward
customers. It is because of this phenomenon that we hear complaints that an
American business. trained well in the home of marketing, sometimes acts too ag-
gressively in trying to impose the products of its own company and forgets that
"all customers are kings" when it attempts to sell its products to Japanese users.

In conparison, Japan's sense of new establishment had solidified. Although we
felt small in face of the originator at the beginning, we started to become con-
fident about certain products as we caught up in the technology and further es-
tablished mass production technology.

In the past couple of years. Americans have begun to make some remarkable state-
ments regarding the reliability, quality and stability of Japanese 10 memories
in particular. Some American business managers have come forward to warn the
American corporations which indulge contentedly in the pride of being the orig-
inal manufacturer. These managers have the experience of having worked as a
high class administrator in Japanese business or have often visited Japan. Or
they have Japanese friends who are outstanding businessmen. although they them-

selves haven't visited Japan too often.

The number of managers who organize quality control groups within the company
and strive for the improvement of quality has increased also in American business.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are definite signs that the day is approaching when the American corpora-
tions with persevering strength and extensive resources will cast off their pride
at being the originator.

COPYRIGHT: Electronic Engineering 1981

8940
C80: 8129/0488

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI10FT1C1AI.USE|DNLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

AJINOHOTO'S BIOTECHNOLOGICAL RGD ACTIVITIES DESCRIBED
Tokyo SHMKAN BIRION in Japanese 6 Nov 81 pp 72-75
[Article by Kazuaki Taya]

[Text] Among the Japanese food enterprises are high-profit firms such as Sun-
tory and Kirin Brewery. However, Suntory is a whisky manufacturer, and Kirin
Brewery is literally a beer manufacturer. Thus, as a "general" food enterprise,
there is no business enterprise that surpasses Ajinomoto.

In the third term of 1981, the scale of Ajinomoto sales was 376.3 billion yen.
The makeup of sales is led by processed foods, followed by seasonings, fats and
oils, amino acids, etc. The sales in 1965 amounted to 54.4 billion yen, less
than one-seventh of the 1980 figure. It was a seasoning manufacturer, and the
makeup of sales also was centered on seasoning products, namely the large-scale
production of Ajinomoto [MSG], which accounted for over 50 percent of the total
sales.

Today, 15 years later. it has achieved a great transformation in its posture as
a general food manufacturer.

President K. Utada, who took office in June this year, emphasizes a five-column
operation--that is. a comprehensive balanced operation of seasonings, fats and
oils, processed foods, amino acids, and overseas business. However, as we view
objectively the direction in which Ajinomoto is advancing in the 1980's, we may
say that growth in the amino acids and overseas categories hold the key. In
other words, life sciences and multinational development are the directions in
which Ajinomoto is advancing.

On a worldwide base of multilateral development in amino acid technology,
AJinomoto life science is enlarging its prospect for growth with pharmaceuti-
cals. Brentsl [phonetic], an enteric nutrient marketed after being adopted by
the health care program in September, is the first pharmaceutical for Ajinonoto.

Brental is a nutrient which is directly injected into the patient's intestine
through a tube before or after surgery. It is the first pharmaceutical of this

type. It is estimated that it will grow eventually into a product with a monthly
business of 200-300 million yen.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(22 percent)
19 pet““"
33 ve'°‘“‘)
(15 ve*°°“‘)
(3 percent)

13!: p13ca
2d place

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Following behind it are the hmmunologic anticancer agent Rentinan [phonetic],
the chemotherapeutic (directly attacks cancer) anticancer agent CAM, and the
antibiotic AC-1370. Rentinan [phonetic] was submitted to the Ministry of Health
and Welfare for approval last spring, and there is a prospect for obtaining
approval in 1982. CAM is abOut to begin the second-stage clinical testing.
Rentinan is an injectable drug, while CAN is being developed as an oral prepara-
tion. When both products are marketed, methods for combining the two are anti-
cipated, which will probably become an important factor for increasing sales.

Sales of Erental will be handled by the subsidiary Horishita Seiyaku, while a
sales agreement has been arranged with Yananouchi Pharmaceutical for Rentinan
marketing. can is a product developed jointly with chugai Pharmaceutical. We
can see Ajinomoto's strategy of expanding agreements with leading pharmaceutical
firms using its technological strength as the weapon. '

AC-1370 is a new antibiotic of the ao-called third-generation antibiotics. It
is currently in the animal experiment stage. However, as clinical tests begin,

it is fully expected that collaborative studies with major antibiotic manufac-
turers may be undertaken.

RGD Structure of "High Tech-High Touch"

Anticancer agents and antibiotics have large pharmaceutical markets. As Renti—
nan, CAM, and AC-l370 join the front, the foundation for Ajinomoto‘s pharmaceuti-
cals will be strengthened rapidly. Such a posture will probably be seen clearly
in some 6—5 years.

The pace of RED directed at life science at Ajinonoto has increasingly hastened
of late.

The objective of some 600 personnel at the central research laboratory isto find
seeds for life science to grow in the areas of food, pharmaceuticals, or inter-
mediate medicinal foods.

The number of staff at the central research laboratory at the highest point
reached about 1,100 in the period 1965-1975. The fact that the number is now
less than 60 percent of that is one of the byproducts brought about by empha-
sis on efficiency of the R50 effort. In the midst of this, the pharmaceutical
developments which were undertaken earnestly for some 7-10 years are about to
blossom now in the form of Brental. Rentinan, etc.

In July of this year, the Department of Basic Research, with a staff of 30-40,
was newly established in the central laboratory. The objective is to advance
broad basic research cross-sectionally with a long-term view.

Furthermore, Ajinomoto has become more forward-looking about mergers in Japan
and about technical exchanges with Kellogg (cornflakes), CPC International
(soup, mayonnaise), General Foods (coffee), Jerube-Dannon [phonetic] (fresh
cheese), etc. In October, it invited Vice President Grant, whoisin charge of
R&D at the CPC head office, and initiated a "technical exchange meeting" of

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

three firms, including the top executives of Knoll Foods (merged with CPC). Its
plan is to aim for cross-sectional expansion of technological developments in the
future by holding broad-based technical exchange meetings which include the
above-mentioned collaborators and merger firms.

Last year, jointly with General Foods, which is a partner financier of AG?
(Ajinomoto-General Foods), it established a separate new company for the devel-
opment of protein foods.

In the midst of rising interest in the fields of physiology, nutrition science,
and immunology, the life science research at Ajinomoto is expected to show fur-
ther expansion.

The skillful advance in R&D management such as efficiency, direction, etc, is
also a very important point. In this respect, Vice President T. Kakuta, who is
in charge of R&D, is emphasizing "high tech-high touch" by quoting from a book
by H. Hironaka--that is, a strong human factor in addition to high technology.

A Forerunner in Genetic Engineering Related to Amino Acids

Among life science-oriented areas, the one likely to bring technological innova-
tions is genetic engineering.

In particular, regarding genetic engineering in the area of amino acids, Ajino-
moto's posture is aimed at being the forerunner not only in Japan, but in the
world. It is also to save face as the world's amino acid enterprise. Unlike
others, Ajinomoto is still in the very initial stage in genetic engineering.
However, in the fall of last year, it succeeded in the technical achievement of
doubling the production efficiency for threonine, one of the essential amino
acids, by using a new strain of E. coli in genetic engineering.

Incidentally, between 1971 and 1980 it acquired four prepublication patents
which are believed to be related to genetic engineering. This number is the
second highest among Japanese firms, after the seven held by Mitsubishi
Chemical.

In addition, for 2-3 years it has been sending young researchers, believed to
number almost 10, mainly to the United States for genetic engineering related
work.

Ajinomoto's achievements in the life sciences area has gradually begun to pene-
trate overseas. For example, the amino acid sweeumerAsparteem is one result.
Asparteem [phonetic] is characterized by a sweetness approximately 200 times
greater than sugar and yet has fewer calories. It expects to obtain approval of
the U.S. FDA (Food and Drug Administration) and begin exporting the product to
the United States by next spring. Asparteen is a U.S.-Japan joint merchandise
effort, for which the U.S. c. D. Searle has the application patent and Ajinomoto,
the manufacturing patent. Other than in the United States, it is being sold in
France, Belgium, and Luxembourg. Approval has been obtained in five more coun-
tries including Mexico, and approval is being obtained in Canada as well.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Regarding the above-mentioned anticancer agent, Rentinan, it is a noteworthy
point for the future that Ajinomoto has already received more than 10 overseas
collaborative offers. Regarding amino acids for medical use, which have been
exported until now, a plant is expected to be completed in the United States

by the end of the year to switch to local production. This is a trend that con-
tributes to overseas business development, which will be discussed next.

In the Harch'l980 term, Ajinomoto received income totalling 4.4 billion you
(2.9 billion yen for PY-79 in royalties, loan interests and dividends from
overseas subsidiaries. Based on the overseas investment and loan balance for

the same term of approximately 26 billion yen, the investment efficiency is
17 percent.

Also, based on the fact that the profit contribution of the five overseas subsi-
diaries is estimated to be approximately 25 percent of the 1980 consolidated
profit, it may be concluded that Ajinomoto's overseas firms are developing their
business smoothly on the whole.

As of June 1981, Ajinomoto's local plants overseas numbered 12. The local pro-
duction consists mainly of seasonings, which are produced by six plants, includ—
ing Thai Ajinomto. Others include Euro-Lysine (France), a feed lysine; and the
manufacturing of instant noodles in four countries, including the United States
and Brazil, through collaboration with Nisshin Foods. Also, at the end of this
year, a plant for the above-mentioned amino acids for medical use will be com-
pleted in the state of North Carolina in the United States as a plant for Ajino-
moto USA (sales firm).

Among the overseas firms, the consolidated firms number five, including Thai
Ajinomoto, and the total sales of the five firms is approximately 30 billion
yen. Total overseas sales, including the sales of other local firms and ex-
ports from Japan, were on the scale of approximately 60 billion yen in 1980.

As a result of the considerable expansion made in seasoning plants in the last
1-2 years. the production of monosodium glutamate overseas surpassed that of
domestic output during this fiscal year. The average growth rate is also
higher overseas than the domestic rate. A new plant for instant noodles was
also completed recently in Brazil.

In addition, in preparation for future expansion in sales regions. Ajinomoto
they opened resident staff offices this year in Karachi in May, and in Cairo
in July, thus placing strategic cornerstones.

Ajinomoto's future production overseas is expected to diversify gradually to
processed foods, with seasonings as the base. Also, as found in the case of
the local production of amino acids for medical use in the United States, a
trend toward an increase in the local production of pharmaceuticals is also
expected, mainly in advanced countries.

In such an environment, Ajinomoto's multinational development is likely to show
expansion, and the depth will also be increased by product diversification.

Depending on circumstances, it is conceivable that the company will move toward
buying up business locally.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The history of Ajinomoto's overseas ventures goes back to export pioneering in
1914. Soon after that, it opened a resident staff office in New York.

Local production began in the latter half of the 1950's. Major bases in South-
east Asia, Thai Ajinomoto and Malaysian Ajinomoto, were founded in 1960 and 1961
respectively. Thus, they already have a 20-year history. Malaysian Adinomoto
has already been listed on local stock exchanges, and Thai Ajinomoto is also
heading toward listing. Furthermore, a trend toward independent fund procure-
ment by overseas subsidiaries is being emphasized, as in the case of Malaysian
Adinomoto, which is planning to issue stock.

However, this is not to say that Ajinomoto has had no failures in its overseas
ventures. Only one such case has occurred, in Italy, where the local factory
had to withdraw due to changes in the raw material situation and labor instabil-
ity (a special loss of 2.6 billion yen was added to the March 1978 term). As
multinational development is intensified in the future, how to avoid high—risk
countries will hold greater importance than before for Ajinomoto.

The same can be said for pharmaceuticals development. These days, the develop-
ment of a large-scale pharmaceutical is said to cost "3 billion yen and 10
years." Investment risk in R50 for pharmaceuticals is much greater than food
when it fails. However, if it succeeds, the reward is that much greater in fact.

Interview [with Ajinomoto President Utada]
Question: What changes do you envision for Ajinomoto in 10 years?

Utada: People say various things about us, bothnothing has changed in that we
are basically a food manufacturer. My concept is to expand the business as a
whole on the basis of a five-column structure of seasonings, oils and fats, pro-
cessed foods, amino acids, and overseas venture. A business called Adinomoto
[element of flavor] need not plan such drastic multilateral operations. I would
like to make progress with a way of life so that business branches out little by
little from the trunk.

Question: Among the five columns, it appears that the importance of amino acids
and overseas categories will increase.

Utada: If I am asked specifically which category, I suppose you are right.
Amino acids have many more areas to explore yet, and we believe that they will
grow into a bright limelight in the next 10 years. Since people's interest in
health and nutrition will steadily increase, it is very important to grasp what
is new firmly in this regard. As for overseas business, it currently accounts
for approximately 20 percent of the consolidated sales. Aside from the figures,
there is no doubt that the importance of the overseas category will greatly in-
crease in the next 10 years.

Question: Among multinational developments, buying up businesses is also con-
ceivable, is it not?

28

FOR OFF” 1:“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Utsds: Depending on circumstances, we V111 naturally consider buying up busi-
nesses. Although we are not now practicing this, looking at the years ahead,
that need will probably become stronger in Japan also.

Question: Your views on the price of shares?

Utsda: I consider that as a top firm in the business, a lo-digit figure--
1.000 yen—is not out of line.

COPYRIGHT: Billion [Shukan Birion) 1981

7722
cso: 4106/27 END

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY