FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10052
15 October 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 59/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPR!

15 (

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 59/81)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Suzuki Politics Analyzed
(Ikuzo Tajiri; BUNGBI SHUNJU, Aug 81) ...............

Political Union Viewed by Columnist
(Takehiko Takahashi; MAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 17 Sep 81)

Liberal-Democratic Party Launches Meubership Drive
(Takehiko Takahashi; MAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 23 Sep 81)

Formation of New Political Group Welcomed
(Editorial; MAINICHI DAILR nuns, 25 Sep 81) .........

Sonods-Cromyko Meeting Analyzed
(Editorial; THE DAILY YOMIURI, 25 Sep Bl) ...........

ECONOMIC

Private Capital Outlsys Reported Running High in FY 81
(JAPAN Ecouonrc JOURNAL. 15 Sep 01) ......... ..... ...

Fujitsu Fanuc Lauded as Most Corporately Sound
(JAPAN acouonrc JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .................

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Governnent, Academia, Industry To Develop Microprocessor
(MIKKAN KOGYO sntusun. 5 Aug 81) ....................

Market for New Information, Communication Systems Grows
(NIHON KEIZAI sulnsuu. 31 Aug 81) ...................

Japanese Auto Industry Views Rising Problems
(DIAMOND'S INDUSTRIA, Sep 81) .......................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Automotive Electronics Era Poretold
(DIAMOND'S INDUSTRIA, Sep 81) .............................

Use of Robots in Car Making Described
(Drsuoun's lunusrars, Sep 81) .............................

Technological lnterchsnges Among Businesses Spread
(DIANOND'S INDUSTRIA, Sep 81) .............................

World's Largest Coal Liquefaction Facility To Be Developed
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

World's Car Electronic Sophistication Race Crows
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Prices of 66K RAH Chips Drop
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Semiconductor Production Rises in First half of 1981
(JAPAN ECONONIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

British To Set Up Hinifax Venture
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Japanese, Swiss Firms Porn Venture for Carbon Fiber Material
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Nissho To Enter Biotechnology Industry
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

New Technology Produces Cheaper Steel Deoxidizing Ferroailicon
(JAPAN ECONOHIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Hard, Tensile Type Glass Developed
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Huge Electromagnet Insures Stable Current Plow
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Amorphous Silicon Solar Cell To Be Connercislized
(JAPAN ECONOHIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Way To Double Efficiency of Heat Exchangers Devised
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 15 Sep 81) .......................

Briefs
Biotechnology Industry Grovth
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SUZUKI POLITICS ANALYZBD
Tokyo BUNGEI SHUNJU inJapaneseAug 81 pp 110-122
[Article by lkuzo Tajiri, political affairs critic]

[Text] No Political Enemy for Time Being

They say his castle is built on sand. Perhaps so, but the political relationships

surrounding Prime Minister Suzuki (see separate chart) appear to be surprisingly
stable.

First. there is apparently no political enemy on the horizon, as seen from the Suzuki
administration. Moreover, the opposition groups appear to be regarding it with

a warm understanding. If the rumors that Suzuki will retire before his time is

up is true, who will step forward to bring him down?

It is very doubtful whether it revealed his true intention, but former Prime Minister
Tanaka. the most powerful figure in political circles, was recently quoted in the
newspapers as follows: "You know, Suzuki was elected by a unanimous party vote

and. unless he himself decides to quit. his premiership is based on the premise

of a long-term regime. -He was urged by everyone to run, although he had declined,

so we must support him to the end. I believe absolutely that there is no cne who
would pull him down. If there is. that persona' political career would be ruined.
Suzuki is not stumbling at all." (YOHIURI SHIHBUN 21 June)

Such hyperbole makes one wonder. The same Tanaka was reported six months ago to
have said, "He recommended Zenko (Suzuki), but he turned out to be a misfit." Per-

haps Tanaka himself might turn out to be the very ringleader of a "Movement to topple
Suzuki." The future is difficult to predict.

However, the portion in Tanaka's statement which says, "Unless Suzuki himself decides
to quit," is true. Since there is no political adversary in sight, it depends on
whether conditions could be created under which Suzuki would be forced to voluntarily
announce his resignation. This could turn out to be a strong factor in Suzuki's
favor. if he were to be pushed into a corner.

Eisaku Sato announced his resignation under comparatively benign conditions. Never-
theless, it was after a record reign of 7 years and 8 months. when the public had
tired of the Sato government. when he was elected to his third term as party presi-
dent (a full 6 years), even his brother Nobusuke Kishi recommended that he quite,‘

1
FOR OF11C1A1.USEGDNLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

saying. “It is enough. It's time to retire.’ Yet. he continued to reign for nearly
another two years. It was therefore relatively easy for him to "resign."

Because subsequent administrations have been, without exception. plagued with politi-
cal enemies and were shortlived, they were in effect built on sand. No one could
predict that Kakuei Tanaka, who made an auspicious start with the restoration of
Sino-Japanese diplomatic relations and boasted a support of over 60 percent. would
succumb in 2 years and 5 months. He was criticized by Takeo Hiki and Takeo Fukuda.
and his government collapsed because of criticism against his money politics. During
the next Hiki administration, a "topple Hiki movement" by the entire party began

soon after his inauguration. and he walked a tight rope but persevered for 2 years.

Fukuda's chances were obstructed by Hasayoshi Ohira. Ohira was exhausted by his
political feud with Fukuda, and he died suddenly. Thus, although they were regarded
as full-fledged regimes, they were both sho.tlived. The regimes were fraught with
the unforeseen and dangerous vicissitudes of fate. Although the Suzuki administra—
tion could not possibly be an exception, it is difficult to predict whether it will
be longlived or shortlived.

The Suzuki administration will welcome its first anniversary on 17 July. Since
it is the halfway mark of the first term. talks can be expected to begin concerning
a Successor. Especially with his returnhome from the Japan—U.s. summit talks in

mid-May as a watershed. the atmosphere within the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP)
has suddenly changed. The erstwhile talk of his re-election has disappeared into

thin air and has been replaced by talk of an early retirement.

Keys to Chart on p 111

(1) Political correlation (9) Miyazawa (17) New Liberal Club

Chart (10) Kishi (18) Komeito Party
(2) Nakasone (11) Nakagawa (19) Japan Socialist Party
(3) Tanaka (12) Hiki (20) Japan Communist Party
(4) Suzuki (13) Rokusuke Tanaka (21) Suzuki Administration
(5) Fukuda (14) Sonoda (22) Close relationship
(6) Komoto (15) Democratic Socialist (23) Ordinary relationship
(7) Watanabe Party (24) Weak relationship
(8) Sakurauchi (16) United Social Democratic

Party

Similarities Between Sato. Hiki and Suzuki

Before making any judgment concerning the longevity of the Suzuki administration, I
will attempt to typecast it. One can see it as a cross between the Sato and Niki
administrations. Noboru Takeshita (former finance minister). a Tanaka faction cadre,
pointed out the similarity between Sato and Suzuki as follows. "Mr. Suzuki is basi-
cally a cautious man. Although the Suzuki regime may give the impression of being
unreliable. it survived the extraordinary Diet session (last fall) and it has gained
confidence by formulating this year's budget (FY-81). I think it will continue to
mature. Through my own experience, I feel that the Sato Cabinet. which was formed

in November 1965. matured after undergoing the test in the Diet. There may be some
peeple who find fault with Mr. Suzuki's approach to politics and with his outlook.

but that is because he lacked the opportunity to explain his convictions before being
inaugurated as prime minister and president to the LDP. In the past. an election

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was held for the party president. and the winner had a chance to explain his beliefs
beforehand. Mr. Suzuki did not have such an opportunity. The Sato administration
came into being with Mr. Ikeda's abdication. At the outset. Hr. Sato's interpellations
in the Diet were read from a prepared text and he did not provide strong leadership

to his followers. He resorted to 'wait-and-see' politics. It was similar to

Mr. Suzuki's case."

Subsequently. political conditions changed considerably. and major problems arose

in succession. including the difficult Japan-U.S. relations. administrative reform

for which the Suzuki regime is "staking its political life." and the personnel changes
in November which are bound to raise havoc. It is certainly true that Prime Minister
Suzuki faces severe times. Nonetheless. Takeshita's theory is basically correct.
Suzuki's "politics of harmony" places priority on overall peace rather than exer-
cising leadership, and it is similar to Sato's "wait-andusee" politics. The main
difference is that. as a landmark of the regime. administrative reform is for Suzuki
what the return of Okinawa was to Sato.

The two men also share a common lack of political enemies within the LDP party. In
Sato's case, soon after his inauguration as prime minister. his powerful rivals.
Ichiro Kono. Bamboku Ono and others. died in succession. and he was afforded the
opportunity to solidify the base for a longlfved regime. In Suzuki's case also.
his regime started out with an unanimous and suprafactional support by the party
(although not an aggressive support). and there was no powerful rival worth note.

Again, he was like Niki in two aspects: Tenacity and an astute strategy in winning
public support. According to Hichiharu Hakamura (vice president of the German Food
Products Import Association). who is close to Suzuki as a junior alumnus of the Japan
Fisheries Institute. "He is not necessarily a so-called ‘nice guy.’ Even today.
peOple tend to see him in that light. but he is not so naive. He has always been
lowkey and very ineptinpromoting himself. but he possesses the peculiar tenacity

of a native of the Tohoku region. He never changes his attitude or posture. and
always carries out what he proposes to do. He has managed the party for ten years

as chairman of the party's general affairs. and is an expert in timing. He is more
knowledgeable than anyone concerning party affairs."

Party members generally agree with this evaluation, although with slight variations.
Suzuki's tenacity is considered "positive" in comparison to Hiki's "negative" tena-
city. They share a stubborn streak which is lacking in other powerful figures like
Tanaka, Pukuda. Ohira and Nakasone.

Although Hiki frequently had his back up against the wall where he would have been
forced to quit. he never admitted it. At the climax of the "topple Hiki movement"
in September 1976. Hiki dismissed the anti-Niki members of the Cabinet and dissolved
the Diet. He took the tough stand of splitting the party and went to the voters

for support. He thus persevered against the anti-Niki forces and stayed alive. It
was the so-callcd "9-10 affair." Until he took responsibility for the defeat in

the general elections in the same year, Miki prolonged the life of his administration.
albeit for a short time. It is difficult to foresee the kind of crisis Suzuki will
encounter in the future. but like Hiki he will surely not give up easily. In such

a case. he will probably like Hiki give "public support" as his reason for hanging
on. Moreover. unlike Hiki. Suzuki does not maintain a factional position which puts
the party majority in the opposition. but has the backing of the so-called "mainline
faction" (KOCHIKAI). which gives him an advantage over Niki.

0‘

J
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Despite His Brand As a "Stupid Monarch"

Although Niki is a totally different type of man from either Sato or Hiki. he would
have a chance in prolonging his reign if he could combine the comon trails of those
astute men. An analysis of the character of the Suzuki administration would indicate

at least such a possibility. Meanwhile. however, there are some glaring shortcomings
in Suzuki. compared to Sato and Niki.

There are doubts cast on his fitness as a prime minister. Masayuki Pujio, a labor
minister known for his sharp tongue. recently labeled him "a stupid monarch."

it is unclear as to which half of the label was given greater emphasis. but it clever-
ly expresses Suzuki's strengths and weaknesses. Soon after he became prime minister.
Suzuki often stumbled in his speeches. lie comitted errors in his Diet interpellations

concerning economic growth figures. and he addressed U.S. Ambassador liansfield as
"your Excellency. the President."

At the time. voices were frequently heard within and outside the ID? that "he doesn't
even have figures and data on basic state mangement in his head. At this rate. his
Cabinet won't last long." He assiduously memorized data written on cue cards by

his secretary and read studiOusly from his notes in Diet interpeilations in order
not to be caught with mistakes.

Gradually acquiring self-confidence, he would before long expose his weakness con-
cerning foreign affairs which is not one of his fortes. For example. there was the
trouble over the Japan-U.S. joint statement and Foreign Minister Ito's resignation

in aSSuming the responsibility. Also. the confrontation between Suzuki and the
Foreign Ministry in which emotional struggle within the Suzuki faction became involved.
These issues have become extremely refracted. but in effect his image of ignorance

in foreign affairs bordering on "stupidity" remains.

Criticism toward Suzuki spewed forth from the LDP. For instance. Raizo Matsuno stated.
"Suzuki simply does not understand. If Mr. Shigeru Yoshida, who was very particular
concerning foreign affairs. was alive. he would have given him a loud scolding. Japan
has always placed top priority on Japan-U.S. relations since the end of the war and,
whenever the relations do not run smoothly. it acts as if it had a tumor in its aorta.
Japan and the United States are separate nations and it is strange that one should
criticize the other because it finds itself in a tight situation. 'l'o simply explain
its position to the other should suffice. What it is doing may mend things for the
time being. but it will bring grave problems in the future. Suzuki sees only the

ups and downs of Japan-v.5. relations, and ends up making a series of mistakes.

He began with a mistake regarding the joint statement. He threw an unwarranted pebble
into the water and created waves. One wave led to others. Next was the Ito resigna-
tion. Foreign affairs should essentially be handled by the prime minister. In any
era, the main actor in foreign affairs is the prime minister himself. while the posi--

tion of the foreign minister is like that of a parliamentary vice minister from another
government ministry."

However. there is also sympathetic argument. A Dietman of the LDP in charge of foreign
affairs remarked, "in retrospect. his ASBAN tour was a mistake. Hr. Suzuki went
there and became overconfident. He also tried to strengthen his initiative in foreign

affairs vis-a-vis the United States. But there are many aspects of foreign affairs

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which are difficult to influence through individual power alone. Usually. circum-
stances facing the nation at the time become the deciding factor. The prime minister's
overconfidence produced the turmoil over the Japan-U.S. joint statement. but I think
Mr. Suzuki regained himself just before his European tour.

In any case, things went too smoothly during the six months after his inauguration.

He gained self-confidence in the ASEAN countries. But if he has returned to his
former self of caution and harmony as the result of the recent cirsis, it means

he has passed his test at an early stage. The fact that he is now aware that individ-

ual power cannot in any large measure influence foreign affairs indicates that he
has learned his lesson."

This is completely different from Hatsuno's contention that foreign affairs should

be managed by the prime minister. but Suzuki was unmistakably tossed about by foreign
affairs during this time. He appeared to be affected by his troubles and returned

to his former self during the European tour in June, where his lack of confidence
was reportedly conspicuous. showing him a pitiful figure.

It would be worth watching which of the two attributes of "stupid" and "monarch"
comes to the fore in the future. Will he cuntinue as a cross between Sato and Niki.
and show the strong side of a "monarch." or will he succumb to his failures by being
"stupid?"

Hill The Suzuki-Tanaka-Fukuda Alignment Last?

Among the so-called three elements of "fortune. dull-wit and spirit," probably 70
percent of the fate of anadministration is decided by “fortune." Although one may
mourn. "If only Fukuda had not been careless." or. "If only Ohira had not died so
suddenly." it was probably to a large degree a matter of fate.

It would be meaningless to speculate whether Suzuki would be blessed in the future
with good fortune. or whether he will be forsaken by fortune. but as far as the
circumstances in which his administrationtms formed are concerned. they were unmistak-
ably very fortunate. Even when thoae around him asked after Ohira's death. "Don't

you think it's your turn?“ Suzuki was evasive. saying. "I would like to be the

one to appoint a prime minister. I would like to be the most influential party
member, but I am not the prime minister type." In the end he reportedly said. "I
amno longer able to avoid the appointment." Whether or not that was his real state

of mind, the realization of "Prime Minister Suzuki." which had not been in the thoughts
of anyone including himself, became a fact before anyone was aware of it. This

can only be described as good fortune.

There are three keys to predicting the stability of the Suzuki administration as

it enters its second year. First. the factional relations within the LDP. especially
the transition in the balance between the three main factions -- the Suzuki. Tanaka
and Fukuda factions -- which support the Suzuki regime.

Secondly. the manner inwhich the administrative reform will be carried out. And.
third. the ties with such extra-party forces as the national consensus and the opposi-
tion parties. These three factors will decide the fate of the administration while
deeply interacting with each other.

5
FOR omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFK‘MI. USE ONLY

First. the situation within the LDP which has lacked serenity. Koichi Kato (former
chief Cabinet secretary). who managed the affairs of the younger Suzuki faction
members. sees the present conditions as follows. "I am aware of active rumors that
the Suzuki regime is stumbling because of the lto resignation issue. My feeling

is that the administration has sufficiently overcome both the Ito issue and the
treatment of the Reischauer testimony. It has made an 80 percent or 90 percent
recovery from the damage received from these issues. I think party conditions suru
rounding the Suzuki government have settled down beyond expectatiews. Commotion
prevailed within the LDP for eight years under four party presidents. following

the forming of the Tanaka government. And it reached a climax during the last year
of the Ohira regime. In effect. Mr. Ohira bore all the agony within the party and
died on his cross. Like Christ. he bore everything and died. After the storm sub-
sided, peace and stability. and an absolute majority. remained. From the standpoint
of party strife. a recess period had begun.

However. since the LDP is an energetic party. i feel sure that it has the ability

to recover from the eight years of fatigue. within a year, and to again pit one's
energy against another. But. in order to do so. it is necessary for the anti-Suzuki
forces within the party to concentrate somewhere. At the moment. such a phenomenon
is not clearly seen. Therefore. I think the present quietness will continue for
some time.”

it is quite a wishful outlook. But, as far as the ostensible impression is concerned.
it is close to Kato's View. Despite incessant rumors of a shortlived government

and a popular theory concerning party succession. there are no anti-Suzuki forces

or prominent successor candidates in sight.

Nonetheless. a subtle undercurrent of movement is beginning to manifest itself.
Although the Suzuki-Tanaka-Fukuda alignment. which supports Suzuki. is closely knit
as the political correlation chart shows. how long will it continue? Toshikazu
Fukuya (former Lower House member). a political pundit. analyzes the connection.

"The Suzuki Cabinet is already forsaken by those other than the direct Suzuki follow-
ers. 0n surface, he is supported by the three factions. but the Fukuda and Tanaka
fattlons continue their support merely because they prefer to remain in the present
lukewarm state of affairs. In other words. both Fukuda and Tanaka want to avoid

a change in party presidents. They also feel they wouldlike to keep an absolute
majority. It is convenient to continue a 'calm and windiess' state of affairs based
on an absolute majority.

However. the important leadership 2 not forthcoming from the prime minister/party
president. Therefore. in order to offset it. the bosses of the major party factions
tighten the reins on their factions. Unless they do so. all hell will break loose
("A hundred poets will sing“). Also. Hr. Fukuda could continue as faction leader.
and Suzuki will isten to him. Mr. Kishi's retirement and Mr. Hiki's gradual loss

of power over factinnal affairs indicate that Mr. Fukuda could retain control as
the 'shadow prime minister.’

As for Kakuei Tanaka, I think he is of a similar frame of mind. Under present condi—
tions. he could continue to rule over party affairs as leader of the largest faction.
and he could move Suzuki around at will. In fact. he succeeded in tying Susumu
Nikaidu down in one of the three major party posts. Nonetheless. it is perhaps

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON!)

well that a balance exists between the Tanaka and Fukuda factions. but if a single
cross-purpose should occur. the situation could explode instantly. In that sense.
the Suzuki government is a castle built on sand."

However. only six months earlier, when the Tanaka faction was expanding rapidly

and those inside and outside the party were watching Tanaka's moves and relations
betweenthe Suzuki. Tanaka and Fukeda factions, the sale Fukuya said, "Suzuki is
presently close to Mr. Fukuda. One might say. the two were stuck together. As

in the case of everyone else. once a person is inaugurated as prime minister. he
tries to become independent from Mr. Tanaka's influence. This is also true in Suzuki's
case. He declares his reluctance to be under Mr. Tanaka's influence. As for

Mr. Tanaka. he evidently feels he wants to restrain Suzuki, so he takes the offen-
sive by setting up Nikaido. Of course. Mr. Tanaka did not necessarily abandon
Suzuki. As for the views of the various party factions regarding the aggressive
steps taken by the Tanaka (action. the Nakasone faction probably felt uneasy. while
the Suzuki faction was afraid and the Fukuda faction was shocked."

Also six months ago. a young Dietman of the Suzuki faction said. "From the standpoint
of relations between the forces supporting the Cabinet. Hr. Suzuki cannot stick
close to Tanaka. That is the difference from relations between Tanaka and Ohira,
because Mr. Tanaka was the only ally of Mr. Ohira. However. even Mr. Ohira depended
on himself and did not adhere to Tanaka. He put a stop to Tanaka's heavy pressures.
in Mr. Suzuki's case, Mr. Tanaka is not his only ally. He does not stick closely

to him. which angers Mr. Tanaka. But Mr. Tanaka should know best the circumstances
surrounding the birth of the Suzuki Cabinet. The public thinks that Mr. Tanaka
created it. but a close scrutiny of the moves made at the time indicatethat it was
formed only after Mr. Pukuda, who had remained quiet. raised his hand to gesture
that 'Suzuki is okay.'“

Through such testimonies. it is apparent that the Suzuki-Tanaka-Fukuda connection
was rocking with tension six months ago. Today, there is a discrepancy between

"peace and serenity" (Kato) and “a castle built on sand" (Fukuya), but a tentative
balance does exist.

it was Suzuki's bold decision to approach Fukuda which brought a change six months
ago. He looked to Fukuda for guidance as his mentor. and asked Fukuda to visit

the United States to pave the way for his own Japan-U.S. summit meeting. The then
Foreign Minister, who was disturbed by this. remarked. "It should be the task of

the foreign minister. Moreover. what could his purpose be in using Hr. Fukndu.

who was Mr. Ohira's political foe?" This became a factor later in Ito's resignation.
A honeymoon relationship between Suzuki and Fukuda was glaringly evident, close
enough to conjure up a shadow Fukuda Cabinet.

When he paid a courtesy visit (on 6 June) to Fukuda's private residence prior to
his European tour, Suzuki chatted at length in the sitting room with the Fukuda
couple, and Mrs. Fukuda said to him as he was leaving. "Hold your chin up. Suzuki-

san.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it was during the height of criticism against Suzuki on the Japan-U.S. issues. It
was also rumored in political circles that he must have revealed his frustrations
to the couple and received words of sympathy.

Suzuki's strategy in flattering Fukuda to the skies has worked. At first, Tanaka
intended to restrain Suzuki. who refused to bend to his will. and tried to enlarge
his own faction through force tactics. whereupon Suzuki, instead of recoiling,
dared to repel Tanaka and more openly sidied closer to Fukuda. If Tanaks were to
push any farther. Suzuki and Fukuda would totally unite and create a fission in

the Suzuki-Tanaka-Fukuda alignment. There was even the apprehension that Tanaka
would become isolated.

That would spell trouble for Tanaka and. as Fukuya says. it was advisable for Tanaka
to "continue the status quo."

Tanaka retreated. and the temporarily ominous atmosphere was cleared to permit a
return to the comparatively stable Suzuki-Tanaka-Fukuda tri-factional alignment.

Although Fikuya talks of a castle built on sand. one should not overlook Suzuki's
astute intraparty control tactics seen in this tug-of-war episode. Instead of try-
ing to maintain a balance with both Tanaka and Fukuda, his tactic of pushing Tanaka
back by drawing closer to Fukuda gives an insight into his tough nature. Rather
than a "castle built on sand," one should see the alignment as an impregnable tri-
angle, where the interests of Suzuki. Tanaka and Fukuda are balanced.

Fukuda's Post-Suzuki Coal

it is true that a new development has recently become apparent. A sort of collu-
sion has appeared in the Tanaka-Fukuda relations, which was thought to have been
maintained with Suzuki as the middleman. Especially noticeable is the change in
Fukuda. On his lecture tour in the United States (late March). Pukuda stated.

"The domestic scene in Japan today is unusually stable. Mr. Suzuki is a respected
man, who is astute in political management. There is no possibility of his admini-
stration stumbling in the face of attacks by the opposition. The problem lies with
Lhu party in power if something should happen and a pretext should be made to
impugn Suzuki. there is no clearcut candidate who could fill the post-Suzuki slot.
Japan's political situation will continue to be quiet and stable for some time."

He thus publicized the stability of the Suzuki administration and confirmed his
chnnces for reelection. Also. on his return home on 8 April. Pukuda made a grandiose
speech before 120 Dietmen at a meeting to report on his trip, which was held in

u largu hall in the LDP headquarters. He clarified his all-out support for Suzuki.

"we do not at all intend to imitate the Reagan administration but I think Mr. Suzuki's
administrative reform is the greatest proposal since the Hamaguchi Cabinet's great
coup. First of all. we.must unify the party members and rally support by all means.
We must carry out the reform in a crowning glory, but it would be a crowning glory

for the reform and not for the Suzuki government."

However, two months or so later, Fukuda clearly changed his tune. Apparently becoming
conscious of his chances for a post-Suzuki government. he is reportedly approaching
Tanaka to form a Tanaka-Fukuda alliance which excludes Suzuki.

0

o
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Recently, when asked about the future of the Suzuki government, Fukuda replied as
if he had forgotten about Suzuki's reelection question, "It would be unethical

to say there is no one except Hr. Suzuki (as a suitable prime minister). so I won't
say there isn't. Nonetheless, since we are confronted by many problems at home
and abroad, I don’t think a change of administration would be good. Let's take
care of next year's problems next year. Things might change by then, you know.

In any case, we expect Hr. Suzuki to exert his full energy toward the solution of
the problems. If he succeeds, the stability of the Suzuki government will be en-
hanced." (YOHIURI SHIHBUN 210 June 81)

Fukuda thus switched from a posture of full support for Suzuki to that of a bystand-
er. Also, when asked in the event of a fall of the Suzuki government whether he
would be ready to form a Cabinet. if urged by the party members, Fukuda tentatively
replied in the negative, "I don't want to join the mudfight. I have had enough

of that. I am interested. but I won't stick my nose in.“ (YOHIURI SHIMBUN 2!» June
81)

It was a superficial remark made in an interview. He reportedly told his close
associates, "It won't be long for Suzuki now. Japan—U.s. relations have deteriorated,
thanks to Suzuki. The political test does not rest or. administrative reforms or
personnel management, but on Japan-U.S. relations. There is no administration which
caused relations with the United States to decline and lasted long. Suzuki cannot
pass the test, unless he handles matters very astutely, but our guess is that it

will be difficult. I may be urged to take over, but I cannot accept if it is only

for a short period. If given three years, I may be induced to try mending Japan-

v.5. relations." These words indicate his strong ambition.

lrlith Fukuda inclined to run, there is no reason for Tanaka not to respond. Rumors
were circulating in political circles that Tanaka said. "After Suzuki. there is

no one but Fukuda or Nikaido." Whereupon Fukuda is said to have replied immediately
with great flattery, "Hr. Tanaka is a gifted politician, who is one of a kind in
thirty years.‘ It is typical of the political world that, if necessary, a still
more brazen lip service can actually take place.

There has been a history of fierce struggle between Tanaka and Pukuda, and Pukuda
knows well that Tanaka will not easily lend a helping hand to his resurgence. But
in the political world, once a struggle begins for power, a different atmosphere
usually takes over. It is not unusual for yesterday's enemies to join hands.

In a hypothetical movement to support Fukuda for reelection, the posture of the
Tanaka faction -— the largest LDP faction -- would be decisive. The reason is,
whether it is'an aggressive or passive support, the party direction would be greatly
influenced simply by a clarification of non-opposition to the movement. There is

a wide variation between support and nonsupport, and the subtle shades of difference
between the factions would determine the direction the political struggle would
take.

If Tanaka had really spoken of the alternatives of "Pukuda or Nikaido," it would
indeed be big news For Fukuda. The reason is, since it is cot-non knowledge that
the materialization of "Prime Minister Nikaido" would be difficult for the moment.
and if that was truly Tanaka's intention, an early Suzuki retirement would hasten
Fukuda's chances. It is only natural for the Suzuki-Fukuda relationship to become
unhinged.

9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of course. the Tanaka side has other plans. It is probably like 3 Tanaka faction
cadre has stated. "In effect. Hr. Tanaka's aim is ultimately to restore himself
to power. Toward such a goal, which administration is best as a successor? Should

he fight against Fukuda, or should he join hands with him? Mr. Tanaka's considera-
tions all start out from such a base."

It is probably Tanaka's intention to drive a wedgebetweenSuzuki and Fukuda. and
t. take the initiative in the Suzuki-Tanaka-Fukuda alignment. That fact that Fukuda

has begun to aspire to the post-Suzuki premiership has given Tanaka an opportunity
to move towards his goal.

Fukuda, and of course Suzuki too. can continue to play the psychological Suzuki-
Tanaka-Fukuda alignment game while reading Tanaka's strategy. The surfacing of

the post-Suzuki movement has sparked increased activity in the three-way game. Yet
it cannot be considered to be necessarily disadvantageous to Suzuki.

As Kato has stated, the time is still distant before the party factions would engage
in infighting and the anti-Suzuki forces would unite to launch a fullufledged “topple
Suzuki movement." Meanwhile, Suzuki is more adept than Fukuda in manipulating the
party members in the psychological game, and it would be interesting to see what

moves Suzuki will make in his second term, after the Suzuki-Fukuda honeymoon in
his first term has ended.

According to Hichiharu Nakamura, he met Suzuki before the latter's trip to the United
States. and he said. "You seem to be getting along with Mr. Fukuda. Is it for real?"

Hhereupon Suzuki answered. "I believe he is quite sincere. That's the reason why
1 am being sincere. That's all."

This exchange is interesting, because it is typical of Suzuki. It contains the
nuance that, if Pukuda's sincerity is suspect, Suzuki's attitude could also change.
It reminds one of Suzuki's pragmatism. One could say, the fact that he does not
try to apply the unreliable yardstick of whether or not the relatio—ship is real
gives one an inkling of Suzuki's basic strategy in organizational control.

How will the Suzuki-Tanaka-Pukuda coalition change in the future. and will it lead
to the disintegration of the Suzuki regime? Or. will it become further stabilized?
The answers are inseparable from the second and third keys.

Debate on Administrative Reform: 15 It Feasible Or Not?

Whether he succeeds or not, the Suzuki administration will be remembered forever
for its hand in administrative reform. If the proposed plan is successful. he may
make a glorious exit, just like Sato after the return of Okinawa. 0n the other
hand, despite his successful revision of the U.S.-Japan mutual security pact. Kishi
reluctantly relinquished his government under duress.

Tanaka used his successful restoration of Japan-Sino relations to move ahead. Suzuki
is conceivably the same type as Tanaka. If he moves on the righttrack, his administra-
tion will gain strength. but he must be prepared to resign if he fails.

10
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second key is administrative reform. First. let me quote Koichi Kato's words.
"Regarding Suzuki's statement that he will 'stake his political life.‘ people say

it is premature to make such a statement. or that he probably let his tongue slip
without realizing its grave significance. Seriously. however. the Suzuki Cabinet

had only two alternatives: To increase taxes or to economize. This year. there

were several large targets. such as corporate taxes and automobile taxes. But

next year. there will be none. The only alternative left is to economize. Consider-
ing only the budget issue. even if Mr. Suzuki were not the prime minister. administra-

tive reform would have unavoidable. I believe the Suzuki administration is capable
of accomplishing it."

Suzuki himself has repeatedly stated, "Isn't it true that. of the two alternatives.

administrative reform is the only route?" However. there are many ways. slow or
quick. to carry it out.

There is some danger, as Kakuei Tanaka has pointed out. "If it was during the Ohira
regime. he might not have said anything like 'staking my political life on administra-
tive rcform.‘ I think Ohira would have considered administrative reform too formidable
a task and settled for non-recognition of any increase in budget expenditures. If

the Suzuki Cabinet is capable of implementing administrative reform in three years.
Ohira might have taken six years. Bx—bureaucrats are not likely to do anything
drastic with the bureaucratic system. In that sense. some party politicians do

resort to policy measures which are somewhat extreme." (Interview in ASAHI SHIHBUN.

19 June)

Tanaka's theory on the reform of the Japanese Islands was also a party politician's
brainchild. The administrative reform plan is probably an attempt which is similar
to Hiki's reform of the political funds control act and the anti-trust act. They
are all attempts to maintain the status quo.

Criticism of the administrative reform plan, which is tied to vested interests.

is steadily rising within the LDP. Toshikazu Fukuya says. "I don't believe the
administrative reform contemplated by Suzuki is feasible. The LDP is a political
party whose farm politics and subsidies have garnered votes. A serious implemen-
tation of administrative reform would shake the very foundations which prop up the
LDP. There is no reason why Suzuki should do that. After all. he has made quite
a big~uhow. He was estatic with an absolute majority as his support. Although

he stresses a 'politics of harmony,’ I believe in reality it is the exact opposite.
i don't believe the administrative reform plan will make any headway."

The debate leans toward an "impossible" view, rather than discussing the merits
and shortcomings of administrative reform itself.

At the prsent stage. it is difficult to predict how it will evolve. so let us put
aside any discussion of its feasibility. However. when the main debate on administra-
tive reform begins in July. the confrontation between the "pros" and "cons" will

take on added heat and breadth.

Whether Suzuki will be able to provide leadership in coordinating the debate may
become the test which will decide the fate of his administration. First. there
is the coordination necessary to draw the line somewhere. and also the question
of how Suzuki will respond when coordination fails and the majority decides the
reform is not feasible.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kato says, “Prime Minister Suzuki's method of emphasizing the party consensus on
the one hand. and watching public opinion on the other has a low center of gravity,
so there are few factors to cause a storm to erupt." Nonetheless. a confrontation
between party opinions and public opinion over administrative reform must be seen

as inevitable. The third key is. whether Suzuki will join hands with public opinion
on the "pro" side.

Consistent Importance Attached to Public Opinion

In looking back on Suzuki's politics during the past year, it has been surprisingly
consistent in its attachment of iaportance on public opinion. Bis "politics of
harmony" has eVOIVed in a multifacet manner. and it appears to have been given a
high priority in his political judgments.

His response to Tanaka's Lockheed affair; the storm over constitutional revision;
the American demand for the bolstering of Japan's defense strength; the three non-
nuclear prinicples; and administrative reform -- when forced to make hard choices.
Suzuki has acted generally in line with public opinion trends. Of course. he may
have taken other factors into consideration also. but Suzuki's realism has apparently

persuaded him of the safety in staying close to lines of cannon sense demanded by
public opinion.

Mrs. Suzuki, who accompanied him on his European tour. spoke in New York of "my
husband, Zenko." revealing his political posture aptly. "He never loses his composure.
He is always like the same, ordinary water temrature. It never turns boiling

hoc nor icy cold. Depending on the occasion. the water expanse is broadened or
narrowed; or the speed of the water flow is altered. It flows according to the
terrain and never tries to flow against it. He is like a river which never tries

to cut into the banks. or to cause floods to the people‘spredi‘canent. but flows seren-
ly on.

I think his philosophy is that there are probably many arguments concerning the
defense issue, and that it is not advisable to confuse people with sudden changes;
that one cannot win over anstional consensus by doing so. However, if that is the
national consensus, he will go along with the flow and maneuver freely. He is not
an obstinate person."

Mrs. Suzuki also spoke about the importance of the national consensus -- that is,

public opinion. In some aspects, the public opinion connection has made it difficult
for the opposition parties to attack him.

it reminds me of the time both the Upper and Lower Houses conducted a joint investi-
gation into the Reischauer testimony. Such Diet polemists as Hasashi Ishibashi
(former secretary general) and Takahiro Yokomichi (executive secretary of the special
comittee on anti-base measures) of the Japan Socialist Party concluded after a
discussion of ways to attack Suzuki, "We shouldn't hurt him too much. If we destroy
him, a more hawkish prime minister from the farther right might show up."

Junya Yano. secretary general of the Koneito Party, also said, "This could be the
most dovish administration to come out of the LDP."

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if Suzuki should be pushed to the wall by being repelled by the LDP factions, it

is not inconceivable that the opposition parties would rally around to support him.
As thepoliticalcorrclation chart shows, the opposition forces stand close to the
Suzuki administration, and not in confrontation. Especially the four centrist par-
ties -- the Komeito. Democratic Socialist Party, New Liberal Club and the United
Social Democratic Party -- are close enough to ride on the same bus. The pro-Suzuki

public opinion surrounds him at the outer fringe. Therefore. Suzuki's political
position is not necessarily unstable.

According to recent opinion polls conducted by the newspapers, the ASABI SHIMBUN

shows 36 percent in support and 39 percent in non-support. The YOHIURI SHIHBUN
shows 37 percent in support and 42 percent in non-support. The non-support figures

thus surpassed the support figures for the first time. However. the HAINICHI SHIHBUN
showed a slightly larger number in support. with 33 percent in support and 31 percent
in non-support. Considering that the polls were taken during the height of the
Japan—0.5. controversies and the nuclear issues. the support figure should not be
deemed as being low. It could turn upward in the event of a controversy over admini-
strative reform. The problem lies within the LDP. where frequent storms are brewing
against the outside. However, Hatsuno says, "Everyone in the party is watching

to see whether Suzuki will succeed in winning national support. The reason is.

it may affect themselves some day. If they can win in the next election with Suzuki
as their leader, they will support him. If they feel they will lose, they will
instantly demand a change in leaders. They are all alert to this. In that sense.
the Suzuki administration could be said to be standing at the crest of a precipice.
It is said. a politician in charge of a government is powerful. but if he loses

the people's support he will roll down the hill like a snowball." '

If Matsuno has accurately described the atmosphere within the LDP, Suzuki, who seeks
a union with public opinion. might be surprisingly longlived.

The "Suzuki style." which became a household word a year ago. has finally begun
to bare its contour. Even if he is destined to resign prematurely. his manner of
retirement will be interesting to watch.

COPYRIGHT: The Bungei Shunju Ltd. 1981

5885
C50: 4105/254

1
FOR OFFICIRL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

POLITICAL UNION VIEWED BY COLUMNIST

Tokyo MINICHI DAILY NEHS in English 17 Sep 81 p 2

[“Nagatacho Doings" coltnan by Takehilto 'l'altahashi:

'Ex-LDP' and 'Ex-JSP'")

[Text]

in the world oi politics. in
stead oi action being taken
based on a theory. there are
otten cases in which action is
taken lirst and a theory tormed
later based on that action.

The New Liberal Club and
United Socialist Democratic
Party are no exceptions in this.
in the case at the New Liberal
Cluttwasatatlmewhenthe
Liberal-Democratic Party was
toilowing the path at a decline
that the h'LC was located.
centering on Yohei Kono. in a
manner tantamount to tor-
sailingtheLDP.

What wouldbethebestwayto
participate in the ad-
ministration? This must have
been the thought uppermost in
themindsottheh'hCleadersat
that time. it the 1.0? were to
lose its majority to a greater
extent because oi the birth ot
the NLC. the LDP could be
torced to ask tor NLC's
cooperation in taming a
coalition government. ‘lhe NLC
would then be able to par~
ticipate in the government
under more tavorabte con-
ditionsthanasoneiaction oithe
LDP.

Contrary to this calculation
by the NLC. however. the
Liberal-Democratic Party
today possesses a stable
majority in both the llouse at
it resultant-as and the House
ot ounciilors.

Underaichasituatithere
is no opportunity tor the New
Liberal Club to appear on the
stage.‘l'heonlythingitoandols
to wall tor the next general
electionwiththehopethatthe
LDP‘sstrengthwllldeciiMln

tor that day. the
MC: own inﬂuence must be

strengthened.

Thiasltuatlutalsoapplieeto'

the ltomeito end the
Democratic SoClalist Party.
That is why DSP's Chairman
ltyosaku Sasaki is calling

y tor a “coalescence
ot- middle-ot-the-road in

AtonethnetheDSPhlntedat
readiness to loin a coalition

government it a call were
issuedbytheLDP.

Komeito Stance

The Konteito is cowardly
taking an anti-LB? stance. but
tnwardlyittheLDPweretocall
won it to ioin a coalition
government. the Komeito too
would like-to accept. Together
n'iththeLDP.thereareseveral
places. including the ‘toityo
metropolitan assembly and
local assemblies. where the
itomeito is the. government
party and it is well aware ot
how advantageous it is to he the
government party.

05? Chairman Sasalti has
tour panics-Kamila. ESP.
NLC and USDP—in mind tor

1h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.0139“!

"Uniﬁed Conunion of

the “coalescence ot middleol-
theroad inﬂuences." Belore
could make headway.
another plan by the Nile and
£80? to tortn a unitied intra-
Diet communion has
ahead.

In the lieu” ot Represen-
tatives. the NLC has it seats
and the USDP only 3. “that
combined they total only it.
They rank the lowest
numerically among the op-
position parties.
unitied intra-Diet communion
wouldnotbentmuchadvantage
to the NLC. Nevertheien the
aim might be to apply a brake
on the "0an at middle-
ot-the-road parties" advocated
by 08? Chairman Sasati.

it the New Liberal Club were
to coalesce with the Kotneito
and DSP. oppoeltion would
arise within the ranks ot the
NtﬁJtmlghtevenleadsomeot
the members to withdraw trom
theNLCandiointheLDP.Attd
yet. It the NLC remains
betuddled. the movement tor
"va ot middleol-the-
road inﬂuences" will gain
momentum and the mic might
become isolated among the
oppositionparties.

Theretore. it conceived the
idea ot locating a unified intra-
Diet communion with the
050?. even it that party has
only three members. in order to
torestali the "coalescence ot
.1 ........................
55% 3.9.3. .8253 So
cum. 2:. .61. £58 :8 28 a
5.532: a 8323::
23. = a n33». .33 so
58323. ”$335. 81. 8
.39 25.. :6 saw. :88
8:23 5 3808982.?
row. 25 8 2P8 3:9 is

5162».
7.25.53. :52 52.

582. 2. £832 a gain
32: 8 .3 an 2: 53 a?
a 525 $3.63. 5% 925

3.33.} 7D. .3. In: um—‘ND-
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

POL IT ICAL AND SOC IOLOC ICAL

'decided to have the

The thoughts that people have

are accompanied by both-

"plus" and "minus" (actors.
What was once midered "a
good idea" to solve a problem
may later turn out to be "a
dud."

A good example is the
revision oi the Liberal-
Democratic Party’s system for
election of the party president.
Not so long ago the LDP

PM!
president elected with the
participation oi all party
members. This was evaluated
highly as being unprecedented
in cooservativepolltics ~

in the first election held under
this system. there were tour
candidates-Talieo Fukuda.
hiasayoshi Ohira. Yasuhiro
Naiiasone and Toshio Komoto.
A preliminary vote was to be
held to determine the two
leading candidates tor the party
presidency. The Diet members
attached to the LDP would then
cast their votes to select one oi
thetsnasthepartypresident.

The result at the preliminary
voting placed Ohira in first
place and Fukuda second.
Fukuda thereupon declined to
be a candidate in the main
election. Accordingly Ohira
became the party president and
assumed the reins oi oiiice.

This was a surprising result
tor the people. Moreover. the
real situation oi registered
party members was ain-

biguous. it is said that l.5lll.0lll
party members participated in
the preliminary voting but the
question arose as to how many
of them actually paid the dues
themselves" Doubt was also
raised as to or not
some oi the names were he
titious. '

Alter much llltmspection on
this election. a revision oi the
system was studied. Not
knowing what kind oi system
would be newly adopted. tboee

_tntendingtobecome

tor party president made
trantie etiorts to gather party
members wiio would support
them. As the result. the party
membership swelled to J
million. it was said that l
million oi them supported
Kotnoto

Without Election

Aiter the sudden death of
Ohira. however. .the Suzuki
administration was newly

_ established. Zenho Suzuki

became the party president

‘l‘amura. chairman oi the
LDP's National Organization
Committee.

it was decided that voting
would take place in the
preliminary election on three
candidates {or the party
president. Moreover. each

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lees than three a preliminary
vote by all party members’
would not take place. The party
does were also raised to 3.000
yenannually. _

Under this system. ‘aud when
the actual situation oi the LDP
b' it "mi 8 Dim
tics y no posslbil ty 0 a
pre'lminary vote being held.
Under such circumstances.
therewouldbellttle meartngto
paying hmyenmdueeﬁnthe
other hand. it a muldbe
candidate were to deiray the
dues tor his toilowers. it would
amountto a very big sum'and
would be a waste it the
preliminary vote were not held.

Because oi~stioh a situation.
the LDP membership tell
conspicuously. Although there
were 3 million members at one
time. it has diviniﬂed to one
tenth arbouoooatpresent

The party members haveaiso
decreased in the Gumma
Preiecture and Hyogo
Preiecture constituencies of
Director General Nakasone
oi the Administrative litan-
agement Agency and Di-
rector Generai Kornoto oi the
Economic Pianmng' Agency.
who are looked upon as iii-
iltientiai candidates to succeed
party president 8min. The
only place where the LDP
cummemoretion."’Tén~
muctionotnallswassurtedh
some places. But the party
members have dwindled.
ieeling that “tliete is little
meaning in being a party
member iiwecen't participate
in the election oi the party

When ‘l‘atnun [emulated tits
revision plan it was regarded
an brilliant idealuﬂodaythe
vitality oi the LDP has {alien
and trouble is being en-
eountered iinenciaily. The
"minus" aspects oi the revision
plan enduring attention.

The Liberal-Democratic
Party is eweavoring to gather
party members by designating
October as “a month ior
promoting the ecqutsition ot
party members." it is doubtlul
whether great expectations can
beplacedontliisrnovement.
FORMATION OF NEW POLITICAL GROUP HELCOMED

Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEHS in English 25 Sep 81 p 2

(Editorial:

[Text]

"New Pol ltical Group“]

An amalgamation oi two small political parties is
merely a slight change in the political World but.we
hope that it will become a harbinger at new waves in
Japanese politics.

The New Liberal Club and the United Social
Democratic Party have tamed a new group called
the .‘Shinjiyu Club-Minshu Rengo" (literally. New

'Liberal ClubDemocratic Alliance) in the‘l—iouse oi

Representatives. The group comprises 13 members

and remains the smallest party in the Lower House.

We cannot expect a new 'political phase by its ac-
tivities in the Diet. The question. however. is whether
or not the energy to form the new group would prompt
lull-fledged political‘ movements which may come
next.

in a statement issued at the inaugural ceremony.
the group said it aims at doing away with the rule
established by the Liberal-Democratic Party. which
had won an overwhelming victory in the June elec-
tions of the House of Representatives and House oi
Councillors in 1980. and also at concentrating political
forces which can replace the present LDP govern-
ment.

Originally. the goal was specified by the tour
middle-olthe—roaders. including the Komeito and
Democratic Socialist parties. in the process of con-
centration. the two sin: ller parties were left out. The
tour parties could not unite themselves because of the
diiierence 0! views on diplomatic and defense policies
between the Komeito and the DSP. .

An amalgamation of political parties is a dlilicult
thing and cannot be implemented in a simple way.
For example. one of the ll N LC members reiused to

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

join the new group. saying: ”The new group
repments a merger with a political party which has
a different political ideology from mine. and this is
against my political philosophy and against the will of
the voters who voted for me."

We support the merger because. the new group's
political target to put an end to the LDP rule is in
accordance with the. general voters' wishes. We also
believe that the Japanese political setup centered on
the Liberal-Democratic and the Japan Socialist
parties for more than 25 years has brought about
inﬂexibility and corruption.

in this sense. the birth of the new group is not the
completion but the start of a new political trend. We
want to emphasize that the merger. will end up as
"news ln,briet" in political circles ii the new group
fails to prompt a widescale amalgamation oi the
middle-oi-the-roaders as a whole and tom a new
political group to replace the LDP government.

One thing we want to reemphasize here is that
such an amalgamation must be put into practice
based on solid principles and not in a hasty manner.
in the joint statement. the group said that it will try to
check an easygoing trend to expand military strength
and a right-leaning tendency. It also conﬁrmed that
the group will iaithiully follow the three non-nuclear
principles.

We hope that the new group will laiiblully iollow
the nonarms expansion and non-nuclear principles.
At the same time. we call for the Komelto and the
D8? to become aware oi the fact that their recent
statements. which can be interpreted as their support
for expanded military strength 0! Japan. run counter
to the public expectation in the concentration oi the
moderate groups. , '

What has attracted our attention was the merger
between the N111. which has been regarded as the
iollower oi new conservatism. and the United Social
Democrats who have a nostalgic feeling for
socialism. Their step indicates that they are pioneers
who can put an end to ideological conirontation. They
have made a choice that they will pursue an urban-
style political party formula with dovish diplomatic
and defense policies.

Out oi the 13 members. Seilchl Tagawa, Yohei

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kono and Toshio Yamaguchi were Liberal-
Democrats before the formation of the N LC some five
years ago and Hideo Den, Yanosuke Narasakl and
Shogo Abe were Socialists four years ago. All of them
were dissenters and their formation of a new group
may forecast political changes.
Thenewgroupisnotanewparty.8utgroup
members will join hands in their parliamentary
activities. We hope that their activities will send a
freshbreezeinto the Japanese political world.

iNICllI DAILY NEHS 1981

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SONODA-GROHYKO MEETING ANALYZED

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 25 Sep 81 p 2

[Editorieh

[Text]

"Dialog With Hoscow"]

Foreign Minister Sonoda's meeting with US Secre-
tary of State Alexander Haig and Soviet Foreign
Minister Andrei Gnomyko during the current UN
General Assembly session have opened the way for
dialogs among the three nations.

At the SonodaoGromyko meeting, Japan and the
Soviet Union agreed to resume their administrative.
level consultations which have been suspended since
1979. They also agreed to reopen regular toreign
ministerial talks. '

These developments are welcome. However. Gro-
myko again dashed Japanese hopes for the return of
the Soviet-occupied northem islands 01 Hokkaido
whenhesaidtherewasnoterritorial issuebetween
thetwocountrheﬂeaecusedJapanotmahingsimh
territoriaiclaimsunderpmddingtmmaiinaandthe
US, saying that Japan was taking steps to become
a military power. -

Gmmyko's charges follow the line of Soviet Pres-
ident Leonid Brezhnev who told the 26th general
meeting of the Soviet Communist Party in February
that Japan’s diplomatic policy was markd by its
sympathy for the dangerous plans of Washington and
Pekinganditsleaningtowardhecomingamilitary

power.

Need For Perseverance

Realistically, the JapanSoviet territorial issue is
related to changes in the international situation.
Japan must persevere to solve the issue while helping
to promote dialog between the US and the Soviet
Union and to ease world tension.

in the 1956 Japan-Soviet joint statement. Moscow
promised to return Hahomai and Shikotan islands to
Japan after they conclude a pesce treaty. Later. how-
ever. the USSR condemned the signing of the Japan-
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

US security treaty and said it would not return the
islands unless the US forces withdraw from Japan.
In the 1973 JapanSoviet joint statement. issued by
then prime minister Kskuei Tenslta and Brezhnev,
the two countries agreed to solve various issues pend-
ing since World War II and to conclude a peace treaty.
This friendly interlude was broken after a detecting
Soviet pilot landed his MiG in Japan masts-ma
Japan andChina' concluded a peace treaty in 1978."
Japan's claims to the northern territories have
nothing todo_witheithertheUS orChins.The Soviet
Union has been changing its stand by relating the
territorial issue to the international situation. Moscow
appears to be haunted by the phantom of collusion
among Japan. China and the US, which does not exist.

Back To Basics

When the administrative-level consultations are ne-
sumed, the two countries should return to the line of
the Tanks-Brezhnev joint statement. It is quite na-
tural that talks should be held on the basis of an_
agreement once reached by the leaders of the two
countries. .

“The unsolved issues pending since World War II."
as mentioned in the joint statement, are nothing more
than the territorial issue. There are no other unsettled
issues between the two countries.

We hope that talks on the territorial issue will
materialize as a result of an easing of tensions
through a USoSoviet dialog and the promotion'of dis.
armament.

Still. we cannot condone the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. which is counter to the principles of
peace. Japan cannot easily liftits sanctions against
the Soviet Union. The Sonoda-Gromyko meeting laid
only a thin thread which can lead to further talks.
We must try to enlarge this opening to attain our

purpose.

DAILY YOMIURI 1981

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ROWIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRIVATE CAPITAL OUTLAYS REPORTED RUNNING HIGH IN FY 81

Tokyo JAPAN econouuc JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 972, 15 Sep 81 pp 1,2

[Text]

Domestic investment in plant
and equipment by Japanese
corporations looks likely to
continue at a ligh level and
lead. together with exports,
the economy's recovery in the
rest ol ﬁscal ISO! and beyond.
according to the result 0! a sur-
vey ol investmem programs of
major corporations by the
Nihon Keizai Shlrnhun pub-
lished last week. (An interim
tabulation ol the survey was re-
ported in the Japan Economic
Journal September I issue.)

Planned capital investment
for ﬁscal 1901 ol the Lao firms
totaled v “.68” billion. up 11.1
per- cent over liscal 190's ac-
tual spendings. In ﬁscal usao.
they grew by to per cent. Corn-
pared with these corporations'
original investmerl programs
for the ﬁscal year. surveyed 8
0‘ last February. the latest
ﬁgure represeuts an upward
revision ol 1.6per cent.

The major source of strata}:
of capital spendirgs is the
manufacturing industries. in-
eluding. particularly. steel and
electric machinery. Even such
sluggish areas as chemicals
are moving to step up cap'tal
investment. the survey noted.
Smaller eras-prises with a
capitalization ol ¥0.5.5 billion
are also willing to invest vigor-
ously.

The corporations' mounting
interest in new plant and equip
mcnt stems from necessity to
deal with recent rapid technical

23

innovations and soaring costs
0! energy and to survive severe
companions both at home and
abroad. Labor savlun and new
mdud. developing! are the
top priorities in the investment
prey-anus. Since investmmt
geared to such purposes is out-
side the inlluence of hunters
cycles. the surge in private
plant and equipment experti-
tures that started in the latte
part of fiscal 1978 is considered
likely to lreep its momentum
for soruue time to come.

Capital investment planned
by manufacturing corucerns tor
nscal lm is up 12.7 per cent
from fiscal mo. according to
the survey. while that at non-
manulacturing ﬁrms is up 9.1
per cent. The sharp rise iru
manufacturing investment re-
ﬂects rruore than I) per cent in-
creases in such areas as steel.
electric machinery. tramporta-
tlon equipment excluding
autos. and precision ma-

'8

ﬁrms plan spacings 9.9 per
cent larger than last fiscal
yer. while airlines and rush-
eriesareslowingiuuvestment.

With regard to original in-
vestment programs for fiscal
user surveyed as oi last Feb
ruary l.003lirms.or4&1per
cut 0! all. have revised up-
ward the planned m
and Mar nope-ecu. have
reviseddownward

1hemarginolupuvsrdrevi-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
compelled to
capacity to keep up With rapid-
y expandnc dem

by electric appltance makers
for fiscal M] has come almd of
that of the steel industry. fol-
lowing electrtc power and auto
mobile industries.

A noteworthy trend is a slur
bte upward rension reported
try the depressed chcmncal in-
duxtry The high" investment
pom-am stems from the unten-
sitying race for capacity build.
up for line memicals and linear
low demity polyethylene. "If
we (all behind in investment
under the pretext of Mines
stuInp. we will lose out to (or-

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Masaki Yahldn. mi” of

Mitsubishi Puncher. l 00..

Miseitrim to themncue use at
0" s 0'in hut-try.
Sawmill upward revision.

Plant Ballpoint Investments
Phone! for Final ml

Plan-It
not w
“Mn Winona.
m (UNNIUI

Ml.
Almkh .. .. .IJ” Il‘H-ll‘)
taunt.»
I" ”SH?!”
6| 6.")(0 M)
(o 9.!)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trolytic utvanlzed product:
Machinery makers In his

' up Investment to mes
Wort tor robots an:

mated
ECONOMIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUJITSU FANUC LAUDED AS HOST CORPORATELY SOUND

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 972. 15 Sep 81 p 3

[Text]

The most outstanding com-
pany in Japan as to overall cor-
porate excellence in fiscal Ml
is Fujitsu Fanuc Ltd..
numerical control device
mailer. with the second and
third lighut ranlirg going to
htori Seiki Co.. a NC macline
got maker. and Toyota Motor

his is according to the Nlhon
Keiui Siimbm's latest check-
up oi overall corporate stand
ins bed on ﬁscal lm fin-
ancial data with its NEEDS-
CASMA system —- Nikkei
Economic Electronic Databank
System-Corporate Appraisal
System Multi-variate Statis-
tical Analysis.

it showed that the llrst two
places were won by corpora-
tions which were opening new
demand in the mechanical-
eiectronics tmechatronicsl
held. in a broad saute. in an-
swer to the new times requiring
economization of labor and
energy.

the assessment also ranked
in the top grouping such large
Japanese enterprises capable
oi competim with the world's
best as Toyoto Motor. Matsu-
shita Electric industrial Co..
iiitadii. Ltd. and Nippon Steel
Corp.

Japan's economy has been
registering a stable growth
after weathering two oil crises.
and the soundness oi its
ecomtnic imdamcntals this

has draw the world's attention

However. Japanese corpora-
tions lace more trouble in the

More. such asneceaaitytosw»
mouse the rollback oi the
Western world. such as em-
pitiied in the US. Reagan Ad
ministration's industrial
revitalization policy. mid to
cope with increasinc linema-
timaltradeirictions.

1he Nihon Keisai stimbtm
strove to obtain an image oi
\vtnt exactly was an excellent
corporation in ﬁscal I”! in the
overall sense by combining its
NEEDS system with the
appraisals made by its re
porters and those oi Niltei
BueimJtsmagaaioe.

'l'he checkup was directed at
1.67 companies chidly listed
on the nation's staid stock as-
changes. with the top moothen
beta selected (or awraisai. 0!
them. thetopsoareasshown in
thetahle.

the survey restits showed
that the excelled companies
comprised largely thosetahin;
the lead in electronics and
mechatrooica. such as electric
equipment. machinery.
automobiles and precision
machinery. and phar-
maceutical firms.

Fujitsu Fanuc. the beet. was
lound to rate £67 points. or
nearly double the ”paint
average mark. This company‘s
prodiction system is auto-
mated to such a agree as to

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arotneoommentthatitsrobots
Induce robots. Its market
share oi otanerical control
devicesreaches‘lbpercers.

Second-placeItoriSeiklalao
boasts a domatlc market
sharedoverﬂpercattinthe
lield oi reducing NC type
lathes.ltsenportratioreadies
overﬂperoeotslnoeitesporia
oil “I“! etptlpsnait to the
US.aodalsomaciinetoolsto
aircraittnaktlatta-otuhotdthe
world.

Wilcitsaitetpriaeacaieis
tar from being large. Mori's
eanimpowaiaoianestraor-
dinarymtunsinceitttnaout
high value-added products
hasedonhightechnoltcy.

'l'helota'thbatcompanyw
ioundtobexyotoceramlcco..
which has achieved swin cor-
porate youthonthestreoﬂh
oi its integrated circuit
ceramic packaces. it com-
mandsthebiuesteharcoithe
world'smarltetinthbarea.

‘l‘DK neurones 00.. top
maheroimapetic tapes. was
rankedﬂitthiaoompaoyh-
aseperoentsharedtheworid
marketiorvideotapereoorder
tapes.andziperomtiorauﬁo
tapesltundttakesprothctioo
intheUS.

Hitachi Maxwell Ltd. Pio
neerBlectronicCorpandVlctor
Oompanyoquianaisocameh
withiothemthrankim.‘t‘hese
oompars'es are alihe in that
theyhaveorginalityindevelop
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Top-Ranking Firm: by NEEDSL‘ASMA Ilalhg

" i

I Followed-u: . W
1 Moduli ~
1 ToyotaMoiov u
a chuamk an
s TDKlmNoiaca an
e amen-Marian ...... g.
I l'aiaha'narmaaulical. as
a (woman ..... on
e 6W ...... en
lo NW” 7.
I0 mumilailecmclmlvial .. M
I: nmnm ..... 7.
l) lum'ummmu... m
u memmnmu ...... m
is Kuwimhma ...... no
lo V-cluCoanun ....... 7“
I1 canon ., .. 10!
II Mamilollccmcworu- ..... m
II Nico .. .. tel
40 Suwmvalroh . ..... 737
II Erna- .. .. ..... I”
n Mam-um . no
22 “Insult - ’9
74 Sony. . .. . 15!
75 "Write... in
to menu ....... w

in: new ﬁelds of htsineaa with
their strong technological
development capacity.

Seven pharmaceutical com-
panies. including Taisho
Pharmaceutical Co.. Fujisawa
Pharmaceutical Co. and Green
Cross Com. also "math" the
top so ranking Their earnlm
rim high on the basis of their
technological development
capacity.

liisolsoaiactthattheranb
oi the big businesses which
represent Japan have gone up
this time. Toyota Motor. which
was ﬁlth lastyear. rosetothird
Matxtnhlta El climbed from
lsth spot to lath. Nissan Motor

 

 

 

17 allocni .............. I.
u Mew-Ia (Milkmen
law-mu ........ m
1| MWMimit-vn . m
”lem.......m
” “Nun“ ............ ’11
n MMEIKRKWorIa..... . . m
1) MOW-ll [Mk 'l‘lln _. 73;
SI YMMMWuII .... m
ll 7)!
1a ......... m
)7 ...... r8
8 no
i A no
. . 11:
4| "New. 715
ll immune-um m
4: Selena.- .............. . m
u rqimsum ....... m
u NWTMWW . m
I Delubnm'ﬂnm...... .. m
I “are ............. m
C MIMI ru
0 WW. 7!!
I tmmmwm. m
I. Mewuleli ... m

Co. edged up to 12th. Hitachi
roeeiromeﬂhtomJnlep
ponSteelJmlethtoe‘lth.
Those that rate hid: in the
listing were compani- width
were producing “atramlc
type" products and whoeepro
Milanalsowuhioi
world market it was aho‘m

thatnmmialslahisofmtol

They were enjoyiig a "favor-
able cycle" oi high earninp —-
development of high value
added products. this increasing
market ahare. and again

inﬂicting hlﬂt earrings.

31, The Nihon Keizai Shinhun, Inc.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

GOVERNMENT, ACADEHIA, INDUSTRY TO DEVELOP HICROPROCESSOR
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 5 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] A basic agreement has been reached between Matsuahita Electric Industry,
Sanyo Electric, Sharp, Mitsubishi Electric, and Osaka University for joint develop-
ment of a "new microprocessor" with a new logic structure. This plan is being car-
ried out as part of the Kinki district's information industry development project.
The Osaka Trade Bureau and the Osaka Science and Technology Center (Hasahiro wads,
chairman) have decided to give it active support. Since it is the first large-
scale project in the Kinki district with the joint participation of government,
industry, and academia, there are great hopes for its success. The new micro-
processor, which is the leading item to be developed, is planned to be a "non-
Neumann type" computer which can perform high-level parallel processing. It will
be the "Kansai version" of the fifth-generation computer development plan being
promoted by HITI. However, this project is primarily ained at developing popular
applications. The specific plans will be firmed up this year, and the official
start of the project, following determination of the operating budget and develop-
ment period, is scheduled for next year.

Intended Mainly for Popular Use; To Begin Next Year

This project came out of the activities of the Kinki Information Industry Develop-
ment Committee, which was organized as an advisory committee to the Osaka Trade
Bureau director last spring. A statement by the committee this spring emphasized
the need for a joint research organization centered around industry but enlisting
the support of government and academia. There are no mainframe computer manu-
facturers in the Kinki district, but there is a concentration of high-level tech-
nology for microprocessors, and the area leads in technology for popular use (one-
chip microcomputers, etc.). Microcomputer-related industries are also active, and
the committee arrived at a consensus that the total capacity of the Kinki micro-
electronics industry should be brought together for information industry develop-
ment.

They decided to build a joint research organization around a nucleus of private
industry, the three major Kinki electronics companies-Hatsushita, Sanyo, and
Sharp-and Mitsubishi, which has its central research laboratory and its base for
semiconductor development in the Kinki district, and obtain the participation of
the local university, Osaka University. It is possible that there will be further
participants, including other influential companies whose business is related to
microcomputers, plus Kyoto University.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The new microprocessor which will be developed will be a next-generation computer
popularly referred to as a "non-Neumann" computer. It will be used to solve the
problems of the present control system, the sequential processing method (software
crises such as program complexity, expanding program development and maintenance
costs, low speed, etc.). By using a high-level parallel processing system which
can carry out a large number of commands simultaneously, it becomes possible to
eliminate troublesome programming, carry out commands closer to the operator, and
process normal language.

A major technological factor behind the development of this "non-Neumann computer"
is the shift from LSI circuits to VLSI circuits. The technology for developing
the device, keeping in mind the aim of popular use. will be based on an extension
of silicon technology. Development of a new microcomputer (VLSI) will require an
especially large investment, so mass consumption will be essential to increase

the effectiveness of the investment. A practical application for popular use is
suitable because it involves mass production and lower cost. Also, the Kinki dis-
trict has a traditional strength in the popular applications of electronics, and
there is a firm foundation of applied development capacity. This is one reason
for carrying out this project. In this respect, the concepts used will differ
from those used in projects for fifth-generation mainframe computers. Beginning
next year, an operating budget will be determined, and a research association
consisting mainly of four private companies will be organized and given the go-

COPYRICHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981

9651
C80: 4105/22?

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOUJGY

The "new media" is emerging because: 1) As the "information society" advances,
individual preferences and lifestyles are diversifying and the recipients of in-

more selection of information. 2) Because of the amazing progress of communica-
tions and electronics technology, the equipment required for the new_medis is in-
expensive and widely available. Also, the progress of the new media is not con-
fined to equipment manufacturers. It has spawned new business in information-

discs, "a record that makes pictures," and a parabola antenna for home use that
will receive electrical vaves directly from satellites, in addition to voice
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

movements indicates that these manufacturers consider the new media to be a stra-
tegic field with very practical possibilities.

Particular plans include the following: 1) The CAPTAIN sy_.em is scheduled for
practical application in 1983, 2 years from now, and character multiplex broadcast-
ing is expected to be ready by 1983. 2) Expansion of communications, broadcast
satellites, and the use of light coununication is expected as we move toward 1995.
These developments show that there is an awareness that the new media is close to
a period of rapid expansion. This has motivated industry to work with the new
media.

The VTR (video tape recorder) has been called the "advance guard" of the new media.
This year it will grow into an industry that goes beyond color television. Kenzo
Tatematsu, director of the Hatsushita Electrical Equipment Image Information Sys-
tem Development Promotion Center, has said that the beginning of audio multiplex
broadcasting "has promoted a demand for color television that is beyond expecta-
tions." Products related to the new media have become major products for equip-
ment manufacturers.

A "television that anticipates 1983," which looks ahead to the period of practical
application of the new media, has come on the market. One such item, a "televi-
sion with multiple built-in functions," was recently put on the market by Japan
Victor. In addition to audio multiplex broadcast reception and VTR recording and
replay features, it has a videodisc player and a hookup for the CAPTAIN system.
Sony has begun selling a "single function" television, with only a picture tube
separate from the speaker and tuner.

The new media whirlwind is headed for the overseas market. For example, Sony is
locally manufacturing a receiving terminal for the Prestel system, the British
version of the CAPTAIN system. The home converter and program production equip-
ment for CATV (cable television) in the United States is said to be mostly made
in Japan.

New participation by fields other than the related equipment manufacturers has be-
come conspicuous in the form of provision of information. Nomura Securities, the
largest securities company, is providing an information service to its customers
with VTR and facsimile. With the end of next year as the target, it plans to in-
stall a uniform display system (television image display devices) throughout its
network of domestic and foreign branches and to develop an international invest-
ment information system. Financial institutions have also begun to study the use
of the CAPTAIN system to improve and streamline their teller services.

The advertising industry has taken notice of the role of the new media as an adver-
tising medium and has quickly begun to study its influence on "existing media,"
such as television and newspapers. Dentsu, the leading advertising company, is
participating in experimental projects for the CAPTAIN system and has set up a
special video disc organization. Nakuhodo, the second largest company, has es-
tablished a "media research and development center." These efforts by industry

to apply the new media to new business seem likely to become more and more active
in the future.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

9651
CSO: 4105/240

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON ’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIBME AND TECHMLOCY

JAPANESE AUTO INDUSTRY VIEWS RISING PROBLDB

Tokyo DIAMOND'S INDUSTRIA in English Vol 11. No 9, Sep 81 pp 8-12

[Ten] Japan's exports of automobiles (four-wheel vehicles)

during fiscal 1980 (April 1, 1980~March 31, 1981)
totaled 6,152,108 units, according to the Japan
Automobile Manufacturers’ Association. The ﬁgure
represented a record 25% increase over the previous
year. Export business in two-wheel vehicles was also
brislt in that year.

Despite all these, the auto industry community
seemingly lacks vividness. This is probably because
the United States and the European Community are
stepping up restrictions on imports of Japanese cars,
while domestic sales of new cars show a more or less
downward trend.

However, nobody in the auto industry, which has
become the top earner in the nation's external trade
through energetic efforts and research activities, must
have lost his aggressive attitude to move ahead con-
stantly by resolving whatever difficulties standing in
the way. In this article we will present the current
state of the auto industry from the standpoint of
economics (possibly including political aspects) and
technology. (Ed.)

Exports to US. Market

During ﬁscal 1980, which ended on March 31. l98l,
2,576,38l cars were shipped to North America. ‘l’hat
represented about 40.7% of Japan's total automobile
exports — 6, I52, 108 units (four wheel vehicles). A majority
of them were bound for the United States. It is a really big
market for the lapanese auto industry, and major ﬂuctua-
tions in demand there could deal a serious blow to the
Industry. Therefore, the scale of exports to the US. is the

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rmst important factor for Japanese automakers to project
their annual business plans.

However, growth of car exports to the U.S. has rapidly
slowed down during the past few years because of protec-
tionist moves on the part of the United States. Discussions
continued within the Japanese auto industry and the Japa-
nese Government to decide whether the industry should
exercise voluntary export control or the two countries
should conclude a governmental agreement to ﬂit annual
shipment volumes. Initially, the Government assumed the
position that the auto industry should control exports on
its own and that the Government would provide administra-
tive guidance -nly when it was deemed necessary. However,
U.S. pressure for self-restraint increased after the turn of
the year, while there was persistent demand for Japanese
cars among U.S. consumers. As a rewlt, the Government
decided to seek a political settlement. Through the talks
between the Japanese Minister of International Trade and
Industry, Rokusuke Tanalta, and the U.S. special trade
representative, William Brock, on May I, l98l, Japan
agreed to curb car exports to the U.S. during fiscal I981
to the l,680,000 unit level. They also agreed to control the
volume of exports for ﬁscal 1982 and I983 to an extent to
be decided after studying market conditions.

Thus the problem of car exports became a political
issue between Japan and the United States. The Ministry
of International Trade and Industry originally calculated to
ﬁx the ceiling above 1,700,000 o‘nits. but eventually accept.
ed the agreed ﬁgure, as Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki
instructed a quick settlement in the fear that it could
develop into a political issue that would affect diplomatic
relations between Tokyo and Washington.

Immediately after the agreement. International Trade
and Industry Minister Tanalta issued a statement saying
that the Japanese Government fully recognized that the
U.S. Government was making serious efforts to reconstruct
the U.S. auto industry and that the latest ayeement was
a provisional measure which was taken on the assump-
tion that the U.S. would continue such efforts, with a
view to expanding the Japanese economy under the free
trade system Prime Minister Suzuki, too, emphasized
that the measure was taken to maintain the free trade
system throughout and that the measure would not be
applied to the European Community or Canada without
conditions.

However, Takashi lshihara. president of Nissan Motor
Co., Ltd. and concurrently president of the Japan Auto-
mobile Manufacturers’ Association, expressed strong dis~
satisfaction over the latest decision. He said it was extreme.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ly regretful that the industry‘s position, that the voluntary
control measure should be made a provisional one limiting
the export volume to below last year's level and lasting for
only one year, was not accepted. Probably there were
strong hopes within the industry that the ceiling for exports
would be set at a level far more than the actually fixed
volume - 65% of the exports last year and that the control
would last for only a year. At the same time, the Japanese
auto industry fears that the European Community will
demand similar measures and that the ageed three years
of voluntary control will also force great sacrifices on
manufacturers which supply materials and partsto assemb-
Iy makers.

Rep-reunions and Countermeasures

Whether the indusuy likes it or not, the export ceiling
for fiscal I98I has been set at l,680,000 units, which is the
mean volume of actual exports to the US. in ﬁscal I979
and 1980 — i,546,740 units (up 9% over l978) and
l,8l9,092 units (up ”.696 over l979). The Ministry of
International Trade and Industry set the export quota for
each automaker on the basis of the average of its exports
during the past two years with a marginal adjustment of
increase or reduction. Toyota Motor was given a quota of
Sl8,000 units (-6.2% units from the average), Nissan
Motor 458,600 unit (-S,600), Honda Motor 353,000 units
(-4.800), Toyo Kogyo IS9,000 units (-2,300), Mitsubishi
Motors "4,000 units (63,100), Fuji Heavy Industries
66,000 units (*2,200) and Isuzu Motors 17,000 units
(08,600). Thus the quotas were unfavorable for the top
three makers. This was designed to help close the widening
gap between big and small makers in exports to the US.
At the same time, considerations were given to makers
afﬁliated with U S. automakers (Mitsubishi with Chrysler
and Isuzu with GM).

In saIes of passenger cars, )apanese automakers are
heavily depending on exports to the US. market, and
a fall in the ﬁeld of business could give a fatal blow to
smaller makers. It is, therefore, reported that approaches
to MITI by automakers for bigger quotas were quite aggres-
sive. In deciding the quotas, confrontation between the
Big Two (Toyota and Nissan) and other manufacturers was
also brought into relief. Toyota and Nissan called for
quotas based exactly on the past results. Other makers
demanded adjustments. asserting that ﬂooding exports by
big makers caused the latest trade friction. Some maker

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.-

even said that it would withdraw from the Japan Auto-
mobile Manufacturers' Association to pursue its own way
in export business. Thus there was confrontation among
the members of the association. Under the circumstances,
MITI ofﬁcials continued heated discussions for days with
export staffers of automakers.

However, all makers complained about the quotas they
had received. Even smaller makers who had additional
quotas were not satisfied. Some of these makers said that
the quotas would not be enough to maintain the operations
of their dealers in the U.S. Although the ceiling of exports
for ﬁscal l98l was generally acceptable for both Japanese
and U.S. Governments, it caused great dissatisfaction and
left a heavy residue of hard feeling among Japanese car
manufacturers.

These manufacturers are now busy working out counter-
measures to continue business expansion in spite of the
bleak situation in trade with the U.S. Many are studying
plans to develop new export markets in countries other
than the U.S. The number of automobiles registered in
Japan totals about 37 million units to the total population
of some ”0 million. The domestic car market is obviously
in a near-saturation. On the other hand, Japan's auto-
mobile production now stands at about to million units
a year. The auto indusz needs to export more than half
of them if it tries to maintain the production scale of last
year. And, they possibly want to keep this year’s output
at the preview year's level. However, European countries
are stepping up controls on car imports from Japan. Makers
have turned their eyes to Latin American countries. In
fact, car shipments to Latin America sharply increased in
I980, and it is becoming the third largest export market for
Japanese cars, following the United States and Europe. But
business in that part of the world is not at all easy, because
inflation is rampant in some countries and the political
situations are not very stable in some countries.

Therefore, some makers are placing more emphasis on
exports of trucks and other vehicles than passenger cars.
while promoting car exports in "knock-down formula."
Exports of used cars to Southeast Asian countries are likely
to increase further. One of the big makers here began a
large-scale market survey and sales campaigns for used
cars in Southeast Asia. But all market watchers questioned
point out that used car business in Southeast Asia is not
very proﬁtable, because market prices are sluggish, while
users ask for more improved performances.

In trade with the U.S., many manufacturers hold a view
that they should add more values to their products to take
more profits out of the limited number of exports. Toyota.
for example, will probably try to expand the export of

3b
FOR omcut. use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

rmre expensive passenger cars like "Celica" and "Cressida."
But some observers say that exports of expensive passenger
cars are not very promising since these products will inevi-
tably compete with "J-Cars" of GM. Another effort to earn
more proﬁts would be to sell more optional equipment,
such as power steering, air conditioners and car stereo sets.
Makers especially want to sell more air conditioners. In
exported cars, 90% of highgrade cars are equipped with air
conditioners. But the ratios of medium- and low-grade cars
are W. These ratios may be raised more in the future.
Options like power steering, car stereo sets and aluminum
wheels are all expensive products. More cars to be exported
to the us. may be equipped with these optional goods.

Anyway, Japanese automakers will face various diffi-
culties in trade with the U5. The fact that the ceiling of
exports was set this time through governmental talks will
probably be used as a sort of precedent to impose sanctions
on Japanese automakers whenever the US. auto industry
complains of "excessive exports."

Parts Exports

Despite their self-restraint on car exports to the United
States and European Community nations, Japanese auto-
nukers have so far no plans for major production cutbacks.
Some makers even maintain that there will be no change in
the production scale this year, while some company execu-
tives say they can hardly foresee demand two or three
months ahead. Changes in demand, up or down, will
inevitably affect business of parts makers.

Recently, however, it has been often reported that
Japanese auto parts makers had concluded contracts to
directly supply parts to assembly makers overseas. These
reports appear to suggest the future of Japanese auto parts
manufacturers.

For example, Nippon Oil Seal Industry Co., Ltd. built a
production plant near Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A., last year,
and it went into operation in November with a total of
some 300 mloyees. (Of these, 50 are Japanese engineers
for provisional assignment.) The company's products are
ranked "A" by General Motors Corp., following rigid tests
last year. A wide range of oil seal products for cars will
be supplied to GM in large quantities, starting this autumn.
Nippon Oil Sea! is Japan's top oil seal product maker with
a domestic market share of about 6096, and seals and
related products for automobiles account for more than
50% of its total output.

Products of Nippon Oil Seal will probably be installed
on J‘Cars, a rival product of Japanese compact passenger

35
Fort art-1cm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cars. In this connection, an executive of the company says.
"Competition in the auto parts is harsh. On the other
hand, if the quality of products is high, any automaker will
buy them. Japanese cars may use American-made parts,
while American cars use Japanese or Europeanmade pans.
We are exerting efforts to make better products under the
concept that we are net Just for domestic automakers but
for all automakers in the world."

To be sure, the quality of Japanese-made auto parts are
fairly high by the world standards. The above-mentioned
executive attributes this to Japanese automakers and car
users who are particular about quality problems. Undenia-
bly, the high product quality has helped raise the populari-
ty of Japanese cars in the world market as it is today. The
Japan Auto Parts Industries Association says that exports
last year totaled $3,752 million, a 23.8% increase over the
previous year (including those used in cars exported). This
comes to about ¥849,700 million, according to the average
exchange rate of last year. The ﬁgure represents about three
times the amoint of exports five years ago. This year's
exports might reach ¥l00.000 million, since the value of
the yen tends to decline and also exports during the first
half of this year were above the level of the previous
corresponding period.

Especially norable in this year's exports is that ship-
ments of replacement parts for cars exported in the past are
likely to increase. Also likely to increase this year are
parts for knockdown exports of cars to foreign automakers
by Japanese assembly makers. Overseas production plants
of Japanese pans makers will expand production to supply
more parts to automakers in the cauntries of their loca.
tions, as in the case of Nippon Oil Seal Industry.

Competition is undeniably fierce among parts makers.
But future prospects of Japanese auto pans makers are
rather bright, because the qualities of their products are
high. The Japanese automotive parts industry should there
lore, continue efforts to make even better products to
become a maior parts supplier for automobile manufac-
turers in the world.

Lead Co., Ltd. 1981

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

AUTOMOTIVE ELECTRONICS ERA FORETOLD

Tokyo DIAMOND'S INDUSTRIA in English Vol 11, No 9. Sep 81 pp 110-17

[Text]

Microcomputer Cars

When Nissan Motor Co. carried out
model changes on Datsun 280C
(Nissan Cedric/Gloria on the lapanese
market) in lune, I979, it marketed
models equipped with an integrated
microcomputer-controlled engine sys-
tem for the first time in lapan. This
system is called an "Electronic Con-
centrated Engine Control System"
and dubbed as "ECCS." This system
constantly detects engine conditions,
the position of the accelerator pedal,
the transmission shift position, the car
speed, the air conditioner operation
and the battery voltage, and it decides
the fuel mixture, the ignition timing
and other factors for the best engine
performance.

The lapanese auto industry was late
in the adoption of a microcomputer
system for engine control compared
with its American and European
counterparts. But Nissan's ECCS is the
most comprehensive system, which
controls even the state of the combus~
tion chamber. And the marketing of
cars with this system was called by
mass media the beginning of the "era
of microcomputer cars"

In October, i980. Toyota Motor
Co. similarly announced the marketing
of Cressida (Mark II in Japan)
equipped with a TCCS (Toyota Com-
puter Control System) engine. TCCS

37

enoloys a l2-bit microcomputer, com-
pared with the 8-bit type of Nissan,
and Toyota claims that its system
covers more areas of control. Honda
Motor announced that the company '
is ready to adopt a 16bit microcom-
puter for the engine control system.
TCCS is now also employed by
Crowns. Nissan’s ECCS is also available
for Datsun 2802)( (Datsun Fairlady Z
in japan). However, the costs of these
systems are still high, and they are still
options for high-grade models.
Microcomputer systems were origi-
nally developed to more properly
meet the world’s strictest control
standards for exhaust fumes now in
force in Japan. In August, I971,
Nissan marketed Oatsun Bluebird U
(now Datsun BIO Maxima in North
America) equipped with an EGI
(Electronic Gasoline Injection) engine.
Toyota's first system of the kind is
an EFI (Electronic Fuel Injection)
system, announced in September,
I97l. The conventional mechanically
controlled carburetor was unable to
maintain the ratio of fuel and air
mixture at high degree of accuracy
required for the best peformance of
the 3-way catalyzer to reduce the
contents of HC, CO and NO" from
exhaust fumes. The microcomputer-
applied fuel injection system served
the purpose of accurately controlling

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
22:63..“ 89:55“ :6 :8 325.
8 5a (5322.. £603 3a 82
.25.

«36.. .385; .— ..mv8x 23:2:
3. 5:5 33:28 <28 0: 93:3.
32.3.3 5 0232. 68. 2x :6
23. :30 5 :5 £26. .3 :8 92:9.
:5 856 £23 om 3.3 .3 :22. .3
So 3:652 3232 535... 2.
3289.3. 3332.3. 3: =5. 26
32852. 3 m 26033 328.
“$83. .25 $552K <18 «:3 53.
in“ £3: :8 3253 303.82 3+.
03 o. :3 ax so: none... on: o.
non—£38 (:2. :8 £3.20: :2 a
:- g-ﬂ .‘a‘ula .ﬂu cl 11:- CG “aft-a
5383....

9:3 :8 3.033352. 3 263.
:3. :33 a 3 62 0.. «88333
5 c8. .2.» 3:83.538. 333.
3:2: 3.. 26.33 9.5.353 83»
3.3.63 88.: 33 p.309. can:
angina. : as 3 RS .1.
400m. 9: :53. on :8 .553 3..
«2 «323:5 2.x. :8: So «83....
3333 .3 E: :25. 35.832...
26 52.. a so 5535. 3:83 5».
SEE 838. :8 3:3 8125.63
m... n 3303332.: 3252.. 5 3a..
Buscvoﬁza ﬁn a: m: a span 5.
COPYRIGHT:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060029-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

point, the Navicom will constantly
detect the current location in relation
to the destination and tells the dis-
tance still to go and a directional
error if any. Therefore. it can guide
the driver to an unfamiliar destination.

In April, 1973, the Agency of
Industrial Science and Technology of
the Ministry of International Trade
and Industry launched a six-year
national research project for "The
Comprehensive Automobile Traffic
Control System" The project was
designed to develop a system to
provide necessary information con
cerning changing road and traffic
conditions for cars on the road and
give them proper guidance by a
telecommunication link between cars
and the traffic control facilities at
major intersections.

The project was participated in by
five public organizations or research
institutes, including the National
Research Institute of Police Science
of the National Police Agency, and
nine private companies, including
Toyota Motor and leading general
electric and electronic manufacturers.
Experiments were carried out by
using an area of about 300,000 km'
in the western part of Tokyo, includ.

Diamond Lead Co., Ltd. 1981

C80: 4120/13

lio

ing the cor
Roppongidistr

The experii
The newly devi
in practical us
mous costs. F1
driver inductiv
“ALI," was tes
West Germany,
Volkswagenwei
research proiei
hint that car etc
cover traffic co

The car ell
begun, but aﬁ
ties are now
extensive areas
errors, althougl
projects are all
Is an age really
”car electronic
near future? la
world's top in
proud of its ef'
tern and high I
as well as of ti
products. lapal
industry where
electronic tech
thing does the r
its future progre

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060029-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'ecmlomcv

i IN CAR MAKING DESCRIBE)

l’S INDUSTRIA in English V01 11, No 9, Sep 81 pp 18-20

Industrial Robots

In the past, the most popqu photo-
graph of a car production plant was of
a conveyor line where cars are near
completion. In Japan, however, it has
recently changed to the scene of the
welding line of a car body. Many
hands would come out of robots and
perform the spot-welding of the car
body. Of course, there is no man seen
around the machine. It may give an
inpression that Japanese cars are being
made by industrial robots.

In the introduction of robots for
body welding Jobs, Nissan Motor Co.
was the most active. In fact, General
Motors introduced robots for welding
Jobs earlier (in 1965) than Nissan (in

.l967). Nissan ﬁrst began using the
Unimate robots of the US. at its
Oppama Plant. Nissan is now using a
total of abOut 500 industrial robots at
its plants mainly for spot welding iobs.
This is the largest number of robots
being used among automakers of the
world. Toyota Motor, too, must be
using many industrial robots, although
their number is not made public. Toyo
Kogyo, Japan's third largest auto-
maker. is now using about l$0 robots.
And it has plans to introduce 140
more units to a new plant now under
construction and another 50 units
to other plants. In other words. the

M

company 'will soon have 340 robots
in operation at its plants.

The output of industrial robots in
Japan has increased sharply in recent
years. According to the Japan Indus-
trial Robot Association, their ship-
ments totaled ¥l3,72s4 million in
value in 1976, ¥21,l28 million in
1977, ¥26,613 million in 1978,
”8,080 million in 1979 and ’176,928
million in I980. An overwhelming
number of those robots were shipped
to the automobile and electric appli-
ance ‘ndustries. The ratios of the auto
industry to total shipments from I916
to I980 were 30%, 34%, 39%, 38%
and 3096, respectively. Similar ratios of
the electric appliance industry were
2195, 23%, 24%, 18% and 36%. The
association's survey indicates that the
auto industry has been increasingly
introducing industrial robots.

According to a survey published by
the Robot Institute oi America in
March, I979, there were 47,000 units
of robot in operation in Japan, 5,850
units in West Germany and 3,255 units
in the United States. Other countries
surveyed had less than 1,000 units.
As for high-grade robots having play-
back or more sophisticated functions.
Japan operates 3,000 units. the us.
2,l5$ units, Sweden 570 units and
West Germany 450 units. As far as
the survey shows, Japan leads the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060029-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

world in the use of industrial robots.
The robots used for spot-welding at
car plants have playback functions.

Japan with scarce natural rescurces
heavily depends on imports for raw
material supplies and therefore exports
a large amount of manufactured goods
made from imported materials to keep
its economy running. Japanese indus-
try, therefore, is making streneous
efforts to raise its productivity with a
view to maintaining the competitive
strength of its products on the overseas
market. The active introduction of
industrial robots is part of those efforts.

There is another reason why robots
are prevailing in Japan. The introduc-
tion of robots, which can replace
human hands, is liable to meet opposi-
tion of labor unions. In many coun-
tries, craft unions are popular and
it is difficult to change occupations.
In contrast, most Japanese Iab0r
unions are organized on a company
basis, and a change in occupation is
relatively easy. This would provide
more opportunities to employ indus-
trial robots.

The Japanese auto industry has
made uhausme efforts for business
rationalization. Ideas of workers have
been actively employed to Improve the
qualities of products and raise produc-
tivity. In June, l98l, Toyota Motor
celebrated the 30th anniversary of the

establishment of a system collect ideas

_for work improvement from among

employees. During the period, a total
of 5 million ideas, large or small, were
received. During fiscal I980 alone,
92.3% of the total number of em-
ployees presented an aggregate
859,000 proposals, and 94% of them
are said to have been adopted. Not
only the management but also all its

ha

mloyees at»
business ratic
created a favc
ploy many roll
plants.

Merits of Robe

For spot.“
automakers in
welders of Ma
in the past. Th
to weld many
But their unit
and they were.
model. They h
time modelswt

the number
reduced to 0
replaced by in
form spot~wek
purpose robots
less of model cl
In October,
began using mu
were developed
Corp. This robt
of ten welding
problem to p
robots on the I
welding line. T
multipurpose
Motor develop
system, which
perform minim
weldings at th
welding pro“:
replaced multim
In I978, Nis
at its Zama Plan
two different ty
neously on a wt
flow productit
inportant, wher
types increases .1
“19¢ falls. 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060029-0
2.1 :uI-Id- I. 1...; '11.: .qu-uI.I|cI.

in 52: 2 :6 3333... 9.5 9...:
in. So as. (3. no 583 8822
is. z 332. 5a m. a: 28
«3335.. «so :3 on 5.8 3.8:
5. 86.2.3. 2 .30.. 35 to...
$5.: 3.3 5 :6 3:3» an Boa
3303.." n35...

roves. (an: to; 5:63 2....
233 8 39.3 an 3. 35.8..5
922%. 393.: £33 58 u so
$2.2 ca 25. 3.63.5.8: «:23.
no.6: :8 can: 8 an 52. 3.. ‘38.
”3 5a 23‘ 93035 no... 5 .5.
333...» £253 88:33. maﬁa...

I’l’ I'rlr-I rip-I r...) on! ’-0: I g-
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060029-0

COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stand practical use. In spot-welding,
what is required of the robot is
primarily to pinpoint spots for weld-
ing. In painting, the robot needs to
control lines or areas involved in work.
That is why the introduction of robots
to the painting process has been delay-
ed.

Kobe Steel, Ltd. has been turning
out a robot for painting, "Kobelco-
Trallfa" under license from Trallfa
Nils Underhaug of Norway. It has
already shipped out about 200 units,
of which 80 units are delivered to
automakers. They include robots for
painting cylinder heads and cylinder
blocks. In 1980 the ﬁrm announced
the completion of a robot for body
painting Robots of this type have
already been delivered to Nissan
Motor, Fuji Heavy Industries and
Honda Motor, two each. In lune this
year, it also received an order for
additional two from Nissan.

Tokiko Ltd., a maker of auto-
motive parts, is manufacturing paint-
ing robots with'flexible wrists. It also
developed a more sophisticated prod-
uct and in luly, l98l, it received an
order for 20 units of those robots
from Toyo Kogyo.

Kawasaki Heavy Industries. a big
maker of spot-welding robots.‘has also

4120/13

Diamond Lead Co.. Ltd. 1981

his

developed painti

ing this field ;
Industries, Hitau
Fuiikoshi. 8i:

introducing pain
spot'welding rob
began using roI
They, in fact, an
for various other
auto industry i
expanding the us
for some time
facilitate the sir
tion lines.

The Japanese
made productio
econornv is shi
moderate 9'0th
under voluntary
the industry can
plant and equip
raise product qu.
production lines‘
in; itself for lit
a worldwide ran
cars. The adoptic
this line. In addi
nese automakers
tronic technology
The adoption of
advancing in bo
and products.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060029-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE arm Tscuuowcv'

TECHNOLOGICAL INTERCEANGES AMONG BUSINESSES SPREAD

Tokyo DIAHOID'S INDUSTRIA in English Vol 11, No 9, Sep 81 pp 100-103

[Text] _

This year is called the "ﬁrst year of technological inter-
changes among businesses of different categories." This is
because the technological interchanges among small- and

mediurrrscale enterprises in the different fields have
become noticeable and the Government has begun

supporting the move.

This is against the background of the new age of tech-
nological innovation which came to the fore in the latter

ha”

. last year. The enterprises’ strategy for survival,

which has just been started, has many promises, but, at
the same time, it embraces many problems that must be

solved.

Background

The "Technological Interchange
Plaza" was started in July. l98l,
under the auspices of the Small and
Medium Enterprises Agency of the
Ministry of International Trade and
Industry. It is designed to select, at the
initiative of prefectures, about 30
managers of small- and medium-scale
enterprises enthusiastic about tech-
nological development and hold their
meeting on technological interchanges
once_a month. It is planned to hold
such meetings in 25 prefectures,
including Osaka, during the current
fiscal year and spread them through-
out the country during the next ﬁscal
year.

The pmiect is being backed up by
the Small Business National Corp., an

its

organization affiliated with the
Ministry of international Trade and
industry. The corporation already set
up a specialized "Technological Inter-
change Department” and held the ﬁrst
national meeting on the technological
interchanges among businesses of
different categories in last March.

The technological interchanges
among businesses of different catego
ries are nothing new. Osaka Scientiﬁc
Technology Center, which is a founda-
tion. took the initiative in organizing
such meetings in 1970: Local govern
ments and private organizations
embarked on similar proiects around
1975 and the Small Business National
Corp. began to tackle it in 1977 as a
"project on the promotion of the
transfer of technologies." But this year
is called the "first year of the techno-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5» 33.8.. 2 883:3 n33...”
38:52 5a soars-5:6 3.953.
3. Sign 3:633. .2 2.8322.
gonna—i on 2:: was“. r a ta .3.
:5 3:63»:- 2: an “.8932. ~33.
23. 0‘ So 3:. 3323a £5 «1:.
.3 3.353. d.» .33 0‘ 593.8.
.2. 538333 I 36523 a so:
5 So .92 c8 0.. 033 3325a
26 so 83.... 0.. 3.220325.
«83 3:33.

is: a 583:!“ w 5. :38
”823:2. 9:33.: (in: can»: 5
082.62 .3. «on... :39. :5 .533.
an: 2635. 2 33:3. 8 ax.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060029-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

survival" in the new age of technologi-
cal innovation. He says there are limits
to the manpower, money and hard-
ware of small- and medium-scale enter-
prises, compared with big businesses.

Whenever one visits groups of pio-
neer companies in the interchange of
technologies, they say such inter-
changes require "hungry spirit" and
prompt action. This is the very charac-
teristic of groups of small- and
medium-scale enterprises.

Kosaku lida, president of Beritas,
quit a large enterprise and established
his own company, which has pros-
pered by coordinating technological
interchanges among companies of
different categories. He says: "Since
a large enterprise is divided into
several vertical societies and lacks
hungry spirit, it has only weak power
to develop unique technologies suited
to a new age. According to my own
experiences, each division of certain
big business is keeping its technologies
idle. Such divisions dislike technolog-
ical interchanges because they want
to distinguish themselves in technolog-
ical development. When I proposed
the expansion of a non-textile division
of a leading textile company, the
personnel in the company flatly
rejected the proposal since it had been
made by an outsider. A group of 20
middl'eclass executives of a major
shipbuilding company has been asked
by the top executive to work out
within three years an idea for expand-
ing the non-shipbuilding division at a
cost of ¥'2,000 million. I was surprised
to have been asked by the group to
help them because they could not hit
upon anv good idea after the lapse
of two years." -

However, big enterprises have
recently begun to eye with interest the
technological interchanges among
small- and medium-scale enterprises.

it?

Is it not because
their own weak p
of technological
such major firm
Electronics and
Works, which it
develop technolor
and conduct the

changes among 1
scale enterprises.

Coordinator

It is said tha
interchanges betv
ent categories are
the process of t
tween enterprises
information), the
of the other (m
technologies) at
(ioint developrner
in this order. To
this process, a t
an alternative plat
the gasping of e
character, evalua
resources, analy:
of managerial
examination of
tions to be cornpl
tion of effective
in the light of
In the process of:
the ﬁrms concern
to each other 0
approaches, exan
contract and negot
group of compar
leader, work out
formation of a
contract and laydt

What follow ar

.of a system of in

firms of different
ment and evaluati
of tie-up, formatio
and improvementr

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000400080029-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02l09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060029-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.\'

tion and replanning of the project and
the expansion of the merits arising
from the systematization. The tech-
nological interchanges between enter-
prises of different categories surely
produce excellent results, but it is
required to follow steps and solve
problems involved.

The biggest problem is whether it
is possible to find a suitable coordi-
nator. Although there is hardly any
problem in a tieup between two firms,
the combination of a youp of more
than three companies requires a good
coordinator who is healthy and has
scund judgment and good character.
Most groups of companies which have
been conducting interchanges tor a
long time picked as coordinators

managers who are enthusiastic about
coordination and unobtrusive. 0n
the Other hand, a group in Yokohama.
which was faring well under a good
coordinator, was dissolved after he was
killed in a trafﬁc accident.

A coordinator occupies such an
important position. But it is desirable
that besides the coordinator, there will
be such assistants as experts on tech-
nology. accounting and law. and
managers who can express candid
opinions to other members. It will be
better if there is a good balance in
the age brackets of members.

The success of the Marimo Group
in Kawaguchi, Saitama Prefecture,
is attributed largely to the composi-
tion of its members. The group made a
start in I974 when eight machinery
and metal processing companies got
together. The group has jointly
developed more than ten kinds of
products. such as the large gear tooth
testing machine. high-speed automatic
rack cutting machine, automatic
Kushidungo (spitted dumpling) making
machine and the machine for stretch-
ing gut on tennis rackets. These prod-

1:8

ucts surprised
their efﬁciency
ber companies
prosperity and
or have plans
Other makers
sion-plagued ci
tion, are enviou
In the case
member comp:
any specific
development I:
booking of ord
received the o
panies to make
to undertake p
conditions are
transferred to
life and excelle
group are attrib
of its represer
mate, who is t
moto lron Wor
of a good assi
They are Keni
who has quit
maker; and
presidentof Asa
Nakada says.
to each other,
fectural governr
always quarrel
would not last
failure of inte-
panies of differ:
after all, on ho
of hearts of met
the operation 0
because the m
founders of co
generation presic

Patience

President Mt
Nado Research I
take at least ten

nological interch
different categor

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00050R000400060029-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060029-0

COPYRIGHT:

650:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attempt which does not give thought
to the long time required will surely
fail." The institute is a member of
the "Study Group on Market Research
and Technological Adaptation," which
is coordinated by Osaka Scientiﬁc
Technology Center. The institute has
developed a system for marking
flaws on steel bars and tubes, iointly
with Konan Camera Research Insti-
tute, which isa member of the “Study
Group on Managerial Strategy for High
ValueAdded," also backed by Osaka
Scientific Technology Center.

The new system born Out of the
docking of a chemical company and
a machinery maker is in great demand
from leading metal and machinery
makers. But Arakawa says it took a
total of ten years to jointly develop
the system - five years after the two
presidents met, three years for
development, and two years before
the new system began selling.

The foregoing Small and Medium
Scale Enterprises Development Center
has. as the parent body, a group of
member companies of the Association
of Small and Medium Scale Enter-
prises, which is more than 25 years
old. The Marimo Group is also a
gathering of enterprises united by a
moral movement.

A report on the research on the
inprovement of the system for pro-
moting technological interchanps
among firms of different categories,
published by Osaka Scientific Tech-
nology Center in March, says such
interchanges bear fruits ﬁve years or
more after the start, judging from
the results of inquiries into the exist-
ing groups of companies. But, the
report says there are some cases where
menber companies got hints on busi-
ness or caught the needs of clients two
to three years after the start of tech-
nological interchanges.

Cooperation

Since it takes a long time to get
excellent results of technological inter-

6120/13

Diamond Lead Co., Ltd. 1981

lt9

changes, there 2
checked, other I
to men.

An expert li
points as secre
cooperation amr
are the leader
organizer, the
significance and
a tie-up, the in
dual enterprises.
that can be offer
aim of the tie-r.
partners or mer
organize and co
putting in writil
and give-and-ta
those concernec
the merits of u
range viewpoin
These points a:
nological tie-up
different catego

It is also imp
to the manner
ment backs ti
companies says
succeed if theG
guidance and t
be left to priv;
says that if the
a tie-up, it is
budgets for it i
keep officials i
same posts for a

Whether VOIl
private firms or
ment, interchar
of different ca
electric, machir
will spread to r
and medium-s
Government, a
bodies will have
of the interchr
replace the
between compa
ness. But the
technological
firms of differ
smooth.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000400080029-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

WRLD'S LARGEST COAL LIQUEFACTION FACILITY TO BE DEVELOPE)

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 6

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

4120/14

The New Energy Develop-
ment Organization plans to
start building the world's
largest coal liquetaction
demonstration [hot with 500
ton-a-day coal processing
camcily as early as fiscal m.
NtZDO's plan. iormulated alter
suspension oi solvent reﬁned
coal ll project. calls for con-
ceptual design worlt to be
wmpleted by the end of this
ﬁscal year and detailed design
by next year.

Three iiquetaction eilorts will
be combined into the sirgle
demonstration plant project.
making it a major program
along with the joint Japanese
Australian plan for brown coal
liquefaction.

Nt-ZDO and the Ministry oi
lulcrrintional Trade 8: industry
di‘t'ldtd to try the demonstra-
tion plant construction by
ullltlmg the technical SRC II
data. uhich Mitsut SitC Devel-
opment (.‘n has so far obtained.
'nw Ml‘l‘l "Sunshine“ project.
cullt-tl iur scaling: up iiquelac-
tum mic-arch and rim-clopmcnt
mm renown-day plants. But
the Ministry judged that larger
demonstration plant capacity
was desirable to commercialize
tho it and D etiorts. The
projected size is twice as large
as the Exxon Donor System.
which is being experimentally
net in the us.

The large projcct mil in-
rnrporatc know-how being

50

developed by three groups: Mi-
tsubishi tsolvolysis ms).
Stanitotno (solvers attractant
and Nippon Koltan K.lt.-Hitscta
loam Co. tllitacla' Shipbta‘itling
6 Engineering Co.. direct
hydrogenationi.

Parties concerned agreed
that itscal difﬁculties will not
allow promotion ol all three
ditlerent technologies. Their
processes are similar enoudi to
be incorporated trio a stale
technique. they also judged
The new plant will combine the
advantages of the three routes.
with all Japanese companies
engaged in quuetaction
research urged to torn: a slmle
consortium.

The current pilot plants'
capacity is limited to 1 ton a
day in terms of coal consump
tion. Nippon Brown Coal Lime-
laction Co. will soon start ain-
struction of a plant with a daily
coal retatiranent of so tons in
Victoria. Australia.

Both N300 and MIT! regard
coal liquefaction 8 a most
promising altemauve energy
source in the mm. The Japa-
nese Government's long-term
energy supply program calls
[or obtaining 22.6 million kilo
liters oi liqueﬁed oil in ﬁscal
mo. it this coal is realized —
although SltC ll suspension is
likely to delay it - liqueﬁed
coal will account [or more than
3 per cent of the country's total

primary energy supply.

1981. The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

"ORLD'S CAR ELECTRONIC SOPHISTICATION RACE GROWS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 7

I Tex t I The era at international com

petition for attaining more dec-
tronic sophistication ot passen-
ger cars seems entering its

GM already expanded.
among its mt models in-
troduced in autmnn. last year.

second round with all makers the number of :3 mi” “is;

feeling more strongly that their "‘ ' ”“23: "(7:33“

plans will determine the inter- mfg.” Gaff,” "P

national ratingol their products still 3 elect . ll

in the future. . more romeo ysoplia
ttcated at: in greater glan-

‘lhe new round of such oom- tity.

petition among General Motors

Corp. and Ford Motor Co. otlhe Jag"? “rm”:

U.s.. Toyota Motor 00.. Nissan

the US. America's ﬁrst 16bit
microcomputer-controlled
amine ears amoru its In
models to he introduced thing
this autumn. For uh a ﬁve.
the company seam to have

Motor Co. and lesser auto-
makers ol Japan. and Volu-
wttgt-tiwcrk A.G. and Daimler-
Benz AG. at West Germany is
also closely connected with the

world‘s small car war already ".th its IWI
getting into ttll swing. ties with Intel Corp... another
Acmrdingtotndustrysources. leading US. semiconductor
GM has a head start in the new matter.
'“"'“°‘°‘2' ‘1"?J'Mmé3 'i’ “WW“ "d ”m
its room s or o .
gather all sorts at electronic 333$ Wm"!
ltmwlt-dgo applicable to auto tion and W WSWW'M'"
nmhtlat tmm both American J. ese automobileaodeleo
attdtnreiunonteql’itesmtopot “mm“: W
its ctt‘oﬂs to build up its own car “‘3 m” '
electronic newt-e production In Japan. Nissan Motor 00..
capacity. spearheadd'ing Nora's
GM so far had been purchas- equivalent lves since te
in»: most of the semiconductors 'm' ”‘5 Toyota Motor Co.
"t d ' ' . have both started gearing tp
nu It [or application of elec ,
tmttic dcvices to its cars trom "m" “(M5 ‘“ canpetllion with
- GM and Ford. In the ease of
hltttnmla lnc. But It recently . .
slam-ti producilg its own sani- "‘3‘“- "- WM], hasstarled
t-nntlurlurs mmgamg,mm‘
l-‘ttrtzcrmorc. GM has start- [m Hitachin Ltd. “.1 e:
ml M1 in}: the cooperation ol "chm i L
Japan‘s Toshiba Corp and Mi- changes . Tm V: th I
lsttbishi Electric Corp. among “M0" "3'." teantly. Nissan
0mm. 5 started tts own eﬂ’orts to
51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ellip largest-ale integration
greater sophistication 0! its
i already l‘ar outnumbcring
ola's products in terms of
tronic modernization. Dur-
last ﬁscal year. more then
in coral oI Nissan‘s cars
lL'SIICiIIIy marketed were of
tronic types.

.yota has made Nippon-
:o Co. its car electrical

upluent producing sub-
iry. start expending its
iconductor division.
lis Japanese dn‘ve ha
r to involve even smaller
«takers. including Honda
3r Co. lxuzu Motors. Ltd.
lleavy Industries. Ltd.
DMOIOI'S. Ltd. and Suzuki

Motor Co. Honrh Motor.
tutoring such “electron
tion" from Its own technolo
ingenuity. is also plannir
start marketing its own net
series with a lHiit micro
putercontrolled type.

During fiscal IN. Jaw
wtput 0! can with electl
fuel injection systems re-
733.000. to account lor so
cent of the total.

Since the start of this 1
Japanese automakers
marketed ll new series
various electronic devices
are likely to introduce I
from this autumn. By some
next year. hall 0! their tota
production could he 0!
tronic type.

l-chctronic-(‘ontrelled Cars Unveiled In Japan

“all at sales Car‘s name
Emu". III 500'"
March. Int 90's.!
WV. I'll D-alta
\M'. lent llrvcnl
June. Ital m": Leone
luw'. leal Auol (elm
Jvoc. Ital val-la
.‘ulv. I'll Celoca xx
MIMI. It“ SIVIIM
Am'. ltll (rm
Amt. III S'allet

SQDIC'I‘NP. "ﬂ Ac‘uﬂ

Mall!

1m Motor
"I“. MOW
IWI Motors
I“. W
‘vl- tlt

an It!"
I“ WWII
Nu. m
I'm. m
mun M000!
IMO m
town now

mm

5mm

Electronic "to“ "null col‘WI
ounce

Elms-on ol electronlc outline
ain't! device

Electronic Inc-lie control cake
Elcclromc who control oer-cc
luclrolllc luel snooty on: com
cultlot oer-ca

Electron-c luel Inncllon luv-cc

lsoanalon ct electmic old-M
meclbn oev-ce

Electron-c eno-llc control and run
nlno camel devices

Electron-c enolnc control OM M
cling control Mk“

Electronic «allot dew-cl II no
(II-ed to "MM

Dev-co tot sumo tuel at the time
ol nun.

Auto were-on a plane aulornat-e
allot-no ounce tumor olamnol

., The Nihon Keizai Shiabun, Inc.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PRICES 01" 64K RAH CHIPS DROP
Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 111 English Vol 19, No 972. 15 Sep 81 p 9

[Ten] Prices of union: random

At present. makers of -
access memory iRAhi) chips per

have been plunging re-
markably since their ap-
pearance only a year ago.

“the 64K RAM is the ﬁrst-

generation

product oi so-called

very large-scale intetrated cir-
cuits (VLSI). featuring highly-
advanced microelectronics

techniques.
According

industry

same. a 61K RAM now sells
for H.000 on a long-term con-
tract basis. only «re-tuith ol
the sample mice of ”0.0!”
oilered in autumn. last year.
lndustrymen say that the price

will continue to

dropfurtherto

below the lH.000 level next

year.

64K RAM mass-promotion
plans announced in succession
by Japanese and American
semiconductor manuiacturers
are one of major factors (or the
drastic pnce plume.

In anticipation oi a lurther
downward spiral 0! prices.
computer builders. peripheral
equipment matters and other
major customers of «K RAMs
are holdirg down their pur-
chases. causing an “exceasive
supply" in the market.

Suppliers thus will be lorced

to review

their business

strategies lor 64K RAMs.
Transactions of 64K RAMs.
however. are still very slim.

sonal computers and peripheral
mime“! are the N880!
customers. But they buy the
highly interned chips only in
a lot oi 1.000 units a month.
Pricesaresetonaqtnrterlyor
monthly basis. Accordim to a
semiconductor dealer. only
several tens of thotnands units

are now on the market.

Another factor that makes
people wary oi buying MK
RAMs is their still low evalua-
tion of the memory chips as to
eiﬁciency and quality. They
preiar the earlier-made
“reliable" leK RAM: to the
«K to avoid possible detects.
Actually. the price of tour 161‘
RAMs. eqtivalem in capacity
to a ﬂute MK RAM. is almost
thesameasthatoiaMKbe-
came a tax RAM now sells ior
1W.

At pruent. semiconductor
makers are racirg to establish
MK RAM mass production
teciuiques to vie for larger
aharaolthe VLSI market. Not
a law at them. however. seem
to have laced dilliculty in
raisins produaion yields to a
commercially lenible level.

The current market price oi
04K RAMs. which came down
in expectation of mas produc-
tion. does not necessarily
reﬂect the true situation. some

industrymen hold.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, The Nihon Keizai Shinibun, Inc.

C50: 5120/11.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SEMICONDUCTOR PRODUCTION RISES 1" FIRST HALF OF 1981

Tokyo JAPAN EONOHIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19, No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 9

[Text]

COPYRI

C30:

Semiconductor [Induction in
the first halt military-June) of
last roseztpercenttromthe
yearearlier levd to $01,617
million. according to the Elec-
tronic lndutries Association of
Japan.

The association. which com-
piled the fists-es item the Min-
istry o! luernational M I:
industry's production statisr
tics. ascribed the rise mainly to
brisk demand trom mamdac-
turers oi video tape recorders.
color TV sets and ofﬁce auto-
mation emipment.

Semiconductor exports. how-
ever. dropped 2.5 per cent to
“19.876 million because 0!
poor demand from the 0.8. and
major European countries. 1m-
ports gained 6.5 per cent to
”1.320 million. Both export
and import tigtres are based
on the Finsnce Ministry's cus-
toms clearance statistics.

Semiconductor output broke
down into it 175.516 million [or
discrete semiconductors. up
27.1 per cent. and V3l6.l0l mil-
lion {or integrated circuits. up
22.3 per cent. The rate at in-
crease ol discrete semiconduc-
tors topped that of le for the
first time in several years. the
association mid.

Prodtction of linear His. 1!
major component [or V'I‘Rs and
audio equipment. shot up 6.8

UHT:

6120/11.

per cent. while bipolar-type
dutal iCs. used mainly tor
computers. also recorded a re
markabie gain at set per cent.
In contrast. M08 (metal-oxide-
semiconductor) diﬁtal IQ.
which had been puliim the 1C
industry. gained merely 10.2
per cent. The slowdown was «-
cribed to the pluny in pic. or
tG-kilobit random access
memory (RAM) chips. Mich
are one of npresaitative HOS-
type digital iCs. in imit terms.
output of NOS-type digital It)
gained 44 per cent. the associao
tion said.

Noteworthy is that exports ol
minced dscrete saloon-
ductors increased 25.6 per cent
because semiconductor makers
hastily shipped thorn in the
form at silicon waters mainly
to their assembly plants in
Sotaheast Asia. A part oi them

mm in the US. d Japa-
nese semicontaictor matters.

Imports of W it)
nose ".8 pa cent as acute
American semiconductor
matters have been stepping up
assembly in Japan.

Production. Exports]: Imports
owe-Meters h
lulu.“ IUI
(III mull-Ilﬁnl

enooocnon

10m ................... «wuss-m
I. m It'll--

mm ....... ”5.5mm.”

anions .............. “(+34.”
b. amumm .. nmtnm

chemists" neat-nu)

e Hummers ........ vacuum

s. Valuers ........... WHO.”

I. hymn" ........... mu u)
0. MI?“

more-en . “tonal

n Oman ........... Imt— ’2)

1. anlMt-mﬂh. . stem ten 3)

a mementos ”(of)"
I. melrcvlla salutes”)
1. Willekwh ....... ”Jute-l! ll

   

red J - sue-u ........... 'umteudi
meme pm in prod” u. nos ............... senate-I.”
- e mmo.... Uranus.”
“mt “ shown "Eu” .01 W i. Tnh-lllmle ......... asnu» 0."
cent gain in diode imports and s. mew-me. ........ mum»
the 34.3 per cent rise
- execs" weoars
m "”31““ ‘m' mu . .. . . . mam— as) mam a.»
ports. I "mm sum so ions in)
. Micron-nu . i ) . u
['7st 1" pack a mam . union» cat—u.»
aged le (hopped e om ....... . win in mun“)
:- ems... . ““1- I." ”(‘39
9"? P" cent. While a one" .. . tum. m arm— on
1 6e d ”Put' a. nmeinem-n.... uni-m aurora an
aged {Cs gained a. one-cum. . .iusnomn Linton.”
n exam . aunt- so: am. am

ts per cent. The
association attribut-
ed this to greater

1981, The Nthon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

51;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Note Monies. ensues trom he vssr earner
lent in new.
loans. Mt‘l't one ﬁnance M‘nistrv.
SCIENCE AND TWHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRITISH TO SET UP HINIPAX VENTURE

A Japanese-British venture
to produce the Minilax — small
iacsimile communication sys-
tems for home use - will beset
up in Britain as sound by the
British Government.

This is because six Japanese
companies which jointly
developed this system with
Nippon Teteyaph ti Telephone
Public Corp. (N11) recently
approved a proposal tor such a
venttre made to N1? by the
British Government.

The project stands to become
the tint instance at Japan‘s
cooperation with Britain in
such a technology lntetslve in-
dustry area. Many hope also it
will help do away with the
trequent trade trictions be
tween the two nations over
Japan's overactive exports.

An oliicial contract to start
the joint venture is expected to
In- mined hetore the cod ot
Scitcmbcr on the occasion ot a
tm‘thcnmimt visit to Japan ot
Kctth Jmcplt. British Secretary
at State tor Industry. because
the approval olthe plan and ac-
companying conditions decided
by a recent meeting among
MT and the slit Japanese corn-

COPYRIGHT:

CSO: 4120/14

ponies have been immediately
made known to the British
authorltla through lchiro
Yamanouchi. Japanese
Minister of Poets and Telecom-
munications then touring Bri-
tain.

The six Japanese cornpmia
are Matnalnta Graphic Oom-
mmlcation System. Inc.. ex-
pected to repraent the aeatet
in the joint venture. and
Toshiba Corp. Nippon Electric
Co.. Hitachi. Ltd. Fuitsu Ltd.
and Tamara Electric Works,
Ltd.

Intended for wide ponder-tu-
tion at the facsimile corn-
muniention tacitlties. like tele-
phone. redo and television
sets. the “hits: syuem tea-
turee. among others. Gleam
in prediction coat and price.
The average podietion cost is
no more than $100.00 a ant.
compared with anywhere be
tween venom; and in million
for his convenional aeta tled
by industrial corporations and

he Britiah Government has
talten mudi intact in the
Minitax and Mild to in-
troduce such lacilities into its

1981, The Nihon Keizai Shinhun, Inc.

55
FOR omcm. use ONLY

planned electronic mail a:
in Britain tor meaeape se
and receivers to coated
other in tacaimilepr
word: through the telt
Int-nation network at B
Teleeoin am.

either with the Ministry t

hold the tnanaperial initat
it.

The six Japanese iii-nu
approved the matte on t
tlon that t) thehint enter
Mice only the guy's:
deve mint type of at
1010 yttOmmlnpapei
and consult the James:
tor apparel itit istoe:
such sets to the tram
standard tacslmlle paper
d211hy210rnm.and:
joint llrm will have a me
tlstic rim to eell the M
tadltttes only ttalde Brita
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIEIKZE AND TECHNOLOGY

JAPANESE, SWISS FIRMS FORM VENTURE FOR CARBON FIBER MATERIAL

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 12

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

4120/14

Asahi Chemical industry Co.
and Ctba- -Geigy A G. has
agreed to jointly prodtace and

compaite materials
baseda on carbon fiber: by aet-
tinu up an equallyowned joint
venture in Japan as early as
September. Their negotiations
started last fall and led to an
agreement that they will build
a plant at Aaall Chemical'a
Moriyama. Ship Prefecture.
works by the spring of tail.

The joint venue will pro
duce the aocalled "honeycomb
cores." special teatilea. aheata
with carbon ﬁber preim-
prcgnated — all from carbon
fiber. The proaicta will be
marketed tlrotgh the Swiss
parter‘a marketing network.
too Applications of theae sooth
include aircraft. and leiaure
good.

The Asahi-Ciba-Geigy tleup
was waived aa a mum by
which Asai Chemical intends to
advnncc into carbon fiber pro
ducts after its activities lagged
behind that of Toray Industries.
Im.amajnrproducerofacry—
lic tihm tfrom which polyacry-
lonitrilc carbon fibers are
made). Asahi Chemical tied up

56

with Nippon CarbooCo to form
their joint carbon fiber venom
in'l‘okyo ltlaachedtled locom-
plete a carbon fiber plant with
monthly capacity of is lol- by
the autumn of m2.

Meanwhile. Tony will raiae
its tat-but fiber capacity from
as torn a month at proud to
its tooaa monutby mid-tn.

To catch to with Tony in the
carbon liver field. Aaahi
Chemical choae Cilia-Gel” for
its strong position in production
of epoxy resin. which is indie-
pemable for carbon fiber‘a
compoeltu In addition. the
Swiss firm is experienced in
composite malerlah' develop-
ment and product (halal. not to
mention ita acceaa to aircraft
makers.

Integrated Motion — not
just carbon fibers but alaoonm-
poeilea - is said to hold the hey
to increasing comumption of
carbon libs-a. The tletp. to
tended for Aaahi'a lnteyated
carbon fiber operation.
followed the basic agreemtof
Toray with Elf Amitaine and
Ution Carbide to set up a joint
venttre in France. (See JEJ
August mime.)

1981, The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOWGY

“15890 To ENTER BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY

Tokyo JAPAN acouonlc JOURNAL 111 English Vol 19, No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 12

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

4120/14

Ntsaho lwai Corp. has
decided to venture lolo biotech-
nology. including "Iain" oI
Stanlord Unlvenlty'a patent
rights tn Japan and owning a
partial interest in Oettl Com

0! ttadlng cancel-n5 here.
Mitsul & Co. have so II vlr-
tually monopolized blotch-
nology mules: by alumina
deals between US. value blo-
technology capitals and Japa-
nese ﬁrm: — a pooltlon Nisho
[val giant! to threaten.

Stanford's patent officials
already vlslted Niaaho but to
brief the tradtm company
about the mivenity's biotech-
nology patents and emetic
engineering match slttntlon.
The trader arranged so that
mate than a) compauea ewld

57

slammebrieﬂng.

Thou companies which cont-
tnetciallaed peodttcta by mill-
otgenetlcemlneeinawlllhave
to license Stanton! vote!!! “If
exuding them to the us
Taking note at the tact. the
trader plans to serve as a lo-
hetweon so that comm.
hen can llcatae Stanford's
hiotecluolog sated m-

In addition. Nisaho Mal is
mandating with Cetus to ac
gum . pm at as capital. It
duct Imminent I8 impal-
sible. than it will try to loan
cooperative tlatp relatlom
featutlng [undue by "W
lwal o! reward: “Mot. Cell!
developed a ptoccaa (More.
actor). «Inland replace I III"
at the petrochemical may
with the new biotecmcal
mate.

1981, The Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE All) TECHNOLOGY

NEW TECHNOLOGY PRODUCES CHEAPER STEEL DEOXIDIZING FERROSILICON

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 13

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

4120/14

A new method to produce
steel deoxidizing ferroeilicon
that reduces power used by at
least 20 per cent has been de-
veloped by Japan Metals a
Chemicals Co. of Tokyo.

The leading Japanese metal-
lwgical and chemical manu-
facturer said its new method.
developed under stbsidutlon
by the pvemmental Research
Development Corporation of
Japan. has brought technologi-
cal inquiries from Canada and

temperature of arotmd 50 de-
yees C. Ferrosillcon melted
from each lump and coming
onto the surface hardens to
wevent the escape of the
yealer heat inside.

1he company term-ted the
method by tum’rg the ftrnace
into a semiclosed type by plac-
ing a water-cooled lid on the
furnace top to keep the ora' in-
side ternperature at 1.100 de-
gees C. and their surface tem-
perature at so). Became of

elsewhere. besides winning the such a high surface tempera-
governmental corpuation's of- lure. ferrosilicon does not solid-
ucral momitionofsucceea. ify on the surface. to increase

According to the company. theelectric power's working ef-

production of reﬁned ferro
silicon with an electric lttnaoe
in Japan had so far required
9.000 to 10.000 kilowatt hours of
electric power per ton.

The company is said to have
ascended to reducing such
electricity consumption to 0.000
kilowatt hours a ton in the net
at its principal Wakagawa
ferrosilleon factory in lwate
Hefccture

lly the best conventional pro-
duction method. silica ore are
heated up to 1.700 degrees Cen-
tigrade for refining in the elec-
tric furnace. But the furnace is
upmi at the top and the surface
at each lump of one is kept at a

58

ficiency. This has lowered the
per ton powa' corumnption
from 9.000 to 8.500 kilowatt
hows.

In addition. a 5.000-kilowatt
power generator built alongside
the furnace last yearend has
started applying 4.”) to 4.700
kilowatts of power by making
the most of the furnace top heat
of about soodegreea C. ‘l‘la'a has
meant a so per cent recovery of
a total of 20.000 kilowatts of
electricity needed for operating
the furnace. Thus. another 1.700
kilowatt hotrs (abut: 20 per
cent) was cut down from the
(Instlreduced 0.500 kilowatt

e.

1981, The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECI'MLOG'Y

1‘ new KIM 0‘ in-
dustrial and scientif-
ic glass provitg to he
the hardest. and yet
one of the most
tensileol its sort. has
been created by the
National lnstitute tor
Researches in In
organic Materials o!
the Government's
Science and Tech
nology Agency.

it‘s new Met is
a kind at oxynitride
glass containing lantanum. a
rare earth element

The new glass. chemically
identiﬁed as Lo-Si-O-N glass.
produced lrom laotanum oaide
43.0,). silicon oxide (Sim).
and silicon nitride tSi,N.t.
mixed at the rate of 2 parts. 1
port and 1 part respectively.
besides helm extremely ten-
sile. is much more than twice
at. strong as the conventional
kindsol glass.

It ix also odorless and
trumporcnt and easy to mold
into a librous torm. It thus
promises wide applicability.
including the maltirc of a com-

industrial material in-
tensifier like the gtnsstiber lo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he mixed in the reﬂllor'ced

plastics. and windowpana ol
highpreuin climbers and
vesoeh. lts initial high cost at

ion could be sillicieruly
through mass manu-
laeture.

Geation at such a strong.
hiﬂ-tensility does is known to
have been attempted by Amer-
ican. British and West Germ
glassmaiers. research In-
stitotes sod universities in
ditlerent properties. But all
such attempts have been
common as t: the use of
nitrogen as a ey to W
thehsrdnasand termillty.

The Japanese govemneotal
institute's new product features
a nitrogen content or 13.2 per
cent. the ugliest nitrogen inchi-
sioo ever known. Hitherto. the
light-st coreetit ot the kind had
been about a per cent for a trial
product of the Stantord Uri-
vereity retard: irntitttte. 0!

According to the Japanese
institute. its new glass was
developed by a team led by
Aliio Matishima. the institute's
chiet‘researcher.

1he mixture. in a powdered
form. at the three kinds of
mateml is pelletiud at a

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

premn of 3m kilograi
swore cerditneter. file
then are plead in a
temperature and hid: pt
furnace made of carho
furnace then is tilled *
mm (as. and its it
me is raised to 30
spheres. and the pellets
are melted down at a tea
tureot about tandem-en
The Lo-Si-o-N glass
obtained alter ts to 30 to
at melting prooeas'has or
have such a lush titroge
tent became the pellet:
melted down in In either
full or nitrogen. and com
with other methods usir
norms atmospheric pre
there ms little ehanc
escape of nitrm throu
gas desolation by heat.
By the Vielter's ha-
teet. the new produc
proved to reset up to l2:
grams pe- eqtnre minim
m. compared with

t‘orthewhitesspphlrei
mataulordelmu
tones

. Q'dinnry t
guattainsodysoo."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE All) TECHNOLOGY

HUGE ELECTROMAGNET INSURES STABLE CURRENT F10"

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 13

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

A huge electromagnet that
defies the destructive effects ot
pwerful electric ctnents h.
been cxperimerully developed
by a poop of national univer-
sity. governmental research
lnMitute and industrial re-
searchers.

The achievement. that could
find wide applications. if
refined. meially to energy
development projects. such as
nuclear ftsion and electric
power storage reaeardies. was
attained thrown cooperative
studes among Prof. Shiplti
Mori of Tsultuba University.

Prof. Yobi Hirahayashi and his
team of the Education Min-
istry‘s National Laboratory for
my Energy Physics. and
raearchers of llitadti. Ltd.
and Hitachi Cable Ltd.

The gmp explain that an
electromegnet produces a
strong magnetic field with only
a weak electric cutmts if
retrigerated down to shots 210
degrees below zero C. ac-
cording to the known wincipie
of mctnls' loss of electrical
resistance at such an extreme
temperature The National
Railways' lloat-and-run
(magnetic levitationi swer-
spectl railway vehicle runs by a
linear motor utilising such an
electromagnet cooled with

liquidhelium.

But when a along electric
ctrrent ts sent though such an
eiectromagnet to produce a
very strong magnetic field for
energy developmem. there
that be some highefﬂdency
heat-absorbing material to

.oover the magnet because the

great heat generated by that
current passage destroys the
magnet's superconductivity. to
oameaquenchingpheoometm

The group attained its suc-
cess by ustu a in per cent
pure kind of alumintn as the
principal heat shoot-her. It has
built a test electromaanet as a
mantle of tltinner-than-hair
lines of a niobium-titanium
combination material about 1
meter long and thick. and first
strrounded the circumference
of the magnet with the same
amount of copper. and then
wrapped tp the whole sides of
the coppereovered btlk with
stath aluminun 2t times I
much as the magnet.

m latest testing results
were so good that the passage
of a Min-ampere electric
current. 1.500 more than
originally specified. has
created a magnetic field ot1.5
Tesla. 30,000 times the earth's
magnetism. without a trace of
the matching phenomenal.

1981, the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

C80: 4120/11:

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

SCImCE AND TECHNOIDC’Y

AMORPHOUS SILICON SOLAR CELL TO BE COMMERCIALIZI

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19, No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 13

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO :

(0120/14

A new amorphous silicon
solar cell tilt attains a photo
voltaic eillcieney ot bdweenm
and 3.5 per cent will be com-
mercialized shortly by Kanega-
iuchi Chemical industry Co.

The Osaka chemical com-
pany said the new solar battery
was developed at its Cerlral
Research Laboratory by Yoshi-
hisa Owada with the guidance
and cooperation oi Prof.
Yoshilo'ro Hamahawa and As.
sistant Hiroaki Okamoto. oi the
Faculty of Engineering
Science. Osaka University.

It said that even its new cell's
minimum photovoltaic et-
iiciency of 7.5 per cent tops the
two preceding world recent —
6.5 per cent set in use by the
same research team of Proi.
liamakawa. and 6.9 per cent
set in March. this year by the
central meardi institute of
Sanyo Electric Co.

it its new battery is
chemically treated tor
eliminating ligil reﬂections. it

61

will attain 8.5 per cent or even
more. it said This will exceed
theuitimatetarptot'ltolper
cant set by the Ministry oi
International Trade in Industry
in its solar cell development
policy.

Theaecnetoi itsmachieve
ment. the company said. was
its thvelopment oi a lumbar»
containing thin (liming of
silicon carbide

To prepare tor com-
mercialization oi the new cell.
the company will build soot: a

ir of pilot plants — one or
l:tal'ﬂiiihins a basic manufac-
turing process hide its central
rcearch laboratory and the
otha' tor developing diiterent
ways oi application to meet all
sorts oi demand at its Saka-
rnoto factory in Shin Pretee-
titre.

initially. the canpany plain
oommercially to produce the
new cell tor varietal portable
applied solar cell prothm.
such as watches and electronic
calculators.

1981. The Hilton Keizei Shtmbun. Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WAY TO DOUBLE EFFICIENCY OF HEAT EXCHAIKERS DEVISH)

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 13

[Text ] Heat transmitting capacity of

gas-liquefyitg

conthnaation

heat exchangers can be in-
creased at least taupe-cent by
a new high-voltage electric
current flashing method
developed by a Japanese gov-
ernment resureh laboratory.
The method was recently
perfected by the Mechanical
Engineering Laboratory of the
Ministry of international Trade
and industry‘s Agency of
industrial Science and Tech-

nology.

According to the laboratory

at Saltura Town.

lbaralti

Prefecture. its EHD «Electro-

hydrodynamic)

method is

being refined lurther toward an
ultimate aim oi increasing heat
conduetwity by 400 per cent or

ﬁve times as high.

A condemalion type heat

exchanger turns

the heat-

carrying gas medium into a

liquid through condensation.
separating and emitting heat.
The procaes has had the draw-
back of requiring a large struco
lure if a high rate ofheal tram
mission is wanted. posing
problem of expense [or con-
struction and operating costs.
The haste trouble is interfer-

ence in the heat

transfer

through the heatexchanging
metal panel by constant for-
matmn at a thin film of liquid.
ahoin ot millimeter thick
over the surface of the panel in
the gns-tmiensing chamber.

The institute has successfully
removed mat of that liquid
film by installing a few slender
lineaofaomehlghiy electrically
conductive metal a few milli-
meters above the panel aur-
lace and ﬂashing an electric
eta-rent anywhere between
5.000 and 10.000 voila lhrotgh
the gap between the surface
and the wire from one elec«
trode to another. Sch heat
medium is tnually electrically
mneonductive. that is. tarra-
pomive to electricity. Even so.
it is attracted by the tilt d
higtwoltage current. and its
liquid ﬁlm on the panel sin-lace
talls off toward the metal
wire.

The necasary electricity
consumption. however. is no
more than 1 watt for each job
because only M milliampere
is needed for a highvoitage
ﬂash. 1he method promises
economic leaslhiilty.

The laboratory envisions
wide applicability. noting it as
method to many kinds of heat
exchangers including those of
geothermal heat and seawater
surlacedepth temperature
difference types of electric
power generators. A Utiyersity

of Tokyo professor has taken
interest in the method for its
wide applicability noting it as
powbly the first sttceeuhtl
substantiation of a dauic
concept for controlling liquid or
mammals with an electric
l .

COPYRIGHT: 1981. The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

C80: 4120/15

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BRIEFS

BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY GROWTH--Biotechnology industries will grow into a $4.2-
6.8 trillion market annually 20 years from now, the Ministry of International
Trade & Industry predicts. It concluded that no adverse effects will be gene-
rated by biotechnological industries. The conclusion, reached by a biotechnology
committee, encouraged HITI to make aggressive policy to help biotechnology grow
as an industry. The group. consisting of scholars, businessmen, consumers and
experts from MITI's Fermentation Research Institute, studied the possible

impacts of biotechnology on society and industries. [Text] [Tokyo JAPAN ECONO-
MIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 972, 15 Sep 81 p 12) [COPYRIGHT: 1981. the
Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.]

CSO: 4120/16 END

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY