APPROVED FOR ﬂELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPO2-00850R000100040008-0

t ”IL 1979 (F000 11/79)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040008-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/8372
3 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 11/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040008—8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newapapere, periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
tranaaiaoiona and broadcaste. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those troa English-language aourcea
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristica retained.

lleadlinea. editorial reports, and material encloaed in brackete
[] are aupplied by ”Rs. Proceeaing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
laet line of a brief. indicate hcw the original intonation was
proceased. where no proceaaing indicator ia given. the infor-
aetion wae auanarized or extracted.

Unfaailiar naaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
encloaed in parenthesee. Horde or naaes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheaes were not clear in the
original but have been aupplied aa appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notea within the body of an
itea originate with the aource. Tiaea within iteaa are ea
given by source.

‘Ihe contente of this publication in no way repreaent the poli-
ciee. views or attitudea of the 11.3. Gwernsnt.

COPYRIGIT MRS ARI) WTIORS 6013310!” MIMI“? 0P
MTERIALS REPRODWBD alum REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
01’ THIS PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED MMICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ML!

JPRS L/8372
3 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(rouo 11/19)

Coureuts

POLITICAL MID 806101061 CAL

'CIIIJO KORON‘ Anelyxee Oblra ee New Prue ulnletnr
(Kuhn uchtd‘; mo mm“: :‘n 79)..OOOOIOCOOCODIOI‘......D

LDP Focttonul Actlvltlce Geared to 1980 Preoldentiel
Election
(A8“! s'llm, 18 ?.b 79)....OOOIOODOO..OCOQOOOIOOIDDODIOO

11.8. Nuclear Umbrella 1n Bent Aele cut-ed No longer
Ettoctlve
'(sum MI. 16 Feb 79)....00000000OOOOOOOOOCCOOOOOOOOO'.
SCIERCB AND namom

861' neucy 3-Yur Project on Superconducting Electronlce
(Ymm SHIN. 17 Dec 78):.00.000.000000000IOIOOOOOOCOOO

Core-lee RH) for One Turbinen Started at Kyushu Institute
(“m ‘mo sum. 27 Dec 78).0.0.0.000...IDOCOOIOOOOOO

PAGI

13

17

22

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'CHUO KOROR' ANALYZBS OHIRA AS NEH PRIME MINISTER
Tokyo 0800 K030“ in Japanese Jan 79 pp 160-169
[Article by Kenso Uchida. political analyst]

[Text] The producer in the Ikeda cabinet. which coined
the catch phrase "tolerance and patience." has since
been known as the nusber two sen. Now that he has
assused the prise sinistership, hie true potential is
in doubt.

The Reader Politician

Among politicians tolay. Hasayoshi Ohire is a rare reader of books. I
point this out fiaot in trying to profile the new prise sinister. Ohira
himself has said "no setter how busy I as, I always try to stop at a
nearby bookstore at least once or twice a week. and usually I end up
buying two or three books to take hose. The arose of new books and their
softness to the touch give as great pleasure. This is the instant when I
appreciate the Joy of living."

he hes not changed today. On 29 November, ohira slipped into a bookstore
and bought four or five books. "hat differs now is that Ohira. whose
election to the prise sinister's post is assured, now has an entourage

of "Ohire watcher” reporters following his around, causing his to
unconsLiously sigh, "I guess I can no longer browse without care in a
bookstore."

0hlra has been extresely busy the past several years as foreign sinister
in the Taneka cabinet. finance sinister in the Niki cabinet. and secretary
general of the party in the Pukuda adsinistration. but his passion to read
has not abated. After political reporters ceased their night beat, Ohira
would be enjoyable reading at his quiet private residence in Seta. Tokyo.
He would be relaxed in Japanese garb in his western style roos. sitting on
the rug and issersed in reading. a scene which I have encountered sany
tiles.

1
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O??ICIAL USE ONLY

Politicians today have completely given up on book reading. Their ties
isoccupieowith entertaining petitioners. travel to and fro- their electoral
districts. evening banquets. and whatever alight learning they pick up by
car. have not most of the pest succession of prime siniators been this
way? This wasn't the situation imsedietely after Horld war II. Tetsu
Katayeae was a practicing lawyer. who also authored a book on appreciation
of Pei Lao-t'ien'a poetry. while Hitoahi Ashida was known for his work on
the diploeatic history of Horld Her 11. Shigaru Yoshida was known to be

an ardent secret reader of Kodo Nonure'a detective stories. and his wealth
of anecdotes and abundant humor can only ates from such reading. The

fact that lchiro Hetoynas was also a good book reader is clear from reading
his neaoira. As for Tanean Iahibaahi. he left a aonusentel lS-volune work
on Japan's political history.

However. with the three-generation. bureaucratic political era represented
by Shinsuke Kiahi. heyato lkeda. and Bisaku Seto. it see-s that we no
longer have any readers, not to sention writers. I remember a well-known
veteran journalist. who knew these prime ministers well around that time.
lamenting to me that prime linistera nowadays only read the newspapers and
governaent documents."

Then how did so easy book readers happen to come together under Prise
Minister lkeda. who himself was always stressing statistical data and
figures? One night sention Shigeseburo Haeo. the senior seaber of the
lkeda clan. who was known as the best book collector in political circles
and also renowned as an essayist with a book on study of the signs of the
zodiac. Shunji Shiomi donated the Shiomi literary collection to his hose
prefecture, Kochi. Furthermore. the three musketeers under lkeds. namely
Ohira. Yasuyoshi Kurogane. and Kiichi Hiyaeawe. are all well-known in
political circles as book readers.

Some people say think it an odd question to ask whether being a book reader
is of any advantage to a politician. One would probably meet with a

cynical response that "culture is an impediment" in present-day politics.
where forceful action is respected. Or in an era of a headlong rush towards
a managed society. where data and figures are ell-important. such play with
abstract concepts would be deemed unnecessary.

He note that the decades starting with 1955 and 1965. from Kiahi to kakuei
Tnnaka. were a period of high economic growth. when the Japanese pursued
naterisl goals and they could live with the dream of a great economic empire.
However. Japan in the oil-shock decade starting in 1975 i. in a period of
confusion and searching. ohira reportedly has recently read several of
Galbraith'a books. and one can assume that the explosive boom generated by
the translated words of ”the Age of Uncertainty" reflect sone of this
confusion and searching. It seems that for the same reasons. Tekeo Hiki
and Pukuds. the political leaders following Taneka. were compelled to make
sous spiritual appeal to the people. As during the time of confusion
following "orld Her 11. is it not again the time when sone type of thinking
or historical perspective is desired of our leaders? It is at such a tine
2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

that we see the "reader Ohira" eating his appearance on stage. Ohira
hineelf admits that "I find nyssl! stopping in front of the bookshelves
labeled history. society. essays. and such subjects rather than politics.
scone-ice, and law.“ If his range of reading really covers these areas.
it only proves that his reading lakes him a student of this history of old
and new, and East and west. In this transition period of continued
searching, wu should have great expectations of a politician who thinks

in the framework of history. For this reason. I have elected to point out
that this is a rare appearance of a book-reading prine minister on stage.

Faeous Director of lkeda Politics

All during the prise sinister election, Ohira becane teasingly well-known

as the "ahs-and-uhs Ohira." Undoubtedly Ohira's utterances are at tiles
totally obscure. giving the impression that he is inuxplicit in words and
action. However, if one troubles to read transcripts of his talks. speeches.
or responses to the Diet, one notices that the text is surprisingly clear
and to the point. The "she" and "uhs" in oratory only seen to be the birth-
pains of a search for the right words.

The previous prine ninistsr. Pukuda. left a reputation as a lastar of coined
words such as "Shown-cenroku" and "ranpaging col-odity prices." but Ohira
has the patent on his own coinage of "tolerance and patience" for the
annals of Japanese political history.

According to Kiotsu Shioai's book "Listening to hayato lkeda." lheda was
advised during his visit to the United States about "patience and tolerance"
by then Secretary of the Treasury Schneider. At a neeting at Ikeda’s
Shinanolachi residence with Ohira, Hiyazawa. and others to discuss a lotto
for the new political party in office, Ohiru suggested the use of "kanyo"
(tolerance) and "shinbo" (perseverance). and there the latter ended. Ikeda
later approved the suggestion, but suggested that Ohira not be told so as
no: to inflate his ego. :he word "ahinbo" was also thought not to have
enough class and was changed to "nintai" (patience, perseverance).

This is an episode on the eve of the Ikeda cabinet in 1960. It is a
historical scene. bringing back vividly the atmosphere of the lkeda clan
at that ties.

Ohira. who was originally a con-on bureaucrat in the Ministry of Finance,
established his political ties beginning with the post of secretary to
Minister of Finance Juichi Tsushina on two occasions just before and after
the end of Horld War It. This was followed by the post of secretary to
Minister of Finance Ikeda in the third Yoshida cabinet in 1969. His
political connections. particularly that with lkeda which led to his
election to the Lower house in October 1952. narked the beginning of his
political career.

Hhat brought politician Ohira suddenly into the limelight wes his appointment
as director of the prime ninistpr's secretariat in the Ikeda cabinet in

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

July 1960. In the turnoil surrounding the Mutual Security Treaty issue
in 1960, Ikeda's politics, which were responsible for changing the
direction of conservative politics from power rule to management, from
frontal attack to flanking, from confrontation to consultation. and from
high to low posture, marked a major turning point in postwar political
history. which has been evaluated and a consensus reached.

The shift from a position of confrontation on the security past to a

policy of high growth, and the change from political to economic priorities.
allowed conservative rule to avoid a crisis. and this furthermore resulted
in the long-tern prosperity during the 1960's and into the 1970's. Although
the ship's captain was undoubtedly hayato ikeda, the helmsmen were the
secretariat trio of Ohira, Kurogene, and Hiyaaawa. led by Hess, and also
Shoeuke Ito, better known by the'nickname "bu-chanl' Ohira, who was in the
middle of the low posture politics of "tolerance and patience.“ was not
simply a head clerk in the cabinet, but actually a distinguished director

of Ikedn politics. ‘ "

How can we tell whether being director of the secretariat of the prime
minister's office and an efficient aide were good for Ohira? The reputa-
tion that he is always the exemplary supporting actor, the deputy, the

chief of staff, and at best the number twe man seems to follow his around.
For instance, foreign minister in the lkeda cabinet, director of political
coordination for the party and minister of international trade and industry
during the Sato administration. foreign minister and finance minister in the
Tsnaka cabinet. finance minister in hiki's cabinet. and finally petty
chairman in the Pukuda administration.

One particularly remembers the strong impression left by the Tanaka-Ohire
duo, which accomplished normalization of Sino-Japanese relations, further
establishing the image of Obira as always following Tanaka around.

Friendship With Kakuei Tameka

There is no stranger pair than that of Ohira and Tanaka. Ohira is known

to be a careful, deep thinker while Tv'ska is impatient and decisive. One
can see Tanaka ”thinking on the run" while Ohira would be slow moving to
the point where he wouldn't "cross a bridge even after it was checked for
solidarity." One recalls a characterization by Tomomutsu One, who wielded
power as party vice president is the days of the Ikeda administration, that
"Haeo has superior talent and knowledge. Kiichi Aichi is well-learned,
Kakuei Tanaka is an extraordinary genius." Ohira likes to portray himself
as an ordinary man with honesty as his motto. In an epitaph written for

a senior alumnus. Saburo Koda, Ohira made use of the interesting expression
"Roda was not an ordinary fellow, but I'm just a simple man.“ Even if old
man Tomomutau were to scold him "you have no talent," Ohira would probably
just barely smile.

I.
FOR OYPICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ohire and Taneka reportedly became acquainted soon after Ohir'a first
election victory. Ohire recalls Tanaka as being "very high spirited.

fast thinking. and a fast worker." Hayato Ikeda and Eisaku Sate were
Shigeru Yoshida's two lieutenants. Ohire became Ikeda‘s right are, while
Teneka becane Seto's vessel. During the decade following 1955, in the
world of a cooperation-opposition and love-hate relationship between lkeda
end Sets. the two pillars in the history of the Liberal Democratic Party
(LDP). the friendship between Ohire end Tenakn grew deeper. It seems that
such extreme opposites in political disposition found stisulation in
temple-outing each other, end this eventually tied then together. In the
personnel shuffle of July 1962. the on-stege appearance of the Ohire.
foreign ninister-Tenake. finance sinister combination. which replaced
ether stalwarts in the cabinet. startled the public. Fifteen years have
passed nince then. Ohire has publically never wavered in his personal
friendship for Tanaka even during the latter's resignation in 1976 as a
result of a money end politics scandal or his arrest in the Lockheed case
in 1976. As an individual. this nay represent honesty end be a virtue.
but he is a public figure end currently prime minister. The Lockheed
trial with Tanaka as the defendant is proceeding on schedule in the Ohire
administration. end this is where a major probles for Ohire may exist.

All of Japan’s nass media have been raising cries of warning end are closely
watching develop-ants. while the public has also been showing extraordinary
interest in the issue. Despite the fault of repetition. I can only

reiterate the gravity of the setter. since public trust in the Ohire
administration rests on this single point. Although this may cone as a
surprise to Ohire. there is already the gossip end speculation being
circulated in political circles that "Ohire is too careful and lacking in
decisiveneas. Aren't major national issues really being settled by a summary
telephone call from hajiro (Tanaka's residence)?"

Repeating again, the future of the Ohire administration depends on Ohire
escaping Tanaka's shadow.

A convincing argusent for the Tanaka administration theory is that the
capability for action and the vote-gathering operations of the so-called
Tanaka Arny Group played a deterministic role in the prime minister primary
election. Is this true? Let we quote a few of the arguments.

One cannot deny that. not the general public, but the extraordinary capability
for action of the Tanaka Army Group, a type of professional collective with

e vote-getting operation turned on 1.5 million party seabers. had an

enormous effect. It can also be pointed out thst the plurality of 110 points
and winning 550,000 votes far exceeded the strategy expectations of the
Ohire-Tanska ca-p. This kind oflandslidecan only seen that there was some
change in the consciousness of party lenbera or the public beyond that
producible by vote-getting tactics. good or bed. which, howev ', happened

to work in Ohira' fever.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
YOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"hat was this change? Strategically speaking. this was partly due to poor
thinking and tactical errors by the Tukuda canp. Early in the prinaries.
the hawkish posture of Kakasone pronoting emergency legislation and his
views on modifying the constitution appealed to the far right-wing neabers
of the party. and this led to persistent runors that his popularity was on
the rise. hoping to turn this need to his advantage, Pukuda adopted a
forceful high profile posture with repeated hollow attenpts at self-promotion
such as "support for Fukuda is rising free all corners of the country," or
"who can handle the Tokyo sun-it? The world wants Pukuds!" without paying
any attention to Takeo Hiki's caution about "speaking too loudly." these
utterances nust have not only brought resent-ant but also nust have had
acne influence on the voting by party nonbers.

Conpared to the shrill Fukuda. Ohira caspeigned throughout at his own pace.
Ohira kept repeating in subdued tones that "one resorts to force as a last
neasure. I believe in a politics of harmony, striving while hunbly
reflecting. trying to reach an understanding in good faith." One prevalent
appraisal of the two candidates for the prime sinistership was ”the Pukuda
of accolplishnents. the Ohira of personality." but this eventually changed
to "the arrogant Pukuda. the undependable Ohira." Pukuda. with his high
posture boasting of his acconplishlents. appeared arrogant and generated
antagonism. while Ohira. with his constant down-to-earth low posture, see-s
to have generated support and sylpathy such as that nor-ally accorded a
judge.

There is also sooe harsh criticisn such as "that's Ohira's style. but behind
the apparent low posture. there lies a crafty calculating nind." I
previously Iantioned the solidarity of the Ikeda clan sole years ago.

The death of boss Ikeda in 1965 was followed by a tumultuous confrontation
of internal factions. The senior neaber haeo inherited the niroiks-hsi
Ikeds faction, but this resulted near the end of 1970 in a sore serious
confrontation between a younger group within the faction densnding transfer
of power to Ohira and the old-boy group desiring to protect Haeo.
Colleagues Kurogsne and Hiysrawa. known as nenbers of the secretariat

trio. supported Haeo. while Ito. with a journalisn background. supported
Ohira. Eventually. in the spring of 1971. Hseo resigned the chairssnship
of the Hiroike-kai in favor of Ohira. and this prevented a split of the
group left by Theda. The spasns from this esperience have not altogether
vanished. even after 7 or 8 years. The fact that Hseo. who later becsne

a distinguished leader of the Lower house and a party alder. Isintained

a bystander attitude throughout the present prise sinister election. even
though it was a csnpaign for Ohira. slnoat like a younger brother. see-s

to show that hard feelings do not die easily. It cannot be honestly said
that Ohira can completely disregard the ill-feelings surrounding his
relationship with Haeo.

In retrospect. no politician. especially one who sins for the prise ninister's
post. can survive by beong gentle. sincere. and likeable. Ohira's boldness
and tenacity. once he lakes up his mind. can be observed first when he

6
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inherited the lkede faction from Mean and later in the current political
struggle against Pukuda. Prom this viewpoint. perhaps he is too retiring,
while Pukude is too outspoken and lacking in tenacity. Pukuda's announcement
on the eve of 17 November of dropping out of the race is typically Fukuda.

Enough about personalities and strategies. and let us return to the main
problem of party member consciousness. Speaking of introduction of the
primary election system and its actual administration, it could easily be
criticized as still being simply backroom-faction-money politics now
practiced on a national scale. or that party member- and sympathiters
constitute a special professional collective. Nevertheless. none can deny
that the general election involving the LDP has been liberalized and is one
step closer to becoming that of the people. There is much more significance
in an election involving 1.5 million voters than in one involving some 400
party members in both houses of the Diet. There still remain questions

and room for improvement regarding party membership registration and the
system of vote point allocation. but one should note that party members

are at the same time the public. Therefore. the party members and the
results of the public vote seem to reflect to some degree the fine variations
in the national consciousness. This seems to be more specifically reflected
in the response to the confrontation betueen Ohira and Nakasone on the issue
of the principle of emergency legislation.

Nakeaone's vociferous advocacy of the theory of emergency legislation has the
theory of emergency legislation has the appearance of an exciting preliminary
skirmish before the primary election. and various surveys were used to show
that it was popular with the rank and file of the LDP. This was used to
prove that rightdwing resiliency in the LB? was strongly rooted. a favorable
comparison to the strength of left-wing resiliency in the Socialist Party.

At about this time. Ohira deftly made known his own critical views on the
highly-touted emergency legislation theory. ”The present Self-Defense Force
Act represents carefully enacted emergency legislation whereby the prime
minister can order self-defense force mobilization in case of imminent attack
and obtain Diet approval later. In other words. we already have the mechanism
to deal with ‘n emergency (15 October speech). Also. "existing laws should

be constantly reviewed, and, as necessary. the Diet can be asked for a
decision. I do net believe that Japan's security is at present fragile

as an eggshell, such that the issue of emergency legislation must be
considered immediately“ (Kyodo News Service interview. lb November).

A statement such as this in the atmosphere of a prime minister election is
quite an act of courage. I am not simply saying that this emergency legislation
argument between Ohira and Nehasone was a powerful factor in Ohira's victory
over the Pukuda faction. I am simply pointing out that Ohira'e down-to-earth.
sensible. and in some ways courageous statements were more warmly received

by party members. such that Ohira lost no ground in the primary election.

It almost seems to me that the image of the "undependable Ohira" has nearly
been canceled by this quiet and courageous statement.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

Perhaps I have dwelt too much on Ohira's victories. In order to avoid this
accusation. I would like to introduce the following comment. even though it
be repetitive. "The results of the prime minister election may have erased
the image of a right-wing LDP. but there still reaaina the strong iaage of
the monsybsgs LDP." ﬂow can the new prime minister. Ohire. respond to this
criticism? '

Although the political views of Ohire end Fukuda differ to some extent
because of a difference in generation. it could also be due to differences
in age and upbringing. Pukuda was born in 1905. Ohire in l9lO-a difference
of only 5 years. In contrast to Fukuda's boosting of "Meiji 38 years old."
it would be unlikely for Ohire to say "Meiji #3 years old" even in jest.

In contrast. one recalls that Ohire was reportedly baptized in his youth

es a Christian. and followed Toyohiko Kagaws‘s teachings. and considering
his school days in the early Shows period. one feels an association with a
lingering image of democracy in the Taisho period. On the other hand. while
Fukuds. with the same background in the bureaucracy of the Ministry of
Finance. took the straight elitist road from the First High School to Tokyo
University to talented bureaucrat. Ohire spent 8 years on a circuitous road
from the Tskamatsu higher Business School to the Tokyo University of Cos-arcs.
This difference in background may account for some of the differences in
their personalities.

Hope To Cope With the Right-Hing Forces

It was said during the general election for the prime minstership that "there
shouldn't be much change in political direction. foreign diplomacy. or
economic policy. whether Pukuda is reelected or Ohire becomes the new prime
minister. The problem is actually Ohire coming after Fukuda." Let us see
what this means.

It is difficult to believe that there will be much change in diplomatic or
economic policy because of Pukuda's retirement and Ohira‘s appearance on
stage. There should be a change in political style. however. if not so
much in political direction. For instance. in contrast to Fukuda's earnest
desire for a return to absolute majority rule by the LDP, Ohire conceives
of an age of relative rule by means of a flexible alliance with opposition
parties.

In June 1977, Ohire coined the word "partial alliance." This indicated the
possibility of a timely and opportune alliance with opposition parties
before the Upper house election in which a reversal of the balance in
conservative and reform seats was anticipated. Actually, the balance was
not reversed, but in view of the almost matching strength of opposition
parties in both houses of the Diet. Ohire as party chairman had been in
reality for the past 2 years conducting Diet operations on the basis of
partial alliances. such as on the issue of budget amendment. Prime
Minister Pukuda. who could hardly disregard this reality. had to play along

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with Diet aanagement on chairman Ohira‘s terms. On the other hand.
Pukuda's earnest desire was early dissolution of the Diet followed by
general elections to regain an absolute stable majority in the Lower House.
This hope was never fulfilled because of defeat in the prime minister
election and subsequent early retirement. Pukuda also tragically beta-e
the only prime minister who didn't experience a general election in the
23-year history of the LDP after Tanzan Ishibashi. whose administration
only lasted 2 months. One can easily understand Fukuda's disappointment.

The job of dissolving the Diet and holding a general election was now passed
on to the new prime minister, Ohira. Ohira is in no hurry to undertake
this task. and it will probably be postponed until after the fall of 1979.
This can be partly attributed to Ohira's nature to be discrete and not to
force the issue on any matter, but also there is no urgency for Ohira to
plan forceful recovery of an absolute majority by the LDP at this time.
and national political objectives can be readily achieved by means of
collaboration and a partial alliance with the opposition parties. At a
joint press conference when he entered the primary election race. Ohira
stated "My way is to think together with the people, to avoid unproductive
confrontations, to avoid rigid thinking, and to conduct politics in an
effective manner. I would like to adopt the posture of confronting
difficult problems by including opposition parties and, if possible,
together with all of the people" (6 November).

From the standpoint of the high posture faction. which aims for recovery
of absolute majority control by the LDP, this sounds of defeatism.
Antagonism and resistance to the Ohira administration froa right-wing
forces represented by the Seifu-hai is expected to increase. how will
Ohira cope with this?

Behind this political posture lies what might be called Ohira's historical
perspectives and political philosophy. The era of the old and rigid
conceptual and ideological scheme of confrontation between the
conservatives and the reformists has ended. As the interests of the
people become more complicated and multifaceted. one needs to understand
that the only way is to develop a broad consensus. In this sense. Ohira
appears on stage at a turning point in Japanese politics.

Hho Hill Carry the Responsibilities of the 1980's?

The decades following 1955 and 1965 were the golden days of conservative
rule and fast economic growth in Japan. According to the Hestern calendar.
this was the "order of 1955," but to be more exact, this probably ended
with the fall of the Sato administration in 1972. These golden days were
supported by three successive bureaucratic administrations--the Kishi
cabinet for 3 years and 5 months, the lkeda cabinet for 4 years and 4
months. and the Sato cabinet for 7 years and 8 months, a total of 15 and

a half years.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?IC!AL USE ONLY

The retirement of the Sate adsini'tration. which was too long. signaled the
sunset of L0? control. and the beginning of days of confusion and search.

The three transition adeinistrations--the Tansha cabinet of 2 years and s
aonths. the Niki cabinet of just over 2 years. and the Fukuda cabinet of less
than 2 years. totaled no sore than 6 years and 5 aonths. The depth of the
turaoil and confusion is evident when the lengths of the last few adninistrs-
tions are coapared to the 7 year. 8 aonth rule of the Sato adsinistration.

The three transition administrations were strongly characterised by their
critically defensive attitude calculated to avoid any danger to the LDP.
The Tanake sdsinistratian talked of breaking the deadlock in doaestic

and internationﬂl affairs by "deternination and action." Although the
deadlock in foreign affairs was resolved by the realisation of aerial Sino-
Japanese relations. there was less success in doeestic politics because of
an off-beat idea about "reconstruction of the Japanese islands.“ not to
sention the disastrous effect of the oil shock.

The Niki sdsinistration following Tanaka. who was forced to retire as a
result of soney-politics scandals. stressed a cleanup in politics and a
return to conservativ. rule on a platforn of aorslity under the banner of
the "clean Niki.” Although a thorough investigation of the Lockheed scandal
would have been an appropriate Iission for this adsinistrstion. it was
lieited because of a basic weakness in the party which rendered the
adsinistration inpotent in carrying out its policies.

The Pukuda administration. which case on stage after the Lockheed scandal
general election defeat. barely escaped defeat in the Upper Nouse election.
and while proclai-ing a return to conservative power rule. it exercised

its sdsinistrative capabilities in disposing of pending probless. however.
Fukuda's over-confidence and high posture. against which Niki had warned.
led to his resignation as a result of being tripped up by the prilary
election systes which he had hieself introduced. The days of both the Niki
and Pukuda sdninistrations can be said to have been spent in a succession
of trials and errors.

The question now is whether the Ohira adlinistration can put an and to
these trials and errors connitted by the three previous sdsinistrations
and stay in power for any estendsd length of tile. There are a nulber of
conditions in his favor. but whether or not he can realize this advantage
will depend on the new prise einister's personality.

Priee Ninister chira's tern runs to the end of Novssber l980. Although

the probles of extending the prise ninistership another 2 years is yet
unresolved. there is every possibility that he can cosplete his first 2-

year tern and then hope for a 6-year two-tern stay in office. In other words.
Ohira will be in a position to direct the events of the 1980's.

Hhile the 1970's is about to end in a continuation of confusion and search.
this also marks the end of the so-called "postwar" type of Japan which
peaked in the 1960's. This decade can also be considered a tine of going

throagh the birthpains of entering t2; 1980's.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan up to new has been excessively locked into a textbook confrontation
between conservatism hoping for return to a prewar Japan and the reformists

desiring to reap postwar benefits. however. 30 years after the war. the
"warleus" class. which is not interested in any such scheme. now almost
constitutes the majority. It seems that the new prime minister. Ohira.
is quite aware of the problem of what kind of politics is required to
respond to the interests and desires of this "warloss" generation.

Fukuda typically represents the conservative desiring a return to the prewar
world. 1 think. however. that Nakssone is different. his series of recent
opinions and posture statements sees to envision a political front adapted
to a new core. after breaking down the unproductive confrontation between
the prewar and postwar factions. The content of his views differs
considerably. however. from those of Ohira. which seems to be the heart of
the problem for the LDP.

In any event. there seems to be no clear winner candidate for the prime
ministership to follow Ohira. Ten years ago. during the Sate administration.
one could easily name four post-Sate candldates--nala1y Pukuda. Tanska. Niki.
and Ohira. They actually succeeded to the prime ministership in the order
of Tsaaka. Niki. and Pukuda. with Ohira the last to take the stage as the
prime minister. An honest opinion is that after Ohira. the LDP will have
run out of potential leaders. This could easily provide a motive for a

long run by the Ohira administration. Yasuhiro hahasone and Toshio szamoto.
two candidates in the recent prime sinister election. are considered as
possible successors to Hire. Also. as soon as Ohira became prime minister.
the name of Kiichi Miyetswa should start to attract more attention. Other
possibilities are Tohuseburo Koeaka. Shintaro Abe. and Yeheixawano. who

was instrumental in reorganisation of the conservaties. if Prime ﬂinister
Ohira's mission is to bridge and reconstruct conservative politics in

the l980's. then the discovery and training of successors. established or
unknown. becomes a part of that job.

However. Ohira. who has just ascended to the throne of political power.
would naturally have no time to devote to problems such as the training of
successors. The more urgent and major problem is what the Ohira administra-
tion is supposed to do from new on.

During the prime minister election. Ohira spoke frequently on political
philosophy and political techniques. significant words characteristics

of Ohira. For instance. with respect to political posture. Ohira made
frequent use of the words "flexible but strong." and he also expounded on
"reaching an agreement through persistent persuasion and understanding.”

They closely resemble the expression "tolerance and patience” or the "politics
of low posture” of l8 years ago.

however. 1980 is no longer 1960. In l960 Prime Minister Ikeda played the
star role and called the shots. while director of the secretariat Ohira
played the role of deputy and planner. lheda. while aided by the political

11

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

tactics orchestrated by Ohire. led the charge and achieved the sajor
political goals of increasing incoue. rapid econoaic growth. and the
building of an econosic aspire. Now in 1978-1979. Ohira himself is on
center stage and doing the perforsing. Perseverance is ceasendsbie and

so is persuasion. but it is not altogether clear what political objectives
Ohira hopes to achieVe by the use of these political tactics. Words such

as "from quantitative expansion to qualitative improvement" or "from
asteriel to spiritual" bantered about during the prise sinister election
represent only concepts which can hardly substitute for hard political
goals to inspire the public. For instance. at a press conference with

the new prise sinister on 1 Dace-bar. Ohira was questioned about the ”one
strategy and two plans." nasely. the cosprehensive security strategy. the
plan to strengthen the foundation of the fasily. and the rural-urban
development plan. "is replies were "it does not represent the establish-ant
of any new goals," "will reconsider the reordering of priorities of existing
policies.” or "to sisply eugssnt and bring to coupletion wherever tiers

has been a deficiency.”

' Such responses can hardly represent political goals to inspire the will
and the spirit of the people.

The most ilportant political quality to be expected of Ohire. who has now
becose the star and player. should be the decisiveness to be able to
determine what and when. The qualities of Ohire. previously known as a
superior side. planner. and number two man. are new in question for e sen
delegated with the highest authority. Can Ohire respond decisively enough
to problems to get a passing grade?

A superb politician is said to act out history. ls Ohire. who likes to read
history books. prepared to act out his own pet phrase "the eternal present"
in Japanese history?

COPYRIGRT: Chuo Koronsha 1979

5576
050: 6105

12

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND 8001mm“.

LDP PAC'l‘IONM. ACTIVITIES 0mm 10 1980 PRESIDMIAL ELECTION
‘l‘okye ASA!!! 3mm in Japaneee 18 Feb 79 p 2

[Article: "Signe of Growing Pukuda-Nakaaona-Hiki Cooperation; Mutual
Soundinga Behind the Scenes Shaking Ohira Rule"!

[Text] A little over 2 aentha after the launching of the Ohira regine,
the l’ulmda. Nakaaone. and Niki factions. which were defeated in the
Liberal Democratic Party preaidential election. have couple ted rebuilding
their organizatione and have begun to diaplay an attitude of inteneifying
activity ahaking Ohira‘a rule. vhich ie centered upon the united Tenaka
and Ohirn factione. however. upon probing into the internal affaire

of the three factiona, it can be aeen that there in aleo a atrong element
of continuing to mend one another out with an eye to next year‘e
preeidentia‘. electione. The Niki faction. in particular. hae dieplayed
an attitude of dietancing iteelf. and with the differencea among then.

it appeare that for the peaent their cooperation vill be on an ieeue
by ieeue baeie.

Giving amentu to the joint novee by the Pukuda. Neurone. and Hiki
factione vae the dr-a aurrounding the recent eelection of a aucceaeor
to Speaker of the llouee of Repreeentativee Ileri. thin wee due to the
eucceea of the three factiene in lining up behind a nova to dup Katee
Pukuda. aaid to be the 'faverite.‘ and bring about the aelection of
Speaker Nadao. hen the Fukuda faction laadere even cut the renark
that. “thin in the beginning of n tukudn-Nakaaone-lliki alliance counter
to the Ohira-‘l'anaka alliance.“ Then, at the Executive Board meeting on
the 16th, net-bare elect to the ﬂakaeone and lukuda factiena fiercely
attacked the arguente caning fro. Ohira faction leadere and othere

favoring the freezing of the budget for the 826 early warning aircraft.
Concrete novea ouch ae theee have aurfaced to date.

however. thie ie not all. One thing aperking the intra-party atruggle
ie the atrong peaeihility that. with reapect to the problen of party
reforn. the Pukuda. llaltaeone. and Niki factiona vill neve in atep on
the point that ”the preeident and the chief eecretary eheuld not belong
to the ease faction," and mira'e problene in nanaging the party are

bound to increaee. however. even if we nay apeak of three faction unity.
their internal affaira are complicated.

13
FOR OVPICIIJ. ”SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pukuda-Naknsone-Hiki Alliance Buphoria

"At first we were in complete disarray concerning the selection of the
house speaker, but in the end we managed to get in step. This is the
creation of a Pukudn-Nnkasone-Hiki alliance to counter the Chin-TenantI
alliance." After the anergenco of Nadno as llouse speaker I Pabruary the
Pukuda faction leadership see-ed overjoyed. At the tine of last year's
presidential election the Pukuda cup vigorously pursued a strategy of
cooperation bemoan the Pukuda. llakasone. and Hiki factions in the final
election by Dist nesbers. however this faded away with the avoidance

of a final election. from the standpoint of the Pukuda faction leadership
which was the center of this strategy. even if belated. this twist be like
a dream tone true. Hith respect to the emergence of house Speaker Nadao,
prior to the falling into line of the three factions, Prise Minister Ohira
was said to have decided to appoint Nadao in order to avoid turmoil in

the party. however. the three factions assert their effectiveness. saying.
"Perhaps the prine ninister's decision cane earlier in tine, but the
propsect of three faction unity nust have put pressure on his."

Bases for Dissent Abundant

At present. the bases for unsettling the (hire regime are party reforn

and treannent of budget deliberations. Uith respect to the proqu of
party refers, discussions have begun in the Party leforn Prenotion
headquarters: however. pros and cons of the positions of president and
chief secretary being taken by the sane faction are the greatest roadblock.
Already the Niki faction has argued for separation. stating at the general
meeting on dis 15th. ”The positions of president and chief secretary should
not be occupied by the s-e faction." Both the Pukuda and llakasone factions,
arguing for separation. crushed the «tire proposal to ease Zenko Suzuki
chief secretary at the tins of the launching of the Ohira regins. and

a confrontation seems likely with both the Ohira and ‘l‘anaka factions,

which believe strongly that having both officers from the ease faction

is all right.

In the case of the budget deliberations. the problem is the freezing or
clisination of the 820 budget. The suspicion was strong that the fact
that the soft line. that freezing was unavoidable, becane a target for
attack at the general seating on the 16th was an indication of an assault
by the Pukuda and Nakasone factions. Those receptive to the opposition
party denand for frosting are relatively nuserous in the Ohira and ‘fanaha
factions. while opposition to freesing is in the najority in the Iukuda

end liakasone factions.
Next Presidential Election the ‘l‘argc:
Behind the attespts by the three factions to intensify their regine shaking

activity is the fact that they have recovered fro: the shock of defeat in
the presidential election and have cospleted for the present their

1‘

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organizational coneolidetion. 'lh. Pukuda faction, which wae eeen by
other factione ae likely to eplit if the forner prine ninieter retired,
hae revived under the name of the Clear llarnony Club [Seiwe Keil. It

ie united with Puhude at ite head, a party reforn heedquartere hoe even
been eetebliehed within the faction. and already provieional organiaation
for policy and etrategy couitteee for the canning preeidential election
and a general election conittee hee been completed.

‘lhe liakaeone faction hee put forth a goal of 20,000 party nubere for
oach Diet nenber. and hae launched a party refora con-ittee. It hee
aleo eet up epecial connitteee on houeing and urban development.
attempting to create a mum Plan“ to counter Prime Hinieter Ohira'e
Garden City Plan. The Niki faction. aleo. hee eetebliehed a political
ethice coeuittee, and along with creating an organization to argue

the baeic point of party reforn, the Niki faction eelling point. it ie
full of onbitione. According to one faction ledere, "He went $00,000
affiliated party nonbere who can bech our baeic vote."

Still Boonie.

All of the three factione value highly the Pukuda-Nakaeone-Miki cooperation
which eucceeded in the Route Speaker Nadao deeignetion. However, when

it conee to tho queetion of the degree or couree of future joint action.
for the nonont viewe differ widely.

If Pukuda faction leadere eeeert that the Pukuda-Nakaeone-liiki vereue
0hira~‘l'anaka Work will continue in the future. Riki faction leadere
etreee that. "Our baeic etance ie keeping equidietent fron the (hire-
‘l‘aneka and Pukuda-llekaeone groupinge.” lath ie looking toward the next
preeidential election. and calculatione concerning how to aeiae the role
of leader are at work.

The Puhuda faction ie attempting to tie the energy of Pukuda‘e tern an
prise ninieter to the party preeidential election. The Ramona faction
ie aiming at a three faction eyeten under ite leaderehip. ‘fhe Niki
faction doee not wieh to be buried within a three faction eetup.

Varioue typee of conferencee along the three fectione. have been held
frequently even eince the preeidential election. but the neat forward
looking have been the Pukuda-Nakaeone. Executive conferencea of the tukuda
and Nahaeone factione have been held three time eince laet year'e
preeidential election. and middle level and younger nenbere' neetinge

are aleo being held. llowever. reactione of participante have been

nixed. ranging fr. the view that. "Thane are prelininary novee in
etrengthening cooperation between the two factione and a Pulmda-llakaeone-
liiki alliance.” to the eeeeeenent that. ”Then are merely an exchange

of viewe.

within the Nakaeone faction there in aleo the opinion that. "Rather
than inteneifying a etance of vainly challenging the chin-ranch alliance,

15

[0| OFFICIAL USE DULY
POI ORIGIN. “8!! ONLY

eeerchins out e route to power within the Ermwork of the party ee

e whole ie the better etretegy," end there ere thoee who interpret the
feet the: former Executive loerd Cheireen Nekeeone conferred with reneke
fection lender former Minister of health end welfare roteo Otewe on

the 16th ee evidence of thie intention.

Contecte hetvenhoth fectione end the Riki fection ere etill et the level
of individuele. end enohengee between leedece hevo not uterielieed.
Uithin the Riki tection the belief ie etcons thet. "Rethu then telling
into n three fection eetup, holding e cnetins vote in politicel

eﬂeire will ehou the ettensth o! the fection.“ end it eppeere thet
mtuel eoundinse none the three tectione will continue in the future.

cormam‘: Mehi Shinbun Tokyo llonehe 1979

9407
080: 6105

16

FOR onxcuu. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDOICAL

0.8. NIELEAR UMBRELLA IN EAST ASIA CLAIMED NO LONGER WTIVE
folgyo SHUKAN ASA!!! in Japanese 16 Feb 79 PP 28-30

(Article: ”More Than a Dagger Thrust in Japan's Ribs--Real Meaning of
Conversion of Etorofu and Kunashiri Islands as Bases by USSR.”]

[Text] hill-fledged military bases were under construction on Etorofu and
Kunashiri Islands by the Soviet Union. This was confirmed by the Japan
Defenne Agency. Some officials say agitatedly that, in addition to creating
a new barrier to the return of the northern territories, it is tantamount to
a dagger pointed in Japan's ribs. What is the Soviet Union's real intention?
How should this situation be interpreted?

On 30 June when the news was flashed, the mayor and assembly chairman of the
city of Nemuro, Hokkaido, which is only a stone's throw from the islands of
Etorofu and Kunashira, Jointly sent several urgent telegrams to Tokyo. They
were addressed to Prime Minister Ohira, Foreign Minister Sonoda, and the
speakers and Foreign Relations Comittee chairmen of the Upper and Lower
Houses of the Diet.

"We local citizens are greatly shocked by the fact that the Soviet armed
forces have built permanent bases on the two islands which are our rightful
territories. We request that you take strong measures to have the Soviet
forces depart from the islands and to have the four northern islands returned

as soon as possible."

However, if one expected the residents to be caught up in a wave of commotion,
it was to the contrary. Chairman Mitsuo Yanami of the Nemuro City Council to
promote the return of the northern territories stated, ”He must absolutely
prevent the demand movement from losing momentum because of recent events,”
and adds, ”However, we should refrain from causing increased investigations
and seizure: of Japanese fishing craft by the Soviet Union, and from hurting
our fishing industry by making too strong a demand." "The question is, will
it henceforth cease to be a matter of mere violation of the fishing treaty
and become a cause of suspicion of violating military secrecy?”

17

M ORIGIN. 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The shock and uncertainty of the local inhabitants, who depend on fishing
in the northern waters as their key industry, have doubled and tripled.

Maneuvers would have Been Preferable

According to investigations by the Defense Agency, the Soviet military
installations constructed on the islands are as follow. Military personnel
total some 5,000 men, or roughly one battalion, of which h,ooo are stationed
on Btorofu and 1,000 on Kunashiri. Among the facilities, the existing air-
field has been repaired and expanded, and a new radar site has been added.
Also, technical components include a squadron of anti-aircraft fighter planes,
a patrol brigade, a commnications brigade and a comissariat.

The Defense Agency has known about the movements of the Soviet forces on the
islands since the early half of last year. First, at the end of last my,
the radar in Hakkanai caught the busy activities of the Soviet forces. No
151's headed east on two occasions, while a medium-size Antonov transport
plane headed towards Etorofu on a total of ll trips, accompanied by 3 or it
large helicopters.

Meanwhile, according to Soviet coununications caught by the radio monitor in
Hokkaido, it was learned that steel planks for temporary runways, cement and
construction machinery were brought ashore. Concurrently, a considerable
number of new military personnel was being deployed. Since it was couson
sense from a military standpoint that bases should not be built adjacent to
border areas because they would be vulnerable to attack, the then Joint chief
of staff Hiroomi Kurisu decided that "they must be conducting maneuVors."

also, it is still fresh in our memory that Kurisu revealed his Judgment openly
and this became an issue in the Diet as a "dangero.. and careless statement."
In retrospect, the views expressed by Defense Hinistr: Shin Xanemaru were
correct when he explained it as "a misjudgment by Joi 't Chief of Staff Kurisu"
and said, ”The movements of the Soviet forces do not constitute maneuvsrs."

Of course, the debate in the Diet was ended with a reprimand of Kurisu, but
it did not solve the problem itself. In retrospect, one Defense official
pointed out the half-baked solution by the Diet, stating, "If they were not
maneuvers, it could only mean the islands were being fortified as bases. If
they were maneuvers, the troops should eventually return home. however,
strengthening the bases would imply that they will not leave, which would be
a much more serious problem."

The winters around Btorom and Kunashiri become severe in November. If they
were conducting maneuvers, the pullout operations would be easily detected
around that time. however, there has been no sign of such a pullout. There-

fore, the Defense Agency has eade a final Judgment, with the help of data
obtained from the United States, which boasts a strong data-gathering capacity
through the use of spy satellites, that "they have become full-fledged bases."

What does all this mean? There are apparently several answers. The Defense
Agency sources naturally take the most critical outlook that "it is a dagger

13
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

thrust in Japan's weakest spot." It analyses the Soviet intention as
follows.

Under the Japan-0.8. security pact, Japan was not such an important existence
in the past from the Soviet viewpoint. Hanover, last August Japan signed a
peace and friendship treaty with China, her former enesw. Memhile, the
goodwill and friendship pact with the Soviet Union still has not aaterialised.
Anti-Soviet feeling is rampant in Japan. At this point, there is the need to
deploy a siseable number of troops and apply political as well as military
pressure against Japan. '

Ain Is To Turn the Sea of Okhotsk Into an "Inland Sea"

The Self Defense Forces stationed in Obihiro in eastern Hokkaido consist of
only one division (about 5,000 men). The reason the Soviet forces deployed
an equivalent number of troops on the two islands was surely not to defend
two tiny islands. It is an overdeploynent from the standpoint of their
defense. The answer scene to lie rather in a "secret motive."

"If so, then should an emergency situation arise, the existing Self Defense
Forces are far too inadequate. It is necessary to drastically strengthen
our defense in this area. An airfield must be built in the Konsen (Ne-auro-
Kushiro) plain. hawk missiles must be brought in. Mechanized troops would
also be necessary. Otherwise, the security of 5 million people in hekkaido
cannot be guaranteed."

Other Defense Agency officials lake frightening references to the abandonment
of eastern Hokkaido, albeit as a hypothetical case. It sounds as if tomorrow
Soviet landing craft might come swarming in on the beaches of Todohara around
lake Otainuna, the famous tourist spot in eastern Hokkaido.

In order to strengthen the existing Self Defense Force, "the present defense
expenditures of 1 percent of the on? is far too inadequate. He would need
expenditures between 1.5 and 2 percent," according to Defense Agency sources.

However, military cmntator Hideo Aoki has a different view. he says, ”There
can be no dagger pointing at Japan, merely from the standpoint of materiel
supply. There are no harbor facilities on the islands which could unload
supplies to be used for attacks. If they intended to attack Japan, they could
cone from the Siberian uainland and free Sakhalin. The landing points would

be Ishikari Day and Hakkanai."

According to Mr Aoki, the Soviet forces have been mainly defense-oriented
forces, at least in the past.

an 14-25 Jet which landed in liakodate was also a defense fighter plane equipped
with air-to-air tissues.

19 °

'08 OFFICIAL 08S ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Unless we acted carefully under those considerations, we would be asking
a grave mistake. 'Ihey would probably not attack us in the near future.
Abandon eastern Hokkaido? You must be kidding." Then, why did the Soviet
Union act as it did? "is view is that it was "strictly from the standpoint
of nuclear strategy vis-a-vis the United States." On this point, 'lbnohisa
Sakanaka, editorial writer of the ASA"! SHINBUN, coapletely agrees.

"By controlling both ends of the Chishiaa island chain with bases on the two
islands of Etorom and Kunashira, and with the Petra Xhabarovsk base on
Kamchatka Peninsula, the island chain could become a formidable barricade
protecting the Sea of Okhotsk. ﬁle Sea of Okhotsk would thus turn into a
Soviet inland sea. In other words, their aim is to build an iapregnable
sanctuary against foreign threats.

The Soviet Pacific fleet in Port Vladivostok includes some 100 submarines.
Half of these are nuclear subs and about 30 are said to carry nuclear missiles.
In case of war, these subs would pass through the Soya Straits and spread out
in the Sea of Okhotsk. Pro. that position they would be able to launch ais-
siles toward the 0.8. mainland.

The 0.S.-Soviet nuclear ares race in the 1960s was aeasured in terns of the
nuber of their respective 1cm. However, with the increase in the explosive
power of nuclear missiles, their target-hitting precision was improved. As

a result, the man land bases are now within range of destroying each other.
That would leave only the subs, which would launch their missiles while moving
around. '

At one tine, the Soviet suhaarine missiles (3m) had a short landing range.
Taking the Pacific Ocean as an exasple, they would have landed midway beween
hueii and San Francisco, and would not have reached the 0.8. aainland. Today,
however, long-range SIM, such as the 880-8 (8,500 km range) and the 880-18
(9,000 km range) have been developed. They would reach free the Sea of Okhotsk
directly to the 0.8. aainland. -

0.8. lhbrella Now a ”Torn lhbrella"

Of course there is also a Soviet submarine fleet on the western side. It is
poised to aove from thraansk on the Arctic Ocean coast, pass through the north
side of Norway and strike at the 0.8. aainland from the Atlantic. ﬂoweVer,
they would be inediately caught in the undersea anti-sub network laid by the
Western nations fro. Greenland to Scotland.

On the other hand, the 0.8. fleet would find it difficult to penetrate the
“Chishima barricade“ in the Sea of Okhotsk.

Additionally, the straits between Eton-om and 0rup Island was heretofore
viewed as the mst easily penetratable spot in the "Chishima barricade.”
Therefore, the purpose of strengthening Etorofu as a base could be to increase
its capability as a watehpoint for the straits. Our source in the Defense
Agency agrees with this interpretation.

20
M ORIGIN. 088 ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY .

"Half of the soya Straits, the entrance to the Soviet sanctuary, in Japan's
sea territory. Japan'n attitude would greatly influence Soviet strategy.
Therefore, the 033R reads weakness in Japan's foreign policy and is using
threat to pressure anan with the implication, 'Don't fool around with us.‘
Also, they are showing their determination to the effect that 'the two
island: are new key military bases. Be assured that we will never return
then.

fortiiying the two islands and taming the Sea of Okhotsk into a Soviet
sanctuary has caused a major change in the nuclear balance between the
United States and the Soviet Union. ‘lhere is also the opinion (Mr Sakenaka)
that "thenU.8. nuclear umbrella in East Asia is now about to become a torn
mbrella.

ﬂow then will Japan react? Kr Sakanaka anticipates that "there will be a
stronger demand from the rightwing to strengthen our defense power to counter
Soviet military power. On the other hand, there could be increasing conten-
tion from the leftwing that U.S. supremacy has already declined; that the
continuation of the Japan-v.8. security treaty entails the great danger of
Japan's being involved in a U.8.-Soviet nuclear war; and that the only
alternative is the abrogation of the treaty and the adoption of a position
of neutrality.”

Fro- an international standpoint, China will probably not accept such a
situation in Bl'nsllcu. China will probably use it as a reason for a Japan-
China alliance, saying, "The northern bear has resumed his sinister moves....
another case of hegemony." (Defense Agency source)

The United States might also pose a difficult proposition. For instance,
there is the demand for a stronger Self Defense Force so that "Japan would
have the power to block the Soya Straits.” Whether or not that is the
reason, the Maritime SD? is already reported to be planning the capacity
for a mine blockade with the use of C-l30 transport planes for its niddle
stage defense plan, which begins next year. Of course, this will gravely
aggravate the Soviet Union, which is sensitive to U.8.-China-Japan collabo
oration. On 5 February, the Japanese GoVernaent called soviet Ambassador
to Japan Polyanshy to the Foreign Office, where Councillor Takashima strongly
protested that the Soviet moves were ”contrary to the spirit of an early and
peaceful solution to the northern territorial problem,” and he denuded the
withdrawal of the military fortifications on the two islands.

how such this was based on a firm foreign policy and defense stance reuins
to be seen within the framework of our future foreign policy vis-a-vis the
Soviet Union, the United States and China.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbunsha 1979

5800
can: ”105

21 o

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL 088 ONLY

SCIENCE AND MIMI-WY

8&1‘ AGENCY 3-YEAR PROJECT ON SUPBRCONDUCTING ELECTRONICS
‘l'okyo YMURI snmun in Jepeneee 17 Dec 78 p 11

[Text] The Science and Technology Agency hea embarked on reeearch on the
entirely new electronic element "euperconducting emeiconductor" which
poeeeeaee euperhigh propertiee euch ee very high epeed twitching, very low
noiee. and very low power coneueption. which are indiepeneeble ettributee of
leading electronic equipment to be need in future very large electronic com-
putere. epece toe-unicetiona. electromagnetic aetronomy. end reeote aeneing.
The reeeerch will be comlucted according to a 3-year plan. and 61 million
yen fro- the m 1978 Special Reeeerch Praeotionel Pund eeeigned to thie
inetitute will be allocated to thie project.

Noiee to Greater the higher the Temperature

The noiee generated by electronic element! 1.. primarily the product of
electrone that are in randoo movement within the interior of theee elenente,
and thia random motion ie greater the higher the tenpereture. ‘l'hie ie why
parte of certain epece coemunication equipment or electromagnetic telescopee
are cooled with liquid nitrogen to facilitate the detection of very weak
eignele end their amplification and thereby minimize the contributia: of
noiee. 0n the other hand. when the ueuel typee of electronic eleeente are
cooled to too low temperature, their propertiee deteriorate, and they no
longer can maintain normal operation.

when euperconducting bodiee are cooled to teeperaturee of the order of ~2100c
or lower, their electrical reeietancea drop to zero. In addition, electrone
tunnel through electrical ineuletore to naintein their (low thereby
developing a cherecterietic unique to euperconducting bodiee. ‘l'hie

preeent reeeerch ie aimed at exploiting theee propertiee to produce eeei-
conductor elemente that can then be ueed ae diodee or traneietore.

When temperature ie lowered to an extremely low level. noiee ie eleo reduced
to a very low level. when noiee ie reduced to a very low level. then. for
example. a very weak eignal can be amplified greatly ea e reeult of which
can reeolve a problem that in preeently impeding electronic equipment
development. ‘l'hie ie why euperconducting eemiconductore have been tabbed

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the “trunp cards“ that will becono available to future electronic elements.
and spirited research is being promoted in the Hestern world headed by
coapanies such as IBM. Present research is directed at studies involving the
exploitation of the Josephson effect, which is the property in which current
flows between two superconducting thin plates even when an insulating membrane
is placed between then. Now these Josephson elements require superthin
insulating membranes of the order of several dozen Angstrons (an Angstro-

is 10'3 cm), end the technology for fabricating such thin materials has not
yet been developed. Consequently, another well is being faced.

Production will Be Possible with Future Technology

This is why research in this country is being directed at attempts to

prepare these superconducting semiconductors by the vapor deposition of
semiconductor with good very high frequency characteristics (superhigh

speed switching property) on very thin semiconductors can be as much as

100 tines greater than those of the Josephson elements, and it in felt that
no undue difficulties will arise even employing technology available from

the past. In addition, where the Josephson element is limited to a diode

(one type of tunnel diode), this ouperconducting elusnt has the possibility
of being developed into a transitor type element with varied properties, which
gives it another great advantage.

According to the research execution plan of this agency. theoretical research
on superconducting semiconductors and research on semiconductors will be
delegated to the Blectrotechnical Laboratory of the Hinistry of International
Trade and Industry (HIT!) ad research on this superthin finishing of super-
conducting thin membranes to the Institute of Physical and Che-ital
Research. These will be followed by attempts to prepare super low noise
electromagnetic wave detectors than can receive electromagnetic waves ranging
from nicrowaves to the far infrared region in the form of a first stage
model aimed at making practical the fruits of the research described above,
and this effort will be centered at the Blectronagnetic Have Laboratory under
the Ministry of Postal Services.

This detector will have the capability of detecting even the very weak
electromagnetic waves that come from estrononic space (these were not
detectable by the astrononic instruments of the pest), and it is planned to

conduct various types of field tests at laboratories such as the
Blectronagnetic Have Laboratory.

Every Country In Turning to Active Research Activity

Research on superconducting suiconductors can hit an impasse should research
on the Josephson element hit a deed and. and the different leading electronics
countries are quickly girding effort in other directions. Research activities
are being activated in efforts to develop superconducing transistors, super-
conducting integrated circuits (Ic). and supercoaducting lsrgeescele
integrated circuits (1.81) of the future.

COPYRIGHT: Yuiuri Shinbumha 1978

2267 23
080: 10105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

CERAMIC!» N60 FOR 6A8 TURBINES STARTED AT KYUSIIU INSTITUTE
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUN in 309.0000 27 Doc 78 p ll

[Textp (Sage) The Kyuehu Government Induetriel Reeeerch Inetitute of the
Agency of lnduetriel Science end Technology (Yedo-nechi. Torieu chi. reiithi
heyeehi director) hee eeberked on the develepnent of cereeic uteriel for
uee in high efficiency gee turbinee ee e deeigneted reeeerch eubject.

Thie ie an inportent reeeerch for developing high perfonunce amen fe-ily
ceramic materiel cepeble of withetending high temperature of the order

of 500°C to be ueed ee perte for high efficiency gee turbinee. which in

e reeeerch end developnent theme in the country'e Moonlight Plen. A 7-yeer
nlen ie under wey with the purpoee of etteining the objective of e precticel
proceee by m 1986.

During the period between 197‘ end 1977, thie inetitute wee engeged in the
develop-eat of new euperherd end heet reeietent cupeeite neteriel at e
epeciel reeeerch ee e reeult of which it eucceeded in developing the eilicon
nitride-elusine fe-ily eintered product "amen" with euperior high teepereture
etrength. end thie neteriel ie being looked on with greet intereet ee
werrenting utilieetion reeeerch for epplicetione ouch ee bledee of gee
turbine and jet enginee. Alreedy eeme lerge induetriee euch ee Iehilteweji-e-
ﬂex-inn lleevy Induetriee. Tohuyele Sode, end the llectro-Cheuicel Induetriel
Co. Ltd heve diepetched reeeerch pereomel to thie inetitute to engege
in precticeliution reeeerch. end the outlook for thie uteriel on e new
cermic eppeere prmieing.

“thie ie the bechground for the eeeigueent of thie developeentel reeeerch
involving the high perfornence SIMON fenily cere-ic ee e deeigneted

reeeerch with very highly evelueted cherecterietice. Yukio lligeehiy-e.

heed of the Heteriele Developeent Depert-ent in cherge of the project.

hee eeid. "ﬁle would like to epply the‘ beeic dete of 3m to develop e
uteriel thet cen withetend ”00°C end eleo incorporete iqect end

corroeion reeietence to no order high enough to give ue e precticel product."

'l‘hie reeeerch ie pert of the reeeerch end develop-eat of new uteriele
neceeeery to the conetruction of very high theml efficiency gee turbince.
which ere pert of the energy coneervetion progre- under the Moonlight ﬂee.

2‘

TON OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M 0?"an US! ONLY

It will not be Halted to Juet the develop-eat of date smon fully
oer-lo. but will eleo include denlment of bledee end other gee
turbine perte. M e reeult. thle ney turn out to be e project of

nejor propel-time. steeter then enythlos thle lnetltute hee ever
hendled in the put.

COMMIT“ Nikkei: Keno “intone!“ 1978

2267
cso: nos m

25
M ONICIAI. IDS! ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040008-8

END OF
FICHE
DATE FILM

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040008-8
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040008-8

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-R0982-00850R000100040008-8