FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10161
3 December 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 68/81)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English—language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/1016l
3 December 1981

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 68/81)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

Ruling Liberal Democratic Party’s Activities Updated
(mum KEIZAI SHIHBUN, various dates)........................... 1

Internal Party Haneuvering
Cabinet Peahuffle Prospects
M Hays To Promote Stability

Magazine Updates Japan Socialist Party's Factional Dispute
(55m SHE-“mo. 15 Oct 81)....0sosasooososaooosooooooos.ItOslo 8

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

New Product Lines of Various Robot Manufacturers Introduced
(Various sources, various dates)............................... 10

Carrier lbbots
Casting Burr Removing Robots
Assembly Robots

16-Bit Microconputer Control

Arc-welding Robots

Cutting. Welding, Location-Determining Robots
Direct Numerical Control System

Development of Electromechanic Industry Analyzed
(SHUKAN DIMDO, 11 Jul 81)...‘................................ 18

Product Developmqnt of Phjor Chemical Indmtriea Surveyed
(SHUKAN ORU TOSHI. 30 Jul 81)....oboosts-soo-s-ooo-ooooseasons. 42

MITI To Establish Biotechnology Promotion Comittee
(NIHW KOGYO SHIHBUN, 12 Sep 81)...scocoon-ooaooooo-Ioooooosoot 54

Concealed Image Transmission Method Developed
(NIKKAN KWO SHIHBIN, 21 sep 81).ssossoaoos-ooooooo-uovsoosous 55

- a - [III - ASIA - 11]. P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

RULING LIBERAL DDIOCRATIC PAR'l'Y'S ACTIVITIES UPDATED

Internal Party Haneuvering
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SIIIMBUN in Japanese 3 Oct 81 p 2
[Text] Possible New Luv Leaders Discussed

while control of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) by the three elder statesmen--
Prime Minister Suzuki and former Prime Ministers Tanaka and Fukuda-ocontinues amidst
relative harmony, various budding "signs" and changes are detected among the second
echelon of party leaders which could influence the future political trend.

In the Tanaka faction, Noboru Takeshita and Shin Kanemru, who have hitherto been
generally regarded to be "on their good behavior," recently resumed their activity
on center stage. Rokusuke Tanaka (HIT! ninister) and Hichio Natanabe (finance
minister) are intensifying their respective policy study group activities, while
Shintaro Abe (LDP Policy Research Council chairman) is increasing his voice within
the party and stepping up stumping activities throughout the nation. Also, the
Shukyo Seiji Kenkyukai (ReligiOus and Political Study Society; Kazuo Tamachi, chair-
man), the base for the debate on a change of generations which had been dormant for
some time. is again actively holding weekly general meetings.

The alignment between the three elder statesmen, which was consolidated with the joint
Upper and Lower House elections in June 1980 as a backdrop, does not presently show
any signs of disintegrating. However, the new movements mentioned are seen as likely
to gradually alter the party power structure in the future.

During the joint elections last year, a movement arose within the party to "destroy
the 'l‘unaka-I-‘ukuda power alignment after the elections and to set up a new leadership,
in which Takeshita and Kanemaru would participate.

Consequently, the general view within the party was that relations between the two
men and former Prime Minister Tanaka had cooled. Meanwhile, Susumu Nikaido (LB?
:enernl Affairs Council chairman), who is considered to be former Prime Minister
Tanaka's "alter ego," rose to control the real power within the party, and Ganri
Yamshita (Lower House Steering Committee chairman) has also loomed as one of the
likely heirs. Takeshita seldom attends the meetings held by the new leaders, and
there have been rumors that ”Mr Takeshita was shouted down into complete humility by
the master of Hejiro (former Prime Minister 'I‘anaka)."

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l‘SlE ()VIN

But a more recent view is that 'he appears to have been reinstated in Mr Tanak‘s favor."
This opinion is based on Mr Takeshita's appointment as chairman of the Tanaka faction
delegation to South Korea in late August, his participation in the Nikaido-led dele—
gation to China (PRC) in early September by direct order of former Prime Minister
Tanakn, and his closing address at the seminar for young members of the faction in
early September.

Sources close to former Prime Minister Tanaka have publicly acknowledged that "judging
from the makeup of members at the seminar, rumors of cooled relations concerning

Mr. rakeshita are unfounded. One could easily surmise Hr Tanaka's feelings on the
basis of the attendance." They thus imply that Mr. Tanaka's ire has subsided.

Also, on the basis of former Prime Minister Tanaka'a decision, Hr. Kanemaru was
appointed to the post of chairman of the Lower House Political and Financial Committee,
which actually controls the fate of the Suzuki cabinet.

There are speculations within the LDP such as: "It probably means Mr Kanemaru has
become so powerful that Hr‘ianakacould not destroy him, even if he wanted to" (a cadre
Diet member of the Tanaka faction), or "Mr Tanaka set up the Nikaido connection and
the Takeshita-Kanemaru connection as trump cards to be used in the worst possible case
situation arising from the lockheed scandals trial" (an LDP cadre).

the Shinsetai Kenkyukai (New Generation Study Society) led by Rokusuke Tanaka had
hitherto been characterized as a "policy group,) but it was admonished by former LDP
Secretary General Kunikichi Saito, leading cadre of the Kochikai (Suzuki faction , that
"it is all right to hold study meetings, but one should refrain from holding so-called
politically oriented general meetings." On 17 September, 34 of the groups' 58 members
gathered in the city of Fukuoka, Rokusuke Tanaka's home base, for a party to commemo—
rate a publication by the group. There was reportedly one Diet member among them who
was visiting Seoul as a member of the Japan~$outh Korea Parliamentary League delegation,
but he hurriedly flew to Fukuoka in the middle of his Seoul tour.

Although Rokusuke Tanaka himself denied that he "made contacts or ordered members to
attend. or that he anticipated such a large turnout," sources close to him pointed out:
"whenever a Study meeting is held in the Tokyo office, members are tempted to casually
'buy a ticket to the race' and attend on the strength of appeals by Miyazawa (chief
cabinet secretary) and Rokusuke Tanaka. 0n the other hand, when the study meeting was
held in Fukuoka, they took the plane with a certain determination." It was thus openly
implied that attendance at the commemorative party constituted a kind of "test of loyalty.

it is reported that six Diet members have subsequently applied for membership in the
study group, attracting attention within the party in the sense that "the race for a
successor to head the Kochikai has become quite interesting." (A non—affiliated Diet
member)

According to Rokusuke Tanaku, the following dialogue took place between the late Prime
Minister Ohira and himself: "Rokusuke, I intend to supply Hichio Hatanabe with men and
funds. Is that agreeable to you?" "Fine, I have no objections."

During the 40-day struggle late in theyear before last, Watanabe entice Kabun ﬂute and
Scmpachi Oishi of the Nakasone faction, which was confronting the Ohira-Tanaka camp, to
support(ﬂiirn. He was expelled from the Nakasonc faction and is presently non—affiliated.
Unce a month, he gathers together young Diet members from the various factions and
conducts study meetings under the aegis of the Onchikai.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The study group has 34 or 35 members. There are many who came from the Kochikai with
the blessings of the Nakasone faction and the late Prime Minister chira. Beginning

in October. they will be holding breakfast meetings every week. This is seen by party
members as '% steppingstone to the formation of a Hatanabe faction."

Hatanabe himself believes: "It is more relaxing to be by myself. I am so busy with
administrative reform and financial reconstruction that I don't have time to think
about forming a faction." He therefore postponed hanging up an Onchikai nameplate
on his office door. although he had planned it for 2 days. He explained to his col-
leagues: "One cannot predict the future, but the important thing is to strengthen
lateral relations within the party."

Nonetheless, the Nakasone faction and the Kochikai are warily eyeing Hatanabe's moves.
They are "debating whether they should warn the young members against participating"
(a Kochikai cadre).

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

Cabinet Reshuffle Prospects
Tokyo NIHOH KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 13 Oct 81 p 2
[Text] Talk of Cabinet Reshuffle Stirs Up LDP Factions

The theory of a "drastic reshuffle" has come to the fore, pointing out that 'hdthout
a drastic reshuffle, passing up the July opportunity would prove to be meaningless"
(a source close to the prime minister). The prime minister is said to have "already
prepared a list of 70-80 candidates for the cabinet." (a party cadre). However, the
target date is next fall and a balance between the factions would be the highest
priority. There is also an opinion within the party that "there is no room for the
appointment of Diet members from the intermediate factions and non-factions to the
cabinet" (a party cadre). Let us therefore take a look at the conditions within the
five main factions and LDP members of the Upper House.

Lineup of Top Three Officials for Reelection Is Focal Issue

[Suzuki Faction] The focal issue is how to line up Kunikichi Saito, Kiichi Miyazawa
and Rokusuke Tanaka--the top three faction leadera-as chairman of party affairs,
chairman of "zaibatsu" (business groups) affairs and principal cabinet member. There
is a growing opinion within the faction that. with an eye toward a Suzuki reelection,
a solid foothold must be secured among the three party posts.

As far as the three party posts are concerned, the faction is not particular, except
that Chairman Nikaidc of the General Affairs Council should either remain in that
post or assume the post of secretary general. It is rumored that if he should remain
in his present post, either Kunikichi Saito or Heiji Ogawa would be fielded as
candidate for secretary general.

0n the premise that Nikaido would become secretary general, the faction elders are

urging the prime minister to field Hiyazawa for chairman of the Policy Research Council.
However. sources close to the prime minister are strongly urging retention of Hiyazawa
in his present post, saying: 'ﬁhere is no one else who is qualified as chief cabinet
secretary, and Hiyazaua has proved to be a capable chief cabinet secretary."

3

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

1he elders of the Suzki faction are increasingly for "support Hiyazawa,“ while the
younger members are leaning toward support for Rokusuke Tanaka. Consequently, the
candidacy of Miyazawa and Tanaka with respect to the cabinet reshuffle is tied to the

question of a successor to the Kochikai leadership.
A host of Candidates Seeking Cabinet Posts

[Tanaka Faction] The basic strategy is to support Chief of General Affairs Nikaido
for the post of secretary general, and to increase the allocation of cabinet posts by
one. As for the question of Nikaido as secretary general, "There aren't many candi-
dates for secretary general in either the Suzuki or Fukuda factions" (a Tanaka faction
cadre). 1his situation is thus regarded as providing "an excellent opportunity." As

a backdrop in the quest for an increase in cabinet posts, there is the expansion factor
of the faction into " a host" of 104 members, many of whom are seeking cabinet nomi-
nation. The aim is therefore to seek nominations for newcomers. The plan is to obtain
appointnnnts for those with six or five terms in the Diet, including Noboru Minowa,
Yukiyasu Matsuno, Ryohei Tamura, et a1. It is also hoped that a post can be garnered
for one of the members who joined during the past year.

Among former cabinet members, the 'hnn in the spotlight," Chairman Kanemaru of the
Lower Mouse Special Political and Financial Committee, is regarded as the front runner.

Abe's Move and His Successor Are Keys

[Fukuda Faction] The focal points are Shintaro Abe's move to a major cabinet post and
a successor in one of the three party posts. There are calls among the middle cadres

and younger members of the faction of Abe's appointment to foreign minister or finance
minister, or in the case of the three party posts his appointment as secretary general.

In the event of Abe's appointment to the cabinet. names looming as candidates for the
three party posts include: Kichizo Hosoda, Tatsuo Tanaka and Keijiro Shoji. At
present, their respective support groups are reportedly holding meetings and directly
or indirectly approaching former Prime Minister Fukuda, who has the "power to make
recommendations" to Prime Minister Suzuki.

In case a problem is faced by the faction regarding a successor to the three party
posts, the speculation is that "former Prime Minister Fukuda may recommend Ichiro
Nakagawa, who has been acting as a detached force of the Fukuda faction."

Additionally. the faction is prepared to field newcomer Ihei Shiseki, as well as
Mutsuki Kato. who seeks a complete comeback from his tribulations in connection with
the Lockheed scandal, for cabinet posts.

Accommodation of Top Cadres Is Difficult

[Nakasone Faction! Administrative Management Agency Director Nakasone is prepared to
remain in his present position if asked. "Unless I am asked to quit by the prime
minister, I will concentrate on administrative reform." In that case, the sorest point
Is what to do with Secretary(bneralSakurauchi. He himself appears to be expecting a
cabinet post as a matter of course for his "great contribution to the landslide victory
in the joint elections." If it turns out that way, only the top cadres would secure

I.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the posts they aspire to. There are some faction members who feel that "things would
be better all around if Mr Sskurauchi would resign from his post. The other top cadre,
Sadanori Yamanaka. is well qualified in view of his accomplishents as director of the
party Tax Affairs Committee. Equal treatment for him will prove to be difficult.

Newcomer Hotoharu Horishita is at the top of the list of recommended candidates with a
record of six terms in the Diet. If Horishita is again passed by, the younger members
of the faction will not be pacified. Hikosaburo Okonogi, with five terms, is in the
"eye of the typhoon." He may not only pass his seniors, but he also has close
relations with Tanaka faction members, which causes Nakasone aides to worry that "if
he should be recommended by the Tanaka faction, it could result in a decline in
prestige for Nakasone as faction leader."

Rumors Rampant of Boss's Resignation

[Komoto Facrion] Amidst his "independent statements" on administrative reform and tax
reduction, there are frequent rumors within the party concerning Komoto's resignation
as chief of the Economic Planning Agency. Komoto himself laughs the matter off as
having "merely expressed his personal thoughts," while the prevailing view in his
faction is that "Mr Komoto's departure from the cabinet would mean a decline in his
prestige and a minus for him in the race for the post-Suzuki party presidency " (a
cadre). However, middle-level cadres and younger members admit their inner feeling
that “in view of the limited number of cabinet posts (two, including Komoto), if only
the boss would resign from his post...." Komoto's moves will thus continue to draw
attention inside and outside his faction.

In the event Komoto remains in his present post, Soichiro Ito (party public relations
director), who has served seven terms in the Diet, would be the strongest contender for
the reamining post. However, Hyosuke Niwa, who served as National Land Agency director
during the “28-day cabinet" of the Tanaka regime, is said to be eager for a "return
match," causing a dilemma among faction leaders.

Can The Three-Post Quota Be Retained?

[Upper House] The Upper House is allocated three cabinet posts. For a while, it was
allowed two posts, but this was increased to three with the advent of the Suzuki
government, thanks to the persuasive efforts of Secretary General Fujita of the Upper
House. Although LDP members of the Upper House are confident of retaining the three
posts despite the cabinet reshuffle, one worrisome element is the direction of the
Tanaka faction. The Tanaka faction is demanding more posts for Lower House members

on the basis of the expansion of the faction. and if the issue cannot be settled within
the framework of the Lower House, the Upper House would be affected. There is thus

concern that the three posts may be cut to two.

Although the three posts may possibly be retained, if the Tanaka faction is denied an
increase in posts for Lower House members, it is possible that the faction may demand
that "a Tanaka faction candidate be promised one of the posts allocated to Upper
House members."

COPYRIGHT: Nihom Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

5

FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

No Hays To Promote Stability
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 19 Oct 81 p 3
[Text] Suzuki Government and Cabinet Reshuffle

Encouraged by the smooth sailing deliberation in the Diet on the administrative reform
fill, LDP Diet members are focusing their attention on the direction of the cabinet
reshuffle and on nominations for the three party executive posts. Visits to the prime
minister's residence by politicians who have become eligible for cabinet posts are
incessant. Active 'bncouragement meetings: by politicians are increasing, and many are
viewed as seeking demonstrative effect with an eye toward the coming cabinet reshuffle.
Meanwhile, the so-called "pilgrimage to former Prime Minister Tanaka," who has powerful
clout with regard to the political situation, continues without letup.

As far as the general public is concerned, they may entertain spectators' interest,

but it doesn't matter to them who occupies the three LDP posts, or who sits in the
principal cabinet posts. This is because the public considers that "the cabinet really
does not change, and the situation will be the same regardless of who is appointed."
Therefore, the hubbub in Nagatacho (the prime minister's residence) even appears
abnormal. Nonetheless, from the standpoint of predicting the direction of the domestic
political scene, there is an aspect of the November reshuffle which cannot be overlooked.

The noteworthy point in the upcoming cabinet reshuffle is how the stability of the
Suzuki government will change. As far as the prime minister, who is handling the re-
shuffle, is concerned, he will do his utmost to enhance the stability of the government
and to build a readiness to cope with domestic and foreign situations. This is in line
with his strategy for reelection next fall. The question is the proper personnel
alignment for that purpose. Therein lies the main concern of the prime minister's

personnel moves.

There are two ways to increase government stability. First, to join hands with the
forces which constitue an overwhelming majority within the party, and to control the
political situation as its leader. The second is to maintain a balance of power
between the various forces within the party, which is the key to maintaining the
stability of the government. In building language, the former is a 'bard" structure,
while the latter is a "soft" structure.

The Suzuki cabinet has the earmarks of a "soft-structure government," in view of its
inauguration after the demise of his predecessor, and the character and political
methods of the prime minister himself. Its governmental base is founded on a main-
stream factional system centering on the Suzuki, Tanaka and Fukuda factions, and its
stability depends on a balance between the Tanaka and Pukuda forces. However, during
the year and a half existence of the Suzuki cabinet, the conditions within the party
have changed drastically. The Tanaka faction has expanded to the point where it is
said: 'Mhoever doesn't belong to the Tanaka faction is a nobody."

within the Tanaka faction, there are already strong demands for a larger allocation
of cabinet posts, with an eye toward the cabinet reshuffle (an increase from the present

four to five posts), and to "field Nikaido, or a Diet member friendly to the Tanaka
faction, for the post of party secretary general."

FOR OFFKJA1.USEZONLN
Regarding recommendations for the cabinet reshuffle, the Tameka faction "does not intend
to make any requests which would perplex the prime minister, but the prime minister is
well aware of the Tanaka faction's position" (a Tanaka faction cadre).

The Fukuda faction is showing signs of rejecting the wishes of the Tanaka faction.
“increasing the allocation from four to five posts would violently upset the peace
within the party" (a Fukuda faction cadre). There is deep-rooted caution against a

Tanaka faction takeover of the three party executive posts, especially the post of
secretary general.

Although Prime Minister Suzuki is reportedly seeking stability for his government based
on a 'Tanaka-Fukuda equilibrium," to what extent is it possible? A dilemma exists in
that if relations with the Tanaka faction should sour, a split would occur in the govern-

ment itself. On the other hand, an extreme-compromise would result in deteriorating
relations with the Fukuda faction.

In that sense, the focal issue regarding the cabinet reshuffle would again concern
appointments to the three party executive posts. The transfer of Secretary General
Sakurauchi is said to be a foregone conclusion, and the issue is: who will succeed
him to the post of secretary general? As for Prime Minister Suzuki himself, he would
like to appoint someone from his own faction to one of the executive posts in order to
solidify his strategy for reelection, and the most probable solution is a combination
of candidates from the Tanaka, Fukuda, and the mainstream Suzuki factions.

In such an event, the party control would shift to a Tameka-Suzuki government. How
will the prime minister, who is solicitous of relations with the Pukuda faction, deal
with this? Inasmuch as it relates to the foundation and stability of his government,
it may turn out to be a "troublesome cabinet reshuffle for the prime minister" (a
party elder).

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunshs 1981

5884
C50: 4105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SJCICLCXHCAL

MAGAZINE UPDATE JAPAN SOCIALISl‘ PARTY'S PACTIQJAL DISPUTE
Tokyo SHUKAN SHINCHO in Japanese 15 Oct 81 p 24
[Text] No One Is Troubled by the Split in Tokyo Headquarters of Japan Socialist Party

At the regular general meeting, mpposedly convened to reconstruct the party. by the
Tokyo headquarters (Diet Councillor shcngo Oki. connittee chairman) of the Japan
Socialist Party lJSP), which suffered severe defeat in the July metropolitan elections
and fell to second place among the opposition parties, the Socialist Association and
the Anti-Socialist Association confronted each other and a split resulted.

Immediate Cause of the Split Is the Question of Eduction in Party Dues

One of the Diet members of the Socialist Association pointed out that a party member

of the Japan Telecommunications Workers' Union, the supporting organization iron which
committee chairman Oki merged, was paying only 1,000 yen of the monthly party dues

of about 1,200 yen, and a supplementary resolution "that he reinstate payments retro-
active to February of this year" was put to a vote. Upon this develqment, chairman
Oki and the executive committee (16 members) of. the Anti-Socialist Association resigned,
claiming that it was "in fact, a vote of no confidence.” They boycotted the general
meeting and held a "Diet members' conference to rebuild the Tokyo party headquarters."

At this conference, a metropolitan assemblyman of the Anti-Socialist Association was
se1ected as secretary-general to replace the secretary-general belonging to the
Socialist Association; he organized an executive committee with the incumbent chairman
and vice chairman remaining. The Anti-Socialist Association withdrew from the JSP

party headquarters in Bongo and established at office in the House of Councillors'
building.

For the executive committee to split over the question of only 200 yen discount in
party dues is typical of JSP actions but actually this is only an wtward excuse.

It is reported that the strategy to oust chairman Oki, with the party dues question
as an excuse, began to be formulated a month prior to the general meeting. A veteran
party member of the Socialist Association reported this.

Two-thirds (252) of the Diet members cf the general meeting are members of the party
[action "March Association,’ which is sympathetic with both the Socialist and Anti-
Socialist Associations, and the leader is Tuio Hiyabe, chairman of the Federation of
Municipal Labor Unions. Miyabe intends to run as a candidate frcm Tokyo's four

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

districts in the next Lower House elections. The retirement of Diet member Hitsu
Kaneko. who presently represents the four districts, is certain. Howwer, Miyabe
cannot get the ncmination being only the chairman of the Federation of Municipal
Labor Unions. Therefore, he sought the position of chai roan of the JSP Tokyo head-
quarters and connived to crush Oki by forcing the supplementary resolution to a vote.

Chairman Miyabe is not the only one aiming to replace Diet member Kaneko. So is
Mitsuo Tcmizuka. secretary general of the General Council of Trade Unions of Japan,
who advocates coalition between the JSP and the Kaneito [Celan Government Party]. It
is also said that chairman Oki is also thinking of switching from the Upper House to
the Lower House.

On the other hand, a member of the Anti-Socialist Association who is also a veteran
Diet member interprets the recent split in this manner:

"I had anticipated that the Socialist Association would try to discredit chairman Oki
with the dues question. In short. the difference between the Socialist and the Anti-
SOcialist Associations is the difference between the 'JSP-JCP' or 'JSP-Komeito' course
of joint struggle. The Socialist Association criticizes us for cooperation with the
Komeito, but the victory of 10') Diet seats (house of hpresentatives) was the result
of the 'JSP-Kcmeito' joint struggle. Labor unions and the Japan Telecamunications
Workers' Union are saying that unless a candidate belongs to the 'JSP-Komeito‘ faction.
he will not be recommended.

Therefore. at this time, even if the organisation has to be broken up, I want to
disassociate myself from the Socialist Association which supports the 'JSP-JCP' line.
The vote on the supplementary resolutim was an opportune measure, but will the JSP
use that as an excuse to split? The aforementioned Socialist Association party member
states vaguely that: 'We will make our position clear and stage a demmstration aimed
at the next general meeting. We will make chairman Oki admit that he is responsible
for the split and isolate him locally, limiting his support to only the Japan Telecom-
munications Workers' Union. Up to that point, the strategy has been planned, but
there are no plans to split the party. Coordination with the supporting labor unions
remains to be carried out...."'

The Anti-Socialist Association states: "There might be a difference in the policy
but the party is dependent on labor unions for building a party of a million ushers,
for providing election funds and for delivering the votes. He cannot cursorily break
up the party." For the mment. we must be cmcerned with the electim of the Tokyo
governor. He added ncnchalantly that ”we will probably be in trouble unless we are
unified by then."

Kaoru Ota, former chairman of the General Council of Trade Unions of Japan, made the
following comment:

'Following last year's 'double' elections, if the party loses the metropolitan
assemblymen's elections, the positions of veteran labor union leaders might decrease
and no future job prospects exist. Becoming helpless, they will lean toward the side
with money and votes in order to obtain positions. It would be a split without any
relation to party ideology or principle. If developments have becane this bad, the
situation might be cleared up if the party did split...."

COPYRIGHT: by Shinchosha 1981

9134 9
cso: 4105/16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEW PRODUCT LINKS OF VARIOUS ROBOT MANUFACTURES INTRODUCED
Carrier Robots
Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 19 Jun 81 p 6

[Text] Nihon Robot Industry (president, Noriaki Hotoda; l-ZS-l, hishi-Shinjuku,
Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan; telephone: 03-348-8585), a manufacturer specializing in
carrier robots established by the tie-up of Toyo Terminal and liotoda Electronics
Industry, has built a 110 mit/month-scale mass production system at the Kagoshima
plant, and has started full-scale sale of the product through 25 agencies. First-
year sales of 2.5 billion yen are projected. Also, the company has received in-
quiries concerning production tie—ups, sales tie-ups and plant exports from 25
countries. For the time being, it plans to set up bases in two areas, the United
States and Europe. and has begun to select the tie-up partners. In conjunction
with the starting of this series of business activities, the capital was increased
from 50 million yen to 110 million yen, which invited a new capital participation
by Motoda Electronics Industry and Rain International, which is the parent company
of Toyo Terminal.

Nihon Robot Industry is a manufacturer specializing in carrier robots and was
established in September 1979 by Motoda Electronics Industry which offered the
robot technology and Toyo Terminal which offered the capital. The company has
induStrislized its robots, headed by "Piler" robots with 125 patents including
utility model patents, and "Ampman" and "Y-man" robots. The company has already
achieved appreciable sales results with domestic automobile makers and with overseas
major industries such as Volvo of Sweden. Nihon Robot Industry is characterized

by the fact that it sccomodates the needs of users by offering various machine
models and an ample selection of robots costing from 1.5 million to 20 million you.

The company has been building a new plant adjacent to the Kagoshima plant of notods
Electronics Industry (Kedoin-Machi, Satsuma-Gun, Kagoshima-Ken) since its establish-
ment, and it has recently completed and begun to operate fully a total production
line which is capable of manufacturing 10 "Filer" robou a month, and 100 "Amman"
and "Y-man" robots a month. According to the company, orders have been received
from all types of industries: from the automobile industry, to begin with, and from
the food industry, the cement industry, the cement secondary product industry, hhe
metal mold industry, the storage industry and the port industry. It is evident that
the production line will not be enough to meet all the needs unless "automation of
the robot plant" is promoted. The company is now rushing construction work aimed

at increasing the total production to 250 units by the end of this year—50 "Piler"
robors and 200 "Ampman" and Y-man" robots.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The capital was increased to prepare for an increase in funds in association with
the starting of this full-scale Operation, and new capital was raised to 110
million yen. Toyo Terminal has been the 100 percent investor (50 million yen) of
this company until recently, but Heim International and Hotoda Electronics Industry
have made new investments of 50 million yen and 10 million yen respectively.

On the other hand, the steady flow of inquirhs from overseas is very encouraging—
for instance, inquiries concerning the purchase of plants from the USSR and North
Korea. Meanwhile, inquiries from advanced nations such as the United States and
European nations have been dominated by sales partnership offers. In line with

the overseas strategic policy of the company to send only essential parts and to
finish the goods at the local sites, it is willing to show positive interest in
tie-up proposals. The company will medite the selection of business partners
focusing on production technology and sales capability. As a first step, it intends
to conclude tie-up negotiations with one American company and one European company.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo lbuaha 1981
Casting Burr Removing Robots

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIPBUN in Japanese 31 Jul 81 p 21

[Text] Casting burr removing robots hay be created as early as the next fiscal
year. This means that the technological development pursued by the Small Business
Promotion Corporation [SBPC], which had contracted the work for the automation of
the cast finishing (removal of burrs), the final process in the manufacture of
castings, to Japan Industrial Robot Manufacturers' Association, Sogo Imono Center,
Kawasaki Heavy Industries and Kobe Steel, is on the threshold of a breakthrough.
The SBPC has decided to make a trial model within the next fiscal year and to
present it and spread its use. Casting burr removers specifically for mass-
production use were developed previously. However, the machine which is about to
be developed at this time is likely to become popular among smaller business enter-
prises because the robots will be equipped with a teaching machine, a sensor and a
high degree of freedom, suitable for various small quantity productions.

Casting burr removal is a process that follows the mold-making, melting, pouring and
mold-separating processes, and is the final process generically called cast finish-
ing. This process has become the largest bottleneck standing in the way of rational-
ization of the entire process, as the burr removal involves removal of burrs using

a grinder, which requires hard work, generates noise and dust, and produces a hazard-
0us work environment. It is difficult to secure workers for this task, and the
mechanization of the process is also problematic. In addition, lately it has been
extremely difficult to hire young laborers, and the aging of employees is a serious
concern. The automation of this process by the use of robots has become the issue of
induStry. However, in reality, 99 percent of the 2,800 companies throughout Japan
that conscitute the casting industry are classified as small businesses and lack the
ability to develop their own technology.

With this background, the SBPC decided to wrestle with the technology development
under a 6-year plan, from “-78 to “-83, and pushed forward research and development
of both software and hardware by contracting out the project to the Japan Industrial

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Robot Hanufacturers' Associat ion, Sogo Imono Center, Kawasaki Heavy Industries
and Kobe Steel. This casting burr removing robot is composed of a teaching
machine which instructs the machine which burrs are to be cut off, a sensor which
verifies the location and size of the burrs, an oil pressure mechanism which
drives a burr removing tool along burrs and a control system which controls the
total systu, so it is designed to remove burrs from various castings produced in
small numbers. Robots are expected to remove burrs of several to some tens of
casted products, such as gear boxes, pump casings, valves and motor casings,
weighing 10 kg to some hundreds of kg. Robots for smaller castings and robots
for larger castings are being developed by Kawasaki Heavy Industries and Kobe Steel,
respectively, under contract. on the other hand, softnere development was carried
out at the Sogo Imono Center—for example, the improvement of the manufacturing
process to standardize the site and shape of the burrs. At present, the develop-
ment of robots both from the software and hardware aspects will become a reality
in the near future.

Up to now, robots for painting have shown rmrkable progress in popularization.

As this is the first time that a robot for casting work will be made, those involved
in the manufacture of this robot are full of hope. The problem, however, is the
price. The majority opinion is sumed up: "It is difficult for the robot to be-
come popular among small business enterprises unless the price is below 20 million
yen." (Japan Casting Industry Association) It appears that the future spread of
these robots will depend on how much lower the prices can be set.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Aaseably Robots
Tokyo NIIOtAN KOGYO SHDIBUN in Japanese 31 Jul 81 p 10

[Text] Toyota Machine Works is advancing into the automobile assembly robot field.
The company intends to utilize the technology accumulated through development of an
automobile assembler by the company as part of the development of a compound produc-
tion system with laser application, one of the large projects of the Agency for
Industrial Science and Technology. The plan will be edaodied after 1983, when the
project to develop the system will be completed. The company intends to practicalize
robots both for assembly of various articles produced in small numbers and for
assembly of specialized mass-produced articles. Both types of robots will be
developed as part of the rationalization of facilities in machine-work plants. As a
start, a small-scale assembly robot will be manufactured, following closely the
trend of demand. This is the first time that a Japanese tool machine maker' has
advanced into this type of robot field, and Toyota's future activities in connection
with this business will be very interesting to watch.

Toyota intends to advance into the assembly robob field on the basis of the convic-
tion that the company can surely grab a large share of the robot market if it can
make its technological ability work and develop a unique product, since the automa-
tion of machine parts assembly lines is imperative but still totally unexploited.

0n the other hand, one of the reasons it does not intend to go into the material
handling robot field is concern that there are too many other makers already in the
field for Toyota to be able to squeeze successfully into the market.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The company began to get involved in the development of robots much earlier, about
10 years ago. It actually manufactured modular type spot-welding robots and sold
some 50 sets to automobile related makers. The company also made a product out of
material handling devices such as specialized machines and assemblers by giving
them the function of a robot.

The assembly robot which Toyota is presently trying to merchandise is considered an
extension of the specialized machines and machine work systems such as flexible
manufacturing systems. A project team was organised to develop an assembler for the
compound work system with laser application, and some 1 billion yen was invested,
including a development fund from the national government, which resulted in the
completion of a prototype robot that assembles gearboxes and spindle units absolute-
ly without human labor. Toyota is now designing a utility model which is scheduled
for delivery in 1983. Buoyed by this achievement, the company is showing growing
confidence in the automatic assembly of various fine parts: "We have established

a technology beyond the reach of other companies."

Although the manufacture of products will encounter some problems relating to the
raising of the assembly speed, size and weight reduction of the robot, miniaturi-
zation of the control system, etc, ”it is possible to receive orders and produce
robots which can meet broad needs" even at the present stage of progress, the
comapny says. Nevertheless, the spread of the assembly robot entails plenty of
problems to be solved, in addition to problems related to the development of the
robot proper and the software-for instance, changing the position of the workers.
Toyota envisages a hopeful surge in demand once these problems are solved. Assess-
ing the right time as 4 to 5 years from now, Toyota intends to merchandise the
robot in tune with the arrival of the real demand.

COPYRIGHT: Hikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
l6-Bit Microcomputer Control
Tokyo NIKREI SAHGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 15 Aug 81 p 6

[Text] Industrial robots, the ace of energy saving machines, are now basking in
the dawn of the 16-bit microcomputer era. Kawasaki Heavy Industries, the largest
robot maker, will adopt in full scale a 16-bit parallel processing microcomputer for
an assembly robot to be merchandised next spring, following in the footsteps of

a painting robot which has recently been offered for sale. Already, Yasukawa
Electric Manufacturing and Shin-Heiwa Industry are using this computer for welding
robots. Also, Hitachi. Kobe Steel, Fujitsu Panuc and other prominent companies
will soon introduce robot models with a l6-bit microcomputer to the market one
after another. This series of actions reflects the rapidly increasing demand for
sophisticated robots in industry. It is viewed as inevitable that in the next
year the mainstream of microcomputers used for sophisticated robots will be the
lG-bit model instead of the currently dominant 8-bit model.

Kawasaki Heavy Industries will use a 16-bit microcamxmer for the sophisticated
"Puma" model, an assembly robot to be sold next spring. Though an 8-bit microcom-

puter will be used for inexpensive models, it is forecast that a 16-bit model will
be the mainstream of the robots. The company engaged in a serious sales promotion

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for spot-welding robots with an 8-bit microazmmcer starting at the beginning of this
year, but now it seems to have determined to introduce a 16-bit model to cope with
the steadily advancing technological innovation.

Kobe Steel, the largest manufacturer of the painting robot, will soon sell an arc-
welding robot with a 16-bit microcomputer. The company has sold less than 20 arc-
welding robots to date, and it is anxious to exploit this field with the pending
opportunity of selling the 16-bit model for the first time.

Fujitsu Fanuc is now in the process of developing an intelligent assembly robot
with the cooperation of Siemens of Heat Germany, and the 16-bit microcomputer will
be used to all control parts of the robot. Already, currently manufactured models
partially use the 16hbit microcomputer, and the company believes that "a 16-bit
model will be a common sight in future robots." (President Seiuemon Insba,
Fujitsu Panuc) '

Likewise, Hitachi will switch all robot control systems over to a 16-bit model from
the currently effective 8-bit models as early as this autumn. Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries, Osaka Transformer, Tokiko and other robot manufacturers are all rushing
to adopt the 16-bit model. All the main machine models of each company, all of the
robots for welding, painting and assembling, may be converted to 16-bit models

from this year to next year.

The industrial robot production was 19,800 units lastzyear, a 36.7-percent

increase over the previous year. Among them, 3,000 units are playback and numeri-
cal control model sophisticated robots which integrate a microcomputer in the brain--
a remarkable four-fold increase over the previous year. A shortage of skilled
workers in industry is becoming a serious problem, and this has spurred the steady
rise in demand for sophisticated robots which can work almost as well as skilled
workers. These microcomputers are currently of the 8-bit type, but future robots
will be dominated by the 16-bit model, and it is predicted that the sophistication
of robots will be furthered by the momentum.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Arc-Welding Robots
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 22 Aug 81 p 6

[Text] In September, Osaka Transformer will inaugurate a system which produces

50 arc-welding robots a month. With the completion of a new plant primarily for
robot production scheduled at the end of this month in the Settsu factory (Settsu,
Osaka Prefecture), the company deployed an aggressive formation-reinforcement of
businessmen specializing in robots, organization of 30 sales agencies and placement
of 100 full-time salesmen in each agency. With these positive strategies, the
company wants to double the arc-welding robot sales of this term (April 1982 term)
compared with the previous term.

Osaka Transformer has merchandised right-angle coordinate-type arc-welding robots
since the end of 1979 to join the robot market. Additionally, in April of this
year, it started to sell multijoint type arc-welding robots and furnished "both
wheels" in terms of the makeup of the merchandise.

14
In consideration of the improving demand from automobile and machine manufacturers,
the company decided to strengthen its production capacity. Once the new plant
being constructed in the Settsu factory is completed, the major product of the
plant will be robots, and a 50 robot/month system will be established.

In conjunction with this, the company has furnished a robot sales system. The

core of the system is the "Robot Center" established previously in the main office
for the management of sales and orders received, information retrieval and education
of sales agencies. At this time, the number of businessmen specializing in robots
has been increased to over 30 men. Also, in line with the policy of increasing
robot sales agencies, 30 agencies were, as a first step, brought under one system,
and 100 full-time robot salesmen have been positioned to facilitate the sales at
each sales agency.

The robot sales of Osaka Transformer in the previous term (April 1981 term) were
valued at approximately 1 billion yen, whereas in this term the company aims for
the first time to reach 2 billion yen, double the previous term's sales as a

start, in accordance with its vision to raise the robot sector to become the future
backbone of the company by realizing an annual sales' increase of 1 billion yen
from now on .

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Cutting, Welding, Location-Determining Robots
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 22 Aug 81 p 6

[Text] As a link in the chain of robot model expansion, Shin-Heiwa Industry has
seriously begun to pursue the development of "cutting robots" and the cultivation
of the demand for them. The company has succeeded in merchandising the plasma-
cutting robot, the first product of which has been just delivered to Toyota Motor,

a gasdwelding robot and an automatic shearing system with a location-determining
robot as its core-two robot models and one system inithe past year. It is planning
to press positively for the standardization and generalization of these products.

Shin-Meiwa began to develop a robot which can effectively cut solid objects with a
complex contour the year before last, and last year it succeeded in merchandising
a gas-welding robot as the first of the many to come. One robot each was delivered
to Hitachi and Fuji Electric, and currently another robot is being manufactured.

Also, this spring the company developed an "automatic shearing system" and sold it
to Ishikawajima Kenkl (main office: Tokyo; president: Yoichiro Doko; capital:
2.6 billion yen). This system is totally automatic and can shear steel plate out
into any shape other than rectangles. Other components of the system besides the
location-determining bobot are a feeder (steel plate supplier), a turntable, a
shearing device and various conveyers, and the total process is controlled by a
minicomputer.

The plasma-cutting robot delivered to Toyota Motor is the first machine model pro-
duced in the robot industry which handles solid work with speed, and a standard
model is scheduled to be merchandised very shortly.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Encouraged by the fact that the company could secure orders from types of business-
es and corporations which had nothing to do with the manufacture of robots such as
Toyota Motor as a new source of demand, Shin—hive Industry hopes to exploit the
field of demand from automobile manufacturers and home electric appliance manu-
facturers with a series of cutting robot .

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsa 1981
Direct Numerical Control System
Tokyo NIKKI-:1 SANGYO SHDBUN in Japanese 25 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] Nippon Electric Company has developed a one (direct numerical control)
system for computer group mnegement of NC (mmerical control) machines using an
optical fiber circuit. Since various data re exchanged between the computer and the
group of machines by way of optical fiber circuits, large volumes of data has be
transmitted without interruption from electric noise. The systan has already been
introduced in its own company plant in Kawasaki, Kanagswa. As this trial use con-
firms that the system has an extremely wide range of application as a FMS (flexible
manufacturing system) which automatically and efficiuitly produces small quantities
of various articles, the company finally decided to merchandise the system.

The DNC system developed by Nippon Electric is characterized by the use of an
optical fiber circuit data transmission -systsu. The optical fiber lines are the
same thickness as wires used for home electric appliances and can transmit a large
volume of data. The circuit can be easily installed in a machine factory. Further-
more. the transmission circuit can completely block noise induced by powerlines and
sparks, reducing the concern for erroneous operation. Processes to produce various
articles in small quantities require a control of gross data, and the use of
electric wires has conventionally limited the spread of large-capacity circuits in
the premises of a factory.

The company has already introduced a DNC system with an optical fiber circuit to the
Tamagawa shop in Kawasaki, Kansgawa.

This system is utilized to process metal plates used for carriers to be installed
in telephone exchange stat ions. A group of eight machines, including a turret
punch press for making a hole and a shearing machine for cutting, are controlled

by one microcomputer. The monthly metal plate production is approximately 150,000
pieces. but this is truly an example of a production line which manufactures various
articles in small quantities, producing nearly 10,000 different plates. The average
production lot number for manufactured plates is 15 pieces at a time, but this
system can even produce one manufactured plate almost without human hands on the
command of the microcomputer. Hith this benefit, the previous 40 workers in charge
of the production line before the introduction of the system have now been reduced
to only 5 inspectors.

At one time, plates were processed in this factory by the playing of an RC tape

for the NC machines, but this has be¢ one obsolete with the introduction of the DNC.
The photoelectric converter used for optical transmission has been put to practical
use in the form of a general model. If this converter is adopted for the convention-
a1 NC machines, it is so designed that the DNC syst- of an optical fiber circuit

can be used imdiately.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In addition, at this production site, a CAD (computer aided design) system has been
introduced which is connected directly to a large ACOS 900 computer at the computer
center of the Thmagawa shop. In this system, not only graphic data of over 300,000
types, but also production technology data such as process designs and management
data such as production plans, are centralized and processed. Presently, a
microcomputer and a large computer for one are used under an offline operation.
However, in the future, they 0111 be operated under an online system so as to estab-
lish a comprehensive production system.

For the time being, the compshy will stick to the policy of limiting the acceptance
of orders for the DNC system without getting into the comprehensive production
system which integrates the CAD system. Sooner or later, the system presented

at this time will be promoted to an FMS system which efficiently produces small
quantities of various goods, and will be sold. according to the strategy, as a

resourceful large system which incorporates an industrial robot besides the CAD.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsa 1981

8960
cs0: 41051232

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DEVELOPMENT OF BLECTROHBCHANIC INDUSTRY ANALYZBD
Tokyo SHUKAN DIANONDO in Japanese 11 Jul 81 pp 12-23
[Text] Promote Exports

Would it be overstating the case to say that mechatronics rescued the Japanese econ-
omy from the oil crisis? According to the statistics released recently on the na—
tional income, the real economic growth during FY-BO was 5 percent (3.8 percent by
the new standard), which is a rather high rate of growth in view of the second oil
crisis. The United States showed a -0.1 percent growth, the United Kingdom -3 per-
cent, and West Germany 1.8 percent, which places the Western countries in a position
of low growth, and Japan's growth rate is causing some consternation in some of the
countries. The economy did not suffer any more than a slight recession.

The growth has been sustained by exports and investment in facilities by industry.
The breakdown of this 5 percent growth rate shows that 3.8 percent is attributable
to increased exports and 1 percent to increased investment in facilities. The prime
moving force behind this increase in exports and investment in facilities has been
the machine, in other words mechanics, and the electronics area where IC and LSI are
continuing their rapid advances, to comprise the area of mechatronics, which has be-
come a spectacular field.

First of all, let us look at exports. The FY-80 exports topped the previous year's
level by 29 percent (dollar base), and what is eye catching here is the 36 percent
(same base) in machinery equipment, which contributed 75 percent of the increase in
the nation's total exports. It was the mechatronics product group which led this
export of machine equipment.

As shown in Table 1, new mechatronics products, headed by the automobile which is
becoming more and more electronified, NC fabrication machinery, industrial use robots,
reproduction equipment. typewriters, cash registers, automatic data processing equip-
ment, quartz watches, medical equipment, and air compressors, are showing great ex-
pansion as export goods.

What is increasingly becoming the center of attention is office automation equipment,
which is a systematized combination of personal communication, word processors, fac-
simile, and reproduction equipment, and this is expected to be the large growth ex-
port product of the future.

18

F0l,0F11C1Al.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECR (electronic cash register) is a good example of a product which when compared

to the mechanical cash register of the past possesses far more performance and caps—
bility (such as business management capability, sales information collection capa-
bility). is seeing advances in miniaturization, cost cutting, and reduced power con-
sumption, and has been reborn into an entirely new product. Hechatronics not only
is responsible for producing office automation equipment, medical equipment, and
robot type new equipment but is also behind the promotion of tool machines, other
machines, cash registers, and shipbuilding type industries, which had come to the
brink of decadence because of the catchup efforts of the developing nations.

This 5 percent rate of growth is from a macroeconomic viewpoint, now is a time of
unprecendented boom for electrical and machine industries, which are now entering
into a new stage of growth.

Positive Development With Restoration of the Oil Crisis

"Tllc term 'push out exports' has been applied to Japanese exports in the past, but
the present situation is one of 'suck in exports' on the part of the importing coun-
tries." said Yuichi Moriya, head of the Domestic Survey Department, Plans Agency.

Automobile exports to the United States were forced into a self-imposed restriction,
and this was because Japanese cars outsold American-made cars to the extent that the
American car makers were in trouble. To be sure, this sharp increase in the export

of mechatronic products will often encounter such roadblocks.

Particularly since the oil shock, Japan's industry has been trying to get back on
its feet, starting off with conservation of energy, rationalization, and conserva-
tion of power and branching out to rekindling of domestic demand by the development
of new products and the results of this all-out effort are now being seen.

NC fabrication machinery and industrial robots were born out of the need for improved
power conservation and productivity, while car electronics and microcomputer-attached
air-conditioners were developed to affect fuel economy in line with the needs of the
energy conservation age. The electronification of machinery has recently advanced
into the areas of continuous casting facilities in steel mills, heavy electrical ma-
chinery, and shipbuilding, which are the areas of giant machinery.

investment in facilities on the part of industry was expected to remain stagnant for
a while directly after the oil crisis, based on established theory. On the other
hand, this emergency of mechatronics has had a large impact on the will to invest in
facilities on the part of industry. and investment in plant facilities which had tem-
porarily become dormant directly after the first oil crisis began to experience a
real push starting about 1978. The investment in plant facilities by industry in
FY-79 showed an increase of 21 percent over the previous year, followed by a 25-per-
cent increase in FY-do, and a l3—percent increase is expected for FY-81.

The big gainers in this field are construction machinery, communications equipment
parts, electronic parts, automobile-related electrical material, precision machinery,
office equipment, and ceramic type members of the mechatronics-related industries.
"NC construction equipment has made spectacular improvements in performance with

the emergence of IC and LSI. Not only has efficiency been improved, but highly pre-
cise finishing is now possible without the need for very experienced workers. There
has been sudden broad use starting along about 1978." This was stated by Kojun Shi-
mizu. head of the Planning Department of Ikegai Steel works.

19

FOR OFFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The volume of the related industries participating in facilities investment is ex-
erting a very large effect on demand which is spreading over the entire economy.
This recovery in facilities investment will entually result in increased demand,
which will support the Japanese economy.

These investments in facilities and export increases which have supported the emer-
gence of mechatronics may be said to have rescued the Japanese economy from the
depths it had plunged into following the oil crisis. 0n the other hand, this is
still not all as far as the actual situation is concerned.

Take Up 18 Industries of the Top With Best Industrial Growth

"Meehatronics is not a technological innovation which has developed in a planned man-
ner based on the interpretation of new scientific principles. It is a so-called ap—
plied technology which has upgraded and made more complex technology already on hand.
This is an area in which the Japanese are most adept. Products such as industrial-
use robots, electronic cash registers, electronics proliferation in automobiles,
microcomputer-attached machines. quartz watches. and self-operating cameras all

first became practical in the United States or Europe. But it was Japan which was
able to mass produce and use them as growth products.

Although mechatronics is not a planned technological innovation, it is true that it
has made for more complexity and brought new values. The market expansion of mecha-
tronics has only just started. and it is only from this point that this industry
will become numerically larger. Roughly speaking, the present situation is expected
to continue into the latter half of the 1980's be it in demand or in exports. For
example. the robot industry is as yet very small numerically speaking. Even so it
has no competitor worldwide, and it is a product of which much can be expected in
the future.” said Yutaka Hatsushita, director of the Nomura Combined Laboratory.

As shown in Figure l, the expansion of the steel industry production index between
1975 and 1980 averaged 1.63 times overall, so a ranking was made of the expansion in
almost 100 industries, and this ranking showed the top 20 places to be occupied al-
most exclusively by mechatronics-related industries. Placing applied electronic
equipment. with a 21.64-fold expansion, at the top. the next is watches at 5.6 times,
followed by office machines at 4.06 times, fifth-ranked photosensitive material and
lath-ranked medical products are the only outsiders to break into this near monopoly.

The Japanese economy is presently entering a new growth stage due to mechatronics,
through the so-called merging of mechanics and electronics, which has resulted in a
growth and high level of the economy through the "mechatronico" revolution that is
proving to be a powerful propellant for growth.

Prof Isuneo lida of Nagoya University in his book "Composition of an Active Japanese
Society" states: "What will probably spearhead Japan's economy through the 1980‘s
will be the combination of the machine industry and the 1C industry in the form of
emerging 'mechatronics'. The development of such a combination-type technological
innovation is made to order for an area where the high level of education and ex-
perienced onside training are superior, as in Japan. The possibility that Japan
will lead the world is concealed in this present situation" (abstract).

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of mechatronics has not only promoted increased exports and private
investment in facilities, it has enhanced the efficiency of the Japanese economy
through improvements in productivity in industry, energy conservation measures, and
the higher level structuring of industry and has speeded up Japan's release from
the oil crisis.

One example is the contribution to price stabilization. The rate of increase in
wholesale prices averaged 32 percent in the 5 years between 1975 and 1980, but dur-
ing this period there was a decrease of 29 percent in the price of desk calculators,
26 percent in cash registers, 17 percent in electric ranges, and 13 percent in can-
eras, and mechatronics-related goods all showed a similar reduction in price (see
Figure 2). f the price of permanent consumer goods and capital costs had gone up,
the effect of the oil shock on prices would have been amplified, and this probably
would have been followed by a serious aftereffect.

The same applies to the international balance of trade. The rapid improvement in
the international balance of trade picture is due to this increase in exports, but
the fact that imports have not increased as much despite the high price of crude
oil is also a large factor. In fact, the trend during the past few years has been
for imports to run below the preceding year's total. What lies behind this situa-
tion is the establishment of an economic growth not tied in with the use of energy.

At the time of the first oil crisis in 1973, oil consumption per 100 million yen
GNP was 346 kiloliters, this decreased to about two-thirds, to 226 kiloliters, in
1980. While the roles of energy conservation (there is a contribution of mecha-
tronics here) and substitute energy policies have major roles here, this result
basically is the change from steel, cement, and chemical type high oil-consuming
industries to machine equipment production industry in which the concentration of
technology and the introduction of higher levels in the production structure are
promoted.

The fact that mechatronics is lowering costs and improving the international balance
of trade is an aspect that should not be forgotten.

The 1980's Also Will Be Japan's Age

West Germany traditionally has been known as the ruling country in the field of ma-
chines, but at present, it lacks the power to compete on equal terms with Japan and
is inviting collapse in its overall economy.

As shown in Figure 3, the portion of the export structure occupied by machine equip-
ment in west Germany is only 40 percent, compared to Japan's 60 percent, and this
figure has recently been slipping. This lack of growth is tied in with the high
value of the mark, but what must not be overlooked here is that this country has
fallen behind in the trend to mechatronics which is worldwide.

"There is the difference that Japan's machines are general use machines through
mass production, while the German products are special use and massive machines pro—
duced by the accumulated and traditional mechanical technology. Their meister sys-
tem is making difficult any introduction of electronics"--this statement is attri-
buted to Yoshitomi Ishimaru of Tomen Sanyo. Hiroshi Takeuchi, head of the Research
Department, Nagasaki Bank said: "Germany has relegated its dirty work to foreign-
ers. Japan is considering the use of robots for such work, and that has brought
forth the rapid development in mechatronics today."

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most important aspect is that Japan's government and industry have zeroed in on
electronics, including computers and semiconductors, as the item for the future

and are making all—out efforts to provide training and forward moving investments,
and this has led to the position of mechatronics today. In West Germany, this goal
is occupied by the nuclear power industry and aircraft industry. Its electronics
industry has fallen behind in growth, and it is presently buying computers and IC
from the United States and Japan.

In another direction, the United States is the home ground of electronics, and it is
ahead in the areas of large computers and military industries. Its weapon is the
model mechatronics, but the present picture is that the transfer of this technology
to private use equipment and setting it on a cosmercial basis cannot be readily re-
alized.

"Comparing the situation to mountain climbing, mechatronics is just at the stage
that it has come up to the third seam. The products from here on will be large ma-
chines which will be used in all kinds of plants, and Japan's market will probably
grow both internally and externally," according to Matsushita of Nomura Laboratory.

During the course of the next S-b years, mechatronics will bring Japan's industrial
structure and export structure to even higher levels, the technological concentra-
tion and high add-on value to an unprecedented rapid tempo, and will lead to econo-
mic growth. Japan, which relies on foreign sources for crude oil and most other re-
sources must rely on exports as its lifeline. Hechatronics produces products with
various capabilities. and the past trade frictions arising from patterns centered on
a single item will decrease. The 1980's will see the "mechatronics revolution," and
it may be possible to say once more that it is Japan's day.

How Will Hechatronics Alter Industry? Power to Promote "Japanese Products as Number 1"

The central actor in this shift to mechatronics is electronics, and this is where
serve (control) technology is a vital adjunct. Just how far has mechatronics ad-
vanced at the present time and what does the future hold?

The Shadowy Area of Hechatronics

There is not only light but some shadowy areas regarding mechatronics which will have
to be overcome in the future. The following are some of the major problems.

First, functions which were previously performed by man are now being performed by
electronics, and there is naturally a shouldering effect appearing. It is presently
a broad process, and the problems are still few, but there is the possibility that

a limit will be faced sooner or later. ﬂow will we face such a situation?

Secondly. there is the possibility that the self-reexpansion and development of
technology will occur, and how do we handle this? As a result of replacing func~
tions performed by man by functions performed by electronics, there will be no high—
ly skilled men, and a high level of mechatronics introduction may become untenable.
Once mechatronics takes over and skilled men are no longer around, there is the
danger that the technique may stop right there.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Third, there is the question of the establishment of a reasonable production price.
It is not the micon attached to machinery that is the main factor, but the software
that is put in it that accounts for its true value. There is as yet no rule for
reasonably evaluating the cost. Too high a price will result in sales resistance,
and too low a price will muddle the economics. It is difficult to draw the deciding
line.

Related to this is the situation that software is an intelligent judge of good or
bad, and just as there are changes in models, newer models appear one after another
to replace former models and cut down on the life cycles, giving rise to business in-
stability. even though this may be hazardous to the business.

Fourth. there is the relationship of the machine maker to the electronics maker. As
mechntronics develops more and more, there is a corresponding decline in mechanics,

and the add—on value of machine makers who had been ordering their electronic parts

elsewhere declines with the chance that they will become simply assembly houses.

Fifth there is a technological problem in that future development will leave behind
many areas that have room for technological development encompassing peripheral tech-

nology such as sensors and new materials. At just what tempo can such developments
advance?

To be sure, every maker has had his own resolve to meet these problems in his own
way.

Intelligent Robots; Rising Figures in the Unmanned Plant Trend; Their Costs Can Be
Recovered in a Year

The industrial robot is already attracting worldwide attention as the framework of
Japan's mechatronics.

The number of Japanese makers, the production figures, and the number of units in
operation are far greater than in the countries of the Western world.

Only the high-performance units with a capability beyond the playback type used for
welding in Japan are called robots in the Western countries. In Japan the so-called
fixed-sequence type low-performance robots account for 70-80 percent of the total
number in operation, so that comparisons on the same level are not possible, but
there is no question that Japan's robot industry has seen sudden growth as one of
the tools of mechatronics.

At present, the production of high-performance robots is at a fever pitch and grow-
ing. It is estimated that these high-performance units will account for close to
half the total production in 3-0 years.

Behind this sharp rise are the increased demands for conservation of power, conserva-
tion of energy, and lower cost from the industrial world.

For example, according to material furnished by the Japan Industrial Use Robot Indus-
try Association, the value of the cost of a single robot divided by the labor cost

of a single worker decreased from 10.5 times to 3.4 times between 1971 and 1979 as
the result of rising labor costs.

23

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we use this calculation for a single robot-to-worker relationship and project
its application to an all-night unmanned operation, then the cost of a robot will
be retired after a year.

There is also the added effect that monotonous work and work in a messy environment
can be performed in an automated manner, and product quality can be made consistent
and even improved.

For example, the monotonous portion of material handling accounts for an average of
30-40 percent of the finishing cost, 80-95 percent of the worktime, and 85 percent
of the industrial accidents, and the effect of robot use in such an area can be great.

A company such as the Nissan Automobile Company already has about 500 robots in oper-
ation and is already performing 100 percent of its welding operations by this means.

It is now focusing attention on the use of robots for painting, and this is in keep-

ing with what the other makers are doing.

The use of robots is also increasing among the electrical makers, and it is reaching
high levels. Matsushita Electric Industry has introduced machines to insert parts
on to a printed board to produce television sets at an 80-percent automated rate.

The various industries are eyeing the use of high-performance industrial robots for
use in all—night unmanned plants.

The Fujitsu Fanac attempt is well known, but it is not only these top ranking compan-
ies but the medium ranking companies which should also see some expansion in the use
of robots.

The influential tool steel maker Yamazaki Steel Company, with its main base in Aichi
Prefecture. has put up close to 3 billion yen with production expected to start up
this fall on a completely automated plant where everything--supp1y, working, and
transport of products--will be automated. Where a plant required 250 workers in the
past, the first shift will need 8 men, the second shift 5 men, and the midnight to
8 am shift will be entirely unmanned in this system.

Department head Hichi'naru Tanimoto of the Robot Business Department of Kawasaki Heavy
Industries points out: "There are as yet only a few industries that are operating
in the black using robots. A high-performance robot suitable for large variety small
lot production requires the development of sensors to give it sight, feel and audi-
tory power." Yet despite these problems, the demand has been increasing at the rate
of 50 percent over the previous year during the past few years. It is expected that
production will increase to 500 billion yen by 1985 (78.10 billion yen in 1980).

The subsidiary in Japan of the American Texas Instruments Company, which is the
world's largest semiconductor maker, at the start of this year became a formal mem-
ber of the Japan Industrial Use Robot Maker Industry Association. This is the first
foreign company to enter this association. and it is said that its aim is to collect
information from Japan's robot makers.

NC (numerical control) construction machines made their appearance in 1954, and
Japan is still the "world's supply base" for these machines. "The Japan-American
relationship in NC construction closely resembles that of the automobile. In 2 or
3 years the United States will come out with a "J car punching NC machine" is a pre-
diction by a certain member of the industrial world.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Crossing Point From Starting to Post-NC Fabrication Machines

One of the reasons export of NC fabrication machines is expanding is that the lead-
ing country, the United States, has been completely engrossed in large machines,
while Japan has specialized in junior machines. In other words, this should be re-
garded as a marketing victory.

If we liken the technological level of NC construction machines (ordinate) and its
market (abscissa) to Mt Fuji, then "the United States accounts for the first three
sections while Japan takes over between the third and seventh section" (Hitachi Seiki)

The reason Japan leads in the area of junior machines is largely due to the CNC (com-
puter numerical control) device developed by FUJitsu Fanac. "The reason Japan has
such a strong competitive strength is the Fujitsu Fanac CNC" is one view.

The story of CNC will be left to the interview with President Inaba of Fujitsu Fanac,
but there is also the element of the demand of the times behind this NC construction
equipment boom.

There is a shortage of mechanics. "Mechanics were once stars of blue-collar workers,
but no one wants to be one any more." (related party).

In the midst of shouts for a reduction of business has been the need for conserva-
tion of power and energy, and this is also thought to have accelerated the boom.

Hhile it may be partly grasping at straws, "the situation now is not that only Fu-
jitsu Fanac has the high—level technology to produce CNc devices; it is the compara-
tively high cost," said a related party recently.

CNC devices are not the sole domain of Fujitsu Fanac: Yasukawa Electric and Mitsu-
bishi Electric are entries in this field.

The ultimate target of NC construction machines is an unmanned plant. This is a
common awareness shared by Fujitsu Fanac and the other construction machine makers.

In the meantime, it is necessary to clarify problems associated with automation
assembly of a single product production and automation of automation production
process.

Even at the Fujitsu plant of the leader Fujitsu Fanac, automation of assembly is
still at the beginning stage.

"Looking at the present orders situation, we can confidently expect good export of
NC construction machines for the next 2-3 years. From then on it may be a question
of whether the construction machine maker will become a production process planner,
which will decide the outcome (related party), and Japan's makers have started in
the direction of post-NC construction machines" (same party).

Docking of Power Work and Brain; Komatsu Which Lends Caterpillar
There is the image of power work in the construction industry, and electronics may

be considered a world completely apart, but there are also construction machines
which carry micons.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Komatsu Limited displayed 12 models of its machines at "Conexpo '81" (held 25-30
January), among which its bulldozer, dump truck, and power shovels were equipped
with micons.

"He are the first in the world to put micons in construction machinery" (Electronic
Equipment Center of Komatsu).

It was about 15 years ago when Komatsu started to introduce electronics. When the
first microprocessor 'Intel 8080' was marketed, this company immediately jumped into
the picture. "At that time, a single chip cost 150,000 yen" (same source).

Simplicity of operation and energy conservation are the selling points of micon-
equipped construction machinery. Where a bulldozer is concerned, the operator must
move a lot of dirt rapidly. The "volume of earth moved" and "number of lever opera-
tions" are the yardsticks for determining operator qualifications.

A micon-equipped bulldozer can move 10 percent more earth than an ordinary operator,
and the number of operations is reduced to one-tenth. Just this reduction in the
number of operations is tied in with energy conservation.

The bulldozer can slip on earth. When it slips, the operator will increase the speed
in order to increase the volume moved, but it cannot be done. A micon is used to
catch the load on the blade (earth mover) and control the dozer at the optimum speed.

The wear-resistant specifications for 10 used on construction equipment include tem-
perature of -30 to -80°c, vibration impact level of 100 G, and humidity of 100 per-
cent. The vibration impact value for IC used on automobiles is about 10 G.

Romatsu's rival, Caterpillar Tractor, began to strengthen its electronic capabilities
about 2 years ago.

"Komatsu is leading Caterpillar where the change to mechatronics is concerned,“ is
not very explanatory, but to say that "there is a vast difference between 15 years'
and 2 years' experience" has more meaning.

Not only a large company such as Komatsu, with annual business of 504.9 billion yen,
but even a small company such as Sanwa Kizai, with annual business of 6 billion yen,
is developing mechatronics construction machinery.

Micon horizonger is one such product. As the trade name implies, this is an excava-
ting machine which cuts through earth in a horizontal direction, and this is an in-
dispensible item for sewer construction.

The basic concept of this product development is that many sewer construction work-
ers are of advanced age, and automation is necessary both from the standpoint of
safety and conservation of energy, according to the general talk.

"here small-bore pipe is involved, the sewer line is placed in a horizontal position
underground, and the water flows by natural slope by so-called blind reckoning such
that previously it was possible only to dig no more than 50 meters at a given stretch.

This is why for every kilometer of line, it was necessary to dig vertical holes at
21 sites. It requires three or four times the labor to dig vertical holes that it

does to dig horizontally.
26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When a Mlcon Horizonger is used, a combination of a laser beam, receiver, and micon
are employed, and a horizontal excavation of 100 meters is possible, while the point
of advance can be established from aboveground, thereby eliminating any right-left
or up-down deviation.

Digging operations in the past required one operator, one observer, and 3 workers,
but the introduction of the Hicon Horizonger "eliminates 1.5-2 men" (Technology De-
velopment Department of the company).

It should be evident that Japan is leading the world in the matter of introduction
of mechatronics to construction machinery.

To Computer Control of Engines

The wave of mechatronics is also beating against the shipbuilding industry. The Kin-
kazan Maru, which was built in 1961 for ferry service, is one such example.

Since that time the automation of ships has been expanded and the H0 (Marshinari
zero) makes possible elimination of night engine room watch: the Japan Magnolia
(mineral oil and general use ship, 94,465-ton weight) was built in 1969, the Seiko

Naru (tanker, 138.370-ton weight) was built in 1970, and the Samposan Maru (tanker,
227,756—ton weight) was built in 1971.

Automation was introduced in the engine room and the cargo oil loading, where comput-
er controls were used.

As a result, a 10,000-ton cargo vessel which formerly needed a crew of some 60 men
can use as few as 20 men.

The ability to cut a large fraction of the manpower costs, which account for a large
slice of the roughly 300 million yen required to operate a ship per year, is a great
plus for the introduction of automation.

At present, Nippon Yusen, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Osaka Shosen, Hitsui Senpaku,
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, and Mitsui Shipbuilding and Engineering are laying con-
crete plans for 18 men crew container vessels and container-liver [phonetic] ships.

Joint research by the Ministry of Transportation and the shipbuilding industry is
targeting 11-12 men crew container bulk carriers and tankers as its technological
goal.

Timero is also pursuit of superautomation in which the crew will be reduced to less
than 10 and the international maritime satellite will be utilized to conduct unmanned
navigation through remote control devices.

In 1981 a start was made on technological development of computer control of the en-
gine to improve fuel consumption.

Mochatronics is a powerful weapon to guard Japan's position as ruling shipping coun—
try against the catchup efforts of late-developing countries such as Holland and
Italy.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The introduction of mechatronics to automobiles started with the use of thermistors
as temperature gauges to monitor cooling water for the internal combustion engine.
This was followed by its introduction to the regulator (voltage adjuster) and igniter
(ignition device) type parts around the engine.

A micon placed on a vehicle to serve as an electronic control fuel injection device
made its appearance in 1979, in this a fuel injection valve replaces the carburetor
and the flow of fuel is controlled by an electronic circuit to improve combustion
efficiency and reduce the CO content in the exhaust gas.

Exhaust gas control and improvement of fuel consumption efficiency may seem to be
opposing each other, but the introduction of electronics has made possible an 8-per-
cent increase in fuel consumption compared to what was experienced in the past.

It is said that several years ago there were 25-70 IC units used on an automobile,
but the advent of the micon-equipped car has resulted in the use of several hundred
IC and transistors per automobile.

"The cost of the electronics in a high-class car is about 2-3 percent of the total
value of the car. In the future the cost of the electronics on a passenger car will
probably be 10 percent of the total cost. This is what is quoted, but I believe
that this will be closer to 7-8 percent," said Vice President Hiroshi Takahashi of
Nissan.

"The value of electrical equipment including semiconductors is presently about 5
percent, and this is sure to triple to about 15 percent in the future," said Direc—
tor Masao Hurayama of Nippon Denso.

Among the car electronics recently installed, digital displays and sound alarm de-
vice—type accessory units stand out, but it will become technologically possible
along about 1980 [sic] to install microprocessors (CPU) as central information pro-
cessing devices for an automobile, it was indicated.

Development of car electronics is being conducted in joint development by combina-
tions such as Toyota Motor-Nippon Denso-Toshiba, Nissan Automobile-Hitachi-Nippon
Electric, and Mitsubishi Automobile-Mitsubishi Electric-Nippon Electric.

Nippon Dense, which is a member of the Toyota group, has its own IC plant and has
produced 3 million IC units per month for test research, Nissan is also reinforcing
its self-development image.

"The automobile makers should have the semiconductor makers take over the introduc-
tion of electronics into automobiles and should also possess the software technology
for the system" seems to be the joint outlook on the part of both parties.

LSI Pursues Mechatronics Parts Computer Incorporating Camera (7)

The electronification of cameras is generally seen in automatic exposure EB cameras,
and a totally automated camera which has a CPU installed is a representative example
of mechatronics.

The electronic circuit is placed in modular form within a single flexible base plate
where computation and display of exposure, record of exposure, shutter speed, and
even adjustment of lens opening are determined.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The use of an active element such as a transistor to control exposure was initiated
in 1963 by the Polaroid automatic 100 camera which appeared on the market that year.
This marked the appearance of the electronic shutter operated through an electronic
circuit and magnet.

Since then the electronification of exposure control can be divided into three per-
iods, according to improvements based on IC and LSI.

First of all, the period between 1963 and 1970 was the comparator age. This was
used in the Yashica Electro 35; the comparator refers to a voltage comparator by
which ON or OP? is determined according to the high and low input voltage.

The period from 1970 to 1974 was the time for the analog data treatment system using
a monolithic IC. The Asahi Pentax ES (1971) and Nikomat EL (1972) are representa—
tive units.

The camera using a logic 1c circuit to handle digital data made its appearance in
the period after 1974. The Fujica ST 901 is such a camera.

The area of electronic adjustment of exposure has developed technology for applica-
tion in photography sequence (order), electronic control, and automatic focusing.

Electronic control of a photography sequence is designed, for example, to control a
series of operations from the time the shutter button is depressed until the end of
the picture taking, or from the time the film is wound up until preparations for the
next picture are completed. The Polaroid SX-70 (1972) and Canon AE—l (1976) are
representative of this technology.

The Konica 35A F (1977) was the first camera to appear on the market with an automa-
tic focusing device using the Visitronics module made by the Honeywell Company of
the United States. This was followed by the ultrasonic type Polaroid SX-70 Sonar
Autofocus (1978) and the infrared type as represented by the Canon A F 35H (1979).

Electronic control of motor drives and strobe lights has also been introduced.

With all the different functions coming under electronic control, the camera has be-
come an instrument which is much more simple to use.

New functions with electronic control have appeared one after the other. but the
price has been held down despite all these developments. It also should not be over-
looked that all these improvements have been incorporated without increasing the

size and weight of the camera. Arbitrarily setting a value of 100 for 1975, the
retail price index for 1965 was 65.5 and for 1980 was 96.2.

"When a camera is electronically controlled, there is a trend to miniaturize the
electronics to assure space for the circuits and the power supply batteries. This
fraction has made possible improvements in the mechanical parts, and miniaturization
has been aided" (Nippon Kogaku).

Hechatronics technology stands behind Japan's position as the top in the world with
respect to camera quality and quantity.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Number of Parts Down by 50 Percent or More

In contrast to the camera in which electronic control introduced new capabilities in
an "add-on type electronification," an electronic watch is a case in which the mech-
anical parts of clocks have been completely replaced by electronic circuits in a so-
called “substitution type electronification."

The crystal wristwatch generally called a quartz watch includes the digital type

watch which has no gears or springs. The only parts are the battery, the crystal
vibrating element, and the HOS'LSI.

The HOS'LSI contains a frequency divider circuit which converts the pulse signals of
vibration current emitted by the crystal oscillator and divides the signal into sec-
onds, minutes, hours, days, and months as well as a display command circuit.

Japan and Switzerland first displayed test-produced quartz watches at the 1967 Gen-
eva Observatory Concours, and 2 years later Seiko came out with the world's first
quartz watch on the market with an analog (needle type) display.

Crystal oscillators. LSI, and liquid crystals are all suitable for mass production,
as a result of which the assembly processes of a labor-intensive nature previously
characteristic of this precision instrument business no longer exist.

Where the number of parts is concerned, in an analog watch the number of parts de-
creases to 70 percent and in digital watches down to 40 percent, and the relative
importance of the assembly process has also decreased.

At the Tamu plant of Citizens Watch, the conservation of power and automation have
advanced to the stage that the day when a fully automated assembly line will be re-
alized may not be very far off.

One of the problems facing the quartz watch is how to come up with a watch which can
match the mechanical watch in size.

The single greatest item which limits size is the battery. Initially, a large cur-
rent was required, which naturally required a large battery, but this size has now
decreased to the stage that 1 cm diameter batteries are now being used.

As a result of the development of low power consumption C-HOS'IC and the development
of high-efficiency pulse motors, quartz watches of 0.09 millimeter thickness are
presently being marketed.

Hechatronics Hill Determine Destiny of Household Electrical Equipment
The introduction of mechatronics is also taking place in the'area of household elec-
trical equipment. In the case of the washing machine, the mechanical timer used in

the past was associated with many malfunctions, and the electronic-controlled or
micon-controlled electronic washing machine has made its appearance.

30

FOR OFTWCJAI.US£GDNLY
Sequence (order of operating steps) control, automatic adjustment of imbalance at
the time of the draining operation. and automatic control of waste water disposal

are functions which are controlled in line with the volume and dirtiness of the
wash load.

The electric range is an example in which the capabilities of the micon can be under-
stood by anyone. Since micon remembers the 40 or so preparation patterns of menus
which are used in daily fare, the cooking preparations can be initiated simply by
pressing a button, as a result of which the micon stops the cooking by exercising

temperature and humidity control and completely shuts off the heat when the cooking
is completed.

An air conditioner is turned off when the entire room is adequately cooled, and the
unit is restarted when the room temperature rises by 1 degree. This alone accounts
for a roughly lO-percent saving in power cost. Meanwhile, a humidity count circuit
operates to guard against a rise in temperature and cuts off the room fan when the
thermostat is OFF and effects even more energy saving.

A micon jar beverage container "first applies a weak flame" followed by "popping"
heat and then a temperature-maintaining effect by which a beverage is held at the
proper drinking temperature.

"The pursuit of ease of use, miniaturization, and lower power consumption in house-
hold electrical appliances is similar to attempting to preserve their destiny. Me-

chatronics is a natural component in this direction" (Matsushita Industry and others)
seems to be the consensus of the industry.

The merit of 1c lies in the reduction in the power consumed and in the number of
parts. Take the example of a color television set. According to Matsushita's ex-
planation, the 20-inch color television T H 8800 D which was marketed in 1971 and
which was provided with one or two units of special-use LSI consumed 150 watts/hour
and consisted of 750 parts.

In contrast, the 20—inch T H 20-A2 (about five LSI units) color television set mar-
keted in 1976 consumed 88 watts/hour and reduced the number of parts to about 500.

The 1981 color television set T H 20-821 (five-seven LSI units) consumes 99 watts/
hour and has increased the number of parts to 650, but this is because a new capabil-
ity of sound and voice are incorporated.

It was the American Motorola Company which first announced to the world the use of
IC in color television sets (1966). but Hitachi was the first to put the first model
with IC on the market ([969). By the following year, all of Japan's household elec-
tric appliance makers had turned to the use of 16.

whether it was the introduction of 1c to color television or VTR, the basic develop-
ment took place in other countries, but it was the Japanese makers which succeeded
in commercializing the development.

The Fuji plant of Fujitsu Fanac has been called the plant where "robots make robots";
it is a place where a representative NC machine for tool machines used in Japan can
be seen. It is already "Japan's NC tool machine showplace." In addition, there are
many who sense the presence of feet in the movements of the transporting robot.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is said that there are 300-400 visitors per week at this plant, which indicates
the interest shown.

The foreign visitors who come by special bus all take a souvenir photograph of the
plant, with the imposing outline of Mt Fuji looming in the background.

While there may also be a presentation by Fujitsu Fanac entitled "NC machine show-
place" there is a feeling that this plant, which has collected the various aspects
of mechatronics technology, displays the status of Japan's present economy.

Install Video on Robots; Top Strategy of Fujitsu Fanac for the l980's-Interview
with President Kiyozaemon Inaba of Fujitsu Fanac

Fujitsu Fanac is the world's largest CNC device maker. This company
played the role of igniting the mechatronics boom. It is presently
directing its major effort to the development of an intelligent ro-
bot. This company, which is dubbed "little giant" by the rest of the
industry, is headed by the man who founded the company, and he spoke
enthusiastically of the past, present, and future.

Female Deity of Fate

More than 20 years ago, in 1956, a group of several technologists in electricity and
machines began research and development on control systems in a small laboratory on
the grounds of Fujitsu. The term control covers a broad field, and the situation
then was that one could try anything. I had been delegated to be in charge of this
development. and I tried to conceive a system based on a mechanical technology which
exploited my specialty.

This operation was extremely successful, but 3 years previously the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) in the United States had developed a new control sys-
tem for construction machines at the request of the air force. and this system was
called a numerical control (NC) system by MIT.

The famous "HIT report" which covers this development is still interesting reading
both from the classical standpoint as well as for the magnificent text.

About the same time, Pronhsuto Takshashi of the University of Tokyo, who at that
time was teaching at the University of California (Berkeley), introduced this report
to a small control engineering meeting.

Upon hearing this report, we thought this would be the most suitable system for us,
and we immediately took up research and development.

It may be said that this was the time when an element of Fujitsu entered the mecha-
tronics area. The bonding of electronics and mechanics, including motors and fabri-
cation machinery, and the struggle to bring this technology to fruition had begun.

The Ministry of International Trade and Industry was very interested in this research
and development and granted this program financial aid a number of times over a 10-
year span. There was a time when despite the very promising future of this technol-
ogy. the market was not yet ready for it, and the subsidy funds from this ministry
were extremely valuable to the industry. Such funds turned out to be the trigger
which set off new product development.

32

FOR 0FT1C1AL.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During this period, it may be said that we had no reason for existing as an industry.
But as the 1965 decade was approaching, there was a sudden expansion in the NC mar-
ket. It seems as though the deity of fate had smiled on us. To this day, I believe
that deity sympathized with our unbending philosophy in the midst of a world of neg-
ativeness.

we took this technology and jumped into the market. In 1972 we branched off and be-
came known independently as Fujitsu Fanac. Since then we have been able to grab a
good share of the CNC market. At present we account for about half of the world
market and about 75 percent of the Japanese market.

From Automation to Unmanned Operation

During the 1965 decade, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry came forth
with the Kidenho (machines and electricity law) ordinance and adopted a policy of
encouragement toward machines and electronics. He set our sights on development of
even higher degree control systems and laid plans by which an entire plant would be
placed in the hands of a large computer, to which all the fabrication machinery
would be bound and thereby enable automated operation of the entire plant. This
was the entirely new group control system concept which we took up.

This system was completed in 3 years, and we believe that this system has been very
instrumental in the automation of the Japanese machine industry at the present time.

As the 1975 decade was entered. the Ministry of International Trade and Industry
came forth with a new ordinance entitled Kijoho (machine information law) which en-
couraged automation by the integration of machines and electronics on a much greater
scale and also the development of completely unmanned systems. The large project
based on this concept is presently centered at the Tsukuba Machine Technology Re-
search Laboratory in which 16 companies are participating, and the target of these
efforts is the unmanned operation of a plant called the Laser Application Multiple
Production System. I believe that there is no other such system in operation else-
where in the world.

Among the units which make up the unmanned system. the unit which is now coming under
the greatest scrutiny is the robot.

In order to make practical this new concept, Fujitsu Fanac constructed a very modern
machine plant among the rice paddies around Lake Yamanaka. There are only 100 work-
ers including the plant manager. The machine fabrication plant is completely unman-
ned. It is thought that simple machine parts and assembly of machine units will be
possible through the use of intelligent robots by the end of the 1980's.

Robots with Sensors

Previously, complete assembly performed by a robot was achieved before September of
this year at this company's Servo Motor Plant in Hino. Unfortunately, this robot can-
not be classed as an intelligent robot. Since it is not equipped with sensors. it

is incapable of judgment discriminations despite the high capabilities the micro-
processors have. It may be thought of as a blind robot with a good mind.

This is why the next robots must be provided with senses associated with the eye an

hand. Should a robot equipped with such senses be developed, the automated assembly
of complex machine units will be possible.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of sensors is treated as an industrial secret by each company. 0n
the other hand, there is the accumulation of high technology in a variety of areas
in Japan, and there is no need to start from zero. What we have set our sights on
is something which has already been partially completed. The answer is found in the
item which is enjoying the greatest expansion in the area of home electrical appli-
ances and is the greatest menace to camera mechanization. In other words, it is
video.

We will miniaturize video and then couple it with our microprocessor. This will
serve as the eyes of the robot. This explanation alone should make it possible for
one to realize what mechatronics of the future will be like.

The development of new technology is not conducted only at the one Panac site. We
have obtained the cooperation of a number of friendly companies. The development of
sensors is being promoted jointly by the Fujitsu Laboratory and the Semiconductor
Industry Department of Hitachi Limited. He want to use the highest technology that
can be found in Japan and in the world.

What will be the future of NC? We incorporated into NC as quickly as possible the
bubble memory that was developed for communications use in electronic exchanges, and
we were able to greatly improve the reliability of the NC.

The next generation NC naturally will use bubble memory, but the use of optical fi-
bers also comes to mind. Here again, the first ones used will probably be in the
communications area.

When I inquired about optical fibers from Director Ishigaki of the Agency for Indus-
trial Science and Technology, I learned that optical fibers can even transmit energy,
and this was a tremendous shock to me. Till then I had thought that optical fibers
could be used only in data communications. If energy can be transmitted as well,
then the level of power required in NC fabrication machines should be transmittable.
We are resolved to put every effort into the application and introduction of optical
fibers.

Dividing Line Between Victory and Defeat

It is thought that some 10 years are required before a single product can be marketed
seen from an idealized viewpoint. A product made ready in short order has shallow
roots and will readily be subject to improvements by other companies. 0n the other
hand. too much time in development will delay its appearance on the market. Here is
where the problem lies: just how much absolute research time should be allowed?

This is a major problem.

The ideas that man comes up with will always have something resembling some other
idea. This is why success or failure is determined by just how fast the product can
be marketed or whether this product has a basic nature which other companies cannot
readily match.

To this end, the first step is to settle on a price which will be difficult for any

of the world's other makers to meet. Next, the unit cost of production must be estab-
lished. This is followed by a sales price which allows an absolute profit. Product
development is assigned the condition of a 5-year minimum life.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Product development is conducted along the lines of a singular policy. The slogan
for this basic policy is summarized in ”Weiniger Teil" which is written in a strange
German dialect. This can be summarized as meaning: "make a design involving the
minimum of parts." This means the development of products with maximum performance
using a minimum number of parts.

The production system at the plant is also another important aspect in the practical
application of the developmental‘results. I believe that the most effective system
is one which is a combination of NC fabrication machines, robots, and computers of a
versatile nature--in other words the FMS (flexible manufacturing system).

We hope to come up with an ideal FMS by the end of the 1980's. This is why we need
to push development of the intelligent robot which is the nucleus of this project.

There are about 200 robot makers in Japan alone, and they are probably in the fray
gritting their teeth; and it is not yet the time to criticize any one company's
share. I would like to know what Fujitsu Fanac's share will be 2-3 years in the
future.

The variety and areas of application of robots are very wide. Every maker should
succeed as long as it does not err in selection. One can fail if he embarks into an
area requiring vast investment. I believe the key lies in putting all effort into a
simple and specialized area. This selective capability is one which a robot maker
president should have.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Rankings of Principal Machine Exports (1980)

  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  

 

E
3: tIll-k-H-z 7 6:
«ha I..‘ n a u
on: m a
:‘V T R I; 1’ 52
tam-019 22
“ii it I B 19
“.0. h I as
v.1”! man as
nieamnnu l7
”"3 If to
13 "mm-Jun: «
14 ma-mumn 36
IS a: :2 I a d2
8 I K 9
I I I 24
.a I I: 36
'I I 5 16
I l I; 12
r '/ I.
a l n 68
_K I K SI
24. I 9 It: “LI!!! :5

 

2:510 m 2 ml 293.325 I

Export value, 100 million yen 2. Ratio vs previous year, 1

Passenger cars, trucks 6. Communication equipment
Shipping 6. VTR, etc

Optical equipment, cameras 8. Heavy electric equipment
Prime movers 10. Business equipment
Metal forking machines 12. Watches

Household electric units 14. Construction, mining equipment
Loading equipment 16. Agricultural equipment
Fibermaking machines 18. Railroad vehicles
Medical equipment 20. Measuring equipment
Machines 22. Printing machines
Packaging machines 24. Total machines

(Total export value)

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1. Best 20 Expansion Rates According to
Different Industries (1975-1980, Mining and
Manufacturing Production Index of 97 Industries)

1' I o
* “1w
I tmnﬂlﬁlliﬁiOUSMZI-ZO

mmso: ~SS¥ - szmnn ' ”I'll 'U 2,.

    

_. .1" g ,\ ‘;1
“WT-'1; ; <7 /
33mm. W .. I

9833!. --’ '
‘3 .. _

. “ v‘ ‘ .
q :gﬂfald M .
x - . I - ‘- I 1' ‘
._ \- LA - _
L... , , , . -
.. ~

.- 3. j~ 1' \l
r recount: (a a I»:
EggggmﬁC’z‘MI3l 7-.1 fl é-
Imnlleltgsgngzlr‘. its ‘ l
*7:?‘i'”"'+§4n.4 '. 3‘
=11 I-Hﬁ " a
a 501.017.". in n 1
’1 H;'“‘ .ﬁs 5 e 9 ~
51 4‘ 3"
' m

21.66 times

1. 2

3. Applied electronic devices 4. watches
5. Office equipment 6
7.

Photosensitive material 8. Cryostatic equipment

9. Electronic computers 10. Metal fabrication machines
ll. Motorcycles 12. Optical equipment, parts
)3. Production vehicles 14. Measurement instruments

15. Radio. TV, audio equipment 16. Medical equipment

17. Electric measurement units 18. Other general use machines
19. Special production machines 20. Passenger cars. trucks, bus
2]. Electric motors 22. Generators

23. Average mining and manufacturing

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. Five-fold (or 500 2)

Communication, electronic parts
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2. 20 Products Which Were Lower in Price in Last 5 years.

(Wholesale Price, 1975 Price = 100 of 1980 Level)
_._.-—_——“"‘_——'
thxaﬁszmosrmumas

(Ill-E381. ' HMSO¥ -I INS: Ltmwll)

 

 

:2 34 s a: 789130
a s s n .1. R.
-."l 1! 5 Q -'.'~
. \‘93 l “I!
2 38 II 7- l '/ Z
I 5 W-
C : :
, g: : t : : :f
I
I] 2!
' OI
' n N n
. ”.Cil7ﬂuu.”“'
: ””3".
K
1. Electronic desk calculators 2. Integrated circuits
3. Honey counters 4. Color TV sets
5. Semiconductor elements 6. Electronic ranges
7. Reproduction equipment 8. Tape recorders
9. Tape decks 10. Electron tubes
11. Electric washing machines 12. Stereos
11.. Memory watches 15. Radios
16. Cameras 17. Wrist watches
18. Small passenger cars 19. Light trucks
20. Electric refrigerators 21. Ordinary passenger cars

Figure 3. Machine Exports Which Sustain Japan's Exports
(Changes in Export Structures of Japan, United States, West Germany)

(a) stoma: in new:
(a - easmmnm)

18 a: 27”»

   

      

dismn 'n remains n n

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFIUAI. USE ONLY

Key to Figure 3

1. Japan 2. United States

3. West Germany lo. Food products
5. Primary fuel 6. Various manufactured products
7. Fibers 8. Chemistry
9. Metals and metal products 10. Machine equipment
11. 1970
Table 2.
Rankings of Semiconductor Source: Fuji Keizai "Survey of
Manufacturing Device Markets. Semiconductor Hanufacturing Equipment"

 

  
        

Hyman. ﬁlth III-u 9 H27. s-rrxvﬂu:
7a 6

sea-17.1&t537r7!—.1E1v7+uv.ﬂﬁtﬁ° 3
“5 31.8 man. twirl. 96747ov4z>1. are»: 13 i
115 90.6 {tilt-797cm. azﬂﬁiﬁ. 8*1t#. ﬁlth‘ 12 ;
38 5 Ill.u«?t°’/. lﬂlﬁ 14:

LSIfRPUIs

 
  
  
 

   

72 9 79 4 1'- "
“ﬁtﬂill n
I'l‘lkll i i

 
    
 
      

[Ran/714w. ennui. Elli. “wk?!" 16

mntﬁ. AMT-‘Ja-NV. Iii-£537. 777b1'7fuyiea»
r/y

“lbw-ﬁll. Biff/FIR. EIII. BELT—+7720

limitll. 311109”. B’Slitﬂﬁ. III-la 7 l 0221- i
ﬁlm“. mlxvnoy. sierra. 5'+z=4>7--;::
5+». lib-varuzﬂx r
III-PHI”. BI‘MIW. (slalom. aﬂmmn 2‘

murmurs» 7ru7.AMT=/’w¢'/JL&I1V 7 r "HE'I

‘2' A I 15
fr’zgvgrnal)

1:89 romanm ’

      
  
   

   

90-yn-L :0
F54zvivfil *1
amsxuimmllil

  
   
    
    
  

”Mair/7.. rs
MCVDII :7

mpzragg‘l 7’ 13 35.8 smut, 3-07. >4vall. innit?

...-.——-

    

‘1

I74anX—LIIII

75.031173. oL"?"'/. "/{’\'ILIK ‘ 54
fo-f-izri:’-

54.1 9251!. I840}. 82!? as

5 Fl

*x'ln‘Illﬂlileul n n 104.9lmmt5t.m:.w+u=7z 32
anvzananium nu 90.9 antenna. art: a:
!t I all ‘9 16 7.2 unpuw. Willa. -7>7'v7.y.~¢> 3.
lemon” ms 27.4 nest. 'IEIHWE. new. name an
'nnzziza- M s 100.0 +Imun. :9'17. nuxwruwx. inﬂow
xv7r0:71

7¢|~729tﬂt9ﬂ£ul u 8 56.0 attl. a:>r>t$ 42
79chvoul 4': 0 36.1 AMT-yew. Ines». xuxvﬂufaz “.
vzaawx‘v-a M s 73.3 mutt 94mm“ ‘3
tantalum“! v 5i 42.9_A.\1TEM-I¢7. uneasy so
v-V-zixﬂﬂlll 4" J. 120.0!" zt¥-z>;=10>7. .1:a-> 7:5;
Ox—I\”I&I‘I !) 3 73.3! next-221:. an 53

1

1

x

 

i7: Hummus!“ 40.0 aunt: 5°

pea-avnv-a— l""‘ — lﬁﬂl'F-"zl‘i'l. 62 6°

mufﬁn-pl 7l§K13 . .

en-mimmaaln — — “a. one: 3777!-. 12mm nanny. 010mm
39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30.

34.

37.
38.
39.
40.

61.
42.
43.
66.
65.
66.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to Table 2.

Name of product

Estimated 1981 sales (100 million yen)

Ratio vs previous year, 2

Principal participating industries

LSI test equipment

Takeda Riken Industry, Ando Electric, Tokyo Electron, Hinato Electronics

Mask aligner

Canon, Kanematsu Semiconductor, Tokyo Electron, Kokusai Electric

Ultrapure water making equipment

Kurita Kogyo, Organo, Nomura Nicroscience, Nippon Junsui

Reduction exposure equipment

Sumisho Electron System, Hitachi Limited, Nippon Kogaku, Itochu Shoji

Automatic wafer prober

Tokyo Electron, Tokyo Seimitsu

Ion injection device (doping device)

Tokyo Electron, Nippon Shinku Gijutsu, Kokusai Denki, Columbia Boaeki

Epitaxial growth equipment

Kokuaai Denki, AMT Japan, Kanemitsu Semicon, Tenpress Japan, Canon

Clean room

Takasago Thermochemical Industry, Hitachi Plant Construction, Sanki Kogyo,
Nippon Airtech

Dry etching equipment

Tokyo Oka Kogyo, Nichiden Anelba, Nippon Shinku Gijutsu, Tokyo Electron

Metal film thickness and resistance rate measurement device

Abe Shoji, Tokyo Electron, Nippon Bunko Kogyo, Jaacointer National, Kanemitsu
Electronics

Sputtering equipment

Tokyo Electron, Nichiden Anclba, Tokuda Seisakuaho, Nippon Shinku Gijutsu

Reduced pressure CVD equipment

Kokusai Dcnki, Tokyo Electron, AMT Japan, Marubeni Electronics

Hicrodimension measurement device

Nippon Kogaku, Kogaku. Seibel Kikai, Union Kogaku

Silicon single crystal drawing device

Kokusai Denki, Maruheni Electronics

Automatic external mask examination device

Nippon Jido Seigyo. Nippon Kogaku

Diffusion furnace

Tokyo Electron, Kokusai Denki, Tenpresa Japan

Scanning electron microscope

Nippon Denshi, Akashi Seisakusho, Shimazu Seisakusho, Hitachi Limited

Flatncss tester

Konishiroku Shnshin Kogyo, Nidec, Marubeni Electronics, Abe Shoji, Kanematsu
Electronics

Photomask exposure correction device

Nippon Electric, Union Kogaku

Plasma CVD device

AMT Japan, Kancmatsu Semicon, Harubeni Electronics

Mask comparator

Nippon Kogaku, Seibel Kikai

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key to Table 2 continued

47. Normal pressure low-temperature continuous oxide film forming device

48. AMT Japan, Kanematsu Semicon

49. Laser scan defect searching device

50. Hitachi Electron Engineering Union Kogaku

51. Wafer appearance testing device

52. Nippon Kogaku Kogyo, Nidec

S3. Hicrozoom microscope

54. Bausch Lomb Japan, Siebel Kikai

55. Laser dust monitor

56. Kondo Kogyo, Nitta Belt, Hitachi Denshi

57. Photomask defect recognition device

58. Union Kogaku

59. Pattern generator (reticule mask manufacturing device)

60. Sumisho Denshi System

61. Electron beam engraver (exposure device)

62. Nippon Denshi, Kanematsu Semiconductor, Toshiba Kikai, Tokyo Electron, Hitachi
Limited

COPYRIGHT: Diamondosha 1981

2267
CSO: 4105/266

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“JAI.USE40NLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT OF MAJOR CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES SURNEYBD
Tokyo SHUKAN ORU TOSHI in Japanese No 553, 30 Jul 81: PP 1b-18
[Text] Toray Already Leads the Compound Fine Chemical Industry

Tbray's emphasis on fine chemicals is based on the following fundamental position:
"Because of hikes in fluctuating expenses and excessive competition, we can no
longer make profits in mass production-based chemistry; From now on, business
must be based on the price per gram, per set, or per square meter, instead of per
ton and per kilogram" (President Hasahisa Ito of Toray).

The main target of Toray is to provide information-related industries with
materials which it will develop using as weapons its high-particle chemical and
minute-processing technologies which it has accumulated over the years through its
interest in synthetic fibers and plastics. The second target is life science
which, as represented by genetic engineering, will change the very foundation not
of only the chemical industry but also of the society.

First of all, all of Toray's new materials have one thing in commmn they are all
high-particle substances. For instance, although polyester film and PET resin
differ in shape and function, they have the same polymers. Also, the majority of
engineering plastics and carbon fibers (made from long acrylic fibers) have the
same polymers as the synthetic fibers. Therefore, Toray's new materials are basic-
ally the result of the application of high-particle chemistry and fine-processing
technologies.

Polyster film has already become Toray's major product and its "present source of
income" (Ito). Its VTR tapes are among the best in the world. It has captured the
mass market for "information-related tapes." Its monthly production capacity is
2,200 tons, but this will increase to 3,100 tons in 1982. The sales of the film
department, including those from polypropylene film, reached 53.7 billion yen
(fiscal 1980). The sales target of this department 5 years from now is 100
billion yen, which will make it the most profitable department of Toray.

Technologically, the electronics materials are extensions of engineering plastics.
This fact alone is sufficient to show the potential power of Toray, the top
engineering plastic manufacturer.

The department of electronics raw materials and equipment recorded sales of only
several billion yen in FY-80, most of which came from integrated circuit materials.

42

FOR 0FT1CLAL.USE‘DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Its goal for FY-83, however, is 10 billion yen; and in 10 years, combining the
sales from personal computers and character printers, its sales and ordinary
profits are expected to reach 100 and 30 billion yen, respectively. These are
ambitious goals. Toray's electronics resist for forming integrated ciruit patterns
will be one of the principal money-making products.

The sales of engineering plastics have already become steady, and in polyamide
products Toray is the leader, appropriately, as the king of nylon. Sales reached
35.6 billion yen in FY-80, its target is 100 billion plus for FY-90.

Toray supplies carbon fibers to UCC of the United States, and its strength lies in
the fact that it has dominated the 0.5. aerospace industry. Carbon fibers are
essential to compound raw materials, and Toray holds 50 percent of the world market;
its dominance is unlikely to fall. The secret of its dominance is in the high
quality of its polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and in its superior spinning and calcination
processing technologies. By June 1982, production of carbon fibers will triple to
105 tons.

The present domestic demand for carbon fiber comes from sporting goods, and in
America it comes from space and aircraft industries. Already it has been unofficial-
ly decided that Toray's carbon fiber will be used in the 3-767. A ton of fiber is
used for each aircraft.

In the area of life science, interferon has already been developed and is being
clincally tested. In 5 years, Toray hopes to have its interferon in the list of
drugs. Interferon has opened up Toray's interest in the overall development of
pharmaceuticals. For example, it is fully committed to production of pharmaceuti-
cals using genesplicing technology.

Toray is already the leader in the compound fine chemical industry, supported by
its large-scale revolutionary new materials such as engineering plastics and carbon
fibers. In 5 years. the sales from the fine chemical departments will increase to
more than 60 percent of all sales, as Toray tries to transform itself from a mass-
production—based synthetic textile manufacturer to a high-techology fine chemical

enterprise.
(um—M" “W
(15) “3% )

«vs-720121;

erases. (22
can”: (23)

an“: (21.)
Julius)

  
 
 
      
      
  

L997 (26)
’.a. 7: I”,

(16)

alt->291. (17)

8 .suL
gig}: I 'ngiﬂif"!

 
 
     

 
  

[Key on following page]
43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:

1. New Raw Materials 16. PBT resin, etc

2. Information-Related Raw Materials 15. Toray

3. Polyester films 16. Carbon fibers (PAN-related)
a. For VTR tapes 17. Photo-printing system

S. For audio tapes 18. Waterless flat sheets

6. Electronics Materials 19. Nylon resin convex sheets
7. Photosensitive resin 20. Life Science

8. Electronics wire resist 21. Interferon

9. Transparent conducting file 22. Cell-breeding method

10. 1c film carrier tapes 23. Genetic Engineering Method
11. PTFE copper plates, etc 24. Blood dialyzer
12. Engineering Plastics 25. Artificial kidney
13. Polyamide resin 26. L-lysine (essential amino acids)

Mitsubishi Chemical Industries Active in Life Science and Rare-Earth Materials

Mitsubishi Chemical has been stepping up its efforts in fine chemicals. Mitsubishi
Chenical's business strategy is "to activate the existing operations by individual-
izing the products, including general products" (Fresident Biji Suzuki). This may
include items that deviate from what may be called the concept of fine chemicals,
but its position can be understood better as that of “specialization."

Mitsubishi's fine chemicals can be categorised roughly as: 1) information
materials, including carbon products, resin (such as engineering plastics), are
rare-earth substances; 2) life industry products, ranging from pharmaceuticals
and reagents to equipment, foods and agricultural chemicals; and 3) dyes.

In the area of carbon products, the future develop-ant of the new pin—shaped cokes
and that of carbon fibers now being developed look interesting. The carbon project
has also produced technologies that have become the basis for the developaent of

C1 chemicals and coal liquefaction.

For the petrochemical companies, what should be at the core of their "fine-iration"
process is, first of all, engineering plastics. As for Mitsubishi Chemical, it
possesses three principal items: nylon, polycarbonate, and PDT (polybutylenc
terephthalete). It was behind in PET, but by commercializing its 1.686 raw
materials, it is gaining some of the lost ground. And by importing polyamide—

imide and polyimide resins, it is consolidating its interest in engineering plase-
tics. Mitsubishi's definition of life industry is broad: "An industry contributing
to the improvement of human welfare and lifestyle." Its present operations include
pharmaceuticals, agricultural chemicals, and reagents. But interest in Mitsubishi's
life industry at present is due to its rapid development and commercialization of
pharmaceuticals and other products resulting from genetic engineering.

Mitsubishi's interest in pharmaceuticals goes way back. Before the war, it estab-'
lished Takeda Chemical Industries and Yoshitomi Pharmaceutical Industries. The late
president Shinojima served privately as a managing director of Tanabe Seiyaku Co
Ltd. But in the postwar period, partially due to large investmetns in petro-
chemicals, Mitsubishi temporarily withdrew from pharmaceuticals and then reentered
the field in 1969-70. However, since there was this blank period, its production

64

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE‘ONLN
was limited to hemostatic drugs and steroid hormones (orignally used in birth

control pills) and its development of pharmaceuticals (including intermediate
raw materials) lacked vigour.

This situation, however, changed rapidly when it acquired Nikken Kagaku's stock
through a third-party capital increase (Mitsubishi holds 5 percent of all shares)
and became the fourth largest stockholder. This February, it acquired stock in
Tokyo Tanabe Seiyaku by the same third-parth capital-increase method and became
the third largest stockholder.

0n the other hand, Mitsubishi Life Science Research Institute, which recently
celebrated its 10th anniversary, is one of Japan's top institutes conducting basic
research in life sciences. But thus far, there have not been many cases in which
technologies developed by the institute have led directly to cmmmercializstion.

Last October, Akita Niwa, then vice president of Mitsubishi Chemical, was appointed
director of the Life Science Research Institute. This was done to encourage
commercialization of technologies developed by the institute.

For the time being, the institute's goal will be the application of genetic engineer-
ing for enzyme-related products. In addition, in terms of intermediate goals,

it is anticipated that the developm ent of the catalyzer will contribute to the
development of petrochemical processes at normal temperatures and pressures.

As in the life industry, Mitsubishi is actively promoting rare-earth projects.
Following the purchase of America's USR Chemical Products Corp (manufacturer of
fluorescent substances for TV) this July, Mitsubishi bought out the X-ray

sensitized paper department of CAP Corp, and it is also planning to purchase a
similar department of the Arc Light Corporation. With these purchases in the United
States, combined with those already made in Malaysia and Norway and with that of
Kasei Optonics (it bought out a plant of Dainippon Toryo Ksikotai), Mitsubishi's
strategy for an international division of production structure will be strengthened.
Furthermore, it also has a plan to build a rears-earth plant at Kurosaki. Mit-
subishi is already the world's third largest manufacturer of rare-earth sub-
stances, but it will continue to expand in a worldwide strategy.

Excluding cokes, Mitsubishi's ratio of fine chemicals to all other products is
still below 10 percent. For the time being, the goal is to achieve a 30-percent

ratio, which means that the rate of development of its life industry will be the
key to its shift toward fine chemicals.

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR.0F1IC1AI.USE|DNLY

‘ . (2) l
(1) gag-gnu) ' I

    

$53; a : n.41a
6 I: can (15)
(7); a

(8)' I 713.598‘16
(i3; ‘ ’ “17’

[>73 '
«unna- (20)
M“ (21)

    

Key:

1. Dye 12. Mitsubishi Chemical Industries
2. Active carbon 13. Information Materials
3. Pin-shaped cokes lb. Rare-earth

6. Carbon Products 15. 660

5. Pharmaceuticals 16. Aluminum PS sheets

6. Diagnosis reagent 17. Toner [7]

7. Equipment 18. Resin-Related Products
8. Food 19. Engineering plastics
9. Agricultural chemicals 20. Ion-exchange resin
10. Feed 21. Special resin

11. Life Industry
Asahi Chemical Industry Co Ltd: Pursues Toray in Compound Fine Chemicals

Asahi Chemical Industry has been mass-producing chemicals, mainly naphtha deriva-
tives such as ethylene and propylene. It is, however, in the process of changing
its policy, since this mass production of chemicals, which had been the company's
strength, has shown to be ineffective structurally in raising profits. Thus, Vice
President Reiichi Yunikurs's statement that "Asahi will concentrate on nurturing
fine chemicals."

As in the case of Toray, the basis of Asahi's success will be high-particle
chemistry and minute-processing technology, which it has mastered through produc-
tion of synthetic fibers and plastics; however, it is involved in food production
and research in fermentation technology, neither of which Ibray deals in. More-
over, in a life science field such as genetic engineering, it is slightly ahead
of Toray. In addition, Toys Jozo Co Ltd, its affiliate, has enzyme technology,

so that in terms of drug development potential, it is the leader among the three
synthetic textile companies.

0n the other hand, among the synthetics, its polyester line is weak, so there is
the disadvantage of not having polyester films. In any event, in the area of fine

chemicals, its position is that of a pursuer of Toray and its potential is
remarkable.

- 46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Among electronics raw materials, its emphasis is on sensitizing resin. The repu-
tation of its dry film resist for print wiring sheets in integrated circuits has

already been established. Another noteworthy item is the Hall elements.

In the area of engineering plastics. Asahi Chemical is superior to Toray in

the production of Nylon 66, which the latter lacks. Nylon 66 is superior to Nylon
6 in terms of heat resistance and durability. In the acrylic MHA resin market,
Asahi Chemical has the second largest share (20 percent), after Mitsubishi Rayon.
But again, since its polyester division is weak, its plastics have not outgrown
the stage of dependence on general use—~principa11y, medium- and lowbpressure
polyethylene.

In the area of carbon fibers, although Asahi is the top acrylic manufacturer, its
temporary halt in this area has made it fall behind Tbray and Toho Rayon. In 1979
it resumed carbon fiber development, and in 1981 it cooperated with Nippon Carbon
Co Ltd, a major pitch type manufacturer, to begin participation in PAN-related
production. In 1982, it will immediately begin production at a rate of 20 tons

a day. The question is how it will attach itself to the v.5. aerospace industry.
For the time being, its demand will come principally from sporting goods. It is
also inclined toward the development of products for automobiles as one means

of reversing its position among its competitors.

In terms of new materials, it cannot be denied that Asahi is behind Toray, but
its level of chemical technology based on the ion-exchange membrane is on par
with that of world leaders.

Its sodium hydroxide manufacturing plants using the ion-exchange membrane constitute
50 percent of all such plants in the world. Since conversion from mercury to the
ion-exchange method is underway throughout the world, the market is growing

rapidly.

In the area of life science. due to the accumulation of fermentation technology,
Asahi's scale is two or three times that of Toray. Vice President Yumikura states
with confidence: "Research and past performance of the enzyme are the key to
success in genetic engineering."

In the area of drugs, Asahi Chemical moved from a bulk supply system to manufactur-
ing. In 1976 it completed a pharmaceutical plant; it is now engaged in developing
cures for leukemia, anticancer agents, and cephalo-type antibiotics. The hoped-
for cure for leukemia is expected to be on the health insurance list by 1982, and
it is expected to become a major merchandise item with monthly sales of over 1
billion yen. Asahi's market share of the midair thread-type blood dialyzer using'
Bemberg is number one. Furthermore, Asahi Medical, its subsidiary, has high

profit rates. In the area of MB, it has a proven track record in CT scanners and
an ultrasonic diagnosis syst an.

Asahi's genetic engineering research is done at the research institute in Fuji

city. In addition to mass-production technology using the genetic characteristics

of aminoacid, it is promoting mass production of pharmaceuticals and research into
interferon.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although the present sales ratio of Asahi's fine chemicals or special products is
as low as 10 percent. it intends to raise it to 20 percent in 5 years, which will

make them as profitable as its petrochemical products.

IMIMC V 6
“7’qu 19

11:31.5“38 3

(201—0273!

(5 I! I>(23)

 

Key:
1. New Materials 14. Antileukemia drugs
2. Electronics Raw Materials 15. Anticancer agents
3. Sensitization resin 16. Medical Equipment
10. Hall elements 17. Blood dialyzer (artificial kidney)
5. Engineering Plastics 18. Supersonic diagnosis devices, etc
6. Nylon 66 19. Genetic Engineering Research Based
7. MA resin on Fermentation Technology
8. Polyscetal. etc 20. Uranium Concentrates by amenical
9. Carbon Fibers Conversion Method
10. Asahi Chemical 21. Uranium Recovery from Seawater
11. Life Science 22. Sodium Hydroxice Production by Ion
12. Pharmaceuticals Conversion Membrane
l3. Cephalo type antibiotics 23. New Technologies

Sumitomo Chemical Co Ltd: Rapidly Moving Into Agricultural musicals, Pharmcauti-
cals. and Nev Materials

Sumitomo Chemical is strongly promoting its fine-chemical operation. This is
based on its "present goal of achieving and maintaining a 30-percent share of fine
chemicals as against all other products (the most recent period showed a 25-percent
share)" (Takeshi Hij ikata, president). The focus is on agricultural chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, and new materials. The approach via bioengineering is also
developing rapidly. supported by the introduction of technologies.

Among these, agricultural chaicals. in particular, have grown into major sources
of profit. Their growth is phenomenal; 1981 sales are expected to reach nearly 50

billion yen, about 2.7 times those of 1976. Smilimo is among the world's five
top agricultural chemical manufacturers.

-48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Agricultural chemicals are generally classified into three categories--insecti-
cides, germicides, and herbicides. Sumitomo Chamical's strength lies in the
first two. Especially the insecticides "Sumichion" and "Sumisaijin" and the
germicide "Sumirex" are considered major international products.

In 1976, a joint venture plant with the United States began the manufacture of
"Sumichion." The "Sumisaijin," which was first used for cotton, is being exported
to more than 70 countries in Europe, North and South America. In the fall of 1982,
the U.S. Shell Chemicals, to whom Sumitomo provides technological assistance,

will beginnfull production of "Sumisaijin." The latter is also effective in
animals, and for this reason it will probably be exported to South Africa, South
America, and Australia.

"Sumirex," a germicide for vegetables and fruit trees, is mainly exported to
European countries such as France and Heat Germany. Its Japanese registration per-
mit was granted this spring so that domestic demand is also promising. To these
three items, synthetic [? pyrethroid] (artificial Dalmatian pyrethrum) insecticide
has been added. The export ratio of agricultural chemicals reaches nearly 60
percent .

The future focus will be on the development of new herbicides. Since the demand
for herbicides accounts for 60 percent of all agricultural chemical markets in

the world, it is an attractive field. For the time being, research will focus on
herbicides for wheat and soybeans. The herbicide for soybeans, S3532, being
developed in the United States, is a promising item, but its commercialization will
come in 2 years at the earliest.

With respect to pharmaceuticals, Sumitomo has acquired bioengineering methods,

and has been emphasizing the development of new drugs, such as those for the
circulatory system, antibiotics, and anticancer agents. While it used to suffer
from a lack of developmental efficiency and sales forces, these have been gradually
improved. The sales volume of pharmaceuticals for 1981 is expected to increase

to the 40-billion—yen level (33.5 billion yen, previous year).

The increase in 1981 is due to contributions made by I? "Inteban"] ointment, the
price of which was officially listed at the end of last year, and by the anti-
cholesterol agent [? “Epokurin"]. Other promising new drugs include the semi-
synthetic penicillin [? “Parushin"], the synthetic antibacterial agent [

[? "Furudajin"] (jointly developed with Taisyo Pharmaceutical Co Ltd).

In addition, ccphalo type, the third-generation antibiotic SHl652, the anti-
inflamnatory painkiller SXlO32, and the depressant IDl938 are among the drugs under-
going clinical testing. Each of these is a candidate for a new drug that is

being jointly developed; if these become commercialized, the product line of
Sumitomo will be strengthened in one sweep.

In the area of bioengineering, Suaitomo is prepared to make the developments in
interferon and growth hormones a breakthrough in this field. As for interferon,
Sumitomo has imported the lymph node method 2 type from Helcoma Corporation of
England, and is already conducting clinical testing. Depending on the progress
of the testing, it may begin domestic production next year.

. 49.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Growth hormones produced by the gene splicing method will undergo clinical testing
in September. This method is isported from Ravi Corporation of Sweden. Although
neither item is based on Smitomo's own technology, they will advance pharmaceuti-
cal product ion technology that uses bioengineering and improve clinical testing
methods.

Another growth area is new materials. Smitono's policy is to strengthen its
position in three major materials: electronics, compound, and special function
materials. In particular, it is interested in developing the application and
expanding the demand for carbon fibers, FHA resin, highly pure alumina, sensitiz-
ing resin, and super-heat-resistsnt resin.

In particular, concerning carbon fibers, Sumitomo plans to increase facilities

to produce 500,000 square meter sheets annually; this is supported by the export
contract to America's Hercules Corp, with whom Sumitomo has had a long relation-
ship. In this manner, Sumitomo is trying to catch up with Toray. With respect to
INA resin, whose applications in optical fibers and optical video disks are in
progress. Sumitomo's goal is to surpass Mitsubishi Rayon.

Annual sales from these new materials are still under 10 billion yen, but
Sumitomo's potential for growth is huge.

 

(2); . _
(3)' I: _ j
— (1e)
(4) (17)
(5) (1°)
(6) ‘
(7)1 1 ~ g “ - (2°)
(22)
Key:
1. New Materials 12. Growth Hormones
2. Carbon Fibers 13. Interferon
3. Almina Fibers 110. Agricultural Chemicals
’0. RNA Resin 15. Insecticide
5. Highly Pure Alumina 16. Smichion
6 . Photoresist 17 . Sumisaij in
7. I? Econol] Resin 18. Artificial Dalmatian pyrathrum
8. Dye 19. Germicide
9. Smitomo Chemical 20. Sumirex
10. Bioengineering 21. Herbicide
11 . Pharmaceuticals 22 . S3552
. 50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Shin-Btsu Chaucal Co Ltd: A Forerunner in Pine Chemical Strategy; Its Target
Is To Achieve 50 Percent [Production Level of Fine Chemicals]

For Japanese chemical companies. whose raw materials foundation is weak, “fine
chemicals" is the byword. But since the field of fine chemicals is wide. if too
much time and money are spent on development, the very goal of achieving high
added value becomes meaningless. For this reason, the target of development must
be defined clearly and intense selection is required prior to comercialization.

In this sense, since Shin-Etsu Chenical's fine chemical sales constitute more than
40 percent of its total sales. its case can be seen as a model for the entire
industry.

Shin-Etsu's fine chemical products can be classified into three categories:

silicon resin, electronics materials consisting of semiconductor silicon and rare-
earth substances, and I? Hetorose] and synthetic perfumes. These fine ch-icals
were brought out strategically in order to get away from production of universal
chanical products such as vinyl chloride, vinyl acetate, methanol, sodium hydroxide,
and fertilizer.

The March 1981 period recorded a large loss; however, the loss in vinyl chlorides
and vinyl acetates was covered by profits in fine chemicals. In other words, its

fine chemicals are already supporting the company's profit.

The use of silicon resin is wide, ranging from electronics to scaling agents for
super-high-rises, to medical products such as blood circulation tubes. Demand for
it is expected to grow by more than 10 percent annually. At present. Shin-Btsu
has a SO-percent market share in this item, surpassing those of Toray Silicon

and Toshiba Silicon.

The sales volume of electronics materials reached 30 billion yen. a 30-percent
increase (ending May 1981). Their combined sales ratio. too, has increased to more
than 20 percent (16.5 percent in previous period) of all sales. The major product.
here is semiconductor silicon. Single crystal silicons are semiconductor materials
for IC and LSI, and are shipped as wafers.

The production of semiconductor silicon is carried out by Shin-Etsu Semiconductor
(100 percent capital investment), a subsidiary company. Shin-Etsu Semiconductor
became an independent enterprise when it Joined hands with the 11.8. Dow-Corning
Corporation (45 percent investment) in March 1967. In 1979. partially because
Dow-Corning was concentrating on a multicrystal semiconductor silicon, the joint
venture was dissolved and Shin-Etsu Semiconductor became the sole owner.

The future demand for semiconductor silicon, principally for super 1.51, is expec-
ted to grow 20-30 percent annually. In order to cope with this, Shin-Etsu
Semi-conductor will increase its equipment investment rapidly for the next 2-3
years.

In addition to Shin-Etsu Semiconductor, Shin-Etsu Chemical has Naoetsu Electronics
Industry and Nagano Electronics Industry as subsidiaries for wafer processing of
semiconductor silicons; also, there is SEE Malaysia in Malaysia. The nuaber of

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

employees in the domestic and overseas semiconductor departments, including those
in Shin-Etsu Semiconductor, is already about 2,000. Although it falls short of
the 2,400 employees of the main Shin-Etsu atomical, it is still a significant
number.

In addition, it is now investigating the possibility of extending its operations
into the United States. It has purchased 50,000 tsubo [l tsubo - 3.305 square
meters) in Vancouver, in the United States, and is studying the feasibility of
building a single-crystal silicon plant. Its 833 Malaysia is already exporting
silicons to the United States, but its intention ultimately is to meet the
increase in demand in the United States, including that from Japmese enterprises
in the United States.

Recently, GGG [gadonium, gallium. garnet) and synthetic quartz have been added to
Shin-Btsu musical's list of new electronics uterials. The 608 has already been
applied to fixed-memory of electronic switching systans. It has a memory capacity
far superior to that of semiconductor silicon, and because of its great future

various companies have begun production. There is a demand for synthetic quartz
for use in photomssk materials and optical fibers.

Including these new products, the sale of electronics materials is expected to

grow steadily at an annual rate of 25 percent; by 1986, sales are expected to reach
90 billion yen.

Shin-Etsu Giemical deals in other fine chemical products, such as joining agmts
for construction, building materials, food, and pharmaceuticals, [metorose ?]
(domestic market share, 90 percent) for coating, and synthetic perfumes such as
jasmine. Shin-Etsu Chemical treats them as fine chemicals; however, in comparison

with electronics materials and silicon resin, the rate of. increase is low and the
scale is small.

It is strongly expected that 'Shinaiﬁtsu Chemical, which is always a step ahead in
business strategy, will move ahead with its goal of achieving a SOnpsrcent fine-
chemical share of all products and will strengthen its production structure.

  
     
   

(2)i _'
(3)I rim-mu.

Key:
1. Fine Chemicals lo. Electronics Materials
2. Silicon Resin 5. Semiconductor silicon
3. [Hetorose ?], Synthetic Perfumes 6. Rare-earth substances, 666

[Key continued on following page]
52‘.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02I09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080015-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. Hagnet, synthetic quartz 14.
8. Shin-Etsu Semiconductor 15.
9. Indicates major subsidiary con- -/ 16.
party in charge of production 17.
10. Shin-Eton Polymer 18.
ll. Shin-Eton Chanical 19.
12. General-Use Products 20.
13. Vinyl Chloride
COPYRIGHT: Shukan Oru Toshi 1981
9710
CSO: 6105/261
53'

Sodium Bydr
Methanol

Shin-Etsu V
Shintec

Nisshin Che
Fertilizer,
Shin-Stan K

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080016-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MITI TO ESTABLISH BIOTECHNOLOGY PRDIDTION comm-res
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 12 Sep 81 p 2

[Text] Major Effort by HITI To Promote Biotecl‘mology Industry; Comittee To Be

Established Next Year; Representatives of Chemical Industry To Formulate Basic Long-
Term Policy

HITI plans to establish a "Biotechnology Promotion Measures Comittee" (tentative
name) in I-‘Y—82 to promote bioindustry. Although bioindustry is expected to make

great progress in the future. Japan is behind in investigation of the direction

of future progress and safety measures in this field. Therefore. a comittee com-
posed of representatives of the chemical industry. persons of knowledge and experience.
and related government officials will be established to create basic long-term policy.
For initial research expenses for 1982. 5 million yen vill be appropriated.

Bioindustry is an industrial field in which biological functions and reactions.
especially of microorganisms. will be used on a large scale for industrial purposes.
This industry is still in an initial stage; throughout the world, it has only appeared
in parts of the medical and pharmaceutical products industry. However. it is ex-
pected to expand a great deal from the late 1980's into the 1990's in such wide-
ranging fields as 1) fine chemicals. 2) basic chemical products. 3) resources and
energy. 10) food products. and 5) the environment.

In the United States there are already plans for large-scale application of bio-
technology in technological development. For exasple, there is a plan to change

the method of manufacturing ethylene oxide. a raw material for synthetic fibers.

by an ethylene heat oxidation reaction to a manufacturing method using micro-
organisms as a catalyst in 3 years' tin. If this [1.8. development is successful,

it will be possible to manufacture ethylene oxide at normal pressure. and this will
be agreat contribution to energy conservation. In Japan as well. an aggressive
approach to these developments is required. so the present plan to organize a comit-
tee of specialists was conceived to study future trends.

Also. because microorganisms are used in bioindustry. it is essential in developing
this field to institute safety measures to prevent leakage from laboratories and re-
search centers and to protect human beings and the environment. HITI plans to

have the comittee study these problems as well.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1981

9651

050: 4106/8 51.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TBGINOLOGY

CONCEALED IMAGE TRANSMISSION METHOD DEVELOPED
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUU in Japanese 21 Sep 81 p 3

[Text] New Secure Communication Method Developed by Professor Toninaga et al of
Haseda University; Industrial Espionage Throws Up Hands

In the field of facsimile, which is one of the three "divine objects" of 0A (office
automation), a new method of communication developed for the purpose of "keeping
things secret" has been the topic of conversation recently. As the amount of in-
formation in society increases, many problems are expected to crop up. That is,
there is urgent need for transmission of confidential documents by means of
facsimile transmission, for measures to counter the theft of documents and "eaves-
dropping" on microwave millimeter wave transmission, and for protection of images
(documents) transmitted which are of value to a third party. A new concealed

image transmission method has been developed by a research group headed by Professor
Hideyoshi Tominaga, Department of Electronic Communication, Faculty of Science and
Technology, Haseda University. The "concealed image transmission method" developed
by this group uses a format that may be called a "hidden image" conversion method.
Secrets can be kept and certification (confirmation of document exchange) can be
accomplished conveniently by this new method. It has caught the attention of many,
because development of such software enables the confidential management of various
"documents" according to their importance even after the 0A document management has
entered the paperless age.

Documents and Images Protected, Jumbled Transmission, Sharp Reception

Facsimile transmission is a method of transmitting images such as documents by
electronic means over a distance to a receiver. The original document that is to
be transmitted is scanned with a light, and the black and white density of the
image is converted into electric signals. At the receiving end, the electric
signals are converted back into the corresponding image. However, facsimile equip-
ment used in an office is shared by many for economic reasons and is used for
transmitting various types of documents including both confidential documents and
open letters. Under such circumstances, if a document that must be kept secret can
be transmitted with jumbled signals which can only be decoded by the rightful re—
ceiver with a certain key into a clear image (document), then the confidentiality
of the document can be maintained.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are many applications of this method. For example, it can be programmed to
detect whether the seal of electronic mail has been broken by a third party or not.
or only a portion of the document such as the signature may be concealed by the
jumbled signals so that only the rightful receiver is able to reproduce the
signature. Thus, the transmission of documents which could be of value to a third
party, such as tickets, entrance tickets, and checks, can also be carried out, and
"many other new uses may crop up," says Professor Tominaga.

The basic principle of the method is as follows: the arrangement of the image
(letter) point and the arrangement of black and white are mixed up so that the re-
arranged signals have the appearance of a jamming signal. The change in arrange-
ment can be accomplished by changing the order of scan lines according to a random
number generator and repeating this pattern periodically. In an actual machine,
this becomes part of the logic inside the shift register before codification.

The decoding key used by the receiver for reproduction of the image consists of the
same random number generator. Hith this key, a register logic which is the reverse

of the transmitter is created so that the scan lines are restored to their original
arrangement.

There are infinite variations of this rearrangement scheme, and if the period of
random number generation is increased, the process required to decode it also in~
creases proportionately. However. the standard proposed by the CCITT (Consultative
Committee for International Telephone and Telegraph) is centered around a technol-
ogy which is aimed at shortening the fascimile codification of the image information
in order to imrpove the circuit efficiency. A technology in which the random number
generation is made more complex runs counter to the effort to make codification more
efficient. Therefore, the problem is how to reconcile these two. That is, the
algorism for arrangement change must be decided by the codification efficiency and
the content of the document.

The method for arrangement change may be varied according to the degree of secrecy
desired. One of the methods is called shuffling. The original manuscript (Figure
A) is shuffled into random order by a single scan line as in shuffling a deck of
cards (Figure B); or points may be rearranged on the same scan line (Figure C);

or points may be rearranged between different scan lines (Figure D); or blocks may
be rearranged as a unit. [Figures not reproduced!- This process of randomly chang-
ing the arrangement is called scrambling. The scrambled signals appear to a third
party as nothing but noise.

Concealed image transmission is a method of transmission of a more advanced degree
than the scrambled signals. The signals transmitted by this method consist of the
scrambled signals of a confidential document superimposed on the normal signals

of an ordinary document. Unless one knows the decoding key, the signals appear

to him as an ordinary transmission with garbles. "As the algorith for removal of
garbled information in order to improve the image becomes more commonplace in the
future, the unsuspecting third party will throw away a large quantity of concealed
images diaguished as garbles," says Professor Tominaga.

Reproduction of this concealed image is achieved by turning it over so to speak,
that is, by interchanging the position of an apparent image on the front with the

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hidden image on the back. Thus, by reversing the arrangement order of the front
and the back, the image on the front becomes scrambled while the image on the back
becomes unscrambled. The concealed image may consist of a superposition of several
sheets of images or just a single sheet. In the case of a single sheet of image,
the key section of the document such as the signature may be scrambled and scattered
in the form of garbles salewhere in the document.

Certification may be cited as another effective application of the concealed image
transmission method. Certification is a process of confirming receipt of a docu~
ment by the receiver. An additional scrambled image is superimposed onto the
scrambled signals of the docmlent which is being transmitted. After the rightful
receiver has decoded the scrambled signals with an appropriate key, the reproduced
additional image is then sent back to the original sender. Thus, certification can
be carried out smoothly if the sender and the receiver make arrangements beforehand.

The high speed facsimile machines used today are standardized by the CCI‘l'l‘ as G-III
(Group. III). The next generation of 6-D] facsimile machines reportedly will be
facsimile machines with an internal memory. The purpose of having a memory is to
increase the effective utilization of the circuit and to transmit a larger volume
at a higher speed. With the memory function available, the technique of superimpos-
ing several images which is essential in the concealed image method can be intro-
duced easily and the application of software for confidential transmission can be
accomplished. Furthermore, in the future, when all docmenta and information are
stored in the cunputer memory and the so-called "paperless office" is a reality,
the equipment itself can be shared by everyone, with the confidential and non-
confidential documents intermixed. In such circumstances, the docmaent management
can be easily carried out by takint appropriate secret protection measures in ac-
cordance with the degree of confidentiality. Meanwhile, co-unication by such
means as microwave and millimeter wave is expected to grow in the future because

of the low equipment cost per circuit. Aside from military secret comunications,
other users of comunications via electronic waves are beginning to attach impor-
tance to the concealed comunication technique.

Finally, this group plan to present a paper describing their results at the "Inter-
national Symposium on Image and Document Comunications" in Paris in November.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha, 1981

9113
cso: 6106/11 5"”

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY