APPROVID FOR NIL-”I: 2007/02/°.: CIA-RDPCZ-OOUWROOO“ 00030010-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000300160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8313

6 March 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 6/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030018-0
NOTE

JPRs publications contain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; these from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the .
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.

Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROEFICIAL USE ONLY.
3. Krdpihn'l Arc-Halon No.

  
  
 

 

unuoourmc om I. Report No.
sneer JPRS LIB313

TRANSLATlONS 0N JAPAN , (POUO 6/79)

   
  

'cpon )ne
6 March 1979

  
      
 
 
   
 

--

0. I'cllormn‘ Osmium-cu luv.
No.

       
   
   
    

I0. Vivien/Talbl'ml l'ml N».

  

. PN'OI-II‘ Org-nineties: None nod Adam

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clebe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

la. SﬂOIUIn‘ (Nu-Indo- Neue cod Men

 
  

‘ ll. Connect/(sun: No.

)3. Type ol Repou u I’euod
Coveted

I}. Supple-emery Note.

u. Ahmocu

 
     

A: above

The report contains press and radio coverage on political. economic, military.
sociological. ecientific and technological developments.

7. Key «an end Deccan Ashlie. .- Beaumont
JAPAN

Political and Sociological
ﬂilitary

Economic

Science and Technology

m Identiﬁers/Operated Tel--

11.. coum Field/010w 5c, 50. 5K. 156. 160. 181, 19?, 228

' “mm“ m—
For Official Use Only. . '1“ , . 6‘
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS. mm

It. .

'0” M'Iruubn. Vito-urn: unru-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPFD
6 FD

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN

(9000 6/19L

Comurs
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'BENGEI SﬂUNJU' Analyzes Dynsnics of Ohirs end Tnneke
(Ikuzo Tajtri; BENGEI SHUNJU. 19 Feb 79)..............

'ASAHI' Urges Ohire Must Have Fire Strategy for u.s. Visit
(Editorial; ASA“! EVENING REVS. 22 Feb.79)-...........

'DAILY YOHIURI' Advises Ohirn on Proposed Visit to u.s.
(Editorial; THE DAILY YOHIURI. 26 Feb 79).............

JCP State-eat DenOunces Invasion of Vietnam
(AIAHATA. 19 Feb 79)..................................

Fuus Discusses JCF—CCF Relations in Report to JCF Plenum
(AKAHATA, 12 Feb 79)..................................

'HAINICHI' Welcomes Resumption of SeoulcFyongysng Dialog
(Editorial; HAINICHI SHIHBUN. 18 Feb 79)..............

ECONOMIC

'NAINICHI' supports Ohire's Coming Visit to United States
(Editorial; HAINICRI mm news. 21 Feb 19)...........

Yen To Continue To Rise in 1979
(MAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 8 Feb 79).......................

HITI Officials Alerned by the uncertain PRC Market
(BUNGBI SHUNJU, January 79)...........................

Gold. Exchange Reserves Soar to Rev High
(THE DAILY YOHIURI, 3 Feb 79).........................

Business Recovers. Unemployment Still ﬂigh
(HAINICHI DAILY NEHS. 6 Feb 79).......................
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100030016-0

a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONTENTS (Continued)
ECONOMIC
Priority Given to Oil Supply Plans
(HAINICHI DAILY NEWS. 6 Feb 79).................
Oil Conservation Likely Issue at Tokyo Summit
(ASAHI EVENING NEWS. 6 Feb 79)..................
Briefs
Engineers Overseas
January Exports
Spanish Steel Hill
I

-b-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100030016-0
-r. F01 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'BENGBI SHUNJU' ANALYZES DYNAMICS OF OHIRA AND TANAKA
Tokyo BENGEI SHUNJU in Japanese 19 Feb 79 pp 125-141
[Article by Ikuzo Tajiri: "The Drumics of Ah's. Ooh's and 0kay's"]

[Text] The new Ohira government is sometimes called
"Kakuei (Tnnaka's shadow) Cabinet" or "Chokkaku (direct
Tnnaka) Cabinet." Why did such influential figures
with completely different personalities and nothing

in common. as between the reticent and the restless,
the dull cow and the bulldozer. the former bureaucrat
and the self-made. come to maintain close ties? If
they are seeking benefits and political sins. what

can they be? A young journalist analyzes the future
of the new government making a stormy start.

The Friendly Ties of "Daikaku" (Ohira and Tanaka)

"About 10 years ago in the mid-period of the Ssto Cabinet, Haaayoshi Ohira
and Kakuei Tenaka on a Sunday went out to the Koganei Country Club in
Tokyo. During the game of golf, they paused and sat beneath a pine tree
and started singing the tune 'Sado 0kess.‘ I remember it vividly. Look-
ing at them. I felt that nothing can come between them to sever their
friendship."

So said Rokusuke Tanaka (five-term member of the Lower House; aged 55),
named chief cabinet secretary last year end. in an emotional voice. he
cannot forget what he saw while making the rounds with the "daikaku" team.
Tanaka described this episode a few days before his installation as chief
cabinet secretary, but stories attesting to "daikaku" friendship could be
heard in virtually all segments of the political world.

But many politicians had turned down my request for details on the "daikaku"
ties. including Takeo Fukuda, Yasuhiro Nakaaone, Susuau Mikaido, Kiichi
Hiyazawa, Ichiro Nakegewa and Ikko Kasuga... Pukuda. who was in a bitter
race with Ohira during last year's political struggle. responded. "leave

me alone for awhile."while Nakasone likewise stated, "I wish to think

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

things over for a while." Hiyezawa (through his secretary) said, "I know
nothing of Mr Tanaka, for lhave not been associating with him."

It was interesting to note that responses varied. with ease talking will-
ingly, sone hesitatingly and sons unwillingly. With respect to the "dai-
kaku" ties. the political circles would assume a unique flexibility with
Tanakn's participation. Perhaps they are fearful of repercussions when
speaking about "Tansks," his name being deeply imbedded in the conscious-
ness of politicians. Hr Ohira himself, a party to the "daikaku" team,
had to speak falteringly.

During the 1 December 1978 press interview following his formal selec-
tion as the new Liberal Deaocratic Party (LDP) president, Ohira. in a
reply to another question, said: "I feel. expect and an confident that you
meabers of the Tanaka faction. as a respectable body, will take prudent
actions henceforth. This is no change in ny personal ulstions with Mr
Tsnaka. however, I understand and he too is aware that I must be aoderste
in our ties as a public official."

Thus, Ohira stated in sonewhat honorific terms his intent to separate his
public and private lives. He seemed to have deeply pondered over the
matten including the choice of worda-whether to use the word "prudence."
"self-restraint" or others. An elder LDP Diet-an. upon hearing Ohira's
state-eat, was deeply impressed:

"Such an expression is the best he can do and is as far as he can go. In
Ohira's current position. he can only assune a total partisan posture."

A Tale of Government Takeover After 4 Years

Just when did such strange terns as "daikaku," "daifukd'(0hira and Fukuda),
"kskufuku" (TanakaandPukuda). "fukuchu" (Fukuda and Nskssone) and "san-
puku" (Niki and Pukude) become popular within political circles? There
was no such tern as "ikess war" in the ates of Hayeto Ikeda and Bisaku
Sate. It seeas it all started about 6 years ago in the wake of the
"kakufuku war."

Moreover. in "sankaku daifuku" (Niki, Tanska. Ohira and Pukuda). it was
only in Tanaka's case that the character "kaku" from his given nane was
used. Perhaps this was the secret of the popularity of the condensed
forms. "Denfuku" (Tsnaka and fukuda) and "Ohts" (Ohira and Tanaka) say

not have sounded correct. It can be stated, though far-fetched, that some-
thing fatslistic pervades "kaku," alien to "ssndaifuku" (Niki, Ohira and
Fukudn) but still essential. In a political world "without kaku," mono-
tony would prevail.

A government of "daikaku" was formed after a period of b years. when
Tanaka forcibly wrested power from Seto in July 1972. he envisioned a
long-term government with Ohira as successor. However, the government

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

takeover through the "dalknku" alliance was disrupted by the monetary out-
lay incident and the Lockheed issue, resulting in the birth of interim
Niki and Pukudn governments. The explusion of "sanpulu" from government
is said to have been due primarily to "kaku's" instigation.

with the emergence of the Ohira government, a page will have to be turned
in the tale of “daikaku.” However, "kaku," a party to "daikaku," is the
key performer in the Lockheed incident, a criminal defendant without formal
LOP affiliation, and a 60-year-old wounded lion. Hill there be a restora-
tion of “kaku,” and a reemergence of "kaku" government following those of
”sen” (Niki), “fake,“ (Pukuda) and "dai." (Ohira)? That is the main topic
of this research report.

1. Lineage of "Daikaku"

Initial ties between "daikaku" developed after Ohira left the Hinistry of
Finance to successfully run for the Lower House from his native prefecture
of Kagawa, marking his entry into politics. Ohira was then AZ, and Tanaka
was then a young 33-year-old Dietman.

Kenji Hanabe (one-term member of the Upper House; aged 43), Ohira's secre-
tary for 20 years or more until 2 years ago, looked back on those days:

"Mr Kaku came to Shikoku to provide support, but it was not just an
ordinary support. he would cover every corner of the electoral district
and deliver street speeches. He spent more time in the second Kagawa dis-
trict than in his own. After Ohira was elected. the two had offices

next door to each other in the old Dietmen's Hall. I remember that they
always called upon each other, as both were then without portfolio.

"Hr Kaku would appear suddenly in my old man's office. He would talk con-
staatly for 55 minutes out of an hour, with the old man, a good listener.
summing up Mr Kaku's conversation during the remaining 5 minutes. They
discussed not only politics but also literature and many other subjects.
They were of congenial disposition."

However, it was not simply congenial disposition on the part of Tameka.
According to elder statesman Zentaro Kosaka (ex-foreign minister; lJ-term
member of the Lower House: aged 66):

"As Mr Tanaka is a politician good in reading the future, he would draw
up a list of promising individuals in each ministry as a youth and extend
his support to them during elections. Hr Ohira probably was included
among them. As a newcomer, Hr Ohira was elated over the support. It
seems that their friendship grew from there on."

This was a period of turmoil. The Shigeru Yoshida government, then in
power, was forced into dissolution because of Yoshida's outcry of "fool"

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the Diet and the ensuing shipbuilding scandal. In the conservative
political circle. the furor over the conflict between Yoshida and Hate-
yalaa was leading to the emergence of a coalition. The intimacy of "dai-
kaku" was to develop around hayato Ikeda. the direct disciple of Shigeru
Yoshida and tutor to Ohira. Kosakn. who was foreign ainister in the
first Ikeda Cabinet, continued to consent.-

"At the tine of Yoshida's retirement, Yoshida's l3-ean group set at the
home of Joji hayashi to discuss the formation of the Liberal Denocratic
Party, but Mr Sato, along with Mr Yoshida. did not join the new, conserva-
tive coalition party. However. as Mr Tanaka joined the party together
with Ikeda, haautani (Hideji) and Heyashi, any distinction between the
Ikeda and Sato factions was not yet possible. Tanaka and Ohira were
still inconspicuous in the days of the Yoshida Cabinet.

"Hith Sato and Tanaka as nenbers. Hr Ikeda established the 'Heikokai' at
the present site of Ohira's office (5th floor. Nippon Shortwave Broad-
casting hall, l-cholle. Akaaaka, Hinato-ku. Tokyo). After Sato forued
his faction, Ikeda renamed it 'Koaoikekdi.‘ In brief , Tanaka initially
teamed up with the Ikeda faction. but later changed to the Sato faction.
After Ikeda cane to be regarded as a proainent figure. Tanaka. having
aspirations. apparently decided to get closer to him.

"I do not know for sure, but it aeeus that ‘l‘anaka used Ohira, who enjoyed
the trust of Sara. to get to know the letter, saying that he (Tanaka) was
a relative of Ohira's. I recall Ikeda as saying that "I'anaka was a funny
fellow. "'

Tanaka was very shrewd. After a change of government fron Yoshida to
hatoyama and to Kishi and the advent of a period of confrontation between
Ikeda and Sets, Tanaka foreed ties with not one but with both of them.

It was Ohira who prevented Tanaka from siding with the Ikeda faction.

Raizo hatsuno (ex-sinister of agriculture; lZ-tern member of the Lower House;
aged 61), former Sato faction staff eenber, had this to say:

"Tanaka and Ohira beta-e very close after Iknda, following a struggle with
Sato, was chosen as party president. Both Tanaka md Ohira attempted to
support Ikeda, but as Tanaka belonged to the Sato faction, the latter
tried, rather. to prevent the rivalry between Sato and Ikeda."

The Security Treaty turbulence led to the downfall of the Kiahi Cabinet
and in July 1960 an LOP convention was convened to pick a successor.
Ohira was placed in full charge to drum up support for Ikeda. but he was
still not fully experienced. having only 8 years of experience as a Diet
member under Ikede.

"Truthfully speaking, I was bewildered and did not know where to begin,
as it was my first experience in taking charge of a presidential election.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 then consulted Kakuei Tanaka who. as a Sate faction staff member, had
a role in Kiahi's defeat in the past presidential election. Hithin 2 or
3 days, I received several pages of notes from Tanaka.

"They spelled out policy guidelines on the presidential election, with
specific methods and budgetary matters underscored in green and important
points in red. I was appreciative of Tanaka's kindness. With those notes
in hand, I called on and explained to Ikeda, but he was displeased, say-
ing, 'Don't spend a single yen.‘

"I answered, 'Yes, I understand. I shall do my best to do as you say.
But i wish you would leave this election to us and not meddle in any
manner,‘ and that is the way it worked out." ("My Personal History")

The Tanaka notes contained a passage suggesting a financially influenced
presidential election, causing Ikeda's displeasure. Twelve years later,
those same notes were to be used for Tanaka himself. In any event. the
support for Ikeda constituted the initial attempt of "daikaku" to take over
the country.

Two years hence, Tanaka would make his move when Ikeda came up for re-
election. Tanaka, with experience as minister of posts and telecommunica-
tions in the first Kishi Cabinet, then held the important position of LDP'a
Policy Affairs Research Council chairman at a young age of 63. Tanaka per-
formed the role of mediator, depending on whether Sate would attempt to
thwart lkeda's re-election. Ultimately, however, Sato decided not to run.

According to the book "The Life and Death of Hayato Ikeda," by Hasaya Ito.
Ikeda's noted secretary, "Kakuei Tnnaka argued with Shigeru ﬂori from the
same Sato faction who championed the idea to fight it out. And Tanaka
held Sato by the collar, trying to talk him out of running. Hhat Tsnaks
had in mind is unclear, but my feeling was that he did the right thing

and I secretly admired him for his efforts."

It is unknown whether the collar grabbing episode actually occurred, but
there is no question that Tanska had been contributing funds to Sato from
around this time and thus wielded a strong influence.

Hayato lkeda's "Kakuei Concept"

Not so long ago, Tanaka, in an address castigating the bureaucrats, com-
mented, "Even Sato is really disgusting. Before coming into power, he
would listen quietly, but after assuming power, he would not speak to you
for about half a year. I cared for him, nonetheless. The: is why his
Cabinet lasted nearly 8 years."

when viewed in this light. the collar grabbing incident may not be an
exaggeration. Evidently for his efforts in the re-election, Tanaka was
rewarded with the post of Minister of Finance in the second lkeda Cabinet.
Ohira had backed him. According to Hasaya Ito:

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tory of Relationsh‘l
its and lukuei Tan.

Kakuei Tanaka
ClA-RDP02-00850R000100030016-0

2007102108:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aucwnnu avﬁguo»
vacuum agony

cashew nocqpqu
auazu< Anazv

vOBMOu nouwnlu
madauuwx Aauxv

vouuw
lunacy; conch no
acauauquuaou A>ozv

22.0 :3: 3:3

auco>m yawn:

. uwovuucu cue: momuuor
Icou cu vouuouu< Aconv
hunch ”gonad 3 ago

noaon uo :cnuaahOu :«

on manna—«33am C53
230:

bozo; cu vouooHo

nu hHHuuuuuH Aun<v

cane: 9030; now
souoauaau Haquuaa

a“ nouoouoo Aua<v
hunch o>uauanmoum

5N :aasw wagon Acunv

uuovHQOna my“ aoﬂooop
van ahuoavau acuuuauuu
mu Icou axchu «Show Auunv

 

ou< assess “oaxax

an

on

mm

mm
ou<

couuuom nou«>uom

ounaam .uouso an suahan
acauwuuawnaum anao:
loom cu venoauma Adanv

neuuuom
0&63 vhn .uOnSU aﬂaﬁv

«Busmsuh uuuuaauz oucwcum
cu anauOuuam Aw=<v

awouan oocacam
osxOH .ucoauuaaon xuk
39:2: . “35 €on

«page “guouaua:

acoa

new“

ocou

mead

mead

 

uaor

Isucah «031w: vac auwno “snoaaau: cooauum nucn:o«uuuox no ahOuauz kuuuoHocouzo AccuuqacquOUV

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CIA-RDP82-00060R0001 0003001 6-0

2007I02100:

APPROVEDFORRELEASE
y of Relationship Between Us

585 Kakuei Tanalu
62

(Jul) Post 6 Tele-
communications .‘un
inner in Is: Kishi
' o! Relationshlp Betueq
Age Kakuet 1':

(Jul) “1018::
terns: tonal 1

Industry . 3n
Cabinet

62 (Jul) Prime !
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

"lkeda and I stayed at hakone to work on the Cabinet line-up. Ikeda would
walk back and forth in his roan all day long or come to my room. failing
to formulate a definite plan. 0n the night of the third day. there was a
phonecnll from Ohirs. asking for the prime minister. It seemed that Ohira
was asking that Tanaks be given a position. Ikeda responded. 'Tanaka is a
sort of rickshaw man and horse guide.‘ Suddenly. lkeda turned to me and
said. 'Don't you think so? Come to phone and tell ohira so.’ It was
embarrassing. but I expressed my frank opinion. Ohira said many things
and wanted to speak to the prime minister again... In desperation. I said
to lkeda. 'prime minister. don't think about anything. Upon our return.
Maeo (Shigesaburo; then chief secretary) and Ohirs will come up with
something. Please examine the results and then reach a Judgment.’

“Upon returning to Shinano-cho (private residence). we found Ohirs and Tanska
waiting for us. Kaeo appeared later. Evidently. a tentative cabinet line-
up was determined at that time. Ohirs. without saying a word. left with

a grim face. The cabinet reshuffle was scheduled for the following day.

As word got out about the proposed line-up. suspicion grew that Chief

Cabinet Secretary Ohirs and Policy Affairs Research Council Chairman Tanaka
were trying to win key posts by sealing the mouths of party members. Kono
(lchiro) and Kawashima (Shojiro) filed protests, while Vice President Ohno
reprimanded both Ohirs and Tanska and took the issue direct to Prime

Minister lkeda. Turbulence prevailed.

Through lkeda'a tenacity and Chief Secretary Haco's efforts. things pro-
greased to the attestation stage. with Tanaka being named the minister of
finance and Ohirs the foreign minister. There is nothing as difficult as
cabinet reshuffle immediately after a presidential election. As the con-
science of both the mainstream and anti-mainstream are laid bare, any mis-
calculation would invariably create confusion. I felt that Ohirs ignored
this and acted in an extreme manner. asking a casualty out of Ikeda. It
was an awful feeling in the heat of summer."

In the words of Rokusuke Tanaka:

"Chief Secretary haeo had no intentions of making Tanaka the minister of
finance. But Ohirs backed Tsnaka fully. As a result. the relationship
between Ohirs and "see deteriorated..."

Thus. a legacy of confrontation caists between Haeo and Ohira. but for
Ohirs. who usually assumes a cautious behavior. he was extremely force-
ful. in examining thc"daikaku" relationship. the designation of Tanaka
as the finance minister was epochal. Thus. Tanaka was handed his first
ticket on his ascent to prime ministership/presidency. Why Ohirs chose
to push Tanaka despite criticisms leveled at him (Ohirs) remains a mystery.

In any discussion of "daikaku." this was brought up by nearly all politi-
cians. For instance. Takeo Kisura (ex-minister of construction: ll-term

member of the Lower house; aged 76), an old timer in the Tanaka faction,

commented:

10
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"At the tine. some members of the Sate faction questioned 'how Tanaka.
who belonged to their faction, managed to become Ikeds's Cabinet senber.‘
l regarded Taneka then as a nesber of the Ikeda faction. From lkeda'a
point of View. Tanska was a useful man with an ability to collect funds.
The relhtienship between Tanaka and Ohira is naturally based arpolitical
interests. Hhilc personal friendship may be involved. that is only be-
cause of such political interests."

In the yes of Raizo Hatsuno.

"Tanaka acted as an adhesive in the relationship between the Sato and
lkeda factions. He was sort of a conduit. Such cases are frequently

observed in the political world. Mr Sate probably was making good use
of Tanaks.“

In short, Tanaha was considered invaluable by both Ikeda and Sets, and
Ohira sade it easy for Tanaka to save around, thus accounting for the
con-on interests.

2. Political Strategy and Honey

One view concerning their long relationship is that the two are attracted
to each other. as Tanaka is positive and Ohira is negative. A eoeparison
of the personality of"daikaku" will be sade later, but the negative Ohira
has helped Tanahs out later on numerous occasions.

in hatsuno's opinion of Ohira:

"in judo terns. Ohira is proficient at prone-position throw. while Tanska
is adept at standing throw. Just by looking at his face, Ohira seems to
be broadninded and practical as suggestive of the dull cow as he is some-
tlses called. but inside. he is exacting. he plans things out and ashes
convincing state-ants. Also. he is a use of the world. Fukuda, on the
other hand, is a green boy."

A similar view was held by Shunichi Pukuiye (four-tern nesber of the
Lower house; aged 66). a close friend of Ohira's and from the ease hone-
IOU“:

"People free lki inherently possess two traits. I know because I as also
free Iki. One is that they excel in strategy. especially those free the
eastern region (lat electoral district) of Kegawa Prefecture. Such
quality can be observed in Suehiro Nishio and Bukichi Niki, who hail from
this eastern region. People from the western reghmernd district) are
calculative and are planners. and think in a rational and precise Isn-

ner. I think Ohira is a typical lki person who has both of these quali-
ties. Rather than being a dull cow. I believe he is one of the outstanding
politicians of this age."

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The view that he is a negative strategist may be correct. This is because
quite a few politicians have pointed at Ohira's disposition to resort to
machinations. The government changed hands from Ikeda to Sato and in
April 1971. Ohira relieved Maeo and succeeded to the legacy of lkeds as
chairman of Kaioikekai. fornally establishing the Ohira faction. Some tend

to think that Ohira at that time had definite aspirations to take over the
country.

However. the changeover from Hseo to Ohira was not without problems.
According to Rokusuke Tanska. there was enmity. as previously described.
between the two over the forceful assumption of post of finance minister

by Tanaka. and for Ohira, intra-factional strife was a new test of his
ability.

"This drama of transition appeared to progress normally on the surface.
but human feeling is not as mechanical. Due partly to my lack of discre-

tion. Haeo's attitude toward me seemed to harden, and solid unity could
not be established even within Konoikekai." ("My Personal History")

As Ohira concedes. the issue continues to linger, with the “see problem
casting a shadow on Ohira even in the midst of the latest political strug-
gle. Last fall, Tanaka summoned Rokusuke Tanaka and advised:

"The Maeo matter is crucial. Ohira may be destroyed should Haeo join the
group endorsing Fuhuda. A stand of 'opposition to Ohira' at the final
moment would be disastrous. Tell Ohira to take necessary measures."

Funds Squandered During Presidential Election

Prom around the time of formation of the Ohira faction. rumors persisted
on the retirement of Sate. whose government had lasted too long. "Dsikaku"
activity over his successor gradually grew intense. For "daikaku," this
was the first major hurdle.

The impression gained by Shun Hasegawa (ex-labor minister; eight-term
member of the Lower House; aged 66), member of the former lshii faction
which had been maintaining some distance from "daikaku." was:

“I am not sure whether the purse is the same, but the friendship between
the two. going back to the days of the Ikeda Cabinet. clearly surfaced

during the 'hakufuku war.‘ becoming decisive during the Japan-China
issue.“

Thus. the "kakufuku" struggle was in fact a confrontation between "daikaku"
and "fuku." which recently flared up anew.

The names of four figures--"s1nksku daifuhu"--surfaced at the 5 July 1972
presidential election held at hibiya Auditoriua. with "dsiksku" vowing
to help each other no matter who won.

12
103 OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of the first count were:

Kakuei Tanakn 156 votes
Takco Fukuda 150 votes
Masayoshi Ohira 101 votes
Takeo Niki 69 votes

Hith Tanaka failing to obtain a majority. a run-off election was held
between "kskufuku." with the following results:

Tnnaka 280 votes
Fukuda 190 votes

While "keku's" victory was predicted. the eyes of the party were turned
toward Ohira's three digit figures. There being more votes than be-
fore, suspicions grew that Tanaka may have given his extra votes to
Ohira. Fran Tanake's viewpoint of letting "Ohira eventually take over."
it was important to establish a track record of Ohira gaining more votes
than hiki.

Those around "daiknku" still deny that votes were split between "daikaku."

Hasnhnru Gotoda (ex-director, National Police Agency; one-term member of
the Lower house: aged 64), a confidant of Tanaka's and former deputy
chief cabinet secretary in the Tanaka government. remarked:

"Ohira waged a good battle at that time. The Tnnaka side misread the
ballots. There never was a division of votes. The frantic efforts of
Suzuki (Zenko) were responsible for such an outcome."

There are stories that the Ohira camp expected 170 votes. with Ohira
expressing displeasure at the 101 votes he had received. Seirankai's
Koichi Ramada (three-term member of the Lower house; aged 59), who as a
Shiina faction-affiliated freshman Diet member voted for Tanaka, said:

"I did hear that Tanoka split his votes with Ohira. That Tanaka was able
to do so in such an intense struggle shows that he is humanly great."

ﬂamnda thus accepted the diversion theory. Knowledgeable Shunichi Fukuiye
also commented on Tanaka‘s monetary influence: '

"The way in which Tansks doled out money at that time is remarkable.
with Noboru Takeshita. he probed the financial obligations of younger
members without regard to factional affiliation and paid off their debts.
He even paid for sahjong debts. Ohira’s votes exceeded 100 lecsuse
Tenaka turned some of his over to him. The aim was to leave a bid for
Ohira as a presidential candidate."

[3
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Single rurse for "Daikaku"

As mentioned briefly by Fukuiye, this "kakufuku war” is also notable for
the amount of noney squandered, unprecedented in history. It is generally
recognized in political circles that the Tnnska cnnp's geometric progres-
sion operations boosted the price of a vote. Here, also, was the root of
the Tanaka aonetary outlay incident.

There also is talk that the purse of "dakkaku," which came in first and
third in the "kakufuku war." is cne and the same. with each having a key
to the single coffer. A passkey nay be a sarcastic term. but there are
views that "daihaku" is linked financially.

With r-spect to the financial conduit, Zentaro Kosaka. for-er chairnan of
LDP's Financial Affairs Connittee. commented:

"i think their conduits differ. Ohira. as lkeda's secretary. used to
handle funds. later assuming responsibility for lkeda's financial conduit.
That was one reason for his dispute with Hseo. In any event. Ohira has
an orthodox faction conduit which he inherited from lkeda; in other words.
he gets his funds fro. the mainstream of financial circles. Tanaka scene
to be collecting on a broader scale, but both appear to be collecting
fron najor business circles..."

Yet. sole stories carry a different nuance. Returning to the consents of
Shunichi Fukuiye:

"Since the days of the Ikeda Cabinet. only Tanska and ohira had control
of lkeda's conduit with financial circles. In the collection of fundd.
Tanska's method was wild and involved vested interests. Ohirs, on the
other hand, preserved the conduit with financial circles to which he had
succeeded. These are ease of the differences. but i feel only Tanaka‘s
wild and indiscrininate aethoda have risen to the surface in the Lockheed
incident.“

Hasayoshi Ohira's Bewildernent

Because of such funds, Tanaha shortened the life of his government and
greatly disrupted the "daikaku" strategy. Toward the end of 197‘ when
Tanaka retired fron public life, no longer able to resist criticisns of
monetary outlays. Ohira made the following com-ent to reporters:

"For us. it is a case of noney receiving, but for Tanska, it is money
asking. That is the point of difference. Perhaps I can be said to repre-
sent e bit of the establish-eat."

It is an Ohlra-style expression containing nsny English words, but which
discloses his true thoughts. he pointed to the difference between a
recipient who gets his funds autonatlcally via the thick conduit linked
to the financial aainstrean. with the self-procuring type who sakes coun-
terfeit money frantically and takes risks. "hat Ohira wanted to say was

1‘
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that only the former possessed the qualities of a ruling class. It seems
to bear out Ohira's awkward position that he must keep some distance from
daddy Tanaka. It could be that psychological estrangement was at the
zenith at this time between "daiksku," but this will be discussed later.

Going back in time. Ohira. as foreign minister in the Tanaka Cabinet.
achieved at a stroke the normalization of Japan-china diplomatic rela-
tions. It probably was the most monumental task performed by "dalkaku"
in a period of growing harmony in their alliance. This view wan shared
by Kazuo Shioya (four-term member of the Lower house; aged 58). an
authority on the Japan-Chins problem:

"As I see it. their relationship as staunch friends began with their in-
volvcment in the Japan-China problem. It seemed that Ohira was the cen-
tral figure. as the promotion of relations between Japan and China which
he had advocated in the days of the lkeda Cabinet had been temporarily
shelved under the Snto Cabinet. The reason for success of 'Japan-china'
talks was Tanaka's political foresight and Ohira's contemplative and
analytical ability.

"The fact is that Ohira was the central figure. with Tanaka becoming en-
meshed. Because of this achievement. the ties between the two got even
closer."

With regard to this "Japan-China" issue. a major topic in postwar diplo-
macy. credit goes not only to Shioya but also to Ohira's leadership.

But dark days were to befall Tanaka soon after. Vehemently criticized
for his monetary outlays. Tanska‘s Cabinet fell after 2 years and 5
months (December 1976). Two years later. he was to be arrested as a
main figure in the Lockheed scandal (July 1976). With one party of
"daikaku" a criminal. the alliance was in a state of virtual dissolution.

What did Ohira do? Isaji Tanaka (lS-term member of the Lower House; age
72). justice minister under the Tanaka Cabinet and chairman of the Lower
House Investigative Special Committee on the Lockheed incident. had this
to say:

"Ohira did not have anything to do with either monetary outlays or the
Lockheed scandal. What is clear is that he neither criticized nor
attacked Tanska. He did not show any such attitude or even touch on
them. He was very cautious. Anyhow. he was in no position to speak
out..."

however. it was not that clean. and it must have been an enormous blow for
Ohira. Ohira had to face the grave issue of whether a "Tanska-less"
government can survive. I imagine that Ohira was greatly bewildered as to
whether he should "leave Tanaka" or endure it.

15
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FDR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

But rather than "leaving Tanska." Ohira chose to remain silent. hichio
Hetanabc (ninistcr of agriculture and forestry; five-tern nenber of the
Lower House; aged 55). a Nakaaone faction warrior who joined the Cabinet
organised last year end, expressed his candid views as follows:

"Ohira seened to have had no part in Tanaka's monetary outlays; he ob-
served the situation carefully. It was the ease in the Lockheed incident.
he neither neddled in or instigated it. It is hard for Ohira and his fac-
tion to act forcefully because nany of then were forner government offi-
cials. Evidently. the art of self-protection which they learned while in
governnent took precedence. In those days. it was Rokusuke Tanaka who
served as a conduit linked to Tanaka."

Tanaka (Rokusuke), now that Ohira is in power. chose his words carefully.
It was clear that he was standing up for Ohira.

"Ohira was astounded at the tine. Such a problem occurred because Tanaka
tried to influence the people with aoney and objects. In contrast. Ohira
was assured of funds through connections established during his days at
ﬂitotsubashi University and bequests fron Ikede. At least, Ohira has no
vested interests. This point differs fro- Tanaka.

"The reason that Ohira did not say a word during the nonctary outlay issue
was not to cover up for Tanaka. Ohira did not talk in keeping with his
duty to protect secrets. as was in no position to say anything during

the Lockheed incident."

Ohira was the finance ninister during both incidents. Hatanabe'a view-
point about the art of self-protection say be close to the truth, but it
is not that simple. The reason that Ohira chose to renain silent was
because of the dual aspects of fear and hope in Tanaka's youth and power.
Thus, for Ohira, "leaving Tanaka" posed a risky judgment.

'Money-Tanaka; Power-Ohira"

In such a manner, the "daikaku" alliance continued. paving the way for the
birth of the Ohira govern-eat. But Ohira's destiny was to drag "Tanaka's
shadow" with hin.

in the nidat of last year's presidential election. Tanaka'a support organi-
zation. the Btsuzankai Headquarters, in its publication ”Monthly Etsuzan."
(1 November 1978 issue) carried a special feature titled, ”Tanaka Faction
Moves Toward Pull Support--Hr Ohira Coming Up Past.“ A passage reads:

"Then chief Cabinet Secretary Ohira's friendship toward Hr Tanaka did

not change even after the latter left the government and encountered hard-
ships. Hhile Ieny people changed attitudes abruptly, hr Ohira continued
to remain on friendly terns as before. That attests to the solidity of
their friendship and the deep loyalty of the chief secretary.“

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The article want on to any that Tanaka, leading the largest and strongest
Tannkn Corps in the party. was indeed Japan's "king maker," concluding
that Ohira probably would becone a great preaier. hard to find these
days.

Perhaps this article, most likely reviewed by Tanaka prior to publica-
tion. was intended to show appreciation to Ohira for keeping silent.

However, Kazuo Shioys is inclined to believe that Ohira was the one who
suffered as a result of Tanaka's influence-buying practices:

In
"If the tern influence-buying is applied to both Ohira and Tanaka. it
would be: noney-Tanaka, and power-Ohira. Also, when thinking in terns
of "daikaku" ties, sons questions cone to mind. In other wcrds, with
what sort of power did Ohira condone Tanaka's actions? When viewing past
incidents in this light, their relationship may becona soaewhat clearer.

"for instance. at the time of the Kia Dee Jung incident, there was talk
of 'soae 500 aillion yen' involving Tanaha. Tanaka at the tine was prine
ninister and Ohira was foreign ninister. If the rumors were true. did
Ohira, sitting atop the diploaatic window, condone it or was he really
unaware of the situation? This is an interesting point.

”Hhere there is smoke. it usually is around Tanaka. not around Ohira. On
a stage, it is difficult to differentiate 'daikaku,' the star performer,
free the black-clothed assistants. In ny opinion. Tanaka appears to be
on the losing and. I think Ohira is the perpetrator of the intellectual
crime."

The Shioya theory strikes at the heart of "daikaku" relationship, but say
not tell the whole picture. There nay be some unique relationship of
mutual aid wherein debts and credits,_losses and profits are considered.
and "differences of position” are recognized. It say be called a division
of roles.

3. Analysis of Their Nature

Finally, Ohira ascended to the suanit, but behind the tiaetable of take-
over that Ohirs had foraulated at the tine his faction was organized. But
when viewing only the events that transpired just before he attained the
goal, it aeeas that he took over without much difficulty. In either

case. the "halo" influence prevailed.

The soaring of Pukuda's reelection plans and Ohira's unexpected victory
have been analyzed and discussed in detail. but theley point reasins un-
known. This is because the real nature of the nan-0th group of 155 nil-
lion LDP neabers and friends is vague and obscure. what is clear. however.
is that it was not a victory by "dai" over "fuku," but through the con-
bined efforts of "daiksku."

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hasaharu Gotoda. who was responsible for the key Tokyo election campaign
at Tnnaka's direction, told the inside story:

'Thc Ohira facdods fighting strength was weak because its members were
mostly for-er bureaucrats. It was around mid-November that the Tanaka
faction. centered around Nishimura (Eiichi) and Nikaido (Sususmu), thrust
its full support. Nishinurs issued most of the instructions. He would
ask. 'How many votes can your side garner?.' and again toward the end.
"You're sure of x number of votes?‘ He did not hear from Tanaka. he
probably pasaod instructions down to Nishimura.

"The Tanaka faction felt that should Ohira come in second in the large
voting districts of Tokyo. Saitama and hokkaido, it would constitute an
upset victory. If he did not. Ohira would still come in second by a aar-
gin of from 50 to 100 votes. Elections require legwork and sweat. Eu-
phoria over media forecasts and neglect of election campaigns will naturally
end in defeat."

Tanaka maintained his command posts at his private residence at l-chome.
Hejirodai, Bunkyo-ku and at his office in Itopia Hirakawa-cho building

at 2-chome, Hirakawa-cho, Chiyoda-ku. He may have left everything up to
Gotoda, but is said to have made constant phone calls from early morning.

Tanaka prepared detailed notes similar to those he gave to Ohira about 20
years ago in support of Ikeda. They contained the secrets of the king
maker.

He summoned the staff members of the Ohira faction one by one and encour-
aged them. According to Rokuauke Tanaka:

"This is what he told me. 'In an election, it is to slash or be slashed.
The enemy and the friendly forces should be differentiated. The Ohira
faction seems to lack a sense of seriousness. Tell Zenko Suzuki of this
right awoy.‘ After I told Mr Suzuki about it, Suzuki immediately went to
see Tanaka. Hr Kuniyoshi Saito also called on Tanaka on several occasions.“

At any rate. the Tanaka faction moved desperately. For the opposition
camp, it was strange and ominous.

Four Similarities
The reaction of Pukuda's faction's Shunichi Fukuiye was:

'Tanaka allegedly intended to pursue the abdication line. In other words.
Fukuda would run things until the Tokyo summit. at which time Ohira would
take over. At the parley with Kiahi (Shinsuke), Tanaka reportedly responded.
'I understand.‘ Pukuda would come in first and Ohira second, with the
latter garnering enough votes to befit a succeeding president.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yel. Ohlrn vnmv In Ilrui. contrary to expectntlons. This was because of
Tunnkn‘ p Busedow' a disease. which cannot be checked once it becomes aggra-
vated. This is the case with Yoko Nagata of the Allied Red Army and with
hitler. Once the motor starts, it cannot be stopped. After speeding, the
outcome was inevitable.

'1b the bait that was tossed in, there were many bites. The results that
money had produced were beyond Tenaka's imagination. Many fish took the
bait as Fukuda's reelection would have meant a possible dissolution in
January. to be followed by unified. local elections. The last time that
Tanaka had squandered money was during the 'kakufuku war' in 1972. Because
of the large number of bites. Tanaka gained full confidence."

This view did not miss the mark, for during the climax of the primary elec-
tion, even those within the Tanaka faction, such as Shin Kanamaru, who
opposed any "daifuku" conflict. began to harbor suspicions of Tanaka's
behavior. Kanamaru sounded a bitter note:

'Tanaka has changed. I don't know why. He becomes wild and loses a sense
of balance. There is no one to speak out against him. I would like to
see someone appear who can do just that..."

whether or not the story of Basedow's disease is true. it is too simple
to pin the birth of the Ohira Cabinet on that alone.

Why was Tanaka so active? Many stories say that Tanska was motivated by
his sense of gambling. That may be partly true, but he also made deep
financial considerations. The analysis by Kazuo Shioys on the nature of
"daikaku" furnishes much insight. In comparing "daikaku," many points
have been cited, but according to Shioys, the similarities are:

a. have endured hardships and excel in grasping the mass psychology.
b. Highly calculative, without running toward ideology or principles.
c. Possess a clear vision.

d. Covet power.

'The two are resolved not to fire empty shots. Ohira looks far beyond be-
fore taking a move. while Tameka fires round after round like a shotgun
without wasting a shot. That is why 'daikaku.’ despite a varying view on
many issues. reach the same opinion and conclusion in many cases.

"They both possess a clear vision. Tanaka is inclined to take a risk, while
Ohira is more cautious. In other words, Tanaks feels 'there is nothing

to lose by taking a risk,’ while Ohira feels 'failure is natural.‘ They
both agree in not placing excessive expectations. This indeed is their
strength."

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. there are financial considerations. a sense of resignation and
covetousncss. Shioya thus perceives the strength of "daikaku" to be
based on such qualities to cope in the political world.

If Tanaka, with his sense of ”nothing to lose by taking a risk," and
Ohira, with his sense of "failure is natural." had acted in unison in
the recent situation. Fukuda. with his optimistic outlook, would not
have stood a chance. The mystery of Tanaka's reckless moves would have
been unraveled.

’4. Hill Kakuei Tanska Be Restored to Power?

The final topic evolves around the issue of Kakuei Tanaka's restoration
to power. In this case. it may be better to separately consider the ques-
tion of his political comeback and about "restoration of power" blooaing
into a Tanaka government.

Some of the things Tanaka has been saying to 1.0? members visiting his
Hejirodai home have come to be taken as recent Tanaka quotations. For
example:

"I will not become a politically-affiliated businessman. I wish to return
to politics. I will make a frontal attack toward that end." "I shall
settle the Lockheed incident with my own power. Two more years...I am
confident that I will be acquitted. At the most, a violation of the
Foreign Exchange Law."

On the longevity of the Ohira government. he said. "probably 3 or lo years."

He has become more talkative than before. This change was noted last year
around the time the presidential election became overheated.

It is unclear whether he is seeking a mere comeback or is aiming at a take-
over. but there are strong indications that he is giving serious thought
to succeeding "dai." his declarations about a frontal attack suggest this.

Takeo Kimura. an elder mesber of the Tanaka faction, was more explicit:

"There being no one to succeed Ohira. there can only be restoration of
power for Tsnaks. Though Hiyazawa. Nskasone and Remote have been men-
tioned. they are all minors and lack the qualities 0‘. a prise minister]
president. Tanaka is currently working for an acquittal in the Lockheed
trial. but to a politician, the outcome is unimportant. The essence is
the power relationship. It would end with the reinstatement of Tanaka
into the LDP."

The views of Kimura, however, represent a minority opinion, with most
being skeptical. They are, rather, disinclined to assure any definite
stand. Some reactions on the possibility of a Tanaka govern-en: with
Ohira government as a springboard are described below.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Future outlook of "Dniknku" Relationship

"That is hard to say. It has nothing to do with the formation of Ohira
government. If there is, it would be just a psychological matter...in

an optimistic sense. That's because it is a court and judicial problem."
(Zentaro Kosaka)

"It is difficult to say at the moment. In any event, Tanaka is helpless
until the trial is over. It all comes after the trial ends." (Michio
Hatanabe)

"Nothing like that is on the minds of either Ohira or Tanakn. However, we
are not against Tanaka being reinstated as soon as possible. The issue
revolves 1round making Ohira a springboard..." (Rokusuke Tanaka)

The phrase. "making a springboard" as used in the question seemed to bother
everyone. However, how the "dsikaku" relationship will proceed hereafter
can only be discussed in terms of Tanaka's roinstitution, with the Ohira
government as springboard. And the immediate interest would be how Ohira
would react.

Only lsaji Tanska clearly expressed his v as on Ohira:

"Ohira will not Jump at such a story. Hithout question, there is friend-
ship between the two, but that and politics are distinct matters. Ohira
is fully aware of personal and public interests. Ohira does not have to
take instructtxw from or consult Tanaka. If something did come down from
Tansks, Ohira would probably consider it but will make his own judgsent.
Ohira is the type of person who could do so without worry."

That, according to Tanaka (lssji), is because he is a confident. dauntless
individual. At a public event, Ohira called for "prudence" on the part of
Tanaka and his faction. But what is the object of prudence? Said Gotoda:

"It is a fact that the Tanaka faction felt some displeasure over the naming
of cabinet ministers last year. However, the prevailing feeling at the

top is that they should sit back fornow. It is a wait-and-see attitude
just now."

It is true that the Tanaka faction, usually quite fussy on personnel
matters, has recently assumed a moderate stand. Perhaps, in response to
Ohira's desires, Tanaka is now trying to lessen the "kakuei" impact.

however, should Ohira decide to "leave kaku," would Tanaka sit idly by?
Hhile there have been many arguments over "leaving kaku." most felt that
Ohira would not. Only Hatsnabe stated:

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

"Leave 'kaku'? That's possible. Ohira endured it. perhaps. until he
her-nae prime sinister/president. Now. he has attained what he sought.
The question is whether he can maintain his relationship with Tanaka.
words like 'chokkaku' and 'kakuei' are being leveled at his. It is pos-
sible that Ohira. as prime sinister. will sever his ties."

Hatenabc thus takes an affimtivc position. but his views are not con-
vincing. Hatauno'a following opinion is of interest:

"Ohira most likely will take a noderate attitude toward Tanaka as an indi-
vidual. but will have to give serious thoughts to the Tanska faction.
Ohira will not leave 'kaku' forawhile. Ills heart my be unnovable but
not his position. just as the sun's rays retract on water... liven the
relationship between Ohira and Tanaka is changeable. once one moves up to
because prise minister."

A differentiation of one's true aind from his position is thinkable. Con-
sidering that a deep relationship with "kaku" exists throughout Ohira's
political life. Ohira cannot "leave 'kaku'" boldly. as a wrong nova would
dig a grave for his government.

Should the government base begin to tremble. Tanaka unquestionably will
take the necessary loves. In acne areas. he nay turn rescuer in deton-
stration of "daikaku" ties. but if the government starts panting for breath.
how would each member of the ”daikaku" alliance think and act?

For Ohira. it would aean a closing of the curtain where he lust end his
political career with a clean slate, and for Tanaka. in his sixties. the
last chance to stage a coseback. we will then have a final look at the
extended "daikaku" alliance

Whether or not to lend a hand in Tanaka'a reinstate-ent will be up to
Ohira. Tanaka's long-time friend. But there could be a downfall of
"daikaku" even before then.

COPYRIGHT: Bungei Shunju Ltd. 1979

9097
(250: “05

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SiXIliMJXHCAI.

'ASMII' usces 0mm nusr have mm STRATEGY FOR ".5. VISIT
Tokyo ASA"! avenmc news in English 22 Feb 79 p 2 on
[Editorinlt 'Wniira°s ".8. Visit")

[Textl Prine Minister Masnyoshi Ohira. who is rare anong Japanese Prime
Ministers in that he was unenthusiastic about a "Sankin-Kotai" (a warlord’s
alternate-year residence in Edo) type visit to Hashington. has recently
listened to advice from various people and has sore or less decided to
visit the United States early in May.

Contacts between the top leaders of the two countries could help resolve
the tense trade relations between Japan and the 0.8. He are not opposed

to this meeting. but in view of the situation and Ohira's foreign policy.
we would like to point out that his visit to the United States must be
accompanied by considerable self-exaaination. deternination and preparation.

He want Ohira first of all to reflect on how this situation has cone about.
The dissatisfactions and anger of congress with America's huge trade deficit
with Japan and the closed nature of the Japanese earket have been accurately
and repeatedly relayed through diplonatic channels. by the aedia and by
visitors during the past few months. This is not news first brought back
to Japan by government representative Thkeshi Yasukswa.

So far the Ohiro administration has only abolished the post of Minister

for Haternnl Econoaic Relations. and proclaimed that sttainnent of the
seven percent economic growth rate is inpossible. ohira said in his

policy speech that ”good care will be taken of Japanese things." The Ohira
philosophy of "not saying I can do it when i can't and only those things

I can do" is an honest attitude in a sense. But it cannot be denied that

he has given the inpression both doaestically and internationally that he
Ina not adequately done what he can do despite the fact that he has attained
political power.

For instance. how well has Ohira utilized the good fortune that Alerican
Aabassador Nike Mansfield. whose opinions are respected by the Hhite House

23
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OCPICIAL USE ONLY

and Congress. is stationed in Tokyo? Shouldn't he feel ashaaed to any at
this late hour that he "keenly feels the need for understanding between
Japan and the United States?"

if there is the Japanese type thinking within Ohira‘a feeling that "the
United States will help no save face if i go so far as to visit the

United States." he will be wrong. "hat the United States wants now are
definite steps to solve the economic crisis. not confirmation of "Japan-
0.3. friendship." lf Ohira displays his leadership in creating the con-

sensus for the internationalisation of Japan. there is no need for hia to
travel all the way to Usahington.

Of course. the American argument has its weaknesses. It wants to blaae

all its own troubles on others. As for its stand toward Japan. aiaunder-
standings and "deliberate nisunderstandings." which allow those points
disadvantageous to itself to he ignored are noticeable. in order to counter
such arguaents. Japan must establish a record of having done what it could
do and must present the logic and persuasiveness acceptable to Europeans
and Americans. if possible. Ohira should nest asahers of Congress and
journalists as well as U... Governaent leaders and should have the drive

and sense to hit back when necessary.

Frankly upeaking. however. Ohira doesn’t appear to be particularly adept
at this. in the orient there nay be people who understand his attitude.
which the sympathetic regard as profound and the critical call slow in
coping with changes. But Ohira'a responses cannot be coaprehended in the
United States which considers that government involves ”challenging possi-
bilities.” Actually. the sore Ohira talks with American leaders. the risk
rises that he will arouse disappointment.

lf Ohira visits the United States. various circles will probably utilise
the opportunity to present excessive deasnds. If he should accept then in
an unguarded assent. his visit will really become a "Sankin-Kotsi" type
thing. if he should reject the deaands in an inexpert aanner. he could
possibly stir up a hornet's nest and heighten Anerican distrust of Japan.
in this sense. his U.S. trip will be full of risks. so Ohira oust realize

that as long as he is going. he aust have a fire attitude and strategy or
the visit could he haruful.

What fills Ohira's aind now is probably that he wants to successfully
conclude the summit aeeting of advanced nations to be held in Tokyo in
June and that. for this purpose. he wants to improve econoaic relations
with the United States. But as long as the prime minister of the country
is visiting the United States. they should not just discuss bilateral

trade. but should also exchange opinions on Asia and the Middle East fro.
the long~range viewpoint.

C50: 6120

2‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'DAlLY YOHIURI' ADVISES OHIRA ON PROPOSED VISIT T0 0.8.
Tokyo The DAILY YOHIURI in English 26 Feb 79 p 2 OH
(Editorial: "Ohira's Washington Hission"l

[Text] Prime Minister Ohira has himself said he intends to pay 0.8.
President Carter a visit in a nznth or two to improve communications be-
tween Japan and the u.s. It is nearly three months since Ohira assuaod
his office. But his policies are still not sufficiently understood. far
less appreciated. abroad because he has so far been concerned primarily
with domestic questions leaving foreign relations in the care of bureau-
crats.

At hose. everyone knows Ohira is very different from his predecessor Takes
fukuda. Re is such less severe on trade probleas underlined by President
Carter.

There are two aspects of Japan-0.8. trade dispute. One is basically eco-
noaic while the other relates to trade liberalization. The first can not
possibly be helped since it aleost entirely arises fro- Anerican aisunder-
standing or lack of understanding. But with regard to the second Japan
has no other way but to keep talking to the 0.8.

miira. it may be said. is easy-going. He is optinistic about resolution
of trade problems at officials' level. Naturally. the 0.8. resents this
and has finally roused his to reality.

The 0.5. Governaent would no longer allow Ohira his "wait and see" policy.
But his policy is not totally wrong. Only, he would not tackle the problem
hiaself. Unless he is sufficiently eager himself to resolve the issue his
planned Hhshington talks and subsequent Tokyo sue-it light not achieve such
success.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Three Veints

He has to have a strong personal urge to do something definitive to
convince the 0.9. that not all American grievances are entirely valid.

In his coming meeting with Carter he should bear in Ilnd three points.

First. he nest eliminate all causes of American iapreasion that Japanese
Iarkct is closed. The 0.8. gets most of its false impression about
Japanese market from such Japanear procurement policies as of Nippon Tele-
graph and Telephone_Public Corporation (NTT). This situation has to be
corrected.

Second. the 0.3. must be convincingly explained Japan's policy and measures
to correct paynents imbalance. 0.8. agree-ant to this lust be obtained.

Third and last. exchange of views between him and Carter must facilitate
determination of joint Japan-0.8. responsibility for peace and security

in Asia as well as for finding a solution to the world energy and economic
crises.

cso: 6120

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

JCP STATEMENT DENOUNCBS lNVKSION 0P VIETNAM
Tokyo AKAHATA in Japanese 19 Feb 79 p 1 09
[Article by Japan Communist Party Central Committee Presidium. 18 February]

[Text] Hundreds of thousands of Chinese troops launched a large-scale
invasion into Vietnamese territory across the entire 1,000-km PRC-SRV
border on the evening of 16 February and the early morning of 17 February.
0n the evening of 17 February the SRV Government scathingly denounced the
war of aggression launched by China against Vietnam and appealed to the
whole world to protest the Chinese act of aggression.

china is trying to Justify the military assault by calling it a "self-
defensive counterattack." but it is crystal clear that China itself is

the aggressor who has launched an invasion by throwing a large number of
artillery. tank and fighter aircraft unite across the entire length of the
border. This has been confirmed by the correspondent of AKAHATA, our party's
official paper. China is using precisely the same aggressive tactic of
refusing to hold a dialog and resorting to arms to settle disputes as the
defunct Pol Pot regime used in attacking Vietnam with Chinese support.

Furthermore. the Chinese argument about "punishment"—-as our party previously
firmly pointed out while commenting on Deng Xiaoping's statement in Tokyo--
is a hegemonist utterance made on the assumption that China is judge of the
world. It constitutes a wanton challenge to peace in Asia and the world and
the sovereignty of various nations. It reveals the aggressive and hegemonist
nature of China which is bent upon resorting to arms to subjugete other
nations. Such an utterance clearly contradicts the pledge. in the Japan-
China peace and friendship treaty, of each country ”not seeking hegemony."
The latest Chinese attack on socialist Vietnam not only threatens peace in
Asia and the world but also undermines the prestige of socialism. In fact

it has nothing to do with socialism. In the name of world peace and the
people's right to self-determination, and in the name of the cause of
socialism. our party sternly condemns this act of aggression which tramples
upon all principles of international law. including the UN Charter.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

Our party strongly demands that China immediately stop all its acts of
aggression and instantly withdraw all its troops from Vietnan. issues out-
standing between the two countries. including the border dispute. should be
settled through peaceful negotiations without recourse to armed force.

Our party strongly calls on the Governnent of Japan to take this position
and to demand that the Chinese Government stop its aggression. Our party
also vehemently calls on democratic forces in Japan to launch an urgent
campaign to build up public opinion to oppose China's set of aggression and
to demand that the Chinese side return to the proper stand of seeking a
peaceful settlement to the dispute.

Our party also appeals to the UN Security Council as well as all govern-
nents and all forces championing world peace and the principle of national
self-determination to take effective measures to halt the act of aggression

by China.
COPYRIGHT: Akahata, Tokyo. 1979

680 £105

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

FUHA DISCUSSBS JCP-CCP RELATIORS IN REPORT TO JCP PLERUH
Tokyo AKAMATA in Japanese 12 Feb 79 p 8 0"

("Summary" of the work report delivered by Tetausahuro Puva, chief of
the JCP Secretariat. at the 6 February opening session of the Sixth JCP
Central Cosmittee plenum at party headquarters in Tokyo]

[Excerpt] Our Varty‘s clear Understanding on International Problems

Our party has also carried out remarkable activities to expose the corrup-
tion of plutocracy. including the Douglas and Grumman payoff scandals, a
current major political issue in Japan. The results of the investigation

of these cases in the United States by the team of our party's Diet-en

alone suffices to illustrate our successes in these activities. In a number
of international problems which have becoae major political issues. the
correctness of our party's position and its farsightedness have been sub-
stantiated by a myriad of facts.

Our party's principled stand dominated the Diet debate on the Japan-China
Peace and Friendship Treaty. It is an undeniable fact that our party
thwarted the attempt in some quarters to wind up the debate in a prefunc-
tory and ceremonious manner and channeled it in the direction of probing
the real issues in sine-Japanese relations. Thus we made the government
recognize that China‘s call to the Japanese people for armed struggle and
China's refusal to admit Japan Coemunist Party [JCPI officials as members
of municipal and other official delegations to China constituted acts of
interference contradicting the five principles of peace. Only after we
obtained a government assurance that similar acts would not recur once the
Japan-China Treaty went into effect did our party conditionally support
the treaty. Hhen an upper house delegation visited China some tine ago.
JCP Dietman Hashimoto was included in the delegation. he was the first
JCP official to visit China, and his visit was an outcome of the universal
recognition of our party's principled, reasonable stand on the Sine-Japanese
Treaty issue.

29
FOR OFRICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In China, a fundamental criticism of the great cultural revolution has been
carried out and concomitant readjusteente have been made. This is a
significant fact that deserves our attention. The course of this criticism
sheds light on tho reason why China has been forced to admit the correctness
of our party's criticism of the great cultural revolution. Our party eede
the criticism in the eo—celled "10 October Article" published 12 years ago
under thentitle "The Current Mao Zedong Line and the International Com-unist
Movement.

Coementing on the develop-eats which were taking place in China at that time
in the name of the great cultural revolution. the JCP article characterized
them as stemming from an atteapt to establish an "autocratic rule by Mao
Zedong and his ilk." In a recent article,BEIJIRGRBVIEU characterized the
developments following the cultural revolution which began in 1966 as a
"combination of a feudal autocrecy and 20th Century fascism.” The only
difference between these two articles is that BEIJING RBVIEU did not mention
Mao Zedong but made only "Lin nine and the Gang of Pour" the protagonists in
the autocratic drama. At any rate. the BEIJING REVIBU article is tantamount
to the delayed approval of our party's analysis made 12 years ago. The past
several months have draeatically proved who was right and who was wrong.

Needless to say, the internal readjusteents being made from various motives
have no direct bearing on the question of a departure from the big-power
chauvinist international line. In fact. the error in China's international
line is becoming more and more clear--as is the case with the Vietnamese
and Cambodian questions. Since chairman Hiyamoto dealt with this matter in
detail in his opening speech. I will not go into further detail. But let
me point out: It has been fashionable for Japanese politicians and journal-
ists to present arguments flattering to the United States and China on the
basis of one-sided reports free Beijing, Bangkok and the United States.
Under these circumstances, it is significant that our party has adhered to
its position based on truth and reason and has always presented the right
attitude and line for the progressive forces to follow. while playing the
role of one who, by securely grasping the key link, corrects errors in
Japanese politics.

COPYRIGHT: Akahata, Tokyo, 1979

080: 6105

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'HAINICHI' HELCOHES RESUHPTION 0P SEOUL-PYONGYANG DIALOG
Tokyo MAINICHI ShiHBUN in Japanese 18 Feb 79 morning edition p 5 ow
[Editorial: "Resumption of North-South Dialog in Korea"]

[Excerpts] A preparatory meeting on the resumption of full-dress talks
between North and South Korea was held at Pnnmunjom on 17 February. At the
meeting both sides advanced proposals based on their respective positions
and agreed to reopen the North-South Direct Telephone Link and to meet
again on 7 March. Although it appears it will take more time for full-
dress talks to resume. we rejoice at the reopening of the pipeline for
exchanges of views between the two divided parts of Korea.

South Korea proposed at the meeting to hold a meeting of the long interrupted
North-South Coordination Committee [NSCC] on 3 April in Pyongyang. North
Korea. meanwhile. suggested that preparatory talks be held for convening an
all-nation congress. asserting that the NSCC "does not accord with the wishes
of the whole nation." Thus. the contentions of the two sides remained at
variance.

The difference in the positions taken by the two sides should not be under-
rated. The south insists on resuming the NSCC talks from its traditional
position that only through talks between responsible government delegates
can the unification issue be negotiated. 0n the contrary. the north calls
for the establishment of a preparatory committee for national unification--
a sort of formula for unification debates by mass rallies. The letter
proposal can hardly be regarded as appropriate for negotiations over a highly
political issue.

however, the latter proposal reflects President Kim ll-song's firm resolve
to oppose to the bitter end the perpetuation of "two Koreas." President
Kim has called for the convocation of a great national congress ever since
he introduced a Koryo Confederation proposal in 1973. In responding to
President Pak Chong-hui's call for an unconditional resumption of talks. he
put up a counterproposal in the name of a private organization, called the
Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland. The North's

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

delegates sent to the PannunJom meeting also represent this private organi-
zation. All this can be taken as a manifestation of the north's adherence
to its established policy.

These differences between the north end south are not necessarily related
to the question of how to achieve peaceful unification itself. They show
that the two sides have sharply divided opinions even over such trivial and
formal matters. "any difficulties are anticipated for the north-south
dialog.

The international ell-ate encompassing Korea is very favorable. During
his recent visit to Hashington, Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping agreed
with President Carter on "a peaceful settlement of the Korean question."
The Soviet Union is asking frintly overtures to the ROK. and the ROK seeks
a dialog with Beijing through Japan's mediation. South Korea is scheduled
to participate in the forthcoming world table-tennis championships to be
held in Pyongyang. These tendencies toward talks and exchanges should be
boldly proaotsd by all means.

Nevertheless, both parties appear to be excessively nervous about condi-
tions for reopening their dialog. This fact should be fully taken into
consideration. This applies to Japan's Korea policy; and Japan. as a
neighbor, should render as much cooperation as possible to help promote
the dialog.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shimbun, Tokyo, 1979

C80: 6105

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

'MAINICNI' SUPPORTS ONIRA'S COMING VISIT TO UNITED STATES
Tokyo MAINICNI DAILY NEWS in English 21 Feb 79 p 2 0H
lEditorial: "Japan-0.5. Trade Frictiona”)

[Text] It appears that a visit by Prime Minister Ohira to the United
States. which he hinted at in the Diet last Friday [16 February]. will
soon become a reality.

we think the projected visit, designed to reduce the current econosic
frictions between Tokyo and washington. is necessary in order to prevent
the frictions from increasing. Needless to say. if they do increase. they
will threaten the very foundation of the bilateral relations.

The relations between the two countries have been so close in the past
that they are said to be reaching the stage of "maturity."

Despite this, the nature of the trade problems between Japan and the

0.8. strongly suggests that the relations. however amicable they are. test

he kept under constant review and that any difficulties that arise must be

dealt with as quickly as possible in order to maintain and further consoli-
date the relations.

In order words. the saintenence of close and friendly relations calls for
increased efforts and wisdom on both sides. In this respect, exchanges of
opinions between the leaders of the two nations, which will enable them to
better understand each other's viewpoint. seem essential. Such exchanges.
to be uade freely and frequently, are particularly important at a time when
the Asian and Mideast situations are rapidly changing.

There were those in government circles here who, when Ohira took power.
were opposed to his visiting Washington, on the grounds that it was a mere
courtesy call by a new Japanese Prime Minister. Others questioned the
wisdom of a visit only to the 0.8. prior to the Tokyo Summit of Industrial
lkuncrncies in June--an act which they regarded as showing a inch of

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

courtesy to the heads of other participating countries. We do not agree.
however. with these opinions as we feel that Japan and the 0.8. must
deepen their mutual understanding by maintaining close contact, in order
to respond to a call for further expansion of the world's economy. ful-
filling their responsibilities as economic giants.

we are reminded of the bitter pill Japan had to swallow eight years ago--
the so-called "Nixon shock" which rocked the Japanese Government. The
absence of exchanges of opinions between the Japanese and American leaders
in the six months prior to President Nixon's surprise visit to Beijing--
on American diplomatic move which Japan regarded as being carried out over
Japan's head-~might have been partially responsible for the shock.

American criticism against Japan in the field of economic relations.
which has been reported by two government representatives after returning
from 0.5. visits. has been unexpectedly severe.

it is true that the biggest issue in the Japan-0.5. economic frictions has
been Japan's building up a huge surplus in its trade with the 0.3. busi-
nsss and government leaders in America complain that Japan‘s expanding
exports to the 0.5. are causing increasing unemployment in that country and
that the Japanese market is comparatively closed to American exports.

The biggest political problem the Carter administration new faces is how

to tame inflation. The proposed inflation-taming steps include postponement
of tax reductions and curtailment of welfare spending, both of which would
be unpopular with the 0-8. citizens. however, the administration wants to
curb inflation this year because of the presidential election coming up
next year. in order to win public support for the administration's poli-
cies, President Carter may find it necessary to strongly urge Japan and
Host Germany to reduce their surpluses in trade with the 0.8.

In addition, the 0.8. Congress is to formulate legislation in line with

multilateral trade negotiations and consider bills related to 0.8. foreign
trade.

Another concern to us is the increased American trade protectionism result-
ing from the by-election held last year. Furthermore, there is the feeling
in the 0.8. that Japan lacks serious consideration in its effort to rectify
the big trade imbalance with the 0.8.

He hope that Prise Minister Ohira. taking cognizance of the American stand-
points. will do his best to deepen lutual understanding and improve the
strained trade relations during his forthcoming Hashington visit.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News. 1979

050: 4120
34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

YEN T0 OONTINUE T0 RISE IN 1979

Tokyo mmctu mm news in English 8 Feb 79 p 7

[Econoecope column by Bconoboeruer: "ch will Continue To Rloc"]

[Text]

Throughout taetyear. «port
“Wham“... 33.3
atnicturalretornutoadapttoa
Mryeaﬁovltbthemrn
(or domeetic m which
competewithlrhportuoauiler

mnhdhﬂlpthﬂolhem
elm

Noticeahle declineatnuie
priceootlrnportahavehecn

“WWW!!!"

dustries which had been
catering to domestic needs in
the ahcence ol really eilectlve
ioteimt comnetltion. Suddenly.
lonely competition became
mhetantiaivlihtheapwtoithe
yenvahie.

What. tor instance. will
happen to the domestic
whistler when notch whistle-
hecome avallahle much
cheaper? ﬂow will the

Japanese garment industry he
alieeled when American

htninetnmtaheginaooduthe
local marltet hy trimming
ﬂmontheirpticatap?

Can domestic industries
eatettng to domestic needs
“Menominee-av.

of imports hecauao .
products are tailored' to
domaiictarteanilheycannol.
they will he towed to rename

ihelrprtcesiomatchtheprlceo

"me ”with...
a

tothat-hichuponlndtnulee

hevetaluntownlveiheyen.

appreciation The name oi the
mutationdltatlon.

.ll an toil-try tall: In its

rationalization eiiorta. it will
lotntheranltaoithoaethathave

been untitled an "timehtraily

wtheyenwilliarelnthe
htture.theretore.iaoicon-
aiderahleconcetntodomeatlc
induh-leaeaterhgtodomeatic
needs. Will the yen turn
downwaiditomnonontmder

the etieet oi America's dollar
deiense measures and

Jagfaneeehllation?
.Wtbeyeokaoediune
to because hilation will con
tintielntheUSJndtheeilects
oi America's dollar detain
mammahortuved?

In explaining price
mmmmm

W

the anatyak The .
and therefore mot: tun-
thmental. (actor is com-
parison oi purchasing power
hetveenthedollarandtheyen

At preheat. the theoretical

parity in mm a dollar. and
viilhensmadollarmaeverai
months. What is iunher ahead
lssttllatrongeryen

ﬁle short-ram'ieaoon for
predicting continued ao-
precletlon oi theyeu to Japan's
trade mrplm. J hy Its
time and the state oi‘ Ipaa'a
mm the in my level!!!
he valued at us per dollar at.
preaent.

Oirreney vaiuea are "H
ontheloreignexchamemarlret
nothyptnenuthematleahtuhy
sentlrnents. meculation and
politics. These clematis are

W w M W

When thee elements that
ilgure In iormina quotations
wear oil. the yen will spent
murmmtww
«experts will trot-l: to rotten
theyenvalne.

When all these long- and
short-range elements are
wwimaaiehet
lorthtsyearvllihethattheyen
will contilu to stay on an
wwardpath.nlﬂn;hynorso
everymonthﬂhialsaotngtohe
another year oi yen an
pieciatitm.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

MIT! OFFICIALS ALARMED BY THE UNCERTAIN PRC MARKET
Tokyo BUNGEI SHUNJU in Japanese January 1979 pp 345-362
[Text] New Trend

The flow of history surrounding China changed during the 1960's. China pro-
ceeded to move in a direction that changed the violent current of the cul-
tural revolution and that led to China's Comnunist Party Ninth Central Com-
mittee's Second General Meeting and the Fourth National People's Congress.

United States diplomacy bypassed Japan with the US president's China visit
in 1972. Seeing that the United States could change to such a degree. Japan
began moving toward enbracing the new historical trend.

First of all. an economic cooperation agreement on the yen and yuan was made
between the Bank of Japan and the Bank of China. China's bank specializing
in foreign exchange. in order to mutually avoid the risk of an exchange
based on the fluctuating British pound. which had been used as the settle-
ment currency for Japan-China trade until that time. Afterwards. it was ex-

panded to 28 Japanese banks (13 city banks, 3 long-term credit banks, 6 reg-
ional banks and 6 trust banks).

On July 7 of that year. Kakuei Tanaka’s administration began. Prime Minister
Tanaka as influenced by the advice “we must normalize formal diplomatic re-
lations with the People's Republic of China with a formal visit to Peking

at an early stage.” That advice resulted from a previous visit by a party
headed by Yoshikatsu Takeiri of the Komei Party and Ikko Kasuga of the
Democratic Socialist Party.

As soon as Tanaka assumed political power, he made an announcement. inplying
a leaning toward positive attitudes toward China. 0n China's side. Premier
Chou noted: “we welcome Prime Minister Tanaka's announcement. making an
effort at normalizing Japan-China diplomatic relations.” Along with Ohira.
Liberal Deniccratic Party Chairman Susumu Nikaido and others. Tanaka visited
China beginning September 25. On September 29, in the People's Congress
Hall. Japan and China ended the abnormal situation between the two countries
and normalized diplomatic relations with the signing of a Japan-China joint
declaration containing nine provisions. such as Japan's recognition of the

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

government of the People's Republic of China as the sole legitimate govern-
unent and China's waiver of Its reparation claims against Japan. with that.
Japan also enbraced the trend of the new era surrounding China.

Along with the normalization of Japan-China diplomatic relations. a Japan-
China Economic Society began, under the chairmanShip of Yoshihiro inayama.
who is the real power at Nippon Steel Corporation and who had a close rela-
tionship with Chou En-lai. Yaeiji Hatanabe. who was enthusiastically devoted
to Japan-China relations from his days with the Ministry of international
Trade and industry (MiTl). became chief director of the society.

Kaheita Okazaki. representative of the Japan-China Protocol Trade Office.
supported the Japan-China Economic Society after the dissolution of the
Japan-China Protocol Trade Office at the beginning of 1974. (“The role of
protocol trade ended with the restoration of diplomatic relations between
Japan and China.")

in December [972. one month after the establishment of the Japan-China Eco-
nomic Society. export credit provisions from the Export-import Bank opened
up again for the People's Republic of China. These had stopped after a
Speech by Prime Minister Sato in February 1965. proclaiming that because of
the existence of the “Yoshida note.” “export funds may not be used for de-
ferred payments by China." The leng winter of economic relations between
Japan and China had finally ended.

The PRC's Premier Chou En-Tai proclaimed a new line for building China's
economy in January 1975 at the fourth National People's Congress. which had
finally opened. At its core are these two points: "During a ten year period
beginning from 1975. we will establish a national economic system and in-
dustrial system which will be independent and relatively well organized.

By the end of this century. we will realize the ”four modernizations" of
agriculture. national defense. industry and science/technOIOQY. and will

put China's people's economy in the front ranks of the world's economies.“

This new line for building the economy was stagnated temporarily by the
power of the so-called ”gang of four". but. upon the successive deaths of
China's Conmunist Party Central Committee Chairman Mao Tse-tung and Chou
in 1976. the "ua Kuo-feng regime began. After Chou's death. Teng Msiao-
ping. who had twice been relieved of the duties of vice-premier. was again
restored at the Tenth Coumunist Party Central Committee's third general
ﬂeeting. and there was a switch-over to the "Chou line without Chou.“

The PRC’s economic policies took a 180 degree turn after the "gang of four"
era. inayamu and Li affixed their signatures to a long-term trade agreement
On February 16. 1978 (mentioned at the beginning of this report).

increased import of Chinese Crude Oil

Going back five years before the inayama-Li agreement to 1973. Japan was

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

importing Chinese crude oil on an experimental basis. Chinese oil is a vis-
cous oil. having a tendency to be too heavy. Since it has a specific gravity
and viscosity classifying it as a “heavy crude oil". even with a careful re-
fining process. refining it to gasoline. which has a high demand in Japan.
does not show much profit. when compared to oil such as "Arabian light".

the product of the Middle East. which is mainly what Japan imports.

However. Japan's imports of ChineSe crude oil the following year suddenly in-
creased 12.6 times that of 1973. Moreover. it increased 80% in 1975 over
the previous year and rose to being the leading product among products Japan
purchased from China.

From the time of the fourth Middle East war. when the oil-producing Arabs
used their "oil weapon" strategy and cut off the pro-israel countries. HlTl
began to have a strong. extremely clear recognition that “the establishment
of a policy for the security of Japan's economy has no other choice than to
spread out its crude oil import market.”

Japan was already driven by the necessity of spreading out its crude oil
import market the year before the fourth liiddle East war of 1973. in 1972.
the percentage of Japan‘s crude oil imports. which the Middle East crude
oil of iron. Saudi Arabia and Kuwait held. rose to 80.71. amounting to 246
million kiloliters. 0f the remainder. 16.47. came from indonesia to the
south; crude oil from the USSR was no more than 2.91.

Hill made the Judgment that "nothing would better serve the security of
Japan's crude oil imports than China selling its crude oil to Japan on a
long-term basis. once China's oil really begins flowing."

in November 1975. during which Chinese crude oil exports to Japan increased
to nearly twice that of the previous year. Toshio Kawamoto. Minister of MIT!
in the Niki administration. visited China to hold talks about long-term im-
ports of Chinese crude oil to Japan with China‘s Vice-premier Li Hsien-nien.
who was said to be a self-taught economist.

Although Kawamoto is among the successive Hill ministers. he was a native of
the business world. ranking along with Tatsunosuke Takazaki of recent times.

He entered the former Himeji High School and thought about becoming an his-
torian in the future. But. after he made an anti-war. anti-military speech
while participating in military drills during his school days there, Kawa-
moto had no way of becoming an historian. instead. he built with his own
strength today's Sanko Steamship Company. known as a tanker conpany. it
was right in the middle of the Manchurian incident when Kawamoto expounded
his anti-war. anti-military thinking.

After having gone from being a longshoreman to being a public works worker

to being a factory worker. Kawamoto. who had been punished with expulsion
from Himeji High School. graduated from Hihon University's tow and Litera-

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ture Department. He set up his Sanko Steamship Company based on his involve-
ment with a shipping company during his days at Nihon University. lb held
the presidency of Sanko Steamship Company until Niki (who did not expect to
becomeﬁrime Minister) put together the liiki administration in October 1974.
Since Kawamoto was elected eleven times after his first election in 1949.

he was a Diet member in addition to being president of Sanko Steamship Com-
pany for a fairly long time.

Just from his perception from his business experience as a producer of tank-
ers. Kawamoto could understand very well why MlTi's personnel became so
frantic after the "oil shock" about a multiplicity of crude oil supply sources.
May. it is more correct to say that Kawamoto wrestled with the crude oil
question to the point of pushing the personnel at HlTl.

Even though Kawamoto looked up to Miki as his teacher and superior. he did
not have much of the idealism Niki possessed. Under the two administrations
of Prime Ministers Niki and Fukuda. there were times when the job of MIT]
minister was given to Tatsuo Tanaka. who kept ”the LDP's treasury.” But
Kawamoto showed considerable ability as the ”businessman“ minister of Mill
while serving two terms in the minister of Mill's new offices.

Views on Toshio Kawamoto

At the same time that being a “businessman" resulted in strengths for Kawa-
moto. it also resulted in shortcomings for him. He was able to find a posi-
tive plan for coping with economic problems that could be clearly seen as
hnninent with much greater speed than could a bureaucrat. However. he would
not show any interest in projecting a vision of the future---a future he
would not see with his own eyes.

Perhaps he lost the desire to look at the future from past history at the
same time that the road for Kawamoto to become an historian suffered its
setback at Himeji High School. when one looks at Kawamoto up to this time.
his historical outlook stops completely at reading the present from the
past. He is not the type of person who attracts people with the kind of
statesmanship that confronts the future. as does a politician.

The point must be acknowledged that he differs greatly fr0m TatSunosuke Ta-
kazaki. also associated with the same business world. who likewise served
as minister of Mill.

lwwever. Just as he had studied the crude oil problem as president of Sanko
Steamship Company. Kawamoto knew the existing economy and was thrilled with
assuring the security of energy scurces (concerning which HIT! officials

cried cut hysterically after the fourth Middle East war) by spreading out
crude oil import sources.

in the November 1975 meeting between Kawamoto and Li Hsien-nien, China made
a fundamental mutual agreement with Kawamoto on actualizing a long-term

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

agreement 0n long-term crude oil exports to Japan. Of course. on January 20.
ten months before Kawamoto's visit. a delegation of the Japan-China Economic
Society visiting China under the leadership of [nayama had explained Japan's
plan for long-term crude oil exports from China.

At that time. China's Vice-premier Ku Mu explained to the Inayama group that:
"Our country has decided to advance a positive plan for our economy. Imports

of China's shortage commodities and the purchase of technology will increase
in the future."

But in the China of 1976. Chou En-lai died. In February. wall posters began
to appear. criticizing the “running capitalist” faction. On April I. Fang
Yi's treatise. “criticism of philosophy as the handmaiden of the west."

was printed in THE RED FLAG. China's Communist Party organ. So. it was dif-
fgcu:t to predict what would happen to Chou's line in that time of violent

s cc s.

After experiencing another period of violent disturbances. Such as the Tien
An Men incident and the purge of the "gang of four.“ the engines started up
again for the "Chou line without Chou."

A delegation of the Federation of Economic Organizations visited Peking in
March 1977. The leaders of Japan's financial circles held talks with the
Minister of Foreign Trade, Li Chiang. They reached a fundamental mutual
agreement on exporting oil and coal to Japan on a long-term basis. This
materialized the following year in the Japan-China long-term trade agreement.

The Japan-China long-term trade agreement was backed up from the political
perspective as well with the signing of the Japan-China peace and frienship
treaty (which had continued through long and difficult negotiations) in
Peking in August of the following year. Foreign Minister Sunao Sonoda.

who had gone to Peking and brought the difficult negotiations to completion.
nude this proposal to China: “Since economic relations will welcome in a
new era. 1 would like to have MITI Minister Kawamoto to visit China."
Kawamoto made his second visit to China. lasting five days from September
11. Shiro Miyamoto. director of MITI's new international Trade Policy
Bureau. Maohiro Amaya. director of Resources and Energy Agency. and other
execatives traveled together.

Besides Chainman and Premier Hua Kua-feng. Vice-premier Li Hsien-nien. Vice-
premier Kang Shih-en and Foreign Trade Minister Li Chiang. the Chinese offi-
cials whoa Kawamoto met in Peking included officials from the People's Bank
and from the Ministries of Petroleum Industry and Chemical Industry. In

particular, Kawamoto met twice with his Chinese counterpart, Li Chiang---
at the beginning and at the end of the visit.

Business-like China

kawamoto went directly to MITI upon his return from Peking in the aftern00n

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of September. There he first made the following statement: “The greatest

question was how can the trade volume be enlarged. With this current Japan-
China long-term trade agreement. trade will have a 20 billion dollar volume.
(The limit on Japan's exports is at 10 billion dollars. But that limit will

have already been reached just with the business talks negotiated this year
---the first year.)"

”Because 350 billion dollars is supposed to be invested according to the ten
year plan China has put forward. a revision and increaSe in the volume must
take place at some point in time before the Japan-China long-term trade agree-
ment's eight~year authorized period ends. He would not be able to do any-

thing from now on if Japan's exports are limited to a 10 billion dollar
level.“

Just before his China visit. Kawamoto made a swing through Thailand and

the Philippines on a second visit within the same year to the member nations
of ASEAN (Alliance of Southeast Asia Nations). Then he flew to Seoul for

a Japan-South Korea conference. Immediately upon his return from South
Korea. he went to Peking---a hard schedule! However, Kawamoto. who neither
drinks nor smokes. did not touch any liquor even at the formal banquets and
dinner parties in Peking. Rather. he kept asking the Chinese waiter for
"cha" (green tea) instead of liquor. With that. he was able to survive

his "forced march" (hard schedule).

Shiro Miyamoto. director of the international Trade Policy Bureau. who trav-
eled along from the ASEAN nations to South Korea and China, became exhausted
and experienced some stomach tr0uble. As soon as he returned home. he was
in such a condition that he had to be hospitalized. But Kawamoto. who had
hardened his body while working as a longshoreman during his younger days.
was in perfect health. even after managing such a difficult schedule.

Listed below is a summarization of the problem points which. in Kawamoto's
Opinion. ought to be examined in the long-term trade agreement made during

his second China visit and in the financing of trade and resources develop-
ment.

There is a unanimity of opinion with China on this point: "In order to ex-
tend the Japan-China long-term trade agreement, it will be necessary to
cram in as much trade as possible during the sixth through eighth years of
the 1978-1985 authorized period. He were able to have a fundamental agree-
ment on extending the long-term trade agreement. scheduled to end in 1985.
until 1990. Given the increase in the number of people involved from Japan,
the Japan-China EconOmic Society. with the society's president lnayama as
the key person. will hold discussions with China to decide on the substance
of the extension. Because the trade volume will rapidly increase. the gov-
ernment will give its opinion in contrast to the opinion of lnayama and the
private sector. The gavernment's support is necessary. An agreement be-
tween governments is also probably necessary.

1.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hence. both countries will meet to decide whether it will take the format of

a regularly scheduled conference between the cabinet ministers of Japan and
China. Japan's import volume of Chinese crude oil has been set at 15 million
tones in 1982; the amount from 1983 was left undecided. Concerning the period
after 1983, when l say to China: 'ls there an agreement to accept even a
full-scale increase.’ the Chinese answered: 'we will supply any full-scale
increase.‘ But no concrete figures were given by either side.“

”Deferred payments for exports from the funds of the Export-Import Bank of
Japan, based on the dollar. were "0K"---in line with a promise among the
western nations. which set the interest rate at 7.25 2 per annum for a term
of less than five years. and an interest rate of 7.50% per annum for a term
of more than five years. How to make practical use of the Export-import
Bank‘s system for resource development financing and how to finance the de-
velopment of China's crude oil and raw coal and how to finance their import
to Japan was explained as follows: 'lf you use yen for capital. we can lend
you funds at an annual interest rate of about 6%.'“

"But China saw this as a problem. 'Since the yen is a strong currency and
its value will float upwards. were China to borrow yen. we would have to
work under the view of being helplessly at a disadvantage.‘ No conclusion
has been made concerning whether the Foreign Exchange Bank of Japan will
make large deposits in the Bank of China.“

"China has become extremely business-like. China and Japan are in basic
agreement in the opinion that the terms of the transactions on crude oil

and coal must be able to withstand international competition. They affirmed
the principle that the terms of the transactions on areas such as price

will be looked at on the occasion of each transaction."

China asked for an easing of the list of items under the embargo set by
COCOM. "I said: 'the embargo list must change in accordance with scientific
and technological progress and with the changes in the international situa-
tion occuring each year.’ I promised the positive cooperation of Japan to-
ward softening the list.“

"A secure supply of resources and energy is directly linked to our nation's
security. He will use China's crude oil as a reserve supply for Japan.
There was no discussion with Chinese officials about importing weapons.
However. China requested Japan's cooperation on a plan to build large hydro-
electric power stations on the Yangtze River and Yellow River. Because
China has an abundance of coal and water power. it is in no hurry to develop
nuclear energy generation; and so, it made no such requests.“

with Kawamoto‘s visit to China. the first curtain rose on the “Japan-China
Drama“ opera in the above manner.

New Order in HITI's Bureaucracy

On October 22. China's Vice-premier Teng Hsiao-ping came to Japan for the

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

exchange of the ratification of the Japan-China peace and friendship treaty.
He took a tour of the newest facilities of Nippon Steel Corporation. Nissan

Motor Co.. Ltd.. Matsushita Electrical Industrial 00.. Ltd. until the day

he departed Japan from Osaka on the 29 of the same month. "It is a nuisance
for Japan to have such a poor friend as China. but please remember us."

"China did not consider making loans between governments. but it will be a
subject for future study."

“China calls the Senkaku Archipelago the Chiao Yi Archipelago. Since the
names both countries use is different. there certainly is a difference in
points of view on these islands by both parties. I would think that it
would not make any difference if we shelved this problem temporarily. it
would not matter if we shelved it for ten years. The people of cur genera-
tion lack enouch wisdom. Our discussions would not arrive at an agreement;
but perhaps the next generation will be wiser than we.”

On his first visit to neighboring Japan. Teng left a copy of "Teng Hsia-ping
Aphorisms.“ which are mild at times and quite frank at other times.

From the final stages of the Japan-China peace and friendship treaty negoti-
ations extending up to Teng Hsiao-ping's visit to Japan. it is said that
the Chinese officials made this announcement: "Presently. China's first
priority is 'the four modernizations.' and in order to achieve this purpose
it cannot be helped even if China's political structure changes." Hhether
the words ”it cannot be helped even if China's political structure changes"
meant “changing the political structure. they will actualize the “four
modernizations" or whether it was a metaphor meaning "we will concentrate
our strength on the 'foar modernizations' to the extent that we think it
cannot be helped even if China's political structure changes.“ There were
a limited number of Japanese who heard these words. but they were divided
in their understanding of what the words meant.

However. even though there was indeed a difference in their understanding.
the Japanese were in agreement in their opinion that Chairman and Premier
Hua Kuo-feng and Vice-chairman and Vice-premier Teng Hsiao-ping. who form
a complex combination in internal politics. are definitely committed to the
“four modernizations.“

On October 30, the day after Teng returned to China from Osaka. MIT! opened

a departmental council and set up a committee to expedite measures for
Japan-China economic relations.

“when the Japan-China peace and friendship treaty was c0ncluded. our coun-
try's economic relations with China underwent a large transfiguration; and
they are expanding. in view of the importance of this. it is necessary for
H111 to urgently promote accurate answers to cope with the situation. To
do so. we will establish within HIT! a committee to expedite measures for
Japan-China economic relations. and the committee will draw up and regulate

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIM. USE ONLY

flexible as well as comprehensive measures." The above explained the purpose
for setting up the committee to expedite measures for Japan-China economic
relations.

Shiro Miyamoto. director of the international Trade Policy Bureau. became
the committee's chairman. Miyamoto. who suffered the stomach ailment on
his China visit with Kawamoto. has since stopped drinking and smoking.

But he recovered so well from his illness that he disclosed: "should i go
back to drinking whiskey and water?“ They set up two vice-chairmen under
Cemmittee Chairman Miyamoto---Xiyoshi Takahashi. assistant director of the
international Trade Policy Bureau. and Kiyotaka Kodama. assistant director
of the Resources and Energy Agency.

Besides Tadayoshi Makazawa, chief of the Administration Division of the Min-
ister's Secretariat. they added to the cummittee membership Tsukasa Sakai.
chief of the Administrative Division of the international Trade Policy Bureau.
Moriaki Ueda. chief of both Administration Divisions of international Trade
Bureau and of the industrial Policy Bureau. Mario Saito. chief of the Admin-
istration Division of the Basic industries Bureau. Kengo ishii. chief of the
Administration Division of the Machinery and information industries Bureau.
Jiro Aiko. chief of the Administration Division of the Consumer Goods indus-
tries Bureau. Masuo Shibata. chief of the Administration Division of the
Director's Secretariat of the Resources and Energy Agency. and finally added
the chief of the Administration Divisions of both the Patent Office and the
Agency of industrial Science and Technology.

Thus. there exists a structure wherein these related administrators can be
called together in committee by just a conmmnd from Chairman Miyamoto. when-
even necessary. in reality. assigning them to the colmittee is the same

as a summons or command to the China subject for these “ace" administrators
o MiTi.

Moreover. as subordinate parts of the committee's structure. they established
special project teams. according to subject area. such as "basic questions."
"Japan-China long-term trade agreement." ”petroleum prospecting development."
"coal prospecting development.“ “non~ferrous metals development.“ "preferen-
tial customs duty." ”processing trade." "industrial plant trade.” ”personnel
of commercial finms stationed in China.“

Shiro Miyamoto. director of the international Trade Policy Bureau. stated
the following on the day the Committee to Expedite Measures for Japan—China
Economic Relations started. ”China has one contact desk. Although one sees
a group working in connection with the long-term trade agreement on the part
of the Japanese private sector. there are the two desks of the Cunnittee to
Expedite international Trade and the Japan-China Economic Society. Many
related ministries and agencies have something to do with the Japan-China
question---such as the Ministry of international Trade and industry. the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. the Finance Ministry. the Ministry of Agricul-
ture and Forestry's fisheries Agency. They must simultaneously promote a

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

coordinated policy. not as separate ministries and agencies acting different-
ly on the Japan-China question. but as the government of Japan. who has won
over the private sector. Likewise. especailly since Japan must have one plan
concerning actual questions. such as petroleum prospecting development. we
will have lnayama's Japan-China Economic Society set up a team similar to
our project team."

“when the government had come to a nmtual understanding with lnayama's team.
we set up the Committee to Expedite Measures for Japan-China Economic Rela~

tions in order to prepare a systematic approach for consulting with China's
one 'desk.'“

in short; even with Japan-China economic relations. they used the formula

of cooperation between government and the private sector. which had produced
so effieciently a high level of growth in the heavy chemical industry of the
l960's---that was Japan's original formula for cooperation between govern-
ment and the private sector.

with the liberalization of trade. capital and foreign exchange. MlTl's juris-
diction to authorize approval to the private sector diminished. instead.

the Duet and Diet members began interfering in its administration. A decline
in the value of the bureaucracy became a reality. Because of such an en-
vironment. bureaucrats in the principal ministries and agencies resinged

from official life part-way through their terms. There was a remarkable
increase in the number of elite bureaucrats who entered political life as
Diet members or who turned to working as university professors.

lf Japan-China economic relations really stand as a turning point in Japan's
economy and if they have any future. the management of the economy and the
industrial world by remote control of the discretion of Mill's bureaucrats.
under the name of cooperation between the government and tte private sector.
as originally intended. in reality is connected to the “reinstatement of
MlTl's bureaucrats."

when the Japan-China long-term trade agreement was singed in Peking. Toshi-
hiko Yano. director of the International Trade Policy Bureau at that time.
had a premonition that “the time for HlTl to start jumping ahead would come
at last." Eight months later. his premonition was right on track. as least
as far as form goes.

Future of PRC Market

The day after Vice-premier Teng Hsiao-ping returned to Peking. a mission
came to Japan---a mission with with the long name of "People's Republic of
China National Economy Committee Delegation for Visiting Japan.” The rush
to visit Japan by Chinese administrative officials. such as Teng Hsiao-ping
and the National Economy Committee. opened the curtain on the second act

of the opera. “Japan-China Drama." The assistant chief in charge of the
National Economy Committee was Vice-premier Kang Shin-en. The head of the

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

delegation visiting Japan. Yuan Daohua [Yuan Pao-hual. was the assistant
director of the National Economy Committee. In Japan's ranking. that would
be either cabinet minister or vice-minister.

Under delegation leader Yuan. there were Deng Ligun [Teng Li-ch'un] (Assistant
Director of China's Institute of Social Sciences), assistant delegation chief
Xi Liantu [Hsi Lien-t'ul (Assistant Chief of the National Economy Committee).
and assistant delegation chief Yeh Lin (Assistant Chief of the Peking Revo-
lutionary Committee).

There were 23 delegation members altogether. including interpreters-Ma Hang.
director of the Industrial Economic Research Center of China's Social Services
Institute. Sung Chi-wen. vice-minister of the Ministry of Light Industry.

Yu Brliang [Yu Sch-liens]. sanagcr of the Shanghai Turbine Factory. Yin Chung-
hua (a woman). assistant accountant for Capital Steel Company and others. As
one can judge from the titles of those listed above. almost all of them are
technocrats.

Many of the things which China has been purchasing from Japan. Great Britain.
Hest Germany. France and the United States. such as a variety of industrial
plants. are the latest equipment of the capitalist countries. If it is not
the latest model from a technological point of view. they turn away their
heads. That is. they will not buy.

In like manner. China has been desperately studying management systems in
many areas---from the industrial technology developed by the highly industri-
alized countries of the west. to personnel and product quality control---

and the “know-how“ of economic and industrial policies.

The purpose of the Japan visit by delegation representative Yuanwas the study
of management and planning. On November 1. Yuan,who was visiting with MIT!
Minister Kawamoto. stated. "i hope you will support China's modernization,
which was delayed technologically by the ‘gang of four.'" When that delega-
tion’s schedule is looked at. the thought comes to mind that perhaps the
"Ch0u line without Chou“ means that "they are trying to have a high level of
growth under the name of the 'four modernizations' by introducing such things
as industrial plants. which the advanced capitalist nations have developed.

and the practical application and use of such goods as computer hardware
and software."

immediately upon coming to Japan.Yuan's group received special training in
the relationship between economic growth policy and productivity from Hisao
Kanemori. private economist among the supporters of Japan's growth. and Ta-
misaburo Sasaki. vice-director of the Japan Productivity Center. They re-
ceived an education in quality control at a university and in the movement
to promote quality control from the Union of Japanese Scientists and Engi-
neers. lnc. They heard a concentrated lecture on industrial standardization
and quality control from the Japanese Standards Association. They heard
views on the newly industrialized cities from the National Land Development
Agency. and a lecture entitled "Economic Development of the 1960's" as well
as a lecture on management of today's economy from MIT].

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hm Iii-‘I-‘liflhl. "5|: "NH

Japan's Enterprise Secrets China wants to Know

when Kawnmnto and Yuunnet for talks. the Chinese broke the ire with this com-
ment: "i would like you to teach us the secret of the high level growth by
which Japan achieved its heavy chemical industrialization in the 1960's and
became a major economic power." This is equal to Yunn'udelegation asking

us to teach them the secrets of the enterprises of ”Japan. inc..' concern-
ing high level growth. heavy chemical industrialization and expansion of

At the Same time they were studying high-level growth policies and were being
instructed in technology. newly industrialized city planning. and business
administration methods from scholars. economists and others responsible for
policy. they examined the newly built factories of "Japan. inc.“ These were
plants actually in operation. Such as Nippon Steel Corporation‘s headquarters
and Kimizu Foundry. Tokyo University's Department of Technology, Toshiba Corp-
oration and its divisions for computers. desk-top computers and large inte~
grated circuits. Komatsu Hork's Osaka plant. the Keihin Foundry of Nippon
Kokan. K.K.. Kobe Steel. Ltd., Toyota Motor Co.. Ltd.. the truck division
plant of Hino Motor Co.. Ltd.. the Yokohama industrial plant and communica-
tions satellite installation division of Nippon Electric Co.. Ltd.. Tokyo
Heavy Nachinery's sewing machine division. the headquarters for Matsushita
Electrical industrial 'ompany. Ltd. and its radio. dry-cell batter. related
outside order. electronics parts. television. Braun tube and integrated cir-
cuits divisions. Sharp's Tenri plant (Taiyo Battery). the Takasago works of
Mitsubishi Heavy industries. Ltd.. and Sumitomo Electric industries. Ltd.

and its itami plant (cutting blades and tools).

After that. they made a full study of the Kashima Kombinat as a living exam~
ple of a newly industrialized cit . They studied the kombinat from such
points as the details of its construction and problems of where to station
the plants. At various intervals. they had interviews with the leaders of
Japan's modern capitalism. such as the Federation of Economic Organizations.
Japan Economic Association and the Kansai Economic Association.

Certainly. men and machines work as one unit in the top level production fa-
cilities. That is. it can be said that men and machines become a synchronized
system. This human systematization was highlighted as a problem of “man's
alienation." because it was about to bring our high-level growth to an end.
But China is trying to ardently learn from Japan for its "four modernizations'
program. which includes a systematization of men as cogwheels.

For example. there is a money problem surrounding the "four modernizations."

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is difficult to guess how much is in China's purse. but foreign specialists
on China's economy have observed that. at the end of 1978. the balance for
short-term debts was 367 million dollars. and the balance for the cost of
importing industrial plants was 1.402 billion dollars (that total includes
both principal and interest).

Of this. the limits for payment and repayment came due the same year---for
the short-term debt. 333 million dollars; for the cost of imported plants.
422 million dollars (including principal and interest). It was expected that
the amount would total 755 million dollars. It is tentatively calculated
that the 1979 short-term debt and the total required repayment amount on the

costggg imported plants will be 655 million dollars. and 648 million dollars
n .

Nevertheless. while China's governing body is explaining to Japan that China's
foreign currency provisions are “only some 20 billion dollars." they are ex-
pecting to import a huge volume of products. including weapons from the Unit-
ed States. in addition to Japan, west Germany. Great Britain and France.

On account of this reference to foreign currency. they have diversed in a
subtle way from their previous fundamental policy of “accepting no assistance
from foreign countries." They are supposed to be discussing in Peking whe-
ther it is right or wrong to borrow resources development funds for their
crude oil and long-term economic cooperation funds from foreign governments
for the construction of hydroelectric power plants.

After the Hua-Teng regime came into power. they suddenly advanced counter—
measures for the ethnic Chinese abroad. Hhen Teng Hsiao-ping. who had vis-
ited Japan. visited Thailand and Malaysia. he extended his trip to Singa-
pore. with which China has no diplomatic relations. Has that trip made be-
cause it is necessary for China to bring in the dollars that had been asleep

on Singapore's Asia Dollar Market. due to the sluggish growth of Sautheast
Asian nations.

China's current regime. which has staked its reputation on the achievement
of the ”Chou line without Chou.” began working on getting money from the
ethnic Chinese. who are scattered throughout the world. in order to pull to-
gether funds for economic modernization.

in connection with gathering together this money. it has been indicated that
“besides personal banking accounts. loans and trade financing. now. invest-
ments in bonds. real estate and securities. participation in transactions

on the gold market and entry into consumer financing have been recognized
by the thirteen PRC connected banks of Hong Kong. such as the Bank of China.
Transportation Bank. Central South Sea Bank. National China Commercial Bank.
Kinsong Bank. Kwangtung Pravincial Bank. China Commercial Bank, South Seas
Coulercial Bank and Overseas China Commerical Bank.

Om-the-spot reports concerning how the PRC connected banks are disguising

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

this capitalistic financing were published almost simultaneOusly in the July
I. 1978 issue of the SOUTH CHINA PDRNING POST. the English edition of the
July 12 issue of the ASIAN HALL STREET JOURNAL. and the July 21 isSue of

the FAR EASTERN ECONOHIC REVIEH magazine's column on economy.

According to the SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST report, it was explained that. in
order to serve the “four modernizations“ that China is to achieve by the end
of this century. the 13 PRC connected banks in Hong Kong have been advised
to strengthen their business nnnagement so as to be able to increase their
profits and lessen capital costs.

The FAR EASTERN ECONOMIC REVIEH offered the same kind of description in an
article titled "Open capitalism for Peking." From manufacturing industries
that are under the wing of the PRC controlled banks of Hong Kong to travel
agencies---all received a directive "contribute to China by increasing your
profit margins!“ It is generally observed that the ethnic Chinese in Nong
Kong are now remitting 500-600 million dollars annually to Peking.

China's new regime has begun aiming for a high-level growth. clearly nodeled
on Japan of the 1960's. Hith that. they seem to be trying to equip their
economy with current technology. developed in the latter half of the 1960's.
and to build plants that will operate with a great profit. However. do

MITI officials. who ran to the PRC market. really think they can eulogize
the “new Japan-China era" without any possibility of future friction for
Japan. once China has made progress?

Japan---“Nansion Built on Oil"

Trips back and forth by key figures and technocrats from both countries
flourished. Now. ten Ionths after the signing of the Japan-China long-term
trade agreement, the eyes with which MITI officials see China are bulging

at the complexity of the situation. Perhaps they ran out of breath because
they were too enthusiastic at first.

Now NITI officials are eager to throw cold water on the Japan-China economic
boom. This attitude was preceded by a mood symbolized in the spirited state-
ment of Toshinobu Nada. former vice-minister. on the day the Japan-China
long-term trade agreement was signed. “Japan's economy. which passed a
milestone 30 years after the war and 100 years after Meiji. is now at an
historical turning-point.“

Some MITI officials started making these statements: “when one looks at the
political changes in China from the time when Teng Hsiao-ping was again re-
instated in the summer of 1977 up until recent times, it is felt that the
tempo of change has been too fast. Japan has to make up its mind that with
Such a situation, there may be a reaction against the Teng line. which is
the 'Chou line without Chou'. It is dangerous to frolic about with the idea
there is a PRC market out there with one billion people, and that market is
a 'divine wind' sent to extricate us from an economic slump.“ Certainly.

49
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when one looks at today's China. not only the masses of Chinese people but
also we ourselves cannot help but entertain feelings about what tomorrow
holds. The feeling about “its days as a belligerent nation" still run deep.

Moreover. the basic idea for China's economic modernization is to try settlim
acc0unln with coal and crude oil (the available amounts and costs of which
are uncertain). rather than paying with foreign currency for the import of
plants. construction materials and equipment necessary to build the economy.

Not only that. but China is in a situation where it must collaborate with
foreign technology and capital right from the first stage of prospecting for
their coal and crude oil. On this point. MlTl executives. who had recently
visited China. said: "Until 1985. they will increase the rate of agricultural
mechanization by 85% and will increase industrial production growth by 10%
annually. lf crude oil and coal production does not increase. it is possible
there will be a breakdown in the present ten-year plan (1976-1985) for eco-
nomic development. which will attempt to made crude steel production voliwe
grow to 6100 tons by 1985. and will attempt to construct 10 steel kombinats.
9 non-ferrous metal kombinats. 8 colliery companies. 10 natural gas and oil
fields. 30 power stations. 6 new railroad trunk lines and 5 major wharves.

So far as Japan is concerned. they cannot buy plants from Japan. if they can
not sell crude oil to Japan. Building China's economy. which has to progress
in a money-less condition. has no choice but to depend on their oil. They

do not know whether that oil will be forthcoming or not. That is the mean-
ing of 'mansion built on oil.'“

Even without saying anything about "the mansion built on oil.“ so far as
has been seen in the movement of China's economy in the first part of 1978.
the production of coal and crude oil for export to Japan has not been that
good.

According to reports from China, “industrial production in the first part of
1978 has grown more that 2.46%. compared to the same period in the previous
year. and has achieved more than 50% of the annual plan.“ But crude oil

and coal to be used to buy plants from Japan and others have been limited

to an increase of 11% and 19% respectively. compared to the first part of
the previous year.

As a result. deSpite the fact that exports of mainly crude oil and coal in-
creased 29: in the first part of 1978. compared to the first part of the pre-
vious year. the stage was reached where it cannot be helped but be said

that. as for imports. trade earnings and expenses ended up somewhat in the
black. since there was a rapid increase of 60%. compared to the same period
of the previous year. in the purchase of plants. machinery and survey eduip-
ment indispensable for development.

Uncertain Production of Chinese Crude Oil

if crude oil production really increases. if there is a Surficient export
reserve. and if a stable supply can be promised. there will not be much of

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Nil OFFICIAL USI“. ONLY

reserve and if a stable supply can be promised. there will not be much of a
problem. even though their formula is to pay with crude oil and coal which
will be produced in the future. rather than paying for import costs with
foreign currency. The costs of importing plants is to be paid by means of
crude oil. lf commodities produced in those plants supply a market of one
billion people. who are "poor buy on the way to becoming a developed nation."
the people's standard of living will rise and an appreciation of the value
of the "Chou line without Chou“ will also rise.

But. if the rate of growth of imports continues to double as it dwd in the
first part of 1978. compared with the growth of exports. they will have to
appropriate part of the import cost settlement by earning foreign currency
through "dumping" exports under the name of a political price. without being
able to distribute throughout the c0untry commodities produced in those plants
that have been introduced.

Should that give rise to a criticism of the purpose of modernizatiOn by the
Chinese people. the people promoting the “Chou line without Chou" will
turn a deaf ear to one billion people.

To the question supposing that ”China does not have enough crude oil.". Shi-
geru Knnno. present vice-minister of MIT]. says: "If that is so. Japanese
industry will be forced. willingly or unwillingly. to change its structure
with desperate methods." That is to say. if China takes an export offensive
for a political price. Japanese light industries would suddenly have to
close up shop and would have to change their products substantially. because
their products can not cope with the inexpensive Chinese made products."

for the nations of Asia. excluding Japan. the import surplus from China. in
the anount of 31.701.900.000 dollars in 1976. and in the amount of 1.677.900.
000 in 1977. will grow even more. This will precipitate even more anti-
Japanese feelings in Asia. "He have had to Suffer hardships because Japan
sold new. powerful plants to China." The blood pressure of those who see
improved Japan-China relations as a Japan-China conspiracy. cannot help

but rise. even if unwillingly.

But. it has already been mentioned before that the growth of imports of in-
dustrial plants and the like to China is greater than the growth of China's
export or oil and the like. in addition to this. China negotiated imports
from Japan of plants in excess of 10 billion dollars for 1978 alone. the
first year of the Japan-China long-term trade agreement. Besides this.
China has payments for deferred payment imports and for past debts. That

is to say. should Japan not purchase from China products other than the
exchange commodities which they had agreed to purchase under the JapanoChina
long-term trade agreement. the trade imbalance between the two countries
will becone even greater.

Officials Complain

The idea of the Japan-China long-term trade agreement is to balance trade

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by having China purchase plants necessary for its modernization and Japan
import crude oil and coal. which are the easiest Chinese products for
Japan to buy. if there were a balance in Japan-China trade at present be-
tween the amount of money from Japan's imports. excluding crude oil and
coal. and the amount of money from China's imports. excluding industrial
plants. there would be a balance in Japan-China trade. and trade would
increase. due to progress promoted by the long-term agreement.

However. actual Japan-China trade has had no such luck.

During the period from 1975 to 1977. Japan's export of plants was stagnated
by the death of Premier Chou and Party Chairman Mao Tse-tung. the Hopei pro-
vince earthquake. and the incident of the purge of the ”gang of four.“ Hhen
Japan-China trade statistics for 1977 are checked. there is hardly any men-
tion of plant exports among the list of machinery and other products.

Accordingly. there would be no problem if there were a balance (substracting
crude oil and coal) between the amount of Chinese exports to Japan and the
amount of Japanese exports to China in 1977.

However. Japanese exports of China in 1977 were 1.938 billion dollars;
Chinese exports to Japan were 820 million dollars. after crude oil and

coal are substracted from the total of 1.547 billion dollars. That is to
say. even in 1977. when Japan's export of industrial plants almost stopped.
there was an export surplus in Japan-China trade for Japan. amounting to
almost 1.120 billion dollars.

Granted there was a balance Just in the long-term trade. in accordance with
the Japan~China long-term trade agreement. linking Japanese export of plants
with Chinese export of crud° oil and coal. but if there are transactions in
items other than plants. crude oil and coal at the same pace as in 1977.

the Chinese deficit from Japanese trade will grow fat in the same way a
snowman takes shape.

Therefore. if Japan tries to balance Japan-China trade even slightly while
supplying capital goods, such as industrial plants China wants. there are
only two ways---either China would not purchase anything from Japan but

industrial plants. or Japan would greatly increase the import of Chinese
products other than crude oil or coal.

As for purchasing items other than crude oil and coal from China. there are
such things as processed foods. textiles and miscellaneous goods. These
products have a general similarity to the products which both Japan's nation-
al manufacturers and the nations of southeast Asia (who want a similar re-

vision in their trade imbalance) want Japan to purchase in increasing quan-
t ties.

The executive staff of MlTl's international Trade Policy Bureau is at the
point of making this complaint: “The more one thinks about it. the more

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'.. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one notices that there are many difficult questions with Japan-China trade.
We are at the point in our thinking that we want this easy-going mood about
Japan-China friendship to end quickly.“

One more reason why the MIT! bureaucracy. who have been running to China
during these past ten months. began to run out of steam is that the modern.
newest. most powerful technology. mentioned on COCOM's indiscriminate em-
bargo list. which China wants is great---either because China is too can-
scious of its rivalry with the USSR or because of its aim for an effective
political dennnstration against its own national opposition factions.

Dealing with PRC Market Not Easy

International public opinion basically agrees with some relief on export of
technology to China. since the United States has a strategy against the USSR.
But at most. this talk is within the framework of politico-economic arith-
metic. such as "raising China's level to the level of autonomous technology
of the USSR/Eastern Europe bloc would provide a balance between the USSR

and the PRC; there would not have to be any prediction of an "emergency"
situation between the USSR and the PRC." or “even though that level of tech-
nology is sold to China. it would be no loss to western governments."

If the judgment is made that there is the possibility of having the effect
of some loss for the west. the United States would immediately ask for an
explanation, through diplomatic channels in Tokyo and Hashington. as it did
when the resources development export funds from the Export-import Bank
were offered to China.

Nevertheless. there is much ultra-modern technology that COCOM has prohibited
among the technology that China w0uld buy from Japan. such as Nippon Steel
Corporation's automatic regulators for steel manufacturing. which include
large-scale electronic computers. and efficient high-level integrated cir-
cuit equipment. used for manufacturing. from Hitachi. Ltd. and others.

Even though it is said that "with the arrival of the US-China rapprochement
era. the United States is trying to strengthen China's power as a strategy
toward the USSR." the US posture toward China is that "even though it will
sell various products. it will not sell the newest technology," the same as
its posture toward other socialist countries. Therefore. Hashington is keep-
ing a sharp watch on the exports of Japan and others. together with keeping

a sharp watch on the export of US made computers and computer terminal equip-
ment.

Shingo Moriyama. director of HITI's Machinery and Information industries
Bureau. stated: "As for the newest technology. promising to export to China
and actually exporting to China are two different stories. The government

will confer with COCOH. while watching the state of progress in the business
transactions; but, even if brief. these transaction will involve difficult
negotiations. lasting more than six months.

53

”A" I‘L‘F'I‘Vl' 'Ul‘l‘ ﬂ\"\'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The export of a plant for Shanghai Baoahnnfoundry by Nippon Steel Corpora-
tion. which has been in the newspapers of late as a large business trans-
action. based on the Japan-China long-term trade agreement. has not yet
been approved by COCOM. since computers are involved.

One of the people in HITl's administration expressed the opinion that “there
seems to be an overindulgence in technology" on the part of Peking. who is
frantic about getting the most modern technology. Perhaps this means that
their hunt for technology has gone too far.

The crowds of people from Peking visiting Japan continued unabated. From
them. MlTl officials came to know that China is planning to reverse-export
to Japan certain products produced in the plants introduced from Japan. in
order to alleviate the Japan-China trade imbalance.

This point is very clear---that China is trying to substitute in place of
cash payments for the cost of foundries and color television plants a
production share formula (PS formula). whereby they send back to Japan iron/
steel products. color televisions and color television parts produced in
those same plants.

China came out with this method of in-kind payment because. after all. it
was difficult to get access to foreign currency.

However. Japan cannot take back, with a simple yes, the industrial products
made by a country whose level of technology is such that they have had to '
send a mission to study quality control technology in Japan because they
have so many many problems with their quality.

Certain products have remained in Japan because of the US export regulations
on color televisions and other products. It is a fact that with regards to
iron and steel products, Japan has curtailed operations at its national
blast furnances. The sources of the headaches for MITI officials. who ran
off to China. have continued to increase of late.

Bleak Future for the 1980's

MlTl officials think that their economic relations with such advanced coun-
tries as Europe and the United States will become quite bleak in the 1980's.

The Society for Research on Internaitonal Trade and Industry Policy for the
1980‘s. under the leadership of Shinji Fukukawa. director of the Minister's
Secretariat Planning Board, is the grOup which will begin to put together

a vision of the 1980's. for the international economic societies of the
1980's. Fukukawa himself sees that ”there will be antagonism among the ad-
vanced nations and in the relations between the northern and southern hemi-
spheres; unemployment will increase, due to a prolonged period of 'stagfla-
tion,‘ caused by a weakening in the growth of European and American econo-
mies; protectionist movements. caused by political factors. will increase

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even more than now. Because of that. an era of chaos will come in which
international economic systems. having to do with trade. currency and energy.
will increase the instability further.“

Therefore. on the day the Japan-China long-term trade agreement was concluded.
Toshinobu Nada. vice-minister at that time. made this sonnwhat excited speech:
"From now on. Japan must attach greater importance to China and the Southeast

Asian countries. because exports to the European and American markets have
already reached their ceiling.“

Compared with the European and American markets. whose prospects for the
future are not very bright. the untouched PRC market of one billion people
perhaps seeps very bright for Japan's economy.

Moreover. even MITI Minister Kawamoto. who knew business. could see that
China. where the cultural revolution has been negated and where business
faction of Teng Hsiao-ping's group took power. has become “busineSSalike.“

The valley separating the economies of Japan and China narrowed; but. as
they came to understand China's financial circumstances and economic plans.

they realized deep in their hearts that China's waters aren't so sweet after
all.

Officials Hake From Their Dreams

The Japan-China Joint Trade Committee was opened in Peking on November 28.
1978. in order to look at future Japan-China economic relations. Agency
directors and vice-directors of both countries met together. Urgent econo-
mic Questions were reviewed. such as the question of continuing the long-
term trade agreement. discussed during Kawamoto's China visit. financial
settlements. the question of giving preferential customs rates to China.
China's crude oil exports to Japan, and revision of Japan's surplus exports
to China. Even at this conference. Japan was impressed with the fact that
Japan-China trade is not "rosey-red" by any means.

One of HITI's present executives. who participated in constructing the
Scenario for the high-level growth of the 1960‘s. has been looking at giving
up on the "Chou line without Chou" from China. which wants to haphazardly
imitate the Japan of the 1960's. He said: “I can not think that the high-

level of growth of 'Japan. lnc.‘ is possible for them. because China's soci-
ety is different from Japan."

"China's administrative structure is tied up with the past inefficient
cabinet structure. Horevoer. there is no department corresponding to Japan's
fiercely competitive private enterprise. Although one may try to caunt the
committees and departments in China that correspond to Japan's ministries

and agencies. there are too many to make comparisons with Japan. In addition

to this. the party's bureaucratic hierarchy is intertwined in such a complex
way. The conflict aver authority never ends."

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Although they bring in advanced plants and technoloQY. no socio-political
basis has been built to advance the modernization program to the point of
full operation. So China cannot help but hit a stone wall. even if they
speed up the present regime‘s modernization program. After all. hasn't their
political reform advanced in installments?“

He diagnosed China's modernization line in the above manner. and continued
with: "won't they perhaps settle into a repeat of the Soviet folly. wherein.
even though they bring in equipment and technology from the west. what re-
mains will be a huge loan debt. and wherein the masses of people have a blind
belief in the European and American style of life?"

It seems that finally the scales have fallen from the eyes of MIT! officials.
MITI officials. cooling their China fever ten months after the Japan-China
long-term trade agreement. are once again trying to wrestle with the basic
question of how to heighten the security of Japan's economy for the 1980's.
without relying so greatly on foreign demand for exports. together with re-
assessing the PRC market as calmly as possible.

Within this situation of apparently bleak national and foreign economies

and of new changes in China's politics. having to do with the modernization
program---such as the criticism of the Mao-Hua regimes that began again on
November 19. 1978---. one HIT] official. responsible for the area on China's
economy. expressed the following: “when one deals on an economic plane with
China. who moves too abruptly. one cannot close his eyes to the aspect of

such abrupt changes in Chinese society. with reference to Japan's economy

and industry. China is a partner who cannot deal with the impetuosity peculiar
to the Japanese. To rush to the Prc market and expect much is difficult.
Isn't is Just the ministers of some ministries and the economic news report-

ers for some newspapers and magazines who have overrated China's economy
for Japan?"

COPYRIGHT: Bungel Shunju. Ltd. 1979

9500
CSO: 4105

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90K OFVICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

GOLD. EXCHANGE RESERVES SOAR TO NEW HIGH

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 3 Feb 79 p b 0"

[Text] Japan's gold and foreign exchange reserves increased slightly in
January. reaching another alltime of $33,109 million high at the end of
the month, the Finance Ministry announced Thursday.

The $90 million gain over the previous record of $33,019 million at the
end of December was the fifth straight monthly rise.

The Finance Ministry said January's reserves were the world's second
largest, after West Germany which posted $52,136 million.

The ministry said it believed the trend of steep increases in Japan's
foreign exchange reserves has been put under control somehow, thanks to
growing imports and sluggish exports.

The month's increase resulted from the government's purchase of Interna-
tional Monetary Fund Special Drawing Rights (son) amounting to $225 million
and exchange gains during the month.

But the increase margin was rather small due to export-import banks loans
in foreign exchange totaling $245 million in the month.

The loans were extended for the first time in history for imports of
foreign-made aircraft for lease to a third nation, and for foreign-

registered ships built in Japan and chartered by Japanese shipping firms
on a long-term basis.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shinbunsha 1979
080: 6120

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCOWIC

BUSINESS RBCOVBRS. UNEMPLOYHENT STILL RIG“

Tokyo HAINICRI DAILY NEWS in English 6 Feb 79 p 5 av

[Text] Hhile business showed signs of recovery last year. a recent labor
ministry report noted this did not lead to any improvement in the employ-
ment situation.

The ministry’s annual survey said business recovery was reflected in wages
and working hours.

Last year's average monthly cash pay for a worker was 235,375 yen, up 7.1
percent over the previous year. the survey said.

It was a 3.3 percent increase in real wages over the previous year against
only a 1.1 percent rise in real wages in 1977 over the previous year.

The rise in cash pay was remarkable in construction and real estate indus-
tries apparently because of effects of the government's public works pro-
jects.

Actual working hours last year totaled 172.5 hours a month. up 0.3 percent
over the previous year. the survey said.

Above all. overtime working hours increased by 2.9 percent last year over
the previous year and by 5.4 percent in manufacturing industry. the survey
said.

The ministry report said last year's overtime working hours in manufacturing
industry reached 80 percent of those in 1973 before the so-called "oil

shock” against the ministry's yardstick of business recovery at 87 percent
of the 1973 level.

However. the regular employment index last year stood at 96.7 against the
base of 100 in 1975. down 1.2 points from the previous year.

The ministry attributed the stagnant employment situation to the policy
of having employees work overtime to cope with increased work rather than
employing new recruits.

58

FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

As a result. the labor turnover rate for 1978 was 17.6 percent in the

employment rate and 18.6 percent in the retirement rate. shoving excess
of unemployment.

COPYRIGHT: Heinlchi Daily News. 1979

080: 6120

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

PRIORITY GIVEN T0 OIL SUPPLY PLANS
Tokyo HAINICNI DAILY NENS in English 6 Feb 79 p 5

[Text] The government plans to give top priority to minimizing the impact
on Japan of the current-unstable supply of oil, government sources said
Monday [5 Feb]. A package of steps nou under study calls for collecting
infatuation on oil-producing countries. promoting international coopera-
tion. utilizing oil reserves, strengthening price controls on oil products
and urging the nation to save energy. the sources said.

Government experts agree that a protracted cut in the supply of Iranian
oil will intensify a global shortage of oil.

The government is paying considerable attention to Saudi Arabia. the

world's largest oil exporting country. Saudi Arabia increased oil output

to 10-11 million barrels daily in October and November compared with its
usual output of 8.500.000 barrels. however. it has imposed a new ceiling

of 9,500,000 barrels a day. according to recent reports confirmed by the
government. The world supply-demand situation for oil will immediately
become tight if Saudi Arabia continues to keep the lid on output, the sources
said.

The government has so far failed to take drastic measures to save oil,
partly because it wanted to avoid disturbances like those seen in the 1973

oil crisis. The sources said the government plans to accurately assess the
oil situation for the nation, to call for readiness against unstable oil

supply.
COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily Neva, 1979
i

CSO: 6120

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOM IC

OIL CONSERVATION LIKELY ISSUE AT TOKYO SUMMIT
Tokyo ASAhI EVENING NEWS in English 6 Feb 79 p l on

[Text] Oil conservation may be discussed at the Tokyo smit of major indus-
trial desocracies in June.

The first preparatory meeting will be held in Tokyo on 22-23 March to discuss

the agenda of the susnit and the roles to be played by the participating
countries.

Since the sumit uill take place amid mounting criticiss of Japan's nassive
current account surplus. the government is likely to have a hard tine free
the preparatory stage.

In unofficial talks between Japan and the other participating nations. strong
opinions have been expressed that in view of the political crisis in Iran.
the Tokyo suuit should sake energy as an important itea on the agenda.

As a result. a cor-ton strategy for oil conservation may become a key

these of the suuit. depending on develop-eats in the international oil
situation in the days ahead.

Deputy foreign Vice Minister Hireoichi Hiyazski will preside over the
preparatory seating. Delegates from the United States. Rest Gersany,

France, Britain, Italy and Canada will participate in the capacity of
personal representatives of the heads of governmnt of the six countries.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi shinbun Tokyo Honsha 1979

(:80: 10120

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

BRIEFS

ENGINEERS OVERSEAsuThe Ministry of International Trade and Industry (NITI)
has announced that 130 technicians will be sent overseas to help developing
nations. Last year only 68 experts were dispatched to other countries as
part of Japan's economic cooperation programs. NITI had originally wanted
to send 220 people overseas during fiscal 1979. The scientists and tech-
nicals will be part of a progran set up by the Japan Oversees Development
Corporation. Eighty of then will live abroad for three months and the rest
will stay overseas for eight or nine months. [Excerpt] [Tokyo ASANI
EVENING NENS in English 13 Jan 79 p 3 0H]

JANUARY EXPORTSnJapanese exports on a letter-oI-credit basis totaled
$5,693 million last month. up 17 percent from a year earlier. The figure
compared with December’a year-to-year increase of 10.9 percent. the slowest
12-month rise since a l'O.l percent registered in July, 1977. Meanwhile.
seasonally-adjusted L/C exports rose 1.5 percent Eros December to $5,709
nillion. In yen terns. January L/c exports totaled 1.08103 billion yen.

up 6.2 percent from a month ago. Item wise. exports of chemical and steel
products registered fairly large increases while automobiles, general
sschinery, electrical machinery and textile products dropped below the
year-earlier level. Exports to the United States totaled $1,753 million.
up 2 percent from 12 months ago. Shipsents to China more than doubled from
the year-before level. [Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 3 Feb 79 p 5 0"]

SPANISH STEEL HILL—Smite” Metal Industries, Ltd., of Osaka said Friday
that it would begin extending technological help shortly to a Spanish steel
company which is to embark on the production of quality wire rods. The top-
rate Japanese ateelnaker said it had signed a contract for such technological
cooperation with Ensidesa Verina, a government-owned steel company of Madrid.
Under the contract. Sumitomo will send several technological instructors to
Spain, beginning with two to leave Japan next month. Sunitomo will also
train a number of workers of the Spanish cospany at its Japanese mill.

[Tokyo HAINICIII DAILY NEHS in English 3 Feb 79 p 5 0H]

cso: 6120 mm

62

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY