FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10639
7 July 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 39/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by Jras. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or {Excerpt} in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
aaticn was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFTICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT
(2000 39/32)

Coureurs

POLITICAL MD SOCIOLOGICAL

Paper Discounts Japan's Bole at Verseilles Smit-

(Minoru Hirnno; THE DAILY YOXIURI..13.Jun.82) A » ........... 1
LI)? Main Feetions' Positions Described
(YMURI 851mm. 1’ h, 5 M” 32-) oeeesesseeeeosoeootoeoo'IQO 3
Impact of 8 June Judolent on Tenske Faction Assessed
(Tekuo aweshi; MADIGI DAILY m. 13 Jun 82) ............. 1.1
Draft. Resolution on 16th JCP Congress "
(WA. nJm &) 0..0.0.0....OOOOOOOOOCOOOOOCICCOOJ.'0... 13
”IONIC
ﬁtment Export Industries Outlined
(“131 Ik¢“‘; mus”, lewaz) .l...‘......“........ 56
Japan Aunts Auto-m Inmtorios' Overseas
(NJ'HOII K312“ mm. 11 Jm &) 0.0000000000000000...eeeoee 59
SCIENCE AHDTBCEIDLOGY
First Electron-BOW“ Thrmter Developed .
(mm Emma um. 8Jm 82) OOOOOOOOI.DQOOOOO..OO0.9.0.9... ‘1
New Motion Semiconductor blokes lo Potent Applicatims
(mm! muI “In“. 18 Jm &) 0.0.0.000...OOODOOOOODOOOOOU Q
- n - [III - ASIA - lll I'OOO]

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
PAPER DISCCXJNI‘S JAPAN'S IDLE AT VERSAILLES SW1?

Tokyo ma mum mum 1n English 13 Jun 62 p 3

[From "Behind the Scene" Colum by Minoru Mum]

[Text]

pummwmmum
mwmmewmtw
Jumom‘zmmmmmma
pun-Ingmar.

0:11.:thme-
m expound huh Won..um
nut Prim mum: sum .04 the up.-
nuo mutton Mal-nodapoﬁanm
In (was. commute-III-

n mum-tumm-
ttonuaon batman an 08 And Vim
Bu ommmmmu

the must have“ to: upon u: an-
maltmthﬂthlamntndldnot
comeundnuetounn. ‘

posed the Go

Ion. he and um Imam unity w ul-
Import-at, am not I
momma mtunnymdthutm-
enl pouq mm should be mm
out now.

We need not seen» such mmmuom
by the government M. their hot ulna.
It. m um um u. the mutant Ot-
tawa autumn. Bunk! m uld only "no."
Sunk! Md to Mute his hone: at the
Versailles summit. mu was his man
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080013-4

FOR (WI-INN. USE ONLY

the Vernllleo commit mom oooly. a. cold
the mootlnu mun none or the mobbin-
onthemnGLBoooid:
"Wmcmmhhmotcumncmd-
iutothoaogiotonionJhoWoMuooInp
hodtoiomooonmyondpoohootilut
the womb: mutt-too oi tho Wootom
compioiiodtomonvhothcttoodimt
monopoedtothoob'nogroimmpoor.
ovcnottho ﬂokotlottins
mmuﬂWtotholpoodoitm
vauurouthoydocidodtounhoui
ottholr vopoooo."

m poet-Inmate ioint communique
mod woo-oi woni uproootono ohout
thowoblcmo tourhtnsctoditotothoso-
vietUnion. “mom ttho“dovoloplnont
or economic mom nciolrclottono will
bcouhiocttopeﬂodicox ooottovio'.”
Accordinctothel’onialiniettyot-
new. tho pononoi topmontotivoo oi the
heodeoiototolnotthtootlnootodlocuu
this wohloin hotorothcomnmitohdm-
pared unto] oltornotivo Grotto oi this
port oi tho joint communique. Whot woo
need in tho and communique woe tho
union propond to: one “on tho m-
mltcmroiiodtonoohoccorthwoonot
thcjoboilomhionly.

Dooptto mm hy the Joponooo
Cowmmonhtho mhdoclinooocciontod
otter the umnit. ond Mendel circles
handed the summit on o motion». The
It'ollowin‘tzt'iticiomInnate) hohooniin
8

OTho Joponooo much woe overly
undtivo oft-critictnm tho'wtrodo

i irictionwithutho olorUGondnmpo.

reooon, upon took on ”on mm.
tromboginnlngtoondthoodtit'ooin

S
3

. epooltton topropooo o constructive plot:
to rohobilitoto the intomotiono! nonotu-y
um.

O'Iho U! ond Wooten niropo fought

eoch othor. with thelt roopcctivo no.
tlonol interest ot otohc. to olioit con-
ceuiono from ooch othot hooouoo thou
ammnto of tho Iovlot Union ond their
economic policloo ditto}. not upon od-
hercd to o ”pooco ot my voice" policy.

The Joponcoc Government woiooo itooll
by ﬂying thot upon mod on o Meta
ot the Votoouloe mmnit. But we doubt
thot othor oomtrioo which took post In
the summit epprocioto upon in the unto
my.

COPYRIGHT: The Daily ‘loouuri. 1982

C80: 4120/298

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500080013-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

LDP MAIN FACTIONS' POSITIONS DESCRIBED

Tokyo YOHIURI SBIHBUN in Japanese 1, k. 5 Hey 82
[Article: "Energing Trends in the LDP Politics of 1982"]
[1 May 82 p 2]

[Text] The 1982 political scene opened with predictions
of "great disturbances in the uorl " (for-er Prine Minister
Pukuda). Hhile the Suzuki and Tsnaka factions have been
steadily preparing for Suzuki's reelection. the Puhuda.
Konoto, and Nsksgaus factions have :uddanly begun
strengthening their critical poszure toward the Suzuki-
rsnaka regine. The undercurrent in the political situation
certainly seems to have begun loving toward the LDP
presidential election this fall. While keeping an eye on
the post-Suzuki period. every faction. including the
Nskssone faction, which has kept silent, is preparing for
the sulner and fall battles. "hat is in the ninds of

each fection's leading nenbers....

Two Eyes of Typhoons Have Begun Moving

One day in early April, Rokusuke Tanska. the chairman of LDP's Policy Research
Council and one of those close to the prime minister. "tempted” lcononic
Planning Agency Director Koeoto by saying: "Hr Koeoto. wouldn't you like to
go to the Versailles aunnit (the advanced nations' suuait conference)?"
Bewildered. Konoto asked: "Doesn't Mr Abe (H111 Minister) vent to go?"
Tanaka answered: “No problem, you can squeeze yourself in."

Prinz Minister Suzuki had Koeoto acconpany him to the North-South sunnit last
fall and succeeded in keeping Konoto in his cabinet. Recurrence of the ease
pattern....

"Konoto will resign his cabinet post some day. If an LDP presidential

election primary is held, he will surely resign." It was a firstclass check
by Tsnaka. who has a unique sense for anticipating situations.

FOIIOIFHJAlrUUIIHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One month has passed since then. Komoto has been speaking not only about
econoaic issues but also about defense issues and emphasizing his "existence."
he has also had a meeting with former Prime Minister Puhuda. for which he
carefully chose the timing. "No eyes of typhoons have at last begun moving"--
those surromding the prime ninister have assumed a stance.

In June there will be no shortage of uncertain factors which will shake the
political arena. The first verdicts will be handed down to the political
defendants in the Lockheed incident, and the revenue deficit in ”-81 will
be revealed to be 2 trillion yen. Moreover. adainistrative reform budget
compilation. trade friction...difficult hurdles follow one after another.

As Tsnaka has read the situation. if Komoto runs in a primary election and
Abe and others follow him. a primary election will be held. In such a case.
it will be a task of extreme difficulty for the prime minister. who has been
indifferent about recruiting LDP members. to obtain the highest vote total
in a primary election.

"Don't worry. such a thing won't happen." says the prime minister. In spite
of the difficult enviroalent. he displays tremendous confidence to leading
members of the Suzuki faction who are concerned. "Anybody can offer criticin.
If my way is wrong, they should offer specific countermeasures." whoever
becomes prime minister, this difficult situation will remain unchanged. The
bill for deficit government bonds issued under the Pukuda administration is
now being presented. Komoto hinself is responsible for the economic slump.
isn't he? The prime minister has been hinting at a joint responsibility
theory between the lines. He seems to judge that "tomato and Abe (a rukuda
faction member) lack a just cause for rebellion apinst Suzuki."

Confidence Supported by the Tanaka Faction

what firms up Suzuki's confidence is the support of the Tanska faction, the
strongest corps in the LDP. The Tanaka faction has 109 Diet members. To
Together with 86 Suzuki faction members, 'it accounts for elnost half of the
423 L0? Diet members. Even if the three factions critical of the Suzuki
administration are united, they total only 129, far from the total number of
the Tenalta and Suzuki factions.

The Suzuki and Tanska Regine. a Strategy of Harmony

As long as the Tanaka faction. which has been gasping under the heavy pressure
of the Lockheed incident. is in a situation where "there is no option other
than Suzuki's reelection" (a leading member of the Tanaha faction), Suzuki
will win overwhelmingly in the LDP presidential balloting by 1.0? Diet members
even if a primary election is held. It is an indication of the strategy of
simple harmony that the Suzuki-Tanaka regime is s sum-of-one-plus-one regime
[the Japanese character for "sum" also means "harmony"].

The Suzuki regime is said to be a monolithic regime. ”hm scratched, however,
it reveals unexpected fragility. From the beginning of the Suzuki administra-
tion, dissatisfaction over personnel matters has been smoldering within the
Tanaka faction. Although the Tsnska faction gained the central positions

MWLUSBONLY
lillfﬂﬂﬁCJAl.USE(MHLY

in the LDP in the last personnel change and cabinet reshuffle, Tokusaburo
Kosaka, the Tanaka faction's recommendation for minister of foreign affairs,
was appointed minister of transportation. 0n the issue of reforming the upper
house's nationwide electoral district, the focus of attention in the current
Diet session, the leading members of the Tanaka faction who have been actually
negotiating were placed in a difficult position because the prime minister
had not made up his mind until recently.

"Suzuki never gets his own hands dirty. He always makes use of us," is a
complaint that is constantly heard within the Tanaka faction.

"Suzuki became prime minister in e frock. If he is careless, he will die
suddenly," wisecracked former Prime Minister Tanaka the other day in a meeting
with young members of the Suzuki faction. His tone contained a touch of
cynicism in recognition of the voices within the Tanaka faction.

Tanaka's earnest wish is to overcome the Lockheed incident and to restore the
power of the Tanaka faction as a whole.

For this purpose. elections to both the House of Representatives and Councilors
should be held under the direction of the LDP Secretary General likaido and

Deputy Secretary General Takeshita. Then. "the Tanaka faction membership
will number 135" (former Prime Minister Tanska).

Tanaka's remark appears to be a threat warning the Suzuki faction that Suzuki's
reelection is a means for restoration of the Tanaka faction and that the
Tanaka faction does not unconditionally support Suzuki's reelection.

Former Prime Minister Tanaka intends to have his son-in-law run in the next
House of Representatives election from the same district as Kunikichi Saito.
the chief clerk of the Suzuki faction. this is one example.

"Suzuki became prime minister accidentally. You have served enough, haven't
you? Give the job to Pukuds or Konoto." Recently. this message was delivered
to Suzuki from former Prime Minister Kishi. Since Seto, no prime minister
has succeeded in being reelected. when Suzuki received Kishi's message. the
supposedly confident prime minister's face clouded over for a moment without

a word.

[a May 82 p 2]

First to Hold a Study Meeting

One evening in early April, Agriculture Minister Tsrawa was greeting former
agriculture ministers with complete graciousness. He invited to a party at
the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries annex in Sanban-cho.

Tokyo. eight former agriculture ministers such as Prime Minister Suzuki.

former Prime Minister Pukuda. Tadao Kuraishi. naizo Matsuno, Munenori Akagi....
Suzuki, glass in hand. smiled to the other participants and was in a good

INNR(INHCIAI.UGIIM‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nood. Soon. the partcipante forned groups of close friends and talked within
the groups. Pukude, surrounded by liatsuno. Nakagawe (the director of the
Science and Technology Agency and others. grieved over the crisis in national
finances even on this kind of occasion. which was fitting for a financial
expert.

"He often lake erroneous econonic forecasts. Bowever,.whan we make a nietaka,
we have to take new measures. we cannot allow ourselves to stand idly by
and watch the situation." He criticized Suzuki. who will not even freeze

expenditures partially, in spite of a ”-81 revenue dificit that will certainly
reach 2 trillion yen. One person told Pulmda: "It is your turn to act in

this political situation. You should speak out." To hin, Pukuda nooded. but
said: "I cannot speak now. Hell. let's watch for the government'o efforts."

"There will be great disturbances in the world this year. Even if I don't
nova. heaven will nova." At the beginning of the year, Pukuda often issued
such warnings. Recently. however, he has been keeping silent in public
places. The reasons why are his realization that he cannot nova thought-
lessly and his good sense that criticien of the governnent before the
Versailles emit (starting lo June) is against the national interest.

Nevertheless. before any other factions. the Pulmda faction will hold a
virtual faction study nesting in Bakone on 19 Jma. In order to lighten the

factionnl color of the neeting. the nesting is being called "a neeting to
gather with Mr and Mrs Pukuda." .Iukuds is on the verge of breaking his
silence there.

It will be after the first verdicts handed down to political defendants in
the Lockheed trial (8 June). Theaverdicte are said to be certain to be
guilty. The revenue deficit also will be deternined by then. noreover.
Suzuki is travelling overseas to attend Versailles suit. the United Natione'
Special Session on Disarnanent. and to visit South Anerica in order to avoid
the inpact of the verdicts. and he will return to Japan on 18 June "when

the excite-eat will have cooled down" (a eiddlestending nenbsr of the Suzuki
faction). The Pukuda faction meeting will be held on the day after 18 June.

It is very good tiling.

When the Desire Arises, Can Be Not Speak?

"Hr Fukuda has a desire to make a comeback as prime minister. "hen he has
the desire. he cannot speak out." Those close to the prine einister check
Pukuda in this nanner. Pukuda, on the other hand, coeplaine to those close
to hin: "The political situation is depressing. Suppressed by the power

of nunbers (the Tanaka faction). dissatisfaction has been accunulating in the
LDP. Some day, it will explode." But will Pukude "declare war" by himself?

If Fukuda decides to rebel against the Suzuki-ranska regime in preparation for
the fall battle. Nakagawa will nove and Shintaro Abe (um ninister) will
follow. Even though Fukuda is powerless in terns of nunbers before the huge
wall of the Suzuki-Tanaka regine. the weight of his words as an elder
state-an is unrivaled. Furthermore. behind Pukuda is former Prine Minister

“WWW?
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kishi, the father-in-law of Abe, who is explicitly urging Suzuki to retire
as prime minister. While some are speaking ill of Kishi. as if he were
Hideyoshi Toyotomi. who in his later years nisjudged the political situation
because of blind love for aideyori (Abe), Kishi has becone an 1.1)? supreme
counselor and has returned to the front of the political stage. He is
scheaing to have either Pukuda or Komoto steel political power.

Nakagawa says: "I an ready at any tine." Abe says: "I have served as XIII
minister long enough. I can resign at any time." These two are ready to
resign their cabinet posts end make a political change as soon as they
receive the co-Iand from Puhude. They also keep close contact with Toshio
Konoto (director of the Economic Planning Agency). whose resignation people
also have been talking about.

About a half a month ago, Abe met secretly with tomato in Okayama while on
a business trip. They spent a long time talking about the prospects of the
political situation this fall. I-ediately afterward. e ruhuda-xonoto
nesting was held. The unseen thread is gradually becoming visible.

Nevertheless, there is a great difference between lukude's and Koeoto's
philosophies even on the issue of econonic management. Hithin the Fukuda
faction, there is a mood of war-weariness: "We flatly refuse a recurrence
of the loo-day atruggle for the other faction (the Remote fection)." It is
contradictory for Pukuda, who opposes a primary election. to have Abe run in
a primary. Moreover. even if Abe and other Fukude faction nembers resign
their cabinet posts, the future prospects cannot be foreseen.

"Training is not good. They cannot unite to 'oppose-Susuki'." 'l'hose close
to the prime sinister have been spreading cynical remarks as if they can see
through Pukuda'e dileslaa. In the nidst of such cynical raerka, what is

"the Komon of the Showa era" about to say? [Ramon wee Tokugawa Hitsultuni,
17th century daimyo of the Hito donin who, after retiraeent, travelled
around the country in disguise with two young aides and used a variety of
clever strategema to right the wrongs perpetrated by wicked samurai officials.
Shows is the present era.]

[5 May 82 p 2]

Disabled Birds in a Cage

The Diet “embers Office Building in Nagataucho, Tokyo. A hot debate continued
in the office of Toshio Komoto (director of the Economic Planning Agency).
It was the mid-April caretakers nesting of the Komoto faction.

“When a verdict is handed down, how do we respond? the media will ask us
for content." "He can say that we are 'for' the request for Talusyuki 8eto
to resign as a Diet nember. can't we?" "It will be too late to say this and
that when a verdict is handed down to Ianeke. Us nust have a definite
response to the verdict on Seto." ”How is lit Komoto going to deal with

the matter?"

MWWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hiddle-standing and young menbers, who received training and lessons from
forest Primi Minister Mikiuleisuke Kujiraoke for exsnple—stood up and
asked leading menbers for their thinking one after another. However,
high-ranking nenbers such as Kinju lbriyana said nothing.

Unlike Riki, who is fanatically "entiplutocrat," Konoto is aining for the
prine ninistership by naintaining harnony with other LDP nanbers. The

questions really touched on his weakness. Konoto was not present at that
nesting. In order to avoid exciting other factions, nenbers were strictly

prohibited from talking about this Achilles' heel of Konoto. The scene
revealed the agony of Konoto's strategy.

Both Yasuhiro Nakasons (director of the Administrative hansgenent Agency)

and Konoto are powerful persons aining for the post-Suzuki prime ministership.
However, their factions are the fourth and fifth largest, following the
Tanska, Suzuki and Pukuda factions. Their factions each have less than 50
[DP Diet meebera and cannot run a candidate by themselves in the LDP
presidential primary election. Both Nskasone and Konoto have been taken

into Suzuki's cabinet and have becone disabled birds in a cage.

In this environnent, Konoto has nade the first nova.

On 27 hatch Konoto net with new, who has been critical of the Suzuki-Tannin
regine, for the first tine this year. Concerning lonoto, it has been said
that "unless he noves, he cannot grab political power" (a leading aenber of
the Suzuki faction). At last, speculation spread within the LDP that Komoto
would cooperate with Pukuda. Konoto, however, would only col-lent that

"Mr Pukuda is the authority on economic policy."

Cannot Wait Until Next Time

Komoto's basic strategy is to maneuver large factions with my nenbers in
preparation for the selection of the LDP president by LDP Diet nalbers.

For this purpose, he has contacted not only Pukuda but also the leading
neabers of the Pukuda faction, such as Ml‘l‘l Minister Abe and Shiokewe, the
deputy chairnan of the LDP Executive Coneittee. Horsover, he has had neetings
with for-er Director General of the Defense Agency Kanenaru, a leading nanber
of the Tanaka faction. It is a strategy of "steadily permeating the 1.0?
with the Konoto colors" (Naoso Shibuya, the chief caretaker of the Konoto
faction). However. the possibility of tukude supporting Konoto in this
fall's decisive battle remains completely insrsed "in a fog" (a leading
menber of the Komoto faction). Komoto faces harsh realities.

Concerning runors that Komoto will resign his cabinet post in June or confront
Suzuki over economic policy, Konoto clearly denies than when he says: "Don't
worry about such things."

It is certain. however. that Konoto, “ll years old, the sane as the prise

minister, "cannot pass this fall's presidential election and wait for the
next one in 1984"(Shibuya).

FOIOII'ICIALMONLY
IIIICNﬂNCJAl.USE(MVLY

while trying to approach Fukuda. konoto is giving his best efforts in his
current position and is acquiring a reputation as "Konoto, the policy nan."

His strategy scene to be to wait for "the develop-ant of the coupler conditions
which will pernit Konoto to run in the presidential election" (Shihuys).

But, "isn't he pro-Tanaka?" The Fukuda faction still talks accusingly of
Konoto's atteapt to approach Tanaka last summer.

"At any rate, he is the successor to Niki. We have to be cautious about bin.”
The Tanaka faction's doubts are strong.

Recently, Konoto travelled throughout the country to caepaign for the new
faces of the Konoto faction who are planning to run in the next elections

to both houses. he has also contacted leaders of the niddle-of-the-roed
parties such as Ikko Kasuga. the pernanent counselor of the Democratic
Socialist Party, in order to exchange opinions about the political situation
and policies. Be displays "new novenents" of these types. Even if Suzuki
is reelected in the presidential election this fall, a radical political .
change nay follow Suzuki's reelection. It scene certain that Koeoto has
begun loving in preparation for it.

Exclusively Repeats "Adninistrstive Before"

Meanwhile, Nakasone exclusively repeats the words "adninistrative reiore" and
stakes his political life on it. Even if party opinion is divided over the
issue of reforning the Japan National kailweys. and he is asked to do various
things and is attacked free every direction, he is ready to stick to a
principle and con-it double suicide together with the edninistretive reforn.
"It will never becone a disadvantage." says Soeuke Uno, the'chief caretaker
of the Nakssone faction. The calculation is that Nakesone's efforts will
wipe out his reputation as one who "wants to be too godd all the tine."

and build a new ieage of Nakasone within the LDP.

Pleased by the 6,000 people who gathered at a recent party of the faction,
Nakssone displayed his hidden confidence in saying: "This is an advance
toward our great wish."

To Nakasone. the road toward political power is also narrow and hard. The
Pukuda faction, whose schemes failed due by hakasone'e change of heart at
decisive nonents in the past, such as the first Tanaka-fukuda battle. is
very cautious about Nakasone.

Contrary to their home prefecture's desire for a "Joshu League." there is
no pipeline between Pukuda and Nakasone at present.

One of the political defendants in the Lockheed incident who- the Pukuda

and Konoto factions are watching with stern faces is a leading nenber of the
Nakasone faction, Takayuki Sato. Nakasone's attitude is to unit for Suzuki
to "abdicate" by exclusively approaching the Susuki-Taneka regine.

Leading eenbars worry that "We will be put into a straightjacket if we stick

only to Tanaka," and that they have no guarantee of the Suzuki-Tanske canp's
support for Nakaaone.

IOI10!IIJMI.UBIIINLY
'm ornau use ONLY

Behind the repetition of the worde "ad-iniatretive reform," Naheone is now
trying to strengthen friendship with the Tanaka faction'a leading neehere,
including LDP Secretary General Ilikaido and Gotoda (the chair-an of the
Election System Research Council), in preparation for the day of abdication.

The two who are etooping to conquer do not eeen to have found "the clincher"
yet.

COPYRIGHT: Yoniuri Shilbunaha 1982

9896
C80: 4105/111

lO
MWMONIX
IllPACT OP 8 JUNE JUDGMENT 0N mm PACI‘ION ASSESSED

Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 13 Jun 82 p 2

[From ”Political Periscope" Column by Takuo Hayuhi]

[Text]

MW 0‘ all!!! M
suggests that Tum. loo. VII
be W gully. Ive- II “I
hammer “3:6 also the
mend." he not nape I
"willy”verdlcl.

Moreover. unmet ling
unlormnalc lot Tam ls M
as a recall ol the cum
judgment. m conﬁdant
Susanna lealdo. Linen!-
Dcnncntlc Parly'n m
general. ls recelvln. con-
centrated mach min the
opposltlon parllec. ‘l'le
Wcmﬂymuumc
the so-called “my calculi"
including Nlhldo are deeply
embroiled In the klcltbncl
canals. Hence. lealdo In:
mumaelmouwnx.

How will the ween! M at
cvenu allecl the Min 0!
Tanalu and lb ucllon In
Japaneoepollllec? WIIlthetebe
may leaving the loctlon.
regardlng Tank's tome
WWWWWMWWWWWW WWW ”WWW WWW. ummmm WWWWWWWW
1m. m .u u Mutmm .1 m ﬂimsm

WWWWWWW W WWWWWW WWWWWWWWWW WWW
WWWWWWWWWWW WWW W WW WWWWW “WWW... W WWWWWW
WWWWWWWWWWWWWW. WWW WWWWW WWWWW WWWWW
wwwm-mmmumﬁ WWWWMWMWWWWWWMM mWWW mmmmmmmm

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News 1982

41 20/299

CSO:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500080013-4
DRAFT RESOLUTION ON 161'“ JO? CONGRESS

0‘1161035 Tokyo AKAHATA in Japanese 11 Jun 82 pp 9-11

[Draft resolution of the 16th congress of the JCP scheduled to open on 27 July,
adopted at the 9th plenum of the .16? Central Co-nittee on 9 June]

[Text] Chapter I. [Roman Nueral One] The Horld Situation and JCP's Inter-
national Duty .

l. The Deepening Crisis of world capitalists

The 15th congress of the JCP characterized the crisis confronting capitalise
in the world today as a "grave historical crisis in every political and
economic aspect cosparable to those that existed before and after

world War I and II." International developments in the acne 2 years since
that congress have justified this characterization with Isny facts.

The world's capitalist econony. which experienced the second oil crunch, has
been experiencing an ongoing recession since 1980. World trade declined and
surplus production has become a probles. In the United States and West European
comtries, unemployment has rapidly increased, surpassing the highest levels

of the postwar era. This recession has led to a severe inflation and fiscal
bankruptcy in many countries. which in turn are making the world economic
crisis even more serious. Under these circumstances. various quarters have
signaled their warning of a "recurrence of the world crisis of the 1980's."

For decades, the world's monopoly capitalism has been using Keynesian policies.
which systematized state monopoly capitalism and govermental intervention

in the economy as the main pillars propping up the capitalist economy: said
the econonic crisis today, however, the leaders thanselves of such monopoly

capitalist countries as the United States, Britain and Japan have been
compelled to admit the collapse of such policies. The fact that they are

left with few policy options in this crisis is naking the vicious cycle of
the economic crisis even more severe.

The first summit leeting of industrialized nations was held in 1975. offering

the promise that cooperation among the nejor capitalist countries would
enable the world to overcone the crisis; in the 8 years since then, these

13
FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sumsits have failed to adopt any serious program to combat the crisis although
they adopted measures to partially "adjust" policies from time to time. The

total nuber of unemployed in the seven-mater nations was 8.5 million in 1975;
it has surpassed the 20-million level today.

The old international econasic order centering on the United States began
disintegrating in the early 1970's in the midst of the international monetary
crisis and the oil crunch. This constitutes one of the most important aspects
of the crisis of world capitalist economy. The monopoly capitalist countries.
led by the United States, have made very possible effort to rebuild this
international order but they have failed to achieve the kind of success they
seek in this field. New contradictions and confrontations have emerged.

Developing countries in Asia. Africa and Latin America, which account for half
of the world population, still find themselves under the burden of prolomed
colonial rule. In addition, they continue to be subjected to economic
pressures from imperialism and capitalism. Thus, as focal points of all the
contradictions of world capitalist economy, these countries have experienced
particularly severe economic difficulties in the world recession. Their total
external debts grew 6 times in 10 years from $87 billion in 1971 to

$524 billion in 1981. A Horld Bank report predicts that the nuﬂaer of people
in the "absolute poverty" category in these countries will increase by another
100 million from the present 750 million by the end of this century.

The In conference on environment held in May seriously warned that the environ-
mental destruction of the earth-min the form of air and sea pollution, diminish-
ing forests, desolation of green land. population increases and food problems.
water shortages, increases in famine-struck populations and waste of resources-
is progressing toward jeopardizing mankind's very survival. This warning is
directed at no one but world capitalism which still has the bulk of the earth
under its economic control.

The resolution of the 15th JPC Congress called for an "international struggle
to impose democratic controls on multinational firms, establish economic
sovereignty and establish a new international economic order on the basis

of equality and fairness in opposition to attempts to reorganize in a
reactionary way the existing international economic order which is dominated
by the United States and which infringes upon the economic sovereignty of
other nations." It has become all the more the urgent task for people of all
countries to push this struggle. along with the struggle for democratic
economic reforms in each country designed to eliminate control by monopoly
capital and imperialism.

2. Plan for Limited Nuclear warfare Poses Threat to All Nations
There is a growing tendency among reactionary imperialist and monopoly capitalist

circles led by U.S. imperialism to try to find a way out of the ever-deepening
crisis facing world capitalism through arms expansion. aggression and war. This

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

tendency confronts all nations with the serious danger of a nuclear war. we
cannot forget the historical fact that the 1930 econonic crisis served as s
signal for the forces of fv-‘cisn and nilitarien to touch off war: the
Japanese ruling circles were driven to wage a war of aggression against
China;' the crisis also paved the way for World Her 11.

Particularly the Reagan shinistration of the united States, which cans to power
under the banner of "a strong America," has overtly pursued a "policy of
strength" with night and Iain while covering up its real nature behind a
snokescreen of countering the "Soviet threat." The Reagan adninistration has
stepped up acts of war. aggression and intervention while pushing a large-

scale am buildup centered around nuclear area. It has increased rapid
deploynent forces in the Middle Bast-Persian Gulf region and the Korean Peninsula
and intervened in such Latin herican countries as Nicaragua and 31 Salvador.
blatantly disregarding the sovereign rights of the people in these countries.

Highlightin. the dangerous nature of the Reagan adninistration's superhawkiah
policy to all nations in the world is Reagan's concept of linited nuclear
warfare, the feasibility of which he has reiterated tins and time again.

As our party has pointed out all along, the lieited nuclear warfare idea is a
"nuclear war version of the policy of attacking other countries one by one,”
as nentioned in the report to the lsth 361’ Congress, a policy which regards

' resort to nuclear war as a neans to attain aggressive aim in target areas
while avoiding an all-out nuclear war with the Soviet Union. The 0.8. dlitary

has held this concept as the foundation of 0.8. nuclear strategy over the past
10 years.

It is a serious setter that while saying that “in reflection" the United States
lost the Vietnam Her because it did not use nuclear weapons. the Reagan
administration has hastened to increase its nuclear warfare capability in Europe
and East Asia (including Japan) by bringing back this barbarous concept of
nuclear warfare to the fore. This stale fron a sinister sttnpt to turn
nuclear weapons into "usable-weapons." nanely weapons which can be used in
actual fighting without conpunction. not stopping at using then as a seam of

a blachail. This is fraught with the danger of escalation to all-out

nuclear war.

The Reagan administration's stress on its limited nuclear war plan has brought
to light the real role of U.S.-do|inated nilitary blocs such as ”no and the
Japan-0.8. security treaty and has resulted in the collapse of the deceptive
”nuclear umbrella theory." These nilitary blocs are not "bulwarhs" for the
security of the participating nations but yohss which will lead to national
ruin by asking their territories theaters of nuclear warfare for the security
of the United States. Nevertheless. the Reagan sdninistration. with the
aggressive strengthening of these nilitary blocs as an important pillar of

its "policy of strength,” is pressing its allies to step up preparations for
joint costat operations under 0.8. leadership and to carry out a new arts

15
roe OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOIOFI’ICIALUSEONLY

buildup, in disregard of the voices of all nations against linited nuclear
warfare. The Reagan administration itself is increasing its theater nuclear
forces in a planned nanner, including by planning deployment of cruise
nissila in Japan and elsewhere.

with Japan and other allies. the Reagan administration has persistently taken a
negative and obstructionist attitude in disarnanent discussions in the

United Nations and elsewhere toward disarnanent measures. including on the
resolution calling for a ban on the use of nuclear weapons which nay possibly
stand in its plan for linited nuclear warfare.

Under the Reagan achinietretion, the danger of a limited nuclear war has becone
real. with the possibility of its being ignited by a clash anywhere in the world.
It has batons an urgent central task, literally a utter of national survival

or death, for ellfnetions in the world to oppose the 0.8. plan for limited
nuclear warfare and prevent the concept of limited nuclear warfare fron being
put into execution. as well as to achieve a total ban on nuclear weapons. which
will renove the possibility of a nuclear war fro. the earth.

It is especially important under the present tense international situation to
maintain the position of settling international disputes by peaceful nuns in
opposition to all manifest attenpts to resort to the ”position of strength”

in settling international disputes. There are were actually going on now over
territorial disputes, as is the case with the Iran-Iraq war and the Falklands
war between Britain and Argentina. These were, although linitad to the
respective belligermts at the nonent. 'are fraught with the danger of escalat-
ing into large-scale wars if big powers intervene. Depending on the situation,
no one can rule out the possibility of their leading to a limited nuclear

war. A territorial dispute is an international one between two independent
countries. which is by nature different free a national liberation struggle

no matter how legitimate the slain of each party may he. Accordingly. thorough
adherence to the principle of achieving a peaceful settlenent throud: dialogue
is the only correct way to contribute to world peace.

3. The World Is Changing

The world's overall balance of power today is radically different froa what
it was when preparations for the two world were were underway.

The situation of over 60 years ago, when inperialisn-nonopoly capitalise could
dominate the whole earth. is a thing of the pest. At present. countries which
accomt for one-third of the world population have «barked upon the road of
socialise after leaving the capitalist world. Moreover. east of the forner
colonies and dependencies have cut their colonial shackles and won political
independence. The nsjority of these countries have joined the nonaligned

sunit conference, foraing a powerful current in world politics with world
peace, national self-determination, a ban on nuclear weapons and the dissolution
of nilitary blocs as their goal.

16

MOMGALUSEONLY
IVOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

True. the United States. Japan and the West European monopoly capitalist
countries account for more than half of the world's industrial production.
But in terns of population. they account for only one-sixth of the world.
In the United Nations, socialist and nonaligned countries now occupy about
two-thirds of the seats, greatly reducing the ability of the Western
countries led by the United States, in terns of voting strength. to ran
their imperialist policies through the United Nations.

Inside the nonoply capitalist countries, the working class and the people are

intensifying their struggle, shaking the ruling eystens in their countries
and the policies of the imperialists and reactionaries.

It is of international significance that refer-ist goverments successively
case into being in France and Greece last year as a result of judgnmt lads
by the voters. Particularly the French Socialist Party occupies a special
place asong the European Social Desocrstic forces by having pursued a united
front policy with the commist party over the past 10 years since it
abandoned the line of antimist alliance which it had followed for a

long tine in the postwar period. Despite the complexity of its past and its
contradictions. the French Socialist Party won the presidential election by
dint of the united front with the co-mist party and succeeded in forning a
coalition goverment with the commist party for the first tins in 30 years.
1111s provides a canon lesson in regard to political reforn and the cause of
deaocrscy and socialise in advanced capitalist countries. althoud: the trench
Socialist Party's policies have a water of questionable aspects. such as

its srgunsnt about nuclear arlenent based on the "theory of nilitary balance."

Another iaportant change which has taken place since last year is that the
strengthening of the Reagan ahinistration's posture for linited nuclear
warfare has raised fears and protests anong the people of the NATO comtries

in Europe. who have becose aware of the deceptive nature of the "nuclear
ubrella theory." As a result. antinuclear luv-ants in these countries against
a balance of nuclear terror have spread so wide that they have shaken the

very foundation of the nilitary alliance. In the United States. too, the
Reagan policy is causing various conflicts and ruptures between the goverr-ent
and the people who are being weighed down by the heavy burden of am expansion
and among the leading circles who have hitherto supported and pushed the

0.8. nuclear war policy.

Overall, the world is clearly undergoing a great change in the direction of
peace and progress, with objective conditions continuing to exist and on the

increase for frustrating the inperialists' nuclear war plan which. if unchecked.
would bring about ruinous catastrophe for all nations.

4. International Role of Socialist Countries and Berna of alauvinisn

It is beconing increasingly inportant for world peace and social progress that
the three najor revolutionary currents of the world-socialisn, the revolu-

tionary nova-out and the national liberation nova-eat in capitalist comtriesu

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

neke e correct onward nerch in soliderity in opposition to the inperielist
reactionary forces led by the 0.8. imperielists. Hut conlicetes the
situetion in this- connection is the growing cheuvinist end hegemonist tide
mng socialist cauntries end the world commie: novuent.

Since the birth of the first socielist stete in Russie in 1917. socislist
countries es s whole heve served es s positive driving force steering the
history of unkind towerd peece end progress. Recorded in the world history
for the pest helf e century or so‘ere neny contributions of eocieliem to

the cause of defending peece end independence of verioie netions fron
inperielist eggression, including the role pleyed by the Soviet Union in
destroying the fescist end militariet eggressor bloc in world Her II. end the
victory of the Vietneneee people in their netionel selvetion struggle egsinst
the [1.5. eggression in which they shettered the 0.8. inperielists' divide-end-
destroy policy. In the field of economic construction. too. socielist
countries heve been striving to build poverty-free society. They ere indeed
still subjected to historical linitetions stunning from the fect thet they
hed to etert fron beckwerd econonic conditions, end to consequences of e
series of policy deviations in the pest. Nevertheless. socieJ isn hee demon-
strated to the world meny edvenced scconplistuents including the eliminetion
fron society the cepitelist principle of exploitetion of sen by men end the
firs esteblishent of substentisl sociel security systen. Lenin in perticnler
Iede reseerches in the spirit of trensleting the principles of socielisn
into Russie's historicsl fects; his resesrches were fully scientific.
revolutionery end creetive. Todey they will beer theoreticel end precticel
significance. They were e greet contribution to scientific socielisn.

The problu lies in the feet that under the present circuutences where
socialise encoepesses more then s dozen of countries in lurope. Asie end
Letin Ansrice end hes grown into e glcbel eysten with increesingly greeter
inpect on internetionel politics. the socieliet big powers heve increesed
their cheuviniem end hegemonisn to harm the ceuse of socielisn end its
prestige. end to ceuse en internetionel counterflow or devietions thet
undermine the struggle end unity of the enti-ieperielist forces.

The 15th .10? Congress peid speciel ettention to the question of this inter-
netionel counterflow; develop-ants in the pest 2 yeere heve edded ilportence
to this question for the enti-ilperielist forces the world over.

First of s11. we nust pey ett-Ition to the Soviet intervention in the effeirs
of Afghenisten end Polend.

The Soviet wer of intervention in Afghenisten hee literelly teken on the look
of e coloniel wer "drewn into the qeugmire." As the recent 116-23 us Generel
Assembly vote shows, it continues to be under strong fire from the world
public opinion.

The esteblisl-ent of military rule in Polend in December lest yeer is en
outregeoue sct absolutely incompetible with the principles of socielism. It
wee enother development egeinst denocrecy end egeinst the interests of the

18
FOB OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Polish people for which the hegemonist intervention by the Soviet Union was
responsible. The Soviet lhion, at war with the canpeign for daeocretic
reforne since the earner of 1980, had continued to apply pressure on Poland
to bring the situation there under its control.

As our party pointed out, althth it was required to conduct criticisn end
struggle to overcome the situation caused by reckless strikes by sons
nabere of solidarity and their collaborations with en entisocialist force,
this requirnent does not justify the establish-1t of a nilitery govern-ant
in a socialist country.

Lying at the root of a series of violations of the right of national self-
detereinetion in the past, including the invasion of Czechoslovakia by the
troops of five nations, is the Soviet-centered concept of "sphere of
influence” which is unjustifiable by the language of socialise.

Defenders of chauviniel would talk about an "aid to the national liberation
struggle" or "class-oriented policies" in international issues in an ett-pt

to justify cbeuvinien'e hegenonietic activity; however. piecing another

country under hegenoniet control on the excuse of protecting it free a

future inerieliet eggreeeion is nothing nore than a repetition of the
inperialiets' logic of the partition of the world. It is the elinination of
this logic of intervention that the true internetionelisa based on the interests
of the working classes is demanding.

Secondly. we met pay attention to problene 'in the struggle for the world
peace.

In the current nuclear disease-ant negotiations between the United States end
the Soviet Union, the two governnents'heve produced e series of proposals
respectively. Both sides in their proposals seek a "freeze" or "reduction"

of one weapon or another from the position of "nuclear deterrent" end
“military balance." These propoeele have one cor-on weak point, end it is that
they lack an aspiration for a total ban on nuclear area which is the top-
priority task of nuclear dieaueanent. This type of negotiation between
nuclear powers can produce neeningful reeulte only when the countries involved
seriously lists: to the worldwide duesnd for a total ban on nuclear weapons
and attach isportance to it.

The Soviet theory of ”nilitary balance" practically seeks to preserve Soviet-
u.s. nucleer equilibrim. establish nessures of nutuel trust between the
military blocs, and to set forth theee partial neeeurea es the central task
of the world peece while leaving the preeent situation involving the nuclear
arm race and the confrontation of the nilitary bloce to continue. On
occasions the Soviet Union nantions such basic teske es a total ban on
nuclear weapons and dissolution of all military blocs, but its "Iilitary
belence" theory actually seeks to shelve then.

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore. the Soviet leadership not only bases its foreign policy on this
position but also has strongly seked the peece end denocretic novelents of

the world to support it in the nene of its "peece progren." This constitutes
the met serious prohlen.

In its June 1981 reply to s letter fro. the Soviet lesdership esking our
psrty's view of the "peece progren" edoptsd by the 26th CPSU Congress, the

JCP pointed out thet the slogens telling for s totel hen on nuclesr wespons

end the dissolution of all silitery blocs hsd dissppeered fron the list of
hesic tasks of Soviet foreign policy since the 25th CPSU Congress in 1976.

It proposed in the sens reply that these teske he pursued es s utter of
fundaentel significance in the struggle for world pesos. . In its letter of
July 1981 in response to the JCP's letter, the Soviet lesdership steted thet
"the various tests in the struggle for pesce" proposed by the JCP ere "identical
in principle with whet we have been ssying for sone tine." If‘the etst-ent
ores en honest one. the Soviet lesdership hes the ohligstion of volunterily
taking the initietive worthy of e socislist country towerd e totel ben on
nuclear weepone end the dissolution of ell nilitsry blocs, end of dmutreting
to the world its position of pursuing e different peth then thet of the

inperieliete who persist in the neintsnerce of silitery blocs end "nucleer
deterrent."

Third, the SoViet Ihion turned the journel P11081348 OF PEACE AND SOCIALISM.

en internetionel forum of the colnunist psrties of verious‘countries. into

e propegends orgsn for Soviet foreign policy which violetes the journsl's
principle of the sens rights end equslity for ell psrticipeting psrties. This
is elso s grave expression of Soviet hegenonisn. 0n issues reflecting inter-
netionei differences, the journal trests the views of the CPSU end psrties
following the CPSD's leed es the ”orthodox" view thoroughly shutting out free
publicstion the views of ell ‘other psrties thet do not conforn to it. In the
one of struggle egeinst "enti-Sovietisn." it not only shuts out ell criticises
of the Soviet Union but elso continues to heep ehuees on such criticises
charging thet they side with inperislist ideologies. At s conference of the
representatives of psrties in Novednr 1981. the JCP end e series of other
psrties strongly denuded corrective action. The denend wee ignored by the
Soviet Union end the journel's editoriel burssu. Since thet tine, P3031348

0? PM! AND SOCIALISH end its editoriel hureeu hsve even intensified their
ectivitiss es s propegende orgsn for the USSR. In recent ergunents between

the Soviet lesdership end its followers concerning the journsl, Soviet-
c'entsrsd eeeertions thet the Soviet Union is the "citedel of pence on the
earth" end the "center end vsnguerd" of ell the struggles in the world. end
thet supporting the Soviet foreign policy is the intrinsic duty of the journsl.
PROBLDB or race AND SOCIALISM. heve energed in en increasingly neked feshion.

The journel. PROBLEMS OF P3468 AND SOCIALISM, end its editoriel hureeu heve

reduced theuelvee to en instrunent of hegenonisn for rellying the co-unist
psrties of the world around the Soviet lesdership es the lender end under its
line. Their hernful role in the world co-uniet move-eat cen he conered to
thet of acumen which ected as so. instrument of internetionsl intervention

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the Soviet leadership headed by Stalin. The proposal for abolishing
the journal represents a just, international initiative based on the
great cause of scientific socialisn.

Fourth, under the banner of international coercion, the chauvinisn and inter-
ventionisn of the GOP in its international activities since the "Great
Cultural Revolution" caused extremely great losses to the world co-unist
novenant and the international struggles of anti-inperialist forces.

In the area of doaeatic affairs, the CCP has. to sons extent. conducted
general reviews of the mistakes of the "Great Cultural Revolution” since its
Sixth Central Co-ittee Plenu- lest year. and. on the basis of such revius,
initiated changes in its line. Regarding its niatakes in international
activities such as interventionist acts against revolutionary novenents in
other countries and its policy of alliance with 0.8. inparialisn however. the
CCP has not yet aede a clearcut reviu or change in its line. Under its
interventionisn in particular. the CCP attupted to force on the JCP the
doctrine of violent revolution to the effect that "the gun brings political
power with it." and the theory of "four enemies." It also trained fectional
elenente against the JC? with a view toward creating confusion within JCP
ranks, and even encouraged anticonunist and rightist forces in Japan through
its theories glorifying the Japan-11.8. nilitary alliance. The OCP has thus
inflicted extra-sly great here on the reformist wants in Japan.

This year narks the 10th anniversary of the restoration of diplonatic rela-
tions between Japan and China. The econonic and cultural exchanges during
this period marked the developnsnt of certain positive significance in the
national intercourse between the two'peoples; however, the basic position of
the Japanese reactionary ruling circles such as the L1)? goveruent and
businesses in pronoting Sino-Japanese relations was praised on the attitude
of the Chinese authorities' welcoming of the Japan-0.8. nilitary alliance.
This attitude has something to do with a new attenpt to restore and strengthen
nilitarisn, and make use of Sino-Japanese relations in their pursuit of
reactionary policies in Asia.

The JCP hereby points out that if the CC? truly wants to liquidate its errors
of the "Great Cultural Revolution" on the basis of reason, it should know
that a general review of the aistekes of its interventionisn into inter-
national activity is a question it cannot avoid.

5. International Duty of the JCP

The JCP has been opposed to all trends of inpsrialisl and hegenonisn and rude

every possible effort for progress in the struggles of the Japanese and world

peoples, upholding the banners calling for nuclear war prevention. a total ban
on nuclear weapons. dissolution of all nilitary blocs. and for the defense

of the right of self-determination for all nations.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the area of international activity and struggle. the JCP deems it necessary
to attach importance to the following point in particular:

First of all, the concept of limited nuclear war being prepared by 0.8.
imperialism leads to a holocaust of the peoples the world over. including the

Japanese. Preventing the danger of such war and defending world peace is
the duty of foremost preference in the international area.

Japan has been incorporated into 0.8. inerialists' nuclear war plan as a
forward bus in the Far East. It is of particular importance to the Japanese
people to proaote unified developments betwun international struggles for
nuclear war prevention and ‘‘or a total ban on nuclear weapons and struggles
in our country against turning Japan into a nuclear base under the Japan-
U.S. secm'ity treaty and against the LDP government siding with the 0.8.
nuclear strategy. Under present circumstances in particular. where the
government and the L0? and such anticosnunist parties as Koaeito and the
Democratic Socialist Party are pursuing a dangerous path toward large-scale
arnament expansion under Japan-0.8. joint operations and. at the same tine.
talking about disermmsent in a propaganda address to the UN General Assdly‘s
special session in an attempt to deceive people and cover up their true
identity. the struggle against the policy and action of the LDP government.
which plays a role in the 0.8. nuclear strategy, has becone a key toward
realizing the Japanese people's desire to oppose a nuclear war.

In the struggle to prevent a nuclear war and eliainate its danger. greater
efforts must be exerted to overcone the aistaken theory that an “equilibritml
of military potentials" centering around an equilibrium of terror by nuclear
arse deters a war and the influence of the theory. There is an argueent
that a‘ transition "from equilibrium to reduction” is the realistic line of
nuclear diesreansnt. However, what was promoted in reality was nothing but
the putting of spurs on the limitless buildup of nuclear armament under the
pretext of aiming to achieve an "equilibrium" with each other, far from
"reductions."

In the struggle to prevent a nuclear war, as our party stressed in its article
”For a True Program of Feats" published last June. it is most ilportant to
take the lead in the struggle to heighten and spread the demands and campaign
of the people of all countries into international opinion without limiting
than within the framework of maintaining an "equilibrium of military potentials,“
thereby making a total ban on nuclear weapons the most urgent task. of course.
even partial asasures for nuclear disarmament are significant if they do not
legalize a nuclear erns race, are effective in truly preventing a nuclear war
and contribute to a total ban on nuclear am. The conclusion of an agreement
on the prohibitioa of the use of nuclear arms is a task for serious considera-
tion. In regard to a UN resolution calling for accelerating the conclusion

of this agreement. the Soviet UniOn changed its attitude from an "abstention"
to a consent last year after our party criticised its "abstention." Although
belated. this was a natural course of action for a socialist country to take.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our party strongly appeals to the Japanese people. the people of the world
and all organizations that desire peace to regard a total ban on nuclear
arms as the central task in the international struggle for world peace and
to develop international solidarity extensively on that basis. This is
the way for the denands and canpaigns for peace to truly advance with the
strength to cut off the vicious cycle of a nuclear ares race and is the
nest urgent international duty for safeguarding unkind's existence and
pnosperity free the danger of a nuclear war.

Next cones the struggle of each nation to defend its right to self-deterIina-
tion in independently choosing and deternining its course and destiny and to
oppose any infringement upon it. This is a very sole-1 dnand of the cause
of scientific socialisn and. at the sane tine, it constitutes an indispensable
basis for a stable syetu of international peace.

Our party hasbeen sternly condeming the Soviet Union for its infring-ent
of the right to national salt-determination and intervention into Afghanistan
and Poland. However. in the world today.‘ the country which is neat antagonistic
to the right to self-determination of nations is 0.8. inpsrialise which is
bitterly denomcing the Soviet Union for infringing upon sovereign righczs

in connection with the Afghan and other issues. Under the Japan-0.8. nilitary
alliance, even the Japanese people'e'ridit to deter-ins whether to participate
in a war is virtually held by the United States. ‘lheir territory is turned
into the United States' base for aggression and intervention to encroach upon
the Asian nations' right to self-deternination. It is a clear historical fact
that the United States has been resorting to every conceivable neans of inter-
vention. including terrorise and artifices, to inpose upon other nations a
political or social systel suitable to it not only in the central and

South American countries but also in broad areas of the world which it arbi-
trarily counts as the "sphere of influence" of inperialian.

In connection with this question. the position of denouncing one side‘s
intervention while defending the- other side's intervention lacks any

reasonable consistaicy and. in the end. results in defending either ieperialisn
or hegenonisn. In order to help the work for the peace and social progress

of the world firnly naintain the position of justice which can win the true
understanding and synpahy of the people of all countries. we must carry out
the viewpoint that all nations' right to self-deternination nust be respected
and that no infringeeent upon this by any force-~ba it ieperialisn or
hegemnisn of a big socialist country-mean be tolerated. We nust neke this
viewpoint a consistent precondition for international solidarity.

me third is a resolute struggle against all expressions of big country
chsuvinisn and hegenonisn in the world's co-mist nave-ant.

For the past 20 years, the .16? has been nost actively carrying out the inter-
national poleeics against big country chauvinisn and hegemonise on the basis
of facts and reason, and in a nanner conforning to the principles and rules
of the conunist novenent. It has also carried out a consistent. principled

23
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

struggle against an intervention by bringing up antiparty sectarianism or
the question of the reduction of the journal PROBLES OF PEACE AND SOCIALISH
to a Soviet propaganda tool.

The "Resolution on Some International Questions" adopted at the eighth plenum
of the Central 'Connittee in March of this year is of particular significance
as a compass for future activities.

In the future, our party will also continue to strive to strengthen friendship
and solidarity with not only the (to-unist and workers parties but also with
all other progressive organizations that take independent positions. At the
same time, our party will continue to uphold the basic attitude of developing
relatiom with those parties with which it holds a difference of opinion

on some important questions'irrespective'of whether they are parties of
socialist comtriea or capitalist countries as long as they do not carry out
intervention or attacks on the Japanese party and democratic movement. At
the sane time, it will continue its active endeavons to overcome the mistaken
positions, policies and deeds of big country chauvinisn and its followers which
harn the world comunist movement as a whole.

has present crisis facing world capitalists clearly shows that there can be no
stable solution to the present worldwide contradictions within the framework
of the capitalist and monopoly capitalist system. The thesis of the party _
program—' 'as a direction in the development of world history, the fall of
imperialism and the victory of socialism are inevitable”-is gaining its
conclusive evidence on the whole.

Big country chauvinisn and hegemonisn which impair the work of socialise are not
inevitable products of socialism but, in essence. they are legacies of the
previous era which are linked to deviations fron the principles of scientific
socialise. If various deviations found in a country are overcome in accordance
with the principles of scientific socialism. there is the possibility and
prospect that the work of socialism in any country of the world can advance
with the support and smathy of the working class and people. As long as

the working class and peOple exist in the world, the overcoming of big country
chauvinism and'hegemonism and the victory of socialism are the definite
direction in the development of world history no matter what complicated course
they may traverse.

The fourth is to fight in the van of the national work to oppose the road of
militarism and imperialism subservient to the United States. which the 1.1)?
govemaent and its follower forces are pushing. and to win the road of no
nuclear arms, nonalignmant and neutrality thereby abandoning the security
treaty and aiming at abolishing the San Francisco arrangements. If a new
Japan joins in the international current of no nuclear arns and nonalignnent,
it will be a significant international contribution to the establishment of
a new international economic order, a ban on nuclear arms. the dissolution of
mliitary blocs and the realization of a collective security system.

2';

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The JCP fir-1y upholds the banner of scientific socialise and unfolds the
gradioee vists for mnkind's history which is drawing near a new era in which
the original superiority and vitality of the work of socialise can be duos-
strated through respective new advances and the Victories of the three
revolutionary forces of the world. while doing so. the .10? will stand in the
van of the people and carry out an energetic struggle for the victory of the
work of Japan's progress and reform—the work for administrative reforms--
which is the immediate historical duty.

Chapter II. Japan's Domestic Situation and Tasks for National Administrative
Reform

1. Hhere are nonopoly capital and the LDP trying to lead Japan?

Along with capitalism's worldwide crisis. Japan's monopoly capitaliu—subsarviant
to the United States—has deepened its structural crisis with the econonic
conflicts between Japan and the United States or the Heat European nations
becoming sharp. The inportant thing is the fact that Japanese monopoly capital,
which has further strengthened its international economic position and voice,

is more highhandadly and offensively pushing ahead in the direction of playing
the role of a subordinate ally of U.S. inperialisn in the can of inperialism
and world monopoly capitalism in all of the economic. political and nilitary
areas—not in the direction of weakening or eliminating its relations of
dependence on the United Statee--aa the basic strategy for defending its ruling
system and carrying out overseas inroads.

~ The L0? governnent and monopoly capital. brandishing the argment. that "Japan
is a Ianber of the West." are volunteering to play the-role of a main pillar
of the reactionary ruling system not only in Japan but also in the Far Best
to oppose all the forces of anti-i-perialisn, peace and progress. 'l'hey are
carrying out these reactionary policies with emphasis on the following points:

First, the LDP goverrnent did not even say a word to protest or express its
opposition to Reagan's idea of a linited nuclear war. Instead, it virtually
approves his turning Japan into a nuclear beae-to that end—and takes the
attitude of cooperating with and participating in the linited nuclear war plan
by opposing the resolution prohibiting the use of nuclear one at the United
Nations.

Furthermore, it is openly preparing for Japan-0.8. joint operations in which
Japan itself plays a part in a nuclear war under the accepted precondition

that the self-defense forces will participate in the war in the event of "an
emergency in the Far East." At the sane tine, it is dashing ahead along the

road of a quick-paced arm buildup linked to a nuclear war by cumin its

share in the "defense" of 1.000 nautical nile seas and purchasing large
quantities of new equipeent needed for joint operations. To remove obstacles

to this dangerous plan, the goverment and the LDP are scrapping a series of
statements and promises, which heretofore have been regarded as restraints

to an arms buildup, one after another and. It the call. time. “P953100 PNP‘r‘ti-W'

25
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for an "emergency legislation" to pave the way for forcible lectures to be taken
in tine of war. The revision of the constitution for the worst. which the
1.0? has decided to promote in parallel with the upgrading of the Japan-

0.8. security treaty into an "offensive and defensive alliance" equivalat
to that of NATO, is defined as a legal finishing touch on a reactionary
reorganization of the domestic political system. which, among other things,
will mks the emperor the sovereign ruler. and on the plan for Japan's
participation as a masber of the ""estarn Alliance" in an aggressive war to
be ignited by the United States. '

Second. to achieve the goals of protecting the interests of big businesses

and carrying out an area buildup in the n‘dst of a financial crisis. the LDP
government is trying to lay the financial and administrative foundations on
which to freely carry out its reactionary plans. shattering at one blow
democratic systas built up in all areas as a result of protracted national
movements and struggles to data. To this end. it treats the "extraordinary
administrative research council.” which is no nore than an advisory body. of
the office of the prine ninister. as a virtually supreme organ above the Diet.
Thus it is resorting to fascist neans by letting the business circles directly
take col-sand and decide basic "national policies" such as a priority arne

buildup and drastic cuts in welfare expenditures. at a place beyond the reach
of the people.

Third, on the political front. the LDP indeed won more seats than anticipated
in the 1980 siwltanaous elections for the House of Representatives and the
House of Councillors, partly for sentimental reasons involving the unexpected
death of Prime Minister Ohira. From a long-term point of view. however, the
LDP's strength is on the decline and this trend continues unabated. It is
trying to bolster its strength with the help of such anticoaaunist parties

as Koneito. the Democratic Socialist Party and the New Liberal Club. which
have been drawn into the ruling camp in preparation for the inlementation

of reactionary reforms. At the sane time. through the irreversible JSP slip
to the right generated by the "JSP-Komeito accord." the LDP is concentrating
its anticonunist, antireformist attack on the .16? in an attnpt to divide
the reformist front. Under this mticonunist strategy, anticouunist
splitism has become a najor instrument for pushing policies of war and reaction

and policies to destroy the livelihood of the people in every area of political
struggle.

The behavior of Japanese monopoly capital and the LDP government proves the
correctness of the JCP'a foresight indicated in its political program and of

the decision adopted by the JCP congresses in the past. In its reference

to the restoration of silitarism and inperialism in a Japan subjugsted to the
United States, the JCP political program states that Japanese monopoly capital
"links our country to the 11.5. inparialists' nuclear war progran. Economically,

it is gradually taking on isperialist characteristics and is following a path
toward the restoration of nilltarisn and imperialism."

In a general sense, Japanese monopoly capital today lies in the phase of
imperialism economically; furthermra, in international politics, too, it
has bscone one of the most positive members of the world imperialist camp

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

headed by the United States, as it now wields the second greatest industrial
power in the capitalist ’world and occupies a place as a capital exportilg
country second only to the United States and Britain. The path along

which the LDP government and nonopoly capital have led Japan and the Japanese
people was not a path toward "indepmdent inerialian" and severance of the
ties of subjugation to the United States on the basis of an econuic power

that has expanded and grown stronger, but a path es envisaged in the JCP
political progran--a path toward the realisation of their alliterist and
inperialist ambitions through Japan's closer linkage with the 0.8. inperialists'
nuclear war progran. It is -a attenpt not only to abject the absolute majority
of the people to new econonic difficulties as a price for further prosperity

of nonopoly capitalise, but also to push Japan back into the dark age of
nilitarian and fascists, even exposing the people to the danger of a nuclear
holocaust.

This road of war and reaction. and of national distress should be blocked;
a new road should be paved to promise the Japanese people adninistrative
reforms, and through such reforns. sovereignty and security, democracy and
better living conditions. This represents the nsjor essence of the "con-
frontation between the two roads” in Japan in the l9w's.

2. Trilem of the Japanese Economy

As a result of investnents in plants and equipment in the ”high growth"
period and the native stockpile of advanced technologies, plus the substantial
budgetary protection and subsidies and severe exploitation of workers and
nedim- and stall-size subcontractor businesses, Japanue monopoly capital

has becone highly coepetitive in international markets, enjoying a certain
degree of superiority in the trade war despite the worldwide recession.
Donestically, following the first oil crisis. it took crisis control neasures
with emphasis on the interests of big businesses. Under those seasures, it
thoroughly carried out reductions in the work force in a capitalist fashion

in the pane of "fat-free nanagenent." thereby building bminess sysoaas to
secure sufficient profits even at a tins of "low growth” and further expanding
its influence over the Japanese industries and econosy.

In contrast to the huge profits and prosperity of big businesses, the Japanese
economy as a whole is faced with a serious crisis, which is a chain in the
crises facing the world capitalist econoly. and the ruling circles themselves
can hardly find a way out of this crisis. The crisis found its concentrated
expression in the "trilaua" of prolonged recession. fiscal bankruptcy and trade
friction.

1) The outer of bankruptcy cases (with a debt of sore than 10 nillion yen) along
nedium- and sssll-size businesses surpasses 1,000 per mth and this situation
has continued for the 79th consecutive month new. The worker's spending on
consumer goods has gone down for 2 years in a row, and the nudnr of the
conpletely uneaployed in 1981 reached an all-tine high. All available indicss
point to the fact that the nation suffers from a vicious cycle of a "consmer
recession” in which the woes of the business recession are passed on to the
people's livelihood, pushing down their living standard, and the working

people's low spending on conamer sooth in turn further prolongs the business
recess ion.

27
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) me government 's fiscal bankruptcy. caueed by the maive floating of
"deficit-covering national bonds” by the LDP government in the 1970's, has
gone tron bad to worse. The "fiscal reconstruction" pledged by the Suzuki
cabinet has proved to he a complete failure. While the official redonption

goods and the opening of Jepeneee markets. Hhile the government is trying to
cope with the situation throude a eeriee of concessions to the United States.
there is no prospect for a solution under this kind of "adjustnent" neasuree
that leaves the root of the coupetitiveneee of Japan's big buoineseee—the
root cause of all problenen-untouched.

his bueineeses. strengthening the Japan-0.5. nilitary alliance and accelerating
the nilitery buildup in'the nidat of the crieie of capitalise and at the coet

of workers and the people. The government and businese leaders. with no signs
of any self-emination on these critical reelitiee they gave rise to. are boast-
ing that now is the tine for real "edninietretive reforms." They are thue

of state and local adninistretive end financial functiona. and e nultileteral

nonopoly capital at hone and abroad—plane that have no parallel in the world.
Their prograns aleo include a dreetic cutback on welfare budgets, and the
scrapping of protective neaeurea for agriculture and nsdim- and enall-aite
busineaeea through a elanderoue "overprotection'F'mpaizn. In addition, a
drastic ten hike plan, ained at shifting the responsibility and burden for
the financial bankruptcy entirely on the people 'e shoulders, is also placed
on the order of the day. It in certain that these will nahe the etructurel

crisis of the Japanese econouy and the people'e hardships in livelihood note
and nore eeriou.

Hith respect to the col-Iodity price issue. the rete of consumer price rises
in at present shifting at a relatively elow level ee tempered with thoee
of the United States and a meter of the ﬂeet European countries. However.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further-ore, the LDP government is unconcernedly abandoning even its ninimn
responsibility for the people's environment or safety. For instance. it is
pronoting plans to drastically increase nuclear powerplents while having no
reliable systme established for insuring safety, accelerating snvirouental
destruction by forcibly undertahing large-scale projects, relaxing pollution
control regulations. and nutilating and rolling back the enforcuant of the
anti-pollution neeeures under the pretext of "sinplifying administration."

The reality of the Japanese econouy clearly proves that it is inpossible to
find a fundamental solution to the present crisis in die framework of the
U.S.-dependent monopoly capitalist system and the LN adninistration.

To overcome the trilemlu and the structural crisis and rebuild the Japanese
econosy. drastic changes in dosestic and foreign policy as advocated by our
party have become inevitable, urgent tests. These changes include. in the
area of econonic policy. efforts aimed at putting national livelihood before
anything else and expanding the doneetic nerket; and in the financial field.
earnest efforts to plunge a scalpel into the two sentuerissunilitery

spending and service to big business. They also include democratic administra-
tive reform ained at establishing efficient adninistretion to serve the
people and a changeover to an independnt economic policy based on nonalign-
nsnt and neutrality, breaking evsy from the diplonacy of toeing the 0.8. line.

3. Trends of the Political Front and Rupture of the JSP-Komeito Accord

As bitterly criticised in the resolution of the 15th party congress. the accord
reached between the Socialist Party [38?] and lonsito in January 1980 was an
important preparatory step aimed at splitting and attaching the reforniet
forces ans turning the political front in the 1980's to the advantage of those
defending the establishment.

The .18? leadership at that tins tried to justify its action on the grounds that

it was checking the rightist tendency of Komsito and other parties and striving

to realize a coalition goveruent of the opposition parties at an earlier date.

Developments on the political front in our country in the past 2 years shatter-

ed these arguments with the logic of facts and fully proved that the JSP-Koneito
accord was nothing but an antirefornist tool to enable the antics-mist parties
to become new government parties and supporting the LDP's political rule.

First, the JSP-Konaito eccord spurred the rightist tendencies of such enti-
commist parties as Konsito. the Democratic Socialist Party [DSP]. the New
Liberal Club [81.0] and the Social Duocretic Federation [30?] and virtually
helped turn then conpletely into nu government parties.

Under the JSP-Komeito eccord, Kcneito won the JSP-‘s recognition of its position
of ercluding the JCP and effirsing the status quo regarding the security treaty
and the self-defense forces and also further quickened the teIIpo of its approach
toward the 1.1)? in its official line. At its 19th party congress held in

29
FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
roe OFFICIAL US! ONLY

December last year. Konsito put the finishing touches on its rightist tendencies.
Anong other things it: 1) expressly stated that "Japan is a nder of the Uest"--
a theory cow-on to the LDP--and put forward the policy of strengthening the
Japan-0.8. nilitsry alliance and actively pronoting era buildup: 2) openly
vowed, in its plan for accession. to power, that it will "basically continue

and naintain" the JD? sdsinistrstion including its "foreign end defense

policies" as well as the "free economic system"; and 3) explicitly incorporated

in its policy the possibility of "a new choice" of participating in a coalition
with the LDP govern-sat.

The US? has taken the position of actively supporting and proeoting the LDP's
reactionary line with respect to the security issue and in aleost all other
areas of donestic and foreign policy and has nora actively played a hawkish
role than the 1.1)? in dealing with the introduction of nuclear weapons. the
ares buildup issue and the "energsncy legislation" question, in attacking
school textbooks and in calling for the unconditional inplenentation of the
policies adopted by the ad hoc comcil on administrative reforns. Lying at
the root of this is the party's basic constitution that it is a rightist
social deaocrstic party which relies on alliance and whose biggest foundation
is the "labor-capitalist mity? support of big business. Its leadership

has sought closer ties and adhesion with leaders of the LN. business circles
and self-defense forces and the party has becone a nost direct spokesun in

the political world for the interests of big individual businesses including
the nunitions industry.

The no has bared its nature as an offshoot of the LDP. backing away signi-
ficantly froa its original pretense of being an "anti-Ln? faction, slung con-
servative political circles and is playing a peculiar role of linking the anti-
coa-unist opposition parties and sons civic forces with the LDP governnent

such as by uniting with the 801'. In the Diet it is acting as the lost
faithful supporter of the LDP.

These anticonnunist parties sin to participate in a conservative auxiliary
coalition goverment to reinforce the LDP. In the present political reality
their differences with the 1.1)? over individual issues (such as reforn of the
election systen) nay becone acute but, on the whole, they form a cap of new
goveth parties that seek to carry out the Japanese and 0.8. ruling circles'
reaction plans for the 1980's in cooperation with the LDP.

Second. the JSP's diversion to the right under the JSP-loeeito accord has
brought itself into a chronic state of crisis.

men the JSP-Koesito accord was-signed, the JSP leadership apologised that it
would be an agre-ent limited to a plan for future accession to power and

that as such it would not bind the JSP's actions in other areas. However.

its practice for the past 2 years has belied this apology and the anticommist
and antireforniat position spelled out mdar the JSP-Konsito accord has
virtually bacone the basic line regulatim the JSP'a activities in all areas.

FOIOFII'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is an increasing tendency of the J8? joining antirefornist coalitions
with the L0? and other antics-mist parties in elections of heads of local
governments and of abandoning confrontation with the LDP government. In
Tokyo, it went so far as to decide to dissolve "Akarui-Kai" [Bright Society]
at its party convention. In the Diet the JSP tentatively puts up "denili-
tarization" and "the defense of the constitution" as its signbosrd, but in
actuality it is deeply bogged down in a course of unprincipled cospromises
and deals with the LDP. With regard to the election systes issue, it is
taking the initiative along with the L1)? in promoting a plan to mlreviee

the national constituency system in violation of the constitution. after

last year's malrevision of the public election law. As for the budget question.
the JSP refuses to wage a joint struggle with the JCP from the reforeists'
position, and instead follows to the bitter end the anticommunist stratagel
of Koneito and other parties calling for a so-called "joint struggle excluding
the JCP." l'urthermre, it goes so far as to volunteer to play a role in a
secret deal to camouflage the LDP'a position of rejecting a tax cut and even
drop the desand for a cutback on military spending.

0n the labor front. the "unification of the front" promoted in response to the
JSP-Komeito accord has begun showing-are clearly as it takes a are concrete
shape—that it is no more than a rightist reorganisation led by the Japanese
Confederation of Labor [Deni] to nest the expectations of business circles
and the government. Donei has recently been putting up the banner of promoting
an buildup and defending big business more clearly than ever before. Although
the new unified organization my for the tine being not inscribe this anti-
reformist position in its unified program. it is certain that the organisation
will confine the aovements of the participating labor unions to a framework of
not conflicting with the Donei's line of defending the establishment, thereby
setting a landmark in the rightist tendency of nesting the expectations of

the L0? and business circles.

Under the JSP-Komeito accord, the JSP has made unprincipled coapronises with
the LDP government and diverted to the antimist and antireforuiat
position despite the fact that in terns of the number of Diet seats it is the
No l opposition party. This has increased the criticism and disappointment
among many party nenbers and supporters who had pinned their hopes on the
party for carrying out reforms. thereby sharpening the contradictions within
the JSP. Reflecting this situation, the party node some changes in the
personnel field at its congress this year. but in the field of policy it
officially decided to inherit and continue the line of the JSP-Koneito accord
and review its program on the basis of the line of diverting to the right.

Koaeito and other ant iconnsunist parties. joining hands with the rightist forces
within the J8? and the General Council of Trade mions of Japan [Sohyo], are
continuing to pressure the 33? to follow the line of asking it a new govern-
ment party, using the JSP-Komeito accord as a weapon. As a result, the JSP's
confusion is becoaing increasingly serious under its new executive conittee.

’Ihe only way to enable the .18? to recover and to extricate itself from the
crisis and oonflusion and thm meet the people's reformist expectations lies
in breaking away from the anticommunist and antireformist constraints under

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the JSP-Koneito accord and changing over to the direction of the United
Refornist Front. A courageous action taken by a JSP eenber in a recent
gubernatorial election in Kyoto and other new trends eined at reformist
recovery have been observed although they still are localized and partial.

The .16? strongly desires that the JSP draw a correct lesson fron its diver-
sion to the right carried out under its accord with tensito end that it
becoee an active participant of the struggle for national adniniatrative
reforI.

‘lhird, the LDP has gained strength from the turning of the antico-unist
parties into new govern-eat parties. the ”We alignment toward splitting

the reformist forces end the achievement of a stable esjority in the
sinultaneous elections of the House of Representatives end the house of
Councilors in 1980. On this basis. it has Iberkad upon an all-out challenge
against the people end the reforeist forces in an sttsapt to realise its
reactionary goals in one sweep by asking the soot of this opportune chance.

Its dyed-in-the-wool corrupt and plutocretic nature hes been corroborated by
the Lockheed scandal trial proceedings. The govern-ant hes continually shown
its lach of resourcefulness and has cousitted blunder after blunder not only

at hone but also abroad. Thus. while containing within itself may seeds which
under noraal circuutances would touch off political tureoil. the LDP has
mintained an arbitrary political stance in disregard of ptblic opinion. As
denonstrated by the recent LI)? action of forcibly extending the Diet session,
its faction known as the ”Corps" faction which is led by the accused in a large-
scale international bribery case is actually doeinating the ruling party. In
fact, this and other ans-alias which can never be tolerated in a country
dedicated to denocracy are continuously increasing. Also on the increase are
dangers of neofascisn ahead at the utter destruction of the denocracy and
freedoe established after World Her 11. Bxanples of these dangers are the
"contingency bill." the love to eelrevise the constitution and the canpeign

to create a null-constituency election systn. lhe min factors in parlitting
and abetting this LOP inpudmce are the transforeation of the antico-unist
opposition parties into new govern-ant parties and the [word indistinct] joining
this bandwagon. This fact should be heeded by whoever earnestly sins to safe-
guard deaocrecy in govern-ant.

6. we Rule Is Aggravating Contradictions Between the LDP and All Classes of
the People

On the political front the LDP rule has many supporters including the new govern-
nent parties, but in the people's everyday life it is intensifying contradictions
between Lb? interests and those of all classes of the people in every field.

In the current protracted recession. working people in particular are suffering
from increasing hardship and toil--ever-swelling unenploynent. long working
hours and evereore toilsone labor. yearly increasing actual tax burdens and
diminishing actual disposable incoea. worsening housing conditions. increasing
difficulties in business operation and increasing bankruptcy cases among snail
and nediun-scale fires and industries. increasing difficulties confronting
far-era and fisher-en and extras shortage of public facilities for children.
senior citizens and handicapped persons.

32
POROI’I’ICIALWMY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Despite the crisis facing the people's livelihood, the L1! governnent is con-
tinouely enforcing various reactionary policies as reflected by the line of
the extraordinary administrative research council; this is bound to aggravate
the contrsdictions and conflicts between all classes of the people and the
LDP rule irrespective of their political alignnnt in elections.

0n the question of security. the m govern-sot truly regards Japan-0.8. security
relations as e nilitery alliance and has been shoving this position in its
actual deeds. As a comequsnce. a great change is now taking place. The L1)?
has so far nsnsged to win the acquiescence of nsny people in its "security end
defense" policy because the professed purpose of this policy is "the security
and self-defense of Japan." The deceptive propaganda about "the nuclear
unbrelle" and the theory of "defensive capability only" has lost its ground

as a result of the Reagan edninistretion's public stetensnt concerning a
possible linited nuclear war in the Far East. including Japan. as its theater,
as well as the exposure of the real nature of Jam-0.8. joint operation plane
which seems the self-defense forces' participation in fighting in s tins of
energency. Over these issues. too, the line pursued by the LDP end the anti-
coenunist opposition parties of nsintsining the Japan-0.8. security srrangenents
and pushing erns expansion has naturally cone into conflict with the position
taken by the nejority of the people. In recent public opinions polls, the
najority of people have invariably disapproved the goveruent policy of ellocst-
ing disproportionatety large fmds for defense spending. The fact that the
danger of nuclear war end e possible comcription systen ere beooeing something
real is causing a change among the students end youth who are said to he lastly
indifferent to politics.

Along with the co-ercialistic control of culture by big corporetions, the
products of the LDP's reactionary rule—such ss widespread noneydpower
politics through collusion beusen politicians. governnent officials end
businessnen, the penetrstion of elitisn ino the entire educational systn by
overuphaeieing ecsdenic careers. and entegonisn against ell social progress
fron an entices-mist point of view-ere inpeiring and destroying the condi-
tions for the peeple's nentel life. As a letter of fact. the high incidence
of juvenile delinquency, the increase of cultural decadence end the degenera-
tion of social nores-—ell these are but aspects of the crisis facing nodsrn
Japanese society.

In the face of this critical condition. the LDP goveth attaches central
inportence to "defense" in education end the inculcetion of national spirit
under the pretext of "reconstruction of education" and "establish-sat of
national norelity." It hes begun to openly demand the reinstitution of
niliterist education, urging people to be ready to die for the Japan-v.8.
eilitery alliance. This new ettenpt et reactionary intervention in the
people's education and spiritual life is aggravating the educational crisis

and rousing a keen sense of crisis among those who are seriously concerned
about Japan's future.

These conflicts of interests betveen the LDP governnent end the nsjority of
the people are a natural outcone of the political, econonic, cultural and
educational aisle. Even with a majority of the L1)? and of the opposition

33
F0! 0mm]. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parties that have turned pro-LOP, it is absolutely impossible to restrain
the people's discontent and deeands within the present establishments. The
fourfold bankruptcy of the nuclear udn‘ells theory. the extraordinary
administrative research council line, the labor front reorganization and
the JSP-Koneito accord is having the effect of enlarging the basis for the
discontent and dennds of the people became it is a bankruptcy which is
taking place right in the center of reactionary antics-mist politics.
This is the greatest destabilizing factor for the LDP government in a long-
tern perspective. It is also the greatest objective basis on which the
cause: of reforning the conduct of state affair can emerge victorious by
repulsing all anticouunist and sntirefornist attacks.

5. In Response to the Heightened National Energy With Seeks Unity in Action
and a United Front

In contrast with the anticoIIIunist rightist tendencies on the political
front, there have been over the past 2 years nu characteristic upsurges

in the energy which seeks unity in action against nuclear war and for the
protection of the people's livelihood and rights and for dsnocracy, as well
as the formation of a united front.

To counter the reactionary campaign to shift the burden of arns expansion
to the public at the expense of their living coalitions, duocretic lasss
organization. including the Council for the Fornation of a United Labor
Union, inaugurated in the fall of 1980 the "Action Conittee for a Great
National Movement" to iaprove welfare and education by reducing Iilitary
spending. Ever since. a nationwide joint action has been carried out all
across the oomtry with as many as 3 million people participating. To
counter the challenge posed by the government and business circles since
last year in accordance with the line of the extraordinary administrative
research council, variom democratic organisations lost no tine in organizing
the "liaison conference of various circles against the line of the extra-
ordinary administrative research council and for the protection of the
people's livelihood and democracy," this conference has served as a driving
force for a nationwide struggle while broadly exposing the deceptive nature
of the abinistrative reforn plan.

The forces supporting the united front have taken the initiative in actively
promoting unity in action designed to heed the urgent demands and concerns

of the people. In the case of the 21 October struggle of 1980, as the result
of these efforts, the divisive struggle plan originally proposed by the
leaderships of the J8? and the Central Council of Trade lhions of Japan [Sohyo]
was rejected and a joint struggle on the basis of revolutionary tasks was
successfully carried out on the basis of revolutionary tasks with a dozen
years' old tradition. In 1981, despite the serious political situation that
developed against the background of the extraordinary Diet session, the
leaderships of the J8? and Sohyo rejected the reasonable proposal by the
action committee for the abrogation of the security treaty to carry out s

3%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

joint struggle sinilar to that in the preceding year. and held a separate
rally. but this rally. which inbred the principle governing the unifica-
tion of reformist forces. became an arena for quarrelsoee disturbance by

a phony "leftist" hoodlum group and ended niserably in oonfmion. 0n the
other hand. the 21 October central rally sponsored aainly by the action
connittee for pushing through the various demands to realize the abrogation
of the security treaty was a great success. In the subsequent struggle
outside the Diet against the line of the extraordinary sdainistrative
research council, the forces supporting the united front have served as a
new starting point by always playing a positive role.

The novensnt for the abolition of nuclear arm. by awakening to a sense of
grave crisis of war and peace. showed an epochal spread by rallying even
intellectuals of various circles and ten of letters. This was one of the
most significant expressions of a national trend. The mdaer of local
aeseablies which adopted special resolutions. addressed to the second UN
special session on disamnent and calling for nuclear eras reduction and

the abolition of nuclear arns, was 35 in urban and rural prefectures.

391 in cities, 23 in special districts and 659 in villages. a ”national
signature collection canpaign calling for a couplets ban on nuclear arts

and disarmament" launched by the “national pavement promtion liaison council"
had collected the signatures of acre than 27 million people as of 26 Hay, and
the 21 March Hiroshima (with 200,000 participants) and 23 Hay Tokyo (with
600,000 participants) action rallies becane epochal united canpaigns of great
historical significance which channeled the aspirations and ranlu of the
nation's A-bonb victim.

To check the upsurge of national opinion, the LDP and other forces pronoting
ares buildup issued circulars opposing local assenblies' resolutions on
nuclear disarmament and charged that ”opposition to nuclear er. is tantanount
to being an anti-v.8. act," thus taking the attitude of mdisguissdly obstruct-
ing this national movement. At the seas tine, they tried to leave the way

to the acceptance of a nuclear arls buildup open by adding the adjective
"ultiaate" in the wording of a Diet resolution calling for nuclear diurnaent.
They also participated in the antinuclear novenent while openly taking the
position of promoting eras buildup at hone, thus trying to dilute the
significance of the deund for disarnaaent in international arenas. ‘lheir me
of the trick to divert the nova-sat for the abolition of nuclear eras into
sonsthing harmless to the 0.8. nuclear var policy should be noted with serious
concern. It gives added importance to the effort to develop this national
novenent in the right direction. As a result of the efforts Iade by our party

and others. the word "ultimate" was deleted free the Diet resolution. This
use of acne progressive significance. -

The energy of the people rallied to oppose nuclear war should be channeled and
further developed as a lasting novensnt; it should not be allowed to be nerely
a transitory nova-ant occasioned by the on special session. To this end,

it is necessary to expand and strengthen the anti-atonic and hydrogen bolt
council [Censuikyol, the peace consittee and other existing use organisations

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and also to organize, expand and develop "grassroots" movenents against
nuclear area and for peace at the respective local areas or places of work
in a way suitable to the situations or history of the mveeents there.
This has become an urgent task today.

The "united reformist confda" novsment. which our party proposed at the

15th party congress, calling for rallying democratic organisations and people
of all circles desiring to achieve the denocratic resurrection of Japan. spread
to 67 urban and rural prefectures in only 1 year. In May last year. a
national refornist confab was inaugurated, and the second enlarged general
meeting of caretakers was held in late May to mark the first anniversary of

its inauguration. ‘nae number of prominent figures of various circles who
expressed their support for the confab totals 16,000 and that of the
organizations affiliated with it exceeds 1.100. with the total nutter of its
supporters and participants reaching 6.1 million already. Thus it has developed
into a vast mvement systolizing that. even with the JSP's diversion to the
right, the-Japanese people's aspirations for political reform and a united
reformist front based on the three reformist goals have indomitable vitality
and broad prospects.

No small number of .18? “CID who earnestly desire the unity of the reformist
forces, not to mention a number of nonpartisan individuals, are participating
and playing an active role in this movesent.

The democratic reformist current has also been helping big movements in all
areas make some advances.

"hat is specially noteworthy is the advance of the united trade unions council
movenent on the labor front. This movement has been consciously surveying the
direction of mtablishing a class natioml center under three principles--the
independence of trade unions fron capital. their independence froe political
parties, and the unity of action based on manimus demnds and siaultaneous
class criticise directed at Sohyo and other established national centers for
their shift to the right. has movement grew from 850.000 eaters in 25
prefectures before the last nesting to the present 1.5 million members in

47 prefecture-u Haneuvers for s rightist reorganization of the labor front
have been carried out and, coupled with the sbandonnent of the reformist
political tasks, the tendency of the labor struggle to become powerless as
exemplified by "labor -capital cooperation" in the wage struggle has increased.
Under this situation the united trade unions council takes the nationwide
initiative for a class advance of the struggle of workers and trade unions and

serves as a powerful class embryo shouldering the future of the trade union
movement in Japan upon itself.

To help these upsurgee and advances in the ease and popular movements grow and
develop into a movement with the scale and capability sufficient to spread its
unity correctly and carry through dennds in the face of the reactionary forces'

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attacks, the advance of the true reforllist current on the political front in
opposing anticommist. entireformist tendencies and maneuvers of all sorts

and the defense of the reformist cause to the bitter end under any situation
has become all the more inseparable task.

The correctness of the resolution of the 15th party congress end the policy
and outlook it laid before the party and people has been proven by the
characteristics of the development of the domestic and external situations
and through the party's practices for the past 2 years. The stbsequent
development of the situation raises the struggle to slash the reactionary
offensive of the Japanese and 0.8. ruling circles ained at decisively
orienting Japan's course in the direction of war and reaction to the level
of an urgent national task on which Japan's future depends. At the threshold
of the 1980's, the party will basically inherit the tasks and policies laid
down by the 15th party congress, stand in the vanguard of the national
struggle for smashing this reactionary offensive and strive to carve out the
road to Japan's democratic rebirth by forming a united reformist front. To
this end, the party must carry out a resolute struggle to thoroughly fulfill
the duty of the JCP, a party of progress and reform in Japan.

Chapter III. The JCP'a Historical Mission and the Tasks Pacing Party Activities

1. Activities Since the 15th Party Congress

The historical situation of the 1980's adds ilportance to the JO‘P'e duty to
stand in the vanguard of the people and overcone Japan's present situation
in a reformist way.

The resolution of the 15th party congress aux-ed up the struggles of the 1970's
on the whole and clarified in three areas the fact that the present JCP
shoulders duties and roles in effecting a demcratic rebirth of Japan and
reforms in national administration, which no other organization can replace.
The three areas are: l) the capability and foresight to correctly direct the
course to be taken by the Japanese people under any complicated domestic and
external situations; 2) the indomitable consistency to stand face to face
with large-scale snticomunist, antireformist counterattscks and defend the
cause of social progress and reform and the true interests of the nation and
people; and 3) the organizing ability to directly grapple with the struggle
to snash the reactionary rule by building popular positions, with branches

as the basis, in the midst of a fierce "position battle" between the
reformist and sntireformist forces. The development of the situation and

the trends of all political forces since then vividly show once again in
terms of national experiences and facts that one of the fundanental charac-
teristics of the present political front is the fact that the JCP has becene
a main pillar of the reformist forces.

1. Regarding all important questions raised in national administration, our

party put forward basic and concrete refonist solutions in keeping with
the people's interests and the reason of democracy, replacing the antipopular

37
ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY

policies of the government and LOP. which speak for the demands of 0.8.
imperialism and Japanese monopoly capital. Our party's attitude presents
a sharp contrast to the antireformist attitudes taken by anticommunist
parties and the JSP. The anticomaunist parties make toeing the LDP line
their basic principle, saying that "a conservative-reformist confrontation
is anachronistic," while the JSP has been avoiding a frontal confrontation
with the LDP govermaent under the JSP-Komeito accord. With regard to the
security and arms buildup issues on which the destiny of Japan depends,
the JCP was the only political party that clearly carried through in and
outside the Diet the reformist position of not tolerating the strengthening
of the Japan-v.8. military alliance. the transformation of Japan into a
nuclear base or the unconstitutional arms buildup, and was the only party
that demanded cuts in military spending. This is a typical expression of
the characteristics of today's political front.

In the "administrative reform" issue as well, the JCP was the only party
that expressed opposition in the Diet to the composition of the ad hoc
administrative research council, which is led by the business circle. All
other parties are responsible for the establishment of the ad hoc council
headed by Doko. While other parties consented to the ad hoc council's line
or adopted an ambiguous attitude, our party prosptly identified the intrinsic
reactionary nature of the fake "administrative reform" and indicated the
direction of a truly democratic administrative reform meeting the people's
expectations. This attested to the progressive viewpoint of the JCP. In
dealing with the question of public workers and workers of the National
Railways and other public enterprises, the party indicated the active
direction of developing the people's confidence and solidarity by putting
forward the class responsibilities for doing aw” with irregular, evil
practices on the basis of workers' self-awakening and grappling with the
effort to improve work and democratize management.

2. In local politics, too, the .16? is the only party that has firmly main-
tained the position of supporting local reformist govermaente in opposition
to L0? rule and in the interest of the local people. The JCP has exerted
efforts to rally reformist forces while attaching importance to the united
front at local and regional levels, which is aimed at defending existing
local reformist governments, retaking the reins of local governments from
the reactionary forces, and expanding reformist governments. In the

past 2 years, the reformist forces have succeeded in retaining 70 local
reformist govermnents, lost 19 others, and installed 22 new ones in the
offensive and defensive fight over local reformist governments. Especially
in Habikino City (in Osaka), Asago town (in Hyogo Prefecture) and
Hinemimonowa village (in Nagano Prefecture), where comenist candidates

were elected as nyors in the previous elections on a joint reformist ticket.
the reformist forces succeeded in retaining their reformist municipal
governments in the last elections by defeating the anticommunist and anti-
reformist forces, including the JSP at times. In addition, in Nako town

(in Hyogo Prefecture), a new communist mayor was installed, thus giving birth
to another reformist municipal government. This signifies an important
advance in the task of reforming municipal governmmts.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. In line with the policy set forth by the previous congress, the JCP has
made active contributions to pushing forward the reformist tides of mass
movements in various fields, including the national movmaent for unity in
action and for the formation of a united front.

6. As for the question of increasing and expanding the strength of the

JCP itself, the JCP polled more votes in the concurrent upper- and lower-
house elections held lo months after the 15th JCP Congress than in the pre-
ceding elections, except in the national constituency for the upper house.
The number of votes polled by the .10? thus almost reached the peak level
registered in the 1970's in parliamentary elections. Yet, in term of seats.

the JCP lost quite a few inculbent DistIsn—lz in the upper house and lo in the
lower house.

This parliamentary race was characterized by a fierce anticommist attack
momted by the six-party corps, as well as by a general trend toward the
right in the political front. Nevertheless, it highlighted some important
problems involving the party's election strategy which must be dealt with
inediately. The defeat in the upper house of the national comtitucmcy

is attributable to the neglect of that constituency in actual campaigning.
The party lost out to other parties in a amber of upper-house local
constituencies. Another reason for the defeat is that the party entered the
race with the loss of a nuaber of basic supporters. a loss that was not
rectified. The party drew lesson from the «nation of this election race
at the 10th plants: (in July 1980) and the 5th plenu (in lovmaber 1980) to
prepare for the nationwide election race in 1983. These lessons were put
into practice in the subsequent off-year elections.

Despite a number of defeats. the JCP recorded an overall gain in the off-year
local elections in the past 2 years by putting into practice those lessons.
The gain totaled 107 seats, the highest increase among all the parties. The
Social Democratic Party and the LDP trailed the .10? with respective gains of
39 and 33. The JCP's gain brought the total of its municipal assembly seats
to over 3,600, making the JCP the first major opposition party surpassing the
JSP. In the first Tokyo metropolitan assembly election since the LDP took over
the metropolitan government, the JCP gained five additional seats and became
the leading opposition party by defeating the LDP, which had bragged that it
would maintain its majority in the metropolitan asssably and reduce the .10?
strength to a one-digit figure. This victory marked important progress in

the capital city in which political struggle among all political parties
is concentrated.

Among all party tasks in various fields, the pace of fulfillment has been
slowest in the task of expanding party strength in accordance with the
resolution of the 15th congress calling for a boost in party mentarship and
the readership of WA respectively to 500,000 and 1 million. In the
meantime, the JCP has devoted itself to the tasks of qualitatively improving
its organizations and activities in conformity with the existing situation

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the party's stage of development. This task includes a reform of party
organ activities as a whole, which is called a "revolution of the party

organ. It also includes the routinizing of party chapters' activities and

the encouragement of learning and education. It is an urgent task of the

hour for the party to fulfill as soon as possible the goals set by the
previous congress and radically remove the lag in the ndership-readership
drive through partywide efforts and on the basis of the progress lid. so far..

Those are our major accomplishments in our activities designed to achieve
a united reforeist front in the 1980's.

All trends in the past 2 years. including those on the political front and
in the mass movenent. indicate that the .10? has becone the central political
force in Japan's revolutionary current. This gives added responsibilities
to the JCP, which stands in the van of the people's confrontation with the
LDP rule, in organizing a united front for political reforms. in protecting
the people's livelihood, freedon and demcracy, and in realizing Japan's
sovereignty and security.

[Word indistinct] responsibility of the mes-based vanguard party and thorough
promotion of learning and education.

The JCP is open to all workers and people who wish to contribute to the cause
of progress and transformation in Japan. It is also a mass-based vanguard
party which is armed with the theories of scientific socialism and which

holds transformation, fortitude and discipline as its intrinsic revolutionary
spirit. In order for this party to play its role as a historic pioneer leading
the people without succubing to any pressure and attack from the rulers in

the course of Japanese history. it is ilportsnt to permeate the party with

this intrinsic revolutionary party spirit and revolutionary fortitude and
devotion which defies any hardships so that these traits can unifest them-
selves in all party organizations and in all party activities.

The task of building this mess-based vanguard party has mde leaping strides
since the -7th party congress in 1958. As a result, our party has now the
largest organizational strength smug all parties in Japan and is playing
inportant role at home and abroad. Its unity is rock-firm with no faction
whatsoever existing to disrupt party unity. however, as indicated by the
lesson of the experience over the past 2 years, it is urgently required that
quantitatively the JCP, as a mess-based vanguard party, increase its member—
ship as well as the author of mu readers and supporters so that the
ties with the masses can be expended still more. Qualitatively, it is urgent
to improve and develop the quality of the party. particularly the political
and theoretical quality of all party ranks, and to rally thn in disciplined
party life and activities and create a climate conducive to the correct
mderstanding and execution of party decisions.

In fact, nest of the problems confronting the party today are not too difficult

or extraordinary; they can be solved if only all party nembers share respon-
sibilities. The first and foremost reason for failing to solve sons of these

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

problens more often than not is that a condition has not yet been created
wherein all party members share responsibilities. Since our petty is an
organization comprised of those who joined it voluntarily with a wish to
contribute, as party neabers, to the cause of the'party and the revolution,
the key to galvanizing all party embers into activities desiped to imple-
ment party decision lies in intensifying study and education among them

so that they can voluntarily rally in those activities.

For this reason, the entire party must observe the view formulated in the
resolution of the 8th party plenun which regards learning and educational
activities as a "principal condition" for enabling the party to behave

like a vanguard party, as well as a "principal prerequisite" for all party
activities. At the same tine. all party ssmbers nuet carry out constant
learning activities with aphasia placed on the following five areas in
accordance with variom resolutions of the past party congresses and plenum:

1) Study of the line of the party progran. Z) a correct understanding of
the situation and future prospects, 3) study of party policies and lines in
various fields. lo) study of party building, and 5) study of scientific
socialise.

At present basic study and education lag behind substantially. About 20 per-
cent of the new medaers who joined the party since the 15th party congress
are yet to receive education. and those who have completed all the basic
courses account for only ll percent. If those “are who joined the party
before that are included, the nunber of daoee who have not yet completed

the "basic course." a mandatory course for all party were. exceeds
200,000. To overcome at once this lag in education is a matter that bears
upon every aspect of party activity.

The education of new party eaters should by all nesns be completed within
the prescribed deadline so as to help those comrades who newly joined the
party's ranks grasp the basics of party organization and line at an early
date and actively fulfill their duties. This is the nost isportant task of
branches and leading organs in enabling new machete to fulfill their basic
purpose and resolve. Those who have yet to complete the basic course should
strive to complete it—partly by acquiring certificates through self-study»
regarding it as a priority task. Hhile doing so inportance should be attached
to conducting intermediate courses. which have been eatremely week.

For all party Ila-hers, study and education constitute the basic prerequisite
condition for participation in party activities: and cadres of all levels
from the central down to the branch'level as well as sseeni'aly were of

all levels should earnestly grapple with study and education. This is
important for raising the level of guidance and of the activities. Of
particular importance is education by object, such as area co-ittee meters
and branch leaders.

Our party attaches particular inportance to study of party congress and

Central Conittee resolutions and of programs adopted at national neetinga.
This is important became our party's line based on our party's programs is

FOIOI'l-‘ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the product of scientific socialist theory. creatively developed by applying
it to the various conditions at preth in Japan and in the world and in
the Japanese people's struggle for liberation. The party's national resolu-
tiOns reflect this line in a vivid and a most intensive form. However, those
who had read the resolution of the 15th party congress by the tine of the
eighth Central Committee plenus accounted for no sore than 53 percent of the
whole party. and those who had read the resolutions of the Central Co-Iittee
plentms accounted for about 60 percent at most. Here also is a decisive lag
which should not be left mchecked. The whrue party should thoroughly

and firmly see to it that all party members strictly observe the rule that
they should read party congress resolutions, Central Committee resolutions
and programs of national neetings within 2 weeks and that these resolutions
are carried through in reality.

3. Standing in the Van of the People's Demands and Haas Ibvemsnts

Today when the LDP's mlsdninistrstion and the Japanese and 0.8. ruling
c1r¢1eg' attacks are amusing numerous urgent dnands and complaints

among the people of all strata, the party should take up the nasses' demands
in its struggle on a regular and routine basis. carry out livelihood coumel-
ing activities and stand in the van of the struggle to correctly develop
mass move-eats. For the JCP, which for 60 years since its founding has
regarded the protection of the people's basic interests as its net important
raison d'etre, this constitutes one of its most important duties.

1. The resolution of the eighth Central Committee plenum regarding use
movements is an isportant decision indicating the tasks and lines for grappling
with mass movements and struggles. All party organizations and more

should systesatically strengthen their activities along the masses by using
this resolution as a guideline.

With a view to developing the mass struggle into a united front, the JCP
maintains the following "four aims": 1) the fulfillment of denands;

2) the growth of the nassee' missing and strengthening of their organization;
3) the expansion of the party's force. and lo) the respect for social and class
morals. They continue to be our party's principled aims in dealing with sass
struggles. In the present situation where the struggle between reform and
counterreforn is seeming the aspect of a "positional battle" including

in the area of mass struggle, expanding and strengthening democratic mass
organizations while pushing ahead with party building is a task that should be
carried out in earnest at all times.

2. As a matter which affects the basis of mass novments, our party has been
stressing ”grassroots" movenents. They are important for overcoming the
tendency of mass novanents beconing perfunctory activities, by doing nothing
but carry out scheduled canpaigns decided on by existing mass organizations.
At the same time, they are the basic course for mass movements to truly rally
the demands and aspirations of all workers and other people and advance en a
popular basis with a vitality and development potential sufficient to attract

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
new members. From this viewpoint all party branches and groups should
strengthen their routine work regarding "grassroots" movements in local
areas, among business circles and in schools and exert constant efforts

to fill party activities with popular vitality in those areas as well.

The vast national energy opposing nuclear weapons should not end in a mere
signature collection campaign but she ld be organized into numerous anti-
nuclear peace circles in the various localities, work sites and schools

by using practicable and appropriate means. This is a new task in this
field. Taking a serious via: of the present situation where the organizing
capability of democratic mess organizations is still not yet developed

in any aspects of the mass mvuaent, the party should actively contribute
to strengthening and expanding then.

The LDP government's imposition of sacrifices upon the people through its
policy of cooperation toward a nuclear war and arms buildup is stirring

up serious anxieties and demands even among those who have not yet
participated in democratic mess movuents in both urban and rural areas.
The party needs to reflect these demands in the "grassroots" movements,
struggle for their realization and actively strengthen political propaganda
while attaching importance to the expansion of the popular basis of the
work of the party and reform. It is also important to broaden one's outlook
and make active contracts with various organizations that serve as the
conservatives' foundation, thus accepting just demands from those organiza-
tions and their members and expanding activities to broader areas of social
life.

(3) when a mass movement demonstrates a new upsurge with a great energy. various
anticosmunist and entireformist maneuvers aimed at dividing it or diverting

it toward an erroneous direction are bound to turn up. This is what the
history of the postwar mass movements in Japan teaches with a countless nuliner
of facts. It is an important task for the party and the awakened demcratic
forces to struggle against these maneuvers and for the correct development

of the movements while defending the original position of mass movements-
realizing the muses' just demands and achieving unity on that basis.

The latest anticomunist. rightist current on the labor front is intensifying
maneuvers to obstruct the linking of the masses' economic demands and
movements with the reformist tasks and, contrarily, to link them with the
antireformist political line of affirming the security and arms buildup
policy. Using the "joint struggle of four labor organizations" as a pretext.
it is trying to incorporate in its right-leaning line even those organiza-
tions and movements which heretofore have been advocating reformist tasks and
to spread this to even outside the labor front. This is one of the maneuvers
to be watched most carefully in mass movements. It is of particular importance
for the party and the awakened dnocretic forces to oppose this reactionary
maneuver to link economic tasks with antireformist "politics" and struggle

to correctly combine mess movements based on urgent economic demands with
reformist political tasks.

FORWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(6) A powerful development of a mass movement is inseparable from mass
propaganda. Propaganda and educational activities of a tease organization
are, of course, iaportant. However, the party's independent mass political
propaganda is indispensable for clarifying the correctness of the demands
put forth by the masses, the situation surrounding a novenent and the course
to be taken by the movenent. It is also indispensable in helping people carry
out their movement with greater confidence. in snaking people who have yet

to awaken rise up and in overcoming various rightist maneuvers within the
mass novenents on a popular basis. The .16? must attach importance to

the propagation of AKAEATA and other journals and pamphlets along with oral
propaganda and fulfill its leading role as the party of scientific socialism
in the area of propaganda activities as well.

Class-based labor unions need to attach importance not only to general nass
propaganda but also to the class education of workers. It is one of the
important programmatic tasks for the party to enhance the working class with
the ideology of scientific socialist: and true internationalisn, to give it
a firm belief in the ultimate victory of the revolutionary work in our
country and to strengthen its class nilitancy and political leadership. It
is quite natural for the party to tackle this actively.

6. For Leaps in the 1983 Local and National Elections

Next y'esr, in 1983. local elections across the country and a House of Comculors
election will be held in succession. In addition, depending on the develop-
ment of the political situation. the House Of Representatives night be dis-
solved and put to a general election. Thus, it will be a year in which

natiowide election camigns will be held most intensively during the first
part of the 1980's.

0n the political front, the divergence of parties and factions has become
clear. A confrontation between the anticonunist and antireforlist parties
and the reformist current represmted by the .10? serves as the min axis.
while the JSP remins agitated with its fall to the right. The roles played
by the respective currents in the light of the true interests of the people
have also become clearer than ever in both national and local governments.
The JCP's rise and fall in its Diet force influences the conditions of the
struggle to defend the people's interests against reactionary policies.

This fact has been corroborated by the development of fierce political struggles
since the 1970 's.

The party aust score victories and advances by attaching inportance to interia
elections to be held during the period, snake all-out efforts to prepare for

the 1983 election campaigns and attain consecutive victories for the party

and the united reformist forces in the local and house of Councillors elections.
This is the greatest political task facing our party. The whole party must
epochelly strengthen preparatory activities necessary for winning in these

elections. The party, its supporter associations and the united reformist
forces must also exert all-out efforts, thereby making 1983 a year of victory
and advance for the JCP.

his
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Guidelines to be followed in the election campaign were clearly stated in
past decisions. In particular, the decision entitled "the General Sumation
and Lesson" of the simultaneous elections for the house of Representatives
end the House of Councillors, adopted at the fourth Central Conittee plenul:
"For new develoth of the election struggle based on the decision of the
fourth Central Cos-ittee plenum," adopted at the fifth Central Cos-ittee
plenum; "tasks for the construction of the basic vote-the organized votenin
the election campaign." adopted at the seventh Central Connittee plenus;

and the ”Resolution for strengthening preparations for the 1983 elections."
adopted at the eighth Central Comittee plelluu, set forth i-ediate goals
for the whole party to reach, and detailed foreulas for the party to follow.
These goals and forenlas expanded and further developed the resolution of
the 15th party congress on the basis of party activities after that congress

and lasots learned. All party organizations should reject narroweinded
enpiricisn and self-taught eethode end strictly follow the above-nentioned

guidelines. Doing so is one of the inportant guarantees for victory.

1. It is absolutely unacceptable to fail three tines in a national con-
stituency election. The whole party should thoroughly correct such mistaken
concepts as local sectarianien and the natural growth theory and without
fail, win the election of all candidates in the national constituency, as
well as victories in major local constituencies.

Currently, struggles are under way, inside and outside the Diet, against
LDP and JSP plans to revise the national constituency systee. The plans are
unconstitutional and politically activated. Hhile the outcone of these
struggles is still unpredictable, e phase-hy-phase approach, advocating a
wait-and-see attitude, instead of i-edistely enharking on preparations for
the national constituency, should be sternly rejected.

while the JCP ranks first among opposition parties in the total nubsr of
members of local assemblies, it considerably lags behind the JSP and Xoeeito
at the prefectural, decree-designated city, general city and ward aeseehly
levels. The prefectural and decree-designated city assembly elections are
held in very fractionalited constituencies, with parties and factions
launching heated canpaigns. To sake advances in these elections, the party
is required to display nilitancy and have the capability to fight it out
and win in an all-out war. In simultaneous local elections, the party will
begin positive preparations to select its candidates for the three prefectural
assenblies still having no cot-unis: Mars-wants, Pukui and Tokushina--
and for some 700 city, township and village assemblies which also have no
comunist use-hers. At the same tine, regarding it as an important goal to
increase the present number of JCP ushers in prefectural and city (or ward)
assewlies. the whole party will inediately embark on full-scale prepara-

tions to preserve, at any cost, the seats it occupies now and win additional
seats.

As a result of a change in the nation's political situation or in the ruling
party's strategy, the LDP nay dissolve the House of Representatives and
declare a general election. Inherent in a general election is its unfore-
seeable nature. This neltes it all the note ieportant that necessary

145
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prepare ions are made now-in constituencies where the JCP nust win at any
cost in particular--in effective coordination with activities for other
alreadylscheduled elections. At the same time, it is necessary to effec-
tively establish readiness 11‘. each comtitusncy for the House of Repre-
sentati es elections, analyse every possible situation and make plans to
cope wi h it, and to develop consign plans for possible candidates. These
prepare ions should go on simultaneously.

2. In reparations for the election campaign, it is important to focus on
specifi s of msladministration by the LI)? and other parties siding with

than on the levels of stats and local adninistration, and to clearly -
express the JCP's role and accomplishments in defending the interests of

the people, as wall as its fundamental and realistic policies to meet the
demands of the people. It is important to begin early. and constantly carry
on positive propaganda on JCP policies to effectively counterattack any
anticonunist propaganda, in conjunction with propaganda about candidates.

The 1981 amendment to the public officers election act forbids oral propaganda
during the election period. in addition to the previous unjustifiable restric-
tions on written propaganda. In order to repel this mwarranted attack. it

is most important to launch effective preelection propaganda activities and,
through then, make voters fully understand what will be the issues in those
elections, and what kind of policies the JCP will pursue over those issues.
Furthermore, during the election period, the whole party should attach
importance to the authorised means of propaganda and put than to the most
effective use. At the same time, each and every party mater or backer

should master JCP policies and not as a propagandist and organizer for the
broad masses of voters, in an effort to demonstrate the superiority of JC!’
policies to the people.

In any election, a cannon basic factor determining victory is the construction
of the basic vote cast mainly by party members, AKABAIA readers and members

of supporting groups. The current whole-party campaign to achieve "500.000
party mesbers and 6 million ARAHAI‘A readers" goals before the 16th party
congress represents the central content of the JCP's effort to build up

this basic vote; even after the party congress. it is important to carry on
the effort to increase party membership and AKARATA readers with 8 via: to
bringing the basic vote up to a level required for victory.

Concerning activities involving groups of supporters. it is an important,
inediate task to develop all such existing groups into JCP supporters'
associations. For those party organisations which have no such groups, it

is urgently required that they begin organizing their groups with AWATA
readers and party sympathizers. All the supporters' groups should immediately
embark on and earnestly step up activities to prepare for election victories
in 1983. This is the important direction for the JCP to follow for the
insdiate future. Although 1 1/2 years have elapsed since the fifth Central

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Comittee plenum, groups in 54 cities and 613 townships or villages have
not been upgraded to the level of JCP supporters' associations. Further-
more, there are 346 private groups backing incmbents or potential candi-
dates. Even in constituencies where staff matters of party organizations
are running as candidates, as many as 96 groups still remain on a private
level. All this could be attributed to an erroneous ideology endearing
private interests. or to negligence on the part of the responsible persons
who left the situation mattended. In either case. it is clear that the
situation shows the lack of a sense of responsibility on their part for
the implementation of party decisions. and the absence of a positive will
for election victories. As for incubate and potential candidate: who
continue to keep their private groups as they are. the party will review
their qualifications as candidates in the next elections.

3. Alon with election preparation, it is important to strengthen the
guidance and assistance for groups of incumbents so that they spearhead

the sauce demand and launch positive and effective activities inside and
outside the Diet and local assemblies. The accomplislments of a party
tested in an election are the accumulation of such activities. Only
through such practical activities and through activities that are carried
out earnestly and in conformity with the interests of the masses, the cause
of reform and party policies, can we enhance our accomplishents to win
greater sympathy and trust for the party.

In the off-year elections, some incumbents failed to be reelected because
party organizations disregarded the importance of guidance in their
activities until the last meant. comitting the mistake of belatedly
addressing problems after election campaigns began. This type of negligence
and lack of concern exposes a serious wealmees on the part of leading
organizations. who represent the JCP in the respective areas, which could
lead to the abandonment of their original political obligations. For a
serious. full-scale campaign, it is important for leading organizations at all
levels to wipe out every expression of this type of "lack of political
concern" and discharge their reepouibilities as leading organizations in all
problems involving local autonomous administrations and comaunity level
political struggles.

lo. Scheduled for next year are simltaneoua local elections including guber-
natorial elections in Tokyo and Osaka where the goal is to restore reformist
administrations. The gubernatorial elections for Okinawa and Kagswa prefec-
tures are also scheduled to be held later this year'. It is one of the major
duties to restore, defend or expand reformist local administrations in these
elections and all other gtbernatorial elections throughout the country. Our
basic position in the gubernatorial elections is to continue the united
reformist front on a local basis and on the basis of established policy and
organizational agreements with groups and individuals dedicated to the unity
of reformist forces rallied behind that front. For a united reformist candidate.
the JCP deems it necessary to select him or her from among honest. reformist
figures with no party affiliations. The JCP does not support a person with

FORMALUSEONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JSP membership as a united reformist candidate. Even under the circtnnstances
where the JSP elected to follow an anticommunist line reflecting its slip to
the right on the level of the national administration, the JCP would not
keep its doors closed to honest JSP members in areas where joint election
struggles with than are possible. These will continue to be our basic
positions in the gubernatorial elections as they have been in the peat.

While Tokyo, Osaka and Okinawa are under different circumstances from each
other, we seek to rebuild the reformist strongholds to defend the interests

of residents from the LDP's maladministration. To that and, the JCP appeals
to all groups and individuals who are opposed to the 1m government and eagerly
look forward to the restoration of reformist local administrations: we

appeal to than to follow with us, the path toward reformist unity based on

the reformist cause. To that end, the JCP will make every possible effort.

5. Systematic and Studied kpansion of Party Ranks

While the whole party is striving to attain the goal -of "500.000 party where,"
at present the figure. if attained. accounts for only 0.63 percent of the
nation's total population. Wen seen in light of what is required by the
revolutionary cause in Japan. it would mean nothing more than a rudimentary
accomplishment.

In the expansion of party medaarship, it is necessary to attach particular
importance to pursuing the expansion of party ranks purposefully. on a
constant basis, and carrying out the work of party building. in a planned way,
in light of the party's duties. In this regard, party organizations at all
levels should decisively display leadership in both the planning of party
building and the actual carrying out of the plans. Particularly those tardy
party organizations, whose mnbership accounts for less than 0.25 percent of
the population in prefectures or areas, are urged to carry out special
activities for breaking through the percentage at an early date.

The leading organs of the party should always carry through the viewpoint that
the party should be strengthened in both quantity and quality. Cadres of
thee organs should keep in frequent contact with party branches and members
and see that they carry into practice the decision on strengthening the party
qualitatively, while simultaneously expanding party membership.

In the composition of Japanese society, the working class accounts for two-thirds
of the population. This class should strengthen its nilitancy and leadership

on the basis of its revolutionary self-awakening. This is the greatest guarantee
for the victory of the cause of revolution in Japan. For this reason, the
reactionary ruling forces. in close cooperation with anticomunist. rightist
cadres of trade unions, are mobilizing every conceivable means to undereine
party organizations and their influence in business circles. Undaunted by

the attacks and repression of monopoly capital, the party will plant itself

on the results achieved in party building in business circles so far, broadly
accept progressive workers into the party and strive to advance party building

in business circles. including the overcoming of the party's nouns in najor
business firms, with a greater revolutionary ambition.

1‘8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The party will grapple with the organization of labor unions, even among those
workers who are yet to be unionized, by adopting a new experience of linking
union activities with workers' routine interests, thus attaching importance

to party building there.

Building a party possessed with great capabilities among peasants and fisher-
men, the neat important ally of the-working class, and urban working citizens
is also a task which can absolutely not be neglected, as it constitutes a
guarantee for the revolution of the majority.

0f the party Insmbers who have joined the party since the last congress. women
account for 62 percent and women’s nubers have increased. This shows in the
number of Dietwonen, where our party far excels other parties. It is a whole-
some tendency, reflecting the nature of our party which aims at the true
liberation of women and equality of the sexes. However, in reality, many of
the woman party mowers are carrying out their activities while bearing a
heavy burden in society or at hone because they are women. The party needs

to actively work to accept a greater nurber of wonen into party mesbership
and direct particular. comradely considerations to improving the conditions
for woman party nubers' activities.

To expand the party's ranks among youth and students is of decisive importance
to the future of our party. The resolution of the eighth Central Comittee
plenun regarding the Democratic Youth Union [DYU] stressed. as the future
direction of the DYU's activities, that it should drastically increase the'
weight of education and study activities and establish the system and operation
of its organization suited to the m. The 17th DYU Convention held in May
gave a concrete fore to this direction and served as an epochal starting-point
for new development. Party organizations at all levels should attach inportance
to independent party activities along the young generation and strive for

party building among youth at places of work, in local areas and in the
countryside as well as among college students. At the sane tine, they should
earnestly come to grips with the tasks indicated by the eighth Central Conittee
plenum and fulfill their "leading responsibility" literally as a guiding party
towards building a mighty and powerful UYU linked with the broad section of

As pointed out at the national conference of activists last October, carrying
out the task to overcone a vacuum has weakened in recent years in business
circles, schools and local areas. This is primarily a question of leadership
on the part of party organs. In this connection, the party stresses once again
the importance of buckling down to the task of party building under studied,
strategic plans.

6. Centering Party Activities Around the Party Organ as a Fully Established
Practice

The 2 years following the 15th party congress have a great significance in
our party's activities centered around the party organ.

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First, under the consistent party policy of centering party activities around
the party organ, the number of readers of the party organ increased from
over 100,000 in the early 1960's to the 3 million level in the 1970's.
During this period attention was paid to establishing the practice of
centering party activities around the party organ and efforts were rude
accordingly with emphasis placed on improving the system of distributing
the party organ and collecting subscription fees. Although the arrangements
made in this field were far from perfect, record 7 ‘er record was set thanks
to the more than adequate psrtywide efforts to 2 some the difficulties
encountered. Bur as readership reached the 3 m Lion level, it became
apparent that without sweeping changes, including drastic improvuent of
activities designed to center party activities around the party organ on a
permanent basis, it would be difficult to maintain that level, still more
difficult to exceed it.

with the standing presidiun'e August 1980 call for ending confusion in delivery
and subscription fee collection as a starting point, the party began to tackle
this issue in earnest and while so doing cans to realize the gravity of

defects in the delivery and collection system. As a result. the party set

a plan to drastically reform party organ-related activities under the slogan

of "revolution in the party organ," and ends partywide efforts to implement it.
“the national conference of metropolitan. prefactural and area chapter chairmen
in March 1981 formulated a five-point principle concerning party organ-related
activities, namely: 1) improvement of the quality of the organ. 2) increase

in the number of pages, 3) proper delivery, lo) efficient collection of
subscription fees. and 5) increased profitability. The conference urged that
this principle be observed under all circumstances. As main objectives,

the party organ reform plan calls for a drastic change in editing and organizing
the paper with an eye to profitability; the early recovery of the losses incurred
by the paper over the years; and ownership of the organ by the party and its
operation by area chapters. 'lhe plan also calls for an organizational reform
whereby basic party organizations. minly branches and county chapters, will
take main responsibility for party organ-related activities. In November

last year, a "Guide for Party Organ-Related Activities" was published. In

this guide, all these points are incorporated.

Second, in regard to efforts to increase the number of readers of the party
organ, a large drop has been experienced in the amber since the previous
congress, especially due to a weakening of party organ-related activities
during the last concurrent elections for the two houses. Since September 1980,
the party has waged a campaign to expand party strength designed to implement
the party congress resolution calling for recovering the drop in the number
of readers and increasing it to 1. million. In waging this campaign, the
party also endeavored to strengthen party branches' party organ departments
and step up calls for the formation of readership expansion teams, subscrip-
tion fee collectors groups, and teams to prevmt missed deliveries as an
organizational neans to help boost readership.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Despite quite a few positive results, there have been ups and downs in this
campaign when seen from a partywide point of view. Taking a serious view
of the lag in this area, the party in preparation for the coming 16th party
congress adopted a decision to launch a "great campaign to effect the JCP's
advance in comemoration of its 6061: founding anniversary and the 16th party
congress." At the national conference of metropolitan, prafectural and area
chapter chairmen held this April, the party called upon all party organiza-
tions and mubers to set out to impluaant this decision by overcoming any
defeatist, passive tendencies. This campaign is based on the resolution of
the 15th party congress which clarified the need for "partywide concentrated

efforts for a set duration" alongside with routine, planned efforts for the
expansion of readership.

The party Central Committee sent letters to all party mowers stressing this
need. In response to this call of the party Central Couittee, all party
members are now striving to exceed the level set by the pest party congress
as soon as possible and to go on to attain a 4-million readership so that
they can honor the glorious 60th fending anniversary of the party and the
opening of the 16th party congress amid an advance in party organ-related
activities. whether our party organ-related activities in these 2 years will
be really fruitful or not will depend on our present partywide efforts.
Literally all party members and organizations must rise up to combat every
kind of passivism, negativism and defeatism with fortitude and reason so that
thq can fulfill their goals without fail.

As a prOpaganda weapon linking the party to the msses, the periodicals and
various pamphlets our party is publishing and distsminating, as wall as mm,
are of great significance. Particularly the resolution of the eighth party
plem- regards pamphlet subscribers as pocential voters next in order to basic
voters and stresses the importance of planned distribution of pamphlets. It

is important for all party organizations to continue to utilize the party
periodicals and pamphlets according to their respective characteristics, and

to disseminate the.

7. Party Life Worthy of the Masses' Vanguard Party To Be Firmly Established
and Party Guidance To Be Thoroughly Conducted

The fundamental task, which covers every part of party construction and party
activity, is to firmly establish party guidance and party life worthy of the
masses' vanguard party, with special emphasis on the strengthening of "party
activity centering on party branches and with all party members participating
in it."

1) Party branches represent the JCP in their respective localities, places
of work and schools. They are the JCP's basic organization linking the party
directly with the broad masses of the people through their daily activities.
For the branches to discharge their original duties, it is important that
they-~as the party's basic organizations responsible for their respective

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

localities and places of workuestablish prospects and goals of drawing

the masses into the reformist cause and thus effect a change in the balance
of power. It is important, under such prospects and goals, that they work
out necessary plans to increase party membership and other unique policies

and programs and that they make conscious and systematic efforts to carry
them out.

It is an important duty of party branches and all party members to put into
practice the party's national policies and guidelines in a concrete manner
and in conjunction with specific conditions in their respective localities
and places of work and with the demands of the masses. It is wrong to assume
that decisions of the party Central Committee at various meetings and guide-
lines published in AKAHATA daily become tasks of party branches only after
being acted on by intermediate organizations; most of the decisions and
guidelines are directly addressed to party branches. It is necessary for all
party branches to promptly implement them and translate them into reality

in a voluntary and positive manner.

Individual party members belonging to party branches differ in their personal
circumstances and capabilities. Nevertheless. the true merits of the masses'
vanguard party lie in the fact that under whatever circmtances mabers may
find thaselves in they put everything they have to the practice of party
decisions and guidelines. At present, in some party branches many party
members fail to participate in party activities. leaving branch operations

in the hands of a handful of members; in other branches, all netbera take part
in study programs. cooperate in the meebership drive and actively conduct
mass activities. Although at present one branch performs differently from
another, it is important for all branches to always return to the original
spirit of the masses' vanguard party .with all party were actively
participating in party activities according to their abilities and personal
conditions. It is important to constantly seek the building of party branches
along this line. All party branches should strictly abide by the four norms
of party life (branch meetings are held regularly; all members read AKAHATA;
all members participate in party activities; all party mentors promptly pay
the party fee and fees for AXAHATA and other journals). They should strive
to make the four norm a standard for all members to consciously abide by.

As for the leading party organizations, they are also required to place the
organization and activity of every party branch on the track of lively and
conscious development worthy of being a basic organization of the party.
They are required to put guiding emphasis on this point and to pursue it
unceaaingly. Especially when a party branch encounters difficulties such as
that caused by organizational disarray. one of the duties of the party's
leading organisations is to help rebuild the branch. Leaving difficult
situations unabated for a prolonged period of time represents negativism that
should never be tolerated. Last year, the party Central Committee called
attention to the importance of specific guidance in the rebuilding of party

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
branches experiencing confusion in their party life and party activities.
The party Central Committee itself assigned a considerably large number
of comrades to Tokyo to reorganize activities of scores of branches there
involving the party organ and to place them on the right track.

0n guidance by the leading party organisation, the three points-~the thorough
dissemination of guidelines. the thorough conduct of education, and democratic
management and discipline in the conduct of conferences--that were stressed

at the national activists' meeting in October last year as a key to the party's
leaping advances, will continue to serve as an important key.

0n elections for and the cowosition of party organizations including the
guidance departments of party branches, greater importance will be attached
to the implementation of the decisions of the lloth and 15th party congresses
concerning the JCP cadre policy.

2) Along with its effort to make the ideology of the moses' vanguard party
an ideology of the whole party, the JCP has consistently been stressing the
importance of correctly defending democratic centralism. and of struggling
against liberalism, decentralism and bureaucratism. It was from this position
that it has for the past 20 years waged struggles to crush all expressions

of factionalism against the party and to overcome various types of opportunism
and opportunist trends seeking to weaken democratic centralism. Today,

under circmstances where the trend of big-power chauvinism often involves

the fostering of antiparty factionalism as a means of international inter-
vention. the significance of our party's 20-year—old struggle as an advanced
struggle has become even clearer.

Today, the JCP's historic mission has become more important than ever. It is
necessary for the whole party to thoroughly disseminate the ideology of the
masses' vanguard party and the spirit and discipline of democratic centralism
among all party members. and for all party members and organizations to
demonstrate their vitality with a high revolutionary spirit and grand revolu-
tionary ambitions. Today, one of the major factors eroding party discipline
is related to activities in the monopoly capitalist society subjugated to
the United States. and to various kinds of taptations of conservatism,
passivism and petty bourgeois life. The absence of education often leads to
party members yielding to these temptations; special importance must be
attached to the need to overcome this ud'uealthy trend both in study and
education and in ideological struggle.

Various phenomena of social and moral degradation resulting from infiltrating
capitalist thoughts have harmful effects on the purity of the party even if
they are observed among some. not all, members. Therefore, they should be
wiped out thoroughly.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) At a time when the struggle between the reformist and counterreformist
forces is increasing its intensity, it is more important than ever to
defend the party against espionage and covert activities and violent
attacks by reactionary forces.

Spying activities, particularly those by the public security and police
authorities, are increasing in viciousnsss, persistency and covertness.

The number of espionage and provocation cases in the 2 years following the
15th party congress was approximately 300. which was an all-time high.

The figure includes only those cases which were reported by local party
organizations to the party Central Co-ittee. The party should regard it

as an important task to resolutely protest and struggle against such espionage
and covert activities that violate the democratic principles of the constitu-
tion, and at the same time to tighten discipline in party life not to allow
infiltrations by spies.

Meanwhile, rightwing groups dedicated to violence are intensifying their attacks
against the JCP with the LDP's official blessing and with the financial backing
of big business. These attacks are being made while the regimentstion and
organizing of these groups is progressing on a national scale.

Since the fourth Central Comittee plenum after the 12th party congress in
1976, the party has been taking a serious view of these attacks, defining the
duty to defend the party and the democratic movaent against these attacks

as one of the "four pillars of party activity." A persistent trend among
some party members is that they are unwilling to tackle this problem until
they see such incidents occurring right under their nose. This kind of laxity
could invite violent groups to launch a surprise attack against the party,
causing it serious losses. To prevent such disasters, the party will endeavor
to firmly establish the required posture.

lo) It is an urgmt and important duty to strengths; the party's financial
activities, place party finances on a sound basis, and, by doing so, to insure
the building of necessary material foundations for the development of party
actiVities. To that end, all party members should see to it that they pay
their monthly party fees exactly on time, that the party organ subscription
fees are collected 100 percent from readers, and that the money from the
sales of pamphlets is collected 100 percent. These collections constitute
the very base of party finances. At present, in many prefectural party
organizations only 1.0 or 50 perc-t of members pay their monthly party fees
in the month, against the national average of nearly 80 percent in the first
half of the 1970's. The practice of habitually accepting such low rates of
payment and collection as sonething "inevitable" should be thoroughly eliminated
as a passive posture. It is necessary to make some epoch-making improvnente
in this area in a manner worthy of a party with discipline.

The five principles of activities involving the party organ set forth "payability"
as a principle important to the whole party. In every activity indeed, financial

5’:
son omcuu. use ONLY
problems must not be slirhted. This is an extrenely fundamental principle
governing all party activities. The were festival this year. while
correctly cowining politics, culture and entertainment, proved to be a
financial success. too. thanks to the fact that the past "practices" of leaving
the festival entirely in the hands of festival nanagers and of relying too
heavily on conercial businesses were basically altered, and that the festival
was set up basically as a "handude" festival, with firm arrangaents for

100 percent collection of the nosey paid for all participation coupons. The
festival this year thus left an inportant lesson behind it applicable to the
party's financial activities and other activities of party construction. as
well as to the party-fee paynent probl-us.

'l‘hs JCP marks the 60th anniversary of its founding in July. Recorded in our
annals over the past 60 years since before Horld Her II is the indonitabls,
progressive role played by the JCP which has been leading the Japanese people
through manifold difficulties and vicissitudes toward the goal of achieving
the progressive development of Japanese society while protecting the true
interests of the nation and the people. And this record is enblasoned with
the innortal exploits of our pioneers and conrsdes who perished while per-
forming revolutionary tasks.

Today the J6? and the Japanese people are faced with a serious situation which
concerns Japan's future. In this historic crisis. confronting world capitalism.
including capitalism in Japan. the party nust time its entire rank and file
with a sense of pride as nuabers of a party which has been charting jointly
with the people a brilliant path to the duocratic resurrection of Japan and
social progress. It must also inbue its rank and file with the scientific
militancy and the indonitabls spirit which generally characterize the

60-year party history. With this pride and spirit, the entire party must do its
utmost to protect the interests of the people and realize a peaceful and
progressive Japan.

COPYRIGHT: Nihcn Kyosan-To Chuo Iinkai 1982 nen

C80: [0105/ 137

55
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

soomc

suwm mom mus'mms 01mm.
Tokyo WSW in Japanese 18 May 82 pp 210-27
[Article by r3111 Ikehata: "Stagnant Export Industries“

[Sun-nary] Audio equipment m (video tape recorder), watches, etc., were
overstocked in the United States and Europe and becane a cause of stagnant
Japanese exports. Various industrial sectors whose exports continued to ex-
pand in the past are now suffering from overstocks and are in need of inven-
tory adjusuents. Manufacturers are hoping to decrease overseas stocks as
soon as possible, but the prospect does not look very pronising.

Audio industry:

Exports to Europe increased 100 percent true 1979 to 1980, and audio nanufac-
turers shipped 40 percent are audio equipnent in my and June 1981 ained at
Christ-as sales. however, the sudden fall of European currencies and the
price increase of 30 percent on the average for audio equipment, together with
decreased consuqtion, ads the sale during the‘Christsas season in 1981, 10
percent belov that of 1980. As a result of the slow-down of sales, consoli-
dated stocks increased from '50 billion at the end of September 1980 to I85.9
billion at the end of Decewer 1981.

In theUnited States, stores specialising in audio equipment supplied by
Japanese audio nanufacurers suffered fro- high interest rates and their sales
becane lethargic. Hamfactursrs have been taking very aggressive neasures to
increase sales, especially for the 1982 Christ-as season, although the export
for this year's Christmas season could be initiated by using last year's stock.
The chief of the planning division at Pioneer B1ectric 00., Hr Inagakd, said,
"Real active novel will take place next year. This year's production is 20
percent below that of last year."

VTR:

Unlike the audio equipment vhich increased rapidly in stock in Europe, the
overstock of mm in the United States has betas a problem. Eons appliance
industries produced (000,000-500,000 m's at the beginning of 1981, and they
increased production to 1.1-1.2 nillion units by'the fall of 1981, anticipating
that they could expand sales. They exported 2,376,000 units to the United
States. However, demand did not increase as they had expected. Dealer

56
POI OFFICIAL 08! ONLY
inventories reached 400,000-500,000 units this year from 100,000 units in the
spring of last year. As a result of the slow demand, the price collapsed. and
this year's v'ra exports from January to March stood at 580,000 units, 70 per-
cent of last year's exports which had amounted to 800,000 units. "Overstock
can be used up by this fall," said Mr Moriyams, chief of the research division
of the Electric Industries Association of Japan. Production, including the
domestic supply, this year was 860,000 units in January and 1.02 million
units in February. Business circles expect that this year's total V‘l‘R pro-
duction will increase 28.2 percent, equivalent to 12.2 million units and
exports will increase 31.9 percent, equivalent to 9.7 million units. we
export to Europe this year from January to March was 2.29 million units com-
pared to 2.5 million units from October to December 1981.

watches :

Hatch manufacturers whose export totals 80 percent of their products are con-
sidered one of the top exporters in Japan. In order to compete with lower-
priced watches made in Bong Kong, Japmese watch makers increased their pro-
duction 100-50 percent and expanded eXports continuously from 1979 to 1981.
Hatches manufactured during the first half of 1981 reached 358 million. Hanu-
facturers started to cut production back after May 1981 and continued to
decrease it until this yearas the exports began to level off. Hatch exports
decreased 5.7 percent in January and 8.2 percent in February 1982 from those of
of 1981. Manufacturers at Citizen Watch 00., Ltd., expect to reduce overseas
stocks to adequate levels by the end of this year or the beginning or’ this
fall. at the earliest.

Machine tools, such as NC (Numerical Control) and nc (Machining Center):

Exports to the United States increased (02.7 percent in 1980, although sales
had begun to slow down during the latter half of 1980. One of the reasons
for theslowdown was less interest in plant investment in Europe and the
United States. The prospect for thisyear's exports. according to the Elec-
tric Industries Association of Japan. would be a negative growth, that is,
$280 billion, or a 10 percent decrease from last year. The amount of pro-
duction, including domestic supply, would be I800 billion, or a 6 percent
decrease from last year.

Seamless pipes:

The operating nudaer of drilling rigs in the United States was 6.500 in Decem-
ber 1980, but this decreased to 2,500 in April of this year because of the
decline in oil prices. Mamfacturers are concerned about the overstock of
pipes in Huston and nearby areas, and they are especially concerned about the
collapse of prices. The manufacturers announced that they would increase
production from 4.2 million tons to 5.5 million tons in 1983, but there was
talk about the reduction of prices for pipes among buyers. There is a strong
probability that the price may collapse, and manufacturers are determined to
reduce the production of pipes from July 1982.

57
FOR 0mm USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shipbuilding:

Receiving orders declined in 1981 as follows:

First quarter: 2,100,000 tons
Second quarter: 900,000 tons
Third quarter: 750,000 tons
Fourth quarter: 620,000 tons

The volume of. ship construction on hand at the end of March was 8.8 million
tons, of which 6 eillion tons will be delivered in 1982. The voltmle of ship
construction in 1983 may go down to 4.9 million tone or the bottom line in
1978. heavy nachine nanufscturere for ships are concerned about the novenent
of plant orders. Received plant orders in 1981 reached 312 billion, although
MIT! expects to have much lower figures this year. Due to the rise in inter-
est rates, worsening foreign currency conditions in oil-producing countries
and increasing risks in the Soviet Union and Best European countries, nsny
potential business deals will be postponed.

Au tomob iles :

The recession has affected the oil-producing countries, end no other markets
remain for auto manufacturers to expand. The only promising increase can be
made in Saudi Arabia this year. Libya decided to stop accepting passenger
cars and trucks which it ,had already ordered. Nigeria also announced a mea-
sure to stop inorting cars. In Burope, the higher yen rate against European
currencies led to the decrease of markets for Japanese cars. In Heat Germany
the nerket share for Japanese cars (restriction base) which had reached to
10.6 percent in 1980 dropped .to 7.7 percent in Jawary 1982. It is said

that 115,000 cars, or 10 percent of 1.2 nillion cars, the equivalent of .
all exports in the European nsrkets, were in stock. This year's automobile
export would be about the sane or a little less than last year's which was
6.05 million cars and would not reach the number (6.19 million) announced at
the beginning of this year.

Semiconductors:

The 6b! mory has captured 70 percent of the American market and nanuiac-
turers are expecting to increase sales 20-30 percent this year.

Import and export cmpaniee whose prospect was .for a 10 percent increase in
exports at the beginning of this year have now changed their minds, and say,
"From April to September, exports would have negative growth. However, later
this year, they would increase to a high single digit umber."

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Shimbunsha 1982

cso: «105/138

F0! omcm. US ONLY
JAPAN ADJUSTS AUTO-m IWENTORIBS OVERSEAS
Tokyo NIKON IBIZAI snmuu in Japanese ll Jun 82 p 7

(Article: "Japanese Autonobiles and VT! (video tape recorders) Are Overstocked
in the United States and Europe and Inventory Adjustnent Hill Take Until This
Fall"]

[Text] A significant anount of durable consuer goods such as automobiles,
VTR and watches are overstocked. Bach consular goods industry concerned held
back shipoents since the beginning of this year and is trying desperately to
sell, even by lowering retail prices. Stagnant business conditions in the
United States and Europe have been delaying the business upturn longer then
anticipated. It will probably be fall, at the earliest. before the prices of
consumer goods go back to adequate levels. Business circles are not in the
mood to increase inventories even if prices return to adequate levels.

The overstock of Japanese automobiles is a problem in Europe. kports to the
rmwere lower than last year, and sales also dropped nuch nore than last year.
Because of this, the nwer of autonobiles in stock has remained high since
last fall.

Among EECcountries, West Germany, Belgium and Holland suffered a drop in busi-
ness the nost. Due to a voluntary adjustment forced on the sale of automobiles,
sales dropped further. It is reported that during the first quarter (January-
Harch) of this year, sales dropped 20-30 percentfron last year. In response
to this, various business sectors decreased shipments considerably. The drop
in exports for the first quarter of this year to West Gamay was 22 percent,
Belgium 66.7 percent, and Holland 64.7 percent. The delclinehshipnents began
to reduce stocks which at one tine had reached a 6-Ionth supply. However, it
will take at least until this fall before stocks return to adequate levels,

or a 10-month supply.

The biggest sutonobils export is to the United States. However. under import
restrictions, stocks, including passenger cars and trucks, were only enough

to last 2 months in May and they are considered to be short in supply. Sup-
plies of local stocks are different, depending upon the autonobile manufacturer.
For example, Toyota )btor Sales Co. has only a 21-day supply, but Mitsubishi
Autoeobile Industry has over a loo-day supply.

59
mommmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The audio as well as the automobile industries are also suffering from an over-
supply of stock in Europe. kports of audio equipment increased 40 percent
during the 1980's. Audio manufacturers were expected to have the same level
of increase in 1981 and shipped 40 percent more audio equipment. however, the
decline of European currencies triggered a decline in local sales and resulted
in 10 percent fewer sales than last year.

Pioneer Electric Corporation, the biggest audio unufacturer in Japan. had

‘50 billion worth of overseas stocks in Septeaber 1981, but the amount reached
'86 billion at the end of last year. Since the beginning of this year, manufac-
turers have been limiting their shipments while selling the overstocked equip-
ment at reduced prices. They finally reduced the amount to I70 billion. There
is still more a 10 equipment in stock than desired and it will take several
nonths to reduce the supply to adequate levels.

At present, exports of audio equipment are 20 percent less than last year; how-
ever. even if the adjustment of overstocked equipment were completed, increase
in shipments cannot be expected. According to the Pioneer Electric Corporation.
it is expected that exports will decrease 15 percent during this year.

The electric home appliance industry hopes V'l'R exports will i-prorve. However.
this sector is also concerned about overstock. l'or the past several years,
V'rR exports doubled every year. kports to the United States, the largest
importer, began tolevel off in October last year, making it a peak period.
When exports to the United States leveled off. stocks began to increase. Some
100,000 mite of m were in stock 1 year ago, but within the last 3 months.
the figure went up to 500,000 units.

common: Nihon Keiaai Shimbunsha 1982
cso: 4105/1149

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nns‘r Emerson-mam Imus-mt nmom
09090941 Tokyo ASA!!! mums ms in English 8 Jun 82 p 3

[Text] The National Space Development Agency has developed the world's
first electron-bonbardnent nercury ion thruster for loading on engineering
test satellite (ITS) III to be launched in August at its space center in
Tanegs-Shine Island, southern Japan.

An agency spokes-an said that if the test succeeds, it would like to develop
the thruster into a stall rocket for orbit control for a large geostationary

satellite weighing 500 kilogram to be launched in 1985.

Hith its thrust being 0.18 grams, its specific thrust shoving propellant
use efficiency is 2,200 seconds.

weighing 22 kilograms. the thruster consists of two engine bodies, two power
suppliers and one power regulator with power consumption being 86 watts--
62 watts in the engine bodies and 26 watts in power control unit.

As propellant, 600 grams of nercury are replenished per' one engine and of
1,500 hours available for jetting, 150 hours or one-tenth are used for the
ETS-III.

Officials said that the ion engine syst- is cowatible with those in other
countries, including the United States, regarding design and production
technique. -'

The thruster has better propellant utilization efficiency than conventional
chenical rockets since external electric energy is used for particle accelera-
tion to get thrust, the spokesman added.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982

080: 4120/302

61
MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIECB AND mm

m metros smcomcron ms 10 um mrmnoss
Tokyo um um: sum in Japanese 18 Jun 32 p 6

[Text] It was revealed on 17 June that the "New Function Seniconducto'r Research
and Developlsent Foundation" (Chaired by Sedakazu Shindo, Chair-en of Mitsubishi
Electric), which was created under the auspices of the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry, has already nsde more than 10 patent applications since it
was established last August. The foundation is a governent industry joint
organisation which was created for the sole purpose of developing super LSI's.
The fact that the foundation has already started to show concrete results in
uniting patent applications indicates Japan's high standard in semiconductor
technology. 0n the basis of these results. the foundation is planning to hold

a public syllposius entitled the "low Function Sesiconductor Technology 8ylposiu"
on 19 and 20 July.

Foundation officials nsntioned that ”because of the highly confidential nature

of patent applications. their details cannot be disclosed." These patent
applications, however, are thought to he super-lattice elements. three-dinensionsl
circuit elenents and environsental hassrd resistant elenents.

The July synpoeius will diucuee the current production technology of salliua
arsenide. which is getting attention as a new semiconductor asterial in place
of silicon.

The foundation consists of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, the
Industrial Science and Technology Agency and sons national universities. Ohi
Electric, Sanyo Electric, Sharp, Smitolo Electric, Toshiba. sac. Hitachi,
Fujitsu, Hetsushite Electric, Mitsubishi Ilectric and Sony.

COPYRIGHT: Nikon Keizai 8111de 1982

080: 5106/ 136 END

FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY