FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10513

12 May 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 29/82)

FBI8 FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms publications contain information primarily tron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JERS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mtion was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of en
iteu originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Govern-eat.

COPYRIGI LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHIP 0F
MMIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINA‘IION
OF THIS FUELICAI'ION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/10513
12 May 1982

JAPAN REPORT

(moo 29/32)

Courau'rs
POLITICAL AID SOCIOLOGICAL

Propose]. For Upper House Proportions]. Representation massed
(Tewoshi Yemen; 10mm 3mm, 11 Her 82)............. 1

Prerequisites of Election District Reform Analysed
(ﬂaw mm 8mm. 8 Apr &) Oseosseooseeeeeoeesoeeseoee 6

Constitutional Amendment Faction of LIP (h Rise
(“131631 8mm“, 29 m &)OOOIOOQOOOOQOOQOOoosoosoesoooeo 8

Suzuki Denmciation of Oonstitutionsl Amendment Puzzling
(8m mm, 8 m 82)eooseesessosseoeeeseossoseeeesses 11

Probability of April Diet Dissoluticn Discussed
(SHOW, m &)OOOOOOOO00.00.00.500....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 13

LIP'a Political Gedi’ly Rename Discussed
(KenJiKitehm;mm1LYYOI¢URI, 16 Apr 82)............. 2h

Keidenren's Recommendation for Administrative Reform Editorielized
(“Dual MIL! m. 19 Apr &)eseoeeeeeeeseneeeeeeu-eesee 25

Suzuki Government's Policy Revision Predicted
(Tetehiko mmum;mim1 DAILY HM, 21 Apr 82)....... 21

BCOIIOMI C

'MAINIOII' Urges 0min Japan's Fern Mertet
(Editorial; CKIDAILY ms. 21 Apr 82)................ 29_

u.s. Plans ‘lb Take Pen Produce Issue to amm-
(ABM “ﬁne We 16 Apr &)Oooooosoooos-OOOOOOOO0.0.000 31

|

- a - [III - ASIA - m rouol

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (ELY

Sale or Alaska: Crude Oil to Japan Would 11.319 0.8.
(Imm‘ omto; m m, 19 m &)OIIOIOOOOOOOOO

SCIICE AID TECHNOIDG!

Hitachi Sells Semiconductor Technology to Hewlett-Packard
(HIM ICOGYO smut. nmum 1:0ch sum; 3 Mar 82)

Cmtract a: 6k! DRAM
Secmd HP Shock

eta-rent m of Pine Cox-mes, Anorphous Silicon Discussed
(Yumobu ”3‘“; 8mm WU. m 82)....0000000000000

~b-

FOR OFFICIAL U83 (ELY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL MID SOCIOLOGICAL

PROPOSAL FOR UPPER BOUSB PROPORTIWAL MUTATION AMLYZED
Tokyo YOHIURI swam in Japanese 11 liar 82 p 5

[Article by Reporter Tsuyoshi Yanauki: "The Upper House Proportional
Representation Systen That Has Taken Shape"]

[Text] Regarding the problen of revising the Upper louse national electoral
constituency system. the Japan Socialist Party (J8?) has decided to .adopt a
proposal for a revised St Lague type of proportional representation systen
with binding lists. Although it differs fron the D'Eondt formla being
subnitted to the Diet by the Liberal Denocratic Party (LDP) in the nethod of
computing the distribution of Diet seats. the cooperation between the LDP
and the JSP. the two najor parties. toward the introduction of a propor-
tional representation systes in the Upper House national district. based on
a binding list of candidates. will have a major imact. It appears that the
reform of the national district may suddenly loos: as the major issue in the
last half of the current Diet session.

Change in Diet Seats

The aim of the proportional representation system is to structure the Diet
seats in proportion to the votes polled by the political parties. It is
derived. as it were. fro. the idea of designing the Diet as a "sicrocosn"
of the national electorate's will (its support of the parties) and is
adopted in virtually all Hestern European countries with the exception of
Britain and France. which use the small electoral district systel [the
single-newer district systen!. .As a result of the ssphasis on votes
polled by the political parties. the election becones s party-centered
rather than candidate-centered poll. while the "dead votes" (votes cast for
the losers. which are not reflected in terms of Diet seats) decrease in
nunber.

Among such features. the binding candidate list formula is a systen whereby.
prior to an election. a political party subnits a slate of party candidates
in priority'order and. after the election. it designates as it winners the
number of candidates equal to the nuder of seats allocated to the party.

It is a systen widely used in elections which are under the proportional
represattation system. The electorate casts votes for the parties. using
the lists of candidates as reference.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The contention of the LI)? and the JSP in proposing to introduce the systen
in the Upper House national district is that. apart from the excessive costs
incurred by the present system. the nature of the single national district
with its designated 50 seats renders it nore readily adaptable to the pro-
portional representation system than the subdivided electoral districts of
the Lower House. or the regional districts of the Upper House.

If so. in the event proportional representation is adopted. hov would the
seats of the various parties in the Upper Rouse national constituency be
changed?

The chart below is a hypothetical outcone of the allocation of Diet seats
based on votes polled in 1980 and 1977 by the various parties in the Upper
House national district elections. It shows figures which would have

resulted if the binding candidate-list for-ula for proportional repre-
sentation had been used.

Hypothetical Election Results in Upper Rouse National District Based on
Proportional Representation

 

 

 

 

Revised
1980 Vote 1 Seated D'aondt St Legue Here
1.1)? 42.5 21 24 22 21
J8? 13.1 9 7 7 7
Koueito 11.9 9 6 6 6
05? ' 6.0 4 3 3 3
JCP 7.3 3 4 4 4
"LC 0.6 0 0 0 0
$01. 1.1 0 0 0 '1
Minor parties] 17.4 4 - - -
Independents
Breakdown: of Minor Parties/Independents
Pusae Ichikava 5.0 l 2 3 3
Yukio Aoshina 4.0 1 2 2 2
Chinatsu Nakayans 2.8 l 1 2 1
Ryokichi Hinobe 2.1 1 1 1 l
Colubia Top 1.0 0 0 0 1
1977
1.1)? 35.8 18 20 l9 l8
JSP 17.4 10 10 9 9
Koneito 14.2 9 8 7 7
05? 6.7 4 3 4 3
JG? 8.4 3 4 4 4
NLC 3.9 l 2 2 2
SCL 2.8 1 1 1 2
Minor parties] 10.8 4 - - -
Independents
2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

Revised
Vote 2 Seated D'nondt St Lag ﬂare
Breakdown
Pu. 2.7 l l l 2
Chinpei Nosue 1.9 l l l l
Bidets Yashiro 1.7 l 0 l l
Keizo ‘l'akahashi 1.5 l 0 l 1

(Minor party/Independent counted as a political party or organisation.)

There are nsny types of proportional representation systens. However. only
three types are included in the chart: the D'llondt formula proposed by the
LDP. the revised St Lague formla proposed by the J8? and the comparatively
easy-to-understand Bare for-11a.

As the hypothetical figures show. adoption of the D'llondt formla would
clearly be advantageous to the ruling LDP. while the advantage would be less
if the revised St Lague or ﬂare formla were adopted.

Of course. it remains highly questionable whether it is right to take the
total votes of a given party, which under present practices is an accumla-
tion of votes garnered by its individual candidates. and make a comparison
with a system based on a slate of candidates under which votes are cast for
the party. The reason is. although the slate of candidates is used as
reference. the fact that the votes are cast for the party invites the
possibility that the voter trends would be quite different from the past.

Therefore. the pluses and minuses for the various parties in case of a
change to the proportional representation system cannot be judged unquali-
f iedly. However. from the standpoint of the Komeito. which today conducts
the most efficient elections. the proportional representation systea would
clearly be disadvantageous. no matter what method of computation is used.
For example. in the 1980 elections. all 9 Kcmeito candidates were elected
with a total of 6.67 million votes. Under the proportional representation
system. this would result in six seats. regardless of the method of con-
putation used. Hhile one seat today equals an average of 740.00 votes. a
seat under the proportional representation systen would require about 1
million votes. Therefore. the Komeito'a favorite tactic of splitting the
votes and placing its winners in a cluster in the middle to lower rankings
would be impractical.

The .18? has hitherto been basically agreeable to the introduction of the
proportional representation system. however. at the party convention in
early February. critical opinions surged. saying: "It might prove to be
disadvantageous" or "Are we to follow in the LDP's footsteps?" and it was
decided to take another look.

As pointed out by critics at the party convention. the hypothetical figures
show that it would be more disadvantageous to the .18? than the present

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system under any formula except the D'aondt formla' of 1977. Furthermore.
the party appeared to be expressing deference toward the Komeito and the
Democratic Socialist Party (08?). which are cooperating with each other in
opposing the introduction of the proportional representation system in the
Upper House/regional districts.

Points of Issue in Introduction of System

notwithstanding this and despite its advantage to the snall political
parties. cot-pared to the D'Bondt formula. the reason the JSP is proposing
the revised 8: Lague type of proportional representation is that the
national district election. which requires such enormous campaign funds as
to he cynically dubbed the "money-harsh district." has become a burden to
the JSP. Furthermore. it was probably due to the judgsent that it could
attract a wider range of candidates than the presmt candidates who can-
sist almost entirely of former labor union cadres. and that it could -
nuster a nuch wider support in votes by competing as the principal opposi-
tion party.

As for the revised Ll)? proposal. there are many problems pertaining to the
treatment of the minor parties and independents.

The candidates of the ninor parties and independents. excluding the seven
major parties, placed four winners in 1980 with 17.6 percent of the total
votes and four winners in 1977 with 10.8 percent of the votes. A trial
count of the 1980 election. based on the D'Bondt formula. shows that. if
such parties as a "Fuses Ichikawa Party" or a "Yukio Aoshina Party" had
existed. they would have won a total of six seats. however. according to
the LDP proposal, it is conceivable that even the candidates with that many
votes might have lost out. The reason is that the LDP proposal makes it
nandatory to assune the forts of a political party or organisation in order
to run in an election. Also. the conditions to run are: to have polled
more than lo percent of the votes in a recent national election. to have 5
or more Diet members in its ranks. or to field a minimum of 10 candidates.
including national and local districts.

In this respect. the JSP proposal has eased its conditions for the partici-
pation in elections by political parties and organizations. It requires
recent election returns of 2 percent. three Diet members and a slate of
five candidates.

The recent votes obtained by the ninor parties and independents reflect
a critical attitude among the electorate who are dissatisfied with the
established political parties.

Therefore. in revising the national district system. it seems important
that care should be taken not to ignore the wishes of the voters.

{Appendix}

D'Hondt formula—The winners in each party are decided by dividing the
total votes by the whole nunbers l. 2. 3...in order. Then. beginning with

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the largest quotient. the results are placed in order, up to the desig-
nated number of Diet seats allocated. The aim is to average out the num-

ber of votes per seat insofar as possible. The formula is adopted in
west Germany.

Revised St Legue formula—Instead of the whole numbers used in the D'Bondt
formle. odd nuﬁers such as 1.6. 3, 5. etc.. are used as dividers.
whereas the D'llondt fomla is advantageous to the larger parties, the

St Legue formula uses only odd nudera. However, in order to avoid a
flood of mller parties. it has been revised to begin with the divider
1.5. The formula is used in the northern European countries.

Hare formula--Although the method of conputation differs. the percentage of
votes won by each political party (for example. 50 percent, which is
represented as 0.5) is multiplied by the designated number of seats in

the district. and the whole number portion of the resulting figure is
translated into the number of seats won. The remaining seats are dis-
tributed in order. beginning with the party with the largest fractional
number. The problem is, a winner could emerge from a party with extremely
few votes. Therefore, few countries have adopted this formula.

COMIC“: Yoniuri Shilbunsha 1982

5886
050: 4105/ 82

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lN)R‘0F1ﬂC1Al.UEE2(MULY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

PREREQUISITBS 0? ELECTION DISTRICT REFORM ANALYZED
Tokyo NIKON IBIZA! SBIHBUN in Japanese 8 Apr 82 p 2

[Text] A bill for reform of the Upper house national electoral district has
become the focal point of Diet deliberation. following the establishment of
the budget. This is because, in addition to Prime Minister Suzuki's deep in-
terest in having the bill passed by the current Diet, a meeting of minds has
been reached between the Liberal Democratic Party [LOP] and the Japan Social-
ist Party [38?] with regard to reforming of the system by introducing a pro-
portional representation system based on a slate of party candidates in the
Upper House national district. However, all of the opposition parties except
for the LDP [as published] and the JSP are against the bill. and under such
conditions, it would not be advisable to deal forcefully with a problem in-
volving basic political rules. such as the electoral system. Appropriate
political conditions are prerequisites for the realization of any reform bill.

One prerequisite is that it is not desirable for a decision to be made merely
on the basis of agreement between the LB? and the JSP._but that it should
take the form of a bill which could win the support of at least one other
party. The second prerequisite is that although there is not much time before
the regular Upper House elections in the summer of next year, the Upper House
national constituency system should not be dealt with alone. but should be
considered together with the revision of seats in the Lower and Upper House
local districts.

Being cautious regarding the reform of these systems does not mean that we
are opposed to the reform. The fact is, many references have already been
made regarding the shortcomings of the present Upper House national constitu-
ency system, and it is high time some solution is reached. From the stand-
point of the voters, it is not easy to pick one candidate out of nearly 100
candidates in a single voting district. Also, from the standpoint of the
candidates, great physical energy and enormous campaign funds are necessary,
because the entire nation constitutes a single electoral district. And in
conclusion, there is the lamentable fact that a candidate in the national dis-
trict cannot run unless he has organizational backing or is a celebrity in
the performing arts.

The bill for reform of the national district submitted by the L0? and the JSP
was conceived as a method of correcting these shortcomings. The merits of

6
FIHI(Hﬁﬂ(1Al.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFEKJAL.USEZONLN

the reform proposal were considered to be, first, the alleviation of personal
financial burdens and physical wear and tear on the part of the candidates, by
introducing a proportional representation system in the national district and
removing the coloring of a single-candidate election. The second prerequisite
is to make possible the candidacy of persons with good sense who faced diffi-
culty in the past. by having the respective parties submit a list of their can-
didates in priority order according to their previous election victories.

However. the LDP proposal has the aforementioned merits on the one hand, but
drawbacks on the other. The problems pointed out during the Diet delibera-
tions last fall were: 1) Since the proposal is premised on elections center-
ed on the political parties and precludes the candidacy of independents. it
violates Article 14 (equality under the law). Article 15 (freedom of candi-
dacy), and Article 21 (freedom of nonalignment). 2) The introduction of pro-
portional representation expedites the party politicization of the Upper
House. 3) The basis of the reform proposal in stipulating party rules is am-
biguous. 6) The adoption of candidate lists will tend to encourage the pre-
ferred treatment of incumbents. S) It is questionable whether enough inter-
est could be raised among the electorate when the personal factor is ignored.

As for the theory of unconstitutionality advanced in the opposition arguments.
many theories appear to stress that the constitution recognizes the existence
of political parties as an indispensable factor for the facilitation of demo-
cratic government. and that the adoption of proportional representation is
not unconstitutional. However, if the strength of the opposing arguments and
the degree of suspicion held by the opposition parties regarding the LDP's
intent are taken into consideration, it would seem that it is at least neces-
sary to get the aforementioned two conditions straight before any reform is
attempted.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

588“
C80: 4105/83

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AID SOCIOIDGICAL

CONSTITUTIONAL WT FAC‘I'ION 0? LI)? 0“ RISE

Tokyo HAINICHI ShIﬂBUN in Japanese 29 Mar 82 p 2

[Text] Former prime ministers Tanaka and Fukuda, who have virtually total
influence within the LDP. have become counselors of the Diet Hembers' Union
for the Realization of an Autonomous Constitution (former prime minister
Nobusuke Kishi, chairman). which is promoting constitutional amendment. The
constitutional amendment issue is once again in the limelight. At present,
the LDP's Constitutional Research Council (former justice minister Setoyama,
chairman) is divided into subcommittees, and each subcommittee has been con-
ducting specific studies on a draft of an amended constitution. Each subcom-
mittee is supposed to conclude its study by June, and the council expects to
write a draft this fall. Since the LDP does not have the two-thirds majority
in the Diet required to propose constitutional amendments, it is not in a
position to move toward constitutional amendment immediately. But why has
"the issue of constitutional amendment" been brought forth now? One reason
is its relation to the 0.8. request to strengthen Japan's capability to de-
fend sealanes. Some LDP members also intend to promote constitutional de-
bates while the LDP has the majority, and thereby to try to arouse public
Opinion. We have explored these movements within the LDP....

Chairman Setoyama of the Constitutional Research Council visited Prime Minis-
ter Suzuki at the Prime Minister's official residence on the 26th with his
recently published book, entitled "Discourses on Constitutional Amendment,"
and talked to the Prime Minister for 30 minutes. he reported that the basic
policy of the council would be to write a draft of an amended constitution
this fall. In the meeting he described the necessity for constitutional
amendment in the following way:

"After the war. the occupation government started raising the premature baby,
Japan. in an incubator. Now Japan has already reached the prime of manhood.
Japan's GNP is third in the world. In spite of this, Japan still walks in
the world wearing the diaper of a constitution which was provided by the
occupation government. Voices have been rising all over the world asking
Japan to assume its international role in security, trade, and other fields.
Our country, which is now in the prime of manhood, must carry out its respon-
sibilities. Constitutional amendment is one of our responsibilities."

To this. the Prime Minister is said to have given no particular response.
Mr Setoyama's objective is to place the constitutional amendment issue among

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan's international responsibilities. In a meeting with the Prime Minister
on the 27th, U.S. Secretary of Defense Heinberger asked Japan to share in the
defense of the North Pacific region and requested that Japan increase its
capability to defend the sealanes for 1.000 nautical miles. People like Mr
Setoyama who are pushing for constitutional amendment judge that the constitu-
tional amendment issue cannot be avoided if Japan is to respond to these 0.5.
requests for a strengthening of Japan's defensive capabilities. Earlier,
over 50 1.0? members endorsed the Hundred Person Col-ittee Asking for Revision
of the U.s.-Japan Security Treaty. Mr Setoyama's point is in principle the
same as the committee's assertion that "the security treaty should be revised
so as to make it bilateral in nature, if Japan is to carry out its interna-
tional role."

As far as movements within the LDP are concerned. the expansion of the Diet
Hembers' Union for Realization of an Autonomous Constitution has encouraged
the constitutional amendment faction. In May 1979, there were 178 LDP members
who belonged to the Diet Members' Union. Since the overwhelming victory in
1980's double election of both houses. however, membership has been increas-
ing. At present it numbers 295, including independent former prime minister
Tanaka; this is over two-thirds of the whole LDP.

Moreover, because former prime ministers Tanaka and Pukuda have become coun-
selors and three important party officials, such as Secretary General Nikaido,
have become vice chairmen, the Diet Members' Union will change its charac-
teristics.

At a joint meeting of the Coustitutional Research Council and the Diet Heders'
Union held on the 25th. a draft of the declaration which will be read at a
national convention sponsored by the Diet Hembers' Union on 3 May was discuss-
ed. A draft prepared by the executive office was examined. The following
opinion was expressed, and they decided to reexamine the draft later. "When
we assert [the need for a] constitutional amendment, it tends to be taken

as a revival of militarism or as a complete amending of the Constitution. He
should make it clear that we want to protect pacifism and democracy. It is
also necessary to write a phrase calling for amendment by the people." They
said that this was the first time they had had this sort of debate about the
declaration. It can be observed that their approach is to place the greatest
emphasis on rousing public opinion.

0n the other hand, there are some who view coolly the rise of debate on con-
stitutional amendment. "The constitutional amendment issue is one of the
questions that the LDP should address after it has obtained an overwhelming
majority. Nobody thinks the time is now ripe for a constitutional amendment.
Because the number of young Diet members born in the Shows era has been in-
creasing, isn't this debate intended to rouse a mood for constitutional amend-
ment while in the majority, and not to let the constitutional amendment move-
ment wither but to hand it down?" (a Diet member belonging to the Shows Soci-
ety to Think about the Constitution). There are eight members in four sub-
connittees of the Constitutional Research Council (which has 100 members) who
do not belong to the Diet Hembera' Union. Chairman Kamilnira of the Constitu-
tional General Subcomnittee wrote a trial draft of the preamble to the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

constitution, but different opinions were presented one after another. Here-
after, each subco-Iittee will discuss specific utters. such as "m to revise
each item." In an iten-by-iten discussion, it is mooted that a wide variety
of opinions will be presented.

COPYRIGHT: Hlinichi 8111!!me 1982

9896
- CSO: 6105/86

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

SUZUKI DENUMCIATION OP' CONSTITUTIONAL W PUZZLIMC
Tokyo SANKEI SHIMBUM in Japanese 29 Mar 82 p 2

[Text] Prime Minister Suzuki recently "denounced" by name
the activities of the Diet Members' Union for Realization

of an Autonomous Constitution (former prime minister Uobusuke
Kishi, chairman). of which the LDP's constitutional amendment
faction forms the nucleus. This created a stir in the LDP.
In particular, the Diet Members' Union had just received
former prime ministers Tanaka and Pukuda as counselors and
was on the point of developing an active movement toward
"constitutional amendment," slang with the party's Constitu-
tional Research Council (Mitsuo Setoyama, chairmn). Some
members are asking if "the Prime Minister has forgotten the
campaign policies and the party declaration adopted at the
party's convention in January." The Prime Minister, who

had instructed the party's Constitutional Research Council

to write a draft of a revised constitution. and who for a
time had showed a positive attitude toward constitutional
amendment, has reversed course again. There seems to be
something behind all this.

The Prime Minister sumoned Chairman Setoyama to the Prime Minister's offi-
cial residence on the 26th and demanded that the party's Constitutional Re-
search Council be "prudent," saying: "Re have not written a draft yet. If a
body like the Diet Members' Union for Realization of an Autonomous Constitu-
tion talks boisterously without a draft. we could be criticized as scheming
for rearmament or a military draft system."

The members of the Diet Melbers' Union who heard this took the Prime Minis-
ter's words as a “denunciation." They seem to have a hard time figuring out
what his true intentions were, cementing: "At this late stage, what did he
mean by calling us by name and saying that 'we were talking boisterously'?"
The Diet Members' Union is proud of its large membership-mu two-thirds of
the LDP membership of both houses. They understand that "establishment of an
autonomous constitution is the party's just cause, and therefore any act to
ignore it is a violation of a campaign pronise." Since former justice minis-
ter Okuno spoke of constitutional amendment last year, the Diet Members' Union
has engaged in vigorous activity. Last October it presented a trial draft of
amendments for 10 items for which it has been seeking partial revision. At

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the LDP convention held in January, "establishment of an autonomous constitu-
tion" was included among the campaign policies and in the party declaration.
Moreover, the party's Constitutional Research Council has started writing a
draft. Consequently, the members of the union were encouraged to think that

the time had come for the party as a whole to campaign for constitutional
amendment.

Against this background, it is inevitable that Prime Minister Suzuki's “denun-
ciation“ appeared to the Diet Members' Union to be an act [intended] to dis-
courage the constitutional amendment movement. In fact. at the liaison meet-
ing between the administration and the ruling party on the 20th, the Prime
Minister warned Secretary General Nikaido ”to be prudent about the constitu-
tional amendment movement." Moreover, on the next day, the 25th, the Prime
Minister asked former prime minister Fukuda, through the secretary general, to
approve consideration of the constitutional amendment movement in a prudent
manner, since the time is not yet ripe."

As for former prime ministers Tanaka and Pukuda becoming counselors of the

Diet Member's Union, the opposition parties have already initiated the criti-
cism that "Suzuki's public promise not to revise the constitution has been re-
vealed to be false." In addition, the protect-the-constitution faction within
the LDP has been asserting the need for prudence on the issue of constitutional
amendment. Therefore, the Prime Minister's changing attitude could make it
appear that "he has been changing his position" sheerly out of a desire to pro-
tect himself. Furthermore, he is concerned because "opinion within the party
may split over the issue of constitutional amendment, and as a result the
political situation this fall will include many disturbances.”

One leading member of the Diet Members' Union said: "The significance of
former prime ministers Tanaka and Pukuda becoming counselors is great. with
both Tanaka and Pukuda engaging in the establishment of an autonomous consti-
tution. the ground within the LDP for constitutional amendment will become as
firm as a huge rock...." [This member] also seemed disappointed by the sud-
denly cold treatment from the Prime Minister.

Some have offered criticism: "Well. the Prime Minister was originally a mem-
ber of the Socialist Party. He merely repeats pacifism as a holy invocation."
Putting aside this criticism. it is natural for the Prime Minister, who wishes
to be reelected in this fall's LDP presidential election, to want to avoid
disturbances by any means. In spite of his wishes. however, even former prime
minister Tanaka, with whom Prime Minister Suzuki has a close relationship that
is indispensable for his reelection, recently began to talk publicly about
"constitutional amendment.” The constitutional amendment movement has been
awakening. In this situation, the Prime Minister has confusedly applied the
brakes to the movement. This seems to be the truth.

The Prime Minister's attitude is ”to not discuss constitutional amendment un-
til a draft is written." However, if politicians suddenly started debating

the issue of constitutional amendment after a draft had been written, it would
only confuse people. Henceforth, politicians should try to make a "receptive

plate" by continuously pointing out to the people the problems of the current
constitution and what needs to be revised. This seems to be the proper way to
build a national movement.

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keisai Shimbun Tokyo ﬂonsha 1982

9896

C80: 6105/85 12

INJR OIGWCJAI.USEGDNLY
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

PROBABILITY OF APRIL DIET DISSOLUTION DISCUSSED
Tokyo seem in Japanese Her 82 pp 134-161

[Panel Discussion Asong Four Anonymous Diet ﬂashers: "Sudden Ruors About
Diet Dissolution in April"]

[Text] SHOWN: In light of LDP Policy Affairs Research Comcil Chair-an

Rokusuke Tanaka's outrageous state-ant, how does the name "Blabber-south
Rokusuke" sound?

Diet Ienber C: What? I'I not familiar with the details. What exactly did he
say? -

SHOWN: According to the Tokyo newspapers, he said aoeething like this: "Your
question is whether. in the event of a guilty verdict, (the Tanaka faction will
cone apart and) the political world will be reorganized? Frankly speaking.

I think that an innocent verdict is doubtful. .I believe fron' the bottom of

ny heart that it would be nice if (forner prise sinister) Tanaka were found
innocent, but this is doubtful. I wonder whether the Tanaka faction will
really be able to stay united (in the event of a guilty verdict). however, I
think that if the Tanaka faction is attacked free without, it will grow more
unified. (There are people) even today who, lacking cononsense, are joining
the Tanaka faction; what will becose of then? Politicians are a different
breed (fron those with the usual cosnonaense). As to whether the Tanslra
faction will collapse (in the event of a guilty verdict), I think the opposite
will happen. The Lockheed trial will continue endlessly, with appeal after
appeal, and as long as Taneka is able to continue his political activities, he
will continue to do so. Don't you think so?” This is a statenent which

Tanaka mexpectedly nsde during the question-and-answer session following a
speech entitled "The Present Political and Bconoeic Situation."

Diet member 3: “HR-TV disclosed the state-eat, and it caused a great stir.
"Hey: Rokuauke's done it again!" was the reaction.

Diet member D: A flustered Roltusulte tried to explain away his atatenent by

holding a press conference at party headquarters, but it was too late.
Heebers of the Tanaka faction were furious.

13
FORMINONLY
IINRIHHNCIAI.U§IiohﬂJV_

Diet member A: Nikaido supposedly said: “I don't want to see his face again."

3: There were even some who said that shutting the mouth of the blabbermouth
chairman of the Policy Affairs Research Council should have priority over
adsinistrative reform.

A: That was Ryutaro Bashimoto.

C: From Rokusuke's point of View, however. it probably was just a case of the
truth suddenly coning out.

8: Right. Although the subtitle of this series of articles is not "legatacho's
[Name of the street where the official residence of the Prise Minister is
located] True Feelings," it would fit.

C: It would have been more commendable if Rokusuke had shown a defiant
attitude and had asked what was vrong with telling the truth.

"Guilty Tenska" Is ”Nagatacho's True Feelings"

D: There is also another view. One analysis holds that this statement might
have been a carefully conceived plan on the part of Rokusuke Tanaka to lower
the image of Kakuei Tanaka and his followers, so as to help the reelection of
Suzuki.

A: Rokusuke. the loyal retainer. (laughs)

3: That's too farfetched. Unfortunately for Suzuki. he has no confidant at
present within the Rocki-kai [One of the LDP's "policy groups" (i.e. factional
support organizations). originally founded by late Prine Minister nayato Ikeda
in the late 1950‘s; but now identified as a support group for Prime Minister
Zenko Suzuki.] who is that loyal to him. his faction is in a considerable
uproar over the lchi-Roku war and the Ni-Roku war.

SBOKUN: Ni-Roku war?

3: Kiichi Miyasaws versus Bokusuke is the Ichi-Roku war, and Beiji Ogawa
versus Rokusuke is the Ni-Roku war. Zenko's ability to control his faction has
declined sharply. Rokusuke as a "loyal retainer" would be inconceivable.

D: What actually happened. no doubt. was that Rokusuke's snert-elecky nature
got the best of him. and he blurted out the truth.

A: Although "Guilty Tanaka" most certainly constitutes the "True Feelings of
Nagatacho." it is a so-called taboo word around the Nagatcho village. For the
members of the Tanaka faction. in particular, it's clearly an expression of
discrimination. Although now it's a forbidden phrase for the mass media, in
the past there was a word for describing a physical defect. To those in the
Tanaka faction. it's as though that expression had been said. That's because
deep in their hearts they feel inferior for being associated with the Tenaka
faction.

1h
. IOIIMHHIIAI.U§EIHMLY
MWUSEONLY

3: while mention of "Guilty 'l'anaka" of course gets them angry, it's also
said that the members of the Tanaka faction were angered by the statement:
“There are people even today who, lacking co-onsense, are joining the 'l‘anaka
faction." In other words, they are angry because this see-s to isply that
joining the Tanaka faction shows a lack of co-onsense. (laughs)

D: It really doesn't seem like kokusuke.

A: In person, he is good-natured and up on the latest information, so he is
a very interesting person. Sometimes, however, he is apt to be mistaken in
his judgement of the nature of an occasion. (laughs)

I): however, he is surely not a malicious person.

8: within the party, however. Bokusuke Tanaka is seen as a kind of upstart.
Although he has established himself as a new leader. there is a question as to
exactly what sort of track record this reputation is based on. Along with the
tumult of that double election, when it seemed as if the Obon and New Year's
holidays had cone at the same time. came the death of (hire; perhaps because
of all the confusion, everybody became very despondent. Rokusuke seized this
opportunity to work hard for the speedy creation of the Suzuki cabinet, and
that was nimble work for a politician, but that's about all he's done.

His skill was recognized, and he gained the posts of sinister of international
trade and industry and then of chairnan of the Policy Affairs Research Council.
However, things seem to be going a little too smoothly for him.

0: He's jumped two or three ranks. The Pukuda faction and the Komoto faction
don't think too much of that, either.

8: That‘ s the way it stood before his recent statement; now he's angered the
Tanaka faction. too.

"Chase the Pleas on Your Own Head!"

A: One consolidation for Tanaka is the fact that he is in a party office and
not in a cabinet post. If he had been a sesber of the cabinet, the cabinet
probably would have withered away for lack of cooperation from the Tanaka
forces. That might have been true even with his in the party, but if he

had been in a cabinet post, the work of the Suzuki government would have been
held up. At the very least, the work of his ministry would have been put on
hold.

C: Is it true that he went to Hejiro [a district of Tokyo where former Prime
Minister Kakuei Tanaka lives] to make an earnest apology?

A: It's true. And not only to Hejiro; it's said that he went in succession to
the places of all the leaders of the Tanaka faction, from Nikaido's place to
Takeshita's and those of the others, to explain himself.

3: Kakuei supposedly spoke very curtly to him, and said something like:
"Before saying something about another person, look for the fleas on your head."

mommamv
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A: "Mister LDP of Hejiro" would like to win an election before the guilty
verdict is passed down in the Lockheed trial. because if he is able to change
the political situation prior to that. he will be able to change the political
situation prior to that, he will be able to pursue hie ”struggle” for the next
6 years.

SBOKUN: You mean to say that there's going to be an election this year?

A: That's right. Sensing such an odor fron Hejiro, eveybody is hurrying to
prepare himself for the war to cone at any time.

C: The opposition parties see the political showdown as coming in 1982 and
not in 1983.

A: Although Tanaka's arrest was an event which shook heaven and earth. a guilty
Verdict is a preordained event which cannot be avoided. For Kakuei Tanaka,

this will be more damaging politically than his arrest. If, in boxing terms,
the arrest is a punch taken in the first round. the guilty verdict will be like
a punch taken in the late rounds of the fight. so it will have the sane

effect as a blow to the legs and the stoaach.

B: The long-awaited return to power, which he has been developing step by
step-~with the mass nedia his enemy the whole while-would be reversed. If an
election were then to be held under such circumstances. it wouldn't be a
normal handicap either for Tanaka hiaself or for those around his. By all
means, therefore, they want to have an election prior to the verdict.

D: The court hearings will end in April or May. At the earliest, the decision
will be made within the year. With this kind of trial, then, that means it

nay take up to a year to write up the court decision. Therefore. it will be
next year.

A: For Kakuei Tanaka, therefore, a dissolution of the Diet this year is a
political necessity.

C: Shouldn't the election take place prior to the end of the hearings rather
than prior to the verdict? The Mejiro people say be thinking about trying
an election before the prosecution aakes its final argunents and calls for
criminal penalties.

A: I've heard that, too.
D: So. that means this April or May?

A: No, because another of Mejiro's desires is to see how long they can put off
the trial's coning to an end. Although only those involved probably know the
truth. Enowoto's illness ever since last sum-er may also have been a
precautionary aeasure taken for the purpose of postponing the trial's
conclusion. The nass media are clamoring for an early conclusion to the

trial, but as I said in our meeting prior to the last one, I do not think

there will be an early end to the trial. As one night expect. the Hejiro
people are involved in putting it off.

16
IVIICIWICIALIJII(M‘LY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C: Although an election which came after the prosecution‘s final argument

and call for punishment would not be as bad as an election after a guilty
verdict. it would still be a painful situation for the Mejiro people. It is
conceivable, therefore. that they will try for a Diet dissolution prior to the
conclusion of the trial.

3: Although "Mister LDP of Hejiro“ has continually fought over the political
timetable, including setting Nikaido the position of party secretary general.

he has gathered 108 people together and. moreover, has made Nikaido secretary
general; thus he has prepared a systen which will enable him to have a
dissolution whenever he wants one. All that remains is the question of when

he intends to time the dissolution. Everyone, including the opposition parties,
is hanging in suspense on his every breath.

A: Therefore there is the possibility that. rather than after this caning
autumn. dissolution will happen unexpectedly around the time the budget is
approved. Hith the Diet atmosphere of confrontation over an income-tax
reduction. or an adninistrative reform, or a budget revision, there may very
well be sane discontented people who would say: "what a hassle!" or "Shove it!"

SHOKUN: So, when would this be?
A: This spring, around April.
D: That would be awful.(laughs)

A: In other words, it means that Kakuei Tanaka has that much power and that
Zenko Suzuki the man has that close and deep a relationship with Kakuei.

In addition, Suzuki and Nikaido have such a close relationship that they have
been Siamese twins or identical twins. Probably even Suzuki would not go so
far as to turn the nation upside down to save Kakuei Tanaka, but he will try
to keep in step with Tanaks as much as possible. That's because such action
would also benefit Zenko Suzuki.

3: The Suzuki cabinet has yet to consult the will of the people even once.
If the will of the people, who are soverign. were to be consulted, the Fukuda
(action. the Nekasone-Komoto faction, and the opposition parties would not be
able to offer any opposition in the face of such a mandate.

Either Way Is the Road to Hell

A: For Zenko Suzuki. being anointed by the people would be a more certain
route to reelection than a battle for the party presidency. In short, Pukuda
was replaced by Ohira because he lost a stupid fight that he waged only
within the LDP pond. If the Fukuda cabinet had won a general election, there

would have been no need to replace a prime minister and party president who had
been chosen in a general election 2 months later in an L0? presidential

election. Because he stirred up a tempest in the LDP teacup. Phkuda had no
choice but to bow out. If he had thrown his net wider and had sought a fight

in the ocean of a general election. he would have stayed in power for another
2 years.

17
FIIICIWICJAI.UBI1UNIN
FOO1OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

Zenko Suzuki likewise is not 100 percent sure of reelection, and because his
reelection is doubtful without the cooperation of Kakuei ranaka, he should
follow a line that is in accordance with the wishes of Tanaka. Should he go
for a general election. or should he choose a presidential election within the
party? Whichever route he chooses is a road to hell. however. I think he will
choose the sore certain route.

SBOKUN: So you're saying he will choose a general election?

A: I think so. Suzuki's true desire is to cell for dissolution in as

natural a way possible, and in a situation unrelated to the lockheed trial.
This is also the strategy of the Tanaka faction.

B: If this is done in a clumsy fashion. the opposition parties will attack,
calling it a "dissolution to cover up Lockheed."

A: Nevertheless. if it cases to there being no time for a natural way, Hejiro
will use brute force.to bring about a dissolution.

D: However. even though 108 people have been brought together and Nikaido has
been made secretary general, obtaining a dissolution will still require sound
justification.

A: There are any number of sound justifications lying around. (laughs) One
never knows when an accident night happen. That's the reason for living in the
political world.

3: Suzuki wants to have a dissolution on an occasion unrelated to Lockheed,
while Tanska wants to have a dissolution just prior to the prosecution's
argument and call for punishment, so as to lengthen the period of his "struggle."

A: In boxing terms, he wants to gamble on fighting in the later rounds.

SHOKUN: In the Lockheed trial. the teatinony on his receiving noney has
ended. and the trial probably will turn now into a battle over the issue of

a prime minister's official jurisdiction. According to today's newspapers,
however, the debate over official jurisdiction is going to be postponed due to
the need for further preparation.

A: That's what we have been saying since last year. The sass aedia said that
Tanaka'a strategy is to have the trial and quickly and then to eliminate the
remaining synptoms as quickly as possible. However, that is a mistake on the
part of the ease media.

Dissolution in Order To Escape Lockheed Verdict

SHOKUN: In our last session. somebody said this: lakuei Tanaks gathered 108
people together and made Nikaido secretary general because, when the verdict
appears as guilty. the opposition parties will submit a resolution calling

on Tanaka to resign fron the Diet. "hen that happens, the LDP, arguing over
this, will break up in a so-called "Kakuei split." when that happens, he will

18
IIIIINHNCIAI.IIII(MULY
FOIiﬂﬂﬂKIAL.USE(MVLY

have Nikaido put the party back in order, with the support of his 108 people.
Sonebody explained the situation's significance in that light.

A: If it can be done. the dissolution and general election will probably

take place before that happens. Even if a resolution appeared calling for his
resignation. however. it would be shelved in the Diet Steering Co-ittee and.

as in the cases of questioning Daisaku Ikeda and Kenji Miyanoto, it would

never take place. It would be interesting. however, if the nass Iedia were

to take a poll of all the members of the Diet to find out whether they supported
or opposed the idea.

C: The hidden Tanaka faction people would all surface. and the pro-Tanaka and
anti-Tanaka groups would be clearly identified.

SHOKUN: "ho would submit the call for Tanaka's resignation?
B: Probably the Japan Socialist Party.

SHOKUN: If the Steering Committee quashed the resolution, and if the mass
media then took a poll, what would be the response of the LDP Diet members?

D: The majority would reply: ”No comment."

C: As for no, if such a poll were taken, I probably would have to say I
supported it. Politics is not such that it would improve with the arrest of
that one old guy, but crime deserves punishment. so it probably can't be
helped.

3: If a resolution calling for his resignation were to appear. the one most
shocked by it would be Tanaka himself. That's because there already are
restrictions on his activities in the official sphere. As for the case of
Daisaku Ikeda, he is now confined by a mass aedia canpaign. They're like a
kind of jailkeeper. There's the danger that Kakuei will he jumped on under
the sane conditions. The only one who will be able to command authority at
that time will be Nikaido. ‘

SHOKUN: A little while earlier. there was talk of the possibility of
dissolution in April: Are there a lot of people who believe this?

A: In both the ruling and opposition parties. almost everyone thinks that it
would not be an unusual political development. were a dissolution to take
place anytine after April.

3: It depends on Tanaka's intentions.

A: A dissolution in autumn would not be a natural dissolution. and probably
would he a staged dissolution. It would be called a “dissolution to escape

the Lockheed verdict." However. if it took place around April. it would be

a dissolution not necessarily linked to the lockheed situation.

SHOKUN: "hat wOuld be the justification for a dissolution after the budget
had been adopted?

19
l0ﬂ10lfﬂ!hl.U8£(lVLY
MWWONLY

A: It could be justified in any number of ways. For exaaple. overturning one
table in the conference of the ruling and opposition parties‘ policy conittee
chairmen would justify dissolution. Calling the Prine Minister a "fool" would
justify dissolution. (laughs)

It Has Gone Down to "Balancing Accounts"

8: For some reason, when the new year began. everyone see-ed ready to run
away. Such an steosphere serves to help Tanaka. Without a doubt. there will
be a dissolution. If everyone looks the other way. however, everyone will be
able to serve out his tern in office. Therefore. even though no one dances
unless Tanaka plays the ausic. I wonder whether they will go along with the
mood being crested by the Tanaka faction?

C: Even the opposition parties. for sons reason. have taken it seriously and
are ready for a fight. They give the iapression of treablingly holding aloft
their swords (laughs). and saying: ”Cone on! Cone on! You enemy of lay
parents!" They do this even though there is great danger of their being
killed by the ener they pursue. As a result. everyone is helping Kakuei
Tanaka's "Lockheed verdict coverup." Everyone is cooperating in his fight over
the timetable.

SHOKUN: Usually. Diet nenbers would rather not have a dissolution and general
elections if they can be avoided. Right? The double elections were in June
the year before last. so they will have been in office a full 2 years cone June.
Even though there is still plenty of tine left before the end of their tern.
why is there a feeling that there must be a dissolution?

A: As one might expect, it is because the Diet is influenced by both internal
and external factors. Those who now wear Diet aesber In badges think, of
course. that they would like to be there as long as possible. and that it
would be best not to dissolve the Diet. However. there are large groups of
people who have lost elections and people who want to be elected for the

first tine. and they are waiting for dissolution to happen as quickly as
possible. They're getting cold waiting outside, and it's tine to let then in:
it's time for player substitutions! (laughs) These people gradually begin to
make a nave. and when that happens. those in the Diet begin to feel as if a
fire had been lit under their seats. (Laughs)

3. Just have Kakuei Tanaka. or even soaeone of the status of Nikaido or
Noboru Takeshita. take Saturday and Sunday and go speaking around the country
two or three tines. Suddenly. those in the Diet will all be in the mood for
dissolution. When that happens, even the Prime Minister or Takeo Pukuda won't
be able to stop it. This is because. if they go to one person's place to give
his: support. everybody in that prefecture will say that this means dissolution,
that this nuns war--and they will quickly get in the nood to prepare for
battle.

SHOKUN:1'hia changes the subject. but what' a happening with the so-called
administrative reforms?

20
“WWW!”
FOILOFFKJAI.USBII'LY

D: There is a strong possibility now that ultimately things will come to the
point where Doko, chairman of the Ad Hoc Commission. will let loose with a
letter of resignation and leave. As can be seen in the differences over
economic policy between Finance Minister "atanabe and Economic Planning
Agency Director General Komoto, the lack of unity within the cabinet has
already been revealed. Komoto is making his pet argument that. while
administrative reform should not be dropped in favor of measures to counter
the recession, if such countermeasures are not taken, fiscal rehabilitation
will not be possible. Ultimately, however. both Komoto and Hatanabe are
forgetting about administrative reform. In the beginning, it was administrative
reform, but it became fiscal reform without anyone's being aware of it. How,
fiscal rehabilitation alone has become the most important topic. In short,
they are concerned totally from beginning to end with adding up the Finance
Ministry's figures or with balancing the accounts. Such issues as how to
solve the so-called decline in administrative services. what to do about the
National Railways, what to do about the food surplus programs, and how to cut
out the unnecessary parts of government have all been put somewhere and
forgotten.

B: The issue of reducing personnel and reducing bureaucracy also has
disappeared somewhere. Instead, it has all turned into a matter of balancing
accounts rather than of reducing expenditures.

C: That's why policy contradictions have appeared. Therefore. no matter when
the trigger is pulled, there are factors that could greatly upset the
political situation, and these are not limited to dissolution or to the
results of the Lockheed trail. Such factors do exist.

Things "111 Hove After the Budget Is Approved

D: Because Zenko Suzuki has staked his political life on administrative reform,
he will have to eat his words if that does not happen. Looking at the
timetable, therefore, when will the opposition parties start moving toward
thinking that the time has come for him to eat his words?

C: This could come as early as mid-March.

A: However, both the ruling and the opposition parties have the problem of
business conditions and the problem of the nation's economy, so they cannot
try anything risky like dissolution in February or March. For better of for
worse. the budget will be approved within the fiscal year. and then the
political maneuverings will start in earnest.

B. At this rate, if a revenue shortfall develops because of the zero ceiling
provision, a whole batch of government bonds will have to be issued again.

If that happens, the question will be raised again that it might have been
better to bravely reduce taxes by even 1 tri'lion yen in order to stimulate
the economy and to seek increased revenue» . om that.

SHOKUN: Is the government bond deficit nos 80 trillion yen?

21

FOItOFIIJAl.U§l¢l€LY
FIIICHHHCJAI.IENE(MNLY

3: Yes. Up until recently, it was said to be some 60 trillion yen. Therefore,
each and every person, including newborn infants, bears the responsibility for
600,000-700,000 yen in debts. The average household each bears the burden of
2.5 million yen in debts. Something has to be done about this national debt.
However, if public works get zero, and this gets zero, and that gets zero,

then there will be nothing at all in increased revenues.

D: My wife and father often purchase government bonds, but are they safe?
(laughs)

8: They are patriots. aren't they? (laughs) Although this has not been
studied too carefully, there have been no cases in the past in which
government bonds have been turned in for their cash value.

C: Since the Meiji government, government bonds were issued in considerable
quantities at the time of both the Russo—Japanese War and the Pacific war.
Historically, however, these have been turned into scrap paper more often than
not. Is that not right? Certainly there have been almost no cases of these
having been turned in. -

The Diet with a New Year's Hangover

SNDKUN: For the Diet member. is New Year's time a time for gathering votes?
D: It's a crazy time.

C: You shouldn't talk about that here. Really! (laughs)

8: That's because New Year's time is a time for working away from home so
much that it's just as though the Obon and New Year's holidays came at the

same time. Industries' New Year's parties and the drinking parties of every
kind or organization--gatherings of 100 to 200 people-sre held at this time.

A meeting of 100 people at a Diet menber's office usually requires a month of
preparation and a total of around 1 million yen in expenditures. Because an
envelope with a "New Year's present" of 10,000 or 20,000 yen suffices. we
attend at all costs, even if it means going on a stretcher. One can't say

one is grounded because of having drunk too much New Year's liquor, or that one
is off flying a kite. or even that one is in Hawaii on the only vacation of

the year.

A: Well, it's not the same as Yoshitsune's feat of leaping over eight boats,
but it's like being in the East today and in the Nest tomorrow. By consuming

it several tens of times, the next one comes easier. It's like winter Sumo
wrestling practice, so the legs get in shape. (laughs) It's like self-training
in pro baseball. (laughs) Those that don't do it, don't make out very well
once the season starts.

SHOKUN: You do some 10 places in your own electoral district:

A: That's right. Oh really terrible occasions, you might have to nanage 20
New Year's parties in one day.

22
FOI<OIFKJAI.UBIGMNLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3: Somebody drunk on sake might say to you: "You! won't you take a drink of
my sake? When and how did you ever become a Diet nsnber?" (laugh!) Then. you
become his drunk coapanion. saying: "Yes. Yes. Thanks for the feast." (laughs)

0: Even if you exchange toasts with only half a hundred people, it's way too
Inch.

A: Therefore. you put your head and your heart away in a safe place, and only
your body, given over to drink, staggers over here and over there. It's like
a dead spirit offering up liquor. (laughs)

c: If, for exasple, it takes 60,000 votes to be elected, that leans 60 neetings
of.100 people each.

3: If your stonach and your liver aren't strong, you can't do it. (laughs)
A: Everyone is showing the initial sylptons of hardening of the liver.
C: Look at my hand. Have any spots appeared? (laughs)

D: If you think about it, this is not souething a human being should be doing.
This business.

A: If you go to the Diet after the New Year's holidays are over, everyone has
a yellow-colored face. (laughs) Even the whites of their eyes have become
yellow. Everyone is in a daze because of the New Year's holidays.

8: Like Rokusuke Tanaka, therefore, they blurt out things they shouldn't.

COPYRIGHT: THE SHOKUN 1982

9844
C50: 4105 I69

23
FOIOWICIAIJSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

LDP'S POLITICAL GADPLY WA DISCUSSED

Tokyo nu: DAILY mum in English 16 Apr 82 p 3

(Article by Kenji. Kitchen]

(Text)

COPYRIGHT :

C50:

The politicel citation, which wee-e
ehotttlmeWleeteble.l-ehowlnc
eimoipoeelhleupheenleheceneeoite-
venue ehottielle in ilecei lul. providing
:‘mgtlnc omtunltice in! e voliticel
y.

Bomediﬂenitleeenchuverdtoteinthe
Inchheedbrlheryttleieliemthepethoi
aneinnletetmti'eoemnlntowin
mlection ee president oi the motel-De-
mocnticrertymmuonmhet.

Butmumnetwuxeiniettenticn-

to iehlro Nehuwe. director-noon! oi
the science end Mocha Agency.

Nehnwe once Mud himself from
e Diet ”almond criticiud m out
the N ﬁghter-interceptor remodeling

Nehenwe in not teeny e directpollticel
threettommkl.llleiectionienotee
lone u the one led by former poemler
mimic. who is discontented with the au-
znkl edmlnletntion. oi the one heeded by
Economic Planning Agency anchor-Gen-
emmmmuwhobeimingtohe-
come the lender oi the 113?.

nether Nmuwe ls tented Deanne he
hemmtonr'lntiupoliticeiwotid

end is extremely energetic.

neuwellknowniorhieedvocccyoime-

theory oieWeonmv-tive re-
gime.” He tiled once to ion: e new con-

servative party with Remote a president
11):” the occasion at the twin election in

New" ie lntlmete enough with nho
Kenna. tome: cheirmen oi the Demo-
mtlc- Bocieliet Petty (08?). to cell him
his “comrade."

It I: believed thet Nmnwe in plotting
to jolt the Suzuki ndmlniatretion in con-

'l‘he Daily Yomiuri. 1982

“20/247

21:

oertwithpoliticlemlneldeendonmthe

LDP.

_ weendhleenodeteeeiemoet-

edtobemepenneiorememrotthe
Innuendlndependentieetlone

m
_oitheI.DPendthetinltwln¢oithe
Sociolietl’utyiml’).

OloonneJtieimmhehlethetmm
“www.mchudmtic
political Imminent. '

Intemtlonel'rndeendmdnetrymn-
letetBhlnteioAhe.whoieeleolecon-

end eieo come of Nmnwe'e tuna-ten
ere

nemnelyweitinxtoceewhetiieke-
uwewilidonext.

_ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIOLOGICAL

WTIW FOR MINISTRATM REPOM EDITORIAL

am news in English 19 Apr 82 p 2

The Federation oi Economic Organisations
(Keidanren) recently iiied a recommendation with
the Second Ad Hoc Counciion Administrative Reiorm
in an apparent gesture oi shoring up the council irom

the standpoint oi the nation's industries.
The gist oi the recommendation calls ior 1)

adherence to the basic target designed to discontinue
the notation oi deﬁcit-covering national bonds in
iiscai 1984. 2) carrying out a thoroughgoing review oi
expenditures. 8) no more tax increases. 4) the
establishment oi a minus ceiling in the compilation oi
the iiscal 1933 national budget. 5) a review oi the sub-
sidy system. and 6) adjustment or abolition oi various
approval and licensing systems.

in iact. the recommendation is designed to
realize the oit-publicized “small government" cong
cept and boost "the vitality oi the private sector."

The majority opinions in economic circles are
summarized in the recommendation. and there is
little doubt that it aims to extend support to President
Toshio Doko oi the Council. who is the honorary
president oi the ail-powerful Keidanren. in a sense.
the nation's economic world picked him ior the
present post and is obligated to support him
wholeheartedly. _

The recommendation emphasizes that the pur-
pose oi administrative reiorm is to delve into the
highly inflated administrative systems oi both the
central and local governments and realize a sim-
pliiied. eiiective government. ease the tax burden on
thepeopie.andrepeiallmovesthatrun‘countertothe
goal oi the council. such as a tax increase. its a
matter or principle. there is nothing wrong with their
argument. On the other hand. however, we must

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

4120/24?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

question them as to their true intent concerning what
they call administrative reiorm. What do they ac-

'tually hope to gain by the proposedreiorm?

To begin with. the recommendation smacks
highly oi the "philosophy oi patience" advocated by
President Yoshihiro lnayama oi Keidanren. llis
conceptisaupportedbymostoithetopleaderainthe
nation's economic world. Under the chcumstances it
isiearedthatoniythemasseswilibeeompeiiedto
exercise patience. '

Fiscal reconstruction without a tax increase has
long been a catchphrase oi financial circles. As the
income tax cut was shelved this year. workers have to
virtually pay higher taxes. The iinancial world apo
pears to be quite indiiierent to this reality. As such.
they may have no excuse to oiier. even tor the
criticism that ilscal reconstruction without a tax
increase is nothing more than “iiscal reconstruction
without an increase in corporate taxes.”

Secondly, the recommendation insisted that
expenditures should be reviewed irom the ground up,
but it tailed to touch on “increased deiense spending"
which caused a controversy in the Diet discussions on
the iiscai 1982 budget. Why did they remain silent
about this all-important issue?

President lnayama has oiten stated that deiense
and weliare should be dealt with separately. meaning
that preierence should be given'to deiense spending
while applying the brake on weliare policies. iiis view
is gaining strength among the top echelon oi the
iinanciai circles.

The deiense production subcommittee oi
Keidanren. made up oi arms manuiacturers, earlier
submitted a request to the government and the
Liberal-Democratic Party calling ior an increase in
expenses ior the research and development oi arms
and other related items. Financial circles are
deiiniteiy in iavor oi promoting arms. expansion. but
how can they make it compatible with a recom-
mendation which calls ior a thorough review oi ex.
penditures?

We are iully in accord with the idea oi
strengthening “the vitality oi the private sector." but
as we have already pointed out. a militarization oi the
economy through the promotion oi arms expansion
will. in the long run. destroy the vitality oi that sector.

We can hardly take sides with the iiscal and
administrative reiorms proposed by the iinancial
circles ii they are to give preierentiai treatment to the
deiense buildup at the sacriiice oi weliare. The ad-
ministrative and iiscai reiorms must be pushed
forward hand in hand with the masses. No reiorm is
possible without the participation oi the entire nation.

Mdnichi Daily News 1982

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roe OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

5
i
E
E
3

2%:
22%
3?;

E
5

35

E:
E
3
2'

E

k
:32

egg

iagly. Japan's

E 2
iii
.EEEE

E
E
a

“rehabilitation at public
ﬁnances without tax In-
creases.”'|‘hiueenulohetmm
the comtdentim that the and
cannot he done antes hath the
"entrance” and the "an" an
hiochetl

At meetings at the Komoto

I News 1982

28
”WMONLY
FOR OFHOAI. USE ONLY

BWOKIC

'HAINIGH' URGES OPENING JAPAN'S FAR“ w
092209‘1 Tokyo MINIQI DAILY INS in W 21 Apr 82 p 2
[Editorial: "Farm Produce lworts"]

[Text] Japan and the Ibited States have suspended talks in Huhington, D. C.
on Japanese imports of American fern products due to a difference of views
on Japan's inert liberalization of 22 agricultural products. Japan insists
that the two countries should seek a solution on a step-by-step basis but the
United 'States adheres to the view that Japan should cospletely liberalize the
import of 22 items and if not, the two countries should try to settle the
matter through consultation as stipulated in article 22 of the General
Agreement on Tariffs md Trade (GATT).

As a result, the two comtries will continue talks under the new fornula.

It scene there is little substantial difference because the two countries
will continue negotiations. The second paragraph of article 22 reads:

"The contracting parties may. at the request of a contracting party, consult
with any contracting party or parties in respect of any latter for which it
has not been possible to find a satisfactory solution through consultation...”

Japan can no longer satisfy the United States serely through reducing the
number of ilport restrictions on fern products. The failure of the Hashington
neeting indicates that Japan nust take another good look at its liberalisa-
tion policy.

Japanese consuers who have been suffering fron a gradual decline in real
income coqalain about the high prices of inorted agricultural goods. He

do not think that liberalisation would be a panacea for the disputes. never-
theless the governnent nust deal with the matter after mxanining its
unyielding protectionist policy. He hope that the government will denonstrate
deternination to open the doneetic nsrket to foreign fare and other products
when it announces its open market neasunes in early May.

The Washington talks collapsed because of failure to narrow their difference
of views. Japan said that it has been the nost stable nerket in the world
for foreign farm products and proposed that the inort of beef and ormges
from the u.s. should be further studied through bilateral meetings. Japan
also reiterated that it is the biggest cmtoner of Anerican agricultural
products and that an expansion of imports would thus help 0.8. farners.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To this, the 0.5. conplained that far- products ayiwlire the closed nature
of the Japanese aarket and that Japanese "protectionisa" should be considered
a "natter affecting the operation of this (GATT) agree-ant.”

The 11.8. turned a deaf ear to Japanese clai- and proposed to continue the
talke on a qualitatively different level by applying the "conaultation"
formula under the GATT, revealing I). 8. irritation and discontent with
Japaneee policy.

We would like to point out, however. that the 0.8. itself in not necessarily
a faithful follower of the GATT. Only refined sugar is on the Anrican
residual import restriction list but the 0.8. still enjoys the "waiver of
obligations" in the liberalization of 13 goods including adlk, crean and
butter, thua offending the Netherlands.

The European (lo-mity also maintains sone maeuree to protect regional
agricultural production, and it can be said that every nation protects ite
agricultural sector in one fora or other. but claine nd counterclaim
are not a reasonable way to find a solution.

We believe that both Japan and the [hitad States not try to reach an agree-
ment by putting aside their own theories. The 0.8. wants to see Japanese
liberalization of two particular iteae out of 22—beef and oranges. Re
mderetsnd that a comlete liberalization of beef and orangee would not
benefit the 0.8. because they are lees coqetitive than Australian beef ad
Brazilian orangu in the international narket.

Japan nust reader that it has enjoyed the merit of liherelizing aenufactured
products mder the GATT. We hope that officials concerned will fornulate
annual liberalization program by giving up the idea that aanufacturing
industries should progress at the sacrifice of agriculture.

(DPYRIGHT: liainichi Daily Reva, 1982
(:50: “20/253

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICth USE ONLY

EMMC

0.8. PLANS TO TAKE FARM PRODUG ISSUE 70 GATT
ausnzs Tokyo ASAEI ammo news in English 16 Apr 82 p s
[ASABI sumac 15 April editorial: "Pare Products and GATT")

[Text] ‘Ihe issue of Japan's residual restrictions on inports of 22
agricultural products, which has been diseased at a working-level
conference in Hashington, will now be bromt by the Anericans for review to
the General Agreemt on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). So these residual inort
restrictions will be brought before an international form for debate, and
this will probably bring about a new phase of agricultural product deregula-
tion for Japan.

During the recent U.S.-Japan talks in Hashington, the Japanese side explained
that further trade liberalization for agricultural products would be diffi-
cult and pointed out that the limited States also neintains isport restrictions
of its own on various iteas. Understanding was sought on these points, but
the thited States refused to change its position that Japan's residual inort
restrictions violate article ll of GATT which places a general prohibition

on quantitative inert restrictions.

After hearing Japan's response, the Ihitad States will note a fornal proposal
to hold discmsions on the basis of article 22 of GATT. In turning (bwn
Japan's proposal that the residual inport restrictions should be allowed to
stand while both sides seek a contain, the thited States has ensured that
future debate will be focused on the relationship between GATT and the
residual iaport restrictions. According to article 22 of GATT, other
countries that have an interest in the natter nay participate in the discus-
sions to hlep the two sides reach an agreement. Japan will be in a such
weaker position than in purely bilateral talks with the United States.

Even if a coqroeise is reached between Japan and the lhited States, it is
unlikely to lat very long if the agreenent is ad hoc and not accepted
internationally. If U.s.-Japan trade friction grows again, the United

States will almost certainly densnd a review of any cospronise that is reached
between the two countries.

It is very significant that Japan should review its residual isport restric-
tions in accordance with the international rules of GATT at a tine when the

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dispute about these restrictions has reached such a stage that it is being
taken to GATT. Though opposition is expected from farmers, it seem that
there is no escape for Japan. It is only natural, therefore, that the
Ministry of Agriculture. Forestry and Fisheries should have decided to
approach the GATT consultation in a positive manner.

GATT contains special provisions that authorize import restrictions when
domestic production adjustments are being made in specific indmtries in a
comtry. There is now a surplus in the production of most of Japan's principal
agricultural products. In view of this situation and the fact that Japan has

a low self-sufficiency rate for food-72 percent with respect to the total

and 33 percent with respect to grain, it can be very strongly argued that
Japan's market is by no means unreasonably closed to agricultural imports.

Japan, whose agriculture is relatively backward, cannot accept the fact that
advanced agricultural countries in Western Europe and the United States have
been given formal approval for isport restrictions that are no different froa
Japan's. In addition. many people dodat whether trade in agricultural
products, which are influenced by geographic and climatic factors, should be
treated like industrial products.

If Japan's case is brought to GATT, Japan may have to make some concessions
with regard to the liberalization of the market or the expansion of import
quotas. It should adopt policies that conform to international rules, while
taking appropriate steps to see that the basis of its agriculture is not
destroyed.

Some people argue that, to prevent the lhited States from involving GATT

in these questions, Japan should annomce a dramatic plan for agricultural
liberalization as the second plank of the policy for handling trade friction
that is to be launched before the June 8t-I1t of the leaders of the advanced
nations. But real solutions cannot be fomd by means of generalized
discussion on the political level, and if Japan yields to the United States,
it may invite reactions from other agricultural comtries.

Even if progress is made toward agricultural liberalization, it may not

lead to a basic solution of the trade discord. Without measures to encourage
the orderly export of manufactured goods and the stimulation of domestic
demand, which should be taken in conjmction with measures to reduce working
hours and inprove living standards, there will be no end to the friction.

A way of dealing with agricultural products should be considered within the

context of a comprehensive trade policy.
common: Asahi Evening News 1982

C80: 4120/2513

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCOMHIC

SALE 0? ALASKAN CRUDE on. T0 JAPAN WOULD HELP U.S.
Tokyo SHUKAN ASABI in Japanese 19 Her 82 pp 27-29

[Article by staff reporter Yukimasa Okanoto: I"Japanese-U.S. Trade Friction
Is Pure Fictionn': Both Sides Avoid Alaskan Crude Oil Imortation Isaue"]

[Text] Even if one is to judge it from a sympathetic standpoint, the United
States' argtnent in the current Japan-U.S. trade negotiations does seem un-
reasonable in many respects.

For example, let us take the issue of beef, which is thought to symbolize Japan's
protectionist policy. The price of beef is indeed very high. So the Hinistry
of International Trade and Industry's [HITI] arguaent that "with regard to
beef. the United States is far nore restrictive" does have less credibility
than that advanced by the United States. But, if imports are deregulated,

.what would flow in would be Australian beef. And if, as a result of that,
Japanese dairy farmers go bankrupt, there will be a reduction in feed imports
from the United States and the United States may very likely be the loser.

This is also true with respect to oranges.

"If orange imports are deregulated, Israeli varieties would come in; juice
would be Brazilian." (economic conentator Keitaro nasegawa) The U.S. position
is indeed very insecure.

In spite of the U.S. Goverment's haughty demand that "druatic action is
needed" or that "it (the United States) would not hesitate to report Japan's
trade barriers as violations of the General Agreuent on Tariffs and Trade."
the prominent opinion in Japan is that, "regardless of how we rework the tariff
list, the change in trade revenue would be in the WOO-co SSW-million

range." (Noboru Hakino, Mitsubishi Comprehensive Research Institute president)
But perhaps the United States is well aware of these things.

Last year, the U.S. trade balance was $39.7 billion in the red. of this
amount. more than 18 billion was owed to Japan. Thus it is understandable
that the United States is asking Japan to "do something."

Hhat should then be the course of action for Japan? At this juncture, the

Alaska crude oil issue surfaces. Both Makino and liasegawa clain: "All would
be well if we could buy Alaskan crude oil fron the United States."

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lOIl OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The reason is crystal clear. Japan's crude oil import [bill] for 1980 was
13.61; trillion yen. A phenomenal 43.6 percent of Japan's total imports is
taken up by pay-ants for petroleum. Isport volune per day is appmxinately
6 million barrels. One barrel is about 159 liters, so [the daily import
Volume] cones to 636,000 kiloliters.

"If 10 percent of this anount could be imported from the United States at the
rate of $30 a.barrel, the 'purchase' would be $6.6 billion a year. There can
be no other 'drssstic solution' for imming U.S.-Japan trade relation."
(llaaegawa)

This idea gives us the hope of killing not merely two but three or four birds
with one stone. At present, nearly 70 percent of Japan's crude oil inorts
come fro. Middle Eastern statesnhalf of it from Saudi Arabia.

The need for diversifying the sources of petroleum supply in order to ensure a
stable economy has been discussed since the oil shock crisis. having the
United States supply crude oil would contribute significantly toward stabiliz-
ing the Japanese econony.

Next is its effect on the OPEC nations' crude price of oil. As a result of
the unexpectedly speedy spread of energy conservation measures and the imple-
mentation of energy source conversions in the developed countries, there is
now a surplus of crude oil--some say that it is "as much as 2 nillion barrels
a day." Although the "sloO-a-barrel era" was heralded at the OPEC meeting in
Bali toward the end of 1980, that price was short-lived, and the "spot" market
price recently has been as low as $20. Now, if "prime custmer" Japan were to
shift a significant volune of its purchase order to another supplier, the
OPEC price would decline further.

Moreover, there is the additional merit of cheaper transportation costs. The
tanker route fron Saudi Arabia's shipment point, Ra's at-Tannursh, to Yokohana
is 10,600 kiloneters. From the Alaskan shipping point of Valdez, the dis-
tance requirenent would be cut almost in half-a little less than 5,500
kilometers.

Exchange-of Exports Involving Mexican Crude Oil

If there are these advantages, why isn't it being done? The truth of the
natter is that, ironically, U.S. "trade barriers" are impeding its realiza-
tion. Exports of U.S. crude oil are forbidden on principle under the "btport
Control Act" and the "Alaska Pipeline Act."

Alaskan crude oil was discovered in 1968 in the North Slope area facing the
Arctic Ocean. It is transported to the ice-free port of Valdez, located
east of Anchorage, via a pipeline 1,300 kilometers long.

Production voluse at present is 1.6 million barrels per day. This is more
than the West Coast can use, and so nearly 40 percent is shipped to the East
Coast via the Panama Canal. The Valdez-hos Angeles route is approximately
3.300 kilometers. but shipment to Boston on the East Coast neans a travel
distance of 11,500 kilometers--farther than fron Saudi Arabia to Yokohama.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then there is the consideration of the Panama Canal use fee; furthermore, in
order to ship crude oil through the Canal, it has to be transferred to a
60,000—ton-class tanker. For these reasons, export of Alaskan crude oil to
Japan has been under consideration since the start of production.

The portion sent to Japan can be made up by importing fron closer nexico; thus
maintaining the existing balance. At present, Japan is slated to receive
300,000 barrels per day of crude oil from Mexico, but this crude oil travels
25,500 kilometers after it leaves (Paiaritos), the Mexican port of shipment
on the Gulf of Mexico side, passing Cape Town and going through the Indian
Ocean. Starting in April, the shipment will depart from the Pacific Ocean
port of Salina Cruz, but even than the route to Yokohama requires over 10,000
kilometers. It would be most cost effective if Mexican crude oil were trans-
ported to the U.S. East Coast and an equivalent volt-e of Alaskan crude oil
were shifted to Japan.

Three years ago, President Carter seriously considered this alternative, be-
cause "it would mean savings in transportation costs and because it would in-
prove the U.S. balance of trade and moreover strengthen U.S. ties with Mexico."
A Japanese-U.S. conference of eminent pereonages [kenjin], in a report pub-
lished in January last year, stated that "exporting Alaskan crude oil to Japan
or swapping exports with Mexican crude oil" would be an important symbolic
demonstration of Japanese-U.S. cooperation, would stabilize Japan's petroleun
supply, and would remedy the U.S.-Japan trade Malance as well as effect
savings in transportation costs.

Moreover, the head of the largest U.S. independent petroleum firm--Atlsntic
Richfield Corporation's Board Chairman Anderson—also wants Alaskan crude oil
to be exported to Japan. The "Japan Energy-Related Special Council" (the U.S.
caunterpart is the "Pacific Conference Energy Policy Council"), made up of in-
dustrialists and academiciam from Japan and the United States, eat-aerated in
its joint report, compiled in June of last year, the merits of making Alaskan
crude oil available to Japan.

Against this backdrop, it is reported that last autm the Reagan administra-
tion did consider the lifting of the ban on Alaskan oil exports to Japan, and
that the White House Policy Council had "OK'd" it.

But as a result of tension in the Middle East caused by the assassination of

Egyptian President Sadat, there was a lBO-degree aboutface in policy. In
November, the U.S. Government's Presidential Council on Natural Resources and
Environment, in s seven-to-three decision, rejected the lifting of the ban on
Alaskan crude oil exports.

Now that the tension in the Middle East has eased once again, it would not be
inappropriate to resume import talks. but the topic has been all but forgotten.
th? Hr Haaegawa states: "The Japanese-U.S. trade friction is pure fiction.
It is as if the two governments were wrestling with a ghost."

0n the U.S. side, the politicians are looking for popularity points for the
upcoming midterm election in the fall. Their stance is consistent. The basis

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFHCIAL USE ONLY

for the dissatisfaction with Japan is the poor state of the 0.8. economy,
symbolized by an unelploylnent figure of over 10 million. This is directly
tied to their political responsibility. But their schae is to let Japan
shoulder the blane—to channel the electorate's dissatisfaction toward Japan.

As mentioned previously. lifting the ban on exports of Alaskan crude oil to
Japan would have a "dramatic" imact on the trade revenue figures; its effects
on the voters, however, would be entirely negative-4 decline in 11.8. oil
refinery operations, decreased business for the tanker industry, and so on.
Therefore, old stories such as "crude oil exports would endanger 11.8. semrity."
or "disuse of the Canal would wreck the bonds of friendship between the United
States and Pans-a," are still being paraded.

Hr Hakino says: "It would be significant [for Japan] to press for repeal of the
the ban on Alaskan crude oil exports. It would indeed be counter-PR. If it
were to get results, all the better."

But up to now. Japan has not wanted to play this "trim card" up front.

Today, when there is more than enough oil in the world, the lure of Alaskan
crude oil is not very attractive to the petroleum industry. Alaskan oil has
a sulfur content of 1.01. percent. It is extra-heavy oil. Whereas 2’0-25 per-
cent can be extracted from Saudi Arabian oil for gasoline, a little mre than
10 percent is all that can be squeezed out of Alaskan crude oil. The MITI
claims that in the current U.S.-Japan trade negotiations, the Agency of
Natural Resources and Energy, acting on cue from the domestic petroleum indus-
try, is privately opposing the "Alaskan crude oil inportation proposal."

Thus, while the trump card-~the Alaskan crude oil issue--is being ignored, the
friction between the United States and Japan seems on the surface to be gain-

ing in intensity. Regardless of national differences, elections and politi-
cians appear to be very much alike everywhere.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'3 Petroleum Inporte (1981)

 

Africa (8)
Middle East (9)
Southeast Asia

China (10)
Soviet Union (ll)
l'otal import volme (12)
Valdez

CHI: Aaahi Shilbunsha 1982

8029/0999

37

Pipeline

Alaskan crude oil (Nort‘
Oilfield)

North America

South America

from Petroleul Resource
Jan 82

unit - 1000 kl

( ) enclosure represent
in relation to total in

including eokuho-ne [re
value]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND momma!

HITACHI SELLS SMCOMDUC'IOR TECHNOLOGY m MPH-Pm
Contract on 66! DRAM
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO sammm in Japanese 3 hr 82 p 2

[Text] Hitachi. Ltd (president, Mita Katsushige) on the 2d announced the
conclusion of a concrete agreenent with the American specialist electrouics
manufacturer a? (Hewlett-Packard) to contract for the sele of technology
concerning its advanced memory product, the 64K DRAM.

As far as Japanese nsnufacturers providing American cowsnies with 1c
technology is concerned. up to now, outside of the discussions in progress
between Mitsubishi Electric Corporation and Westinghouse, there have been a
few examples involving small to medium-sized in-house mufscturers. but
this is the first instance of a firm agreement involving advanced products
or a large specialist electronics manufacturer like HP.

American interest in seniconductor trade with Japan is focused upon the 66K
DRAM. and in this field the choice by MP of Hitachi as a partner is to be
taken as showing the evaluation by American companies of all Japanese-
nnnufactured 64K DRAM, not only those of Mitschi. Alongside its positive
aspects for Japanese-American technological exchange, this will intensify
the unhappiness of American semiconductor manufacturers.

The substance of the agreement for the sale of technology is that: 1) it is _
concerned with 64K DRAM, 2) it will include 66!! DRAM mask and 3 micron
N-MOS process technology, and 3) its use will be limited to MP's on products.

RP is a proninent American electronics manufacturer and produces
sinicomputers, instruments. medical electronic devices. and the like. It
has 57,000 employees and its sales in I981 emanated to 31 billion dollars.
Recently the conpany has expanded its seniconductor nsnufacturing plant and
is prepared for the nanufacture of the 64K DRAM.

MITI Values Cooperation Highly-~Statenent of Minister of International Trade
and Industry Abe

"There has long been a vigorOus interchange of capital and technology
between Japan and the United States in the area of semiconductors. This

38
roe omcm. use ONLY
m omcul. use can

instance of technological cooperation is a concrete exasple demonstrating
the recognition in this country of the ilportance of further extending moth
cooperation between Japan and the United States in the field of the 64K

DRAM, the nest advanced sedconductor technology. ml also values this
highly. It is very tench hoped that hereafter we will be able to positively
encOurage technical cooperation not only in the seeiconductor field but in
all areas of advanced technology. and be able to count upon coexistence

and coprosperity between Japan and the United States in the field of advanced
technology."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shiebunsha Tokyo Bonaha 1982
Second 8? Shock
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 3 Her 82 p 12

[Text] Hitachi. Ltd (president. Hits Katsushige) announced on the 2d

the conclusion of a fire agreement for the sale of production technology

for the 64K DRAM (dynamic read-and-write nemry) to the Anerican

specialist electronics nanufacturer Hewlett-Packard (HP). The main points

in the agree-ant are: 1) it concerns the 64K nun. 2) the offered technology
is that of its anal: and the 3 eicron h-channel ms process, and 3) its use
will be liaited to HP'a own products. The contract is presently being worked
out, but it is expected to be concluded soon. Once the contract is
concluded, HP will nanufacture 66 K neeories in its recently expanded factory
in the California city of Cupertino and will use than as conponents. For

the American honeland of semiconductor technology, this will he the first
iaport from Japanese nanufacturers of this sort of basic production

technology, including easks .

The sale to HP by Hitachi of technology for the 66K new, the nest advanced
area of this technology, can be taken as important in showing that there is
no hindrance to the establishnent of friendly relations between coepanies

of the two countries as a result of the growing trade friction between
Japan and the United States recently in this field. The concrete reason for
this is that “P, as a powerful electronics nanufacturer, is known for
strictness in quality control and reliability and sees that the acquisition
of this technology will enhance the worldwide reputation of its own

technology .

Value of Japanese-Aurican Cooperation in Advanced Technology-Mister Abe

Hinister of International Trade and Industry Abe. at a press conference after
a cabinet meeting on the 2d. said concerning the fact that Hitachi Ltd has
reached agreeaent with Hewlett-Packard for the sale of production technology
for the 66K DRAM: ”He highly value Japanese-Anerican cooperation in advanced
technology." He added the following.

There has long been a vigorous interchange of capital and technology between
Japan and the United States in the area of semiconductors. This instance of

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technological cooperation is a concrete example demonstrating that our
country recognizes the importance of counting on the development of Japanese-
American cooperation, coexistence and coprosperity in the field of the 66K
DRAM, its most advanced area of technology. It is valued Inst highly.

It is now appropriate for our country to advocate setting up a joint 0.5.-
Japanese study group for advanced technology, and it is very much hoped
that hereafter we will be able to encourage such technological cooperation
not only in the field of semiconductors but in all areas of advanced
technology, and that we will be able to count upon coexistence and
coprosperity in the area of advanced teclmology.

Editorial: A Beneficial Blow for American Industry-ﬂ Shows the Spirit
of Economic Principles

Hewlett-Packard's decision to import technology related to the 66K mamry
from Hitachi may be considered, at this juncture when the Japan-0.8.
semiconductor war is intensifying, as a strong countsrpunch by the American
semiconductor industry, launched by Hewlett-Packard (though with the effect
of an infuriating if beneficial blow).

To the American semiconductor industry, the fact that one of its own
nation's companies, which it relies upon as a major customer, should, out of
necessity, rely upon an enemy company to move into this technology will, at
the same time as it inflicts a blow from an ally that means that there will
be no early victory in the 66]! war, deliver a major shock which will have a
large influence on the future conduct of the 66! war.

HP (headquartered in Palo Alto, California; company president, John A. Young)
is a specialist manufacturer of minicomputers, medical electronic devices,
and analytical instruments, with capital of 393 million dollars, sales of

3.1 billion dollars, and 57,000 employees (all as of October 1980). In Japan
it owns a subsidiary company Jointly with Jokogawa Electric works Ltd
(Yokogawa-Hewlett-Packard) .

In semiconductors, HP manufacturers for its own use optoelectronics, IC,

and IC for microchips. but it does not sell them outside (it does sell some
special semiconductors). Its technology reaches artistic levels, as shown

by its display of a 32 bit micron at last year's and this year's International
Solid State Circuit Conference. As for memories, it manufacturers internally
up to 16K DRAM, but the greater part are bought from outside, and it has
begun to import 64K from Japanese firms.

The previous greatest shock in the Japanese-American semiconductor war was
in March 1980, at a seminar held in Washington by the Electronic Industries
Association of Japan, when Hewlett-Packard's Data Systems General Manager
Anderson compared Japanese and American 16K memories and showed figures that
the defect rate of Japanese products was one-sixth that of American products,
and proved that Japanese quality control was superior. With this, attacks
from the American side suddenly stopped and American cowanies all at once

hO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

became very concerned about quality control. At present they are claiming
that this has had a big effect and that the quality of the current products
is comparable to that of Japanese products. This new mve may be considered
the second successive "RP shock."

Criticism of Japan's excessive exports is considerable, as shown by the
demand for "strong measures" made by the 0.8. Government to the Bsaki mission.
However. RP shows the spirit of the economic principle that, however you

may wish to protect the national industry, it is not permissible for an
American company which is a major user of 66K mamries to tie itself to
Silicon Valley cowanies which, though probably once the most advanced. are
now becoming a backward production area, to put together system incorpor-
ating obsolete 10 from them, and thereby lose competitive power even at

home, let alone overseas.

That being said, it is also dangerous to be able t) survive only through
imports from Japanese companies. It is evident that the comny has
concluded that the best policy is to import technology from a top manufacturer
of 64K and then manufacture them itself. In feet, 1314, Western Electric and
other giant American companies already mass-produce 2-3 million or more 66K
per month for their own use, and, although there are reports of the inelastic
manufacture of 256K. for America's large systems manufacturers the current
66K devices are urgent. In these circumtances its neighbors in Silicon
Valley have announced 66K products, but after lore than 2 years they have
not yet been able to achieve mass production. It might be said that the
feeling has developed that it cannot risk relying on these companies and
going down with them.

Up to now the relationship has not involved capital or technology or anything
beyond the simple purchase of memories. This present proposed

coOperation is at the initiative of HP and is due to its high evaluation of
Hitachi's semiconductor technology based on its previous acquisitions of

16K and 64K. The negotiations on cooperation began in the aux-er of last
year. For HP, its own production of 64! will provide only a part of its
consumption and will not mean the cessation of imports of “K from Hitachi
and other Japanese firms.

In this cooperation it is said that the sending of technicians from Hitachi
and the offer of production machine knowlnv go hand in hand. Up to now
there has been a one-way flow of semiconductor technology from the

United States to Japan, and it is clear that this offer of Hitachi technology
is a remarkable event which shows a change in the direction of the flow of
the export of silicon technology from Japan to the United States, at least

in the most advanced fields of gallium arsenate and Josephson elements.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shiﬁunaha 1982

9898
CSO: 4106/ 79

Ml
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE Am TECHNOLOGY

CURRENT m 0! PIIIB crumcs. moss smoos DISCUSSED -
‘rokyo sum sum in Japanese hr 82 pp 134-150

[Article by Yesunohu Hieato, econonic critic: "1V0 Leading Isles—Ceramics
and Asorphous Silicon—Haida Drive the Materials Revolution; an Attmt Le
Being Made 10 ‘mn Man's Drea- Into lealitf']

[kcerpts] Ceraaic Engine successfully Trial llamfactured

Kokubu city, epproxinately 25 ninutes by car free Kagoshina airport, is the
site of the consolidated research center and the Kohwu plant of Kyoto Cer-
enics Co.

Ite ground, 223,000 square esters in area, is divided into four sections.

In three of the four section are 15 plant buildings, while the fourth se¢>
tion contains the consolidated research center. Although Kyoto Ceramics hes
four plant sites all over the country (rusho and Yokeichi in Shiga Prefecture
and Kewauchi and Kokuhu in Kagoshima Prefecture), Kokubu is the only site a
plant and an m department are integrated in a single location.

"He don't find any inconvenience at all. The infornation necessary for the
research center cones nainly free the sales personnel stationed in the United
States. Kyoto Ceranice Intermtional is headquartered in San Diego. Infor-
nstion concerning what the users want and what technology the users are in-
terested in is forwarded to us.

"News and information from the United States is volulinous became of its
huge technical background.

"Infornetion concerning literature and patents is sent fron Kyoto and Tokyo
over telephone lines to our conputer terninels. Probably, only the telephone
billbill is higher here than it would he in a central location." (Yoshi-itsu

hanano, doctor of engineering, executive director, Consolidated Research
Center).

The world's first ceramic diesel engine was successfully trial nanufactured
here on 23 Dece-ber last year, end a historic step in the 3&0 of ceramic
products was taken. now well the ceranic diesel engine car of Kyoto Car-ice

1&2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ran was televised on 6 January this year as part of the Golden Hour program
of IIIK, entitled "Top Technology that (hangs Japan." So, many of you nust
have seen it.

The ceramic engine nay be described briefly as an engine which does not need
water cooling. because unlike the conventional cast iron engine, the oer-1c
engine has nuch greater strength at a hidler temperature. In today's
gasoline engine (reciprocating engine), no more than 22-23 percent of the
thermal energy released by combustion is used as driving energy. The rest of

the thermal energy is lost: approximately 3 percent through the cooling
water, approximately 3!. percent through the exhaust gas (and the other 20

percent or so through energy loss due to friction and in veriom parts of the
driving mechanisn such as the gear).

The thernal efficiency of a large-scale diesel engine is of the order of 33
percent, which is much higher than that of the reciprocating engine, but ap-
proximately 67 percent of the thermal energy is still lost through the cooling
water and the exhaust gas, distributed approximately equally between them.

Therefore, "loss of energy through a water cooling ayaten can be eliminated if
the combustion chamber is surrounded by ceramic parts, which are good in-
sulators." (Director ﬂamano) In addition, if e turbocharger, which is in
fashion today, is used to utilise the thermal energy in the exhaust gas,

then the thermal efficiency of an adiabatic diesel engine can be raised to

48 percent, according to experinental data (0.8. Gunil- engine). That is to
say, "Using a ceramic diesel engine, the thernal efficiency can be raised ap-

proximately 30 percent over that of the conventional diesel engine in exis-
tence today." (Director llaneno)

The current ceramic diesel engine developed by Kyoto Cornice has a coabustion
chamber completely made of ceramics, including the piston, cylinder, and
cylinder head plate. Director llamano himself has evaluated it and declared:
"Every part that can be benefited by the use of ceramics has been made of
ceramics. So it may be called an all ceranic engine." The prototype con-
sists of a 2.8 liter, air-cooled. three-cylinder engine which is mounted on

a Gemini (1.8 liter) for the road test.

Guided by Director Romano, I visited the engine room. I saw in the room an
engine without either a radiator for water cooling or a fan for air cooling.
The external surface of the cylinder, dark glossy gray in color, was flat and

its waistleas body was bare, without the fins often found on an air-cooled
cylinder.

with a staff member at the steering wheel, I took a ride in this car, which
was Only 20 days old (10 January). and was surprised to find that it was not
noisy. The sound level may be just a little bit higher than in an ordinary
diesel car. "Idling has not been adjusted yet," (Director Hameno) so some
irregularity in engine revolution could be felt intermittently. But its ac-
celeration performance appeared quite sufficient. AlthOugh the engine vi-
bration was surprisingly heavy, it was probably unavoidable because a 2.8
liter engine was mounted on a Gemini designed for a 1.8 liter engine. The

‘13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exhaust gas was bluish in color. To be sure. there were many fine points
that required adjust-ant became it was only a trial product, but the way it
ran appeared quite satisfactory.

Director Hamano told me that the themes related to the practical application
of a ceramic engine are as follows.

Whatever one may say, the first is its cost. A large sum of money has al-
ready gone into this engine. The second is the confirntion of the reliabil-
ity of its parts. Any defect in a oer-it part means instant destruction, so
whether or not ceramic parts can be mass produced depends entirely on whether
or not a nondestructive inspection method can be developed, so that thousands
of manufactured parts can be inspected each day. Although x-ray fluoroscope
and ultrasonic methods are being investigated, the success hinges on how to
discover defective parts among complex shaped objects such as engine parts
during the process of manufacturing. It may tte many more years before these
two problem can be solved."

Nondestructive inspection of defects is such an important part of the mass
production process because, for the sake of safety, the auto makers ispose-
very strict requirements on the reject rate of automobile parts. The reject
rate of automobile parts is in general less than one-one hundredth, and the
requirement on the engine, the heart, is even more strict, However, today's
ceramic manufacturing technology has not yet realised an inspection tech-
nology which can guarantee this standard. ‘Ihe parts used in this trial engine
were tested on-site by actually using them in the engine. ‘lhe reliability of
these parts were inspected by such a cowlicated and time-const-ing mn-
destructive inspection method.

Race Between United States and Japan in Hatters Related to Development of
Application

Pine ceramics found inediate application in such fieldn as high-speed cutting
tools and mechanical seals, but this was only the beginning. The true indus-
trial application of fine ceramics depends on future has activities. Some
possible applications that come to mind include material for construction of
the vacuun chanber wall of a nuclear fision furnace, control rod of an atomic
furnace, gas turbine for power generation, high-temperature heat exchanger,
deep-well drilling equipment, and other itens of the energy and machinery
industries. In the meantime. the focus is on the automobile engine.

In the field of application to the automobile engine, the United States and
Japan have already started a race for development. In the United States, an
engine development law was enacted by the government in 1978, and the develop-
ment of new high efficiency engines by the 0.8. auto makers is backed by the
goverment. The emphasis in the United States is centered around the develop-
ment of a gas turbine type automobile engine. An example of a gas turbine
type engine is the jet engine used on aircraft today. with this type of en-
gine, the higher the combustion temperature, the higher the efficiency will
be. merefore, development of a new engine in which the cosbustion teqer-
ature is raised to l,370° c through the use of ceramic parts is the goal.

hh
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ford and GM have already mamged to make a number of gas turbine parts with
cermaics, and the United States would like to be able to mass-produce ceramic
gas turbines for automobiles starting in the early 1990's.

In this field, the Japanese auto makers such as Toyota and Nissan have also
been actively engaged in research and development. They say that there is no
difference whatever between the technological development levels of the two
countries. while nearly 10 years of additional development is considered to
be required for the development of a ceramic gas turbim, the manufacture of a
ceramic diesel engine is expected to be realizable by the latter half of the
1980's. In addition to the Japanese auto makers. Toshiba, sax Spark Plug Co,
and Kyoto Ceramics are also actively engaged in its development.

at all these firms, Kyoto Ceramics started early, and in 1978 m1 desig-
nated its applications research on s oer-1c diesel engine as one of the
important national technological 35D themes. Over a period of three years
ending in 1980, approximately 100 million yen in development subsidy was
given to Kyoto Ceramics.

"Research activities related to the application of ceramics for engine parts
has been brisk since the 1970's centered around the United States. So we,
too, engaged in making ceramic pistons and cylinders. However, things did not
go well. They all broke so easily....

"He decided to make our own engine five years ago. In April 1977 we hired
mechanical engineers to join our group. At the same time, we began to tackle
the problems related to making an engine in earnest through cooperation with
Isuzu Motors Ltd, which has actual experience in building diesel engines.
Since 1978, when it was decided that we were to receive MI‘I'I subsidy, we have
been in the position that we had to do it.

"A situle cylinder engine was tackled first, and by March of let year we
managed to trial manufacture a small diesel engine with four cylinders. In
this engine, only the piston crown, the cylinder liner, the cylinder head'
plate, and the preheat chamber were made of cermlics.

"Accumulating design after design, last Noveder we began to make an all-
ceramic engine.

"He chose to tackle the diesel engine because its fuel conausption is smaller
than that of a gasoline engine; even the small engines used in family cars
are turning to diesel. However, the main application of ceramics probably
will be in the field of large diesel engines used in trucks and buses."
(Director Hamano)

To understand how different this all-ceramic engine, which was successfully
developed by Kyoto Ceramics, is compared with the conventional engine, the
temperature inside an engine must be explained to some extent.

An ordinary automobile piston is made of aluminum, and it melts at a temper-
ature of approximately 680° C. 0n the other hand, the temperature of the

us
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combustion of gas is in the range of 800-900' C (a tesperaturs regulated by the
amount of fuel and oxygen admitted; the codiustion tewerature of a diesel en-
gine is approximately 50’ c higher than that of a gasoline engine). Therefore,
in today's engines, the piston temperature is kept at about 350‘ c by means of
circulating cooling water through the cylinder liner. In this cue. the
cylinder wall temperature is in the range of 150-200' c.

But in the ceramic engine made by Kyoto Ceramics which does not require either
air cooling or water cooling, "the codustion gas teqerature reaches about
1,500’ c, while the cylinder wall tesperature can read: 800' C." (Director
llamano)

Horeover, the ceradc used in the diesel engine of Kyoto Ceramics is a com-
pound called silicon nitride. Although silicon nitride is slightly inferior
to silicon carbide in its high-temperature strength, its heat insulating
property is superior, so it is more suitable to a system which will not be
cooled by either air or water. Silicon carbide has very good high-temper-
ature strength but no heat insulating property, so it is suitable for con-
struction of the combuster used in a gas turbine engine. (The high-temper-
ature strength of silicon nitride is 1,500' c while that of silicon carbide
is 1,600‘ C.)

Surprisingly Simle Manufacturing Process

We will touch upon the manufacturing process of ceramic products a little
here. The Kokubu plant contains factories for mnufacturing ceramic products
in three different fields. There are three factories for the manufacture of
semiconductor-rented parts, electronic parts, and industrial ceramics.

There are four processes that every product must undergo: preparation of raw
material, molding, baking, and finishing. The case of laminated products,

a process consisting of circuit printing and laminating is added in between
molding and baking. In the case of metallized products, there is a process
called high-temperature metallising following the baking process. The in-
dispensable processes sre the four processes mentioned above. Moreover, the
finishing referred to above means metal grazing and plating in the case of
laminated products and metallised products, and grinding and polishing in the
case of machined products.

I was allowed to have a tour of a plant (industrial ceramics plant) which is
closed to outsiders. ﬂy impression of that plant, briefly, was the image of
a modern foundry. The industrial ceramics plant consists of two rectangular
buildings, each measuring approximately 30 meters wide, 100 meters long and 15
meters high. These floorless buildings of iron fr-es had uncluttered ceil—
ings with the appearance of a large city factory.

The work in the plant begins with the mlding stage. At the far end of the
building are the molding machines. 0n the floor surrounding these machines
are arranged many vinyl bags( the size of a cement bag) containing powdery
material. These bags contain fine powdery raw material which is refined to a
very high purity.

1:6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Several young men were transferring the powder free a bag to a thick-walled
rubber cylinder, approximately 15 centimeters in diameter and 1 meter h1g1.
They tapped the floor with the cylinder to pad: the powder after adding a
small amount, and repeated this process with care. Depending on the sire
of the molded product, larger rubber cylinders are also used. I saw rubber
cylinders as much as 3 meters high standing in the word area.

The rubber cylinder packed tightly with powder to the top is then molded by
being put in a huge nachine called a rubber press. The cylinder is trans-
ported by a lovable crane suspended from the ceiling. First of all, the
rubber cylinder is placed inside a cylindrical cmtainer made of wire mesh
and is suspended from the crane. The metal contaimr is approximately 1 meter
in inside dianeter and 2.5 meters high.

This container is transported by the crane to be placed inside the rubber
press. M the rubber press is a machine which is buried deep underground, the
container is lowered to a depth of 5-6 meters. The hole into which the con-
tainer is lowered is filled with water. Thereafter, the powder is pressed
under a pressure amounting to a thousand atmospheres (hydraulic pressure) by

pumping oil into the press. lhe powder is said to be preninsd with a kind of
binder.

Scores of cylinders thus molded were arranged in the work area. The surface,
to the touch, felt like a hardened fine plaster and it was somewhat dam.

The color is different for different raw materials, so it is easy to dis-
tinguish one from another. white molding is alumina; green molding is also
alumina, but it will turn black after baking. Gray molding is silicon
nitride, while gray mixed with brown is silicon carbide.

These moldings are cylindrical in shape, and they are next machined to the
size of the product. Bach cutting machine tool is manned by a worker. After
nachining, the workpieces are to be placed inside an oven and baked. Alunina
products are baked and hardened inside a dome-shaped gas oven at a temperature
of approximately 1,700' C. There were ovens of all sizes used for the baking
of alumina, including large ovens of a diameter of about 5 meters.

In addition, there was an electric oven called a tumel oven which was approx-

imately 30 esters long. The interior of this even was approximately 1 ester
wide and 70 centimeters high; it was glowing bright red when I stooped down
and looked into it.

Silicon nitride is baked inside a special oven called a vacuum oven in a
nitrogen atmosphere which is free of oxygen. Silicon carbide is also bied
in an electric oven of its own.

Different ovens are used for different products, but what is nest surprising
is the length of tine the products must renain inside the oven. Although
this also varies according to the product, the length of time may vary from
as short as a day to as long as a week. This procedure is very time-consuming

1:7
FOR omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

because the baking teaperature must be raised gradually, and cooling is done
naturally by leaving the baked pieces in the air.

In addition to carrying out baking inside a baking oven, some products say
also be baked by what is loan: as a hot press method. Il‘his method consists
of simultaneous baking as the fine powder is molded in the press. lherefore,
the machining process is eliminated fro. the work process described above.
and both nolding and baking are carried out in a single process. Departed-
ly, the strength can be improved by this method of baking.

The workpieces baked and hardened in the oven are then subjected to grinding
end polishing carried out usually by the workers. Alusina ceramic parts
used on a paper making machine were being manufactured. The surface of the
finished parts felt slippery, like milky white marble to the touch.

In addition to the electromagmstic, thermal, and mechanical functions touched
upon so far, oer-ice have also drawn attention because of their biochenical
functions. Interest in the development of ceramics for surgical materials
such as artificial teeth and artificial bones has also been growing in recent
years. Alanine and single crystal sapphire have already been found to be ap-
plicable as surgical materials because they are not rejected by the living
body. An artificial tooth with an artificial tooth root screwed onto the

jaw bone is said to he al-ost indistinguishable in function from the natural
tooth, so it is expected to become a popular co-odity in the future society
with a high concentration of senior citizens.

whether or not fine ceramics can actually become the third material after
netals and resins depends on the future development. However, there is no
doubt at all about the great potential for application of ceramics not only
in the space field, like the heat shield tiles used an the space shuttle, but
also in the fields of energy, electronics, and surgical naterials.

bhat on Earth Is Amorphous Silicon?

The organization which leads the world today in 3&1) of .orphous silicon is
the Central Research Laboratory of Salvo Electric located in Maikata city,
Osaka Prefecture.

The Central Research Laboratory of Sanyo Electric, standing on a height sur-
rounded by a residential area, is the center of world attention today on mat-
ters related to solar photoelectric generation.

All this is the result of a patent application filed in the United States by
Sanyo Electric. This basic patent. covering a wide range concerning an
"integrated amorphous silicon solar cell," was granted and published in the
United States in late Novedaer last year (the date the patent was approved
by the 0.8. Patent Office was 28 June).

the details of the patent actually involve 75 technological items fron con-
struction, manufacturing, to application. Almost all that can be thought of

M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concerning all "integrated .orphous silicon solar cell” is said to be covered
by this patent.

a basic patent is cos-only secured for an invention. but the fact that a
Japanese enterprise was able to obtain a far-reaching basic patent in the field
of such an advanced technological field was truely epoch-making.

The person who was directly responsible for this invention was Kotoku Rmo.
director of the Kmano laboratory of the Central Research Laboratory. Hr
Kuwano is only 101 years old, born in February 19101. Since research on
amorphous silicon is said to have started in 1968, this invention is the
fruit of 12 years' research effort.

wine-Colored ”lhgic Board"

Now then. what features distinguish this anrphous silicon solar cell, the
11.8. patent of which was won by Saws Electric, from the conventional single
crystal silicon?

First of all, its manufacturing process is sispler. Amorphous silicon con-
sists of three layers (P layer, I layer, and l layer). It is for-ed basically
by the following procedure. Silane ($1112) gu, which is a compound formed
from silicon and hydrogen, is introduced into a low vacuua reactor in which

a plasma reaction is induced by a high-frequency discharge. As a result.
silane gas is decomposed by the energy of discharge, and amorphous silicon

is deposited thinly on a baseboard.

Guided by director Kuwano, I had a tour of the Yodogawa branch office, which
is usually closed to outsiders, and inspected the pilot plant. The plant
(made of stainless steel) was in the shape of a rectangular box 1 meter wide,
100 centimeters high and 6 meters long. 0n the side of the box were five cir-
cular windows, approximately 10 centimeters in disaster, spaced at equal in-
tervals. The plant was surprisingly small.

The presence of five windows signifies that there are five continuous
processes taking place inside the box-shaped plant, and the progress of each
process can be observed through the window. A glass baseboard (1.1 milli-
meter) with a transparent electrode (1,000 angstroms - 0.1 micron - one-ten
thousandth of l aillineter) consisting of a thin file of tin oxide formed on
it was laid on top of a plate approximately $0 centiuters square, and the
plate was placed inside the plant- to begin heating of the baseboard first of
all. The interior of the plant was aglow in orange color as seen through
theOwindow. Heating cantinued until the baseboard tesperature reached

300 C.

The plate carrying the heated bueboard was then advanced to the next station.
where a P layer was to be formed. To fora a P layer, diborans (3236) gas was
added to the silans gas. The interior of the plant was aglow in violet color
as seen through the second window, because a plasna discharge was taking
place there. The P layer is only 200 angstroas in thickness (0.02 micron -
two-100 thousandths of l nilliaeter).

1:9
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After the P layer was forned, the I layer was to he formed next. Only silane
gas was used (or the for-ation of the I layer. This section was also eglow
in violet color. The thickness of the I layer is 5,000 angstro- (0.5
nicron) .

After the I layer was formed, the N layer was to be formed next. Phosphine
(P113) gas was added to the silane gas in this section, and the interior was
again aglow in violet color. The thickness of the N layer is only 300-400

angs tron .

The final process was natural cooling. After cooling, the plate was renewed
. from the plant. The entire process that went on inside the plant lasted q»-
proxinately I) nimtes.

Incidentally, P layer is the abbreviation for positive layer, which consists
of positive holes (positive charges). 1 layer is the abbreviation for
intrinsic layer, which is also called neutral layer. N layer is the abbre-
viation for negative layer, which consists of electrons (negative charges).

Therefore, the diborane which was added in order to fern the P layer was the
so-called P type inpurity, while phosphine which was added in order to torn
the N layer was the N type inpurity.

The light energy striking the board is first of all transformed into elec-
tricity in the I layer, and positive charges (positive holes) and negative
charges (electrons) are generated. These charges are then attracted to
places where they can feel at hone. 80, P and N layers were forced at both
ends of the silicon ahead of tine to attract these charges. This is how a
solar cell is made.

Incidentally, the rest of the process goes as follows. The anorphous silicon
forned on the glass baseboard was then transported to a work process where
aluminun electrode was to be vapor deposited onto the N layer. The aluminum
electrode is l nicron thick (one-thousandth of 1 aillineter) and is used to
deliver the electricity.

Finally, the aluninun electrode was coated with a layer of resin as protec-
tion. The thickness of resin coating is of the order of 0.2 nillineters. At
this point, the main body of the elorphous silicon solar cell, which is called
a transparent conductive baseboard, was completed. All that reneined to be
done was to attach fine conductors at the two terninals of the aluninum
electrode to turn the assenhly into a "nagic board" from which electricity
could he obtained instantly by exposing the glass side to the sunlight.

The entire thickness of the board is only slightly more than 1.3 nillineters,
and the thickness of the a-orphous silicon portion consisting of P, I and N
layers anounts to no nore than about 6,000 angetrons (0.6 nicrons - six-ten
thousandths of 1 nillineter). In other words, if the entire thickness of 1.3
nillineter were nagnified 100,000 tines to 130 neters, the thickness of the
amorphous silicon portion would cone to approximately 6 centimeters. The
amorphous silicon is a deep wine color.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cost Reduced at Once to One-Hundredth

This manufacturing method is called continuous separate formation method.
This is also the world's first machine for mass-producing amorphous silicon
solar cells, as indicated by the fact that a patent on this process was
awarded to Sanyo Electric.

The manufacturing process described above is in fact sinsr than the manu-
facturing process of simle crystals. To produce single crystals, hydrogen
is mixed with trichlorosilane, which is the rm: material, and the mixture is
heated in an electric oven called a polycrystal for-ing oven to a tower-
ature of l,000° C. As a result. the raw material is decolposed and blocks
of polycrystalline silicon are formed. These blocks are called polycrystal-
line chunks. These chunks are further heated in an electric furnace called
a single crystal forming oven to a high telperature of 1,500' C to melt them
slowly in order to form single crystals. P type impurity is added at this
stage, and a whole day is required to make single crystals. The process
must be carried out slowly over a period of a day in order to get a fine
crystalline structure, or to put the lattices in order.

The single crystal is then cut into thin slices and polished into wafers.
These wafers are further heated in an electric oven called a diffusion oven
to a temperature of l,000° C in order to add N type impurity (gas) to it.

It is called a diffusion process because the N type gas permeates the wafer.
The main body of the single crystal solar cell is now formed.

In comparison with this complicated process, the amorphous silicon main body
can be manufactured continuously in a gas reactor oven in a single process.

It is evident from the description of these two manufacturing processes that
the second distinguishing feature of amorphous silicon is the fact that its
baseboard is heated to a temperature of only 300' c, and less energy is con-
sumed during its manufacturing process. line single crystal requires three
processes involving high temperatures in the range of l,000-l,500' C, and the
entire process lasts a whole day. Consequently, more energy is consumed.

The energy consumed in the production of single crystal is said to be 30
times greater than that of amorphous silicon.

The third distinguishing feature of amorphous silicon is the fact that the
film thickness required is no more than 1 micron (0.6 micron in the previous
example), with considerable savings in re! material. This is so because the

high absorption coefficient of anorphous silicon is one order of magnitude
(10 times) higher than that of single crystal.

A light-absorption coefficient which is 10 times greater means that the same
amount of light can be absorbed by a film one-tenth the thickness. The rate
of light absorption is better because the crystal is warped.

In the case of the single crystal, the thickness of the wafer comes to 300
microns. limited by the cutting technique (the limit is at best approximately

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

70 nicrons), which is 300 tines the thickness of amorphous silicon. More-
over, approximately 1.0 percent 'of the single crystal is lost as a result of
cutting.

Further-ore, the facts that mrphoua silicon can be applied easily to a large
area because it involves a gas reaction process and that inexpensive glass

can be used as its baseboard are the additional distinguishing features of
amorphous silicon.

Therefore, when amorphous silicon is mass-produced, its cost is expected to
be less than one-hundredth the cost of single crystal.

Let us discuss further the "integrated" amorphous silicon developed by Sanyo
Electric. This method provides a means of obtaining an arbitrarily high
voltage fron a single baseboard. The solar cell made of conventional single
crystal silicon has its elensnts connected in a series one after another with
lead wires, so its reliability is problematic. The "integrated" solar cell of
Sanyo Electric works as follows. First of all, the transparent conductive
filn formed on the glass baseboard is constructed so that it has divided
electrodes. Amorphous silicon is then formed over it. ‘Ihe terminals of

the divided electrodes are constructed so that they protrude fron the
amorphous silicon film formed over then. when alminum electrode is vapor
deposited over the amorphous silicon film, the back side of the aluminun
electrodes are connected to the corresponding divided terminals.

By this method, a sheet of amorphous silicon solar cell is in effect divided
into a number of independent solar cells, and these cells are in series
connection. Director Kwano called this method of achieving series connec-
tion of solar cells through unique patterning of the anal: "16 form of solar
cell." He said that this idea was the key to practical application.

The reason this idea of "integration" is so decisive in realizing practical
application is because a voltage of only 0.5 V can be obtained so far, no
matter how bit the sheet of baseboard is, while the public electronic devices
require a minimum voltage of 1.5 V as well as higher voltages including 3 V,
6 V, and 12 V. Great lateral freedom is afforded by this "integrated format."
so the shape of the solar cell can be varied according to the application,
and voltages ranging from several volts to as high as 100 volts can be ob-
tained from a single baseboard. Pbr his distinguished services in the de-
velopment of the "integrated amorphous silicon solar cell" (type I was pub-
lished in February 1979 and type II, in Novenber 1979), Director Kuwano was
recognized in April 1980 by an award presented by the director general of the
Science and Technology Agency.

Development of this "integrated" amorphous silicon solar cell was the conclu-
sive factor which led to the completion of the pilot plant described pre-
viously. This pilot plant began production of solar cells in May 1980, pro-
ducing 5,000 solar cells per month. In September 1980, Sanyo Electric made
public the world's first electronic calculator powered by an amorphous sili-
con solar cell.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lhe reason it was first applied to the electronic calculator was based on the
fact that the sensitivity characteristics of --orphous silicon were roughly
in agreement with the spectral (wavelength) distribution of the fluorescent
lamp and it became operable with a light brighter than 200 lux, which is the
minimum brightness with which the liquid crystal display becomes visible (the
brightness of illumination in an ordinary office is more than 300 lux by regu-
lation).

Another Inortant rector—Photoelectric Conversion Efﬁciency

Let us touch briefly upon the history of amorphous silicon. ‘Ihe importance
of an amorphous semiconductor was revealed to the world for the first time
by Ovsinsky [phonetic] the director of an [mericsn venture business, "DC,"
in 1968. However, the semiconductor material in fashion at that tire was
chalcogenite, so the study of an amorphous semiconductor did not develop
very far.

Amorphous silicon caught the attention of the world in 1975, when a profes-
sor of Spear Dandy University in Great Britain made public the fact that
amorphous silicon could be obtained from plasma deposition of silicon by
Ileana of glow discharge and that the smrphous silicon thus formed could be
subjected to PIN control.

In the following year, 1976, RCA of the United States revealed that a solar:
cell could be made from amorphous silicon. this marked the beginning of Q-
plication of amorphous silicon in electronic parts.

Prompted in part by the movenent of the world, the Central Research Laborb
story of Sanyo Electric had been undertaking similar research continuously
for some time. For example, in 1967 Director Kwano was already engaged in
studying the glow discharge of amrphous silicon nitride, and his research
results were published in 1969 in scientific journals.

merefore, when Dr Carlson of RCA published his paper concerning an
amorphous silicon solar cell, the news served only to fuel Hr Kuwsno's
fighting spirit and determination to "surpass RCA in the race."

To be sure, there was someone who scolded and encouraged Mr Kimono. lie was
Executive Director Yamano (doctor of science) who was in charge of the Tech-
nology Headquarters (the Central Research Laboratory, the Development Re-
search Laboratory, the Super L51 Technical Development Center, the Shioya Re-
search Laboratory, and the Patent Center all belong to it).

Mr. Kuwano, it appeared, was dressed down by Executive Director Yamano: "Did
you not start this eight years ago? It is inexcusable that you should lose
it to Carlson." Incidentally, Executive Director Yamano is a graduate of

the Science Department, Kyoto University, and studied under late Dr liideki
Yugswa.

Executive Director Yamsno is generally comidered the other parent of the
Sanyo Electric amorphous silicon solar cell, became he was ninly respomible

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the guideline established in 1975: "Infornation and energy should be the
two pillars of research activities."

"The impact of the oil shock in 1973 was i-eme. Up to that tine, our re-
search philosophy had put the eaphasis on better living. Since 1975, the en-
phasis has been shifted to electronics in support of infatuation and energy."
(Executive Director Yancno)

The first fruit produced as s result of the union between the Yaaano line and
the Ravens research was Japan's first aaorphous silicon solar cell node pub-
lie in October 1978. The following year, in February 1979, Sanyo Electric
introduced the world's first electronic clock powered by an anorphous silicon
solar cell.

This had a big inpact on the world. Because Senyo Electric had denonstrated»
to the world for the first tine the possibility of anorphous silicon being
used in an industrial application. Inquiries were said to have cone even

from the 11.8. Essay and RCA. Sanyo Electric had reversed the situation with
regard to RCA.

After that, Senyo was running alone so to speak, until it recently succeeded
in obtaining a 0.8. patent on its "integrated amorphous silicon solar cell"
based on its continuous separated foraation process. In industrial circles,
almost all future amorphous silicon solar cells either nanufactured in the
United States or exported from Japan to the United States probably will be
in conflict with the Sanyo patent right. The donestic nakers of .orphous
silicon solar cells, such as Fuji Electric and Taiyo Yuden, have all adopted
the ”integration" for-at developed by Sanyo Electric in conercializing
their products. It is the consensus of opinion that there is no other way
but to adopt the "integration" for-at. Director Kwano, too, revealed his
confidence: "They probably will infringe on the patent in any aspects, be-
cause this is a basic patent which covers such a wide range, which we could
not avoid. .. ."

In Japan, in addition to three plants under Ssnyo Electric which have already
begun production, Hatsushita Battery Industry and Ksnebuchi anenietry have
already expressed their desire to join in the nanufacture and sales of
aorphous silicon products. There are more than 60 enterprises undertaking
RED of amorphous solar cells todo. If and when Sanyo Electric establishes
its patent in Japan also, the possibility is very great that these firns will
be obliged to pay license fees.

However. it is often pointed out that amorphous silicon has only one weak
point compared with single crystal cilicon.

Its photoelectric conversion efficiency under sunlight is lower than that of
single crystal silicon. As aentioned previously. .orphous silicon dis-
plays considerably better output characteristics (than single crystal
silicon) under fluorescent light. However, under sunlight, single crystal
silicon's sensitivity characteristics natch the spectral distribution (wave-
length range) of sunlight nuch better than those of mrphous silicon.

5h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

The photoelectric conversion efficiency is a neesure of how well solar energy
over the entire wavelength range can be converted into electricity. Hhile
this efficiency is in the range of 10-15 percent for single crystal silicon,
it is only half this value for the best emrphous silicon of Ssnyo Electric
(7.9 percent for a snall area 2 :- square and 5.6 percent for a large area 10
ca square).

Incidentally, a photoelectric conversion efficiency of 10 percent neans that
100 w of electric power can be generated fron an area 1 ester square.

Therefore, the nain research these related to norphoue silicon today is in-
provenent of its photoelectric conversion efficiency.

Theoretically speaking, the photoelectric conversion efficiency of earphone
silicon can be raised to as high as 12.5 percent. Based on its past re-

search experience, Sanyo Electric has boiled down the research the-es to the
following three.

first of all, the quality of the enorphous silicon file lust be inroved.

The P layer will be ieproved first. To facilitate the passage of light
through the P layer, a nethod is being developed in which carbide (carbon)
is to be added to the layer. This nethod was first developed in the labor-
atory of Prof Kakuhiro We of Osaka University. Servo Electric is nah-
ing preparations to use silicon carbide for the fornetion of the P lwer in
order to put it on the production line by April or June this year. (A
photoelectric conversion efficiency of 5.6 percent for a large area referred
to above utilizes this silicon carbide for the foreation of its 1’ layer.

The photoelectric conversion efficiency of a large area solar cell cone:b
cially available today is only 34 percent.)

AdoptiOn of silicon carbide means, in concrete terns, to add nethane (an)
in addition to diboranc and silene during the process of forming the P layer.

The I layer will be inroved next. Using the sane principle of gas reaction
nethod, Sanyo Electric is said to be undertaking the developnent of a new
nethod of forming (emfacturing) the 1 layer today.

The N layer will be inproved last. The approach taken is sinilar to that of
inproving the P layer. Naesly, a new additive is being investigated. In
short, a substance is added which will more readily attract the negative
charges.

The Central Research laboratory of Save Electric is said to have sons def-
inite ideas about how to carry out the research; it is confident that the
photoelectric conversion efficiency can be inroved significantly.

Director Kuweno said sinply: "An efficiency of 10 percent should definitely
be realizable by 1985."

So far, production of .orphous silicon solar cells rensine snell scale, so
its cost is only slightly less than that of single crystal silicon.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

However, Sanyo Electric estintes that the production cost of anorphous silicon
solar cells will be down to epproainately 200-300 yen per watt by 1985; 60-100
yen by 1988; and 3-50 yen by 1990.

This nsans that by 1990, with a cost of 150,000-300,000 yen an anorphous
silicon solar cell having a capacity of 3 It“ necessary for household applica-
tion nay becolas attainable.

Leading the world, Sanyo Electric itself began nass production in earnest in
February at its anorphous silicon solar cell sass production plant built on
Iuaji Island, nyogo Prefecture, with a monthly production volun of 1.5 nil-
lion electronic calculators. It is truly a nsteoric advance-ant of the
anorphous silicon solar cell.

Splendid possibilities concerning the future of anorphous silicon solar cells
are being discussed today. One of then concerns an idea for producing hydro-
gen energy, which is dubbed the future fuel. fro. electrolysis of sea water
using anorphous solar cells.

Although it nay be in the suewhat distant future, application of morphous
silicon solar cells may go beyond the bounds of national life and go into the
field of electric power. 'lhat day need not be in the very distant future. '
Since the develop-eat of a storage battery is lagging behind, it is imossible
to extend the utilisation of anorphous silicon solar cells to night tine. -
However, it is no longer merely a tire. that the. day nay arrive when household
appliances are powered by solar cells by day and by co-ercial power by night.

Director Yensno of the Technology Headquarters said this: "Last October,

the minister of industry of India visited Japan and expressed India's desire
to purchase solar cells. Solar cells nay not be suitable for countries in
northern latitudes, but they are most suitable for those developing countries
where there is abundant sunlight. If Japan could contribute positively to
the developing countries in securing solar energy. how wonderful it would
be."

Compared with the discovery of basic principles, which often depends on good
ideas, developing the first product is comidered to be far more difficult.
This is con-on sense in the field of research and develop-ant. Edison's
achieve-ant in relation to the invention of the light bulb is proof. In
this set-use, it would not be an overstate-ant to say that the two research
achieve-eats introduced in this article are conperable with Edison's.

tonnes-r: 1982 Bungei smnuu Ltd.

9113
680: 5106/87 BID

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY