FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10281
26 January 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
3.1.: transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
antion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. ‘l‘-imes within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OP
HATRRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1(

26 Janna:

JAPAN REPORT
(FOUO 4/82)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

New Political Leaders Viewed
(THE JAPAN TIMES, 17 Dec 81)...............................

Fiscal 1982 Budget Draft
(MAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 30 Dec 81)

Suzuki Totters on Budget Compilation
(Takehiko Takahashi; NAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 30 Dec 81) .......

Review of Suzuki's Political Activity
(Teruo Tsutsuni; THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL. 29 Dec 81)....

1982: Crucial Year for Suzuki
(HAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 3 Jan 82)............................

Suzuki: Defense Budget will Have Popular Support
(HAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 30 Dec 81)...........................

Administration Destroyed by Its Creator
(Takehiko Takahashi; HAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 6 Jen 82) . . . . . . . .

Upcoming Japan-USSR Talks Viewed
(Editorial; TOKYO SHIMBUN, 12 Dec 81)

Popularity of Suzuki Cabinet Increases
(ASAHI EVENING NEWS, 12 Dec 81)............................

Current Status of Relations with United States Discussed
(Fuji Kamiya; NIKON KEIZAI SHIMBUN. 11 Dec 81; SBIRON:

Dec 81)..................................................

Response to 0.3. Criticism
Differences in Decisionmaking

- a - [III - ASIA - 112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Asukata Reelected as JSP chairman
(Editorial; ASAHI EVENING NEWS, 25 Dec 81) .................

LDP's Diplonacy Feud
(Rai‘suke Haida; THE DAILY YMIURI. 18 Dec 81).. .. . . . .. . . . . .

Storm Over LDP Veep Choice
(Raisuke Honda: THE DAILY YONIURI. 11 Dec 81).............

Voting System Is in Need of Change
(Yuji Koido; THE JAPAN BCOMHIC JOURNAL. 22 Dec 81) ........

Ilpact of Lockheed Trial
(Takuo Hlyashi: MINI“! DAILY My 27 Dec 81) e e e e e a s e s s o -

Suzuki Prods Polyunskii on Northern Isles Issue
(THE DAILY YOHIURI, 7 Jan 82)..............................

Politics of 'ﬂarmony'
(HAINICHI DAILY NEWS. 4 Jan 02)............................

Japan To Defend Itself, Suzuki Says
(THE DAILY YWIURII 1 Jan 82)eeeee-eeeeaeeeeeaseeeeeee-eees

Government Defense Plans: A Leap in the Dark
(m8 DAILY YOHIURI, 30 Dec 81)..

MILITARY

Massive Defense Buildup Planned
(THB DAILY YOMIURI, 31 Dec 81).............................

'ASAHI' Editor on Defense Budget Increase
(ASANI EVENING NEWS. 30 Dec 81).

Security of Sea-Lanes Needed for Survival of Japan
(THE DAILY YOMIURI, various dates) .........................

Safe Sea-Lanes Vital, by Finn Sollie
Safety of Sea-Lanes, by Yoshiya Ariyoshi
Protection Discussed. by Osanu Kaihara

SCI ENE AND TECHNOIDGY

RsD Strategy of Intelligent Robot Makers Discussed
(Hirano: NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN. 10-14. 17-19 Nov 81).......

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

NEH POLITICAL LEADERS VIEHED
0W180955 Tokyo THE JAPAN TIMES in English 17 Dec 81 p 12

[Minoru Shimizu's "Politics Today--and Tomorrow" column: "Competition Among
New Leaders to the Fore"!

[Text] A senior Dietman of the Liberal-Democratic Party (L0?) and one-time
foreign minister says the "one point of interest in future LDP developments is
to what extent the so-called new leaders, whom Prime Minister Zenkc Suzuki
cleverly 'manipulated' in his recent reshuffle, will be able to boost their
political strength in the months ahead." He nredicted that there would appear
differences in strength among the new leaders during the next year or so.

In the new setup created by Prime Minister Suzuki, the new leaders were given
important posts in the cabinet and party executive.

Suzuki had long considered it one of his duties to "foster" the new leaders.
And in his reshuffle of cabinet and party posts on 30 November, he put his
plan into effect.

Though there are more than a dozen younger politicians who are called 'hew leaders."
Suzuki had in mind only six of them-Kiichi Miyazawa and Rokusuke Tanaka of

the Suzuki faction, Noboru Takeshita of the Tanaka faction. Shintaro Abe of the
Fukuda faction, Ichiro Nakagaws of the Nakagawa faction, and Hichio Watanabe who

has no factional affiliation.

In the new Suzuki administration, Hiyazawa was retained as chief cabinet secretary.
Tanaka was made chairman of the LDP Policy Affairs Research Council, Tskeshita

was named senior deputy secretary-general and Abe was appointed international
trade and industry minister, while Nakagawa and Hatanabe were retained in their
respective posts of director general of the Science and Technology Agency and
finance minister.

Important Posts

All of these, except Takeshita, had held important posts ever since the Suzuki
administration was inaugurated in July last year, Abe having been chairman of
the Policy Affairs Research Council and Tanaka international trade and industry
minister and according to the prime minister, they had amply fulfilled his
expectations.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USIE ONLV

Suzuki says that in order to ensure the longevity and stability of the LDP
administration, efforts must be made to cultivate men of talent capable of
carrying on the administration in the next generation.

However, most observers think that his aim in giving key positions to these
young leaders was to improve his chances of getting reelected as president
of the LDP. Being relatively young and energetic. they might possibly move
in a direction unfavorable to the Suzuki administration if they were not
given important posts and were left to their own resources.

If appointed to important posts in the cabinet and party, however, they would
not be free to act as they pleased and furthermore, there would be a definite
plus factor in that their enterprise and industry would ultimately contribute
to the achievements of the Suzuki administration.

Very Hard Work

In a talk with reporters, the prime minister said he planned to work these
politicians very hard. He added with a smile that he expected there would

be some competition among them as they had been given positions of eqsal
importance in the recent reshuffle. "Who will be chosen from among them as

a candidate for the LDP presidency will depend on the efforts of each individual,"
he said.

Fully aware of Suzuki's intentions, Finance Minister Hatanabe, one of the new
leaders, made the following amusing comments in a magazine interview: 'Wh new
leaders are like spirited racehorses. After being qualified to take part in

the rate, we line up at the starting line. And then with a carrot dangling

in front of our noses, we are told to run. The horses run with all their might,
but run as they may, they never catch up with the carrot. Sore of them collapse
from exhaustion and are thus conveniently weeded out by natural selection."

The new leaders first began to attract attention in August 1977 when a policy
group called the group for studies on free society (jiyu shakai kenkyukai) was
formed by some leading businessmen and 11 promising LDP politicians. One of
the aims of this new group was to reform the political administration being
conducted by the influential politicians of the day, in an attempt to check the
decline of the LDP which had been in evidence for same time.

In addition to the six new leaders already mentioned, members of the group included
Canri Yamaahita, former director general of the defense agency, former

education minister Toshiki Kaifu and former labor minister Takao Fujinami. These
politicians, together with present transport minister Tokusaburo Kosaka. who was
invited to join the group but refused, became known from that tin: as the

new leaders.

The six new leaders whom Suzuki has taken under his wing have already begun to
compete with one another with a view to becoming candidates in next autumn's

presidential election. Oddly enough, these six men fall into three sets of
rival relationships--Abe vs Takeshita, Hiyazawa vs Tanaka, and Ratanabe vs Nakagawa.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAI. IS}: ONLY

'lchirnku unr'

The fiercest of these rivalries is that between Hiyazawa and Tanaka who both
belong to the Suzuki faction. One of Suzuki's biggest headaches in his recent
reshuffle was deciding how to treat these two politicians. Relations between

them are so bad as to earn the name "Ichiroku war," taking one character each
from their first names.

At first, Suzuki thought of appointing chief cabinet secretary Hiyazawa to
the post of chairman of the Policy Affairs Research Council, in order to give
him some experience in handling party affairs.

According to LDP custom, for a man to quality as a candidate for the premiership.
he should have had experience in the key cabinet posts of foreign affairs.
finance or defense as well as in one of the three top party posts. Accordingly,
Suzuki considered giving Miyazawa his first party post.

However, Rokusuke Tanaka got to work on Suzuki with the support of the younger
Diet members of the Suzuki faction, requesting that if he could not keep his
position of international trade and industry minister, he should be given that
of chairman of the Policy Affairs Research Council.

Rokusuke Tanaka, an active politician, also sought the cooperation of former

Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka who wields a great deal of influence in the LDP. The
latter was favorably disposed toward Rokusuke Tanaka on account of his friendship
with the late Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira, but he was not on very good terms
with Hiyazawa.

Political Pressure

In the end Suzuki bowed to the political pressure applied by Rokusuke Tanska and
gave him the job of chairman of the Policy Affairs Research Council. Miyazawa
was naturally displeased with this appointment. and relations between the two
men are reported to have grown even worse in recent days.

According to observers, Abe who became international trade and industry minister,
Hatannhe who was retained in the post of finance minister, and Tanaka, chairman
of the LDP Policy Affairs Research Council, have the responsible task of tackling
the difficult problems concerning national finance administration, trade friction
and defcnsv. Any mishandling of these issues would immediately prove prejudical
to their political position.

Although Abe's aides are hoping that his new post will give him a chance to increase
his political strength, the situation does not warrant any such optimism. As

Finance Minister Hatanabe said in his remarks quoted above, a number of the new
leaders may well fall by the wayside. Meanwhile. Yamashita. former director

general of the defense agency. and transport minister Kosaka are aiming to take

part in this competition among the new leaders. Thus the new-leader contest is
likely to grow in intensity and attract a great deal of interest in the coming months.

COPYRIGHT: THE JAPAN TIMES 1981

(25K): 1-l20/1l2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500020050-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

FISCAL 1982 BUDGET DRAFI
Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEUS in English 30 Dec 81 p 2

[Text] The government has adopted the fiscal 1982
budget draft which has given priority to defense
expenditures. Defense appropriations were set at
2.586 billion yen. 31 billion yen more than the original
Finance Ministry draft. The treatment of defense
outlays was unusual when we take into account the
government policy of tightening its belt.

The growth in defense expenditures surpassed
that of educational expenditures in fiscal 1900 and
that of social welfare expenditures by 0.01 percent in
fiscal 1981. We expect the ratio of defense ex-
penditures to the gross'national product (GNP) to
surpass the one percentage mark within a few more
years. in short. we may seedefense expenditures
expanded beyond the 5 trillion mark in the early

19903.
Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki has often repeated

that Japan will not become a military power, he will
not give priority to defense. and that he will use his
own judgment (on defense outlays) from a com-
prehensive viewpoint. The but! get draft reveals that
he has failed to adhere to his pledges.

Suzuki seems to have given priority to defense
expenditures by taking Into account Japan's relations
with the United States. in his talks in May with 0.8.
President Ronald Reagan. Suzuki promised that
further efforts would be made. by the Japanese
government to increase its defense capability.
Despite his pledge to “use his own judgment," Suzuki
accepted the American request without a murmur.

We do not believe that the government can win
public support for an expanded defense capability
because we see no indication of an imminent military

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000500020050-9
FUR OFFIFIAI. l SF. UNI)

threat in the Far East. if there is no threat. we do not
see the necessity of increased defense expenditures.
There was also an increase in economic
cooperation expenditures. We believe that expanding
aid to developing nations for humanitarian-purposes
and maintaining peace is the right idea. But. if this
aid is extended in accordance with the East-West
confrontation formula, such aid is likely to be used to
suppress human rights or serve to increase tension.

On the other hand, outlays for social welfare and
education were meager. We do not believe that the
welfare of the people can be guaranteed if the social
welfare system is tampered with so easily by fiscal
policy. To make matters worse. the price'of rice.
Japanese National Railway fares and state university
fees will be raised shortly Salary earners cannot
expect a tax cut but instead face a tax increase next
year without it beingotficialig fg’ ,‘r; #143.

When we take a good look at these' developmen;
.we believe that the budget draft Was compiled in an.
attempt by thé'g'overnrnentw ”to _f:i_l_thfully:_follow the-
policy of the U. S. We wonder whether the govern-.
ment has abandoned its plan to establish a welfare
state.

Another point is that little attention has been paid
to remove the trade friction with other countries. The
evolvement of this friction can best be described as
follows: low economic growth — inactive domestic
demand and reliance on exports — an increased trade
surplus — sharper friction.

To encourage domestic demand. the government
merely resorted to lower interest rates and took no
action in fiscal and tax policies which have prevented

expanded domestic demand.

We expect low economic growth and expanded
trade friction next year. Trade friction means an
expanded "threat by the Japanese economy" from
Overseas viewpoints, which could result in the
isolation of Japan if proper measures are not taken.
The trade friction with the United States will rekindle
the defense friction. which may prompt a further
expansion of Japanese defense expenditures. in this
respect we believe that failure to pay due attention to
the trade friction indicates that Japan is turning its
back on peace.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The budget dratt was compiled behind closed
doors by the government and the Liberal-Democratic
Party. To remedy this procedure. we call for “civilian
control" in taming the budget with the participation

0! tax payers. In this way. the general public would be
able to check the handful of specialists who set

irresponsibly.

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Daily News. 1981

C80: 6120/115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007f02l09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SUZUKI TONERS 0“ BUDGET COMPILATIGI

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 30 Dec 81 p 2

[Article by Takehiko Takahashi]

[Text]

After promising to
"rehabilitate state finances
without a tax increase." Prime
Minister Zenlto Suzuki has been
driven into a painful position
because of the unfavorable
economicsitualion.

The definite aim of the
"rehabilitation of state
financs" is to put the issuance
of deficit national bonds at zero
in the fiscal 1984 budget. For

thatpurposeitwastntendedto'

reduce the national bonds by
1.830.000 million yen from the
fiscallmhudget.

Notwithstanding. the need to
supplement the fiscal 1901
budget arose. The main factors
in this were 190.000 million yen
for various compulsory ex-
penses. 190.000 million yen to
meet salary increases for
government employees. 260.000
million yen for disaster
rehabilitation. and 400.000
million yen to cover shortfalls
in taxes «the amount not
received because of stagnant
business).

As against this. even if such
measures are taken as 90.000
million yen ummiaation in
expenses. l0.000 million yen in
revenue other than taxes.
100.000 million yen from the
reserve fund (with 260.000
million yen in construction

bonds issued for
rehabilitation) there '
a shortage of 375.0
yen. The governr
therefore decided
375,000 million yen
nationallionds.

This policy was d
theevening of Dee:
time. an emergenc,
ment-LDP liaison l
was held. The polio.
plained to the
Democratic Party a
provat sought. Late
ference of cabinet
concerned with eoo
fairs'was held an
cabinet meettngtoai

icy. _

0n the following ft:
the LDP called a me:
executives to disc
government policy
dissatisfaction I

. government was ex;

this meeting. This in
such an important i
been presented
without any prior cc
with the LDP.

In particular. the fi
Finance seems to hai
this policy beforehanc
that among the Diet
who were formerly
Ministry officials. ll
some who knew a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500020050-9
5:. :3 r2» «Sauna—<3.
5:25. :5 F238 2 a...
a: 8:89. 8:9.

12. 23529 :8 3.92.5
858853382.”

..= w was 9.. =8 .8.
33:8 3383 to... 5.39
9.. :3 2.8 $5 (=— 258.
.3... 9.. 5. 50 38:. >
:31: 832 2 a» 332.. E6
.33 8. 3.. :5 3.: =8». «.2.
E: = 93 833. on 38.52.
25 = E 3328 3:538
26 3.8". £8 15 5.55 So
Ems—5...:

:vzaa Sana. was: 88
5». so :83 ”ES an 8.58.
E... 3.82.35“ :5 «38
2:283 558. u E 52.28.
9.... :a 53¢ a 22..” 23% 8
i=8 3:...” 3:28. 23%
E n i=8: «8 6 :8 253.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR ()l-‘l-‘K 1M. USE ONLV

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

' REVIEW OF SUZUKI'S POLITICAL ACTIVITY

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English 29 Dec 81 p 10

[Article by Teruo Tsursumil

[Text 1

On December at. New Year's Eve. we
Japanese purify ourselves by pounding out
what Buddhists call the "m carnal desires“
as nearby temple bells ring and welcome the
New Year totally afresh. This custom oi
starting afresh the New Year still prevails
even among the Japanese young who have
been exposed to totally diflerent collie-es and
habits alter the war. Thus. as if I were Prime
Minister Zenko Suzuki. 1 would like to
describe what Suzuki might have thought oi
his past days and the coming year:

"About the Japanus. communique case. i
should have known better. I really bungled It
badly. That was when I visited Washington in
May. When newsmen pressed me hard on the
interpretation of a phrase 'allianee' in the
Japan-U S communique. I showed ofl' some
what by saying 'there exists no military
connotation involved in the alliance‘ lam no
hawk by nature and I wanted to emphasize
that point.

hrrthermore. l complained about the way
that the gist of the communique was being
drafted mainly by Foreign Ministry officials
because Japanese newspapers have
harangued day and day to the effect that
mam Suzuki is moving to the road of
militarism. and l just wanted to say to the
press that 'Suzulti's stance is different.“ than
what the papers report. Mr. Masayoahi lto
has resigned from the post of foreign
minister. but i had no other means but to
accept his resignation to protect the prime
minister's imiolabie poettion.

i heard that U S. Government ofﬁcials
have impaired of former Prime erdater
Fukuda about the viability of the Suzuki
Administration. It this meant Mr. Reagan
was mistruthful of my ability. maybe i have
goofed it up after all.

About administratiw
is l who will carry
staked my political lil
there will be no del
fiscal tau. i will step
is not achieved. When
additional deficit-cove
supplemattary budget
the administration's 0
budget for fiscal m2
fiscal reconstruction.
But my reaction is th
issue no such booth i
at the Liberal Del
outraged by the iaa
covering bonds in ti
budget. but there is
that became of plant

The same mismder
administrative and
Second Ad Hoc Cc
istrative Reform eh
Ddto will submit its
only next June. So
report is submitted a
carrying out the relo
Zenko Suzuki. have
istrativc reform.‘ 81
administrative refori
last fall. only iegali
government outlays i1
Thus. many more da}
serious implemental
reform. i really think
and impetuots.

Newspapers demar
the fundamental can
dclicrts like srtowballi
nese National Railw:
when we can do that t
ed out in Mr. Dolto's

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600020060-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

don‘t hivemudtcotﬂdeme marrying item

To make things shod. it III menus that we

have to negotiate with mmo-momooo unton

vortex: and this is not an easy tut. .

lneoocltltoo. whenltookbeckovermy

35d:ysthieyeer.ltuvea Iototthlnolfeel

reg-enable. Somtmewtllukemm

andmtluyendtry mttoslwoﬂ.

Since I appointed Ir. Sun-nu Nihido to the

- post at LDP seen-any :enenl and m tall-

-ned‘ed sowed {ran the Tut-h (action.

the LDP‘: moot poms/u! (rum. 1 am quite

mlmwineredectionhidtotthwl’

[Islam scheduled next fall So all I

Wdohtodothlnain enema mum

(Tenn Tsunami is a Nikon Keml deputy
political editor.)

COPYRIGHT: 1981. The Nihon Kcizai Shinbun. Inc.

cso: 6120/115

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

1982:

CRUCIAL YEAR FOR SUZUKI

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 3 Jan 82 p 1

[Text]

Prime Minister Zenko Simultl
will find 192 to be a crucial
yearinhlshldtoholdonlothe
relnsol government.

With his twoyear term as
president of the ruling con-
servative Liberal-Democratic
Party due to expire in
November. Suzuki’s leadership
will he at stake over critical
domestic and iorelgn policy

‘malters.

Delense and trade men will
continue to be bones at eon-
tenllonanapan'arelationa with
the United States and Western
Europennoountrles.

The US. and European
Community are not likely to
give up predate on Japan to
ease trade friction in the wake
of reports that Japan is hotmd to
register an Sis-billion trade
air-plus with America and more
than till billion with the EC
nations.

0n the domestic scene. the'a'o-
yearold premier will he watch-
-ed to see it he will actually
liveuptohls earlier pied; that
he will stake his political career
on putting into torce the con.
troverslal task oi streamlining
the burgeoning government
structure.

A series oi court ruilnu on
the prolonged trials of the ma
Lockheed payolt scandal will
come out. starting to late
January and probably

elhnaxhghetoretheendotthe
yearwtthaverdletdeliveredon
tor-trier Prime um Kaluei
Tamika.

yen proaecutlnn
lailed‘ to establish a criminal
eaaeaalmt-hlm. ‘ ‘

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suzuki's appointment oi
;l§ltaldoaatheNo.-2manhthe
comet-vat!” party raised the
eyehmwsotaomepeoplehthe

arty. including turner

miers Takeo Niki and
Takeoi‘ulmda.

Tanaira's men also got in-

ﬂuential party and

parliamentary committee

poets. indicated-t m
comttedonthehhebhihh'bid
lorreeleetlonupartyhead.

a remit. a strong tom-
datlonexiatingrrithhthenih;
partyconalathgot-

Aa
thetaetlom
m M m“

«mm.

W oatmeal
the trial lnvolvhg lanaka.
F'uhida and'hia taetlu may
turn against the-prime

minister. -
A-dlitlcult iaaue animating

domestic economy. The
alumintme textile and hate
material peodticlns mm
havebeenlnapmlongedalmnp.

Tariffs
Hie eonaervatlve ad-
Iteleohudecldedtosimolity
input-madam and tom
ptocedwee

However. government'
woes admltled that ﬂees
names were mere step.
designed to stop other nation
iron cinching Japan lo;
havingaclooedmuket. .

The United States. mean-
while. has been etepplng up
calkonJopantomkem
elioets to reinlorce its deieose

ly. ,

However. the loot Is that
lheteuemsloheallmtlto‘the
aomunentlntreothgdeieue
umtasitﬂsohato
rebuild the deliclt-strlckeo
nationaliinanoes

Belore the yeareod. the
govenuneat worked on no
budget lot {local m2 starting
April I. which called (or I to
wuwmshmlonyeetm
billion) to gene"! account
outlays.

Defense expenditutes
amtedtozmjhllllonyee

(om billion). Mk
[Intense oi 7.154

thallm.oto.moeteeuot
the country‘s um utiseoi
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

SUZUKI :

DEFENSE BUDGET HILL HAVE POPUMR SUPPORT

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NBJS in English 30 Dec 81 p 1

[Text]

COPYRIGHT: Hainicht Daily News, 1981

Prime Minister Zenkn Suzuki.

while pledging Japan will never
be a military power again. said
thatthecountryisready toptny
a national detetse role matched
with its economic power.

“Japan should play a role
commensurate with its national
strength for world peace and
security now that it has a to
percent share of the world total
m national product (GNP)."
Sumki said at a pm: con-
terence Monday night.

lie said the government

proposal for a 1.75 percent
defense spending increase in
fiscal 1932 willbehacked by the
people.
But he quickly added: "My
administration will stick to the
mo policy of holding Japan‘s
defense expenditure below i
percent of the GNP.

"i don't think we have to
change that policy for the time
being."Suzukisaid.

The [”2 defense budget draft
of 2.8 trillion yen (about me
billion) is roughly equal to 0.93
percent of Japan's projected
GNP. up lrotn 0.91 percent tn
the current ﬁscal year.

The 7.75 percent defense
hudpetboostcompareewtththe
2.8 percent htctease in social
welfare spending and the 2.6
percent hike in educational
outlays. _

Meanwhile. the national
defame coumil has approved
' .e pvernmut’a order tor P-

30 antisubmartne patrol planes
and 17-15 jet flatter: tor two
catsecutiveyearshfiecaltm.

The fiscal loan request will
involve to P-SCa andlor-tSe,
aovemnentaourceuaid.

They said it may also hiclude
an additional fleet of to MC
Oriono initially scheduled to he.
orderedlnfiacaltut. -.

Japan hasheea asked by the
United States to increase its
deployment of Murine
intelligence aircraft in ac-
cordance with the lat Japan-
u.s. joint comm . which

the “ eelrability
of an appropriate division of.
(defense) roles" between the
two countries in the North-
western Pacific — an area of

(towing Soviet naval strength.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCI OLOGICAL

MINISTRATION DESTROYED BY ITS CREATOR

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY nuts in English 6 Jan 82 p 2

[Article by Takehiko Takahaahi]

[Text]

In Japan at late. there has
been no case ol an ad-
ministration collapsingbecause
its policies have reached an
impala. Since the persons in
charge oi the adminlaration
have all corneoul ot the Liberal-
Democratic Party. lor the
policiestoarrive atanimpasse
would he a big "minus" tor the
LDPasawhole.

Thereiore. when policy
problems come into the
spotll a power struggle
inva y takes place within
the party and this begins to
shake the administration. A:
the result. a change at the ad-
ministration may be carried
out.

In addition. there is a strange

. There are many
cases oi an administration
being destroyed by the motive
power which wielded the
greatest inﬂuence in creating
it. This means that power
dominates the political uorld.
and while that strength creates
an administration. it also
destroysanadministration.

A recent example is that ol
the Tanaka administration. Its
motive power was money but it
was also lorccd to withdraw
over a money problem. The
succeeding Milli administration
was created by the then LDP

14

Vice President E
Shiina but when it
became anti-Mild.
cabinet collapsed. l
the Pukuda adm.
which was created
liueoces that topple
administration. 'l'hi:
Fonda administn
destroyed by a split
loreeeinc inﬂuence
the Tanaka and
lluences.

The «main drag:
Ohira adrnhiistratio
death ol llasayosht
amending Suzuki c
horn wlh the up:
‘i'anaha and We
Aceordhtsly. when
electionottheparty
held in November
whether Prime Itin
Suwki will be able
as the party presir'
determined by the
ol the Tanaka and

tluences.
Even if Prime

Suzuki and the Sn:
desire a continual
Sunkladministrati
by the 1
lactione.
administration

The preset“ Sun
a whole party cabin

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600020060-9
823 Saw 9:. 135? =
29 p 595 83!... :8 E.
9.38 o. 5. 4255 F88
5.9. .235 on 89.3... 8
318:.

we... $33 83. 332. as. =
w 238: 8 v3.5 3.: a...
2.8.5 .333. .38 «.858
3 53¢ 8 325... 9.83.
.5835» 2.. =8 Eczema: 2
:5 33a :82» Ex. 2.28
35.2. 2 cs. :39

.3 use 35’ $35. no 21...:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

UPCOMING JAPAN-USSR TALKS VIMD
W151235 Tokyo TOKYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 12 Dec 81 Morning Edition p lo

[Bditorialz "Good Opportunity To Make a Restart in Japan-USSR Relations"]

[Text] Japan and the Soviet Union are scheduled to resume working-level
consultations in Moscow on 20 and 21 January next year for the first time

in about 2 and 1/2 years. The previous talks were suspended in the wake of
the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan. One may say that the coming
talks are no big thing since they will be nothing more than a businesslike
exchange of views on international and bilateral problems between officials
of the vice ministerial level. Nevertheless, it is more necessary than

anything else for the two countries to sit at the table to find ways to improve
their frosty relations.

In this sense, we are glad that the date of the talks has been set, and we hope
that the talks will be fruitful and pave the way for resuming regular consulta-
tions between the foreign ministers of the two countries.

To this end, it is essential for the Soviet Union to make some compromise on the
issue of the northern territories, the most important cause of the impasse in
Japan-USSR relations. With these relations about to enter a new phase with the
scheduled resumption of the working-level consultations, we once again call upon
the Soviet Union to make some compromise.

It is a coincidence that the Japanese ambassador to Moscow and the Soviet
ambassador to Tokyo are both to be replaced. 0n the Japanese side, former
Deputy Foreign Minister Tskashima, who has always been concerned with the
continuously deteriorating Japan-USSR relations, will become the new ambassador
to the Soviet Union. 0n the Soviet side, present Ambassador Polyanskiy will be
replaced. The outgoing ambassador has been in his post for 5 years and 8 months
since April 1976. This is certainly a good opportunity to make a restart in
Japan-USSR relations.

We do not mean to say that Mr Polyanskiy was a failure as ambassador. Despite
the fact that since the Afghan incident relations between the two countries
have been at their lowest ebb, he preserved his humor and smile under the

difficult circumstances. striving hard to improve the relations between the two
countries as best as he could. He value his efforts highly. During his tenure
there was the MIG-25 incident and circumstances were very unfavorable for him.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He deserves sympathy for this. But it is very regrettable that he merely played
the role of conveyor of the home government's intentions. True, he was demoted
when he arrived in Japan to assume his new post, but he was a prestigious
ambassador because he once was a CPSU Politboro member and once served as
agriculture minister. Moreover, he must have very deeply felt the strong desire
of the Japanese people, both the government and the public, for the return of
the northern territories. Accordingly, he should have been able to ask the

Kremlin to reconsider its intransigent position that there is no unsettled
territorial issue.

According to a public poll on foreign relations conducted last September by the
Prime Minister's office, 86 percent of the 3,000 men and women of 20 years and
older polled answered that they felt "no affinity" for the Soviet Union. As a
reason. 56 percent said they felt so because of the rigid Soviet stance on the
northern territories issue. In view of the Soviet intransigence. we wonder if
the Soviet Union is not totally indifferent to such feelings of the other side.

Nevertheless, as indicated by the Soviet consent to resumption of [word indistinct]
fishing near Kaigarajima [Signalny Island] by Japanese fishermen, the Soviet Union
is concerned about improving its relations with Japan. Economic cooperation in
the development of Siberia will be greatly beneficial to Japan as well as to the
Soviet Union. Although the territorial issue remains unsettled. Japan for its

part should maintain a constant dialogue with the Soviet Union and cooperate

with it wherever it should.

It is feared that talk about a Soviet threat will only exacerbate tension and
mutual distrust between the two countries and make the rigid Soviet stance on
the territorial issue still more rigid.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Chunichi Shimbun Tokyo Honsha

cso: 4105/41

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

POPULARITY or suzuu CABINET mcsnsss
«411.1213 Tokyo asmu svaumc ms in English 12 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] The Suzuki cabinet has regained a popular support rate of 40 percent
in the latest ASAHI SHIHBUN public opinion poll.

It is the first time in eight months that the support rate has swung up to that
level. The public seems to have been favorably impressed by the events since
the previous ASAHI survey in October, such as the government's push about
administrative reform legislation and the reshuffle of the cabinet and officers
of the ruling Liberal-Democratic Party.

Among the previous LDP administrations, only the cabinet of Prime Minister Hayato

Ikeda enjoyed popular support in the [word indistinctl-percent range a year and five
months after its inauguration.

The latest nationwide ASAHI poll, conducted on Dec. 9 and 10, showed that popular
support for the Suzuki cabinet has risen to 40 percent from 36 percent in
October. an] that the non-support rate remains the same at 36 percent.

The LDP commanded 54 percent support, marginally down from the all-time high of
55 percent recorded in December last year.

A notable phenomenon is that support for the clean government party (Kemeito)
has dropped to the lowest level in 15 years. The ASABI survey revealed that
the No. 2 opposition party, which has steadily polled 4-6 percent support

in the past, now has only 3 percent support.

Support for the Suzuki cabinet among LDP supporters has recovered to 58 percent
from 51 percent in October. the lowest figure for the administration. This is a
major factor behind the improvement in the overall support rate.

Among the respondents supporting the Suzuki cabinet, the proportion of those
professing support on the grounds that it is an L0? cabinet increased from
22 percent in October to 25 percent. The ratio of those who explained that
they support it because it is headed by Zenko Suzuki rose from 5 percent

to [figure indistinct] percent.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The cabinet has gained more support in :11 the age brackets over 30. The rate
is 34 percent among people between 30 and 35. 1.10 percent among people in their
1.03, and 108 percent among people in their 503. All the figures are about

7 percent higher than in the previous poll in October.

There has also been an improvement of similar magnitude in vocationally
categorized support figures-403 percent among the self-employed, merchaan and

factory operators, 38 percent among comercial workers. and 310 percent among
clerical workers.

Policies were cited by 16 percent of the pollees against the Suzuki cabinet
as the reason for their non-support, followed by 9 percent who said they are
against it because it is an LDP administration.

The non-support rate tended to be high among people in their 20s and 30s.
clerical, industrial and commercial workers.

The 54 percent support for the LDP compared with 17 percent for the Japan
Socialist Party, 6 percent for the Democratic Socialist Party, 4 percent for

the Japan Comunist Party, 2 percent for the New Liberal Club, and 1 percent

for the United Social Democratic Party. The rate for the JSP is 1 percent
higher than in October.

COPYRIGHT: ASAHI EVENING N345 1981

080: 6120/112

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL A“) SOCI MIC”.

CURRDIT S‘i‘M‘US W RELATIWS WIT}! UNITE) SPM'BS DISGSSED
Response to 0.8. Criticisn

Tokyo mum KEIZAI $81an in Japanese 11 Dec 81 p 1

[Article by Fuji Kaniya. Professor of Keio University]

[Text] Japan-0.8. relations have clearly worsened during the past year. Visitors
iron the United States who! I have met recently have almost unanimously told use

that discontent and frustratim with Japan is getting more and more serious at the
grassroots level in the United States, and that it is characterized by a profound
psychological link between discmtent over the trade issue and frustration cmerning
the defense issue. Since this is one of the difficult problems that concern ae cm-
stantly, I shall frankly write sue of my thoughts here.

Pi rst. suppose we accept at face value the Antican criticism of Japan. Then our
strategy must be, first of all, to sever the linkage between the econoaic and defense
issues. Many Americans seen to think that a primary reasat for Japan's eocnaic
advancement over many years has been excessively seall defense spending. Although

it may be a secondary factor, it cannot be tie prinary factor. Bermading the

United States a: this point and moving the friction between the two countries from
the level of enoticn to that of reasm is more important than anything else.

Secmd, the emnaic issue that draws particular bilateral attention is the 0.8.
trade deficit vis-a—vie Japan. which already exceeds 815 billim this year. Ca1-
cerning defense, the issue is the rate of increase of defense spending in next
year's Japanese budget. which is an indicator of the pcsitiveness of the Japanese
attitude toward defense. In particular, it is whether or not the widely advertised
7.5-percent increase includes a ZJ-prent increase for personnel costs. Frankly
speaking. for Japan the stakes are overwhelmingly larger in the emnanic issue and
relatively smaller in the defense issue. The aforenentiased 2.‘-percent increase is
approximately $260 nillicn in absolute terns. If as could expect a good effect
regarding the separation of the eccnaic and the defense issues by spending this
much, it would be nothing but nearsighted for the Japanese Goverment to reject the
2.4-percent increase because of financial difficulties.

Third. for the Japanese Gwerment not to reject it. however, the United States
must also cool off a bit. The issue of the trade deficit with Japan soaehow resembles
a student who got a 'C' or "P' accusing another student who 9t an 'A" of cheating.

The student who got the bad grade should study two or three times as hard before
criticizing the other student. That is men sense. isn't it?

20
FOR OH‘ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As for a man of the secretary of canmerce's standing to declare publicly that the
cause of the trade imbalance between the United States and Japan lies in Japan's
cultural traditions and social constitution, it is impolite to say that “poverty
dulls the wit," but I cannot help but be sorry to find that the United States has
gone this far.

COPYRIGHI': Nihm Kezai Shinbunsha 1981

Differences in Decisiomaking
Tdtyo SBIRQI in Japnese Dec 81 pp 228-229
[Article by Fuji Kuiya, Professor of Keio University]

[Text] Since the newspapers have widely reported on the Fifth shimoda Cmference
held recently in Oiso, Kanagawa Prefecture, there is little more for me to write.
The conference adopted the following procedire: Except for the plenary session. all
participants were divided into two grasp, A and B. Bad: group discussed the sane
topics separately. I was a cochairman (1 Group A, along with Professor Bugi Patrick
of Yale University, and here I would like to introduce the folloaing exchange of
opinions in Group A.

It concerned the decisiomdting methods in the United States and Japan--a comparison
of the merits and demerits of the Japanese consensus method and the American decision-
by-najority method. One American legislator started the discussion.

“At present the Republicans are in the majority by only 51 seats in the House [as
published] and 7 seats in the Senate. Nevertheless, the Republican Reagan admin-
istration has been making new changes one after another. In canparism, although
in the Diet, it has been holding to an mnbiguous attitude even (:1 a decision that
could justifiably be made--a more positive defense policy. The Japanese consensus
method and its merits have recently been publicized in the United States, but we
cannot deny that it has the serious demerit cf inefficiency. Japan has lost
'leadership' in favor of 'ccnsensus,” he asserted.

Ten years ago, in this kind of situation the Japanese sié would not have held its
own; it would have offered a few excuses and would have tried to evade the point of
the discussion. But nowadays the situation has dnanged completely. Sensing a good
fight, so many hands were raised a: the Japanese side to make counterarguments or
explanations that the chairmen were perplexed about how to control the speakers.

The Japanese participants respcnded to the Americans by arguing the following
points, in particular.

The American way of pushing through with strong leadership and decision-by-majority
may indeed be very efficient in sane respects. But becmse various dscisims made
in these ways often lack the base of a sufficiently strung consensus, they tend to
lose staying power quickly and invite setbacks and turnabouts whenever they cane up
against a wall.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In other words, under the American method. big policy changes occur often and the
consistency of policy is easily danaged. Americans seen to be sure about the dif—
ference between Carter and Reagan. However, Japanese are not so sure how long the
so-called new Reagan line will last. Japamse always under if it will change again
in 2 or 3 years.

Even within the Carter era, policy swung widely from big reductions to increases in
military spending and from withdrawal to a freezing of U.S. ground forces in Korea.
Under such conditions allied countries cannot folloa the United States. Under the
Japanese cmsenais method, the process of making decisions is certainly inefficient.
However, once a decision is made, it cannot easily collapse and tends to retain con-
tinu_ty and consistency.

In summary, the opinion of the Japanese side was as follows: While American policy
lacks credibility, Japanese policy possesses it. This factor is especially important
in the case of diplonatic policy.

One Japanese professor wittily made a cynical remark, saying: "American friends seen
to change spouses me after another in the same way. However, I have never thought
of changing my wife at all.“

I must point out that these arguments were never presented in a confrmtational
manner: instead, they were exchanged in a friendly atmosphere. At any rate, it was

a good opportunity for both hericans and Japanese to reflect at themselves. During
the sessions of the Shimcda Conference the newspapers reported tint the 0.5. Govern-
ment had decided to cut $30 billion over 3 years from President hagan's original
plan for strengthening the armed forces. Recently, the washer has duanged to $13
billion. There is no guarantee that this number will not be changed further in the
future. Doesn't the United States ever think that, in asking its allies for a
specific increase in military forces while the United States itself is this unsettled.
it cannot be taken at face value?

From the discussion, I also think Japan should reexamine its attitude more seriously
than the United States. Hereafter, we shall also consider important the attitude of
agreeing to disagree, that is to, not be blindly thankful for mat the Americans say
as we were a decade ago and to make clear the differences of opinion. frankly
speaking, however, even when Japanese diplomatic policy has sought activism and
clearness in various senses in the eighties, it has still avoided making definite the
particulars of its goals, even though the method cf explaining general policy has
changed. And this causes unnecessary frustration on the American side.

At the Shimoda Cmference the strong 0.5. discontent with Japan became clear in
regard not to only the defense issue but also to the economic issue, in particular
the issue of an open market. There are acne ancng the Americans who want to make
extreme demands on Japan.

However, thedmajoritty of then are frustrated; they are asking not that Japan accept
one number or another, but that Japan decide a little sooner shat, by when, and how.

CDPYRIGHT: Sankei Shuppm 1981

9896
C50: 4105/33

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

ASUKATA REELECTED AS JSP CHAIRMAN
0H271013 Tokyo ASMU. EVENING NW5 in English 25 Dec 81 p 5
[ASAHI SHIMBUN 21. December editorial: "Socialist Party Election"]

[Text] In its first chairmanship election open to all party neuters. the
Japan Socialist Party re-elected Ichio Asukata to his third term. Asukata won
an overwhelming victory that exceeded most expectations. One wonders if this
will lead to a JSP recovery.

Asukata's victory, in which he received nearly 70 percent of the votes cast by
the party's 60,000 registered members, was brought about by a coalition of
nearly all of the party's centrist groups, which form the nucleus of the party,
and its left-wing factions. These two groups together were able to give
Asukata a third term without the help of the anti-Asukata right-wing factions
of the party. So it seems that the .15? has decided to take a stand against
the trend toward the right which has been evident in the Liberal-Denocratic
Party for the last year or two.

It is only on grounds such as these that one can understand the radical state-
ments made by Asukata throughout the election campaign, which included calls
for the abrogation of the security treaty with the United States and dissolu-
tion of the self-defense forces. And the two other candidates. the party vice
chairman. Shoichi Shimodaira. and the chairman of the policy board, Sanji Huto,
who both belong to right-wing factions, asserted during the campaign that they
supported the JSP's policy of a unarmed and neutral Japan. It seem that the
shift to the right in the LDP has caused a shift to the left in the JSP.

B'ut it goes without saying that the advocacy of unarmed neutrality cannot. by
itself have much influence on the defense buildup that is now under way. In

the long-term, one wonders what alternative plans can be prepared to counter
the government's budgetary proposals for fiscal 1982. And what should be

the JSP's response to the government's policy of increasing the defense budget?
Because there was not enough discussion of concrete matters, the campaign for
the party chairmanship revolved around abstractions.

The severe criticism from outside the party concerning this should be noted by
the JSP's leadership and, above all, by Asukata. Confronting the party in power

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and slowing down its drift to the right is the duty of the leading opposition
party. But its responsibility goes beyond this. The party should also get
other opposition parties on its side with respect to both domestic and foreign
policy issues and, furthermore, it should propose alternative plans that the
government and party in power will have to discuss. The JSP should be aware
of its duties as an opposition party.

Nevertheless, the election of the party chairman by a vote of all the party
members is not insignificant. Hitherto, these elections have been closed-door
bargaining sessions between cliques, with at most a few hundred convention
delegates participating in the final voting. This was the first time that

the selection was made in accordance with the will of all the party members.
One can assume that Asukata really does have the backing of the party members
as a whole.

Nevertheless, the campaign speeches of the three candidates raised some questions
that are difficult to answer. Although each man developed his own arguments.

as chairman of the policy board and vice chairman, Huto and Shimodaira have

been dealing with Asukata on a daily basis, and it is hard to believe that

their opinions have been influenced by this. One wonders how Asukata has been
treating the differences within the party, which are represented by ﬂute and
Shimudaira who sit next to him. Along with a lack of grass—roots activities,

the lack of debate within the party in ordinary circumstances should be discussed.

Though he won the election overwhelmingly, Asukata should consider the reasons

for which Muto and Shimodaira ran. The serious doubts within the party concerning
Asukata's accomplishments in the last four years were expressed in the form of
these two men running for election. During these four years, factional rivalry
has subsided, but this is only a function of the general decrease of activity
within the party.

But Asukata has now attained the support of nearly 40,000 party members, and
having beaten his rivals so soundly, he is finally in a position to demonstrate
his leadership.

What will he try to do? And what kind of party structure will he create so that
his plans can he brought to fruition? How will he proceed with the idea of a
party that is open to the people? The time has come for these questions to

be answered.

COPYRIGHT: ASM‘II EVENING Ni'IHS I981

cso: «120/112

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500020060-9

FOR OFFICIAL liSI’. ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

LDP ' S DIPLOHACY PEUD

[Article by Raisuke Honda]

[Text]

The new Suzuki cabinet has begun to
tackle in earnest the tasit of ending trade
friction with the US and Western Euro-
pe but there is disturbing competition on
who will have the biggest say on foreign
policy.

Disputes over hegemony in this field
have erupted between the government
and the Liberai-Democratic Party iLDPi
and among leaders as well.

Before reshufiling his cabinet. Prime
Minister Suzuki made several pledges. He
said he would exert ail-out efforts to car-
ry out administrative reform and to pro-
mote a business recovery. tie promised also
to eliminate trade friction and therefore
would give importance to his selection of
foreign minister and international trade
and indusuy mlnlsier.

However. he apparently took into ac-
count primarily intraporty footionai bal-
ance in selecting Yoshio Sakurauehl as
foreign minister and Shintaro Abe as in-
ternational trade and industry minister.

The two posts are now occupied by the
"big names" of the party who once served
as party secretary-general and chairman
of the Policy Board respectively.

But It cannot be said with confidence
that they are fully competent in their
loin since neither of them served in these
posts before.

in this situation the premier. after con-
sulting with new seen-tary-Oenerui Su-
sumu Niitaido. has set up the Special
Council for International Economic Affairs
and has appointed Masumi Bantu of the
Tanaka faction :is chairman.

Suzuki has a rationale for his selection
of bail.

lie at first intended to appoint bald.
who is close to him. forehsn minister. Su-
zuki reluctantly had to replace Sunao So-

25

Tokyo Tiil’. DAILY YOMIURI in English 18 Dec 81 p 2

nods who had I:
eign minister in
aonoda was cios
would have beer
But the sltuatl
did not allow 3
foreign minister.
him chairman of
he could act a:
the party and c:
Although Nita
suki's appointme
premier'a views 0:
isters will assert
With the ceni
in its hands. th
intention of all
Nakasone factio
faction to asset
field of foreign
Therefore. the
hopes for the i
own faction Incl
Nikaido says
foreign policy c
to the Foreign
to the Interns"
Ministry (mm
party actively ts
tactlng US eon:
ans from other
leaders to solve
Each! is eager
he has been as!
coordinate views
It is only he
and Fukuda fa
and Abe are dis]
meals. in fact. :
the behavior of
halt: faction is
faction.
There is also
pn‘autze which
ummut the fact!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600020050-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFF“ 1M. USE ONLY

When he was chairman of the Execu-
tive Board. lesido showed 3 great in-
terest in loreixn policy ns it applied to
relations with the us end Western E'uro-
pe. His interest remains strong end he is
expected to visit the us next Jnnunry
nt the "request" 0! the foreign minister.

mu Is also in high spirits, saying he
will visit the us end Western Europe In
order to hear fresh opinions from those
countries. .

Rolrusuke Tannkn. new chnlrmnn oi the
Policy Baud end iormer lnternetionnl
trade and industry minister. is nlso eager
with the conﬁdence that he is the but

- . expert on the truie iriction issue.

In this situation. there is the concern
that the Japanese Government may be
thrown into disarray and find It dimcult

to unity its position In negotiating with
other countries.

' COPYRIGHT: TIIB DAILY YOHIURI 1981

C50: 6120/115

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLmICAL

STORM OVER LD'P VEEP CHOICE

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 11 Dec 81 p 2

[Article by Raieuke Honda]

[Text]

The ruling Liberal-Democretie Perty
MD?) in now embroiled in n power m:-
gle over who should till the long-recent
poet oi pert: vice-president. It It in rev“-
ed.

Prime lanteter Suzuki hlmeelf turned
themetterintoeniuue.lnenewerince
queetlon at e news conference ester the
cehinet reehudle on how he would deel
withtheveoentmtaeeeidhewonld
like to think ebout the problem untll the
perty convention echeduled for next Jen-
uery.

No one bed even brought up the matter
or ﬁlling the poet of vioe-preetdent when
the reehume prooeee wee in m

Under the drcumetenoee. reporter- u-
pectedthepremiertorepiy tlnthehed
no Intentlon to eelect n vteeopreeulent.

Suture eteteinent mede eome member-e
of the LDP beileve that the premier went-
ed to chooee e vioe-preeident who would
edvenoe hle own umpelcn to be reelected
perty preeldent in the electlon echednled
for next euturnn.

The late meeku Soto. who med u
premier tor e long time, need vice-pred-
dent Sholiro Kowoehimo oe e middlemen
in his poilticni deolinn

The Pukude [action welcomed the
premiere statement. ’

The Pukudn [notion oompleine etronliy
that the party has been "taken over" by
the Tonnke iectlou through the recent on-
him-t and LB? reshufﬂe.

Such importnnt poet: a eecretery-oe~
nemi. deputy eecrctery-nenerei. chairmen
or the Dlet Policy Boerd and director of
ihe Treasury Bureau are now held by the
Tunniru (notion.

in an eﬂort to curb the power or the
'rnnelie (action. the Putudn lectton wente
to rupture the post oi‘ vice-preeident (or

27

a member or lie I

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR ()l'l-N'IAI. USE ONLY

However. Bunk] rennin: cum in the
unall stem «used by his autumn. m
13 mum. with nu palm“! attitude

— that. can. will nettle on problems.

Suzuki, who u suppotted by 3 metal
balance or the Suzuki. Tomb ond mind:
factions, moat. certainly no“ to choose
a nun tor the no“ that will promote his
own pohuul unhmoxn

COPYRIGBT: THE DAILY YWIURI 1981

C80: 4120/115

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020060-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFFK 1“. USE ONLV

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

VOTING SYSTBt IS IN NEED OF CHANGE

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English 22 Dec 81 p 10

[Article by Yuji Koido]

[Text]

Individual voter's rights to elect parlia-
mentarians should be oi equal imptrtance in
post-World War II democratic Japan. When
thaw rights are lound to be unequal in prae

lice. the Diet is supposed to act to correct the '

ltlluallon. The tact is that even thotuh the
weights at votes have been tomd unequal.
the Diet has done nothing to correct the toe
qttalily. Consequently voters living In big
cities have long voiced dissatistacllon with
the gap.

According to a recent report by the Min-
istry of Home Affairs. constituents in Japan
totaled 82,340,760 as of September 2. lat. up
l.ot per cent or 83.034 over the previous
year. Chiba Preteclure recorded the biggest
increase — 77.586 voters or 2.43 per cell over
the previous year. The constituency with the
most voters per one Lower ltouse parliamen-
tarian ts No. 4 Dtstrtct ot Chiba Prelecture
trims voters for 3 Dietmen) and the small-
est. So. 5 District of Hyogo Prefecture
(".9th voters for :t Dietmenl. The gap be-
tween thine two electoral districts in lernts
ot the wetylt 0/ one vote isl toms. Abouti
votes at Chiba‘s N0. 4 District have thesame
weight as one vote oi liyogo's No. 5 District.
Such u gap was biggest in 1975 — 5.52 tints
to one. but since election districts and seals
increased in I976. it narrowed to 3.40 time
that your and then expanded to 3.50 tlmes in
I977. :i 34 times tn um. :tm times in 1979 and
«lm times in ltitln (‘hiba's No. 4 District is
the licdnmm suburbs at metropolitan Toltyo
and its ptiwlation is certain to increase in
lllt.‘ luturc. Thus. miss the number of elee
two seats is changed. there is no doubt that
the up to the gravnty of one vote will bees-
u-inttt-d in the coming years.

29

On the other hant
encies ot the How
gawa Preteclure ht
Dietitian. with total '
(for four Dietmenl
least voters. The 3:
vote between the it»
compared with 5.90 t

Asthe up in the 1
Pawns yearly, lee
validity ot elections
ﬁled in the courts t
lions were held in
there have been suit
taneous elections to:
last year. is cases 0
in the Supreme Cot
Osalta High Court.

In the past. vari-
down rullings on the
gap in speciﬁc Lou
example. the Supt!
that a up of motel
tional. the Tokyo iii
up of 3.5 times is
Sapporo District Cot
about 3 times is t
more. the'l‘oltyo iii:
the gap at more th.
donal. thereby indi
the clear demarcati
lionality or unconst-
gravity.

As mentioned eat
vote is supposed to
the Public Otlice Eli
the quorum at the i
”will be corrected
But the fact is that

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR "Fl-N ‘IAI. "SI". ONLY

dintrictundthe quorum is very hard tocorne
by become it Involves complicated comics
of interests ol various prtieo end mm:
Dietmon. The: to. am ooun rulings on
Us uncanuunknoﬂu of 0» gap heuuy
pointed out the negligence ol the legislative
branch in correcting the oitmtion

1he&rﬂn::duullDanomIUcPany::::
up vi a n to correct the quorum.
in: in mind the numherol voters and the bol-
Ioting ratios. but the plan has never material»

_ inn Opposition portia on mnimous in

principle over the need for the cor-
mction. but always say “No" w noted I!
they have my Ipeciﬂc mum to correct
the situation. The Ministry oi Home Affairs is
also mum to do anything about it. saying
“it should be done alter getting tenement
tram various penis." manly. the fact
isthotitisveryhord tocorrect thequorumin
Japan. Though theup in themvity of votes
islikclytopersistin theyeon tocolne. the
Dktshmndauiwuu'ackhthequuuMnci
eliminating the up

With Koido to a Nikon Krizoi deputy
nautical editor.)

COPYRIGHT: 1981. The Nihon Kcizat Shilbun. Inc.

CSO: 4120/115

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600020060-9

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

IMPACT OF LOCKHEED TRIAL

FDR ()l-l-K'MI. UNI". UNI."

Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY "Bits in English 27 Dec 81 p 2

[Article by Takuo Haynshl]

[Text]

It was in Jamry rm that
the trial involving the lockheed
payoff scandal. said to be the
largest political scandal in
postwar years. got underway at
the Tokyo District Court. The to
defendants including former
Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka
were divided into three groups
according to the routes through
which funds were funneled.
Hence the trial proceeded in a
tripod.

Verdicts have already been
handed down on two oi the
defendants in the socaiied
“Kodama route" in early
November this year. The
sentence imposed on Kenjt
Osano. a business magnate and
a bosom friend of ex-Prlme
Minister Tanalta. was an un-
expectedly severe one~year im-
prisonment without a stay of
execution. lie was found guilty
of perjury in his testimony
win-n he had been summoned to
the Diet as a witness.

or the remaining two routes.
judgment on the defendants in
the :o-caiied "All Nippon
Airways tANlii route" will he
handed down on two occasions.
first on Jan. 26 next year. and
then sometime In February or
Man-h. The last to come is the
judgment on the deterxtnnts
including ear-Prime Minister
Tamika in the so-ealled

“Itar'uheal Corporation route."
With regard to the Hawaii

route. the prosecution will
formally demand a sentence

.aronnd larch next year.

Speudation is riioantong in-
iormedootneeothuiﬁnhe
case of es-Prirne‘
Tanah."the

and December next year. A
prevailing
formed sources is that 'l'anala
wtiibefound guilty.

How will Japanese politics In
1982 be affected by the series of
judgments on the [new
payoff scandal cane citmaatu
in the judgment on Tanaka?
Forecasts of the domestic
political situation next year
may vary to whether
or not we believe that the forth-
coming judgments will have a
higtmpact.

Among the defendants in the
”ANA route" are an ex-
transport minister and ex-

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500020050-9

3200'] In 5'

man 2'! o :EBE’!‘

BD’U'J:

(- 9.! an
What vill he the political
implicationsinthatcaee?

An opinion has n that main»
will he (owed to realm {min his
post in the [ace of strong
criticism by the opposition
parties and public opinion as
well. Others say that “althouui
he may accept such criticism
brawl“ manage to stay ht nt-

With regard to the inaneiice
_on politics of a “titling {indium
‘l'anaka guilty." sotnespeculate
that there will be an extremely
serious Impact. while othen
believe there will not be that
much impact. The iormer
believe that “time anti-“ranch
inﬂuences centering on tamer
Prime Ministet ‘l'aheo Mada.
made in oi such aeetiom as the
Futuda taction. the Toahio
Konioto (action and the ichtm

COPYRIGHT: HAINICHI DAILY NEHS 1981
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

I'OR (IFFK'IAI. ILN'I-f ONLY

SUZUKI PRODS POLYMSKII 0N NORTHWN ISLES ISSUE

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in Engl-sh 7 Jan 82 p 1

[Text] Priae Minister Suzuki in a meeting Wednesday with Outgoing Soviet
Ambassador Dmitrii Polyanskii expressed "strong hopes" that the Japanese claim
to the Soviet-held islands off Hokkaido will be taken up in the forthcoming
Japanese-Soviet working-level talks January 20-21.

Susuki talked With Polyan-
skli. who is to be transfer~
red shortly from his Tokyo
post. at the premier‘s oin-
clal residence.

The Suzuki -Polyanskii
talks centered on two mn-
ior questions—the Polish
crisis and relations between
Japan and the Soviet Union
—-occordingto a government
spokesman.

This was the first time in
nearly four years that a
Japanese premier had a pri-
vate talk with the Soviet
ambassador since the meet-
ing on February 22 between
then primc minister Takeo
Fukudn and Polyanaklt.

During the 50-minute talk.
Suauiu reiterated Japan‘s
basic stand on the territori-
al issue between the two
countries. demanding that
bilateral nemtiationa be re-
sumed on the basis of the
1m Joint communique fol-
lowing the summit‘ between
the-n Jnmneae premier Kn-
kuei Tanaka and President
Leonid Brezhnev.

The ma communique
confirmed that there exist-
ed "problems unsettled yet"
between Japan and the So-
viet Union. which the Japa-
nose Oovemment interpret:
as including the Japanese

territorial claim to the la-
iands of! Hokkaido.

Premier Suzuki also said
the territorial issue should
be placed on the agenda tor
the coming January 20-21
Japanese — Soviet working -
level talks in Moscow.

Manchu. however. ex.
pressed objections to bring-
ing up the territorial issue
tor discussion in the work-
ing-level talks. ssyins no
preconditions should be at-
tached to resumption of the
Japanese-Soviet dialog.

'lhe Soviet ambassador
tdd Salon that the Soviet
Union has "already clarin-
ed" its position on the
northern island issue. thus
indicating that the Moscow
uovernment still insists
there is no territorial imue
between the two countries.

The Japanese premierand
Polyanslii. however. shared
hopes that the working-lev-
el talks will pave the way
for a meeting between Jan-
anese and Soviet foreign
nunisters in the near future.
thed government spokesman
sal .

Alter the Suzuki-Polyun-
skii talks. a high-ranking
Foreign innistry omcial said
the premiere remarits on
Japan’s "sharing oi views"

COPYRIGHT: THE DAILY YOHIURI 1981

(ISO: 6120/115

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with other Western demo-
cracies should be separated
from the issue of whether
to impose economic sanc-
tions on the Soviet Union
over the Polish problem.

Soviet Ties ﬁrst

Prior to his taihs with
Polyanskii. Sunni indicated
at a press conference that
the Japanese Government
was giving precedence to is-
sues pending between Japan
and the Soviet Union over
the US call tor solidarity of
the Western camp as regards
the Poland crisis.

The premier's remarks
were interpreted as august-
inc that the Japanese Gov-
ernment attaches greater
importance to improvement
of Japanese-Soviet relations
than to concerted action by
Western democracies in pos-
sible anti-Soviet sanctions
over the Poland problem.

During the press confer-
ence Suzuki said: “The
situation in Poland is ﬂuid.
Watching moves by the US
and the West arropean
countries, we will think
about what we should do
what we should not do.'i'he
bilateral problems (between
Japan and the Soviet Un-
ion) are more important."
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

POLITICS OF 'HARMONY'
Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEHS In English 10 Jan 82 p 2

[Text] Rough sailing is anticipated lor the nation’s 1982
political calendar and we doubt whether Prime
Minister Zenko Suzuki can ride through what may be
a turbulent year with his political slogan “Politics of
Harmony."

The advantage of “harmony” lies in settling
things by majority consent. avoiding trouble and
meeting each other halt way throw: dialogue. There
is nothing wrong about the idea itseli. but the
essential thing is the method used in seeking it.

Looking over the past one year and a halt ot the
Suzuki administration. we are under the impression
that the “politics of harmony" advocated by the
prime minister has more often than not tended to be
that of convenient reconciliation. His posture has
lacked consistency. At times he has chimed “in
harmony” with pressure groups. While pretending to
give consideration to “harmony" with public opinion.
he has done the opposite. What the prime minister

' means by “harmony” is not a firmly established ideal
[or political management. but a mere technique to
settle things without causing trouble.

A recent case in point was his handling 0! defense
spending in the liscal 1982 budget draft. At first he
poeedasthoughbewerenotawiiiingtoincreaaethe
detense budget, but In the tinal phase he harmonized
with therequest ottbe United Statesand thepresaure

oi “deiense-minded" members at the Liberal-
Democratic Party. Thus he went back on the wiahu-
ot the majority oi the nation. The same thing can be
said oi the way be promoted administrative and tiscal
reiorm. He covered the great gap between rousing
publicity and its end results with a cloak ol “har-

mony" designed to please everybody.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500020050-9
(YOI‘YR ICIIT :

C80:

4120/! IS

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

 

The prime minister picked Susumu' Nikaido. a
highly dubious ilgure involved in the Lockheed payoii
scandal. as LDP secretary general. This was another
case in which he harmonized with the political power
oi the mighty LDP iaction led by ex-Prime Minister
Kakuei Tanake while totally ignoring public
criticism. Many other problems. deiense, ado
ministrative reiorm. trade iriction and the Tanaka
ssue. were carried over to the new year.

A year loaded with heavy tasks begins ior Prime
Minister Suzuki whose posture has become highly
ambiguous. With a noncommitant prime minister in
charge. the nation greets a year iull of political un-
certainty. li the prime minister is not qualiiisd. we
should replace him with someone who is. There is a
good chance ior a change with the presidential
election of the LDP scheduled ior this year.

Our anxiety. on the other hand. is not necessarily
concerned with the leadership oi the prime minister
alone. We iear that the negative aspect oi “harmony"
might have permeated the political world as a whole.

The Liberal-Democratic Party is known as a
conglomerate made up oi many political iactions.
One advantage of this party is its capacity to embrace
many iactions and maintain a balance with politics.
but the LDP nowadays seems to have lost its energy
demonstrated by .iaction-ridden political behavior.
The leading Tanaka iaction has taken over the
hegemony oi the party while other iactions have
become weak-need. Since court verdicts are ex-
pected to be handed down to ex-Prime ulnister
Tanaka and others this iall, the need ior “harmony"
has been emphasized within the party and all
members seem to have bowed to that call. This is
degrading oi the LDP.

The opposition parties. too. have soitpedaled
their posture instead oi conironting the LI)? and the
government. The sense oi tension that once prevailed
between the opposition parties and the government

has eased oii to a great extent. and opposition policies
have tended to take on a conservative nature. We
cannot call it party politics without an anti-LDP spirit
on the part oi the opposition.

it is regrettable to note that little is'being done by
the opposition ior the promotion oi political morals.
We know that not all opposition parties are pure and
lily-white. but at least they could raise hell about the
Tanaka issue. Should they hesitate on this score. they
are bound to lose their raison d'etre as opposition
parties.

We demand that the dried-up slogan oi “Politics
oi Harmony" be discarded once and ior all.

Mninichi Daily News, 1981

35
FOR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

JAPAN 1'0 DEFEND ITSELF, SUZUKI SAYS

Tokyo ‘i‘liF. DAILY YOHIURI in English 1 Jan 82 p 1

[Text] Prime Minister Suzuki said Japan has to possess minimum self-defense
capability and not rely on others for its defense under an ever-changing. severe

international e ituat ion .

Busuu told it New Yeer
press conference the Jeps-
neee people should heve
spirit to protect the pence
oi their own country by
themselves.

Jepen will stick to its
purely defensive policy end
will not possess e militery
cepeblilty posing e threet
to other countrlee. the prime
ﬂnlster seid.

Jepen will elso meintein
its nonnucleer principles 0
not producing. not posses-
sing end not introducing
nucleer nuns. he edded.

The prime minister eeid
1m might be en eventful
end tumultuous yeer, not-
lng the continued miiltery
stalemate in Afghenlsten.
the strained Polish crisis
end meior problems in the
mdeest

loonomicully. meny coun-
tries heve run into diﬂcul-
ties. such es infletion. high
unemployment end belence
of peylnent deficits. he seld.

internetionel expectetions
ere emerging for Jepen to

ey e role cornmensurete
with its netionel strength.
Sunni seld

trade Disputes

Jepen would eccelerele

the tempo oi nomic re-

covery domes end

men utmost efforts to solve

treds disputes with foreign
countries.

13c prime minister seid
he use sure Jepen could
ecliievs e 63 percentsan
nomle growth for need 1m
(Apriillm-uerch use) in
reel . es projected by
t‘b - mt“...- e’M—O

The government will teke
ective monetery end linen-
ciei salon to reelim the
tergst, he edded.

Jepen. whose gro- ne-
tlonel product (GNP) ec-
eounts tor 10 percent oi the
globel'totel. is being criti-
cised tor telling to mehe
suflldent defense eﬂorts. he

ted out. not insteed.

‘government hes pro-
poad e greeter economic
ssslstence to developing
countries to contribute to
the stebiiity end pence of
the world. he edded.

Jepen's fiscei ms notion-
el budget cells for spending
Home billion (shoot
me union). up 6.2 per-
cent tram dscei m1.

or the totei. defense
spending is put et H.964
billion (ebout $11.15 billion).
up 7.75 percent. end omelel
development sseistence
(ODA) et mm billion
(shout 82 billion). up 1“
percent.

On trede problems, 8min
seid trede imbelences could
not be solved only by is-

pen.

rorelgn countries should
streemline production, im-
prove productivity end de-

COPYRIGHT: THE DAILY YOHIURI 1981

C80: 6120/11.“)

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

veiop low-priced products of
fine queiity to meet lepe-
nose demend. he seld.

The government will
meke eﬂorte to help pro-
mote oversees investment.
set up Joint ventures ehroed
end iointly develop ed-
venced technology with for-
eign countries in order to
expend trede in e beienced
term. he eeid.

Japan-US ‘I’ies

Referring “L upon-US
reletions. aim seid the
two countries hevs teken
close coutscts to deepen
mutuel W‘

At present. there ere
plens for 08 President Ree-
gen to , Jepen. the
prime km...

On reletions with the 80-
viet Union. Busuki eeld the
two countries ere -
uled to hold us high-level
meeting in Moscow on
Jenner)! 20-21 to exdsenso
views on internetlonel
eituetions end metters of
common concern.

To build up the besis ior
reel friendly neletlons be-
tween Tokyo end Moscow. s
ispen-doviet pence tresty is
mind to be concluded. he
But :epen will insist on
teking up pending issues
like the Soviet-occupied
Jspsnese territories in the
northern Peeihc. Busnhi
edited.
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

GOVERNMENT DEFENSE PLANS:

FOR ()FFK'IAI. USE ONLY

ALEAPINTHEDARK

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 30 Dec 81 p 1

[Text]

However. there has been
u “mm“ o pinion m "mm examine what strategies
COPYRIGHT: THE DAILY YOHIURI 1981
(:50: “20/115
37

The government budget
plan for ﬁscal 1932. which
was ﬁnalised uonday. is
unpopular partly because
the government. increased
defense spending by 7.75
percent. without examining
ways to strengthen national
defense forces eifectively.

The government Is also
under fire for across-the-
board reduction in almost
all other sectors except
housing.

Appropriations for hous-
lug starts were substantial-
ly Increased. but it is doubt-
iul if as many as 1.3 million
houses. as hoped by the
cavernment. will be built
during ﬁscal 1m because
houses have become too
costly while the average
worker's lnoome has not
substantiallly increased.

The sharp increase In
defenSe appropriations was
apparently the result of ex-
cessive consideration of the
us demand {or greater de-
fense spending.

Moreover. the government
rolled to basically reexamine
the role of the ground,
maritime and air selfode-
tense forces in authorising
the uniform defense spend-
ing increase.

Admittedly. Japan is
bound to steadily increase
its (It'fctixc cambilily undvr
llio Jupun-US security set-
tm. and this Is confirmed
by the current government
uutliuc (or delcmae force
build-up protmsms.

which seeks to carry out.
Japan's own "comprehen-

'slve" defense policy.

It calls for promoting the
country's diplomatic policy
and those for energy con-
servation and economic aid.
without relying only on de-
fense iorcea in trying to

defend the min.

A limited increase in de-
fense spending was ' of
course unavoidabls_ln view
or the strengthening of In
capability
in the past decade. which
was accompanied by a cor-
responding weakening of
the (18 position in interna-

pan's economic

tional politics.

Japan had apparently
evaded its responsibility -in
terms of defense s_p_ending.
haujﬁ-possiully and hair
unconsciously. buth be-

came no longer

Then came Us demands for.
a substantial increase in
Japan‘s defense appropria-

tions.

The pressure from the us
was particularly strong as
there was no prospect for
decreasing the hues 08 de-
flelts in Its trade with this

country.

Under the circumstances,
leaders or the government
and the ruling Liberal-
Dcmocrstic Party concent-
rated on increasing the de-

tense btidnt.

They in fact neglected to
work out a policy which

would grade the nation's de-
fense plan and also to re-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan should follow to build
up the defense forces.

This was reﬂected in an
equal increase in the ap-
propriations to the three
torcee. by which an increase
in efﬁciency in the defense
capability is hardly expect-
ed to result.

The government is ex-
pected to face tough ques-
tioning in the Diet. to be
resumed next January, be-
cause the random appro-
priation were tantamount
to wasting taxpayers’ mo-
ney. ‘

It has been argued that
the defense budget is not
a "holy precinct” that lies
outside the current attempts
at administrative reform
and fiscal rehabilitation.

The government's budget
plan was also marked by
across-the-board reductions
in spending which were a?-
parentiy made in line with
Prime ulnister Suzuki's ap-
peal that the nation should
equally share the cost aris-
ing from efforts to realise
a small government.

This was emotive in ape
peasing ntmerous proilt
organiutions. but the gov-
emment's original plan to
carry out a “priority princi.
pie" in compiling the 1982
budget plan was totally
ignored.

In the eyes of many tax-
payers. the budget plan
appears to he a negative
one in which the govern-
ment has again failed to
eliminate wasteful spending
and irrationality.
MILITARY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MASSIVE DEFENSE BUILDU? PLANNED

Tokyo m ohm 10mm in English 31 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] The Defense Agency has drawn u
defense forces to be effected in fiscal 1983,
trillion--over one percent of the projecte
it was learned Wednesday.

Called e um mid-term
estimate." the pun I: based
on defense force buildup
pronouns planned by the
ground. maritime and air
stuff offices.

Under the draft plan. the
Maritime Self-Defense Force
(MBDP) would procure an
additional 49 P60 sntisub—
marlne reoonnaisance
planes, 18 destroyers and
seven submarines, while the
Air Self-Defense Poroe
iASDl-‘l it seem: as more
F15 axle let infereeptors.

Beﬂdes no trillion need-
ed to procure these main-
xtay wcawns the defense
torcee “mid need an addi-
tionol ‘lifis trillion in years
after fiscal 1933 to pay for
arm: which will have been
ordered before 1983.

If the root of food and
pay for defence force per-
sonnel is Included. the ‘l‘lo
trillion estimate will have to
be doubled to 1m trillion,

. Informed sources said.

Such 3 large outlay would
be an enormous burden on

' the government, which.

plagued by Increasing de-
ficlu. has pledged to try to
rehabilitate its ﬁnances. me
sources said. ..
bet-ill ol the 1988 mid-

lncreue its numbe

. from the present moo to

l.500 and to substantially
Increase the mobility and
firepower of troops station-
ed in Hokkaido. If this plan
I: realized. three of the
four divisions stationed in
Japan's northernmmt Island
will be provided with a‘euf-
iident number of ermored
truck; There I! no need to
providing such vehicles to
the fourth divider: because
it is on armored division
comprising mainly tents.
0 The procurement of the
0 P30 antilubmarine re-
eonnaluance plane: would

COMIC“: THE DAILY YMURI 1981

080: Io120/115

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

p a plan for a n
which two
d gross no

aosive buildup of the
old cost more than Y10
tionel product for 1983,

squadrons with the N P303
and to repbce 935’ which
would my in twice 1“ 9*
next live-yearlglen. The in-

crease 0‘
would 3“...»mequ
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

'ASMII' EDITOR 0N DEFENSE BUDGET INCREASE
Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEWS in English 30 Dec 81 p 3
[Text]

”the delense budget should The report exempted do-

be increawd to a certain ex-
tent. But we must not let it
appear that the increase was
made under pressure from the
United States. In the long run.
it will work against our rela-
tions with that country.” This
is what former Foreign Min-
ister Toshio Klmura said some
time ago. ,

Delense apprtymt‘ ions were
increased 7. 5 percent in
the fiscal l 82 national -
et, which was lormally -
opted earlier this week. The
rate of increase-was cogpicum
out n compartaon wi
severe retrenchment imposed
on social welfare. education
and other items of expendi-
ture.

The proponents of a sub-
stantial defense buildup within
the Government and the rul-
ing Liberal-Democratic Party
used ”America wishes" as an
excuse to seam ample ap-
propriations. any poo e are
unha . wondenng w y the
Unit States should meddle
in the compilation ol another
country's budget. As Kimura
says. this will certainly have
an adverse ellect on Japan-
U.S. relations. _

ltissaletosaythatthe
policy guiding the compilation
of the ﬂecal l982 national
budget was set by the Extra-
ordinary Administrative Re-
search Council‘s lirst report.
which was presented on July
10. The report called for
spending cuts in welfare and
education. which. it said.
“could not be helped.”

tense and external eeonomsc
aid from the retrenchment it
recommended. With the ex-
emption. the delense buildup
roponents cleared the lira
le. It was Prime Minister
Zenko Suzuki who helped
them clear the hurdle. -
When the council. the Gov-
ernment's advisory body on
administrative reform. was in-
taming general idea
use liecal 1982 budg-
The Obndget will
tax increase; (2)
it necessary not to
increase. in '
(3)
ions lordefense
economic
increased. '
Suzuki has never empha-
sised the "Soviet hreal" as his
own belief. When he talks of
the need to bolster deteaes
power and international
so reason he ones is invert;
0 promote coopera
with the other Free.- World
countries.” in sin honey.
3: reasottﬂdisw t the gumnited
tee a estern
make a {use He came under
strong criticism in Washing-
ton when he held the groanh
of fiscal 1981 delense spend-
ing to 7.6! t. l-le ap-
parently reeoved not to have
the same ea ience min.

i
a
E

gregzti
E35 I" e

3%

gr.
i

&

greater defense elloru when
he visited the United States in
May tor talks with President
Ronald Reagan. During the

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020050-9

327323 2! 3E 5'9 I 532 EEH'E'VQ! ! I

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[ILITARY

SECURITY 0P SEA-WES NEEDED FOR SURVIVAL OF JAPAN

Safe Sea-Lanes Vital
Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 16 Dec 81 p 5

"Safe Sea-Lanes Vital for Japan's Survival"]

immune tampon

who of I W Wind by
.M‘ , some alum an ac mun he s antler oi utmost,
gnthwmmm°ziﬂorLaﬂu pendent ihm onion upon Invariance tor nation-i
.. gazi‘nimMIJJaﬂlyx mum gnd m“-
:3" MI- ”lull in inimoiiomil m' “M the “If“! of Supply Rah
Order in on mu- m in It! on llnu of “PP”- W m mm at that: volume
Tuliyo. The pom wu mini had In “Ch :8 "19
“Shirk"!!! ﬁlnmﬂ CM “‘2 mad W m ’W w d” “I W 0‘ I“ N].
swurily u! 2‘uppllcm'—FAIIIDI’. ‘m I 1 m” w _m. in ".18 em 01 nations.
1‘ ‘ dun-«Noemi! “I“WMWW'W“
Muiume moon I- the W h ' sumac commodity in In-
me-iine of mummonal 900* “Pg; “m “P mu moo. mm-
M. mum n. indusirlu 9°“ ‘°' “W “W” more, more than half me
would stop to! lack oi incl um um donble when» on mm in the
nu! nu mun-m. e W o! on Island union "gm (8” of L5” million
would come to 3 MR. 990' ant could I“. m mm in 1”) cum“, from
pie would sum to: lock 0: Motion, aid aluminum m. m Gui: (”who
food and W! M W m PM” ”‘7 an” ”3 cmn‘, “mm“-
0! modem civmﬂmm‘d WWO MM or ﬁll gm), m a” mm on
cmmble. upon aver-m bun-wt mm a mm, mm-
nondopend— aw: in mm Wat out upon ., mu
me: upon the tree ﬂo‘ oi noon mm am ”our. to: upon“ ma. opule-
moriume amnion in 900- w inn-Wt M t Gunny. upon tho «Liam
ubio only to: muons big country lib Non-n! and m an mica. In vicw
enough md varied cm “Ii up“ in mm mm:- at iii. in: oi panned su-
eo have :11 required ro- thin to cm oi dil- bum in tho mu sud tho
warm god on necessary mm 01 mm undo. mum met at wand
market: within their own m ii to beam upon Ind turmoil. the security 0!
border. "i, even m. Soviet. MO unloved “I Indium! mum moon. m
Union ch is in u mm economy in spin 0! me the Persian Oulibubeeoine
more u complete continent country's bonsai-ms or o mitt: oi vim concern
ihnn a notion ml which 8001' 01 the man import-M hptn more nun any
has ”1 “and” of m. mum! mounts (minding. can: country «momma.
mm "W oi oli kinds. 1-6“ (50an W. this single-source and sin-
cannoi teed in own people cannon-d ma conunuoun sie-touie dependence upon

without. buying million: of

mm“!

from mm or at

ions or gain mm overseas 5“,,” M “m is m sop-n took 70
Docru 0! Dependence :3: m, E “Wm-"5'3 ”:33?!“ ‘” u m“;
mdepuiowbioh in- c out. oimmmionwnlot

dividiwi muons depend
upon (inﬂame W“
to: in «chaotic develop.

of “pan and. indeed. tor
in vet, cad-tone: 0! its in-
dustriu economy. To this

than
meal. in not wily wind. mam. “mum“ °' may. upon iI in . -
“on 0‘ W «pen “a
41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
upon the Cult region for
most at its supplies of all
end upon the Persian Ouli-
mdlsn Ocesn-aoutheestllsis
WWo-rouie tor trens-
porteticn 0: its supplies.
This leeves the count?! ex-
posed to the risk or supply
sinrteses thst they occur
either es s result or produc-
tion eutdowns in the Cult
region or hecsuse at disrup-
tion or the trensport route.

it must be pointed out
in W crisis in or
eround the Middle lest. the
see line irom the Cult will
be extremely vulnershle and
eeelly blocked tor shorter or
longer periods. Oil shin-
ntents from the Cult must

list“!
point" In the world's sinelc

most irnpcrtsnt energy lite-
llne. Here, panels nisy be
disrupted by ieirly simple
menus. either in conse-
quence oi milltery setlon or
as e result oi determined
guerills or terrorist action
to block the sound. for In.-
stence by slnhint ships In
the peseese. msruptlon oi
treiilc of course W occur
turther out. in the Indian
Oceen in the event or en!
crisis in which the meior
powers involved.
The generei stretegie im-
portsnce oi the melon is

most clesriy demonstrsted
by the concentretlon or
miiltsry power in end
ercund the Indlen Oceen.
For non-Soviet block coun-
tries the sppeerence end
continuous presence or the
Soviet Nsvy in the Indisn
Oceen must be e nutter oi
grsve concern.

For Jepen. soviet n'evoi
presence with en evenge
of to ships in the south
chlnn see end eir end
nevsi tscllities in Vietnam.
present en additionsi threet
epsinst e vitel end highly
vulnereble route tor its sup-
. The speciﬁc Impor-

mo no Jepsnese resistry
ships. 190 ct i-isern tenlers.
pessed through the strait.

FOR ()I-‘Flﬂltl. USE ONLY

European Positron
With more then to per-
cent oi tote! inter-ores see-
borne oil trsde coming from
the Perslsn oult. en! major
reduction in shipments from
that region would ceuse e
lenersi internetionsl oil
crisis. No country would he
more serioust hurt then
JOpen. who my lose up to
three-fourths oi current
supplies. Ramps too is high-
ly dependent upon oil trcrn
the Middle asst end would
suiier bediy iron! 3 cut—on

or supplies (mm the Persien
Ouii. Nevertheless. Mpe
prob-bu would be in e bet-
ter position to cope with
the sltuhtion.

Moreover. Europeen coun-
tries eppeer to be meklnu
s more determined eﬂort
then Jspsn to iurther
spreed the risk by increes-
ing supplies irons other
sources. The met neturel
as deel hetween West Ger-
men, lend Hence) end the
soviet Union should silo be
seen es en extort et chem
diversiiicstion.

Mill}. in contrest to
“Pen. Europe hes the ed-
ventepe of laying teirly
ism odel reserves within
its our borders. ‘rhns cosl
may be developed to turther
reduce dependence upon oli
deliveries from the critics!
Pemn Gulf sren.

Diverslncetion or supplies
serves to evold cverdepen-
dence upon eny one source
or supply end upon my one
tampon route. Mpe hes
en edventece over Jepen in
this respect by hlving u-
cess to my sources oi
”will ”In men! direc-
tions. Jepen hes the double
disadventese oi scsrce re-
sources oi its on end en
island position with ssillns
distenccs thet here ievored
concentretion on the per.
lion Cult.

For en outside observer
it would seem thet Jepen
could nin much from de.
velcpnnent ot petroleum rc-
sourcss in other regions
then the uses which now
domlnsts its supply of on.

42

Arctic Development

One possibility for tuture
energies supply tor Jepen
lies In the arctic. where ex-
plorstion tor hydrceerhons
has proven to he one of the
most exciting developments
in the energy ﬁeld in re-
cent yeers. northern re-
sources open new vistes for
energy supply in the north-
ern hemisphere. but they
elso present new ehsllenccs
tor technologicel develop-
ment. pertlculsrly in recent
to ouhore operetions in

ice-covered wetsrs end
trsnspoftltion over Ions
distences under extreme

elllneiic conditions.

80 fer, the meta develop-
ment has been in the soviet
West sltvrien Besin end in
the Alan horth Slope.

some other uses. noiehiy
the Beeutort onshore rc-
sion end the Yehutsh could

miaht enviseced.
s possibility
perticipetion
ment end itnencins to he
peld with future deliveries.
Jspenesc compenles — the

mode end u‘the question
of security of supply hes

been given edeqnste con-
siderstion in these meteors.

New Challenge

Arctic resomces my oﬂer
new opportunities end to
some extent ml! MIMI”
dependence upon supplies
thet ere concentrsted in
one use end here to be

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the governmente concerned
with a rather unique chal-
lenge. The manner in which
this challenge is met over
the next decade or two
many be decisive ior a long-
term devel ment in inter-
national shppine that will
have consequences tar be-
yond the transpOrtatiOn or
Arctic resources.

clearly. there is now a
need to meet the challenu.
Demand tor maritime treat-
port is mounting also in
the non-Soviet hall or the
Arctic. Clearly also, there
would seem to he a need
for a coordinated eaort be-
tween shipping interests
and eovernsnente to lor-

FOR (ll-"FINAL USE ONLY

muiete and pursue a deter-
mind policy to meet that
demand

The immediate require-
ment. is too- coastal ship-
pin: in ‘Canadian and Us
northern waters. but the
need for trans-Arctic mari-
time transport should also
be considered Unless steps
are tabeds’ to develop an
adequate Arctic shipping
capability the soviet Union
may soon he in a position
to establish an actual
monopoly on direct ship-
ment between the North
Paciﬁc and

Safety of See-Lanes

Tokyo Till: DAILY YOliIURI in English 18 Dec 81 p 5

[Article by Yoshiya Ariyoshi:

[Text]

The [allowing to an Ihﬂdiﬂﬂ
wrulnn «t s l-wu‘r prmntni
n5 Yon-hiya Artyoahl. hear-d
muneelnr or Niponn Vueen Kai-
rhn, It a recent International
symposium on “security. Peace
mun rim-rival: lieu Asia and in-
ternational Order in the lithe"
held In Tokyo. The paper was
titled "SNIIHU oi Hen-lanes and
survival or Japan.“-l~tdltor.

t t t

Japan is a small island
country with a total land
area or “3.000 square milee
Japan has no natural re-
sources to rely upon. Japan
has to import from abroad.
100 percent or bauxite.
nickel ore. phosphate rock
end animal reed. 09 percent
of petroleum end iron ore
end 00 percent oi grain,
except rice.

The largest energy source.
oil. is imported annually
in the order of 33,000,000
tons. out oi which so per-
cent is from the Persian
Ouit countries. and the dis-
tnnce from their represen-
tative port of Res Tenure.
Saudi Arebia. to Japan is
0,300 miles. And 12 percent
ls imported from Indonesia.
the average distance being
2320 miles.

"Safety of Sea-Lanes Needed for Survival"]

World Peace

Because of Japan's geo-
graphical position. the dis-
tances over which an the
vital ties ale 'haui-
ed are r then those
for most other indutrialis-
ed countries.

As or lﬂi, there are 8.-
888 vessels dying the Japa-
nees ileg. totalling 80.010,-
000 gro- tons. and about
the same number of foreign
ships amounting to 30,017,-
one gross tons are under
charter for account or the
Japanese shipping com-
panies. and these carry
about to percent oi Japan's
total imports and 85 per-
cent of its caporta

It is obvious that the
survival 0! Japan is entire-
ly dependent upon the
security and the safety or
those see-lanes.

The main reason for Ja-
pan's rapid economic
growth in the past decades
could be attributed to the
fact that the world was in
peace in the ﬁrst place,
and Japan's advent in the
world market as traders

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coincided with the time
whentheprineipieor

iresdomotthetrads-was
prevailinsworidwide.

The Japanese economy
hasbesnoettineproepelous
undertheseemsditionaand
as asworidpsaeeis
maintainedandths prin-
cipleorrreetradeisbpt
emotivelapan'seeohom

is destined to continue on
its prosperity course.
However. conversely i1
and when world peace is
disturbed even partly. those
who suifer most severely
would he the Japanese.
Hence it is imperative for
Japan that world peace
should be maintained at all
costs and Japan should
exert every eﬂort within its
power (or the sane of world

peace.
F res Trade

Iron when the world in
general is in peace, ii the
principle or the freedom or
the trade is broken. then
again those who suiier the
most damage would be the

Japanese.
FUR ()l-"flt'IAl. “SF. ONLY

However. though lt may tn Europe, end the BeCu- tn eptte ot theee eﬂorte.
iOlmd lronlelll. this pﬂn- rlty not between the 08 ll: world peace to mull
:lple ls endangered be- end upon In the For But. even portly, Jepen'e detenee
canoe of the Jenaneee be- 0°ng thet u, u pun should he clearly do-
hevior In world “Now“- vtttl tor upon to melanin need end orientated no

The lnduetrlel ”Null” “5 long exunagd ”names, thlt the 9mm of Ill

ln the Weet ere eonpelled 4.11.; n elven the tore-
to award the We‘ll” 0"“ lt I: not ”mm for most prtorlty ebove ell else.
0! tree trede become 01 the how to protect than ‘1! The report u glmplc

soclel tlpheevele wlthln lte own no“?- W W enough. sun It the melo-
thelr domnlne owned by ooncltnlon 13 "I“ “W lend of up.“ u mace u-

lncmstne unemployment w ‘0 9mm” “W “W“ pen would vlther lt lts'm-
The root come at the re. the heeletenee ot the mem- tenet n, a“ “a, W“!-

cesslon whlch canoe un- here of the mutter! em- 1;; pom worn Wu 1 ma
employment le traeeeble to once. World We: II. the side

the series of otl prtoe hike: Whenever retreated by much mugged to math
eﬂected by the OPEC ooun- the member: of thle el- u. ”may llnee ‘m‘

trlee elnce W3. hence. upon to corn- _ .

Input to the only coun- ply a belt lt con. to lt Meme Pointy
try which could nether la the duty or e member It to therefore eerneetly
succeeslulv the “Motion ot the nuance. honed that the plenum ot
counted by the on emu. 11., Mango. o! m. the defense or Jepen would

”‘4 W “‘3‘ thet "9‘“ Jopmeee tee-lute: u not not “90“ the clam“ 81““-
oehleved thle by concenta only dependent upon the um um the nut pnortty
nuns on "-8 919°" 930"- Western mm but eleo on 0! defense to the melnterl-
mm Jew“ e ”W“ ’0' the sood'lll ot the netlone once at the sea-lone: thou
eponslble for ell the predl- whlch belong to m. up. everything.
03'9“" 0' ww‘m °°‘““ gory ot the Thlrd World. At the next "emertency"
trles. Mtotheeldprotﬂm ”expectedtoheeeevere
”P” ”mm“ that It tor the dovetantnc muons wer °‘ ettrltlon. "“7 °"
to h tapeeoot. that the 90- “pm otter: mm, a; tort would be exerted in

celled trede trtctloh lo not .. “m P“ we peeeetune to thereon the
the only reason (of un- q ' number 0! met-chem ehlpe
employment. end thet Jo- 1‘ 1' “WW“ ‘3‘ under repellent control.

on ls lelthmly tollottne "mm" ‘0 ° ' ‘ mm t t or vlev.

the pﬂnclple oi tree trade. turn u the “M” no- the current Interest re

to
work-lax held. producln: elol ”m" p‘“ " 3"“ m‘ wbddy ot the 3mm
hlgh quellty good! end 90m“ on mtetulneee. Government to o very em—
merketln: m M- reeeon. however. es vlll elent my encounoe
able once: which eppeu ol ell thoee 900919 D 9" ehlpovnere to hulld more
to the eon-amen. eentlnl ln melatohdnx our ,3“, 9, hi!!! nullity.
however, we hm to re- see-lanes. Jenna ovum to 11m system It more coeto
com the not met three be more otneroue end ”13- eﬂectlve counted vlth a.
the unemployment plow pothetle '-° “‘9“ ﬂ" 0‘ reet enbeldlee tor construc-
of the muons of the West thlnklne. uon end operetlon In none
ls rehclllntt to such a To reoepltnlete. Jenn. countm In future thte

munltude u to endenser recounlxtng Ito heevy de- eyetem should be aretully
thelr whole eoclety. Seven peltdenee, for no eurvlvel. etndled from the «(em
should cooperate to thelr on ween to over-ecu re« eagle tether than from the

hardshlp. . Overt every eﬂort to none or aerate eecnrlty
Military Aurora“ mm '0th of the country.

As long as the eltue on 0 Contribute to enee

ot the world todly to n It .30“. o, m m; m $1M“ Wm
Ls. no one country l8 601" 0 Underwood the acetone "

edememente such a cold-
eble ot detendlnc lte ln- eltuetlone the that I". end

ed ”It“. 0‘ M
dependence by lto mutter! (“mg mwogtumm medium reason. the men of

an problem

power alone. mu such fnent ”a rote m the metntotnlnc on ebeohlte

3:11.23 533mm: “e; t2: “mg, m cm mu mu, lumen-B! over no end ctr
use p

o v: nd 0! the In constitu-
The countrtee lo the West frww°£§ﬂ§3m than. the Self-Delano not

protect themselvee by the Ir mentellt eh! ere not moved to
mllllary elllerlcce of "MO 32‘3“”.‘3: «new u’; 1.2me over the ”I:
emu: out old. to protect the Jepeneee
met-cheat W. ‘

A4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The only practice! method

conceivable for the protec-

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lion oi the merchant oommunleetion “a" be cent wut treeuoutiy on
marine is the eeliodeienee M.Wnu_ u to onnbio ell oi them
system of on advanced beroiahipeoreoouipped tobepreparedioronocru
W'- with the telecomiim °‘ “W
With today's advotIced apparent: by which w This chipping intelligence
technology in electronice. it co “a, mu center should coordinate
would notbetoodiaicuit omnhpouibievietbe' cloeelytogethei'witbthe
to innovate I light weight. “mm" from oil cot- center-I oi the m hetero
tooi~prooi ond inexpensive m" of the 31090 oi we 03 end the moo
sell-defense system. This appontulnhwld be' countries no no to m
The system envisaged installed on m the 1-9” maximum utety end
ahouldz— neee my. u noon on W moot eiileient employment
(on Detect danger: ahead ”I. oi the tote! merchmt
well in time, ' marine oi the West.

it» Eﬂectlvoly ion the
beams guiding
tacking nineties.
Launch counter-attack

(C)

II-

Wlﬂ 5’ mim- 'i'hohnetiouoithleoon-
fmwm Ww‘mw I” ter ohotlld be to Mom"
The Japanese deten- ie in: 6:31;?! a:
"may 9““ I” a“ the noon podtioo oi each
principle of “defensive mp every dey in m to
stance. The melt-defence up the “mm" .3
system on board Wheat .1; the rhino et .
ohip. will comply nicely The war! interaction

with nu- principle.

Protection Discussed

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 19 Dec 81 p 5

[Article by Osanu Kaihara:

[Text]

The rotinuing in en ehrideed
vents." oi’ a paper vaunted by
(Mn!!! Kelli-re. Conner titres~
tor. Writ: o! the Netienel
Deienoo Council, at e recent in-
ternluooel eympoeium on “secu-
ruy. Ware und Survival: “and
Mn and intonation! Order In
the 1m" Mid in Tom The
new “I. titled "What in in-
Volvul in Sewn-nu awe-Lem?
What Can I. Ai-hiwod?"—b‘.rii.
tor.

o e v:

Japan in a maritune na-
tion. it has been persistent-
iy propounded. munly by
oﬂicere of the old Imperial
liovy. that for such u no-
tiou the "securing of eco-
lnnos" is absolutely in-
dtuponeeble.

In the 1909 Defense White
Pupcr. the Deieme Agen-
cy. too. stated: "Surround-
ed on an ride: by the sea.
having u large population
on limited lend, depending
on otereeu ”ﬁrm for

moot resources. end being
a treding country. Japan

check on the see any et-
telnptl to invedo our coun-
try end to continue nuk-
ing eiiortl to oecure oce-
lanes which out be called
our life line. These clam
will nerve as e moon: to
enhance the credibility of
the Japan-US security by:-
tern which lien at the bus
or our mntry‘e defense.

mm:
innetely sell-evident truth"
thut Japan must nuke ei-
torts to oecure the safety

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Can a Country Protect Its Sea-Lanes?"]

o! ulnrltime tremc. 'i‘heoe
“atomic were mode by
deienoe omeiaio. echelon
end politician in

Bowever. there is ab-
solutely no concrete ex-
ploration oi such questions
on "What one the con-
celnble we: in which the
eo-leneo to Jepen would
be obotructed or covered?"
and “What countenan-
Iureo could be token end
how would such moo-um
Improve the situation?"

All that the ndvoceteo are
doing I: only to thout. "In
order to ensure the ne-
curity oi the tee-lance. we
mun. holster our ehtleub-
nerlne verlere “\th
:epebiilty end greetly in-
creeee the number o! petrol
lime". end «Myer ee-
noel-I."

Let me an up the paint!
Involved one by one end

put them in their proper
perspective.

m People eey. "Secure
the eelety ol the lee-isms.“

However, “lenee' celled
“see-Mes“ do not exlet.
There ere no "lenee." like
I highway. built on the see
(or the treﬂlc of veeeels.

The eo-oelled "eee-lenes"
ere the val expense 0!
the ocenn lteell. They ore
the Seven Bees.

Japan Imports row mete-
riele from ell over the
world. mahulnctum ﬁnish-
ed products wlth them by
enlletln; the bran: oi
people -tll over the world.
end cxoorte the finished
products to ell pert: ot the
world. It to enctly oe
eteted in the book "the
Future or Jepnn." editorial-
ly super-med by former

measured to protect the
maritime troheportetlon 0!
only speclﬂc mmodltlee
only in e speciﬁc pert o!
the oceans.

The dielence between Yo-

:olne to provtde protec-
tion? No one.

«a; Who or whet will
obetruct eee end
destroy ite eefety? When
and how to it ehvleeced
thet eee-ienu would be
destroyed?

To enewer thie oueetlon.
It. is M to mm:
the problem bi! eeperetlne
tlmu of peace from tlmee
of war or dieputee.

thlnu
eelety of eee-tenee
typhoon: end reel.

pert-low eountry hoe po-
eltloned werehlpe et otte-

FOR ()l-‘l-‘K'IAI. NSF. ONLY

1mm 0! Peace mm or ehtlclpeted by

ml. The only end ‘0' “DOB. The

om. thmten the “0“ 0*

notbeoeueeeny M
ed

lenee here mode m in m"
eecure end eole ““0 m
use Defense White View

thdt 3",.“ piece control

lite line" mm of thle now
etetement not e fee peo- 0"“ ““9 POM"
belle thet various In on interview
Ne World
undo ol ellone 0 this 53:: r ma.”

Jepeneee veeeele ere eble 3“ M"
to ply eelely between Jepeh “The W
end other movies, in-
cludlns those to the 0mm hieetlon iron:

ere. only beeeuee 33%”
there ie peooe the wor tle 0‘
. . hem

In discussing e wartime Soviet 1“”.
eltuntlon. u would, ilrlt oi .m the
all. have to poetulete the oiler

country unmet which Je-
pen would be illhtlne. ””1”
At preeent. people ere “h“
expressing thelr mm hy the" l-
poetulotinc the "Soviet W

n u thinkehle thet tee-mm" “ ‘
Jepen would inltlete e we: unlud MW-
ecelnlt me onion. Mbuwbu
nthereletobeew - onevheeeotthe

tech would horn the EM" .
aovlet e thout any "W8
doubt _ u e
The he re of the med “0" 3'
etuek will Wed Wm M
the o! the Soviet 0'.“
Unlon The meek not tlon end con

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCI arcs All) TBCIINW

RED STRATEGY 0!‘ INI'ELLIGBN‘I‘ RCBO'I' MAKERS DISGJSSE)
Tokyo NIKKEI smo SIIHBUN in Japanese 10-14, 17-19 Nov 81
[10 Nov 81 p 6]

[Article by reporter airs-Io: “Goal Set at Machine Assembly Robot: Cooperation
With 0.8. Unination Canpany"!

[Text] Industrial robots are becaing more and more intelligent. Intelligent rdaots
with the senses of sight and touch, which are cpable of doing work by adapting
themselves to changes in work conditions, have appeared. Although they are mly at
the stage of toddling today, they are growing at m enormous rate. Soon it will no
longer be just a wishful drean that human beings may be freed from monotonous work
or heavy labor by robots, which are entering in force into tie promotion site and
engaging in such operations as welding, painting, inspectim and assembly. The
business strategies of the big aanufacturers, which are putting a great deal of
emphasis on no of intelligent robots, have been investigated.

Post-muthat is the biggest developnent these for the robot technology team of
Kawasaki Heavy Industries. It has undertaken domestic sales of the "PUHA' assembly
robot, a product of u.s. Unination Co, starting this fall, and by next spring three
types of machines will be manufactured daestically. aaever, its technical cap
has already begun polishing post-m plans with a view to accmplishing these plans
by 1985. These plans will undoubtedly involve developnent of intelligent robots
which, like hman beings, will be able to see and feel. Their cooperative develop-
ment system with the u.s. Unimation Co across the ocean will soon get under way.

Robots with Sensors Revealed for the First Time

The industrial rdaot fair opened on 8 October in Tokyo-Haruuni: The exhibition

corner of Kawasaki Heavy Industries, which was situated at the front facing the entrance
to the exhibition hall, was always thick with people. No wonder, because an arc-
welding robot with a visual sensor. developed jointly with the Unimation Co, was on
display for the first time. This product, mich may be the forerunner of intelligent
robots, attracted the attention of the tedmical personnel cf rival firms.

The robot, shaped like a bird, watched the work with a thin be: of light. The light
reflected from the work reached a solid element canera via an optic fiber. This
information was subjected to image-processing, and the location of the welding line
was discerned. After that, the arm of robot swung, and welding was carried out with
a facility comparable to that of a skilled worker. The range d detection was 10 III!
in both horizaltai and vertical directions.

4 8
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To control the movement of the robot at high speed. a bipolar, 16-bit microccmputer

was developed for this express purpose and used as its brain. It is said to be five
times faster than the conventional microccnputers using MOS (metal acids semiconductors).
The spectators uttered "ohs" of adniraticn when they saw the robot begin to work as

soon as it recognized the welding line.

At about the same time, President Bngelburger of Unimation, who is the father of the
industrial robot, visited Japan in order to be present at the "International Symposium
on the Industrial Robot" held in Tokyo. Taking advantage of this opportunity, he

had a heart-to—heart talk with Kawasaki heavy Industries Vice President Kenzo Nikei
and consultant Tsuneo Ando. The main theme of their conversation was centered around
how the cooperation between the two canpaniss may be further strengthened in the future
and how the robot strategy may be unfolded on the world market. The two companies
agreed to engage jointly in the development of post-PUMA robots. Their intelligent
robots are to be unveiled in 4 years.

Technical Exchange Pact on an Equal Footing

It was 13 years ago that Kawasaki Heavy Industries first entered into technical
cooperation with Unimation in the field of industrial robots. In the following year,
the first domestic playback robot was manufactured. At first, these robots did not

sell very well and bitter battles were fought. By 1971, they were able to sell
approximately 20 spot-welding robots to Nissan Autonobile. Successfully riding out

the "ups and downs“ of the period before and after the first oil shock, the robot
business went into the black completely 3 years ago. At about that time, the contract
with Unimation to import technology was rewritten as a contract to exchange technologies
on an equal footing. Ard this Japanese enterprise rapidly gained true strength in

the field of robot manufacturing.

It produced 470 robots last year. The nmber is expected to be more than 650 this
year. Nearly 90 percent of the domestic market in spot—welding robots is owned by
Kawasaki; no other competitor can even cane close.

“We cannot afford to be ccmplacent"--a sense of crisis was expressed by consultant
Ando, who helped the growth of the robot department from its inception. The demand
for spot-welding robots appears to be tapering off. Moreover, many other big
electrical and mechanical manufacturers have also surged into the robot market.

This fall there is difficulty in selling the new series of arc-welding and painting
robots. Therefore, much is expected of the 'PUHA" assaably robot. Accading to con-
sultant Ando, "the favorite among the industrial robots is the assembly robot.“

Electronics Technologists in Short Supply

Even an industrial giant like Kawasaki Heavy Industries has its Achilles' heel.

Kawasaki is inferior, after all, in the number of electronics technologists it has
compared with other big electronics and electric machinery manufacturers. In developing
intelligent robots, the amount of electronics technological power one has makes the
difference. The robot Rib team of Kawasaki Heavy Industries consists of approximately

60 technologists, more than half of when engage in the development of electronic
equipnent. Since the field in which robots are utilized can only grow bigger. many
times the number of electronics technologists they have today will be needed 5 years
from now.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unimaticn is a powerful ally which can make up for this weakness, because Unimation
has been quite successful in developing microcomputers and sensors by skillfully
organizing and tapping the resources of the venture enterprises in and around the
state of California. A new product developed recently by Unimation. 'UNIVISIGJ,‘ which
is capable of recognizing patterns, will be sold by Kawasaki soon. Furthermore,

Kawasaki is trying to gain an advantageous position in the sales of assembly robots
by utilizing the robot language, 'VAL,‘ developed by Unimation.

At the sane time, within the company. two groups, consisting of the RAD department

of the technical headquarters and the hydraulic machinery business department in charge
of robots, are each putting their best efforts into the developent of intelligent
robots. They are trying to speed up the pace of development by instilling a sense

of competition among the technical personnel. "Our goal is to develop robots Which
are capable of assembling machine parts. We do not wish to develop robots for
assembling electronic parts,” (vice President Nibin): the goal for the developlent

of intelligent robots is well defined.

In Nov 81 p 6)

[Article by reporter Hi rano: "Leading in Sensor Tedmology; Cmpanywide Organization
To Achieve Practical Application by 1983"]

[Text] In a corner of a laboratory whose floor is stained with machine oil, three
robots are repeating simple movements over and over. These rdsots. with exposed
structural material consisting of reddish brown steel and dull silver aluminum, have

the air of sturdy workmen. In 2 years, they will appear on the market as intelligent
robots.

Goal Set for Assembly Robot

The 69,000-square-meter research center of Romatsu Ltd, located in an industrial park

at Hirazuka city, Kanagawa Prefecture. consists of three technical units: a technology
research laboratory. an electrical research laboratory. and an electrmic machinery
center. A project team, organized oompanywide for the express purpose of research

and development of intelligent robots, will soon begin its activities there. Its strategy
consists in part of concentrating all the technical personnel engaged in robot-related
work in one roar in order to achieve practical application of the robots by 1983.

What are the new robots that are to be manufactured? There are three types of robots--
large, medium and small, capable of transporting 120 kg, 50 kg and 10 kg of weight,
respectively. They are shaped like a human arm and are multiple-jointed. The
movements on sale six axes are controlled simultaneously by a 16-bit microcmputer.
Sane of the robots are further equipped with "legs,’ capable of moving a maximum
distance of 16 meters on rails. State are equipped with feelers and with sensors for
the solid element cmera so that they are capable of making judgments to sale extent
for themselves. Introduction of an advanced technology recognition of the position

and shape of objects by means of a laser is being investigated. The goal is intelligent
robots for doing assembly work rather than for arawelding.

"We would like to try them and master them in the production lines of our own company
before selling them," said Executive Director Takashi Yanagizawa, who is in charge of
the Ru), revealing a corner of their robot strategy.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'Sli ONLY

In July this year, President Ryoidui Kauai announced that the canpany is going to
phase out its construction machinery department. The idea is to develop new market,
because the demand for construction machinery is on the wane. The sales ratio of all
departments other than the cmstruction machinery department is to be raised from 10
percent today to 50 percent or more in the future. One of the pillars of the
diversified operation is to be the industrial robot department. This fall, the
company introduced itself to the world in the field of robots for the first time by

pitting on the market arc-sensor type welding robots and robots for transporting
heavy objects.

The director of the technology research laboratory, Kazuo Tanaka, showed this reporter
a document entitled 'Progress of Robot RID.“ According to this document, Kamatsu
launched rcbot development in 1976. The objective was to autanate the welding operatic.
of the company itself. At the sue time, collection and evaluation of information
concerning sensor technology was initiated.

Arc Welding in Operation

An arc-welding robot with three-axis control was trial manufactured in the following
year. Although it was not much better than the special automatic welding machine
already in use, considerable good results were obtained from the introduction of
this arrwlding robot to the factory manufacturing parts for large power shovels.
However, this robot was incapable of doing complicated work. The objects it could
work on were also limited in scope. So, the development of a robot with sensors and
five-axis control was tackled 3 years ago.

This is a large-scale robot of a rectangular coordinate type. with its feeler it
searches out the starting position of the welding line. As soon as this is done, the
welding operation comences with a flash of light. The wrist of the robot holding
the welding gun vibrates slightly. Swinging the arc left and right, the robot is
capable of detecting changes in the arc current and thus finding the welding line as
it carries out the welding operation. This robot has some form of sensory function.
A patent application has been filed for this robot and its arc-sensor format.

Robots equipped with industrial TV as an eye have been brought to a stage of practical
application for the welding of large objects. As the welding operation is under way,
the robot is constantly searching for the correct welding positim by the image-pro-
cessing of the arc light with its own microcomputer. "The sensor technology used in
this arc-welding robot is leading other companies by 2-3 years,” prwdly declared
Nashiko Yokoj ima, the chief of the third research laboratory, Production Technology
Research Center (Maikata city, Osaka Prefecture), who is in charge of the development.

A large amount of welding work is required in the process of manufacturing construction
machinery. More than 300 tons of welding wire are consumed every mmth-Jprobably

the largest volume of consumption in all Japan” (President Taguchi). For a bulldozer
weighing 1 ton, approximately 40 kg of welding wire are used. That is why this
company is more enthusiastic than anybody else about the autanation of the welding
operation. This was the motivation which helped them to produce the best welding
robot. More than 20 intelligent robots are in operation centered around their Osaka
plant. where bulldozers and power shovels are manufactured.

$1

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Spurting Electronification of Machinery

Kanatsu's technological camp is burning with the desire to "mild the world's best
research center.“ A ccnsolidated research center with an investment totaling 15
billion yen is to be built an a 230,000-square-meter plateau outside Hirazuka city
from where Mt Fuji can be seen on a clear day. The center is expected to be com-
pleted in 3 years. The technology research laboratory and the electric research
laboratory will move into this new facility. while the electronic machinery center
will remain at the site of the present center. The total number of research personnel
is expected to exceed 700, double the present number. The electrical technological
personnel in particular will increase from 130 to 350. They are spurring the
electronification of machinery. Commanding the service of the computers, semicm-
ductors. lasers and other electronics technologies, they are trying aggressively to
turn up new markets for their major productucmstructicn machinery--as well as
robots.

[12 Nov 81 p 6]

[Article by reporter Hi rano: "Hinning Move for the Introduction of PMS; Making Good
Use of Household Elect ric Knowhow")

[Text] "You have a strong grip"--the 51" (science fiction) robot developed by the
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co Ltd was very powlar at the ”Industrial Robot Fair“
held in October at Tokyo-Haruumi.

When a person approaches, the robot detects the hmn body temperature by its infrared
sensor and swings arwnd slowly. When a lighter flame is moved closer to it, it reports
a gas leakage. If you shake hands with it, it will acknowledge your grasping power
digitally and speak. It was the great delight of diildren at the fair. “That is
worthy of Mr Hatsushita. The display is excellent'--those in charge of robots from
other machinery manufacturers were highly impressed.

Row After Row of Automation Machinery

In the production technology headquarters located at Kadaaa city, Osaka Prefecture,
is a precision business department, and a machinery factory which was completed only
in July belonging to this department. On the floor, as big as a baseball diammd,
are raw after row of autanation machines which are used mainly internally. There
are a number of types of machines, including 'PANASBRT,‘ which automatically inserts
various types of electronic parts into the printed baseboard used in household
electric appliances, and "PANABISB'H‘ER," which tightens bolts and nuts automatically.
Almost all machines contain an 8-bit microcomputer as a control device. These robots
are all a kind of assembly robot. Workers in blue suits are busily engaged in the
making robots.

'Hore than 3,000 of these robots are being used in operatims companywide," revealed
the executive director of the production technology headquarters, Morita.

As of October, the nunber of robots manufactured for inserting parts exceeded 2,400.
Without doubt, Matsushita is the largest dauestic manufacturer. The number of robots
manufactured for tightening bolts and nuts is also among the top. In addition to
internal use, approximately 30 percent of these robots are sold to other cmpanies.
This machinery factory, equipped with the newest manufacturing facilities is about to
be transformed into a factory specializing in robots.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A "robot catnittee,” acompanywide organization, has recently been organized. The
goal is to introduce a large number of rdaots to every plant of the uatsushita group
over the next 10 years. Canpletely urnanned plants are the ultimate goal. 'More
than 100,000 robots will be in q>eration canpanywide in 10 years,“ says Exewtive
Director Morita nmchalantly. More than half of these robots are to be manufactured
by the precisim business department.

Development in Five Groups

The committee cmsists of three groups: a planning group which drafts plans for the
introduction of robots, a developnent group which engages in the actual developent

of the robots, and a technology group which develops the application technology. These
three groups work in cooperation to advance the goal of the project. More than 40
business departments canpanywide offered their experts to participate in the project.
They have already sorted out what type of robot is required by what plant. What is

left to be done is to reduce these to a few types of standard machines and develop
them.

First of all, the robots used internally are grouped into five groups, A to B. Group

A represents advanced intelligent robots with human-like capability: group B represents
intelligent robots having a certain degree of judgmental capability: group C mnsists
of ordinary playback robots; and groupD and group 1-: consist of sequence robots.

The present project is to concentrate efforts on the develorment of the group B
intelligent robots. By the next fall, an ultra-automated model plant employing a

large number of intelligent robots is to be mpleted. The targets for ultraautomation
include the VTR (video tape recorder) plant and various other plants manufacturing
mature products such as vacuum cleaners and washing machines.

“Establish an all-weather production system'--A directive was dispatched to the people
in charge of productim technology by President Toshihiko Yamashita, who has occupied
the chair for 5 years now. The operating envirmment is becoming more and more tense.
The objective is to build up an enterprise framework so strong that the operation

can remain in the black even if production drops to the 60 percent level. As the
taste of consumers bec mes more and more diversified, every product must necessarily
follow the trend of small volume production and large variety.

The only solution to this difficult problem is the introduction of as (flexible manu-
facturing system). ”Intelligent robots are indispensable," according toExecutive
Director Morita. It has been decided to use 16-bit microcanputers in these robots.
These are all robots with high 10's, with sight and a sense of touch in their fingers.

Emphasis To Be m Sensor Developnent

A technical report of nearly 150 pages contains minute descriptions of various
sensor technologies developed by Matsushita over the years. Household appliances
such as the electric range, refrigerator, air conditioner and WR contain a large
number of sensors already. They include a large variety of sensors fa sensing tem-
perature, pressure, gas, humidity, light and magnetism. Therefore, Matsushita's
determination in engaging in the developnent of sensors is enormous. This technology
is directly applicable to the sensory functions of the robots. This is the strength
of Hatsushita.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USl-I ONLY

The Matsushita group entered the field of selling arc-eelding robots in earnest only
last fall. The sales are being undertaken by the Matsushita Electric Industrial Co,
while the production is being undertaken by the subsidiary, Hatsushita Business
Machines (headquarters at Toyonaka city, Osaka Prefecture: President, Setsuo Aokir
capital. 3 billim yen). hatsushita Business Machines entered a seeing robot capable
of discriminating the type and locatim of the work object for exhibition at the
robot fair previously mentioned. With assistance from its parent canpany, this sub-
sidiary company is attempting to mrciaiize assembly robots with sensors.

men Japan's robot industry has grown to a market scale oanparable with that of
household electric appliances today. the Hatsushita group will be expected to concen-
trate its forces at this market. By that time, the use of robots may have already
spread from factories to offices and even homes.

[13 Nov 81 p 81

[Article by reporter Hirano: 'Cooperative Development with Siemens; Aiming First at
Application to Mechanical Work')

[Text] "You are firedl”--Thunder was heard in the office of the president in the Iain
plant of mjitsu Panac located in Hino city, Tokyo. President Inaba is a dictator
also known as I'emperor." Frequently, his subordinates are given a good scolding by
him. He himself flies all around the globe and concludes deals for top sales. In
less than 10 years since the company was established, he has sold more than 800,000
units of NC (mmerically controlled) equipnent.

The First Hadmine Expected in November Next Year

No doubt they are the greatest in the world. The strong persmality and confidence
of the president are tapping the potential of this young enterprise.

Question This spring, a mji plant in midi robots are manufactured by robots was
built in Yamanashi Prefecture; what is its monthly productim?

President Inaba: so robots. By next spring, it will be increased to 100. Althcugh
our production is still small today. we believe the robot industry will grow signi-
ficantly. Our goal, centered around robots for medaanical work, is to becme tops
in this field.

Question: Intelligent robots with senses of sight and touch are being actively
developed today but are there demands for these robots?

Answer: Not so much at the maent. If the robots are compared to working bees,
then intelligent robots are the queen bees. without the queen bees, other bees will
not work. Intelligent robots are indispensable for the successful operation of PMS
(flexible manufacturing system). mr plan originally was to develop this by 1983.
we have advanced our schedule so as to be able to display our first maduine in the
International Machine Tool Sample Exhibition to be held in Osaka in November next
year. [end of answer]

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A contract for mutual oooperaticn in both areas of RID and sales was signed 6 years
ago with Siemens (west Germany) , the largest electric madiinery manufacturer in all

of Europe. President Inaba and the vice pesident in charge of madiinery. Ziegfiedd
N. Siemens, maintain such a clcne relatimship that a hotline is kept between them.
Both canpanies are exerting every effort for the joint developnent of their intelligent
robot '1 series” and their future NC equipnent “x series.‘ In April .ext year, tech-
nical camps from both sides will meet and discuss the technical details.

Robots for Handling Elect ronic Parts Are Not To Be Considered

The first of the I series will be revealed 1 year later. This series consists of two
types of machines: The first type is capable of handling canplicated operations, and
the second type is the cylindrical coordinate type capable of doing higz-precision
work. A (:0) (charge oombinaticn diode) type semiccndictor camera is to be used as

the eye. Of course, sensors for touch are also included. For the time being, the
first unit is expected to have mly the touch sensors. The field of application is
aimed at the assembling of mechanical parts. "Robots for the assanbling of electronics
parts are not being considered,“ says President Inaba flatly.

The NC equipment used in machine tools will be used as is for the brain of robot. The
first intelligent robot is to be controlled by a 16-bit microcaaputer contained inside.
The NC equipment “it series," \hid‘l is being developed jointly with Siemens now and

is expected to be pit into operatim in 3 years, will contain a 32-bit microccnputer,
which is comparable with the advanced minimmputer in capability. This will be

linked with the intelligent robot in the future so that the robot itself will be

able to make judgnents and carry out complicated operations.

A team of 30 technologists is participating in the joint development project today.

By next spring, 20 more new graduates are expected to join the team m the Japanese
side alone. There is an expression, 'Panac‘s hell," in machine tool manufacturers'
circles, because the work is hard there. The members of Fanac kork so hard that its
main plant at Hino, Tokyo, is brightly lit past midnight every day. Even the members
of the pa-ren: coupany, Fujitsu, mich is famous for its aggressiveness, say facetiously
among themselves: "He wouldn't want to has to compete against Panac.” l'The 50 who

participate in our project are equal in strength to 150 in other companies," boasts
President lnaba.

In Cooperatim with Fujitsu Research Group Also

At the sane time, joint research 01 0(1) and optic fibers is being undertaken in
cooperation with the Pal) department of its parent canpany, Fujitsu Research Center
(headquarters, Kawasaki city; president, Bunid'ii Koguchi, capital; 2 billion yen).
CCD is a powerful component that may be used as the eye of the intelligent robot,
while optic fibers are most suitable for interplant oommunicatims and for linking
the robot with the computer. At the dawn of the age of the intelligent robot, the
family tie appears to grow ever strmger.

During the mmth of September, the number of visitors to the Fuji plant exceeded 10,000.
Day after day, the tour buses brought in visitors. Plant manager Hircmichi Scidnida
and the leading members of the plant are kept busy receiving the visitors. The

plant, which is the first hcnest-to-goodness FMS plant in Japan, has fast becane the
center of international interest. This plant will sooner or later becaue a robot

specialty plant. The plant, which is large enougr to contain two Korakuen play-

grounds, "is capable of producing 3,000 robots a month if necessary," says President
lnaba.
55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The total sales of Fujitsu Fame in the first quarter this year was 82 billicn yen,
only 12 percent of whidl is due to the rdaot system today. This ratio is expected

to rise to 40 percent by 1985, men the intelligent robots may have entered the mature
stage.

[14 Nov 81 p 6]

[Article by reporter Matsusoto, northern Kyushu branch office: ”Pursuing 'Arc
Censorz,‘ Hastening the Development of Thin Plate Welding Robot']

[Text] A welding robot with are sensor was the newest product of Yasukawa Electric
Manufacturing Caupany Ltd on display at the Industrial Robot Fair held 8 October at
Barumi, Tokyo. This new praiuct, consisting of an arc-welding robot, “NORMAN,"

which has been a hit prwuct, with an arc sensor attached to it, was very popular
at the fair.

Sales Will Begin Next April

At any rate, this robot was developed over apprminately a year by the autoaation
research laboratory of the MD center, consisting of 20 technologists and occupying

a secluded corner of the Yahata plant (Kitakyushu city) of Yasukawa Electric Co. The
caspany is quite confident about the production of momma," hit it is not so sure
whether the sensors will function properly. It was able to accanplish this mly after
repeatedly carrying out the basic experiments. The director d the automation
research laboratory, Itsuro Hatmoto, who was in charge of its development, is
tenporarily relieved: 'He are glad to be able to make public a product which is 2—3
years ahead of our competitors in the field of arc-welding robots.‘

This robot with are sensor is capable of finding the location to be welded by itself
by detecting the are cur rent used in the welding operation. The welding gun which is
attached to the end of the robot's arm swings left md right as the welding progresses
along the welding line marked on the work. The location of welding is determined by
canparing the amount of electric current that flows between the welding gun and the
work as the welding gun swings left and right.

Gaining confidence Eran a favcxable appraisal received at the fair, Yasukawa Electric
is considering couuercializaticn of this welding robot with are sensor beginning next
April. This will be the first intelligent robot put on the market by Yasukawa Electric.
The robot strategy of Yasukawa Electric is to 'mrsue the goal in the field centered
around arc welding" (Executive Director Masayasu Nishizawa) .

Of course, the development of an intelligent robot will be confined to the field d
arc welding and its applications, hit the caspany is determined to achieve 'a technical
development no other companies can match" in this narrow field (same).

That is why the next item m the agenda for development after the rcbot nade public

this time is a robot with are sensor capable of welding thin plate. The robot with

are sensor put on display at the robot fair has a weak spot: nasely, it is applicable
only to the welding of plate of medium thickness, or more than 4.5 III thickness: because
for a stable operation of the sensor used, the arc current must be greater than the

200 mperes employed in the arc-welding of nediun thick plates.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arowelding Robot for Thin Plate To Be Developed Within a Year

However, the electric current used in the welding of thin plate by the arc-welding
robot is usually in the range of 120-130 aperes. This electric wrrent is too weak
for the sensor to properly detect the location of the welding line. For this reason,
Yasukawa Electric has taken up the development of a rdaot with sensor capable of
welding thin plate as its next subject. According to the plan, Yasukawa Electric is
expected to be able to manufacture it within a year. If so, Yasukawa Electric will
have intelligent robots capable of welding plates of gauges from medium to thin.

According to Yasukawa Electric, "it will be 4-5 years before highly intelligent
robots having a sense of sight can becane very popular in the field of Moulding."
Until that day, it considers that the robot with arc sensor, which is a form of intel-
ligent robot. should occupy the mainstream.

However, the users' demands for intelligent robots are becoming more and more
advanced. Therefore, at the same time the present 'MOI‘CMAN" is being upgraded,
Yasukawa Electric is also aggressively carrying out research on welding rdaots with
a sense of sight.

Development of Sense of Sight Also Under Way

This company has successfully trial manufactured a welding robot capable of grasping
the welding line through the use of a TV camera lid carrying out the welding operation
autcmatically. The directim of the present development is also at the extension of
this robot with a TV camera as its eye. It is undertaking the research and development
of a robot equipped with a combination of industrial TV camera and minicomputer.

The basic technological development necessary for this type of robot has already been
completed by Yasukawa Electric. It says 'it is ready to put a welding robot with a
sense of sight on the market as soon as there is demand."

There are two problems. The first problem concerns the autcmdaile parts industry,
where the Yasukawa robots are most widely being used. The shape of parts tends to be
very complicated with a crooked welding line which reaches where the TV camera cannot
see. How to solve this is the problem.

The other problem concerns the cost. According to an estimate made by Yasukawa
Electric, the minicomputer used (:1 the robot alme costs most than 10 million yen at
the present stage. That price is too high to be marketable. How can the price be
lowered? It says "it may take 5 years before a practical product can be manufactured.‘
If these two problems can be solved, Yasukawa Electric should be able to maintain its
leading position.

[17 Nov 81 p 6]

[Article by reporter Hirano: "Assembly Robot by Next Fall; Advancing Schedule To Take
the Initiative")

[Text] A Hitachi whirlwind was stirred up in industrial robot circles. The date was
3 August. The largest general electric machinery manufacturer in the United States,
the General Electric Company, announced at its robot business headquarters in Bridgeport,

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHUAI. USE ONLY

Connecticut. that it is going to enter into business cooperatim with Hitachi Ltd on
matters related to robots. At the sale time the manufacturing technology for the
miniccmputer robot is introduced from Hitachi, a large number of robots will also be
imported by 6.3., until such time as it will be able to manufacture them in earnest.
Robot manufacturers all over the world caught their breath men they learned of this
pact between the giants of Japan and the United States.

Cooperative Operation Also a Possibility

Coope rative pacts consummated with European and American enterprises one after another,
sales offensives here and abroad, a high—pitched increase in production. and a plan
to introduce robots to all plants companywide--activities in the field of robots

have picked up suddenly since the beginning of this year. what will be Hitachi's
next punch?

"He would like to achieve practical application of an assembly robot by next fall by
advancing the schedule"--5xecutive Director Hiroshi Sonoyama, who is directing the
robot team, revealed the next move. The plan to commercialize intelligent robots with
senses of sight and touch in 1983 has been significantly moved up. The campaign plan
is to take the initiative away from rival companies.

At its Production Technology Researdi Center located near Tczuka station on the

Tokaido line, with a staff of 450, the producticm tedmolcgies are being researched
broadly under five specific themes: the production system, fabricaticm, processing,
automation, and reliability. The breakdown of the research subjects is as follows:
electronics and related subjects, 40 percent: heavy electric equipment, 30 percent;
household electric appliances, 20 percent; and others, the balance. The existence

of a powerful robot research team there became known recently, and its moves are

being carefully watched by rival companies. A large number of robots are being used

as experimental material here and there inside the research center. Young technologists
absorbed in their work near the robots attract people's attention.

One of their achievements is the intelligent assembly robot. Its eye, consisting of
a TV camera, stares at an object. Complicated assembly work is carried out by
recognition of the shape and position of the object. As it has carried out the same
operation repeatedly, the speed of assembly has picked up. It gains mastery of the
operation like a human being because the robot is in possession of a learning capa-
bility. Moreover, two robots can even work in cooperation with one another. It is
truly the world's most advanced assembly robot.

These Ebbots will Be Introduced to the Internal Plants First

This robot, shaped like a bird with a large bottom, has arms with a 6-degree freedom
of movement and is capable of lifting a maximum weight of 3 kg. It can transport an
object at a maximum speed of 1.2 meters per second and can assemble machine parts
with an accuracy of 0.1 mm. The robot's body weight is 80 kg, which is light indeed.
“By disengaging various joints of the robot, it can be transformed into a simpler
robot having only a 2- or 3-degree freedan of movement,“ explained the director of

the production technology research center, Akiguchi Okumura. This is the so-called
module type robot.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A 16-bit microcomputer is used as its control device. A multiple number of robots
can also be engaged in group operation thrmgh control of the microcomputer of each
robot by a superior microcomputer. Moreover, the robot is designed to respcnd to
robot language "ARL-l" such as the voice connand "move to the right“ or I'rotate the
wrist," or to the programmed command. By next fall, this robot may drop its mask and
appear in public on the market as a full-fledged intelligent robot.

"Next year, industrial circles will experience a climax on matters related to the
development of the intelligent robot,“ (Director Okunura) , so its technical team is
spurring the development of a robot with a towel around its head.

The history of Hitachi's research into an intelligent robot is quite 1mg. In 1970.
a pattern-recognizing robot capable of assembling blocks was successfully trial manu-
factured by its central research center. This was followed by the developnent of a
machine parts-fitting robot and a vacuum cleaner assembly robot by its production
technology research center. Developsent of an assembly robot with a sense of sight
began in earnest in 1978. And the research achievements are realized step by step.

A '500 person project" has been under way in earnest since the beginning of this
year to introduce these intelligent robots into the internal plants first. With the
production technology department as the flagship, the assembly robots are to be
introduced to the various plants oompanywide, including the five research centers and
17 plants. Within 5 years, 60 percent of all assembly processes ccmpanywide will
employ robots and the number of operators will be reduced by nearly 30 percent. By
this undertaking, they wish to learn all there is to be learned about the assembly
robot and the knowhow about its introduction. After that, the robots will be stan-
dardized and ccmmercialized. It is truly a strategy to "kill two birds with one

stone."

The merchandise business headquarters is in charge of the production and sales of
robots. Its key production base, shushino plant (Chiba Prefecture), is engaged in the
production of motors. Inside a site large enough to easily contain eight Korakuen

baseball fields stand four factory buildings, each approximately 120 square meters in
size. One of them is making a quick changeover from motor plant to robot plant. The

monthly production will increase from 25 units at the beginning of the year to slightly
less than 90 by the end of the year. The motors are already mature merchandise.

The plant and the technical personnel working there can be assigned to the robot
department. This is an excellent opportunity to revitalize the talents and the
facilities.

Rivalry Between Parent and Child

Shinmeiwa Industries and 'l‘okiko of the Hitachi graip are also moving into the field
of robots today. A tense market war has unfolded between them and their parent
company, Hitachi, in . .e fields of arc—welding and painting robots. Thwgh they may
have a family tie, they are rivals as businessmen on the front line. In spite of
all this, Tokiko is often appointed by Hitachi to do the scouting for electrcnic
technical personnel. A difficult relationship indeed. "For the time being, the
three companies will be allowed to compete freely"--the leaders, headed by President
Hirokichi Yoshiyama, are surprisingly clear-cut. A violent fight may be unfolded
between the parent and the children on matters related to intelligent robots again.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[18 Nov 81 p 6]

[Article by reporter Hirano: I'i’ursuing Basic Tedmology Broadly To Meet the Needs
of System Merchandise“)

[Text] This is the age of industrial robot wars, with more than 150 large and small
companies competing for the market in a disorderly manner. And there is no end to
the new manufacturers which may introduce themselves and join in the game.

The. Latest Participant Which Entered This Sunner

Mitsubishi Electric Corporation began sales of its arcbwelding robots only this sumer.
This company is the latest participant. It launched a cmcentrated sales offensive
targeting the Nagoya area where subcontractors associated with Toyata are concentrated.
Their sales engineers are to learn all about robot sales knowhow and more there.
Nationwide sales will begin next spring.

”Today's robots are nothing more than cheap toys. Intelligent robots will make
remarkable progress in the future," pedicts Executive Directcr Tsuneo Ushio, the
head of the heavy electric machinery business headquarters in charge of the robot
department.

An "PMS developent teal“ organized companywide has born this spring at its Nagoya
Machinery Plant (Nagoya city) which produces motors and business madlines. This is
the team which is respmsible for the research, development, and merchandising of
various CAD/CAM (canputer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing) systems, new
industrial robots related to the PMS (flexible manufacturing system) and related
mechatronics machinery. There are 40 fulltime tedmologists and nearly 300 more
technologists from related department who participate in this activity.

The research activities related to the control devices which cmstitute the brain of
the intelligent robots, the actuators which constitute the limbs, and various sensors
for the senses of sight and touch, are being undertaken here. The assembly robots are
also under the control of the Nagoya Machinery Plant, while the handling robots are
under the control of the Inazawa plant (Aichi Prefecture). According to the plan,
the Nagasaki plant (Nagasaki Prefecture) and the Fukuyama plant will join the ranks
in the future and will be in charge of the development of large-scale robot and a
small-scale assembly robot, respectively.

"The present status of intelligent robot development is like a game of golf in which
the green is not yet in sight. The specific technologies that are needed are still
unclear, so that skirts of am will be spread wide,“ explained Exemtive Director
Ushio, who is the oosrnaMer-in-chief of the entire robot ten, regarding their present
strategy.

There are two other organizations in the company mich are closely related to the
robot team. One of them is the "mas promotion project“ started last smer. The
idea is to aggressively pranote automation and labor conservation measures in their
internal plants. Intelligent robots are indispensable for removing humans from the

productim process in which a small number of a large variety of goods are to be
manufactured. A large variety of electronic and electric products, from electronics
parts of household electric appliances to large-scale electric generators, are being
manufactured at 36 plants scattered all over the country. The intelligent robots
introduced in these plants will eventually be standardized and then oollnercialized.
This is Mitsubishi's strategy.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The other is the “robot committee" organized internally 2 years ago. The technical
personnel representing various business offices meet regularly to exchange experience
in research achievements concerning rdaots. For a house as big as Mitsubishi, an
organization such as this for the exchange of technical intonation is indispensable.
In preparation for the age of intelligent robots, "this organization will be dras-
tically reformed," (Executive Director Ushio).

Short Courses Offered Regularly

The Nagoya plant, where the order of battle is shaping up today. is to be the key
robot production base. A “Production Machine Work Technology Center" is located on
the left, just inside the south gate of the plant. It is where the industrial
machinery revealed this spring is on display. In a spacious hall resembling a
gymnasium are rows of the newest mechatrcnics machines, including arc-welding robots,
laser work machines, and electron-beam welding machines. This is a technical salon
where, in addition to the display and demonstration of various machines, the customers
may also have technical consultaticns. A training school is in session regularly.
More than 3,000 persons use this facility every month.

In 1980, the total sales of these mechatrmics machines related to EMS was 30 billion
yen. A plan is under way to push the sales up to 50 billion yen in 3 years. “Con-
centrating all the industrial machinery in are roan in order to sell it as system
merchandise" was the motivation behind the establishment of the center (director of
industrial machine business department. Koichi Kitaura) , and intelligent robots

will be the pivot point of them all.

Exchanging Technologists with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries

An interesting experiment is under way at the production technology research center

of Mitsubishi Electric. Small nails, the size of a match stick. POP up and then
withdraw. The robot's arm flashes and the nailheads are hit by a banner over and over.
The action is as accurate as that of Musashi Miyanoto in picking up a fly with chop-
sticks. The robot's arm is made entirely of plastic so that it can move very rapidly.
The robots of today are all blocks of aluminum and steel. The robots of the future

may all be made of lightweight plastics. This is only a very small part of the advanced
robot researcS. being undertaken by Mitsubishi. Bach research center is pursuing
broadly the basic technologies that are necessary for intelligent robots.

The Mitsubishi group is a tight-knit group. Its brother company, Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries, entered the field of robots quite early. but its domestic share has never
been very high. As the robots have beccme more and more intelligent, the specific
weight of electronics technology has become heavier and heavier. Technical exchange,
has already begun with the Heavy Industries. There is a great possibility that
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries will join hands with Mitsubishi Electric on matters related
to the developnent of intelligent robots.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[19 Nov 81 p 6]

[Article by reporter Hirano: "Full Force on the Intelligent Sensors; the Senses of
smell and Taste in Additim to the Senses of Sight, Hearing and Tcuch']

[Text) Japan Electric Company Ltd has begun exerting all its efforts for the developnent
of intelligent sensors, because these have become indispensable for intelligent

robots which, like human beings. are to be able to make judgments on the basis of
sight and touch.

Practical Applications in 5 Years

what is an intelligent sensor? It is an electronic component consisting of a micro-
calputer and a sensor. Utilizing semiconductor technology, which is progressing by
leaps and bounds, a sensor and a processor which will process the information obtained
by the sensor are integrated into a small chip. It will undoubtedly becaue a super
LSI (large—scale integrated circuit) containing several hundred thousand transistors
inside a chip 5 m square. "We wish to achieve its practical application in 5 years"
revealed Executive Director Michiyuki tiara, who is in charge of MD. The robot's 10
will jump when such sensors are perfected, because even a feeble signal can be infor-
mation-processed and amplified and then sent to the brain. Then, even sensors with
not such high sensitivity can be utilized. Moreover, the unit price can be brought
down significantly by the mass-production process, because it will be basically an
1.51. For example, the human skin transforms an analog signal such as the sensation
of heat or cold into a digital signal which is then tranmitted to the brain by a

pulse signal consisting of a pulsating wave. Approximately the sme thing is to be
done by the semiconductors.

About 10 minutes' walk from the Hiyazaki station on the Tokyo-Denen city line in a
quiet residential town is a 'white hall.‘l A sensor research division was born at
this chip research center this sumuer. Sensor technology is indispensable for the
realization of CGC (computer and communication) advocated by the director, Koji
chayashi. A force of 20 technologists is engaged molly on sensor research.

Semiconductor Technology-ﬁts Pride

'He will develop sensors which are easy to use by making the most of our specialty--
semiconductor technology." explains the director of the chip technology research
center, shizuo Asagama. Doctor of Science, about the company's aubition. At this
research center, problems related to the developaent of artificial intelligence are
being attacked from three sides: can (charge combination diode), a newly developed
semiconductor: three-dimensional IC with solid structure: and the biosensor. The

project is to last 7 years. Practical application of the intelligent sensors is
listed among the most important themes.

CCD which is to be the eye of the robot first: The semicondactor element developed
by the 0.5. Bell Research Laboratory is considered to be the favorite candidate for
the solid state TV camera. It can be made much more cmpact and lightweight than a
TV cunera using vidicon. 'CCD cameras with a million picture elements will soon
become practical" observes the director of the sensor research division, Hirer-itsu
Shiraki. As the first to engage in CCD research in Japan, it has sufficient technical

power for the task. It has already made practical a color ca: camera with 200,000
picture elements.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It has also developed a touch sensor using semiconductors. A silicon chip is loaded,
in addition to the sensor. with an amplifier circiit ad a temperature compensation
circuit. This is the forerunner of the intelligent sensor. Already, sane automobile
manufacturers are investigating the feasibility of adapting this sensor for their cars.
Of course. this sensor can also be used on the robot as its sense of touch. Ammg its
recent research achievements are the infrared ray sensor for the detection of tem-
perature, the semiconductor gas sensor and the magnetic resistance element sensor for
the detection of rotatimal direction.

I'Cola." "Juice.“ The little ones about at the microphone. A robot mich is shaped
like a human arm responds to the order, pills a bottle of beverage frcn the box, '
removes the cap from the bottle and gently pours it into a cap. "Gl's' of admiration
can be heard even from the adults ammg the spectators. This is a scene at the
'lndust rial Robot Fai r' held in October at Harumi-Tokyo. This voice-recognition
robot was very popular and the stand was packed with people day after day.

There are many applications for voice-recognition robots. Por exanple, people tend

to utter a cry when there is an accident. A robot can catdl this voice and quickly

stop the operation. In this way, not only can a physical accident be prevented, but

the production of bad products can also be prevented. Horeover, in a factory, a

human operator engaged in one task may be able to camnand a robot to perform other
operations. Manager Shigendm Sato, who is in cal-and of the robot business ten,

says "many more applications in offices can probably be discovered.‘ Research into

the developnent of sensors for smell and taste are also under way. “A fire-prevention
robot capable of smelling smoke can appear," and the dream continues to expand endlessly
(Manager Sate).

Robots with Sensor To Be Unveiled Next Spring

Japan Electric has only recently entered the field of robots by putting on the market
three types of assembly robots toward the end of September. One of them is an ultra-
precision assembly robot capable of assembling IC and computer terminals with a
position accuracy within 1 micron. Development of this type of precision robot is the
staple of electronics manufacturers, which machinery manufacturers cannot imitate

very easily. According to its plan, assembly robots with sensors will be calmercialized
next spring.

This is an age of microelectronics, with semicmductors at the pivot point.
Optoelectronics will be the next to bloat. and "the middle of the 2lst century will be
the heyday of bioelectronics,’ predicts Executive Director Uenohara. One wonders

how close to human beings the intelligent rdaots will be then?

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

9113
cso: 4106/24 mo

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY