ml! OFFIGAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10582
11 June 1982

Japan Report

[FOUO 34/82)

FBES FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPIS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10582
11 June 1982

\

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 34/82)

CONTENTS
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

9:1.» Minister Suzuki's Relationship with m Hawks Examined-
(ASAHI snmun, 16 Apr 82)

Possibility of Pukuda's Bid for Power Discussed
(101mm sancuu, 11 Apr 32)

Nakesone's Dilelna Described
(Kenji Kitahara; THE DAILY YOHIIRI, 8 May 82) ..........'.......

Nakesone Paction's Role Analyzed
(Tetsuo Tenure; 111: JAPAN BOOWIC JOURNAL. 18 May 82) ........

Changed Nature of Labor Spring Offensive Analyzed
(“IRON KEIZAI samuu. 16, 17, 18 Apr 82)..

Handling of 3-4 Phanto- Issue Criticized
(Shintaro Ishihara; BUNCH SHUNJU. May 2)

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Government. Private . Academic Biotechnology Efforts Reported
(NIlnN KDGYO SHIHBUN. 10 Feb 82).. ..... ..

DNA Experiment Guideline; 1!. Suite Interview
Pour Applications of Biotechnology

Active Enterprises in Hestern Japan
Haunting Interests, Expectations

- a - [III - ASIA - 1.11 too:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAI.

PRIME MINISTER SUZUKI'S RELATIONSHIP WITH LDP MARKS EXAMINED

Tokyo ASAHI SBIMBUN in Japanese 16 Apr 82 p 2
[Fifth in series of articles: "Prime Minister Suzuki's Hurdles"]

[Text] Speeches and activities relating to former Prime Minister Rakuei
Tanaka, who is good at handling matters realistically, have recently tended
to be hawkish.

A party was held on the evening of 17 March to celebrate former Prime Minister
Nobusuke Kishi's becoming and LDP supreme counselor. Before approxiamately

80 people from the political arena and business world, former Prime Minister
Tanaka proclaimed in a raised voice: "A constitution written under the
occupation of another country is not a constitution. Although constitutional
amendment has been_considered taboo, our party upholds the establishment of
an autonomous constitution in its platform. does it not?"

Sense of Security From a Stable Majority

0n the same day, at a party commemorating a publication of a Tanaka faction
Diet member, former Prime Minister Tanaka said: "It is good to study amend-
ment of the constitution which was given us by the occupation force." of

the 60 Diet members who endorsed the Committee of 100 Requesting Revision of
the Japan-0.3. Security Treaty that was founded in the middle of March. one-
third are Tanaka faction members. In the case of the Japan Strategic Research
Center organized by Mr Shin Ranemaru, former director of the Defense Agency
and a leading lember of the Tanaka faction, which has gathered together
retired uniformed officers of the Self Defense Forces and military specialists,
the important positions are all occupied by members of the Tanaka faction.

The reason behind this hawkish tendency which has encompassed the Tanaka
faction is the sense of security that arose following escape from the evenly
balanced situation between the ruling and opposition parties in the Diet and
regaining a stable majority after a long hiatus.

Since then Justice Minister Okuno's remark about constitutional anendnent last
year has occurred, the menbership of the Diet Members' Union for Realization
of an Autonomous Constitution has increased to over 300, and the LDP's three
highest officials, including Mr Nikaido, have become vice presidents.

FIII(HHHCJAI.IEI!(IULY
FEHRCHWWCJAI.USE(NMLV

The number of participants in the Diet Mambars' Group to Pay Universal Respect
to the Yasukuni Shrine is 321. Nine cabinet members, including Prime Minister
Suzuki, paid visits to the Yasukuni Shrine last year. Moreover, virtually all
cabinet members are going to pay respect to the Yasukuni Shrine on 15 August
this year.

A party circular letter to restrain antinuclear and arms-reduction movement
was issued. There is a movement to strengthen inspection of school textbooks.
The Defense White Paper placed emphasis on patriotic education.

As the LDP has been gradually realizing its long-term desires, the Tanska
faction's attitude has also become clear. In regard to objectives, some
people observe that: "For the Tanaka faction , awaiting the conclusion of

the Lockheed trial, the Suzuki regime is absolutely necessary as a protective
wall. In order for Suzuki to be reelected, the Tanaka faction is trying to
fill the gap between the prime minister, who sometimes shows dovish tendencies.
ane hawkish groups. It 1: a farsighted and deeply laid tactic." Can protec—
tion of the Tanaka faction really contribute to maintenance of the Suzuki
regime?

The United States Provokea the LDP Hawks

Hhether or not the United States has observed a change in the condition of the
LDP, U.S. maneuvering of the LDP has become active. Concerning the issue of
increases in defense power, in particular, the United States seems to have
concluded that "it is more efficient to fill in from an outer moat-~the
LDP--rather than attacking the Suzuki administration itself."

Since last month, pro-Japanese Americans have visited Japan one after another.
Former presidential adviser Allen, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
Shoesmith, former Secretary of Defense Drown, former Minister to Japan (cur-
rently ambassador to the United Nations) Sherman, and Congressman Solarz have
had meeting with important members of the LDP. All of them conveyed the
severity of U.S. congressional criticism of Japan over the trade friction
issue. They impressed upon the Japanese that the "U.S. Government stands in
front of these tough opinions which are directed toward Japan" (Motoo Shiina,
director of the Association for Study of Asian Problems). While giving such
an impression, they demanded that "Japan should therefore carry out the
prime minister's public promise" and realize "defense of the sea lanes for
1,000 nautical miles."

This kind of behind-the-scenes maneuvering by the United States is reflected
in the LDP's Security Research Committee Subcommittee on Maintenance of
Defense Power. The U.S. maneuvers, an eye on the compilation of next fiscal
year's budget draft, have stimulated subcommittee moves to eliminate the
"within 1 percent of GNP" upper ceiling on defense expenditure. They are also
intended "to open a road through the leadership of the LDP since the Suzuki
administratior cannot do it" (a former Defense Agency director).

Considering this kind of condition within the LDP, the prime minister's
reputation is not necessarily favorable.

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USI(HWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

At the palace banquet to welcome Italian President Petrini on 10 March, the
prime minister and an elder LDP Diet medaer had a chat:

"A movement to revise the Japan-0.8. Security Treaty has come into the open."

Prime Minister: "If one thinks it possibleto amend the constitution or
revise the Japan-11.3. Security Treaty, he is disqualified as a politican.”

”Then, it is better for you to speak out."

Prime Minister: ". . . ."

Doing Everything to Maintain an Equilibrium for Relection

Certainly the prime minister is prudent about constitutional amendment and
revision of the Japan-0.8. Security Treaty. In the Japan-0.8. suit meeting
held last year, he made c".ear the items Japan should reserve in regard to
increases in Japanese defense power. His instructions for a "porcupine-like
defense system appropriate to a maritime nation" is a moderate opinion in
the LDP.

Tokuma Utsunomiya, a former member of the LDP's dovish fa: .ion and currently
a member of the House of Councilors, sympathizes with the prime minister,
saying: "Hr Zenko is preferable m the midst of domination by the hawkish
factions." The prime minister seems to be losing the support of the hawkish
factions to the same extent as he i: gaining sympathy from someone like

Hr Utaunoniya.

Nevertheless, the prime minister pulls the hawkish groups back to his side
by shifting in his attitude from time to time. Hhile he is eager to attend
the special general meeting of the United Nations for arms reduction he re-
jects endorsement of the antinuclear movement because it will generate an
anti-American atmosphere. He once opposed a big increase in the defense
budget, but in the end he approved it. In regard to the LDP'e requests for
official visits to the Yasukuni Shrine by cabinet members and establishment
of a day to mourn the war dead, the prime minister rejected the former but
accepted the latter by entrusting it to a third party for detailed study.

The prime minister's politics of "harmony" sometimes maintain a balance by
following the strongest forces and the loudest voices. For example, he
appointed members of the Tanaka faction, the largest faction, to various
positions. He accepted reexamination of the green card system. He held back
from addressing political ethics. He raised the producer price of rice in
the last fiscal year. Whether or not these are due to his skillful main-
tenance of political power, at any rate he does not step outside the bounds of
trends within the LDP, which are often marked by overeagernesa. The leading
member of the Suzuki faction says:

"Considering the path towa:d reelection, there are many instances when the
prime minister cannot push through his opinions." lie also admits that the
prime minister's political technique is rather effective.

3

”OFFICIALUSIONIX
I'Ull WIN—non var. unu-

Hhich way this prine minister's sense of balance for the purpose of reelection
directed the course of Japan is a question that will be asked when we look
back at our history in the future.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Honshn 1982

9896
680 : !6105/ 100

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
Ft!!!)FITCJAI.lﬂﬂE(ﬂULY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

POSSIBILITY OF FUKUDA'S BID FOR POHBR DISCUSSED
Tokyo YOHIURI SBIMBUN in Japanese ll Apr 82 p 2

[Text] “The revenue deficit in the FY-Sl budget is going to be big. Since

a revenue deficit is a financial issue, in that sense it becomes a political
issue." Thus predicted former Prime Minister Fukuda. As if to substantiate
his prediction, the issue of the revenue deficit came out at the cabinet meet-
ing and the LDP Executive Committee meeting of the 9th. The government has
begun reexaming its economic management. Although Prime Minister Suzuku still
maintains an aggressive stance and says that "the goal of reducing deficit
government bonds to zero remains unchanged," he is undeniably caught in a
pinch.

0n the other hand, Mr Fukuda avoids talking about the political situation as
much as possible and remains calm and quiet. "hat has happened to Mr Pukuda's
other prediction of "a great disturbance in the world?" Contrary to former
Prime Minister Tanaka, who is much talked about one way or another, Mr Pukuda
continues to hold an uncanny silence.

'This year is going to be a year of much disturbance. Even though we do not
move, heaven will move."

At the beginning of this year, Mr Fukuda uttered sensational remarks one
after another. He may have spoken them because of his bitter feeling toward
"the Suzuki-Tanaka axis," which dared to appoint Mr Nikaido secretary general
in the cabinet reshuffle at the end of last year. A more likely reason is,
however, that he was picturing to himself the thorny path toward November's
LDP presidential election, which will include the first verdicts for politici-
ans who are defendants in the All Nippon Airways case of the lockheed trial
scheduled in the spring, a verdict for former Prime Minister Tanaka which
early this year was expected to be handed down this fall, a difficult recon-
structuion of national finances and economic management, and furthermore,
external pressures surrounding trade and defense. It is not hard to imagine
that Mr Pukuda was picturing himseff the path at the beginning of this year.

The political schedule Mr Fukuda fixed is certainly falling to pieces at least
partially because of countermeasures (7) by the Tanaka side, including a
delay in the verdict on Tanaka. However, the revenue deficit has become a
political issue entangled with speculation on the political situation. The
Suzuki administration is being forced to correct its economic management

F!!!()FIIC1AI.IIBII(IILN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

policies. At this time. is Hr Fukudu ready to change his previous attitude
of "supporting Suzuki" and become "active?" Attention in the political arena
is now focused on just this point.

Recently a Diet member of a certain large faction visited Hr Pukuda. Hr .
Fukuda pointed out to him again the importance of the revenue deficit issue
and told his the following: "Hr Suzuki's reelection lust be considered care-
fully. ﬂowever, the question is who is to succeed." Restraininz the Diet
matter who replied, "Hr Pukuda. you should becose prise sinister," lir Pukuda
supposedly said that "the age of the new leaders will inevitably cone, but
before them how about Mr Komoto (director of the Economic Planning Agency)?"
According to the analysis of the same experienced Diet member, Hr Fukuds is
in a complex state of mind: (1) Although he has doubts about Suzuki's reelec-
tion, he cannot find a good candidate that he can support as Suzuki's succes-
sor. (2) He cannot completely deny his own desire for a comeback as prime
sinister. (3) Although he feels a closeness to Mr Komoto. the situation has
not yet reached the stage for a "Fukuda-Komoto tie."

Although he is very critical of the concentration of power in the Tanaka
.faction that is the other support of the Suzuki administration and distrusts
Suzuki's politics, Hr Fukuda still cannot decide to take action to turn the
political situation. His mind is still unsettled. As if seeing through his
mind, the Suzuki and Tanaka factions sake cynical remarks about Fukuda. "Be-
cause Pukuda himself wants to relieve the prime minister, he neither seriously
supports Komoto nor takes rough actions to antagonize us" (a leading member
of the Suzuki faction).

Putting aside these speculations fros the outfield bleachers, Hr Pukuds
himself enjoys his present position considerably by making pinpricks at
Suzuki and Tanaka. "Although nothing will happen by sumser, there will be
many crises by November's presidential election. I will store my energy
for a while." "The basis of people's trust in politics is clean politics."

Then. when and how will Hr Pukuda turn to the offensive? In particular, how
is he going to respond to the-presidential election? This is going to be a
focus of attention.

"If the vrime minister's leadership is firm, there will be no primary election.
How Hr Nskasone (director of the Administrative Management Agency) acts will
determine the future political situation."

Although Mr Pukuda has been negative about the primary election because he
has thought it would have too many adverse effects and until last year
declared that there would be no primary election, since he is one of the two
powerful men along with former Prime Minister Tanaka. indications of reorgani-
zation in the political arena such as "a Pukuda-Kosoto tie" or "Pukuda-Komoto
plus the middle-of-the-road parties" glimmer fitfully in the distant

background.

FOIIGJIIICIAI.llBliCl'lJV
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In any case, he is certainly expecting "a great diuturbnncc” to ucrur between
8 June, when verdicts will be handed down to the defendants in All Nippon
Airways case of the Lockheed trial, and the middle of next year. Pbrler
Prime Hinieter Innate, Pnkuda'o rival, in also buey every day tightening up
his own culp as if to say "Be aware of Pukude."

COPYRIGHT: Youiuri Shinbunshn 1982

9896
080: 6105/ 98

MWWMY
FUR UtI'ILlAL 03!. Uth

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

NAKASOﬂE'S DILEMMA DESCRIBED

Tokyo THE DAILY YOMIURI in English 8 May 82 p 3

["Political But" colm by Kenji Kitaharn]

[Text]

4M mid-I“! ‘3‘ III. m

COPYRIGBT :

C80 :

nmmmmummmm
mbltlonnndnottohouuldve.lmn
never tote Any InIunIIve.”

That no m‘m o! Yummy» Nt-
mono.dmw-mruotthom
mm When: mambo I; own
In the ponuonl would at n on. than
poﬂﬂambtlncsttnodnpnnlnahrn
nortodotunnqulmy.

Nammntmnollduaolmoldm
WarntnmtntIMMnmo!
mmmummmnm-
“Mano-Inn.

manuuonmn yum
Mcw mm mm
sectional upon. to be ammo In
npottonul
:nInbtmIve atom tobaconlpucd InJul

memmmm Baton vIIIbo

It
of
or
y.

rocketed In tho awn-pew: Pony;
(we) mum election W :or

mm mm upon bo' Inn-on.
nntl‘l‘oohlo Know. anew-um d
mWW.A¢my.uuu&
tomato. mu clan w tot-norm
mum-mum nndudupenlns
"loam mmmumn. much:-
«non! ot the Selina M W
Annemnndnloxunu. «mum
Denounce-W Pony, I: oondncuna
nnooenncotocﬂuwl’pm.
8mm. chum“ tool Ram's plans
”chow.
numyumwuumzmuum-
aonolnnovmdentIumkolnd-
mun ntonn u {omrm n-
mmmnuomordnownm
compliant! unuu u on or the ("ot-
"anathema.
mmwmmmmwmo

hm.houmnnnyﬂnnnmwotyw

The Daily Youuri 1982

6120/27]. 8

«at-mm. '

Onootzhemntoibomwymont
Inc an: or walnuts-nun utonn In IIne
mmmmmm'smmum

am.muuamummmo
numtutovmchshomdeomm
mmmuonumunn-
tom. no. n cry to: balm-a mm
mm by Komolo :3 NM! rival
ummat.

In “III situation um mm to
IW III: pom-Ion by owns the
mwoonunuopuulnxm' mm-
muvcntonn.

“New ventund. noIhIns “Inca." Na-
mono nppuontly would nu to Ian:
mum; tromthhbmnrb.

The on»: mm II we youths. ﬂa-
mommybonbutowtmdoddln:
votoltm.unppomdbyhuncuon
mmammmw
bymmdumunmmabe-
can... of the bounce of pour.

nthlooccum Noumwmnnnonncc
thntho'ulnotmnlnuupnllunnm
ohcnonnndthochevmnwonm

In order to any out «mutt-mu n-

tormlnnbldtoucmmumramﬂ.
RaucomutopntrJtumculnw
tho: an own not! mm :uuons
mummmumm
mwmmmummmnz
totollwauam.
mauMnoeencounouthukIndotape-
mutton.
anunnunocnnnnmmnuupo-
IIIIonI alas-non VIII develop In 0113 my
ngmmzmmum
Butthonnemwbonoomerchoicebot
mmuunpomawzmummz
Mammal-mm .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL Mil) SOCIOLOGICAL

NAKASONE FACTION'S ROLE MALYZED
Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English 18 Kay 82 p 10

["Political Scene" column by 'i'ctcuo Tamara: "Rakasone Faction any “we Deciding

Power"!
Mhawiqupwual mwﬂmuadunmimm
[Text] circus that Yuuhin Nahum. m away. M U he did. Jam's palms would
waldUnAdminimuveum-‘w www.1tu'enbowddbcn
Agency. and his (action will hm undue» prohchilily an NW mid halt the
“Mmmwmdmmml mthdtheTamanGSuntlmm-md
-Denocnm Pmy': waidcnﬁaldocﬁon mmmwummw
mmum.mmumﬁez Wmnlrm.mmh~
the Nazam 1mm. 0 "uni-mum gone and Nahum joined but we: the
action" aliynd with minimum Tam how at "mum" there «and be a
and Suzuki locum. could My meet clutter um one (out mm can not
OnSwiiCabM'suuﬂllmmu magma-mum
inch award "anti-mam" tuna. and allct much Won. Sunk! mid be

mm O ".3:me g... Mamexpecled Mild 13mm
uyztmamﬁgm W mg ”cg ma gu meme lot rue-I no: ":3th ml

Dmcml‘l‘ahioxomolodunm under such emu-mu. one cannot
mm Plant-Ins Amy. and pm Get deny the possibility out the W (ac.
ml Iclm Nahum 0' the Science and no» will change its mind and may pin
Tum Amy hm expand their the "nus-mammal!" cmpwheo mecca-
inunl‘m to run in the election It NW mu arm-A M poem. a mill." View
www.m'ﬂlhtwcm- anwl’doesnammmmmn‘s
dues. OM 0* W“ the“ must 5' chats to meted Suzuki. but than is no
heldoccotdlulopmymla.‘fb|il.ﬂ «aﬁmmtmmummﬂdy
MummeMn-nmmmwmbem cauﬁdltelobecmthenntpmnicti‘c
medwbolduﬂmekdiwmwm mum.myootiskeepin¢ocmu

unto-wmwwmm mwummmmwmammm
8w!“ is Rf! lid! to N m In 0* tin-l mum at the mm unaided»! elec-
puioency. uou and one Mun cm 0! Japan:

01! mm Mullmitmhmde ”W"
cided m be "macaw." it would not eu-
Mnceﬂsclnmolmnimme out

COPYRIGM‘: 1982 The “than Kauai Shinbunsha, Inc.

CSO: 6120/270 9
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

CHARGED NATURE OF LABOR SPRING OWNSIVB ANALYZKD
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHDBUN in Japanese 16, 17, 18 Apr 82
[16 Apr 82 p 2]

[Text] "It will conclude with a bluff fight." (Top-level executive of the
General Council of Trade Unions of Japan) The 1982 spring offensive was the
first "spring offensive without a transportation strike" in the history of
spring offensives because a strike of the Iajor private railway companies and
the Japanese National Railways was averted. Amid the adainistrative reform
storm and the criticism of "the good old government will foot the bill" atti-
tude, there is no way of concealing the ebbing of the National Council of Gov-
ernment and Public Workers Union (Kankoro), which until now has taken upon
itself the role of axis of the labor aovenent. The labor tide has started to
shift from Kankoro to private union leadership centered in the labor front
Unification Preparatory Association (Toitsu Juabi-kai).

National Council of Government and Public Workers Union Disheartened

Kaoru Ota. chairman of the General Council of Trade Unions of Japan (Sohyo),
who is bath the originator and father of the spring offensive, preached the
"end of the spring offensive" in 1975 with the consent: "A settlement was
reached on the price offered by the employers via their response to the iron
and steel workers." It is forecast that this year's spring offensive wage in-
crease will soaehow reach the 7 percent level and "actual disposable income
will increase about 2 percent." (Chairman Hiyata of the Metal Workers Federa-
tion) And there is no feeling of defeat in the labor unions. Rather, it is
held that private industrial unions, such as the International Metal Workers
Federation-Japan Council's col-Ion front of steel. electronics and automobile
workers and the General Federation of Private Railway and Bus Workers Unions
of Japan (Shitetsu Soren) have "fought well."

Ksnkoro, through the National Railway Workers Unions (Kokuro) and the National
Railway locomotive Engineers Union (Doro), and Sohyo. in which Kankoro occupies
the main current, have been battered. The fact of "no JNR strike" for 2 con-
secutive years has clearly given the impression of a decline in Kankoro's
power. Given the stormy sea of the "administrative reform spring offensive,"
Kokuro officials have been locked in a prone position since the beginning of
the year, saying: "If possible, we want to avoid a strike." The criticism
that the workplace discipline is Is: has also helped, and it may be accurate
to say that Kokuro is "no longer able to wage a strike."

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rise of Labor l-‘ront Unification Preparatory Association

0n the one hand, Shitetsu Soren, the main power in Sohyo affiliated private in-
dustrial unions, made application to participate in Toitsu Julbi-kai before the
spring offensive, and intensified its "separation from the government unions."
An illustration of the coordination of strike dates strategy until now is that
Sohyo promoted coordination with Kokuro. Nevertheless, Shitetsu Soren indepen-
dently set a strike for the 13th and 16th, and after that the Council of Public
Corporation Workers Union (Korokyo), such as Kokuro, went along with fhem. de-
ciding to strike for half a day on the 13th. Backbiting con-ants, such as “we
carried a heavy burden" or "an ugly woman's persistent attachment," were heard
from within Shitetsu Soren. Chairman Katayama of the Federation of Independent
Unions (Churitsu Roren) (chairman of the Federation of Electrical workers Unions)
has predicted that "leadership by the private unions will be strengthened more
and more."

Toitsu Jumbi-kai is at the stage of recognizing participation of the second
echelon of Sohyo, such as Shitetsu Soren and the National Trade Union of Metal
and Engineering Workers, on the 17th. If so, influential private industrial
unions will be assembled in Toitsu JuIbi-kai and about 6.3 million washers
will collectively have the strength to match the membership of Sohyo (6.57
million menbers). It is inevitable that in the fall Toitsu Jmi-kai will
expand and reorganize into a "council," and will assume leadership of the
spring offensive next year.

In some ways, this spring offensive was also the spring offensive which ques-
tioned how the "Toitsu Juliai-kai spring offensive should be." At the beginning
of April, Noboru Goto, president of Tokyo Electric Express Railway, Ltd, ob-
served that "this year will see a serious spring offensive in that Toitsu
Jumbi-kai has been allowed to take root," and that he would send back a
generous answer to Shitetsu Soren as a congratulatory gift for its joining
Toitsu Jumbi-kai. Management's "parental affection" in fostering the sprout-
ing Toitsu Jumbi-kai could be seen at every turn.

Birth Pains in Next Year's Spring Offensive

As for the rise of Toitsu Junbi-kai, the view concerning the National Spring
Offensive United Front Congress, comprised of Sohyo and Churitsu Roren and
others, that "next year Dhuritsu Roren will pull away fron the congress and
the congress will not be organized" is spreading. (All-Japan Telecomnice-
tions Workers Union official) They have been placed in a life or death
crisis.

Chairman Kataysna himself, one of the rounders of Toitsu Junbi-kai, spoke
ambiguously with these connents: "If Toitsu Jubi-kai is substantially
strengthened, naturally the private united front will become its axis. How-
ever. if the view of labor front unity does not grow a little more, the
spring offensive united front may last only one more year." It is certain
that the "decline of the spring offensive united front" has drawn near.

The end of the spring offensive. Granting that the spring offensive format

does not disappear, the spring offensive formla to date, whereby the wage
increase market is pushed up via the effect of riding together under the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

backdrop of a strike, has, in substance, became a mere shell of itself. And
the Sohyo style labor linkage with Kankoro as its core is standing at a turn-
ing point.

In such a situation, will the Toitsu Juﬁi-kai and private unions' spring
offensive give birth to a new spring offensive formula? The private railways'
labor and management have already begun to grope for a labor-management coop-
erative "united response forlula" similar to that of the steel workers. hen
within Sohyo, the assessment has been voiced that "because it will be the end
of a one-shot response comes to the forefront: we will do our utmost until a
reply is given; it is worth a three-shot response." (Sohyo official)

Therefore, this also has the defect of making it easy to fall into a "spring
offensive controlled" by management. While Sohyo and Kankoro are searching
for the path to a painful rebirth, in the meantime, the private unions for
which Toitsu Junbi-kai is a aother's wonb seem to be experiencing the birth
pains of a new spring offensive pattern.

[17 Apr 82 p 2]

[Text] "It is presumptuous for us to grade this year's wage increase offen-
sive. but won't everyone give us a prize for our fighting spirit?" 0n the 8th,
when a simultaneous response was given to the metal workers federation (Inter-
national Hetal Workers Federation-Japan Council, six metal and electrical
workers unions), Ichiro Shioji, chairman of the Federation of Automobile work-
ers Unions, boastfully made the above comments. The rate of consumer price
increase in FY 81 was lo percent, a reduction by half over the previous year
(7.8 percent). Since it was expected that this year a wage market "in con-
forlity with prices" would drop sharply compared to last year's 7.7 percent
average, this may be called an expression of confidence from labor, whose out-
look was that a 7-percent increase could be maintained throughout the Japan
Council.

However, the view is strongly held that in this year's spring offensive, the
employers judged there would be no transportation strike by private and gov-
ernnent railway workers from the very beginning, and joining forces, they
worked out a higher than anticipated wage increase. The response to the steel-
workers, which is the standard for the response to the private railway workers,
was 13,100 yen, a 6.36-percent increase, less than last year by only 400 yen
or 0.63 percent. The private railway workers answer topped the steelworkers
offer by 1,200 yen during the last 2 years. The private railway management
promptly declared early inApril that "a difference of 1,200 yen will be main-
tained this year aswell." It can be said that the private railway response
was set at more than 14,300 yen.

High offer Was Effective

At this stage, the observation that ”There will hardly he a transportation
strike" began to be made by some within the Japan Council. After all, the
second reply to the private railway workers which came on the 12th was settled
at 14,500 yen, which added 200 yen to the bottom line, plus cost of living
allowance (1,000 yen beginning in October).

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

While the negotiations were continuing to the utmost before the second reply,
there were even union officials in the major private railway workers unions
who were saying, "If we get 16,500 yen, there will be no strike even without
the living allowance given last year." It can be said that the employers'
deep attachment to a "no strike" was the reason for the high response.

One person connected with the National Railway workers Union (Kokuro) made
the following analysis: "It was handled perfectly by nenagsnent. Kokuro and
Doro could not have a strike independently. If there is no private railway
workers strike, a strike by Kokuro and Doro would automatically disappear.
Next year and thereafter, private railway management will lake a-high offer
and try to continue the 'no strike'; aren't they aiming at a single shot re-
sponse in the future?"

Kokuro and Doro Also Pull Back tron Strike

Amid severe criticism of JHR, such as blackmarketing and working while drunk.
Kokuro and Doro have conspicuously lost ground. Nevertheless, this year from
their position of honor as the "core unions" in the spring offensive up until
now. Kokuro and Doro set the strike dates-—a half day on the 13th beginning
with the first train departure until noon for the National Railways counter
trains in the capital and Osaka areas, in unison with the lajor private rail-
way workers; on the 15th for the principal arterial railroads; and on -he
16th, simultaneously throughout the entire country. But from the very begin-
ning, they had no intention of striking. There are indications that even re-
garding the simultaneous strike with the private railway unions on the 13th,
Kokuro approached the private railway unions about averting a strike.

What will happen to the private railway unions strike next year and thereaften
given the phenomenon of Kokuro and Doro which joined forces with them in the
transportation strike calling for a "pull back from striking?" Likewise,
management does not have a clear and accurate outlook, saying, "If possible,
we will settle with a one-shot response. and we would like to stop making our
passengers nervous. but it will take 4 or 5 more years." (Managing Director
Sudo of the Japan Privately Managed Railway Association)

Shitetsu Soren (whose chairman is Takeshi Kurokawa and which has 203,000 mem—
bers) holds a pessimistic view on a no-strike settlement. "The problem is the
extent of the reply; it can't be said that the pattern next year will be the
same (as this year, which had an early settlement). It will still take time
to arrive at a one-shot response. Likewise, there are times when the strike
itself is the objective (for maintaining the organization)." (Chief Secretary
Tanura)

One key forecasting the direction of the private railway strike is the course
of Toitsu Jumbl-kai (Labor Front Unification Preparatory Association), which
took leave of the Kankoro type labor movement which makes the strike omnipo-
tent. and is advancing with the leadership of the private labor unions. Even
though it was shelved at the managers' conference of Toitsu Jumbi-kai held on
the 16th. Shitetsu Soren's application with Toitsu Junbi-kai is an already
established route. There is also the view that "management's intention in
hoping that Shitetsu Soren will affiliate with Toitsu Jumbi-kai (whose aim is
the no-strike line) is working behind this year's high offer to the private
railways."

l3

FOI:OF11ClAl.lEﬂ5(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Break-up Deepens in Korokyo

Moreover, the breakup within the Council of Public Corporations workers Unions
(Korokyo), such as Kokuro and Japan Telecoamnnications workers Union (Zendent-
su), is showing signs of deepening further. Even concerning this spring's
basic wage rate increase, it was strongly voiced within Zendentsu where busi-
ness is good that "Let's increase the difference with JNR where there is a
deficit," but in the end, it seemed to settle at about the same rate as in the
past. Apart fron the reality, dissatisfaction has accuaulated with Korokyo
which took pride in being a aonolith, and there is the potential for the cri-
sis of dissolution.

"The private railway unions are going to Toitsu Jumbi-kai, and Kanboro is being
cut up. Nottosnntion the private railway objections, the decision for no
strike will unnistakabiy take root beginning next year." Such comments free a
Kokuro official appear to suggest a spring offensive next year and thereafter.

[18 Apr 82 p 2]

[Text] The backers are outside the mosquito net. The Japan Federation of
Employers Association (Nikkeiren), the General Council of Trade Unions of
Japan (Sohyo) and the Ministry of Labor are the backers needed for the spring
offensive. The wage increase in this year's spring offensive was decided with-
out concern for these backers, who were all put outside the mosquito net. For
example....

"Re are not saying, proceed with a wage increase in accordance with the produc-
tivity standard principle, but instead we are saying we want to temper the pro-
ductivity standard principle with the ability to pay.“ (Chairman Otsuki of
Nikkeiren at a regular interview on the 15th)

'This year's spring offensive is full of changes in comparison with the past.
Official sources are talking about everything from the content of the reply
to the tine period. An illegal act!" (Chairman Makieda of Sohyo at a press
conference after a meeting with Minister Hatsumura of the Ministry of Labor
on the 12th)

"Each enterprise decided independently on a wage increase with both labor and
management. No problems appeared. Our turn never came." (Official of the
Ministry of Labor after agreement in the wage increase negotiationswith the
private railways)

Nikkeiren Ignorca

It was Nikkeiren which waved the flag of wage restraint, insisting on "a wage
increase within the limits of a productivity increase rate." But when the re-
sults were known, the major private companies went with a 7-percent wage in-
crease. noth labor and management effectively ignored the Nikkeiren guidelines,
and decided on "their own" wage with labor and Ianagement cooperating. It can
be said that Nikkeren's wage increase theory ended in "empty talk."

16

FIIRCMWWCJA1.U§B(IVLY
FOR OFTHC1A1.USEIDNLN

Condition of Major Private Industrial Union Rage Increases

Last Year's Years
Amount and Base Actual Resulishverb of In-
Percentage wage (yen and age ploy-

of Offer (yen) percentage) Age mant

Electronics (16 companies) 13,072 + a 175,560 13,346 (8.1) 32.7 12.2
(7.5+ o)

Automobiles (11 companies) 13,223(7.4) 179,624 13,611 (8.0) 34.6 11.6

Iron and 'steel (5 companies) 13,100(6.36)206,000 13,500 (7.0) 35.0 15.0

Shipbuilding (7 companies) 13,100(6.6) 197,366 13,500 (7.1) 37.5 16.0

Power utilities (9 companies) 13,800(6.3) 219,062 16,300 (6.9) 35.5 16.6
Private railways (8 companies) 16,500(7.06)205,667 16,700 (7.6) 39.6 19.0

(N.B.) Only steel differs from the other industries in the standard laborer's
formula.

This is also the reason for the weak-hearted words from Chairman Otsuki, speak-
ing on behalf of Nikkeiren: "He want to temper the productivity standard prin-
ciple."

The situation is the same with Sohyo. In addition to the "pressure“ from ad-
ministrative reform, disorder in the National Railways labor union which
symbolizes Kankoro is the subject of all-out public criticism. Even though
Sohyo wanted to get a word in on the spring offensive, the circumstances did
not allow it. Shitetsu Soren, which leans most toward Kankoro among the pri-
vate labor unions, explicitly broke away from Kankoro in this year‘s spring
offensive and joined the private unions. Sohyo, that is, Kankoro, stood com-
pletely alone. The spring offensive was an affair symbolizing change.

In this situation, a no-strike spring offensive materialized for the fist time
and, as it were, generally settled down with a wage increase standard. The
Ministry of Labor also has no turn in an undisputed spring offensive. A spring
offensive close to the Ministry of Labor's ideal materialized but ironically
resulted in dimming the significance of the existence of the Ministry of Labor.

Disposable Income Increase Expected

In this year’s spring offensive, labor and management of the major private
companies realized a 7-percent wage increase without being bothered by the
backers. Since many factors, such as business trends, the enterprise's earn—
ings, labor-management relations, trends in other companies in the same indus-
try, and labor supply and demand were counted in the 7 percent. The wisdom of
both labor and management was pooled.

Hhat influence will this wage increase have on business (especially the indivi-
dual consumer) snd prices?

15

FE”!(MFFICIAI.I£5EI€HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First of all, let's look at the influence on individual consumption. It is said
that one reason for the stagnation in consumption is the decrease in real wages.
Especially with the natural tax increase, real disposable income has dropped for
2 consecutive years. There is no hope for a recovery in consumption. However,
the Ministry of Labor's analysis is that with the 7 percent increase, "about a

1 percent increase in real disposable income is firm."

The condition for a recovery in individual consumption has been tentatively
arranged, and the prominent view is that "the psychological effect of gaining

a 7-percent increase will stimulate individual consumption." (Ministry of
Labor) Nevertheless, considering future business trends, there are also impor-
tant factors such as the decrease in overtime work and a constriction of the
bonus. There is little possibility of total cash wages expanding more than last
year.

And even considering the influence on prices, the general view is that "I don't
think it will be a factor in price increases." (Chairman Otsuki) However, this
does not mean it is not a matter for concern. "when the future international
competitive ability is considered, I feel it was a little high." (Chairman
Otsuki)

Further Acceleration of Private Leadership

Certainly, the United Autombile Workers of the United States and Rest Germany's
Metal workers Union accepted an actual decrease in wages in this year's wage
revision. Concerning wage increase, a phenomenon of passing each other occurred
between Japan and Europe and the United States. This is a matter of concern for
management looking at the mid- and long-term views.

However, the majority in the financial world voice the opinion that the movement
of "employment over wages" in Europe and the United States is "two or three
rounds behind Japan." It is not thought that a 7-percent wage increase will
have an effect on international competitive ability.

Concerning this year's spring offensive, certain persons in the financial world
stated: "Real wages increased and public sentiment will stabilize." It can
also be seen that in thiayear's spring offensive, Japan's labor and management
made the "wisest" decision both macroeconomically and politically.

In this year's spring offensive, this pattern became quite clear--the influen-
tial power of the old backers dimmed and the negotiations of private labor and
management will decide the spring offensive market. Such movement will
accelerate even more in the spring offensives next year and thereafter.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

9600
080: 4105/93

16

FIN!(NHH(JAI.[EHE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL All) SOCICXJXEICAL

MNDLING 0? [’40 Human 188m CRITICIZXD

Tokyo BUNGBI SHUNJU in Japanese by 2 pp 136-146

[Article by writer and Diet member Shintaro Ishihera: "P-lo Phantom Deception"]
[Text] Philistine Politics Rejected

Unsound ”Diet Policy"

Broadly speaking, as long as there are internal politics and external pol-
itics, the political aims of any government are varied. In addition, those
aims are organically intertwined, and the political means and methods for

their attainment are implemented while interacting with each other in a com-
plex manner.

In this sense, except for very unusual circumstances under given conditions in
a given era, a singular and absolute politicslaim or theme is difficult to
conceive. The priorities within a variety of political aims are not deter-
mined easily, and if they are determined they are inevitably altered due to
changes in eras or other political coefficients.

It is very dangerous for politicians in positions of leadership--i.e., a
limited group of people who have a powerful influence not only on politics
but also on society in general from the standpoint of social engineering, in-
cluding the spirit and psychology of the national masses--to easily deternine
the priorities of sins within the politics at their disposal. The upshot is
that the range of political choices is narrowed down and rendered inflexible,

while the nation and the people are likely to be coupelled to bear unnecessary
sacrifices and losses.

'l‘oday, unnoticed by the people, politicians are always acutely sensitive to
the handling of legislative and political affairs by the Diet and the govern-
ment. There is a firm order of top priorities concerning political goals. It
is called "Diet policy" and all political issues mat yield to Diet policy.
Nevertheless, ”Diet policy" is merely a means of Diet operation and should

be subordinated to concrete political issues. But in the present politics,
the cart is being placed before the horse.

l7

MWLMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Roughly speaking, a judgaent of political values is made only by induction
in relation to politically indispensable matters-mainly the budget and elec-
tions.

However, a budget is only a budget, be it the main budget or a supplemental
budget. It is merely a political derivative, while an election is merely a
component of politics. Of course, it depends on the nature of things, but a
political theme which can influence the fate of a nation can also become a
factor in basically influencing a national budget in proportion to its in-
portance. It can also provide the political impetus for a new election, de-
pending on the political situation. Nonetheless, in Japan's politics today,
the cart is placed before the horse, and regardless of the importance of a
political issue, discussions are held only in the framework of such a per-
version.

This has resulted in a serious confrontation in Diet deliberations, and the
more likely an issue is to evoke heated debate, the more possible it is for a
budget to be denied speedy approval, depending on the Diet policy of the op-
position. Therefore, in order to provide impetus for a new election, the
ruling party would attempt to water down the key political issues by resort-
ing to superficial debate and deliberation, while the opposition would denand
concessions from the government party, irrationally distorting the substance
of the issues, in order to prevent the formation and inlementation of the
budget. manwhile, whenever there is the possibility of an issue being
linked to an election, it is customary for the substance of the issue to be
diffused amid stormy debate from the two sides.

The individual political issues which become the subject of Diet deliberation
constitute the heart of politics, while the derivative issues and procedures
such as budgets and elections are mere auxiliary affairs. However, the
sterility of modern Japanese politics stems from the reversal of these two

elements. It could perhaps be offered as solid proof of the qualitative de-
cay of an advanced culture which Sei Ito predicted long ago in his thesis on
culture during the early stage of Japan's consumer society.

The formation and implementation of a budget are indispensable in government
administration. However, as long as the separation between the executive and
legislative branches of government is a key prerequisite for democracy, it
cannoc be considered sound from the standpoint of the functioning of democracy
for the concepts of the executive branch to coincide completely with those of
the legislative branch in which a political party plays a role, although that
party happens to be the party of a long-reighing government. The formation and
implementation of a budget are most important to a goverment official, next tc
his life. Or rather, it is the raison d'etre of a government official.
Despite this, and regardless of the existence of a large nusber of former of-
ficials as Diet members of the ruling party, it is definitely unsound for them
to completely dominate the party's concept of values and purpose. The absolute
control of the Japanese nation by its bureaucrats is clearly evident, judging
from the concepts held by the ruling party.

18

mammals”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As long as politics reflect their concept of valuasuor rather, their sense
of highest priority regarding their methods and practices as govern-eat of-
ficialsnthere can be no hope for dynamic politics. There would be no reason
to expect foresight on the part of politicians to transcend the present or to
haVe a historical awareness. Their concepts should not move ahead of the
cycle of budget formation, nor could they willingly accept the correction
and revision of their past errors due to their excessive self-pride.

To conduct all political affairs on the basis of induction from the forma-
tion and implementation of the budget--thet is, the nethods of the present
Liberal Democratic Party (LB?) and its govern-ant in placing top priority
on "Diet policy"-~|nay be easily explained away as self-defense, even when a
basic error has been emitted, but to that extent they are only being irre-
sponsible and philistinely customary.

I would venture to say that the charge often made by the ruling party, to the
effect that the perennial innaturity unique to the opposition and its irrespon-
sible brazennesa in refusing to acknowledge that fact has produced the present
state of Diet policy, is actually the opposite of reality. That state was
actually derived from the disposition of the ruling LDP itself.

 

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. tip of Japan and Its Environs
2. 405 nautical silos
3. 508 nautical miles
a. P’m
about 400 nautical miles
(SOO-lb bombs x lo aboard)
5. 3-15 about 280 nautical miles
6. P-éBJ about 250 nautical miles
7. P-l about 200 nautical niles

8. 335 nautical miles
9. 895 nautical miles
to. 412 nautical miles
ll. about 800 nautical stiles

Goverment Views Fail To Present Purspective

My preface has been somewhat lengthy. The majority of the people who pre- .
sented the LDP with an unexpectedly decisive victory, albeit tacitly, in the
previous general election of 1980. had hoped that the party in power would
bring about a drastic refer: in response to this turning point in history.
and to make possible a new developent on the basis of the reform. I have
been frustrated and irritated by the almost total failure of the government
and its party to respond to this challenge following the election. The rea-
son is, ever since I becaue a politician, I have seen with my own eyes the un-
changing philistine attitude of the L0? in its political management.

The constitutional debate sparked by Justice Minister Okuno, which became an
issue in the postelection Suzuki cabinet; the problem of interpreting the three
antinuclear principles relative to the pros and cons of port calls and passage
through territorial waters under present international conditions; the con-
fusion arising from the interpretation of the U.s.-Japsn ”alliance" in the
joint statement which was signed by the prime minister himself; the adminis-
trative reform which was tentatively effective in bringing about a zero ceiling
in this year's fiscal budget, but which has subsequently shown signs of taper-
ing off; especially the major overhaul of the totally dilapidated National
Railway Sytem, which not only is the greatest minus factor in Japan's govern-
ment and finance, but could also adversely affect the spiritual health and
judgment of the masses; and the futile controversy in the budget committee

this year over the remodelling of the F4 jet, which was an appropriate

medium for the dispersal of previous deceptive notions concerning self-defense--
despite the fact that these are all more or less equally crucial issues sur-
rounding the nation's fate, and even today when their political coefficients
have clearly changed in comparison to the points in time when their seeds were
planted or were first brought to attention, the goverment has not rendered
any statement or manifested any attitude which would contribute fsva'ably to
any solution or progress of the issues in terms of the interest of the nation

and the people. The views expressed by the goverment have been absolutely
stupid repetitions of past practices.

20

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They are apparently unable to see the steep and treacherous incline of the
stages in history which they themselves have climbed. They barely see the
individual steps, front end back--i.e., the budget cycles--and do not bother to
stop and look back at the steep steps they have climbed or are about to climb.

With regard to the normalization of Japan-South Korea relations, the 11.8.-
Japan security pact, etc., the IDP formerly resorted to free-for-all fighting,
adoption through steamroller tactics, and unilateral adoption in the main Diet
sessions. Moreover, only a minority of the people today criticize as wrong
those choices which could only have been ads by such methods. The opposi-
tion also submitted nunerous proposals of non-confidence, criticized the slow
pace of the administration and conducted nonstop deliberations for as many es
4 days on end, late into the night. To that extent, at least, the people
focused their attention on politics. Today, however, neither the ruling
party nor the opposition has such volition or energy. Hhan did such rigidity
and secrecy begin to set in into real politics, alienating the people? It
probably began under the rule of Prime Minister Sato, who boasted of his long-
reigning government. Moreover, the chronic and endless decline of the LDP pro-
ceeded parallel with it.

It seem that, after the previous general election, the seeds of the key
political issues placed on the agenda were sown mostly during the Sato era.
Witness the establishment of the peace constitution, which was repeatedly men-
tioned by Prime Minister Suzuki in the same words. Witness his statement
that "no constitutional reform will be contemplated during my term of of-
fice"; the three antinuclear principles which were actually two antinuclear
principles according to its rhetoric; the coldblooded abandonment, during ,
party President Isozaki's era, of support for the National Railway's move-
ment to increase productivity for fear of a strike, resulting in the National
Railwsy's ruin and decline; and witness the foolish attempt to decrease the
capability of the P40 planes which were bought at high cost.

Of course, Prime Minister Sato did have a political goal to which he gave high
priorityuthat is, the return of Okinawa. For its early return, regardless of
the costs and apparently denying himself any thought of a wider range of
choices and with surprising casualness, Prime Minister Sato ignored the im-
portance of all other political issues. His merciless curt dismissal of all
cabinet members who caused problems was described as "the cutting off of the
lizard's tail." Probably in his view even a single mosquito which disturbed
the issue of Okinawa's return was cause for anxiety and could not be spared.

Seeds sown During Sato Era

At the time, I made an interpellation before the Budget Comaittee of the Upper
House regarding Prime Minister Sato's attempt to establish the three anti-
nuclear principles by accepting the broad interpretation or' the opposition.

I stated that the denial of port calls and passage through territorial waters
and the renunciation of the "manufacture, possession and entry" of nuclear
weapons was typical Japanese jibberish which ignored the strategic and tacti-
cal principles of self-defense; that it would result in a serious disaster
under certain conditions in the future. I incurred the wrath of Prime

21

mmmmv
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Minister Sato. As I recall, the prime minister said: "Hhat do you mean by
jibberish? If you don't like it, you can leave the party." As long as such
an obstinate "conviction" on the part of the prime minister was based on his
desire for the return of Okinawa, the party probably really had no alter-
native but to quietly follow suit. Nonetheless, the seeds of the three
antinuclear principles, which have gained attention again recently, and the
bombing equipment problem concerning the 9-4, were indeed sown during this
era.

It is unbelievable that even today, when the international situation surround-
ing Japan has changed drastically, the goverr-ent's position on these issues
remains unchanged. Regarding the port calls and passage of nuclear weapons-
carrying warships, Prime Minister Suzuki replied at the outset as a meter of
course: "He will deal with them on the basis of reality." It was probably
an honest reply based on the fact that the political coefficients had changed
since the Sato era, or it was the hackneyed phrase used by politicians who are
not knowledgable about the circustances involved. Ironically, however, from

the standpoint of those who were well-advised, it was a very appropriate state-
ment. '

however, extremely absurd views which were counter to the connonsense of Prime
Minister Suzuki-m man of counonaense who was not an expert regarding such is-
suer-had been pursued as policy throughout the years, beginning with the Ssto
era. The superficial newspapers pointed this out and the government hastily
compelled the prime minister to retract his statement. If the prime min-
ister's advisers had backed his very practical vow to "deal with the situ-
ation realistically," there might have been some debate, but it would have
resulted in a return close to the direction of couponsense. however, politics
emphasizing the supremacy of Diet policy forced a compromise for the sake of
maintaining a pacified Diet policy.

Despite the U.S.-Japan security pact, there is no right on Japan's part to
search U.S. ships entering Japanese ports, and if we consider the case of the
Soviet nuclear submarine which had an accident in the vicinity of the Nansei
Islands and pushed its way through our territorial waters despite warnings
from the Japanese side, Japan does not have the power to check or prevent

the passage of nuclear weapons. If that is so, the problem of port calls and
free passage under the three antinuclear principles is actually a hollow ia-
sue. Also, while the United States and the Soviet Union are laughing behind
our backs, the United States, an ally, carries on a dialog as to whether or.
not it will bring in nuclear weapons.

Therefore, the question is why such a hollow issue is so important. Such

deception could greatly impede the proper awareness of the people who lust
support political choice; when they count. lbreover, this could become a

great strategic advantage to the Soviet Union, an adversary. In fact, the
Kremlin immediately responded to an antinuclear manifesto issued by

Japanese literary figures and called for strong support of the three anti-
nuclear principles. A political principle which does not recognize port
calls and free passage for the ships of the United States, an ally, would
clearly be advantageous to the adversary from both the strategic and tactical

22

mammmomv
FOI'OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY

standpoints if it were to be actually enforced. Even though we are aware
that it is a hollow issue, some people in Japan would use it as a pretext
to accuse the government and the United States, which would become a minor
but effective factor in bringing about political confusion. In any case,
failure to deal with reality and continuing the lies and nonsense which
originated more than a dozen years ago would only result in benefitting the

adversary.

It is said that as long as it is within the time limit of its mandate to rule,
the government could successfully deceive the people. There is arrogance on
the part of the bureaucrats who say, "Let the people come to us," and pre-
sumptuousness in their View that there would be no time to argue the pros and
cons of port calls and free passage in the case of a showdown. At the same
time, they say there may be no chance of it coming to a showdown. As we
wrote in this magazine the other day, it is a baseless optimism which in

fact comes from a typically Japanese world outlook based on insular self-
righteousness.

In fact, the chief cabinet secretary clearly stated that there is some per-
ception gap between the United States and Japan concerning the Soviet Union.
And at a public hearing in the U.S. Congress, former U.S. Ambassador to Japan
Johnson referred to the statement and clearly testified that the ultimate
cause of the crisis in U.S.-Japan relations lies in a perception gap between
the two countries regarding the Soviet Union.

He was probably referring chiefly to awareness of the Soviet military threat,
which constitutes the greatest factor in present international politics, in-
cluding the defense problem. However, there has been no tangible explanation
by the government concerning the difference in perception and, first of all,
there is no reason to expect Japan to have its own information or analysis
which would be the source of such a perception gap. From the standpoint of
preserving U.S.-Japan relations amid the friction centering on several issues,
if there is a perception gap between the U.S. and Japanese Governments concern-
ing the grave question of a Soviet threat, then the Japanese side should pre-
sent its views and propose a debate in order to overcome the gap. However,
that does not seem possible. Typically vague Japanese statements are made for
the sake of preserving U.S.-Japan relations, and still a perception gap is ad-
mitted to exist.

His dissatisfaction with the procedures aside, Prime Minister Suzuki person-
ally signed the recent joint statement expressing satisfaction with the con-

tents. Haanwhile, the cabinet spokesman admitted the existence of a per-
ception gap between the two nations regarding the Soviet Union. Which is

the government's true opinion? If the gap is not crucial to the government,
it should, as the U.S. side has frequently pointed out and Japan has agreed,
assume its "fair" share of the burden for its own security within the frame-
work of retaliatory strategy by the free nations.

Before the percentage of the GNP as allocation for its defense budget or the
number of new planes for purchase are to be discussed, a "fair" share of the
burden can only be realized amid the present international tension, to which

23

IKIlIIﬂﬂCJAI.l!ﬂ£(HULY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Soviet threat is a main contributing factor, by rejecting the habit of seek-
ing help from others on defense~-a habit which was understandable under past
international conditions when Japan did not have its present world statusuand
by shedding the baseless optimism rooted in that habit. But first the decep-
tion which permitted the existence of those factors must be removed.

Incidentally, the government's words and actions concerning the modification
of the P-lo fighter plane, which recently elicited a fierce debate in the Diet,
merely added to the clearly erroneous government view when it became an is-
sue during the Sato era, or rather to the unquestionable deception without
any attempt to correct it. The F4. issue is actually not limited to the
strategic value of the fighter-bomber. The debate between the government and
the opposition over the plane symbolizes the strange and dangerous idealism
which has prevailed in postwar Japan and which is present in the "peace con-
stitution." It also symbolizes the empty rhetoric based on unrealistic poli-
tical rules which prevail only in Japanese politics and the detriment to the
national interest which is fostered by such rhetoric. Otherwise, it was a
great opportunity to stem the negative trend and to restore a sound policy.

Absurd F-lo Debate

The Defense Agency attempted to increase its defense capability as demnded
and concurrently to cut its spending in various areas to conform with admin-
istrative reforms. By equipping the previous second-line F-lo fighter with
modern electronic instruments and devices, it planned to increase its longev-
ity as a self-defense weapon from the original 3,000 hours to 5,000 hon-s
(about 10 years in real term). By recycling obsolete equipment, as it were,
it contemplated its inclusion in the defense power buildup plan. The F4,
costing 3.8 billion (yen) per plane at the contracting point in FY-TI, was
trial manufactured at a cost of 1.33 billion (yen) in “-81 and 391.; at a
cost of 8.496 billion (6en) in “-82. After anticipated results are con-
firmed, it is planned to similarly modify the other P-a's in order to boost
their capability and prolong their longevity. If the initial trial manufac-
ture is successful, the cost of modifying the remaining r-a'. beginning 3 years
later with the second plane will cost no more than 1 billion (yen) per plane,
and for certain types of combat it will have a capability equal to the 17-15
fighter. Incidentally, the cost of the P-15 at its contracting point in FY-82
was as high as 11.2 billion (yen) per plane. Although perhaps not equal to the
F-15, the 132 F-lo's in Japanese possession could be seen as an investment with
a very high rate of return. The modifications will involve changing the radar
system to add the capability to attack a low target in a low-altitude approach,
and adding a central computer similar to the one mounted on the P-15, thus

increasing accuracy by replacing the simple, human-eye operated bombing sys-
tem with a modern electronic device.

The Japan Socialist Party (JSP) raised opposition to the proposal and the
Diet recessed amid turmoil. From the standpoint of the JSP, which emphasizes
unarmed neutrality--i.e., against the use of a single rifleuthe argument is
that, for whatever reason, it is a breach of promise to suddenly reequip the
F-lo, whose electronic bombaight was removed because of a comitment made

210

MMMIBEONLY
F0! OFFIOAL USE ONLY

during the Sato era, with the same device to improve its capability. The J8?
considers it a deviation from the explanation made in the Diet.

From the standpoint of the Defense Agency, it wanted to ask why the JSP was
acting at this stage like it was half asleep, but it refrained. Instead,
the agency explained that, in view of the general improvement of a broad
range of weapons, the restoration of an accurate bombing capability to the
17-4 does not pose the relatively aggressive threat to an adversary that it
did before. Moreover, the P-15, which is superior to the P4, has subse-
quently been purchased and deployed, so the agency assumed it was understood
that the basis for the F-4 threat had become relatively nonexistent with the
change of times. In fact, the 17-10 was not a threat during the Sato era.

Diet member Oide, who made the statement opposing the reequipment of the F-4,
also demanded removal of the bombsight from the F-15 as an excessive threat.
The issue was skirted at the time with the statement that a reply would be
forthcoming after a technical study was made on the basis of an original pro-
duction design. The JSP refused this tie to be circumvented. However, was
it necessary at this juncture for the govermnt to reply to this kind of
argument at the pace of the opposition? In doing so, hasn't the government
tied its own hands, and isn't it bound to suffer a serious setback both
tangibly and intangibly?

Truthfully, it is sophistry to argue in this age of rapid technological pro-
gress that the P-15, which appeared several years later than the F4, -is a
purely interceptor type considered inferior to the 1"“ in its bombing cap-
ability. It would have been better not to purchase such a type of new plane.
It proves that the debate in the name of Diet deliberation, using argtxments
which no one really believes, is conducted only for the sake of a low-

dimensional "Diet policy" whose results and arguments of pro and con deviate
from the real substance.

Following Suit With the Pukuda Statement

Following the uproar, I read the government's view which was made public on

9 March, and was again disappointed. Tl'e gist of the government's explanation
was that the spirit of the statement by former Defense Agency Director
Masuda--i.e., the basic policy of not possessing equipment presenting an ag-
gressive threat to other nations-would be upheld. It also stated that, since
the 17-10 bombing device is no longer a threat relative to the improvement of

capabilities in other weapons, the government would proceed with its
scheduled plans.

Since the deceptive statement which Director msuda issued or was forced to
issue during the Sato era has been upheld with another overlay of lies, the

government has planted and left the seeds for similar unproductive debate to
future generations.

What, then, are the lies and deception in the Hasuda statement which the gov-
ernment has recently upheld? First of all, what did the JSP mean by "an ag-
gressive threat to other nations?"

25

MWUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

By other nations, at the time it meant the Soviet I'nion, China and North Korea.

Today, China would be excluded. By "threat" it meant that the principal
cities of those nations would fall within the flight range of the F4. or F-lS.

However, aside from reconnaissance fligxts, any lag-.6. of plane would have to be
equipped for combat in order to present a threat. The P-é can ordinarily
carry eight 500-pound bombs, but with such a lots. its flight range would be
250 nautical miles one way even in a beeline roundtrip flight. If so, it

could not reach any of the cities in the aforementioned nations, even from
domestic bases in Glitose, Hisaws, Kometsu, 'l‘suiki, Nyutabaru and “aha.
Therefore, the JSP attacked the Defense Agency-fan the basis of a hypothetically
reduced load of four bombs in order to increase the flight range, and the gov-
ernment responded in accordance with that hypothesis.

Data is available on a map which was often displayed at the time. It is a
linear map with a radius of 400 nautical miles one way for an P-lo carrying
four bombs from principal bases in Japan. Actually, an accurate radius of

600 nautical miles would not encompass Shanghai, Pyongyang, Vladivostok or
Khabarovsk.

Nonetheless, the Masuds statement implies that those cities would fall within
the flight range of an P-lo carrying a half load of bombs.

The argument seems to be that even if the 17-4 were to reach those cities, it
would not be equipped with a central computer for pinpoint bombing. There-
fore, it would not go on any raid which might prove useless, and if it were
not equipped with the device it would not become a threat. Even a child would

know, in this day and age, that a strategic or tactical threat is not such a
simple matter.

Strictly speaking, a military threat is based not only on the quality, quan-
tity and capability of military equipment, but foremost on the intent behind
their use. Hithout quoting the example of constitutional constraint, it is

clear that Japan has neither the intent nor necessity to invade and attack
those nations.

As proof, one can look at the flight squadrons of Japan's Air Self Defense

Force and see that there isn't a single attack squadron. They are all inter-
ceptor squadrons.

In contrast, the division-size troops deployed by the USSR in recent years

on the four northern islands are excessiwa large to be justified as so-
called "defense of the islands (Who on earth are they going to defend the is-
lands againstuthe islands they seized from us1)." Also, qualitatively speak-
ing, their landing hovercrafts are nothing but aggressive infiltration wea-
pons suited to Japan's topography. 0n the basis of these facts, we cannot

help deducing their intentions and as a result sense a strong threat from
them.

Such appropriate debate on the essence of a threat was never brought to the
fore by the government at the rim. And even today, when the brazen

26

“WNW!”
NI MIG“. USE ONLY

deployment of heavy fighting power under the Soviet world strategy has been
confirmed on the four northern islands, why doesn't the government attempt
to conduct a fundamental debate regarding such defense problems by centering
on the F-6 issue?

Furthermore, what was meant by the threat of the P40 at one point was none
other than the P-lo's bombing capability compared to other weapons. That is
why the government recognized the 1740 as a plane with a more variable pur-
pose than the P-15. Therefore, the nuclear bombing capability, which is the
F-lo'a real threat, could be nullified merely by removing the nuclear control

system, and the r4. should not become an issue even though it may be equip-
ped with a gauge for bombing purposes.

Nuclear Weapon No Rival of Tyranny

The greatest deception of the Masuda statement lies in the fact that while
advocating pure self~defense and procurring equipnsnt for that purpose under
heavy cost, the government has fallen prey to loud and unwarranted criticism
from the opposition and, without thinking of the various possibilities for
Japan's self-defense in an emergency situation or without referring to it
even if it did, it has only made compromises.

Of course, the Japanese islands are narrow in shape, but they are lengthy in
distance. The distance from Hakkanai to the Yonagunijima Islands at the
southernmost tip of Okinawa is 3,200 kilometers or about 1,800 nautical miles.
If a large-scale invasion should be made directly against Japan, the islands

could easily be split in two. If one were to hypothesize defense combat
support under these circumstances, it would mean in extreme terms that the

capital area (Tokyo) or even Hokkaido would have to be defended by air combat
units stationed in Naha. Half of the entire length of the Japanese islands
would be 900 nautical miles. None of the fighter planes or fighter bombers
used by Japan as interceptors could amply cover this distance. If planes
capable of protective sorties from Naha to Tokyo, and from Komatsu in the
Hokuriku region of the Tohoku region and Hokkaido, were to be selected, the

opposition would again undoubtedly draw radical lines with their compass and
cry "aggression."

Considering only the F-lo or F-lS, from a strictly tactical aspect of Japan's
self-defense, studies should be made to extend the flight rante of existing
planes including the use of in-flight refueling system.

As a result, even if the planes at hand should have the cruising capability
to reach some foreign areas, they would not in the least constitute a threat
by Japan, which could not possibly entertain such an intent. If foreign
countries should be concerned about such a capability, it would not extend
beyond a deterrent capability.

At one time in the secret chamber called the Diet-whether or not it was for
the purpose of paving the way for the return of 0kinawa--enormous national

funds were invested to purchase fighter planes. Regarding those planes, argu-
ment for the sake of argunent was used, calling them a threat to peace or to

27

“WWW!”
l-‘OI OFI'IGAI. USE ONLY

pure self-defense and using words for their own sake whosectrue meanings were
incomprehensible. It resulted in a bizarre conclusion, and a quite compn
question was asked among the people who observed this from a distance: 'How
could our nation be protected with weapons which present no threat to any un-
known nation?" From the standpoint of the perception of the masses, taking
the trouble to dismantle a computer for accurate bombing from a fighter bomber
purchased for defense purposes and depending solely on the pilot's intuition,
which could prove to be unreliable, would be as frustrating as adjusting and
lowering the speed of a newly-purchased car to a level which meets standard
regulations--although the present driving regulations do limit speed. (he
may argue that they are two different matters, but if the speed limit for cars
is for personal protection, the high capability d weapons is also for per-
sonal protection. .

Although it may send like a play on words, if the capability is of the ad-
versary's attention, it would serve as a deterrent as long as there is no in-

tent of aggression on our part. It only becomes a threat when the intent is
altered.

Many Japanese who have the bad habit of viewing things in a narrow sense,
from only one aspect or with inflexibility, cannot comprehend the organic and
complex functions of deterrent power. Often, when in possession of a certain
amount of power, they could only visualize the military effect resulting from
the actual use of that power. To be able only to think in terms of actually
using deployed weapons is like being born to poverty, or it is sheer impetu-

oneness. Half of the efforts, including the money spent, would then be in
vain.

Not only in the area of military affairs involving the use of weapons but
also in the area of foreign diplomacy through the use of language, and
especially in the area of international political strategy involving the use
of both, isn't it customary to use various tangible and intangible ruses, in-
cluding bluffing, before the actml clash? Or to bargain and maneuver on the
side, or to compete with each other?

For example, there is within the retaliatory political strategy evolved by the
Reagan administration vis-a-vis the Soviet Union the view that a limited war
is possible. The real purpose is not so much the meaning of the words per se,
but the anticipated effect of the pronouncement of those words on the aver-
sary. However, the Europeans whose theater is the target naturally feel
anxious and protest. Fully expecting this, the European governments never-
theless support the u.s. strategy, which is an example of the intricacies of

strategic maneuvering. The Japanese seen to forget that where there is ten-
sion, there is naturally an adversary.

Diverting somewhat from the main subject, the antinuclear campaign, which
naturally arose in Europe, has spread to Japan. The Kremlin illnediately re-
sponded to an antinuclear statement issued by a group of Japanese literary
figures, sending a reply in the name of the secretary general of the Soviet
Cosmnist Party and calling for support of an unprecedented three antinuclear
principles which exist in no other country. It promised (.7) that to that extent

28

POI WI. USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Soviet Union would not attack Japan. Do these people who call for the
support of the commique actually understand the intent of the Soviet
Union, which is not involved in the three antinuclear principles? The 75
ss-zo's, which are placed near Lake Bayksl and pointed toward Japan and
China, are equipped with megaton nuclear missiles which could destroy all
of Japan. Those who cannot see them, or who close their eyes to what they
don't know, surely cannot claim to have the power of calm persuasion.

The antinuclear campaign. which spread to Japan as I had feared, developed
in the form of strict observance of the three antinuclear principles. It
went further and developed into a call for opposition to the U.S.-Japan
security pact. In anyone's mind, nuclear weapons are naturally fearsome
and foolish. However, in order to prevent those politically insecure
leaders of the communist society from coalaitting destruction and to bring
them to the discussion table to point out their losses or gains, the only
way after every effort has been' exhausted is to use the warning affect of
a possible limited war, and in the meantime to produce similar weapons in
quantities equal to that of the adversary. In effect, the United States,
which controls the world whether we like it or not and which decided to re-
arm in order to prevent a holocaust, knows the dynamics of political
strategy, being well aware of the huge and wasteful cost. We should also
be aware of such dynamics in order to prevent destruction.

Both nuclear and conventional weapons kill great numbers of humans and have

done so in the past. Today, people are troubling in fear of a crisis in
which further large-scale mssecres will be omitted. We must not forget

that, in the Soviet Union which has almost single-handedly brought about
such a condition and is an innature society despite its enormous power,
actually more people than nuclear weapons could kill are being buried alive
under a warped and deeply deluded dictatorship. Awareness of sucn conditions

depends on whether one considers a man's freedom more important, or the value
of a man's life.

There is no free man who doesn't fear and hate nuclear arms. limever, the
evasion of nuclear weapons mat not be linked to unchallenged permissiveneaa
of murder in disguise through the deprivation of political freedom.

Philistine Politics Could Ruin a Nation

I am afraid that an idealistic and impulsive political movement is again about
to occur in Japan which could strangle the freedom of the people. I believe
the politicians themselves should realize that their form of politics in re-
fusing to examine their own lies and deceptions concerning the P-h or the three

antinuclear principles, and their philistine concern regarding their self-
preservation, are fostering such a danger.

Now that I am a politician, I feel able to understand better, but when I saw
the demonstrations among young intellectuals in opposition to the unilateral
passage of the 1960 U.S.-Japan security pact in the Diet develop in a short
time into an antisecurity pact movemnt, a masher of us who were sympathet-

ically involved left the movement. Jun Bto recently wrote-about his own
similar experience.

29

summon“
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the time, the chairman of the Japan Hriters and Artists Society asked prob-
ingly at the board meeting after the day's meeting had ended: "there is a
strong movemnt in society opposing the security pact, so what do you think
about us drafting an antipact resolution, too!" Whereupon the now deceased
Shiro Osaki and Pusao Haysshi both countered: We are for it. But why are
you fellows against the pact" We would like an explanation." The‘chairman
could not reply. The meeting adjourned without any solution, and there was
no further mention of the subject. It seems to me like an almost pathetically
comic episode. thawhiIe, Prime liinister Kishi unilaterally pushed the pact
through the Diet and provoked criticism even within the ruling party, but it
eventually won support from the nation. At the time, -I myself heard the
chairman of the ruling and opposition parties support the pact. It was" the
first time such an event had occurred in Japan. I recall being surprised
that Prime Minister Kishi, whom I disliked for no other reason except that

he was a former war criminal, showed excellent persuasion in his arm-mt.

0n the other hand, Kishi's brother, Prime Minister Sato, could be said to
have conducted a form of politics during his rule which was in a sense the
opposite of his brother's. It was after the return of Okinawa when the
university disputes were at their peak. Prior to the opening of the Diet
where great controversy over the university legislation and health insurance
reforms was anticipated, Chicf Cabinet Secretary Hori, in accordance with
Prime Minister Sato's wish, invited several literary figures including my-
self, who was also a member of the Upper House, to ask our opinions. At the
time, I recalled the impression I had received of Prime Minister Kishi on
television during the 1960 security pact debate, and ends a request regarding
the prime minister's government policy speech. Hr Hori tentatively agreed:
"That's a very good idea." however, he later retracted: "No, I don't think
we should. If we do, I'm afraid the Diet debate will heat up." His words
probably reflected his concern about the character and basic political posture
of the prime minister whom he served. Hy rebuttal, that the people will not
focus their attention on nor be enlightened by any debate which does not heat
up, was in vain.

Because of the persistence during the Sets are regarding the return of
Okinawa, the recurring Diet deliberation on the subject resulted in weeding
out such disturbing practices as free-for-all fights, all-night debates and
steamroller passage of resolutions in the Diet. However, amid the ostensible
tranquility and quiet, there was no telling how many important political themes
failed to receive proper debate and to be shielded from the people. As a re-
sult, the people were deprived unnecessarily in both a material and spiritual
sense.

Amid great changes in the political coefficients concerning issues, it is a
historical necessity to derive proper conclusions through appropriate deliber-
ation and debate. ‘Io ignore this and to idly follow the political posture of
the past is apt to result in a loss to the nation which is far greater than it
was at the point in tin: in which the action took place.

The prime minister, above all, and all politicians should refresh their minds
to the fact that, unless we once again review such outdated and distorted
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ieeuee as the three antinuclear principles and the 17-4 problem, and unless

we fall into proper step, not only the ruling party but the nation and the
people will also cone to ruin.

The politicians and the people who observe the political scene should heed
the words of Chigaku Tanaka: "Stupidity without evil thoughts" can thought-
leesly invert the order of a political theme and its method, and result in

destroying a nation. It only pm'auea self-preservation and indolence, and

is fostered within a philietine brand of politics which is devoid of true
courage.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Bungei Shunju Ltd.

5886
C80: 6 105/88

31

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR Oil-“JAI. USE UNLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

00W, PRIVATE, ACADEMIC 810130130106? EFFORTS REPORT-

DNA Experiment Guideline

Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 10 Feb 82 p lo

[Interviev with Professor 1!. Saito, Institute of Applied Microbiology, Tokyo
University (Science and Technology Agency kpert Comittee neuter) by
‘1‘. Inemori. NINON KOGYO SHIMBUN Osaka office)

[Text] leading Technology Using Genetic Recodination, Cell Fusion--

Spurred by Relaxation of DNA Experiaental Guidelines

Recently, biotechnology has been in the limelight. It
spread mainly in the United States and Europe as a leading
technology using genetic recowination and cell fusion.

It involves a broad field, from pharmaceuticals and food,
to chemicals and energy. In Japan, MI‘rl incorporated it
in the "Next Generation Basic Technology Development Pro-
ject" vhich began in 1981; and in the private sector, the
Federation of Economic Organizations established the "Life
Science Committee," with the participation of many cor-
porations, including the energy-related industry. and
lively activity is in progress. In particular, the strin-
gent Japanese recombinant DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
experimnt guidelines were drastically relaxed recently
through revision by the Science Council of the Ministry
of Education, which has spurred research and development.
In addition, from the academic standpoint, the "Interna-
tional Symposium on Applied Microbial Genetics" will be
held in June this year for the first time in Japan at the
Kyoto International Hall. The aynposium is being held on
recombinant DNA techniques in broad fields ranging from
amino acids to energy, and approximately 1,200 participants
will gather from specialized fields in Japan and abroad.
Therefore, we interviewed Professor 8. Saito of the Insti-
tute of Applied Microbiology, Tokyo University (a member
of the Science and Technology Agency Expert Comittee)
regarding problems in biotechnology involving government,
the problem in biotechnology involving government, the
private sector, and academic institutions.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ten Firms Leading in the Pharmaceutical Area

[Question] What headway, in particular, is being made in DNA (deoxyribonucleic
acid) research, a technology to open the 21st century?

Saito: Interferon. Specifically, DNA synthesis is being carried out for hor-
mones by Suntory with the guidance of Dr Nakanishi of Kyoto University. Manag-
ing director Noguchi and others are working with beta-lipotropin. Hakinaga is
also working on it. Others involved include Toyo Rayon, Xyowa Bakko, Green
Cross. Sumitomo Chemical, Kanegafuchi Chemical. etc-some 10 firms are in
leading positions.

[Question] Including the late starters, more than 70 firms are working on it
counting just the members of the Federation of Economic Organisations. What
do you think about this situation?

Saito: They are engaged in textbook technical acquisition. For interferon,
some of them recruited Itakura's students and are busy acquiring practical
techniques. Even then, because of the narrow area, there is also the problem
of too many corporate laboratories being involved. Setting the United States
aside. there seems to be a critical attitude in Europe, especially in England
and France. However, when I visited Europe last fall, some in England were
very eager, and in France, the government is taking the lead in working on it.

[Question] The groundwork for research and development lies mainly with the
pharmaceutical manufacturers, does it not?

Saito: That's because they are equipped with research structures that are
not of a conventional pattern, but are compatible with advanced amino acid
mass culture and the antibiotics era. They have been working by means of
gene splicing or cell fusion to improve the ability of a type of fungus that
resembles Actinomyces bacteria.

[Question] "hat about related areas?

Saito: In Belgium, a herbicide has been developed by genetic recombination of
plants. This is not a conventional synthetic herbicide; it was made by remov-
ing a nontoxic gene. It is attracting attention as a partner in labor-saving
agriculture and as having an antiseptic effect. In addition, alcohol synthesis
based on the same principle is also being considered. This will, however,take
5 more years looking at the present state of technology. Also anticipated are
petrochemical plants utilizing petroleum reactions at normal temperature and
normal pressure as well as highly efficient refining in the mining industry.

Petroleum Development by ﬂaking Fatty Acids

[Question] Rather than processes, for example, is energy such as petroleum
conceivable?

Saito: Petroleum is a reduced form of a substance that makes fatty acids.
Therefore, theoretically it is fully feasible by making the fatty acids. Fatty

acids can be made by extensive genetic recombination. It will require much more
sophisticated biotechnological techniques. It will probably take 10 more years.

33
F0! OFFNJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] What about petroleu cost by then?

Saito: Considerations are based onthe premise that it will be three times the
current price. Petroleum development will have the effect of reversing this
cost. Cetus, backed by oil companies in the United States, obtained a patent
for a process to manufacture ethylene, etc, by inducing enzyme reactions. Its
cost accounting basis is set at 3 years hence with the premise that the price
of oil will double by then. Speaking of oil prices, the United States suffered
fro. a gasoline shortage in 1979, and cars lined up at gasoline stations on the
west Coast. I was staying in the United States at the tine and understood
their feeling well. There, voices were asking for gasoline prices to be raised
rather than having to line up, and the price of 70 cents jusped to $1.60. It
was a realistic solution and no complaint was heard. Thus, the increase for
oil will probably occur at an unexpectedly fast pace. we should not fall behind
overseas countries in petroleum development using gene splicing or cell fusion.
If we do fall behind, it's important to catch up inediately.

Government Should Take the Initiative in Mass Development

[Question] I understand. But are Japanese corporations thinking that far ahead?

Saito: In their current condition, they haven't got extra force to spare.
Following the past pattern, they will nake a connection imediately with pharma-
ceuticals, choosing those that have high added values with small quantity. Cost
accounting cones first, and this makes things difficult. Since this is directed
toward large quantity rather than small quantity production. the government—
for example, MITI or the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Pishery--should
take the initiative.

[Question] What about their administrative guidelines?

Saito: The authorities concerned are the following five ministries: the Science
and Technology Agency, the Ministry of Education, MITI, the Ministry of Agri-
culture, Forestry and Fishery, and the Ministry of health and welfare. The
first guidelines were announced in March 1979 by the Science Council of the
Ministry of Bducation, followed by an announcement and notification by the
Science and Technology Agency through the government's advisory organ, the
Council for Science and Technology, in August of the same year. Aside from
DNA experiments. MITI, for example, initiated a 10-year "Next Generation Basic
Industrial Technology Research and Development Basic Program" and began devel-
opnent of recosbination and application techniques in PY-Bl. Among the various
agencies, there are aspects that differ from each other, and their coordination,
which is now being handled by the Science and Technology Agency, is inortant.

[Question] Recently. the Science Council of the Ministry of Education took the
initiative, in its interim report, to relax the recombinant DNA experiment
guidelines, which are said to be the most stringent in the world, to the
European-Anni can level. Any opinion?

Saito: The "subcomittee" compiled the revision proposal and publicly
announced it. The Council for Science and Technology, which stipulates the
guidelines, will also study then and is likely to announce them in early ”-82.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The donors nay be handled at the P1 level, and some that are associated with
experimental facilities can be handled at the P2 level; and two- tothree-atep
relaxation (fron P3 and P“) conpared to the present guidelines will take place.
However, on the other hand, new rules are included as to the handling of new
Iicroorganisms produced by recoﬁination. In this respect, it nay be said
that the contents received full consideration. Now, the research structure

of the concerted governaent and private efforts will be greatly accelerated.

[Qnestion] In the private sector, President Suzuki of Mitsubishi Chenical is
fervently carrying out the activities of the Federation of Bcononic Organiza-
tions; and collaborative artificial DNA development by the brewing and phase--
ceutical industries is attracting attention. Any thoughts?

Saito: It is interesting that they have each gone beyond the other's frene-
work. Especially, in the comittee of the Federation of Economic Organiza-
tions, firms other than life science concerns are also included, which I think
will help in formulating the technological groundwork. Regarding artificial
DNA, a broad area from interferon. insulin, to amino acid tri-ers has been
targeted. I'n looking- forward to their achievements.

Situation Very Similar to Penicillin Developnent

[Question] It is said that the biotechnology rush is very sinilsr to the time
of the penicillin development. Is it?

Saito: During the 1948-1959 penicillin boon after Horld War II, approximately
70 firms appeared. After a while, those which survived included only Takeda
and three others which were in mass production at 10- and 20-tons, and the
rest stayed at the test-tube facility stage producing lo or 5 tons. Mass pro-
duction from fungi entails restrictions as well, and they fell behind in tech-
nical and cost-accounting aspects. However, most of the 70 firms in this re-
search development acquired the basic knowledge regarding the genetic move-ant
and culture 'of nicroorganisns and tied it to the later use production and dis-
tribution of amino acids and antibiotics. The penicillin preparation fron fungi
was not invain by any neans. The same can be said Ibvdt biotechnology. The
genetic technology that has been established by approximately 10 firms at
present will spread to 20 or 30 firms. However, even if firms are weeded out
later, there will be sole technology where their DNA work will be useful. Even
if they don't achieve an energy source such as petroleum, there are broad areas
ranging from pharmaceuticals to food and petrochemicals.

[Question] What is the situation overseas, especially in the United States?

Saito: Among the numerous venture businesses, Genentech is well known. It

has grown more than 10-fold, from a staff of 23, 4 years ago, to nearly 350.
Cetus Corporation is also engaged in a broad area of research and developnent
ranging from pharmaceuticals to chenical processes. food, and energy. In
addition, Professor Kornberg (Stanford University), a Nobel laureate for gene- .
tic research, joined DNA)! and ALZA as a research consultant and is engaged in
the developnent of We drugs. As is seen in these samples, they are ubi-
tioue and there is a several 10-fold difference in research funds and loo-fold
in research staff. ﬁasic biotechnology research has become a regular part of

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

biology program in U.S. universities, and numerous research institutes exist.
In general, I believe that Japan is 3 or lo years behind. In application, there
are some that are more than competitive with a few products such as interferon,
hormones, etc, but the difference is due partly to the delayed experimental
guidelines, etc. However, when it comes to mass culture and market development,
the Japanese senses are fully activated, and they are fast in reaching a reason-
able level. Especially in private industries, I think their response is quick
once they see the prospect for co-ercielization.

First Symposiun in Japan To he held

[Question] Lastly, ". would like. to ask you about the “Fourth International
Symposium on Applied Microbial Genetics" to be held in Japan for the first
time.

Saito: That meeting will be held in Kyoto in June of this year, and Dr Y.
Ikeda, professor emiritus of ‘rokyo University, is the chairman of the organis-
ing consittee. Symposia have been held twice in Europe, once in the United
States, and this is the first time in Asia. I am in charge of program for-11a-
tion (chairman). He are incorporating subjects such as amino acids antibiotics
production, yeast breeding, genetics of food and energy production, recombinant
DNA modification, etc. As of now, we are expecting participation by 37 coun-
tries attended by approximately 1,200 experts from both at home and abroad.

With the relaxation of guidelines, the environment is ripe in Japan, and I
hope many will participate in the sylposium.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo lionsha 1982
Four Applications of Biotechnology
Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 10 Feb 82 p lo

[Text] Recently, in industrial circles, interest in the life science has
rapidly increased. Originally, life science was a comprehensive science in
which the mysteries of life were sought, and it included academic fields such
as biology, physiology, biochemistry, medicine, phansacology, ecology, psy-
chology, etc. However, as a result of progress made in molecular biology in
which the phenomena of living organism are studied at the molecular level,
biological functions have been elucidated, which has opened tht way for appli-
cation in industrial and technological aspects. That applied technology is
"biotechnology." Research and development in this aspect began following the
eludication of the molecular structure of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) in

1953 by Watson and Crick, barely 30 years ago. Subsequently, in 1973, genetic
recombination (recombinant DNA) experiments were conducted for the first time
in the world by Cohen (Professor at Stanford University, U.S.A.), Boyer (Pro-
fessor at University of California, U.S.A.), and others, resulting in a rapid
development. Basic and applied research are being advanced mainly in the
United States.

Biotechnology is generally defined as "the technology in which the life
phenomena operational in living organisms are elucidated to be utilized in

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(HHJ'

solving various problems related to human life or in producing useful sub-
stances"-in short "the applied technology of biological functions.” In other
words, it may be referred to as the technology that incorporates the principles
of life phenomena inherent in all living organisms on earth such as metabolism,
immunity, proliferation, movement, etc, into the category of applied "engi-
neering." Specifically, it can be roughly divided into the following four
techniques.

(Recombinant DNA Technique)

The technique, literally, involves the recombination of DNA which carries bio-
logical genetic information by using enzymes, etc, and growing the living cells
into which genes of different kinds of organisms are freely inserted. It is
playing the leading role in biotechnology. The culture cells (host cells) used
include yeast and Bacillus subtilis in addition to Excherichia coli, which has
a high growth rate. This method enables the mass production of useful sub-
stances which was not previously possible due to restrictions such as material,
etc. Research in the pharmaceutical area is in the forefront; techniques to
manufacture insulin, interferon (IFN), growth hormone, vaccines, vitamins,
amino acids, etc, were developed, and they are now in trial stages for practi-
cal application. Not only pharmaceuticals, but heat-stable enzymes with the
prospect of wide application in areas such as industrial processes and food
technology can also be produced by this technique. Its importance is hmmense
since it becomes related to technical development in various areas of biotech-
nology.

(Mass Cell Culture Technique)

A technique to obtain useful substances efficiently and in large quantities by
mass-culturing animal or plant cells in large quantities that produce useful
substances including various kinds of enzymes, physiologically active sub-
stances, etc. This technology is indispensable in propagating microorganisms
obtained by gene splicing or new cells created by cell fusion.

This technique is being tested for the cultivation of IPN, urokinase (thrombo-
1ytic agent), etc. however, a difficulty in commercialization exists in the
fact that fetal calf serum, which is expensive and difficult to handle, is
being used in the cultivation medium. In order to effect efficient cultiva-
tion, other artificial media or serum-free cultivation is necessary, and the
task is to develop them.

(Cell Fusion Technique)

A technique to fuse cells having different advantages to create new cell types
(hybridoma) having the advantages of both cells. As opposed to genetic recom-
bination using lower living organisms such as microorganisms as subjects,

this technique attempts to recombine entire rather than partial genetic infor-
mation by adhering cells of higher living organisms. It is highly practical in

plant and animal breeding.

It is a well-known fact that the Max Planck Institute in Vest Germany used
this technique to create the "pomato," a mixture of tomato and potato. In

37

FOIi0FﬁKJA1.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan, the Gifu Prefectural Agricultural Experimental Station succeeded in
producing “Hakuran,” a "mixed breed“ between cabbage and celery lettuce; and
the Japan Monopoly Corporation succeeded in producing interspecies hybrids
between its cultivated species of leaf-tobacco "tabacum" species, and tobacco-
mosaic resistant "rustica" and "repanda" species. The merit is in the short-
ened tine required to create a new breed of agricultural crops that took 6-7
years previously by alternation of generations, etc.

On the other hand. in the medical field, transformed lymphocytes and lympho-
cytes with antibody production ability can be fused to create antibody-
producing cells with proliferation ability, which can be cultured to make an
antibody with high precision (monoclonal antibody). The monoclonal antibodies
currently being used as diagnostic agents are being isolated from animal blood,
and being restricted quantitatively, this technique will open the way for mass
production. It will not remain as an imunodiagnostic, but there is a strong
possibility that it will lead to immune therapy in such areas as cancer,
allergy, etc.

(Bioreacto r)

It is a technique of industrial application in vitro of chemical reactions and
substance metabolism being carried out in a living body using enzymes as
catalysts. It is also called a "microbial application reactor" or a "bio-
chemical reactor." The chemical industry heretofore generally used metal
catalysts under high temperature and high pressure for chemical reactions

to produce the target substances. As opposed to this, a bioreactor is a
system to manufacture useful substances under normal temperature and normal
pressure by using useful microorganisms and enzymes rather than metal cata-
lysts. It is an energy-saving, resource-conserving, and nonpolluting process.
when this is realized, huge plants, etc, will become "white elephants." Thus,
the interests of various chemical companies are strong. Both domestic and
foreign corporations are positively advancing the research. Cetus in the
United States developed a manufacturing process for ethylene oxide and propy-
lene oxide using a fermentation method and is testing for practical applica-
tion in a pilot plant.

The problem is that the enzymes are very unstable, and while they demonstrate
high activity in living cells, they totally lose activity outside. Thus, the
task is to inmobilize enzymes in a form that maintains its activity, is insolu-
ble in water, and is readily usable in industry. Imbilized enzymes are the
target; and when this technique is established, it will probably revolutionize
the chemical processes such as continuous production. In addition to the ino-
bilization of enzymes, important points are finding and modifying enzyme
sources in microorganisms and the development of thermophilic microorganisms
that do not lose activity at high temperature.

Ranging From Pharmaceuticals/Food to Chemicals/Energy
"Enthusiastic Pharmaceuticals Industry With a "Dream" Anticancer Drug

As explained above, biotechnology is applicable in many areas such as pharmaceu-
ticals, food products, chemical industry, energy, etc, and it also has depth.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the pharmaceuticals area, it is no longer a dream to develop a genetic recom-
bination technique for Actinomycetes that produce antibiotics and the develop-
ment of antibiotics that distinguish normal cells and bacteria and kill only
bacteria. Prospects in the agricultural field are the development of crops
that do not require fertilizers by directly splicing into the crop plants the
genes of atmospheric nitrogen-fixing bacteria (Rhizobium); and in the energy
area, plant breeding for biomass applications and the modification of microor-
ganisms for alcohol production, etc; leading corporations of the world are in
furious competition.

With European-American firms taking the lead, centered in the United States,
Japan fell far behind. However, the Japanese firms are now spurring their
research and development and are catching up. Biotechnology-related venture
businesses were established in England and France by government and private
joint effort. 0n the other hand, the Japanese Govermsent, which fell behind
in getting started in the aspect of forming a national support structure, has
embarked on building a foundation for research and development and is demon-
strating ambitious movement by forming government and private collaborative
projects with the motto "catch up, get ahead."

First, in the pharmaceutical area, most of the leading drug manufacturers such
as Takeda Chemical. Green Cross, Shionogi a Go, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical,
Daiichi Seiyaku, Sankyo, Chugai Pharmaceutical, etc, have begun research. In
particular, Takeda Chemical, Green Gross. and Shionogi & Co are very active.

However, research in biotechnology is not limited to major manufacturers. A
pharmaceutical manufacturer of medium standing, Rakinaga Yakuhin, succeeded,
for the first time in the world, in the synthesis of "secretin," a gastrointes-
tinal hormone that inhibits secretion of gastric juice by a gene splicing
technique using E. coli. Ringen Biochemical Research Laboratory, which estab-
lished a unique technique of producing IFN (alpha type) using hamsters, is in
the process of developing a carcinoma breaking factor (CB?) with a new phisio-
logic activity in a joint study with Hochida Seiyaku. It is a type of lympho-
kine which is produced along with interferon from human lymphoblasts obtained
by mass culture (Ringen hamster technique). In animal experiments, data indi-
cates that it directly kills cancerous cells while having virtually no effect
on normal cells. Further studies may still be necessary regarding the mecha-
nism of the action, but it has a high potential as a prospective anticancer
drug. In addition, it is said that the serm substitution factor "QM-1"
which was extracted from cholera, a unicellular green alga, and developed by
Kurorera Kogyo, can replace 90 percent of the fetal calf seru used for media,
and it is noteworthy as a substance useful in mass culture of IN, insulin,
etc.

General chemicals firms and petrochemical firms are also leaning strongly to
biotechnology. In the process of transformation of corporate makeup from
general-purpose chemical products and basic chemical products to fine and
specialty chemicals, they are advancing research and develOpment by making
biotechnology the nucleus technology for the next generation; and they are
busy consolidating the structure. Mitsubishi Chemical developed restriction
enzymes that play an important role in genetic recombination. It also dis-
covered extrachromosomal genes, plasmids, of E. coli and yeast, and applied

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for several patents onche preparation processes. Hhile forming a consistent
joint research structure with its affiliated company, Mitsubishi Chemical Life
Science Research Institute, it is also involved in monoclonal antibody work
with an American venture business, Hybritech Corporation, and plans to supply
diagnostic drugs. Thus, it is developing research in a wide range from gene-
tic engineering, cell fusion, to bioreactors. In particular, it contemplates
placing emphasis on the development of resource-conserving, energy-saving
chemical processes. On the other hand, Sumitomo Chemical has newly estab-
lished a biotechnology research team to strengthen the research organization,
and at the same time, a P3 level experimental facility will be completed soon
to build up the structure at the Life Science Research Laboratory. In addi-
tion, a purification plant for IFN-alpha will be completed this summer with
technical importation from the Hellcome Corporation in England, and will start
toward practical application.

In addition, Mitsui Toatsu Chemicals made a technical agreement with Genex for
manufacturing urokinase by genetic manipulation, and is planning to venture
into the pharmaceuticals area. Mitsubishi Petrochemical, Shoa Denko, Daicel
Chemical, Asahi Chemical, Toyobo, etc, are also engaged in biotechnology with
a forward posture.

The food industry, having traditional strength in the use of microorganisms,
is not merely standing by helplessly, either. Along with Ajinomoto, which has
succeeded in the mass production of an amino acid, threonine, by breeding in
E. coli, competing firms are Meiji Seika which is aiming at antibiotic produc-
tion from enzyme research to seed bacteria business, and Suntory, the Yakuruto
head office, Misshin Flour Milling Co, and Sanraku Ocean which are contemplat-
ing joining in pharmaceuticals, among others.

Nisshin Flour Milling Co, along with Green Cross, Earth Seiyaku and Chugai
Pharmaceutical. had their staff attend the Gene: seminars on genetic recombina-
tion techniques which started on the 7th, and began to mobilize for technical
acquisition. Kao Soap, Nippon Oils and Fats, and Miyoshi Oil and Pat are all
conducting research geared to biomass. In the area of genetic engineering
alone, in excess of 100 firms have made themselves heard. With leading trad-
ing firms making a move for technological intermediary, the industry is in a
feverish state indeed.

However, even the so-called "modern-day magic“ biotechnology cannot be devel-
oped by a fluke. It takes a long time to develop into merchanfise, and the
risk entailed is also great. Investment in basic research is also limited
in private enterprises. Needless to say, it should be undertaken as a national
project with a concerted national effort.

Serious Growth Effort Also by the Government

Based on these viewpoints, the government is also responding to the interna-
tional technological competition era, and has ranked biotechnology as a lead-
ing technology for the new generation along with ceramics and new functional
polymers, and has begun working for its growth by investment earmarked in the
national budget. This is the "Next Generation Basic Technology Development
System" started by the Industrial Science and Technology Agency of MITI in
PY-Bl; the development will be promoted by investing a total of 106 billion

40
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

yen in the 10-year plan. Out of this, 31 billion yen is estimated to go into
biotechnology. Already secured are 670 million yen for PY-8l and 1.0% billion
yen for FY—82. The "Biotechnology Development Technical Research Association"
(director: B. Suzuki, president of Mitsubishi Chemical), which will become

the nucleus for technical development, has also been inaugurated; it includes
14 firms and has begun research activities in the respective subject areas.
Gene splicing technique was assigned to Sumitomo Chemical, Mitsui Toatsu Chemi-
cals, and the Mitsubishi Chemical Life Science Research Institute; mass cell
culture technique, to Asahi Chemical. Ajinomoto, Kyowa Hakka, Takeda Chemical,
and Toys Jose; and bioreactors, to Mitsubishi Chemical, Kao Soap, Daicel
Chemical, the Electro Chemical, Mitsui Petrochemical, and Mitsubishi Gas
Chemical. They are to proceed with research and development by choosing pro-
jects with high innovative characteristics. As if to respond to this move,
starting in FY-83 the Agency of Science and Technology also plans to incor-
porate "Biological Information" among the targets under the title of "Creative
Science and Technology Promotion System" in order to advance life science re-
search forcefully. In addition, 3-year research is being conducted starting
in FY-Sl on influenza vaccine and hepatitis B vaccine using genetic engineer-
ing techniques, and preparation is underway to construct a research facility
for gene splicing at the Tsukuba Science City. The Ministry of Education and
the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery are also promoting research
based primarily on their respective standpoints. with the practical applica-
tion of pharmaceuticals produced by biotechnology near at hand, the Ministry
of Health and Helfare plans to evaluate not only the clinical trial of IF“,
but also the method of clinical trials, the evaluation process, etc, and formu-
late a standard for approval of new drugs with a 3-year plan. Although their
research directions differ slightly according to the various ministries, their
objectives are the same in that they promote biotechnological research and aim
for practical application at the earliest time.

The Standard Research Laboratory in the United States cited biotechnology and
electronics as the biggest growth areas in the 1980's. According to the pre—
diction of an American survey firm, Sheets. Inc. [phonetic]. the market scale
for products by biotechnology in 1988-1980 [as printed] is estimated to be
$27.1 billion (approximately 6 trillion yen) annually. In the survey of
Mitsui information development. the market scale in the year 2000 is estimated
at 6.2 billion to 6.8 billion yen. and a market scale of at least 3 billion

yen is considered a certainty. The impact on industrial circles is indeed
great.

However, there are also problems because of the magnitude. In the rush for
development, the possibility of sloppy management cannot be denied. The prob-
lem of bioethics has already been pointed out. The need for proper regula-
tions are obvious. However, too strict rules can hamper research progress.

In Japan, guidelines called "Recombinant DNA Experiment Guidelines" were
established in 1970. However, due to the trend in the United States to relax
regulations, strong voices have also been heard in Japan urging relaxation
along the same lines. These recently resulted in the interim report of the
Science Council of Japan of the Ministry of Education which proposed a dras-
tic relaxation, and it is expected to be announced by early FY-82. The reason
is that in the United States, genetic recombination can be conducted in an

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ordinary experimental laboratory (P1 level) when E. coli is used, while the
Japanese regulations are the most stringent in the world today. Among the
researchers worldwide, the majority hold the scientific opinion that safety

is not a problem regarding the experiments in genetic manipulation themselves
if a proper sequence is used, and this point should be taken into considera-
tion. However, on the other side, it is important to establish a researchers
code of ethics, and a balanced operation will no doubt bring about the proper
growth of biotechnology.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1982
Active Enterprises in Western Japan
Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 10 Feb 82 p 5

[Text] Business undertakings in biotechnology are more active among enter—
prises in western Japan than in the eastern part. Full-scale clinical trials
for pharmaceuticals manufactured by gene splicing will begin in Japan this
year, and most of the drugs were manufactured by western enterprises. At the
end of this month. Shionogi 6 Co will begin clinical trials on human insulin
produced by gene splicing in E. coli supplied by Eli Lilly of the United
States. in addition, Sumitomo Chemical will also start clinical trials for
a growth hormone produced by gene splicing in E. coli supplied by a Swedish
firm, Kabi AB. Thereafter, clinical trials for Takeda Chemical's interferon
(IFN) is expected in the spring, followed by those for Green Cross's hepati-
tis B vaccine. The western firms are currently one step ahead.

In particular, the major drug manufacturers are enthusiastic about biotech-
nology work. First, the two firms, Takeda Chemical and Green Cross are typi-
cal. Takeda Chemical is reportedly one of the early starters in biotechnology
in Japan, including gene splicing, along with Mitsubishi Chemical and others.
It has a large-scale P3 level facility at the Central Research Laboratory in
Yodogawa-ku, Osaka, and is making steady progress in research. Regarding IPN.
in particular, a prospective carcinostatic agent, it has a technical agree-
ment with Nippon Roche, a Japanese subsldiary of Roche, which acquired the
technique from the genetic engineering specialist Genentech in the United
States, and it is hurrying with IFN-niphn development by gene splicing of

E. coli. High purity [Pheulpha has already been produced, and it expects to
go into clinical trials this spring. in addition to new drug developments
using gene splicing technique such as lPN—beta, hepatitis B. vaccine. etc. it
has apparently undertaken biotechnology of cell culture, cell fusion, etc.

On the other hand, Green Cross is making a contrasting move. It has not been
long since it began genetic recombination research, but it has actively made
technical agreements with overseas manufacturers and has risen to the top of
the Japanese biotechnology firms.

Beginning with the importatioa in February of a technique for IPN-gamma using
yeast from Collaborative Research Incorporated (CR1) of the United States and
a technique to produce albumin using E. coli from Cenentech of the United
States, it subsequently imported bacteria for producing IPN-alphs and -beta
using E. coli from Bristol-Myers Co of the United States. In addition, in

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
September it imported a manufacturing technique for hepatitis B vaccine using
gene splicing from Biogen in Switzerland, while receiving the basic patent for
genetic recombination held by Stanford University in the United States, for the
first time in the world. In the meantime, a move was made for capital in-
vestment in CRI in the United States; its active technical agreements being
made with overseas firms are attracting attention.

Moreover, it recently began independent research in genetic recombination and
is developing IPN-alpha and a thrombolytic, urokinase, by gene splicing using
E. coli, where it apparently has seen a prospect. In addition, it is advanc-
ing research in biotechnology to collect tetanus hmmune globulin by cell
fusion and has already completed production of hybrid cells, hybridoma. After
establishing production techniques. it plans to begin clinical trials in 2-3
years.

Shionogi & Co is now moving rapidly with genetic recombination work. It will
import and market in Japan human insulin produced by gene splicing by the U.S.
Lilly Company through technical agreement with Genentech. In addition, in
January of this year, it reached agreement with Biogen of Switzerland to com-
mercialise human serum albumin by gene splicing. In the plan, albumin produced
by Biogen will be conercialised as early as in the latter half of the 1980's.

Although it has not been announced, Pujisawa Pharmaceutical has already estab-
lished a research facility of about P3 level, and is apparently conducting
basic research, also. It commented: "we cannot say what we will manufacture"
(President T. Pujisawa), but its interest seems to be as strong as that of
Takeda Chemical or Shionogi & Co.

In addition, Tanabe Seiyaku is apparently studying the biotechnological area
using the technique of ﬂmaobilized microorganisms, which has already been put
into practical application. rather than genetic recombination. Yoshitomi
Pharmaceutical is also making efforts to develop new drugs since it estab-
lished the autonomous marketing system. As a part of this effort. it is direct-
ing its attention to biotechnology such as gene splicing and cell fusion and is
sending staff members to research organisations. Ono Pharmaceutical is also
showing basic interest.

DNA Synthesizer--Prospect for New Market
--Haau Production Plant Is Also Being Studied

Not only in the pharmaceuticals industry, but many chemical companies are
venturing into the biotechnology area. Sunitomo Chemical, which has a pharma-
ceuticals business as well, is emphasizing life science since it began colla-
borating with Hellcome of England and has embarked on the commercialization of
interferon. Following the completion of a P3 facility in its Osaka plant,

it also built a P3 facility at the biochemical research laboratory (Takarazuka
city, ﬂyogo Prefecture). At this laboratory it organized a biotechnology team
consisting of some 30 staff members. For the time being, they will center
their work on techniques which have already been in practical application.
such as growth hormone, insulin. etc, and are planning subsequently to venture
into development of monoclonal antibodies by cell fusion.

63

INIRiOFF1C1AI.IJSEiCNHLY
Hill OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kanegafuchi Chemical Industry completed a P3 level facility last year at its
Takassgo plant (ﬂyogo Prefecture) in an attempt to expand the pharmaceutical
business with new techniques. Since the firm proudly possesses the world's
leading techniques in fermentation and synthesis, it began to put serious
efforts into gene splicing using its achievements as the basis. Although it
has not disclosed what its targets are. it apparently plans to develop unique
products besides interferon by using biotechnology.

A top firm in the paint industry, Kansai Paint. is also showing its ambition

in biotechnology by advancing the development of chemical products using the
technique of immobilized enzymes. Daicel Chemical is also reportedly advanc-
ing research with emphasis on bioreactors using the fermentation technique at
its central research laboratory in Uimeji city. Toyo Rubber Industry has
apparently embarked on biotechnology research, a first in the rubber tire indus-
try, using the technique of immobilized enzymes in which enzymes are sealed-
into polyurethane resins which the firm successfully developed.

Besides the pharmaceuticals and chemical industries. the textile industry.
mainly synthetic fiber manufacturers, are also eyeing the growth in biotech-
nology and are showing a strong interest in it. Toray began conducting inter-
feron research early on along with Green Cross. In October last year, it.
along with Daiichi Seiyaku, imported the technique for interferon-ga-a which
uses gene splicing, and has ventured into the area of genetic recombination

in earnest. Asahi Chemical Industry also completed a P3 facility last year,
and started research on various new substances including interferon using

gene splicing. Meanwhile, it has sent researchers to the United States and is
aiming for commercialization.

In addition. Teijin is also directing its attention to gene splicing as part
of its pharmaceuticals business. Knraray is also studying the use of gene
splicing in pharmaceuticals and chemicals. At Unitica, research on an AI?
(adenosine triphosphate) reproduction reactor is being advanced. and using it
as a lever. it plans to embark on bioreactor development, an area of biotech-
nology. Through such research. it recently began marketing enzymes and plans
to develop biotechnology-related products as a line for a nontextile business
hithcnsar future.

Among firms in the spinning industry. Toyobo and Kanebo are active. Using the
enzyme technique, which has been commercialized in part, Toyobo wishes to begin
gene splicing research. also; last year. even Stanford University came to offer
its gene splicing patent. It has apparently found a prospect in developing
several kinds of restriction enzymes for cutting the DNA chains needed for

gene splicing. Kanebo. noted for development in large-scale new drugs, does
not show too much interest in the gene splicing technique. However, it has
begun cell fusion research, and future achievement is anticipated.

In addition, among the various industrial categories, Suntory, Takers Shuzo,
Sun Star. etc, are outstanding. In particular. Suntory, led by managing
director T. Noguchi, is demonstrating active movement. Using a rich research
staff as a weapon, gene splicing research is in progress at a rapid pace.
Last year, it succeeded in the artificial creation of alpha-neoendorphin, a
physiologically active substance having analgesic action similar to morphine.

Ab

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It has also succeeded in developing a carcinostatic substance by cell fusion

technique and is also among the top group in interferon research and develop-
ment.

As a unique firn, Takars Shuzo my be cited. The firm is a leader in the pro-
duction of sweet sake and shochu [distilled sweet potato wine], but it has

domestically produced for the first time restriction enzymes which are essen-
tial for gene splicing, and it has co-ercialized approximately 20 restriction
enzymes. From the dentifrice industry, Sun Star has started biotechnology re-

search such as cell culture and cell fusion and is aiming for development of
interferon and new substances.

An insecticide lanufacturer, Earth Seiyaku (head office in Saksgoshi, Akao city)
is also showing great interest in gene splicing. In January this year, it sent
development staff members to the gene splicing technique training course spon-
sored by the U.S. genetic engineering specialist, Genentech. Since insecticides
use organic colpounds as raw materials, mass production by gene splicing is

theoretically feasible as long as the molecular structure is known, and their
future growth in research is regarded as hopeful.

Trading firms are also deeply interested in biotechnology. Following Mitsui 6
Co and Nissho-Iwai, Sumitono Shoji recently ventured into biotechnology. It
has a basic agreement to collaborate with Celltech, a senigoverment, seni-
private venture business in biotechnology in England. It plans to sell Cell-
tech's cell fusion and gene splicing techniques to various firms in the future.

In addition, Hatsushita Electric Industry also discovered a new strain of
oxygen-resistant methane-producing bacteria, and it is aiming to develop and

apply it in a methane-production system and to develop a biosensor using the
i-Iobilized enzyme technique.

Cellular Engineering Center Announces Its Conceptnosaka University

Now, undertakings in biotechnology are not limited to mjor corporations, but
activity is also found among medium-level firms. A typical example is Wakunaga
Yakuhin (head office in Osaka). In June last year, news that it succeeded in
producing a gastrointestinal hormone, secretin, by gene splicing for the first
time in Japan, created a sensation. Using the nutrient tonic Kyoleopin as the
main ingredient, it directed its attention to gene splicing early and achieved
the development under the direction of chief researcher H. Suzuki. Currently.
besides hastening with the final work for the co-ercialization of secretin, it
is aining to develop various new substances such as interferon, and it is

actually conpeting with the top class firns in Japanese biotechnology research,
leaving many major firms behind.

Like Wakunaga Yakuhin, Ringen Biochemical Research Laboratory (Okayama city)

is also attracting attention suddenly as a biotechnology venture business.
Using a unique nethod for mass production of interferon using hamsters, it is
currently conducting safety tests using animals in collaboration with Otsuka
Seiysku and Hochida Seiyaku and will soon start clinical trials. An additional
nsss production plant for interferon is under construction, with a cmletion
target for the end of the year. "he completed, the current annual production

#5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of 300 billion units will be increased to 600 billion units/year. In addition,
as a result of the increased facility, it is expected to establish a mass pro-
duction system for GB? (carcinoma breaking factor) which was successfully
isolated in collaboration with Hochida Seiyaku, as a product of interferon.
further-ore, it concluded a deal to carry out collaborative research with
Hesserschmitt, a spacecraft manufacturer in Heat Gersany, on research into
various physiologically active substances in space. Thus, it continues to
carry out unique activities in the field of bioscience.

In addition, in the area of biotechnology hardware, a noteworthy firm is 14-5
Riki (head office in Osaka city), which is undertaking the development of a
leading apparatus for synthesizing mu, which is the core of the genes. As the
gene splicing research of various fir-s will increasingly beco-e active, the
demand for a DNA synthesizer is expected to expand in the future, and it is
likely to become a prospective new market.

As stated, many western Japanese firm are actively engaged in biotechnology.
Heamhile, Osaka University announced the concept for a "cellular engineering
center" last year in an attempt to create a center for life science using the
leading technologies such as gene splicing. At this center. it plans to con-
solidate the foundation for molecular biology such as genetic recmbination
where broad application is expected, cell fusion in which imne antibody-
foraing cells are fused with proliferative cells for conducting imnological
studies such as allergy, and selective insertion of chemical compounds or
drugs into cancer cells to treat intractable diseases or cancer. It plans to
construct the center with a total area of 6,300 square meters at the Suite
campus after ”-83.

As a result of such a positive undertaking through the concerted effort of both
government and private sectors in western Japan, we are likely to stand
shoulder to shoulder in the not too distant future with the European and Aleri-
can firm which are now one step ahead.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honshs 1982

Mounting Interests, Expectations
Tokyo NIKON KOGYO SHDiBUN in Japanese 10 Feb 82 p 5
[Statement by 8. Suzuki, president, Mitsubishi Chancel Industries, Ltd]
[Text] Last years, an undertaking in the life sciences began with set goals in
government, academic and private sectors respectively. It was a year that may
be called the beginning of the life science years in Japan.
In industrial circles, we have a deep sense of responsibility to relate the
life sciences to the progress and growth of the society by responding to these
issues with a firm posture in order for then to blossom as the basic material

to support the next generation.

There are several factors in the background of the life sciences in which great
expectations repose today. In brief, however, it is due to the fact that the

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

material basis of life has been elucidated by rapid progress in molecular
biology, and based on that knowledge, recombinant DNA, cell fusion, etc, have
been developed as technologies, and possibilities have opened for their broad
applications in industrial and medical aspects. 0n the other hand, as a re-
sult of the enormous consumption of resources and the appearance of environ-
mental problems caused by rapid economic growth, the building of a new tech-
nological system is eagerly awaited by society.

Along with contributions to medicine and biology as the basic science, the
aspect of industrial technology (biotechnology) is attracting the most atten-
tion in life science. At the same time, it involves various problems of
human society as well as problems of welfare and a value system. Consequently,
it is desirable that life science be promoted widely based on the understand-
ing and cooperation of the goverment, academic circles, and the general pub-
lic. In industrial circles, also, it is necessary to respond to and have a
promotional system not only in a specific industry but with a widely concerted
effort of the overall industry. Fortunately, as we look at the member firms
of the Life Science Couittee of the Federation of Economic Organizations, the
constituent firms belong to diversified industries such as food, chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, petroletml, textiles, ceramics, machinery, electronics, in-
formation, electric power, trading firms, financial firms, etc, demonstrating
the extensive interest and expectations of industrial circles regarding this
field.

In the past, the Japanese research and development structure in this field was
not always sufficient compared to that of the Western countries. However,

in the last year or so, the response of industrial circles has become parti-
cularly positive, and the building of developmental systems based on the pri-
vate sector has been promoted positively, including the establisIment of a
biotechnology symposium by five chemical firms. The government is also taking
various measures to fully utilize such vitality of industrial circles.

First, the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology of MITI took up bio-
technology in the Next Generation Basic Industrial Technology Development Sys-
tem with a budget plan of 31 billion yen for 10 years and started a research
structure with the cooperation of industrial, government, and private sectors
targeted at three subjects: genetic recombination application techniques, bio-
reactors, and mass cell culture media materials. In response, 110 firms in the
private sector such as chemical firms joined to establish a Biotechnology
Development Technical Research Association. At the Science and Technology
Agency, also, life science research was included in the c;eative Science and
Technology Research System, and efforts are being made to promote the research.
The fact that these new measures have been initiated while financial recovery
is in progress is a welcome event from the standpoint of industrial circles as
an expression of the governmental policy emphases of Japan, which is destined
to be a technological country.

Thus, the developmental structure of the industrial, government, and academic
sectors toward life science has been rapidly consolidated. However, in indus-

trial circles, it is necessary for us to play the role of grasping the state
of advancement in life science both at home and abroad, and at the same time,

107

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

undertaking projects such as proper formlation of guidelines for technical
development and industrialisation directed toward the healthy growth of this
field as well as promoting correct understanding for the broad society in
general, and furthermore, based on these, at pronoting specific policies
desirable for the country.

Life science is indeed a technology directed to the 21st century. However, we
must realize that it is no longer a dress or fantasy, but has arrived at the

stage of practical application, and make efforts for forward-looking activities
with a realistic attitude.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shinbunaha Tokyo llonsha 1982

7722
C80: 4106/86 END

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY