APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00060R000100020001-:I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8296

28 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON LATIN AMERICA
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material encloaed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as {Text}
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iron. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items.are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND RBGUIATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIR REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P TRIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
. Pedestals. Ouaaalaauaa Nan aad Address

Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North clebo Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

12. Spaaaaﬂa,‘ Ouaaiaadoa Nana aad Mduaa

As above

ls. Sappkuasaay Notes

I. Peder-is; Ouaaiaauon kept.
No.

to. Ploictl/Taak/Uook Uaic No.

ll. Contact/Gnu No.

N. Type oi Report a Pain)
Coveted

The serial report contains articles on political and sociological developments
in major areas of Latin Aaarica. as reported prinarily fron Latin American
newspapers and periodicals. It also includes inforaation on major segments
of Latin American economy. geography. culture. and ethnography.

Political Science __Inter-Alerican Affairs

Sociology LArgentina
Bconoaics _larbados
Culture _Bolivia
Bthno logy Larazil
Technological __Ch ile
Geography _Colonbia

"k UsaﬁﬁualOpea-Eded Tuna X ECMGOI’

_El Salvador

__Guateasla

m. comm Hell/Group 50, 5c, 5x

0. Availability Staten":
For Official Use Only.

Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

I." “'0... NONI ‘

_Douinican Republic

_§_ Guyana
_lla i t i
___llonduras
__Jaaa ica
_Hexico
._Nicaragua
__Panana
_Paraguay
_Peru
_‘rrinidad-‘rabago
___Uruguay
AVenezuela

 

VI‘MOG 00300-9 I |
TRANSLATIONS 0N LATIN AMERICA
(2000 3/79)
'Cou'rsm‘s

MOWER

0.8. Policy Toward Latin America labeled DiscriMnetory
(Raul mu Binds; m omen, 28 Dec 78)

Human Rights Violations Reported
(mIo 16’ 26 NOV 78) I...0.00.0.00.000000000000010.

'l'op Central Bank Beecutives’ Resignation Ia Rumored
(Roberto Garcia; memos, 28 Dec 78) .............

'TAN' ‘I'enk )bdificetions, Ststistics Reported
(Javier de mm; mm, Aug 78)

Complexities Surrounding River Plate main Issue Reviewed
(Estele AreuJo; m omm,1s Jan 79)

MIL

launcher, Satellite Construction for Brazil Proposed
(Pierre unset-em; m e cosmos, 23 Dec 78)

Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo's Political Inprismnent hplored
(mm 16, 3 Dec 78)

mm

Students Protest Increase in Milk Prices
(mm, 30 Jan 79) ooooeosoeooosoooososcsoooosoossooe

GUYANA

Briefs
Contract for Uranium Respecting
'moa' on PRC Attach

~s- [III-LA-IU
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

counters (Continued)
mm

Venezuelan Media Continue Criticizing 'Nev Tribes' kission
(Tm m’ m, Shh N) OOOIOOIDOIDOOOOOIIvOII

Venezuelan Conunist Party Studies Result of Election
(m, 17 Rb N) 00.00.00.000IOCOOUOOOOOOOOO'OOOOO

me Attack on Vietnam Bvohes Protests
(m, 19’ 20 Rb 79) 0.0.0...DCIIOIOIIOOOOIIOIO...

Politicians, Intellectusls
Further Protests, by new Balm

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ARGENTINA

".8. POLICY WARD MTIN AMERICA'LABBLBD DISCRIMINATORY
Buenos Aires LA OPINION in Spanish 28 Dec 18 p x Supple-ent
[Article by Raul Pain Binds: "Hessianism and Errors")

[Text] Relations between the United States and our
country reached their lost delicate point during
1978. Finally. Haahington significantly changed

its attitude. becoming lore moderate. At the time
of greatest tension. the following criticisa pointed
out the Carter mistakes that Argentine must not
isitate.

Jiuy Carter. an almost unknown politician. launched his campaign for the
presidency of his country with the promise to inaugurate a new style and to
impose a new government policy. For his. one objective asde no sense with-
out the other.

Since 20 January 1977, critics of the President point out primarily his in-
experience as the cause of a long list of listskes. among which the follow-
ing may be cited:

"His ingenuity in presenting to the Congress reform projects whose com-
plexity and political connotations have paralysed that: legislation on
energy. fiscal reform. public service reform. stc;

“Ilia haste in underestimating the authority achieved by Congress during
the period of the great crises of Vietnam. civil rights and Hatergate;

"his ignorance or lack of consideration for the complex lines of co-suni-
cation and negotiation between the H‘hite House and the Capitol;

"His ”ill-considered" pressure on bureaucrats and representatives of im-
portant economic interests.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This list appears to blame the President for lack of political realism. But
not all those who can recite it perfectly belong to the Republican Party
or are potential rivals in official quarters.

In the foreign policy plan the militant defense of human rights has colored
almost completely the complex web of issues confronted by the United States.
It is inevitable, in addition, that it awaken contradictory reactions:
strictly reasoning, one cannot loudly demand sanctions against the Soviet
Union for its treatment of dissidents without recognizing along the way the
legitimacy of sanctions against other, more sympathetic countries. But,

at the same time, just such a discrimination must be pointed out in the ‘
American attitude, since certain countries whose strategic location is vital
to the United States have not been made targets of the new policy, or at

least not with the virulence and energy applied to the military governments
in Latin America.

American observers find, among the apparent contradictions of Carter, a
unifying concept which gives sense to his entire policy, and to all his sup-
posed mistakes: that is what Sheldon Holin, of THE NEH YORK REVIEH OF BOOKS,
calls "the particular version of Protestantism" professed by the President.
"Purification.” writes Holin, "is inseparable from redemption. To be born
again is to be cleansed, purified, 'clothed in fine line, clean and white,
since fine linen is the virtue of the saints.’ The call of Jimmy Carter
(...) is a call to clean virtues." It is clear that most of the political
virtues, according to this interpretation, are "dirty" virtues, which the
President acorns. A clear example of this way of interpreting life and
politics was the dismissal of Bert Lance, the budget director and a friend
of Carter. Nixon, if such had been the case, would have asked for Lance‘s
immediate resignation, or would have defended him as an accomplice. Carter,
on the contrary, lost several popularity points by defending his friend to
the limit. If we continue to apply Holin's observation, we will understand
the President's loyalty to his group of Georgians and his wrath toward poli-
ticians and bureaucrats in Hashington--true moneychangers in the temple.

This messianic attitude, if we are to understand all its implications, must
be related to the power of the United States, whose characteristics force
one to consider whatever policy is drawn up in Hashington, however erroneous
ardunjust it may be.

It has been said repeatedly (Vice Adm Cesar Augusto Guzzetti pointed it out
in his time as the Argentine position) that the United States has a right
to deny credit to whomever it wishes. What it cannot do is back up its
attitude with observations which amount to interference in the internal
affairs of our country and an obvious violation of Argentine sovereignty.
The history of international relations, of course, is the history of con-
frontation between nations, and on aany occasions the defense of one sover-
eignty violates another. Diplomacy is the art of reconciling that tradi-
tional contradiction between interference and sovereignty. However, in the
case of the State Department the method chosen is that of discriminatory

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

confrontation with certain countries. It is necessary to be diatruatful in
order to find suspicious the alacrity with which Carter ceased to pressure
and scold Brazil, his favorite target before reaching the presidency?

The case of Chile is clearer, since the regime of Augusto Pinochet relaxed
with noteworthy speed.

The State Department distinguishes, then, among just persons, recalcitrant
sinners and repentant sinners. But, at the same time, it appears to be
considering a new category of countries outside of its church, consisting
of those who are censured, but not sanctioned. Control of exports to the
Soviet Union (material for oil exploration and a computer for TASS) can be
considered irrelevant and demonstrates, in any case. the American reluctance
to apply sanctions to Moscow in view of its bias. In addition, Hashington
is very much aware that a true economic sanction will be a sanction against
American products: the rebellion of the farmers in the Midwest when limit-
ing sales of grain to the Soviet Union was discussed lrst year is well re-
membered. Clearly, any business firm can survive without the Argentine
market, but it will be capable of conspiring against the President if it is
forbidden the Soviet...or the Brazilian [market].

Stanley Hoffman, in an essay for FOREIGN AffAIRs, analysed the decline of
American power, and he attributes it to the following factors: The increase
in the number of countries in the international scene, the growing economic
interdependence, the increase of Soviet power and, basically. the American
inhibition provoked by internal political and social phenomena: the struggle
between the presidency and the Congress, the fears of the economic interests
of losing ground overseas. resistance to accepting the old role of inter-
national policeman and juggler of repressive regimes, etc.

Logically, a superpower will not renounce its leadership mission. If it
encounters difficulties with one policy, it will try another, which inevit-
ably wifl contain some errors. But the difference between a medium-sized
country, like Argentina, and one like the United State», is that the latter
can be mistaken much more often. Hashington made a mi take in firing the
level-heeded Terence Tod-an, who was sincerely cosmittei to the defense of
human rights. and at the same time to the balance which deaands that certain
considerations and subtleties of a political and strategic nature be taken
into account. If he had drawn up State Department policy, if he had won in
the game of politics, the United States would have expressed its concerns to
Argentina fir-1y. but without having had recourse to the whip.

The United States' advantage is that it has a wide margin in which to correct
its mistakes. Now it has chosen a traumatic revival of interdependence, and
it is applying the traditional, as well as new, elements of economic and
political pressure. Its final objective, of course, is to come out victor

in the confrontation with the Soviet Union, or at least to keep it under con-
trol. For this reason it is abandoning the military governments and giving
shelter to the civilian, betting on a political gain. The results of the
recent elections in Bolivia and Ecuador are, in part, the result of this new
attitude.

3
ton orncm. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But it is one thing to pressure Bolivia and another to pressure Argentina.
This difference is what Terence Todman, lore subtle than the other bureau-
crats and embers of the State Departeent-«rore subtle, of course, than
Carter hins- lf-wsrned about.

Clearly. no one expects Carter to dedicate all his energies to trying to under-
stand the specific problens of each country. This is why he has collaborators
and ambassadors. Raul Castro himself affirmed that the Argentine image has
nothing to do with reality. His testimny was not enough to convince the

State Department.

Argentina cannot permit itself the luxury of error. Censured by the leading
power of the West, which can lead to similar attitudes in other countries.
it must chose the way indicated by its dignity and sovereignty, dispelling
any doubt which. in good or bad faith, tsrnishes the Argentine iuge in the
eyes of a country which should be our friend and not our teacher.

COPYRIGHT: LA OPINION, Buenos Airea, 1978

8735
050: 3010

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m1!“

mm RIGI‘I‘S VIOWICNS RSPORTBD
Mdrid CANBIO 16 in Spanish 26 Rev 78 pp 59-64

[Text] Over half a hundred Spaniards are being per-
secuted by the Argentine regime. Although all indi-
cations are that the visit by Their majesties will be
occasion for the re) ease of halt a dozen of then, {or
the great nsjority nothing is going to change, be-
cause it has not been known for years now whether
they are in prison or have been executed.

Perhaps Carli' Rutilo, a pretty little 3-year-old Peruvian, with blue eyes
and still a juoberer, would like to sce the king and queen of Win. Juan
Carlos and Sofia. when they ride down the streets of Line amidst hurrahs
and banners. Surely she would be happy seeing the first king and queen to
visit Peru.

But Carlita will not be in the country where she was born, at that tine.
She must now be in Buenos Aires or in some other place in Argentina. Pedro
Parano prepared the report.

Like her grandnother Matilde, Carlita is Spanish and lives in nadrid.

Like as not 26 "oyster 1978 would be an untorgettable date for her, if
she could go to the nuenos Aires Balsa Airport and could see, through the
shakos and rifles of the guard. even only in passing, the king and queen
of Spain surrounded by generals and protected by other military officers
of the great Argentine nation. amidst notes of nartial nusic.

But Carlita will not go to areiza. either, nor will she see the king and
queen on the streets of Buenos Aires. and 26 Noveuber will not be a key
date in her life. because Carlita was kidnaped by the Argentine Police
or Arny on 29 August 1976. at 1015 hours, at the border post of Villazon-
Ls Quiaca and she has not been heard tron since. At that tins. she was
9 Ionths old.

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hundreds of photocopies of her terrifying biography have become moth-eaten
since then in every philanthropic agency in the world. in addition to the
headquarters of the duooratic political parties in half the civilized
world. all incapable up to now of snatching this little girl from the power
of the Argentine Military Junta. Belgit- has given Carlita a visa and
asylum and Amesty International has sponsored her.

She Saw Ber Mother 'l‘ortured

Nevertheless. the ones most directly responsible for her fate , like the
government of Peru. seem not to want to know anything about Carlita. 'I
have written several letters to Jose de la Puente Radil. Peruvian Iainister
of Poreign Affairs . and I have not obtained an answer," hatilda Artes, her
maternal grandmother, an actress who won the Golden Spike in the 1969
Valladolid Festival for her acting in the fill "8angre de Condor“ [Condor
Blood] said disconsolate. 'Bven the Red Cross and other agencies have in-
tervened before the Peruvian authorities. Accordingly, they cannot say
that they are unfamiliar with the story.“

A tragic story that began in Oruro (Bolivia), when Carlita‘s mother. Gra-
ciela Rutilo. a student leader of Argentine nationality. was arrested on
2 April 1976 for supporting a lining strike. Carlita witnessed, suspended
face downward. the torture sessions to which her nether was subjected.

Between 23 and 28 August. an Argentine Federal Police caseission went to
Bolivia to torture Graciela during the night with an electric current.

The handing over and final disappearance of nether and daughter is said to
have cone i-ediately. Almost a eenth later, Carlita's father. mrique
Joaquin Lucas hopes. of Uruguayan nationality, was riddled with bullets
by the Bolivian Police and Army on the streets of Oochabalba.

the Argentine authorities denied having received Carlita and her mother from
the Bolivian authorities, but Matilde Artes got hold of a tale: massage in
which the Bolivian Govern-ant reports the extradition. The International
Red Cross subsequently verified the authenticity of this tale: message and
ascertained that the surrender had been carried out.

On 7 Rove-bar this year, hatilde Artes and other actors of the Co-aittee
of Solidarity with Family Masters of Prisoners and Missing Persons in Ar-

gentina (OOSOPAM) were received by personnel of La Zarzuela [royal resi-
dence] , who confirmed to the- that they had in their possession an exten-
sive report on Argentine repression prepared by the Red Cross.

me report is headed by a list of 33 Spaniards Itin and list ng fro-
1975 to the present ties and six more of His Majesty's sdajects who have
been rotting in the prisons of the Videla regin for 3 years now. await-
ing trial.

6
FOR 0}?!an USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 9803 [Spanish Socialist Workers Party], 061' [General mion of Workers] ,
PCB, €000 [Horkers Oonissions] and 0CD [Democratic Center Union] have also
received visits by these cosom pilgrims, in. the last few days, in search
of a hope.

It is estimated that the Military Junta has ieprisoned, tortured and
caused the disappearance or assassination of between 25,000 and 30,000
persons . according to data from variom international agencies. It is
difficult to know how many of then are Spaniards or children of Spaniards
who can choose and easily obtain Spanish nationality.

It is estimated that there are a Iillion passport-holding Spaniards, in
Argentina, and aleost £00,000 lore who have renomced their Spanish citi-
zenship but who can regain it at any ties.

Just Like Hoes

"The king and queen are going to find the-selves there just as if they had
not left Spain ." an Argentine who succeeded in leaving that hell 2 years
ago said. “In Buenos Aires. concretely Galicians froe Galicia (we call all
Spaniards Galicians) boast that that is the largest Galician city in the
world. But I a- afraid.‘ the Argentine stated, 'that they are going to

see a sad overseas Spain in naming. Videla and his een have respected
nothing.‘

Ramon Garcia Uiloa, one of the “missing persons” on the list that the
Spanish authorities sub-it periodically to the Military Junta and fro-
which they receive only silence in reply, is a Galician frost Gelicia.

Rance was born in a small town in Lugo. in 1920. At the age of 13 years,
he eeigrated to Argentina in search of work and a decent living. here.
he married and had three daughters. After 40 years of sacrifice, he beceee
oumer of a dry-cleaning establish-ant in which the whole family worked
and a building with three flats at nueber 1732 Neutmen Street, Buenos
hires.

li‘he Police and the Arty went there at 0300 hours on 6 October 1976 to
take him away.

About 40 persons arrived in various auto-obiles. They surrounded the build-
ing. They tore the door down. pulled hie out of bed and carried hie off in

pajamas anid shouts of protest by his wife and hotter. Asuncion Ulloa. an
83-year-old woman.

”He never heard fro: him again," his daughter Susana, 31 years old, now in
Madrid, said. "My lather and ly husband left no stone unturned. mey had
interviews with all possible authorities and habeas corpus petitions were
filed. Nothing. The Spanish awassador at that ties, Peres Hernandez.
pulled every string. Nothing. We wrote to the United Nations. to the lid

7 .
ma OFFICIAL use 0va
POR OPFICIAI. USE ONLY

Cross, to Amnesty [International]. Nothing. In February last year. we re-
ceived some bad news: a friend of a friend of one of lay uncles -- you know
how those things are -- vmo apparently worked in the secret services re-
ported that they had killed his: within 5 days. But we were never able to
verify it."

Motives? Ramon Garcia Ullea never concerned himself with the country's po-
litics. In spite of the fact that he spent the greater part of his life
there, he did not want Argentine citizenship. because he never had any pro-
blens from being Spanish, according to what his daughter stated.

"I believe that they arrested him because of us." Susana stated, "I was a
student leader in the Law School from 1969 to 1973, and another sister had
friends among the Peron Youth organization. But we never had the slightest
contact with violent groups. Nevertheless. I believe that these were the
causes. shortly before they took my father away. at the end of September.
they kidnaped one of my sister's friends , also spanish. Ernesto Fernandez
Vidal, who lived around the corner. and they demolished his house. men.”
she confessed. "we thought that they might take her away and she went to
live with other friends. He never thought that they might choose Iy father
or my mother as victims.n

In spite of the fact that the names of Ramon Garcia Uiloa and Ernesto fer-
nandez Vidal are on the report that was in La aarzuela 2 weeks before the
beginning of the trip by Juan Carlos and Sofia, Susana Garcia has lost all
hope of seeing her father again.

The Basque Carpenter

Horene Lareu. who has also found asylum in Spain. is somewhat lore optimis-
tic. but not much. her father. Julio Eduardo Lareu, 51 years old, son of
Carmelo Lareu, Basque, who emigrated at the beginning of the century, has
also been a victim of the present Argentine regime.

He is another of the "missing persons." no story of his "disappearance"
begins at noon, last 29 May.

Mlve armed men burst into his carpenter shop at 2775 Deheza Street, Bus-
nos hires.

The shoved him into an recount. [National Mall and Telegraph Enterprise]
(telephone coupany) truck waiting at the door.

six of the assailants stayed in the place for about 6 hours interrogating
the workers at gunpoint. mstonsre who arrived went to enlarge the group
of hostages.

That night, his wife went to the police station to submit two complaints:
one for the disappearance of her husband and another because. in spite of

8
FOR OFFICIAL. USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the late hour. there were people in the carpenter shop. me police told
her cynically: “Don't worry. It is not a question or rcbbers or guerrilla
lighters. It is an Army (cos-endo) operaticn.‘ Only the walls or the
carpenter shop were left.

'01 the sane night. I gave birth to Iy third son." herons said. ”I have a
very contused recollection of what happened after that. I know that ny
nether i-ndiately filed a habees corpus petition. but without any result.
We were already taniliar with the steps that had to be taken and. utter-
tmately. with the results.”

She went on to say that "a year before. on 30 May 1977. they had kidnaped
my sister Electra and his husband. Rafael J. Belaustegui. whose grand-
parents were Spanish. That was horrible. Hy brother-in-law's entire fa-
nily 'disappeared'. Three brothers with their wives and children. I be-
lieve that what happened to my father is connected with what happened to
lay sister. We never heard true then again. although we resorted to every-
one. Fortunately. my little nephew Antonio. 1 year old when his parents
were taken away. appeared. "y mother found hie unheated in a children's
institution - they call than that -- paid by the Ministry of Social Hel-
tare. at the end of a eotsth. My father had taken his in and wee living
with then.“

In the case of Antonio there was luck. Not so in the case of Carlita. the
little Peruvian girl who was unable to see the king and queen and the case

of thousands of Argentine children. also victims of the Military Jmta's
repression.

Although there are no accurate figures on children affected by the nilitary
regime. sister Yvonne. a trench Foreign Missions nun devoted body and soul.
in Paris. for a year now to the cause of these innocent children. has con-
firmation that around 400 children were born in Argentine prisons and at
this tins their whereabouts is unknown. "The possibility that their
fathers or nothers will see then again are nil.” she says.

sister Yvonne lived in Argentine 2d years and was arrested on 14 October
'9'". together with sister Alicia band. They were released 24 hours
later. M weeks after that. Sister Alicia and Sister Inonide mquet.

also of Foreign Missions. were hidnaped and have not showed up again.

Their case. aired spectacularly by the French press and authorities. stirred
up angry protests all over the world.

Prison. a Maternity Hard

"children born in prison receive the seas inhueane treat-ant as their pa-
rents." Sister Yvonne states. “They lack nilk. They suffer from the cold
and all kinds of disconfort in an unhealthy environment. They can be with
their nether for only 4 soothe. Then they wind up in an orphanage where
they are not registered with their new or in a black Isrket of children

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

for adoption. 'lheir true identity is never known and. as tine goes on. it
is impossible to identify then.”

Sister Yvonne is also gathering intonation on the vexations undergone by
then when their parents are arrested. or kidnaped. "Methods identical with
the ones applied to adults are applied to then. 'lhey are interrogated
subtly. 'Hho lives in your house with you?‘ they ask then. It the children
say. for example. 'Papa. sauna and an uncle who has just coae iron the in-
terior' . it is neat likely that they will watch the family and search the
house. There are cases of children tortured to snatch this kind of con-
fessions from then and of children obliged to witness their parents' tor-
ture for the purpose of finally depressing the prisoners' norale. Just

as they did with Carlita.“

Children and "missing persons" are cases of slight hope. Steps taken by
the Spanish authorities achieve nothing. when they discuss the topic. they
encounter constant shrugs on the part or the Argentine Government.

From 1976 to the present time. the activities of the Spanish Embassy in
Buenos Aires have obtained the release of 41 persons, all Spaniards. with
the exception of three or (our.

Whenever a case of the 'disappearance' or arrest of a Spaniard comes to the
knowledge of the representatives of Spain, a visit is requested isnediately --
in the case of prisoners -- and an attorney is made available to the af-
fected parties. But most of the tines. an attorney is of very little use .
because there are no trials. "I spent 3 years in the Sierra (mica Prison.
awaiting a trial that never cane.“ J.H.C. stated to the correspondent of
CAHBIO 16 in Oviedo. “in which I would have had to answer for possession

of political propaganda.”

J .n.c. is a young Andalusian who was taken to Argentina when he was 4 years
old. He has a Spanish passport and wants his nane concealed, in order to
prevent problems "for my {sally testers down there.“ he was released by
intercession of the Spanish Bnbassy, Luis Yanes or the 9808 and Claudio
Sanchez Albornor.

Sierra Chica

A small Spanish colony hoping that the trip by the king and queen will serve
to accelerate their release is interned in Sierra Chica. This group con-
sists of Jesus Maria Cabanas, vernando Saleza. Antonio Hernida Sanchez

and Ploreal Canalis, all of then. with the exception of the last-usntioned,
awaiting trial for years.

The four succeeded in circumventing prison censorship and in getting out
a cosqunigue so that the Spanish people say learn the conditions in which
some of their fellow citizens. held in Argentine prisons, are.

10
FOR OFFICIAL I'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nessage. written in very seall. cleer hanchvriting, narrates the condi-
tions to which the 600 political prisoners lodged in 0-2 or sierra Chloe are
subjected. “lledical care is deficient and in root cases is lilaited to
prescribing a sedioine without examination or merely by consulting on the
syuptou. Corporal pmishnsnt, cold water showers. insults and all kinds
of violations of. the most eleeentary huaan rights are co-on here.“

Priest in Prison

A priest tron Palencia. Javier Martin Docs. released end expelled fro- Ar-

gentina last 28 August, is thoroughly familiar with the Sierra Olioe penal
institution. in which he spent over 9 sonths.

”Health care in 0-2 does not exist.” he said. ”while I was there. a fellow
prisoner tell seriously ill. 'ueng yourself.‘ they told him in the intimacy.“

Javier Martin Docs is now in Hedrid hoping that a surgical operation will
correct the strabislus that a stay of over 3 years in slell cells caused in
his left eye. His story can be tho story of any of the Spaniards or Argen-
tines who have undergone persecution by the Military Junta regilas. or

course, the story of the sore fortunate ones, because he in alivu and
tree to tell it.

rather Martin Data was ordained a priest in Palencia. in 1964. and went to
Argentina 2 years later through the Organization of Hispano-Aurican Sacer-

dotal Cooperation. to the diocesis of bones de Zamora, a suburb of Buenos
Aires.

In 1970. he and rm other priests obtained authorization from the bishop
towork as laymen. They were worker-priests in an area with serious social

problelas: poverty, uneeploylnsnt. lack of decent homing. They sade con-
tact with neighbors' associations.

”On 26 April 1975, Police personnel appeared at Ily house," Hartin Docs
relates. '"l'hey covered nay head and the head of another priest living
with no and took us out by force. Lying on the ﬂoor or an autoeobile.
they took as to a building that I an sure was not a police station. ,‘i‘hey
took on sly clothes and applied tho goad to as -- an electric prod -- all
over sly body (or 2 hours. when I informed then that I was a spanierd and
a priest. they increased their cruelty to so. Then they took us to a po-
lice station. where they kept me for 8 days with constant interrogations
on the basis of blows, insults and psychological torture."

From the police station. he went to the 0-9 penal institution. in La Plate.
and then to the sierra Chica 0-2. his testisony on this prison agrees
with that or Spaniards still imprisoned there.

“when the nilitary coup occurred, on 24 March 1976. the prison regime be-
cane considerably sore cruel,“ martin Docs went on to relate. ”In Septewer.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apparently, at the request of the diocesis. they concentrated 12 of us
priests in the La Plata 0-9. 'The transfer was brutal. 'mey beat us con-
stantly with fists and rifles and frightened us with eieulated shooting.

”Physical punishments were on the order of the day or night, depending on
the mood of the watch officer, in the La Plata Prison. Cries of beaten
prisoners would be heard in the early morning in every gallery.

"roar. which they took care to keep constant along the inlates. must be
added to all this constant degradation. Pear even of freedoe. In January
1977, they took out several fellow prisoners. including a newsean. Dardo
Cabo. to transfer them to sierra mica. They killed then by applying the .
ley de fuga. Normally, in transfers they ordered you to prepare your
'nono' -- your belongings -- beforehand. but the officer told this group
not to do anything. That they were not going to need it.“

Father Martin Doce narrated these events in a monotone, without suction.
"In April, an attorney from Zarate. a specialist in cooperatives. went out.
They put his: out of the prison at nidnight. lie had not walked 50 meters
when they fired four shots in his head and left his body on the street.

In that way they kept the prison population in constant anguish.

Old Hen Driven Had

“they say that there are no concentration cups. Nevertheless. shortly be-
fore ! was released, a dozen persons arrived at the be Plate 0-? coming from
the north. Among them, there were old run over 65 years old. Sons of then
were helpless. They were never able to explain where they had been for
years. They were all mentally disturbed and at night shouted frightfully.
Even the jailers felt sorry for then. One of then. who had been arrested
in runs-an and had been taken for a ride hanging from a helicopter. was in
such a state that when they offered his his release he refused to sign it."

In Septemr 1977. Javier Martin Docs was sentenced to 4 years in prison
for illegal association. With the aid of the Spanish Embassy. which leads
an attorney available to hill. he was successful in having the judge decree
his release on parole last April, when he had served two-thirds of the
sentence.

Nevertheless, the National Executive Body (PEN) . over the judicial sentence.
kept his: in prison until 28 August when they transferred hin handcuffed to
the Buenos Aires airport. for the first tine, it granted a pardom

Itis believed. among the family neebers of Spaniards in prison in Argen-
tina. that they will all be released by means of further pardons, before
the king and queen land in Buenos Aires, in a “gesture of Iagnanilaity and
good will" by the Military Jmta.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But there will be no pardon for those half a hundred Spaniards or children
or Spaniards kidnaped. or for Carlita and other innocent children mrecov-
erable by their parents. or for the hundreds and hundreds or grandchildren
of Spaniards for when the Hadrid authorities can do very little. or for
the tens of thousands or Argentines .victisn of repression.

In Argentina. a prison almost 3 million square kilometers in sire, torture
end mrder continue.

Spaniards. Victims of videla

Abadia Creepo. Domingo and Pelicidad. Kidnaped on 3 November 1977. in the
town of Boulogne Sur Her (Buenoe Aires).

Alonso Ciiuentes. Gloria Maria. Kidnaped on 29 June 1977, in Mar del Plata
(Buenoe Aires).

Arrouge Fidalgo. Ernesto. Arrested on 30 March 1976, in La Plata. Trial
in La Plata Court Met 3.

Barreira Garcia. Serafin. kidnaped on 7 April 1977. in Onivalert (Buenos
Aires).

Caenano Ural , Jose. Kidneped on 23 Decelber ‘976, in rigre (Iiusnos Aires).

Cabanas Navarrete. Jesus Maria. Arrested on 20 October 1976. Trial pend-
ing in the Arul federal court. Imprisoned in sierra Chico.

Canalie Leaierra. Plorial. Cospleted serving a 3-year sentence in April
of this yoer. but it still held by the National Bxecutive Body in the
sierra Chica penal institution.

Canoves Bstape, Alberto. Kidnaped from his house. on 27 March 1976.

Caries Salas. Eduardo. Kidnaped on :5 January 1977. in the city of Buenos
Aires.

Carpintero,‘ Pablo and Ricardo. Kidnaped on 9 Novesber ‘977, in villa
Bellester (Buenoe Aires).

Cervera Noto. Luis Justo. Kidnaped on 20 Hay 1977, in the city of auenos
Aires.

Cone Veleeco. Atlantida. Kidnepsd on 12 October 1976. in the city of
Buenos Aires.

Coley Robles, Manuel. Kidnaped on 27 October 1976. in gull-es (Buenos
Aires).

13
roe orncw. use osu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chavarino Cortes. Gustavo Adolro. Xidnaped on 18 Novasber 1977. in the
city of Buanoa hires.

Diaz Berdayee. Jose Felix. Kidnaped on 14 July 1976, in the city of Buenoa
hires.

Dian taper, Alonao. Kidnaped on 14 July 1976. in San Fernando (Buenoa hires).

Fernandez Garcia. Antonia Margarita. Kidnaped on 4 May this year. in Mar
dal Plate.

Fernandez Vidal. Ernesto. Kidnaped on 23 Septewer 1976. in the city of
Buenoa hires.

Garcia Ulloa, 11am and hie wife Dolores del Pilar Iglesiae. Kidnaped on
6 October 1976. in the city of nuanos Airea.

Antonio Garrido. Kidnaped on 7 Auguat 1976.

Gianna: Maya. Pilar. Kidnaped on 4 January this year. in Mar del Plata
(Buenoa Airee) .

Gone: Aguirre. Manuel. Kidnapad on 14 may 1971, in Villa Teseia (Busnoa
hires).

Gonzalez auscbi, Lidia Edith. Daughter of Spaniards, 23 years old. Kid-
napad on 15 Septedaer 1976. in narrancas (nuance Aired." ’

waldoni Heron. Juan Carlos. Son of Spaniards, 30 years old. xidnaped on
26 June 1976. in the city of Buenoa urea." 2

Neruda Sanchez. Antonio. Arrested in Novanber 1973. At present in the
Sierra Chica penal institution. Trial in Cordoba Court Number 2.

Juan Gutierrez. Maria uagdalana. Kidnaped on 23. septa-her 1977, in the
town of Ramos Mejia (Busnos urea).

Labrador Perez. Higual Angel. Son 0! Spanish father. Kidnaped during a
working trip in the provinces of Santa Fe and antre Rios, on 15 Septelber
1916.

Lareu. Julio Eduardo. Son of Spaniards. 51 years old. Kidnaped on 29 May
of this year, in the city of nuance Mree.‘

' Hay obtain Spanish citizenship nrely by requesting it.

1 Not on the list being proceased by the Spanish authorities.

1h
ton orncnu. us: on?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lope: Alonso. Celia. Kidneped on 13 October 1976, in the city of Buenos
Aires.

lope: Fernandez, Urbano. Kidnaped on 16 December 1976. in Villa Beech
(Buenoe Airee) .

Lope: Martin. Angela. Kidneped on 25 \pteaber 1976, in Le Plate (Buenoe
Airee).

. Lopez Munoz. Luiea. Arreeted on 13 Septeaber 1975. At preeent, in the
Villa Devoto Prison. with trial in Cordoba Court "Met 2.

Llorene. Manuel Maria. Son of Spaniarde. Arreeted in Tucunen. in June
1974 and inprieoned in the Rawson penal institution. In the griddle o!
1977, hie wife. whole maiden name ie Viele, wee kidnaped.

Llorene. Maria del Carmen. Sieter of the above. 36 yeere old. to in the
Villa Devgto Prison. at the dieposition or the National Executive Body
(PEN).'

Llorens,28ebaetian Maria. Brother of the above. Kidnaped in Decenber
197s.l

Llorens. Terese retiu. Sieter of the above. Arrested in Mention. in Jan-
uary 197s. mereaboute unknown." ‘

Hartin Hertin, Julio Antonio. Kidnaped on 27 Deco-her 1975. in women.
Martinez. Angela. Arrested on 7 May 1976. whereabouts unknown.a

Martinez norbolla. Rocio. Schoolteacher. 33 years old, two children.
Xidnaped on 16 June 1976, tn the town of needo (Buenos Airee).

Munuzurri Barano. Juan Henuel. Arrested in 1975. At present, in the Le
Plate penal institution, with trial in Sen leidro Court m: 4.

Ourem ‘Doje. Jose Antonio. Kidnaped on 24 Hay 1976, in the city of Buenoe
Airea.

Pena sainr, Juan Roger. Kidnaped on 11 January 1976, in Mar del Plate
(Buenos Aires) .

Plnol noncunill, Jose. Kldnaped on 15 Novenber 1976, in the city 0! Due-
noe Airee.

Puerto del Meeo, Nor-a Lidia. Daughter of Spanish father. Schoolteacher.a
26 yeere old and nether of two children. Kidnaped on 11 Septenber 1977.

15
roe owxcm. use osu
l'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Queuda Haeetro. Joee. Kidneped on 29 Decedoer $977, in the tovn of comral
Rodriguez (Buenoe Airee).

Requom Sanchez. Maria. Kidnaped on 29 Deceeber 1977, in General Rodriguez
(Buenoe Airee) .

Salinas. Luis Antonio. Son of Spaniarde. 24 yeare old. Arrested on 12
February 1976. At present in the La Plata Penitentiary.‘

Sen hetrio. Cesar. Son of Spanierde, 50 years old. Xidnaped in La Plata,
in Magnet 1977." 2

Sena Gorbea. retain. Kidnapud on 26 October 1976. in Becca: (Buenoe hires).

Souto beeton. Manuel Ramon. Kidnaped on 12 June 1976, in none de Zamora
(Buenoe urea).

Suen, Julio. Spanish priest. Date of disappearance mknovn.’

Suarez, Raul. Son of Spaniard. Kidnaped on 25 hey 1976. in Rio Ceballoo
(Cordoba). no we: kidneped together with hie Vito, Elba [beat-lo Puc‘tetta." 3

Tapia Rodriguez. brique. Son of Spaniards, 25 years old. Kidnaped in
hay 1976.I

Valera. Baldouero. Son of Spanierdo, 60 years old. Kidneped on 3 October
1976. in Avollanoda (nnenoo nun."

comma: cmuo 16, 1978

10.042
C50: 3010

16
ma orncm. us: om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘ ARGENTINA

TOP CENTRAL BANK EXECUTIVIS' RESIGNATION IS RDHDRED
Buenos Aires LA OPINION in Spanish 28 Dec 78 p 1
[Article by'noberto Garcia]

[Text] The beginning of a reorganization in the top nsnagenent of the Cen-
tral Bank is expected to be announced within the next few hours. It is
ruaored in capital financial circles that ”the Board of Directors is about to
resign." To tell the truth, the rumor nales four high officials. and it is
not known whether they will resign as a group or individually.

It is no news to anyone that various rumors have been heard for some tine

in the vicinity of the alaost inaccessible office of the'head of that organ-
ization. Dr Adolfo Dir. Furthermore, the story concerning the resignations
does not apply to hin, naturally: on the contrary, the comings and goings,
which he finds annoying. between the Central Bank and the Econouy Ministry-
it is known that he is one of the architects of Dr Jose Alfredo Martinez 6‘
hoz' policy-appear to lake it a key part of the now less liberal plan of
the head of the Finance Ministry.

The rumors concerning the resignations concern the Central Bank's vice presi-
dent, Dr Christian Zia-eraann. and Directors Francisco Soldatti. Jr., Juan H.
Oca-po-alao president of the National Dank-and Alfredo H. Baposito. Not
all these resignationa are for the sane reason, given the differences these
people have already had. But it is interesting to note the fact that yester-
day there was still some conjecture as to how these officials would resign
their posts: all at once or separately.

The rumors have reached such proportions that there is even speculation on
possible replacements for the outoing directors. Thus. it turns out. Dr
Egidio lanella--presently head of the Develop-ant Bank-is being lentioned

as a possible successor to Ora-p0 as head of the Bank of the Nation, while
his vacant post would be taken over by a present senber of the END [National
Develop-ant Dank]. Dr Cayetano Licciardo. As for the position presumably

to be left vacant by Dr Zﬂlaerlann, rulors assign it to the present vice
president. Dr Oscar Purlotti. Naturally. all these replace-ants lust be
viewed as purely hypothetical. As for the cause of the possible resignations,

17
roe 0171an use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

it cannot be found in differencee with Dr Die, except, it ie clear. in the
ceee of Dr Bepoeito. Therefore it ie intereeting to go deeper into the
criticieae of 012' actions by Bepoeito who. according to hie friende. cen-
eured Die for hie conplecency in going along with all the denende of the
budget deficitnineteod of acting ee a proeecutoru-end, beeicelly, for hie
oppoeition to the ieeuing~-policy. That ie. Dr Beooeito. who has been linked
lore than once with Alvaro Aleogaray--contrery to what they eay-would in-
eiet that inetead of having recouree to watery contraction. the Central
Bank directorehip profere currency ieeue.

Amid theee criticiene it ie neceeeery to understand Bepoeito'e alienation;
as for the other three possible reeigneee. the stories are eo varied that
for the moment it is better not to becone entangled in then.

COPYRIGHT: LA OPmIOﬂ. Buenoe Airee, 1978

87 35
680: 3010

18
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“MW Tm HODIFICATIQ‘S, STATISTICS mm
Indrid DBMSA in Spanish Aug 18 (rourth Issue) pp 35-42
[Article by lavier do Masai-race]

[Text] During the past few years, the Argentine Am, which since 1945 has
equipped its unite with the hamster-ml American World Var II "ll-4 Sherman"
tank, has felt the urgent need to asdernize its amcred unite my: the
introduction of new oquipaent that will satisfy the operational concepts

of the armored unite in tone of adaptation to terrain and weather and to
the country's economic realities.

A first step was the acquisition of a license to sanufacture the French
m-131mt tank and of several Assrican H1 tanks and the M 14-11), to
be used as an infantry transport, as well as the execution of studies on
European tanks, chiefly the net-30 and Leopard-1, as possible replaoenonte
for the Sherman "Firefly“ now in use.

Other studies were simultaneously undertaken which, along with the process
of industrialisation completed over the past 20 years, have enabled Argentina
to produce two new arncrsd vehicles of specialised nature and advanced

concept which can have an important influence on the dosigi of future
armored equipment.

These two machines — a combat tank and a troop transport — have node a
favorable inpreeeion on observers from various countries and their technical
and tactical specifications have aroused expectations and interest on the
art of several South American, African and even Asian nations, thus enabling
Argentina to appear on the list of tank-producing countries.

'lhe asnufacture of lilitary vehicles is not new in this country; it goes
back almost a half a century when a 3/4-ton armored car with a 90-EP engine
and trucks for military use were designed and built in the 1930's,

Years later in the 1940's, the Argentine Republic designed its first and
only aediun coabat tank, the 55-tcn DH} “Mel," armed wi‘ . a 754m sun
and two 7.65-an eechine guns.

19
FOR onrcm use cum
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Argentina's entire military production, which was otherwise Very limited,
was exllusively aimed at supplying its any.

The "TAM“

With its policy of modernisation and supply of armored vehicles for national
needs, the Argentine Army in 1973 set up the requisition for a new combat
tank which was expected to supply its units in the 1980's.

'Ihis requisition, which combined the already determined qualities of a
modern tank: "firepower, mobility and protection," established the follow-
ing priorities and specifications for the new designs

A modem gun, 105 an or larger.

Secondary arnmsnt consisting of two machine guns and flasethrower tubes.
Integrated fire-control systen.

Range of over 500 Ian.

Maxim:- speed of 10 in an hour on paved roads.

Power-weight ratio of 20 HP per ton.

Height no more than 30 tons,

Low silhouette.

Atomic, biological and chemical defense system (ABQ).

Crew of three to four men.

With these tactical and technical specifications plus operational, road
infrastructure, weather and mountain terrain factors, design operations were
begun which materialised in "Project '1‘»! (Argentine Medium ML"

Once the project was outlined, the process of study, desig: and develop-ant
was begun in 1974.

The develop-ant of a project of this magnitude requires hidtly capable
research team and an advanced technolog in a great number of fields in-
cluding amrthing from autonotive mechanics to electronics via the no less
important ones of structural denim, armaments or optics or the setting up
of a process for the manufacture of complex equip-eat consisting of hard-
to-get nterials, as well as a powerful industrial infrastructure.

while not all these prerequisites were lacking, sons were and the need to
shorten deadlines for getting the equipment into operation (a project of
this kind requires from 8 to 10 years of work) led the Argentine Am to
turn to countries with more experience in the nnufacture of armored
vehicles and establish various contacts which bore fruit in the fora of a
joint production contract with the Oernn firm, Mosen—Eenschel, under
the terms of which the latter would design and build prototypes of the
TA)! tank which would later be lass-produced in Argentina. 'Ihe contract
provided for the use of assemblies, subassemblies and elenents already
tested and used in similar vehicles.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mann-Henschel inediately went to work on the '1'»! project, which has
been subdivided into two; the tank itself and the "V01?“ (ocabat vehicle
and troop transport), both based on the same vehicle, which will naturally
facilitate mture logistics and maintenance operations.

Meson-ﬁmschel chose one of its cost successml and couple: products as
the basis for the new vehicle, its "larder" VC’I [expansion unknown], en-
dowed with a turret of original desigt armed with a 1054:: gun and which
has been subjected to slight codification of its arnor to improve its bal-
listic protection and with a more powerful engine, resulting in e. mediu-
tank that combines the requirements for a tank that is up-to-date, heavily
arsed, lightweight, with a low silhouette and ecmonioally feasible.

'ihese development operations, chieﬂy concerning the new burst, 'took the
next 2 years to complete, resulting in the production of a prototype that
was ready by January 1977, at which time it was sent to Argentina for test-
ing and teoimical and tactical evaluation, a phase in which it has been in-
tensely involved for over a year now, having been tested over more than
5,000 In of terrain of all kinds and under extreme weather conditions, for
we mist not forget that with its enormous land area Argentina has practical-
ly all kinds of climates, from tropical 'to arctic including temperate

zones, as well as a variety of mountainous terrains.

‘ihe tests inve enabled us to verify that all the technical and tactical
specifications required by the Law General Staff have been met and even
surpassed, thus assuring us of the resistance to wear of its parts and its
excellent all-terrain and operational perfomnce.

Simltaneeus with the development of the m, tools, tool and die nohinery
and equipsent have been produced and acquired and the installations for
mes-producing the m as of 1979 erected. According to Army General Staff
forecasts, 200 units will be produced and work has already begun on the
storing of nterial and acceptance of bids for the mfacture of parts

by Argentine industries in order to achieve a high level of national parti-
oipaticn.

'Ihe internal distribution of the m comprises two large sectiom: the
front, which is-subdivided into the mane-transmission and drive assemblies
chamber, and the rear, which consists of the combat and tin-rot housing
chamber. In the rear of the vehicle a little hatch opens for the crew to
get in and for loading anmition, between the radiators and the engine.

‘Ihe driver sits in the far left front part of the veh 'scle, equipped for
visibility with three periscopes plus a luminescence intensifying system

for night driving with a range of 50 meters, coslplenented by two side-
nounted rear-view mirrors.

2].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ammnt

'm. firepower is provided by u etabilized 105/51-m Hnglich Vickero [#702
gun, the sane no in the ”Leopeard," the ”-60 and others, mounted in a
turret deoigted and built by 'myoeen-llencchel and constructed of laminated,
welded chrome-niekel-molybdenum steel plates set at an angle calculated to
reduce the effectivenese of arisen-piercing ohelle to a minimum.

Thin turret, a hilly eywotrical truncated pyramid, has a typical arrange-
ment with the tank cot-under seated on the ridlt, a dome provided with
eight ports that asoure vioibility in direction and a panoramic tele-
ecope with two ramifications) (2x and H: . me gunner sits in front of
the tank cemnder, provided with a panoramic, front-mounted PERI-2 peri-
ocope that in horizontally and vertically adjustable as well as with a
loser rangei‘inder which can be operated directly by the comnder.

The leader nits to the left of the breech of the gun, provided with a round
hatch in the roof of the turret and a cmll lateral hatch for loading
nhellu and getting rid of empty nhellcases. 'lhia member of the crow also
hue en adJuotable periseope of the same type as the one used by the gunner.

In the roar of the turret there in a box for spare parts and auxiliary
equipment which in accoooible throng: a lid on the roof. Tﬂi‘s radio
antennae are located on both sideo of thin box.

'rm's secondary armament consists of a 7.62% 3‘}! [expansion unknown} co-
axial mchinc gun and another M [expansion unknown] of the same cal bar
and make optionally mounted on the roof of the turret in the connnd dome
pluu eight electrically fired ﬂamethrower tubes located on both sideo of
the turret.

'lhe main gun is fired by meano of a Mly integrated and stabilized system
cenoisting of a balliotic ceaputsr, laser rangsi‘inder, stabilised view-
finder and a turret-poeition indicator, a eyetem that can be complemented
with a lidtt intensifier installed to the left of the gun.

The turret is operated by means of an electro-hydraulic and manual control
with a 360° angle of rotation and the gun has a vertical range of from
-7° to «918°.

Mobili ty

The TAN, which is outfitted with the improved "thxder" motorhdriven assembly,
has been deoioaed for excellent mobilit . One of the factors that providen
this in the hid: ratio of power to weiynt which is on the order of 24 HP

per ton and in nude possible by its low weight of only 30 tons and 6-cylin-
der 90°-V mu 143-833 Ida-500 diesel engine with a cylinder capacity of

22.4 liters, water-cooled, which develops 630 up at 2,200 rpm with a ope-
cific special peak power of 720 HP/DIN end which in ctnraoterized by an
almost constant torque of between 1,200 and 2,200 rpm.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWIOIAI. USE ONLY

The engine is cooled by i sealed circuit provided with two water pumps
and two radiators located in the rear of the vehicle on both sides of the
access hatch, euch equipped with hydraulically-operated fans, whose air
intake vents are on the roof of the vehicle.

lhgine power is transmitted to the tank by means of an “Stile-194 hydro-
mechanical transmission that consists of a hydrodynamic ‘orque converter
combined with a ”high-speed" mechanical clutch, a torque inverter, an
automtic or manual four-speed shift (with planetary gears and direct
drive), a hydrostatic steering system and hydrodynamic brakes.

’lhis transmission allows the TAM to accelerate rapidly and to constantly
maintain a fairly high level of power since the engine runs at a high
rate of speed. it can also be started with the gearshift lever in any

position it my be in, thus preventing the vehicle iron stalling if the
driver makes a mistake in handling it.

The hydrostatic steering system, sided by a servocontrol, provides the
tank with supple and comfortable and exceptionally fast steering, enabling
the 1'»! to move effectively over winding stretches and with the engine
running at top speed.

Another factor to be considered with regard to the vehicle's mobility is
its suspension and:- xming gear which in the classically designed rm
consists of six exceptionally long laterally oscillating arms with a
potential stroke of 330 la, supported by large-diameter torsion bars in
order to obtain a shock-absorbent suspension and avoid excessive pitching
of the vehicle. 'ihie system is supplemented by four hydraulic shock ab-
sorbers on which the two forward and thc two rear wheels on each side rest.

The running gear is cceposed of six aluminum double support wheels with

a rubber belt, three double return rollers and a laterally and mechanically
operated rear tension wheel. The drive wheels, mounted forward and fairly
high and which permit the ms to get over vertical obstacles as much as

1 meter high, are powered by the engine by means of two final-drive re.
duction gears set in the drive-wheel housings which engage the engine
gears; by means of a 45-cln-whle steel chain equipped with rubber shoes,
emnily n. placenble, annufactured by the Diehl company and especially suit-
able for rolling over snow, mud or ice.

Protection

The wrailelopipcd armor shell, built of a special ehmne-nickel-molybdenum
stool and thick enough to resist the inpact of ordinary 20- or 25mm
shells on its sides and with a front end capable of withstanding standard
uubcaliber projectiles, is angled at 75° in front and 32° on the sides.
Both the front and lateml surfaces are completely smooth, which facili-
L1tes mrxiutancc to pressure wa.es caused by atomic explosions, also asking
it easier to decontaminate the tank.

23
ran ontcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Naturally, the TAP. in provided with a device to protect it against AM
weapons which permits the crew to rennin in a contaminated area for 8 hours.
The incoming air, with a rate of flow of 5 cubic asters a minute, passes
through a system composed of two ABQ filters and is maintained in the combat
chamber at a pressure of 30 mm of water over that of the outside air, thus
preventing radioactive dust from getting into the vehicle. It is also pro-
vided with a double-circuit heating systea, one a hot-air system for the
combat chamber serving as a heater for the crew and the other a hot-water
system to preheat the engine.

'I'Al'. communications are taken care of by two 3:31-25 transmitter-receivers,
one intercom with four control boXes aw! optionally with an outside tele-
phone, while the power is supplied by a group of six 12-volt batteries
with a capacity of 400 anperou per hour and which are charged by a 9-kw,
2,200-rpn altcmator mounted on the engine.

The Tan has a range of 520 Ice guaranteed by 600 liters of fuel stored in
three tanks, 3 range that is increased to 900 km with the addition of the
two zoo-liter outside tanks attached to the rear end. It develops a top
speed of 75 kn an hour which, thanks to the torque converter, can be applied
in either forward or reverse gear.

While all other powers follow the trend toward increasing weight and com-
plexity, with the subsequent rise in cost. Argentina has chosen an cconcaio
and lighter (30 tons) tank but one with n firepower equal to that of neat
tanks in use, lurked by a unique general .onfiguraticn except for the new
Israeli "HeritaVa" tank which has its combat chamber in the rear aid part
of the vehicle.

The perfection of this design concept will provide the Argentine Am with
two vehicles, the TAM and the VC'l'P, with similar specifications and the
subsequent tactical and logistical advantages, constituting a "family" for
which other members are at present being developed: a 120-»- sorter
carrier, a tSS-sn howitzer, e consand car, a recovery vehicle and a bridge-
laying tank.

These vehicles, which will make it possible to renodel Argentine mechanized
units in the next few years, are also of interest to other countries on

the American continent, chiefly Brazil, which find thencelVes in similar
circumtances and are also Joining hands on a policy of updating and self-
sufficiency, which could man mass production and, what is sore ilportant
from the operational standpoint, standardization of equipment along the
different South American armies.

Technical Data

TAR: Argentine llcdium Tank

2'.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI! ONLY

Dimension and Heights

Ovorall length
Body length
Width

Overall height

nody height
Ground cloaranco

Contact with the ground

8.12 n ‘l‘rnck 2.62 I
6.79 a Chain width .45 c-
5.25 - Comet mam 29.500 kg
2.42 I ma wcidlt 1,880 kg
1.75 n Transmission weight 1,167 kg
.44 n MotorbdriVen sossnbly
weight 3,210
5.9 a Specific pressure .77 “'2

Mechanical Specifications

Engine:

Compression ratio:
Power-weight ration
Nsl consumption:
'l‘rsnnniosion:

Suupcnuiom

Running gears

Ammont

l-‘ain:
Angle of tire:
Secondary:

Pe ri‘cmncs

ﬂange:
Speed:

longitudinal slopes:
lateral nlcpcc:
Ditcheu:

Vertical obotnolcx

Ford :
Turning radium

Pool:

um lib-8}} him-500, diesel, 6 cylinders in s 90°-V con-
figuration, cylinder capacity 22.4 liters, 650 HP at
2,200 rpm, watemwlcd, right front counted.

19.531

24 HP per ton

115 liters per 100 he

liydronecheniccl 119119194 with hydrodynamic torque
converter. Pourbnpood Innuel or automatic gear box.
Six torsion hero and four lateral hydraulic shock
absorbers.

Six aluminum double-oupport wheelo with rubber bolt,
three double return rollers, rear noohenicel tension

wheel. Porty-i‘ive-on-wide stool chain with rubber
shoes.

105/51-sln L-‘MZ gun, etchiliud.

Horizontal: 360°; vertical; from -7° to +180.
One 7.62m coaxial Bl machine gun

One 1.62% M m mchine gun, optional.

Eight flamethrower takes.

520 Inn; 900 Ian with auxilicry tenku.

75 km per hour mine: on paved roedc, forum and
roverne; 3.5 km per hour minim.

60/.

50%

dd",

5
n
5 In
first, 6.5 It in second, 15.5 a; in third, 20 la;
i fourth, 30 m.

600 liters of disccl oil in three tanks; 400 literu
in outside auxiliary tanks.

:5‘

25
ton ontcm. use om:
.auipeont

Aiming and nidnting

devioee 3

Am defence:

Heating!

llndicl
crew:

COPYﬂIGlﬂ'I

11.466
cso:

5010

NR (WPICIAI. IISR (ONLY

Integrated fire-control eyotsn ocnsietins ci' bellie-
tic calculator, lneer rongei‘inder, ctebilized priury
viewfinder end turret-pooition indicator. More-lo
tsloucope with two umii‘icsticns (2x and Ex) for
the tank comnder. We mu-z-n perieccpen for

the lender and gunner. Bight ports for the tank con-
ncnder and three for the driVsr. luminescence in-
teneii‘iers for firing and night driving.

Consisting of two filters. Airflow st the mate of

5 cubic esterc per minute and ever-pressure or 50 In
or water.

Double circuit. hot voter for preheating engine and
Air for ccnbnt chamber.

'Nc nan-25 transmitter-receivers end intercce with
four control boxes. Optional cutoide telephone.

'hnk cot-sender, gunner. lender and driver.

Bdicicnes Defence, 8.A., Hadrid, 1918

26
ms osncm. use ONLY
I’Oll OI'PICIAI. USE ONLY

ARGBthNA

cowruaxmzs sunnouwmm RIVER MATE BASIN Issue RBVIPMBD
iluenoe Aires [A OPINIOﬂ in Spanish [5 Jen 79 p 7

[Article by Esteis_Arquou ”The River rlete iissin Conference Hes Revived
Sole Basic issues".

[lounges enclosed in sisntiines printed in boldface]

[Text] The Conference of Foreign hinistere or the River Plate Basin hoe
provided an opportunity to review the various rectors involved. There were
two other presences st the conference: one obJectiveiy reel thet had not
been invited (iteipu) end one not yet objectively resi (Corpus). ‘lhese were
the two male words on which the conference focused its attention.

on 20 October neu- ltaipu. Resident Alfredo Stroeesner or Per-saw end
President Ernesto Geieei or Bruii depressed the lever thet triggered the
explosion of 58 tons of dynuite. thereby diverting the throne River into
the utiticiei chsnnel through which it will flow until the project is
colpieted. The explosion we: still rwerberstirg inside the wells of the

Hotel San Rafael oi‘ Punts del Est. when the uinisters of foreign «mu
or the five countries or the River 'rlste Basin use-bled for their confer
once.

The Peransuseventh longest river in the world (“.000 kilo-eters)--we.s
diverted slow s 2.000-Ieter stretch. it was. and will continue to be. the

control axis of the River i'lste Basin.

The basin col-prises on me of 3.2 nillion equsre kiloseters end includes
the imns. Uruguay end (lute rivers together with their tributu'ies. it
extends scross five countries and represents 37 percent of the toul tree
of Argentina. 19 percent of Bolivia. 1? percent of Brazil. 100 percent of

Farm and 80 percent of Uruguay.

The country with the sssilest percentsee of its ores situted in the basin--
the largest country in South Aneticauhes utilized the energy resources or
the basin through the sodiu- oi‘ several projects: ilhe Solteirs. Jupis end

ltnipu.

2'!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

 

1h. River Pun mm: A melons energy resource
that am. he exploit“ in . coherent ml oqulublo tumor

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'ihe proxieity or the lteipu proJect (which 1e currently in e reletively
edvenced etege) Iekee it inpoeeible for Argentim to conetruct the Liberted
hydroelectric proJeotnwith en epproxieete cepecity or 15 eillion kilo-
wette--end et the one tile lilite the teeeibility of the Oorpue project.

Here is whet ecee Argentine experte heve hed to eeys

Adairzil leeec RoJeeo “Argentim ehould not conetruct e Oorpue den of leee
then 120 netere in height. eo thet it will be eble to reectivete the t
river end thereby 1te nevigetion. which todey 1e pertly perelyeed." in
am. No 1010. 25 October 1978)

Nicolee Boecoviche ”It ie not true thet e Corpus 01‘ only 105 feet in

height could produce energy et e coet equivelent to thet of the energy

which will be obtained et Yecyrete. In order for the coet to be ‘equivelent‘
the energy would heve to coet only heli‘ ee euch. end thet would require the
dee to be et leeet 120 eetere in height.” (:4 (Which. 30 Septelber 1978)

Engineer herio c. Nehini heJien ”Gerrying out the Iteipu project without
corpue would eeen en enoreoue weete of thie neturel reeourcet by coeperieon.
e Oorpue 125 Detere in height. plm Iteipu. could produce ee euch ee 28
eillion net kilowette per yeer.” At enother point in hie eteteeent he
declered that e Corpus 105 eetere in height cennot be built but believee
115 eetore to be e vieble height for the den. ("u einguleridrd geogret‘ice
gmenee" [Dietinctive Geogrephic (herecterietice or the ”Gueyenee“ Region].
hiltoriel Oikoe. 1978)

In generel. the technicel reporte conteui thet the lint-u- height of the
lteipu dee cennot be leee then 115 Ietere. in the ebeence or e definitive
decision. the foreign einietry givee the iepreeeion thet it would egree to
e height of erouni 110 eetere. The propoeel of the Bruiliene end Pere-
gueyene ie for e den of only 105 eetere end 20 turbinee.

in order to unleretend the ieeue of the turbinee we euet begin et the
beginning.

‘Ihe iteipu Treety

At the Seventh Conference of Montevideo (held in 1933). in which the coun-
triee of the River Plete Beein took pert (the treety wee not eigned until
1:69). it wee reeolved thet elthough the individuel etetee hd the ”exclu-
e ve right. to engege in utilieetion for irriuetriel end egriculturel pur-
pooee.” the exerciee of thie right wee eede eubject to ”the condition
thet it not iepeir the equel rlytt of e neighborim etete.”

The problee of the weter reeourcee of coneecutive wetercoureee (e proble-
thet detee beck to Bonn lew) requires the eetebliehlent of intermtionel
lepl noree thet will not tremi‘ore every river thet flowe through lore
then one etete into e letent diepute.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY

At the Iburth Conference of Foreign hinietere of the River Plete Resin e
declereticn wee obteined concerning the utilieetion of the internetionel
rivers. It wee epproved on the beeie of the legel principles eeeerted by
Argentine end Uruguey. the downetreee countries. end reeds ee follower

“0n the internetionel rivere that consist of coneecutive wetercourees. end
where sovereignty is not shered. eech etete Iey utilise the waters in
eccerdence with its neede. provided such utilieetion does not ceuse
perceptible here to enother etete of the ﬂeein.” (Article 2)

The Bruilien theeie but been ennounced by thet country’s foreign minister
in Novenber 1968. en follows: "No country whose territory conteine the
heedwetere of e hydrognphic beein cen egreenin Iettere releting to weter
utilieetionntc edopt eelfoiepceed reetriotione which ere not beeed on ite
own technioel requirenents. end on its principles ee eetebliehed in eocor-
dence with its legel reeponeibility.”

During the anerence on the Mullen Miran-em held in Stockholl in June
1972. Bruil requested that Principle 20 of the deoleretion include e
etipuletion to the effect thet ”no etete ie obligeted to provide intone-
tion when cirountencee ere such thet it hes good reuon to believe thet
ite netionel eecm-ity. econuio duelopeent. or doeeetic eotion to inprove
the environ-eat could be endemered.“

Confronted with the threet of pollution deriving m- Breeil'e intention to
eeteblieh ”dirty” industries or chelicel industriee. Argentineo-together
with other Alerioen end Afrioen countrieenoppceed the Breeilien request.
erguim thet 'etetee ehould provide the pertinent inforeetion.” The
propceed elenilent wee not included. however. end the letter wee referred
to the Gensrel Aeeenbly of the United Netione. Before the (LN. took up

the queetion. Breeilurselieing thet it wee losing the erguentuopted
ineteed for en egreeeent between the foreign einistere of the two countries.
The text of the egreeeent reed ee followea

/"Inforletion should be provided. officielly end publicly."/

An ennex etetee thet the ebove doee not elpower e etete to ”deley or
obetruct progre-e. or proJecte. for the exploretion. exploitetion end
developeent of the neturel reeourcee of thoee etetee in whoee territory
such progrens end proJects ere undertaken.”

Argentine hen. succeeded in winning ecceptence for its thesis. but Bresil
had obteined en ennex sufficiently elbiguous to eneble it to evoid hevim
to fulfill the terns of the egreenent.

it wee in thie context thet Perm-Which until that point had Ieinteined
a fire netioml policy em e foreign policy thet oecilleted between
Argentine end Bruilntipped the eceles in Brezil'e fever by pledging. in

the Decieretion of Asuncion. not to cerry out e Joint hydroelectric project
but ineteed to Ienege Pereguey'e entire econoey in eccordence with Breeil'e

intereete.
30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is useful to review the text of the Iteipu Treety. which wee s ned by
Fbreign Ministers Reul 8epene Psstor end Herio Gibson Berbose on 2 April

1973:

Article 1. ”me high contrecting perties scree to cerry out Jointly. in
sccordence with the provisions of the present treety end its ennexes. the
/hydroelectric exploitetion of those weter resources of the Perene River
over which the two countries exercise Joint sovereignty/. frosnend includ-
imuthe Selto del Gusire. or Seltc Grende de Sets Quedes. to the south of
the Iguesu River."

Article 3. [Article 2 oeitted es published] ”Ihe high contrecting perties
shell creete. with eeuelity of rights end oblieetions. e binetionel entity

to be nesed 'lteipu. for the purpose of cer-rying out the hydroelectric
exploitetion to which reference is sede in Article 1.”

Annex A. Consists of the Statutes of the eforesentioned entity 'Iteipu.”
covering the purpose. cepitel end sdsinistretion thereof.

Annex B. Consists of s ssnerel description of the instelletions designed
for the production of electrical energy.

1. Purpose. ”in. emineering works described in the present ennex sey
undergo ssendsent or sdditionn/including the specificetions with respect

to heights end seestn'esents/"if this is required by virtue of technicsl
coneideretions thet cose to light in the course of the execution of seid
works. Moreover. if beceme of sisiler requirslsnts /it becoses epperent
thet there is need for e eubstentiel reduction in the height/ of the crest
of the den. comideretion shell be given to the edvisebility of the
execution of en sdditioml hydroelectric developeent upstrees. in socordence
with the provisions of the eforesentioned [sic] Prelisimry Report.

11. ”The noreel sexism weter level is 220 esters ebove see level. nus
reservoir will inundete en eree of spprorieetely 1W0 some kilo-store
(600 squere kiloseters in Perm end 800 squere kiloseters in Bresil)
end will extend upstress e distence of 200 kiloseters. up to end including
the Sslto del Gueirs. or Selto Grende de Sets Quedss.”

Annex C. Consists of s description of the finsnciel beses of--end electric
power services to be provided byuthe Iteipu entity. This sense wee hotly
debeted before its sdoption.

‘i'he Persgmyen foreign sinister ends the following stetesent st s press
conferences

”He hsve not underteken Iteipu es s business dsel. Iteipu is not s busi-
ness deel. either for Bruil or for Pereguey. The feet thet we shell
reelise sillions of dollers is not isportent. Our objective is not finen-
ciel profit. Our objective is netionel developsentx develop-cut in Breeil

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

and developaent in Paraguay. if there is a derivative benefit in the

fora of dollars for the governsent'e coffers. it is an incidental result.

that itaipu will generate is develop-em." (Pro- a state-ant wade at the

gmuarggsff the Association of Graduates in the Econoaic Sciences on
y . -

LA TRIBUNA of Asuncion in its 26 Hay 1973 issue couented on this episode

as follows: “This assertion by the foreign ainister is by itself sufficient
to invalidate cospletely the Itaipu treaty. inaesuch as he adsitted publicly
that ltaipu is not. for Paraguay. a busineae deal. Selling 35.000 gigawatt
hours over a period of 50 years for tho nillion is obviously no business
deal. It is sisply a gift."

ABC COLOR. in its 2‘0 Hay 1973 issue. said:

"it is also the view of this newspaper that the treaty. as drafted by our
foreign ainistry. will bring us sole benefits during the 7 years the da- is
under construction (labor, rock. ceaent and so forth). but fros the sosent
tho very first kilowatt is invoiced after the Ject is put in operation.
and for the next 1&3 years (until the year 2023 . our country will be
subsidizing-with the soet valuable part of its natural resources-~the
econoaic developsent of Brazil by providing that country with half of the
energy produced by the Parana River in that region. at a price which today
already eeels ridiculous."

0n the subject of future revisions. the treaty stipulates:

“The provisions of the present annex shall be reviewed after a period of
50 years has elapsed fro- the effective date of the treaty. taking into
account--aaong other considerationsuthe extent of the aaortisation of the
indebtedness contracted by itaipu for construction of the developsent
project. and also the ratio between the respective asounts of power con-
tracted for by the entities of the two countries."

There was a change in the number of turbines fro. the in (in Annex B 111.5)
to 18 in 1975 and subsequently to 20 in hoveaber 1978. This asounts in
essence to an asendsent of the treaty and can be construed as iaplying a
revision of tho treaty.

According to the Brasilian press. Paraguay wants sore energy and is putting
obstacles in the way of an Argentine-Brazilian urderstanding with respect
to the itaipu issue. The question of the turbines has now been added to
that of the height of the das. but one should not forget the really basic
probles. nasely the navigability of the Parana River.

Hhat Paraguay appears to be attespting to negotiate is a revision of the
financial conditions of th-s treatynconditions by virtue of which Brazil
receives the "lion's share.” /Paraguay can use the energy itself or sell
it to Brazil at the stipulated price. which sakes it the cheapest energy
in all or South mucu/

32
FOR OFFICIAL use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Utilisation of thie energy (ee the Peresueyen Govern-wt announced on one
occeeion) would enteii the perticipetion 01‘ large cues of oepitel thet cen
only be obteined from ehroed. in em event. Pei-em cannot by iteelf
exerciee thie option.

The eigning or the contrect for execution of the Middle Perm project on
20 NOW-bot 1n “0000'. end the epprovel by the Inter-Anerioen Develop-em
Benk (IDB) of the urgent 1pm ever snnted to Cite ($210 nillion)--i‘or
the Argentine-ﬁremen Yeoyrete hydroelectric projecturepreeent two new
eieeente injected into the Germ-Item: ieeue.

Pereguey ehould rethink ite hydroelectric policy in the light of e lecyrete
project thet will be initieted thie you end ie echeduled for oolpletion in

1985.

”new he: no reneon to reeign iteelf to ceiling-in exchange for e
mail Corpus-4 little lore of lteipu'e energy./

NPYRIGHTt LA OPINION. 1979

10992
030: 3010

33
FOR orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRAZIL

um. um 0018mm NR mum mm
MHR‘MW mmmnMWp'a
[Article by Pious know]

[Text] A nieeicn hon the hetionnl (Route: for Spoco Studieo (cm) which

the ino1udeo cone lunch induotriclioto wi11 co to Basil on 5-9 Fem 1979
to mount tho Bmilicn governnont with union: poooihilitieo for epnoe
oocpention between the two countries. It will be o 'tochnico1 moontnticn'
on oocpention out! o fo11ow-up to pnviouo hench propocnlo for the coming
out of e. Joint epeoe nioeion. colonel Hugo do Oliveizo Pm. dinotor of

the Basilica Institute for Spoce Activities. ncent1y onnwnoed thnt
Munich authorities hove Just oooopted the hench pxcpoon in principle.

Mail in pnrticuluiy intezooted in milling o 120-150 It; satellitr. to:
procticnl uoo in «mud oboomticn ond neteoxclcgy. o :ooloot to: nee in
launching this satellite and o launching pod {zoo which tho rockot would he
tim.mmmmuwuimmlummmmumm
n can minty for lounohing ntaoopherio pmhee. The detail: of the project
hove pot toho eottled. pontictnuly morn-co the :ccltot ia 0W.
“7:; wooed coin; o liquid pnponnnt tint otnce (cf. AIR ocosms

u! I

l'iul eooeptenco c! the Mach pun. 0c1ono1 Pin «pained. will. depond on
necotietiou undettnken with can on ioonee ouch no tho tnnsfor c! tcch-
nolog, coet. toohnionl chmteriotico end ooientifio opplicotiono. In:
to: on tun-tor of technology in concomd. colonel Pm otnted thot coon;
theinduotriclioedcmtrieornnceondceuowweuthencotdiopceedto
participate. In not. Emil has phced Vance end com in coopetiticn
for the project to build hunch taci1itiee an o satellite. The United
Stotoo hos doclinod to participate.

It any oppon- oumioix thot hunce. which dandy hon o well equipped
hunch tooility in tum. bench Onion. (Basil's neighbor). would went to
contact o {mun inotnllotion cue to conpete with it. Emil howover
proton)“ hove ito own tiring pod mother than to use tho GSG [mica
unknown .

mm. ti: 0 Gallon. Pub. 1978

7779 3!;
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CUBA

MY GITIERREZ mom's POLITICAL IMPRISOMENT EXPLORE!)

Madrid CANDID 16 in Spanish 3 Dec 78 p 45

[Text] 0n 1 January 1979, when Castro's Cuba celebrates the
20th anniversary of the successful Cuban Revolution, the
Nadrilenian Eloy Gutierrez Henoyo, a najor with the Second
National Front of Escubray in the fight against Batista,
will be released.

Fidel Castro announced this news by phone to writer Garcia Hirquez. According
to Fidel. by that date, there will be no more political prisoners in Cuba.
except for 14 or 15 officials from the Batista era, accused of genocide.

Sentenced to 70 years in prison, Eloy Gutierrez Henoyo, in when President
Suirez took an interest during his visit to Havana. showed up a few days after
this magazine related his revolutionary experiences and his activities against
Fidel Castro. Over the past 4 years, since 1974, his prison was not know and
his father, Carlos Gutierrez Zabaleta. a former officer in the Spanish Repub-
lican Amy, was being detamed in Cuba by Castro's officials.

He now know that Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo was being held in the Conbinado del Este
Prison outside Iiavana. and he was able to see his father. The latest news fro-
Cuba indicated that Eloy was undergoing a medical examination in the capital
and Carlos Gutierrez was awaiting his son's release to return to Spain.

The last contact of Major Cutiérrez Henoy with the outside took place one month
ago when a contested coanittee of exiled Cubans was authorized by Castro's
officials to visit the prisons for the purpose of obtaining the release of 46
political prisoners.

The interview with Eloy was broadcasted by the Miami television network and we
publish some of his answers which shows that he totally shuns Castro's current
policy of "reconciliation," in which some sectors of exiled Cubans are partic-
ipating.

35
ron orncm. us: can
FOR OPl’ICIM. USE ONLY

As for his possible release. Cutiérres Menoyo appeared skeptical: "The Cuban
government is the one to release Cuban prisoners. I believe the final deci-

sion is in its hands."

He nevertheless souncd to be aware of the inquiries being nade by the Spanish
government. He said: "I heard that the president of the Spanish government
inquired about me. That he reached some kind of agree-lent with the Cuban
government in regard to this matter. Right? In that case. I cannot say any-
thing about the result of these inquiries. I do not know it.“

however. his pessinisa surfaced when he told the interviewers:

"All right. look. I have conditioned myself to the fact that I will continue
to serve my sentence. Therefore. I do not want to have any illusions concern-
ing this matter."

The Government Decrees

Gutierrez Menoyonwho for the past 13 years has refused to wear the uniform of
the prisoners subjected to the "rehabilitation plan" and has lived in underv
wear ever sincenseens to have very clear ideas: “If unconditional freedom is
offered to me and it does not entail having to think differently from what I
think today or relinquinshing ny principles or the ideals for which I fought.
then, naturally. I will accept an unconditional release. Freedom with a single
condition. no latter how well. I will not accept..."

0n the subject of the liberation of political prisoners which is causing tension
along the factions in exile. and the rights of the Cuban people. Gutierrez
Henoyo was categorical during the interview:

"I do not believe anybody is opposing the release of the prisoners. That is to
say. I believe that on this point an error is being emitted. There is not
anyone who can be opposed to the prisoners being released after the years we
have already served. right? And the sufferings we have endured. Now the prob-
lem is as follows: to hold a dialog with Castro's goverment. right? In ny
opinion. the question is that. on the subject of the prisoners. it is Castro's
governnent which is responsible for the prisoners' release.

For example. in Chile. prisoners have been released. Neither the Chilean nor
the exiled coununities were convened to release the prisoners. The authorities
simply met and granted freedoms to the prisoners.

Reuniting a fanily is precisely the correct and necessary thing to do. We
have been separated for a long tine. No one then objects to a family being
reunited. At this point. I do not need a dialog. I sinply need an announce-
nent from the government that. from such and such date. anybody can enter or
leave the country. I do not need a dialog.

Now. there is a third issue which does require a dialog and questions could be
asked on that subject. right? The problen of freedom in Cubaufreedoss of

36
ran orrtcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

movenent. expression. press. religion and academic {reader-that is a series
of questions which deuand a dialog. do you understand? That is to say. I
previously fought against Batista's dictatorship. right? well. on the basis
of that sane principle. I have a right to object. 1 have a right to my opin-
ions in this country. In that case. if the occasion for expressing an
opinion. or the right to express it. is denied me. then. naturally. I lust
oppose the goverment. Right? Now the question that I will ask you--not you
to no but I to you--is this: have conditions changed in Cuba? Can one express

an opinion in Cuba? Are there rights in Cuba? If we can talk about that with-
out any argunents. then I agree to a dialog."

COPYRIGHT: 1978 CAMBIO 16

6857
cso: 3010

37
FOR OFFICIAL use our
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL
FOR OPEICIAL USE ONLY

GUYANA

BRIEFS

CONTRACT FOR URANIUM PROSPECTINC--Ceorgetovn. 20 Feb (REUTER)-The Cuyanese
Government and the French firn Cogent signed a contract on Monday granting
Cogena nonexclusive uranium exploration rights. Initial operations to
deternine the size of uranium reserves in Cuyane's subsoil will begin in
September. Guyana is already engaged in sinilar negotiations with Canadian
and Host Carnan fires. [London RBUTBR in French 0633 GMT 20 Feb 79 PA]

'HIRROR' 0N PRC ATTACKS--Ceorgetoun. 19 Feb (PL)--The Guyanese newspaper the
MIRROR today carrieo a long article criticizing China's policy and especially
its recent attacks on Vietnam. After indicating the need to "oppoee Maoist
policies in and outside Guyana." the neuspeper refers to the close ties and
coinciding views existing between China and the United States. The MIRROR.
unofficial spokeanan of the opposition People's Progressive Party (PPP) led
by former prime sinister Chedi Jegan. alto denounces the anti-Soviet
attitude of the current Chinese regine. It also says that the Chinese
Govern-ent "is exporting the counterrevolution" as seen by its opposition

to the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (HPLA) in Angola. the
Ethiopian revolution. the new Kanpuchesn Govern-ent and the Chilean people
and as now seen in its aggression against Vietnam. [Text] [Georgetown
PRELA in Spanish to PRBLA Havana 1620 GMT 20 Feb 79 PA]

C80: 3100

39
you onxcm. use ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020041-3
STATINTEL