FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/ 10394

l6 March 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE n”LY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
NQTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAI DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LATIN AFERICA REPORT
(rouo 3/82)

Cou'reu'rs
ENERGY ECONMCS
DOMINICA

Briers -
Hydroelectric Study

COUNTRY SECTION
ARGENTINA

Briefs
Manrique Talks With Mexican Press

BAHAMAS

Economy in Trouble on Many Fronts; Unanployment Rising
(LATIN AMERICA RmIOIAL Baron's-mmm, 15 Jan 82) .

(DIDMBIA

Briefs
Indian Congress Denounces SLI

CUBA

Lack of Hestern Support for UNESCO, IPDC Scored
(Pm. 23 Feb 82) oases-oases.soesssssoeososoosseososoo

Economic Conference with Japan Ends, Protocol Signed
(Victoria M. Copa; PRELA, 18 Feb 82) ...................

Briers
Details on PDRY Agreanent
Canadian Fishery Ministry Delegates
l-UK UI'HLIAI. use unu
'PRELA' Reports Villalobos Statement to Veneeremos
(PRELA, 15 Feb 82) .....................................

FMLN Leader Says Struggle at 'Decisive Stage'
(Pam-IA, 15 Feb 82) ooloooooooooaoeooaoocDill000.00.00.00

Insurrectional Spirit on Rise. Says Cienruegos
(Pm. 16 Feb 82) ooosceoeeoooooooo-oceooeo-coo-o.to...

Duvalier's Bodyguards Reported in Armed Clash
(mam, 25 Feb 82) O.lIIOOOOOOOIIOOOOOIDOOOIOOIOOOODOOO_OO

CIA

Briefs
Venezuelan Assistance

$43

Briefs
Visiting Nicaraguan Delegation

UELA

Columnist Scores DISI? Operational Practices
(PREM. 2 Feb 82) toooooooooeoseoooooooeueeoosooooooeooo

Poland's Solidarity Leaders Meet With President
(mm, 27 J” 82) oncocoonsooooocoeooosoooooceoosnoon-o

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY 300801105 DOMINICA

proposed plan will also involve offering cheap electricity to induetry setting up
in the eastern part of the island. The country's electricity syeten is owned by
the London-based Camonwealt'n Developneut Corporation, which in in trouble with
the British government over further funding. The govern-eat would like to buy
out the British organisation's shares, but does not have the money. [Text]

1

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500040040—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040040-8
STATINTEL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

COUNTRY SECTION ms

ROWINTROUBLBMHANYWS: WIRING
London LATIN AMERICA RMIONAI. arrears—cannula: in “311811 15 Jan 82 pp 10-11

[Text] The clasp in tourian and a rising 1-port bill scan that the once atable
Bahamian economy is facing difficulties which can only aggravate the country's
severe social problems. Foreign debt. uaeuploylent and crime are all on the
increase.

‘In spite of all the mistakes that we have made, we
have saved our people from the frustration, depri-
vation: and tragedies ' that have overtaken other
human societies.‘ finance minister Arthur Hanna
observed at the conclusion of his 1982 budget address.
The claim was hardly supported by his ﬁgures. which
clearly showed the extent of the country's economic
problems.

Tourism, which accounts for some 60 per cent of
GNP and over 56 per cent of government revenue. is
in deep trouble (RC-8108). The 18 per cent drop in
earnings from 088695.5m in 1980 to 083488.311)
last year has pushed the industry. back to pre-1978
levels. The decline in real terms was even more steep,
given an average annual inﬂation rate of 10 per cent
over the put three years.

llanna's prediction that increased air and cruise

ship services and more competitive pricing would pro-
duce an early turnaround is belied by the adminis
tration's own calculations. Government revenues
from tourism. including departure. hotel occupancy
and casino taxes. are all projected to fall below 1981
estimates and to incree“ only 12 per cent more than
the US$24m actually derived in 1980.
. Customs duties. fed largely by tourist demand, are
expected in drop to US$156.8m. some US$12.8m
below 1981's projections. and only 9.7 per cent more
than actual earnings in 1980. Stamp tax revenues,
derived mainly l’rom property sales. and reﬂecting the
level of ion-inn investment. are budgeted at US$16.3m.
down US$3.7m over 1981 estimates. and just 8.2 per
cent more than was realised in 1980. Together these
three categories represent 88 per cent of the govem-
ment‘u tax revenue and 65.5 per cent of all projected
government revenue for 1982.

3
ma omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

llannu offered several reasons for the tourism
decline. Besides the present worldwide recession. he
cited the US air traffic controllers’strike. depreciation
of European currencies against the dollar, and a series
of blackouts in Nassau during the height of the
summer. The industry. he admitted. was also
adversely affected by bad publicity surrounding the
drug trafficking problem and the govemment’s land
sales restrictions. Other factors ignored by Hanna but
recognised by the ministry of tourism were visitor
dissatisfaction and the explosive increase in crime.

Meanwhile an additional 1.697 hotel rooms are
expected to come into use over the current year, 730
of them under the aegis of the govemment-owned
Hotel Corporation. The corporation, which already
controls six resort properties and the country'sthree
casinos. has been losing money on its hotel operations
since its formation in 1974. By 1979, the last date for
which financial statements are available. the hotels
had lost some US$20m, apart from the US$40m
investment made by the government for their
purchase. refurbishing and operating costs.

Last year the corporation borrowed an additional
US$150 to build the present hotel/convention facility.
The loan catapulted the nationaldebt from US$280.1m
in mid-1981 to US$420m at the end of the year.
Public debt servicing this year is expected to jump
from US$45.1m to US$64.5m. making it by far the
longest budget appropriation.

Another US$65.6m has been earmarked for
education. the main area of government spending
over the last 14 years. Nonetheless the Bahamas
today is faced with a ‘critical shortage' of skilled man-
power on the one hand. and a ‘fairly large number of
untrained. unemployed or under-employed people'
on the other. Hanna admitted. The reason. according
to education Minister Darrell Rollo, has been the
government's lop-sided emphasis on academic to the
exclusion of technical education.

The result is an unemployment rate which the
government plawd at 26.3 per cent in I977 and 16.6
per cent in 1979. a boom year for the Buhamus.‘l‘he
figures wi-n- based only on New Providence and
Grand Bahama, the two major population centres.
and ignored the situation in 18 other islands. With the
present recession. :1 2.14 per ccnt population growth
rate and a labour force that is expanding by some
5,000 people annually. the number of unemployed is
believed to lime once more cxcwded 20 per cent.

Although the government is now trying to rectify
the imbalance through improved teacher training and
the development of basic skills by students. the

l;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT:

damage perpetrated by the educational system is
responsible for most of the country's present. diffi-
culties. Protracted unemployment has destroyed the
work ethic for thousands of young people and
fostered the rapid increase in crime. At the same time
the inflated lifestyle of many of the country’s
religious. political and civic leaders has encouraged
expectations beyond the means of most Bahamians.
works minister Loftus Roker observed recently.

The tendency to view agriculture and fisheries as
inferior occupatiom has affected hoth unemploy.
meat and the balance of payments. Energy and food
imports now absorb over US$275m in foreign
exchange earnings. Food alone accounted for some
US$160m last year, although more than half of that
could have been produced locally.

With a general election due some time this year
( lifhiil-l (i). tlu- government has embarked on a large-
scale social welfare programme which the parliament
ary opposition maintains has been made necessary by
the administration's shortsighted policies. It seems
unlikely that many of these schemes will survive the
election. As a result of the economy's poor perform-
ance in 1981. the government was forced to reduce
capital expenditure by an estimated 42.2 per cent last
year. Similar cats can be expected in 1982.

No new taxes have been proposed for the current
year. but it is difficult to see how these can be
avoided in 1983. given the size of the public debt. It
is apparent however that the government is once
more counting on foreign investment to provide a
'quir-k fix‘ as it did following the 1977 election. Land
sale restrictions. which were intended to reduce
foreign ownership. have been softened to encourage
time-share resorts as a long-term solution to the
tourism decline. And Hanna, emphasising the.
importance of food production, has called for large
scale investnu-nt by both foreigners and Bahamhns to
exploit the country's agricultural potential. II

LATIN AMERICA REIGN“. REPORTS. 1982
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION

BRIEFS

INDIAN ooncnzss DENOUNCES SLI--Bogota, 26 Feb (PL)-‘1he First National Indian
Congress of Colonbia denounced the negative effect of the Sumer Linguistics
Institute (81.1) on their communities. In a document of presentation to the
event which brings together 70 communities and 2,000 delegates from all over
the country, opposition was voiced to penetration by 81.1 and ether missions in
the tribes desiped to iqaose a new culture. The congress whose- deliberations
will run through Sunday, also denounced the var waged against the Indians by
the Colombian narcotics traffickers and landlords. Indian leader Emilio
EJuegie charged that in the past 19 weeks, 19 Indian people were killed

by landlords. The congress, which brings together the Colodaian Indians for the
first time, is meeting under the watchword "unity, land and culture." [Text]
[PAZSOOSS Havana PRBLA in English 2333 m 25 Feb 82]

680: 3020/ 610

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm
LACK 01’ mm SUPPORT FOR UNIS“), 1PM scam

“241953 Havana PRELA in hglish 2015 GMT 23 Feb 82
[Pool item]

[Text] New Delhi, 2!. Feb (PL)-Cuba charged in this capital that the Western

powers continue stubbornly refusing to support the International Program for the
Development of Communications (IPDC), as well as the UNESCO.

Sergio tbntane, head of the Cuban delegation to the experts nesting of the Inter-

governmental Council for the Coordination of Intonation Between Non-Aligned
Countries, stated that right now there is a asst urgent need to strengthen that

program and defend the principle of multilateral action, through the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).

The official of the Ron-Aligned Department of the Ministry of Foreign Relations
of Cuba said that it not not be pernitted that the lime should serve as cover
so that the private transnational corporations any use it in their strategies of

expansion and control.
That program was adopted in Acapulco, Mexico, in January.

when speaking during the sessions of this meeting of experts, opened by the
Indian minister of information and radio broadcasting, Vasant Sathe, Montana
stated that the Intergovernment Comcil should be the one that should select the
projects, and not the monopolist consortiuns.

Our objective is to develop autonomusly the new international information and
cos-mications order. he stated.

In the opinion of the head of the Cuban delegation. the new international infor»
mation order not solely represents a re-ordering of the communications infra—

structure. but a desire for social and political change, without which that goal
will be unable to be reached.

With the coordinated action of our countries we will be able to strengthen the
new infomtion order that the peoples' lovers of justice, peace, understanding
and mutual respect are demanding. he added.

The deliberations of the experts of the Intergovernmental Council of the Non-
Aligned Hove-ent, that just terainated, were aimd at preparing recolIaendstions
that will be analyzed at the ministerial level in a nesting planned for the
middle of the year in Malta.

(30: 3020/65 7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

EWMHIC CONFERENCE WITH JAPAN ENDS, PWL SIGNED
PA181539 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0250 GM! 18 Feb 82
[Report by Victoria H. Copa]

[Text] Havana, 17 Feb (YD—Ending its sixth neeting, the Japan-Cuban economic
conference signed here today a protocol on aspects of interest in bilateral rela-
tions.

The document was signed by Foreign Trade Minister Ricardo Cabrizas and (Ryoichi
Kauai), president of the Japan-Cuba economic conference, which was established
6 years ago.

(Kauai), who headed a delegation node up of 37 businessaen from 20 inortent

Japanese industrial, comarcial and banking firms, returned to Tokyo after
spending 6 days in Cuba.

Ihe agreeaent notes that means and netth to promte greater develop-ant in
their bilateral relations in the trade, financial and technical fields were
analyzed.

It stressed that the nesting was fruitful and that it involved a frank exchange
of views regarding the present situation and the outlook of econonic ties
between Cuba and Japan.

The two sides agreed on the ilportance of greater Cuban participation in inports
to Japan, particulariy in sugar, the Iain national export.

Cuba urged Japan. to increase its cooperation regarding the narketing possibilities
of other Cuban exports. '

The two sides appreciated the inortance that rare nediun and long-tern credits
has for the development of bilateral trade.

They also agreed on the advisability of getting adequate short-tern financing
for Japanese exports.

1ne sixth meting reviewed ways that would permit the expansion of bilateral
economic cooperation, the final docuaent signed this afternoon stated.

8
ma omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Regarding this, the conference thoroughly discussed the possibility of creating
mined enterprises for tourisn and industrial production in Cuba.

Japan expressed its interest in this and pointed out that it is willing to study
all the Cuban information on the proposed investment goals.

Taking into consideration the importance that tourism has in the development of
relations between the two countries, the two sides decided to create a committee
for tourism.

The Cuban delegation headed by Cabrizas reiterated its interest in signing an
intergovernment agreement for economic, industrial and technical cooperation.

080: 3010/ 979

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Vh vrrsssna. U5]: Ul‘hl

comm: SECTION CUBA

ERIBPS

DETAILS ON PD“ AGREEMENT—Havana, 23 Feb (PL)--Cuba and the People's Denocratic
Republic of Yenen signed here an agreement in the fields of work and social
security for the years 1982-1986. ‘me documnt establishes the collaboration

in the fields of wages, labor organization, naterial stinulas and the use of
labor resources, professional skill, social security and safer working condi-

tions. The document was signed by the sinisters of the State Couittee of
Labor and Social Security of Cuba. Joaquin Benavides and of Labor and Civilian

Service of the Yenen People's Denocratic Republic of Yessn, blasir Nasir Ali.
[Text] [PA231901 Havana PRELA in hglish 1810 CHI 22 Feb 82]

CANADIAN FISBERY MINISTRY Dawns—Havana, 19 Feb [date as received] (PD—Cuban
President Fidel Castro welcoaed here a Canadian delegation of the Ministry of
Fisheries and Oceans, headed by Vice-Prime Minister 6. 8. Vernon. A wide exchange
of opinions on the international fishing situation and the collaboration in this
field between Cuba and Canada took place during the nesting, it was officially
reported. Along with Fidel Castro there were also present anong others the chain-an
of the National Assembly of Peoples Power Flavio Bravo, the First Deputy hinister
Antonio Eequievel and the Minister of Fishery Jorge Fernandez Cusrvo. The Cana-
dian Ambassador to Cuba Janes Bartlenen also took part in the meeting. [Text]
[PA182260 Havana mm in English 1923 GMT 18 Feb 82]

C50: 3025/1032

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION EL SALVADOR

FMLN, FDR (DWIQUB DBNOUNCES ELECTION PARC!
PA020259 Havana PRELA in English 2015 GMT 1 Her 82

[Text] San Jose, 2 Mar (PL)--‘rhe Parabundo lhrti National Liberation Front (ms)
and the Revolutionary Democratic Front [FDR] denounced as a farce the elections
prepared by the Salvadoran oligarchy and armed forces with United States support.

mm and FDR in recalling on 28 February the 5th anniversary of the last "elec-

toral slaughter" pulled by the military, indicate that the "dictatorship that
clamors for foreign intervention is living its last days."

They indicated that now the Salvadoran people do not believe in such elections
as those called for 28 March vhich recalls the massacre of San Salvador's central
park in 1977 ordered by the same oligarchy and carried out by the fascietic
military nucleus that now proaises elections.

"The Catholic Church of the Rosary located opposite Liberty Park in San Salvador
was the scene of the mass murder. Its floors, altars and inges were bathed

with the blood of hundreds of persons who took refuge to try to save their
lives," states the amnion.

The mm and the FDR recall that on the morning of 28 February 1977 everything
had ended and the "conclusion of that hard lesson was the full conviction of the
utter imossibility of a change of government through peaceful means."

They add that the fire fighters hosed the park, the streets and the church to
get rid of the pools of blood shed with the agreement of the United States, by

the oligarchs and the nilitary who today prepare once again to stage an elec-
tion under gunfire.

The com-unique states that the Salvadoran people "through their political aili-
tary vanguards that constitute the genuine peoples army, advance. more every day

and do not believe in elections of the kind being prepared by the military
Christian Democratic junta for 28 hrch."

(ISO: 3010/ 988

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'PRELA' REPORTS VILLALOBOS STATEMENT 1‘0 mczasms
PAl52030 Havana PRKLA in English 1953 GMT 15 Peb 82

[Text] San Jose, 16 Feb (PD—Salvadoran guerrilla Counnder Joaquin Villalobos
said that the forces of the Parabundo mrti Front for National Liberation (mu)
paralyzed an army offensive in the department of lbrazan.

In statements to "Radio Venceremos," he pointed out that m forces, acting with
greater speed than before, attacked enemy positions in Perquin, Iorla, Puente
Hanguera, Cerro de 1:1 Tigre, Osicala and Santa Base de Lima.

These generalised harrassing actions against enemy positions in the department
of Horazan have obliged the enemy to go on the offensive [as received; "defen-

sive"); within the operation that allegedly had offensive ends against our
positions , said Villalobos .

He added that in first place "this means that the force: of the m can inedi-
ately take counteroffensive position that, joined to the \locking of the anew
in the southeastern front, is going to produce new victories."

The guerrilla co-snder stated, on the other hand, that the MN forces have

begun to hit out at the army in San Salvador, the country's capital, at a very
difficult time for the Christian Democrat military junta, "since a large part
of its forces are in the east of the country."

In second place, he underlined, “we have divided the country in two with the
actions that took place on the morning of February ll» with blows in the zone
close to the temps River, in San Vicente Department."

He underlined that the attacks in three main directions cut the Panamerican

Highway and incursions against the positions of the armed forces in the city of
San Vicente were carried out.

Villalobos said that the m combatants stopped the jmta's army from conclud-
ing its offensive in Horszan Department; "ourselves carrying out a sore aggres-
sive action against its forces."

At the same time he revealed that the offensive that the enemy tried to launch
in Usulutan Depart-eat was totally obstructed "and we i-ediately went over to
the counteroffensive."

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'he guerrilla con-under added that all those actions of the M.“ have to be
added to acts of sabotage to transport and comications "that have practically

destabilized the country at the national level."
"we can conclude-said Villaloboa lastlyo-that very shortly our forces will be

in a position to hit the enemy throughout the country and this is going to
bring us inediete victories."

080: 3010/ 969

13
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run VI‘I‘IVIRL WC. UI‘LI

CDUNTRY SECTION 81. SALVAIX)?

mm LEADER SAYS STRUGGLE AT 'DBCISIVB STAGB'
PAl62006 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2310 GMT 15 Feb 82

[Text] Mexico City, 15 Feb (PL)--‘i‘he popular insurrection in El Salvador is at
a decisive stage, Ferman Cienfuegos, one of the top new comaders, said.

In a statement to the .Hexican daily UNO HAS UNO, Cienfuegos warned that "the

0.8. Government must either intervene nassively in El Salvador or accept nego-
tiations vith the m. which would permit a halt to the bloodbath afflicting
our people.“

he guerrilla leader mintained that the withdrawal of 0.8. military aid for
the Salvadoran regime would facilitate the initiation of negotiations and the
fall of the Christian Danocratic military junta.

As for Washington's fears that the m will assure power to establish a
Marxist-Leninist government, Cienfuegos said that nothing is farther from the

truth. "The me: would in fact assume power, but to establish a coalition
government including the various forces that favor a political solution through
negotiations," he noted. ,

He reiterated that the 0.8. nilitary aid is the only thing that keeps the junta
in power and branded the recent statements by Jose Napoleon Duarte and Defense

Minister Jose Guillerm Garcia on the Salvadoran Army's need for 0.8. war
material to survive as "huniliating."
Cienfuegos said in the interview that with the guerrilla strike against the

Ilopango nilitary airport, the PHI.“ began a highly ilportant military offensive
against the Salvadoran Army.

C50: 3010/ 969

1!;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION EL SALVADOR

INSURRBCTIONAI. SPIRIT OF RISE, SAYS CIWS

“1722106 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2165 cm 16 Feb 82

[Text] Mexico City, 16 Feb (PD—According to guerrilla Commander Persan
Cienfuegos, the attack on the Ilopango air base and the guerrilla incursions
into the outskirts of San Salvador have strengthened the Salvadoran people's
insurrectional spirit.

According to Cienfuegos, who is one of the ﬁlm's five comenders, the Salvadorans
are only awaiting the order to begin staging big popular uprisings against the
regine.

While the political organizations in the zones under M.“ control increase their
insurrectional spirit, he indicated, in the principal Salvadoran cities. like
San Salvador, San Miguel, Santa Ana and Usulutan, co-ittees that will support
the urban insurrections are being organized.

First, he explained, we began sabotaging the bridges, then He began staging

actions along the roads and now we are in the cities, staging actions in the
workers' neiguborhoods, even in the capital. nus strengthens the people's

morale and breaks the infernational and propaganda cordon laid around the
capital city's residents by the government.

San Salvador, Cienfuegos went on, was being presented as a shovcase of peace,
as an oasis, but today the entire world knows, both in the capital and abroad,
that the war has already reached the cities and all parts of the country.

The guerrilla col-under also told the local newsnen that while the Salvadoran
people are becoming aware that the decisive battle for the disasntling of the
nilitary regine is nearing, the any has entered into a phase of institutional
crisis due to the adventuresons policy of the 11.8. high-ranking sound.

The armed forces, he asserted, are keeping their sea in total retreat. There
is a general return to the garrisons. They have lost control throughout the

country. while the troops in the garrisons express their dissatisfaction and
weariness.

This crisis is evident, he explained, iron the large nunber of soldiers who
surrender-due to the good treatment we give to both prisoners and the

15
won omcul. use ONLY
wounded--and from the troops' attexpts to mtiny, as was the case in the San
Carlos headquarters in the capital. where on 8 February a company asked the
High Conand to begin negotiating with the m. Another incident occurred in
the San Miguel headquarters, where six uutinom soldiers died.

According to the guerrilla leader, 26 soldiers are currently inprismed in San
Carlos, while ‘6 others were detained in Ilopango following a rebel attack.

Cienfuegos added that. during the first week in February, a lieutenant executed
five soldiers in Usulutan because they refined to fight against the guerrillas.

Another syapton of the current crisis within the army is the forced recruitment
of children [as received] between the ages of 1!» and 17 and the soldiers'

resistance to fighting alongside the repressive bodies, such as the National
Guard, he said in conclusion.

cso: 3010/ 969

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SWIG“ HAITI

DWALIER'S BODYGUARDS REPORTED IN ARMED CLASH
PA260002 Havana PRELA in English 2350 GMT 25 Feb 82

[Text] Montreal, 26 Feb (PL)--An undisclosed nueber of dead and wounded among
the civilian population was caused by an exchange of fire between the bodyguards

of Haitian dictator Jean Claude Duvalier and the regime's Tontons Hacoutes.

Reports from Port-au-Prince indicate that the Wednesday arled clash between
groups vying for power took a toll of nuneroue victim among the population in

the capital who were attending carnival festivities.

Clashes between the Leopards—a force trained by United States advisers—end
the Tontons hcoutes have taken place in recent weeks, pointing up the cracks
within the Duvalier regime.

The recent arrival of new advisers sent by Washington to upgrade the level of
the Haitian arIIy's elite forces appears to man a regime bid to rely sore on

career military than on the Tontons Hacoutes.

The political and social situation in Haiti is steadily deteriorating end the
United States takes advantage of this to increase its ailitary presence in that

country and its territorial waters with warships, said ﬂaitian exile sources
here.

‘lhe recent changes in the Duvalier cabinet reportedly served to boost the weight

of the United States in econonic and social setters. thereby compounding the
mounting 0.8. nilitary presence.

060: 3025/1041

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION 81' LUCIA

BRIEFS

VENEZUELAN ASSISTANCE—Venezuela is to make available US$1.5— to St Lucia for low-
cost housing and other programs. This money forned the basis of two financial
agreements recently signed with Venezuela. The housing programs will use ussln.
at two per cent interest over 40 years. The remaining US$0.5n will he a deposit
loan made on the same terns. Further sgreenmts are expected to follow this year
in the fields of sewerage. roads and tourism. [Text] [London LATIN AMERICA
REGIONAL REPORTS—CARIBBEAN in English 15 Jan 82 p 12] “MIGHT: LATIN
AMERICA REGIONAL REPORTS, 1982)

C80: 3025/166

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500040040—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040040-8
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500040040—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040040-8
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500040040—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040040-8
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500040040—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040040-8
STATINTEL