FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10677
22 July 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 11182)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhcre no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was smarized or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itaaa are as
given by source.

'ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
l'u'I'ERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS

22 Ju

LATIN N‘ERICA REPORT

(POUO 11/82)

CONTENTS

COUNTRY SECTION

INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

Cat ibbean States With U! Ties Seek Regional Defense
(Greg Chanberlain; THE NEW STATESHAN, lo Jun 82) ..........

ARGENTINA

CUBA

Fur ther Revelations on Falklands Operation
(DYN, 24 Jun 82) OIIOOIOIOOOOOOOIOOIIOOICOCOOOOOOIOOOIIOO.

Nicolaides Favors 'Full Enforcement' of Resolution 502
(DYN, 7 Jul 82) .IIDICOOOOOOIOIOOOUOOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOQOCICOI

Diplonatic Mission To Discuss Negotiation Proposal
(DYN. 7 Jul 82) ass-ssousssssossnssosessosoaessssososeaooa

Economist Raul Prevish on Outcome of Crisis
(DYN’ 15 Jun 82) OOIOOOOIOOOOOOOII...OOCOOUOOOOOOOOOOOIDCI

Hassera Contents on Denise of Process
(DYN, 23 Jun 82) oeoocoeoeoooooaoooootoatlotloototooooeuei

Union Leaders Content on New Economic Plan
(mm, 6 Jul 82)

Culture Minister Closes UNEAC Congress
(man, 11 Jul 82)

'PRELA' Reports on Interview With Rodriguez
(PP-Bu. 3Jul 82) IOOIOOOIDOOIOIII....OOOOOOIIIOOC....OOO
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080051-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EL SALVADOR

Foreign Ministers Meeting Part of U.S. 'Plsn'
(PRBLA, 7 Jul 82)

PERU
Briefs
Border Incident Hith Ecuador
SURINAME
‘ noutetse Cites Achieveuents on Lifting Curfew
(PRELA, 2Ju182) ......... ..... ...............
-b-

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080051-2
CARIBBEAN STATES WITH UK TIES SEEK REGIONAL DEFENSE
”061539 London THE NEW STATBSHAN in English lo Jun 82 p 13
[Greg ananberlain report: "After the Falklands—the Caribbean"]

[Text] The billion pound Falklands spectacle is provoking cries frou sale of
Britain's for-er colonies that Mrs Thatcher isn't giving th- a fair whack of
her nco-ilperial defence budget. 1heir sense of fair play was particularly
wounded when the destroyer normally stationed eff Belize was sent off to the
South Atlantic at the beginning of the Falklands dispute.

Antigua-Barbuda's bear-like deputy premier and effective ruler, Lester Bird, can
to London last week to urge Thatcher to follow up her stand against "Argentina's
madness" by helping the Comonwealth Caribbean to set up a strong regional

force to defend itself against ”military adventurisn" by neighbouring states

with similar territorial claim.

Bird accused Britain of "weakening the strength of demcracy and elected govern-
ment. by slashing aid to it former possessions. 'This is not the spirit of a
country that has put its foot down to the Argentines" he said, and warned that
the penniless Caribbean would have to ”turn elsewhere if it didn't get support
from Britain."

In the region, Guyana and Belize live in the shadow of territorial claims by
Venezuela and Guatemala. Partly for this reason, most of their Anglo-Caribbean
colleagues have backed Thatcher's action over the Falklands. This was further
threatened the unity of the Organisation of American States, whose founding
Latin meters have long resented the new English-speaking mini-states.

But Bird and fellow conservative Caribbean leaders are also worried by what they
see as the threat of left-wing "subversion" from Cuba and its regional allies

like Grenada. They hope that Thatcher's new awareness of the problems of snail
islands will lead her to share this fear.

cso: 3025/1109

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION AREN'HIIA

FURTHER REVELATIONS 0N FALKLANDS OPERATION
PY261625 Buenos Aires DYN in Spanish 1330 GMT 26 Jun 82

[Text] Buenos Aires, 26 Jun (DYN)--According to a military source, within
the army, only the comander in chief of the army, former President Leopoldo
Galtieri, and probably Gen Jose Vaquero, chief of the joint staff. and the
heads of the units involved in the operation, knew before-hand about the
Argentine landing in the Ihlvinas Islands on 2 April.

According to the high—ranking military source, most of the major generals
and President Galtieri's cabinet only learned about Argentina's military
occupation of the islands on the day it was carried out.

Several members of the high command voiced their disagreement to Galtieri
when the latter told them about the operation, and Gen Edgardo Calvi even
told him that the corps would have liked to be given the chance to express
its opinion, "although later you can make a decision you may find more

appropriate," he added.

In view of this lack of participation in the decision to recover the
Malvinas, South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands, it has not been possible

to learn of the political and military assessments made before the operation.

The source added that among the many mistakes nude was that of mistakenly
estimating the "position which the United States would adopt, the real war

power of Great Britain and the possible British reaction before the Argentine
military action."

He added that "an evaluation of the country's economic situation was not
done in order to try and solve it, and Minister Alemnn only learned of
the operation on 2 April, and the same thing happened to the rest of the
ministerial cabinet."

Apparently the same procedure was followed in the air force, since the major
generals were reportedly notified on the Ihlvinas operation only 1. days

before the islands were taken.

The sources agree that before the operation "there were no more than 10
persons in charge of everything by order of the military junta.”

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘i-‘K'IAI. llSl-Z ONLY

It was also said that the Foreign Ministry made "an erroneous estination on
the position which Great Britain would take.“

The operation to recover the archipelago in the South Atlantic had been
planned for June or July of this year. but the episode in the South Georgia
Islands involving Argentine workers who raised the Argentine flag there and
the resultant repression by British soldiers forced the San Martin Palace to
state before the military junta that "it will be very difficult to find

another excuse such as this to react and begin the recovery of the Phlvinas."

-Consequent1y, the operation was advanced to 2 April, according to the same
sources.

The political objective sought by the military junta through the direct

action of the Argentine troops was "to activate negotiations with Great
Britain, whose government no longer bothered to answer notes presented by

Argentina to demand sovereignty over the islands."
But this objective was forcibly changed when Great Britain sent two-thirds of

its fleet and "everything became more complicated when the United States to'ok
sides with Great Britain and helped it in the war," the sources concluded.

(30: 3010/1755

3
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(lillN'l'RY SECTION ARGENTINA

NICOLAIDES FAVORS 'FULL ENFORCEMENT." OF RESOLUTION 502
PY071606 Buenos Aires DYN in Spanish 1126 GMT 7 Jul 82

[Text] Buenos Aires, 7 Jul (DYN)--According to military sources, the
Military (bmittee will hold a meeting this afternoon at 1700 at the joint
staff headquarters. During the meeting the Military Comittee will discuss
issues pertaining to the papal mediation on the Beagle Channel dispute and
the consequences of the Halvinss Islands war.

The meeting will be attended by Gen Cristino Nicolaides. Adm Jorge Anaya.
Gen Basilio Lani Doze. President Reynaldo Begnone and the joint staff chief.

During the meeting. the Military Comittee will also discuss the institu-
tional situation and some ideas aimed at achieving cohesion within the
armed forces since the navy and the air force have decided to withdraw from
conducting political aspects of the government.

Yesterday Bignone said that he is "optimistic" about achieving a reconcilia-
tion and noted that an agreement has been achieved with the navy and air
force commanders to allow those officers who hold political posts to continue
in their posts.

The sources said that in addition to these subjects, the Military Committee
will discuss the papal mediation on the Beagle Channel and those instructions
that it will impart to the chief of the Argentine delegation to the mediation,
Carlos Ortiz de Rozas. who is currently in Buenos Airea.

Yesterday Ortiz de Rozas gave an extensive briefing to the armed forces
commanders on the negotiations that are being carried out in the Vatican.

Another issue in the agenda is the situation of Argentine officers who are
being held prisoner by Great Britain as a result of the military actions in
I’uerto Argentine, in the Malvinas, and the negotiations and position that
will be adopted by the Argentine Government to achieve the liberation of
these military officers.

Lt Gen Nicolaides discmsed this issue during a meeting he held yesterday
evening from 1900 to 2000 at the Libertador building with the prisoners'
relatives.

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During this neeting, Nicolaides reportedly noted that the present diplomatic
'position of the Argentine military government "is to comply with the full

enforcement of I.“ Resolution 502, particularly regarding those articles
that concem the cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of both Argentine

and british troops."

Some relatives of those who are held prisoner had reportedly expressed
concern over the initiative of some army officers—who were not identified-
to confiscate all enterprises with British capital in Argentina with the
objective of achieving the release of Argentine prisoners.

(ISO: 3010/1893

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE-ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SiCl‘ ION ARGENT INA

DIPLOMATIC MISSION TO DISCUSS NEGOTIATION PROPOSAL
”081543 Buenos Aires DYN in Spanish 1610 GMT 7 Jul 82

[Text] Buenos Aires, 7 Jul (DYN)--An Argentine diplomatic mission made up

of high-ranking officials left for Brazil today. It will also visit Venezuela
and Mexico to "channel" a Mexican proposal regarding the resumption of
negotiations over the Malvinas Islands within the framework of the UN.

'lhe delegation is made up of Ambassador Arnoldo Listre, the Argentine ad
interim representative to the UN, who has recently been designated as
policy director general, and Raul Quijano, the chief of the permanent
Argentine mission to the OAS.

Listre and Quijano left for Sao Paulo on board a plane that took off at
0800 (1100 GMT), and they will also visit Caracas and Mexico.

Quijano and Listre will hold talks with the foreign ministers of Brazil,
Venezuela and Mexico regarding the lhxican proposal on the Halvinas.

The Mexican proposal is designed to have the UN call on the parties to
urgently resume negotiations over the Malvinas.

Reliable diplomatic sources have said that Argentina is about to start an
intense diplomatic campaign looking toward the upcoming UN assembly.

To this effect, Listre will presunably travel to New York after concluding

the above-mentioned mission in the three Latin American comtries, and he
will remain there until the end of July.

(280: 3010/1893

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNFRY SECTION ARGENTINA

ECONOHIST RAUL PRBBISH 0N OUTCOME OF CRISIS
PY172012 Buenos Aires DYN in Spanish 1410 cut 15 Jun 82

[Text] Buenos Aires. 15 Jun (DYN)-Argentine economist Raul Prebish today
was pessimistic over the final outcome of the crisis in the South Atlantic.
He said that this crisis will have a decisive influence on the future of
Latin America.

Talking to Radio Mitre in the capital, Prebish, the founder of CEPAL (Economic
Commission for Latin America), said: "I am feeling deep sorrow because I
never expected things to turn out the way they did.

"I believe this will have a deep influence on all of Latin America. This is
already evident, but it will be enhanced as time goes by.“ Prehish added.

'?his is a new game of cards," Prebish said, "of international cards, and
Argentina must wake up to this reality. It must not believe that it is a
member of the developed world simply because it belongs to the white race,
but because it has things in common with those countries.

"He form part of the Third World; this is being made plausible by the events
that are taking place," Prebish noted. To a question he replied: "I have
never agreed with those who believe that Argentina is a part of the western
world.

"I have been struggling in favor of the Third World for many years, and I
believe that our country constitutes part of it. This is so even thouﬂ: it
differs basically from some of those countries, but it has many things in
common with them which are of major importance," Prebiah noted.

To another question Prebish replied that the Third Horld "has many ideologies,
but this is not a problem of ideologies but of facts, of level of development,
of subordination to the larger countries. We all share the same problems of
international trade, financing, periodic deterioration in the relationship

of exchange prices, and now we have the problem of the debt."

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prehish also said that "Argentina has always paid its debts. I recall that
during Lhc worldwide depression, Argentina paid its debt despite the major
difficulties it [need at that time. I hope that the present situation will
allow us to pay our debt again. But the loans which form part of the debt
are not in keeping with economic development and with the present status of
exports. It is necessary to renegotiate the debt [coversion de la deuda].

Prebish said that the so-called "economic liberalism" ended before the
recovery of the Halvinas Islands on 2 April 1982. Prebish noted: "I believe
that there was no such thing as economic liberalism, but an opening toward

a world which is closing in on itself ever more. And now, under this
situation, that same government which called itself inspired in liberalism

has been forced by circumstances to take measures to drastically reduce
imports."

Problsh concluded: "To consolidate its growth in the past, Argentina was
in need of an open and liberal British society, which admitted Argentine
exports without obstacles, and with which low-interest loans could be
negotiated. however, this is a bygone subject now."

CSU: 3010/1715

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION ARGENTINA

MSSBRA comam‘s 0N DSM‘ISE 0P PROCESS
W300107 Buenos Aires 0‘!“ in Spanish 2048 CHI 23 Jun 82

[Text] Buenos Aires. 21 Jun (DYN)--Forme': navy commander in chief, Adm
Emilio Hassera. termed "lamentable the schism in the unity of the armed
fatten," and reaffirmed that the process of national reorganization "has
been defunct for a long time."

The former member of the military junta and current leader of the movement
for social democracy talked today about the new institutional stage and
noted that the disagreements between the armed forces "were the result of
the army's inflexible desire to impose its choice for president of the
nation.“ Massera said that "the disagreement with the positions of the
navy and the air force"--positions whose motives and principles he de-

scribed as correct--"pronpts the distortion of the nation's supreme inter-
ests at times fraught with moral, social and political difficulties, worsened

by the stark reality of a military conflict lost within the framework of a
global conflict, which demands a proud acceptance of emerging responsibil-
ities and the exercise of unity and honesty."

Hassera finally said that "the announced regularization of institutions by
transferring power to be effected no later than the first months of 19810 is
very positive," because in his belief power will be transferred to author-
ities freely chosen by the people amid clear-cut and honorable rules of the
game without tricks or illegitimate hopes for legacies or transferred rights
to remain in power."

CSO: 3010/1787

9
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
LNION LEADERS COMMENT ON NEW ECONOMIC PLAN
I’Y080210 Buenos Aires DYN in Spanish 1745 GMT 6 Jul 82

[Excerpts] Buenos Aires, 6 Jul (MID—Union leaders regard as positive those
measures concerning industrial reactivation announced by Minister Jose
Dagnino Pastore, but express their concern over the possibility that the
program now put into motion could entail further sacrifices for the workers.

The above was stated in a survey conducted among representatives of the two
CCT [General Labor Confederation] organizations, CGT-Brasil and CGT-Azopardo,
and of the "nonaligned group" of unions.

Horacio Alonso (court workers). newer of the OCT-Brasil executive board,
said: "We believe major changes have been made in the economic policy
which has been followed up to now."

Alonso added: "it is proper to note that the minister has severely criti-
cized the policy followed by the various administrations of the process

' since March 1976." He added: "As for the implementation of the program,

we will have to wait and see its results." He noted, however, that "the plan
should meet legitimate social needs through a policy of equitable distribu-
tion which will ultimately promote industrial recovery.”

Enrique Venturini (naval electricians) said that Dagnino Pastore was "very
sincere and frankly outlined the depth of the economic crisis the country
has been experiencing."

Drawing conclusions from the minister's speech, Venturini said that "there
will be inflation" and added that "the union movement will have to further
tighten its belt, according to the minister's expressions."

He added that "the above will happen because all these measures are simply
designed to shift the burden of the crisis caused by others onto the people,
especial ly the workers, who will have to again sustain a great sacrifice
without having the assurance that these measures will be later translated
into measures which could make their real salary truly grow."

C50: 3010/ 1893

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SEC’I‘IW CUBA

CULTURE MINISTER CLOSBS WEAC WGRESS
PA121350 Havana PRELA in English 2015 GMT 11 Jul 82

[Text] Havana, Jul (PL)--—Hinister of Culture Armando Hart called for
combining individual talent with the creativity of the people to place the
stress that is required by culture and the qualitative leap to which Cuba

aspires.

The member of the Political Bureau of the Commist Party of Cuba in his
closing speech to the Third Congress of the Union of Artists and Writers
[UNI-2A0] outlined the aspirations of the Cuban revolution in the cultural
sphere.

The closing was presided over. together with Hart, by Carlos Rafael Rodriguez,
Jesus Montane and Antonio Perez Herrera, members and alternative newers

ol' the Political Bureau Nicolas Guillen and Dominican writer and political
figure Juan Bosch.

Hart evaluated the situation of the world in the first place due to the
capitalist economic crisis that affects all the countries, especially the
underdeveloped including Cuba, and the threat of a new world military
conflict as a result of the arms buildup, aggressive policy of the United

States.

If it is not stopped that course could lead to a new world conflagration
warned Hart who pointed out that arms have already begun to speak their
language of terror.

In this regard he said that culture and writers have their message of alert
to move world public opinion and lead it to confront the danger of war.

Later on in his remarks he called on the intellectuals to identify
increasingly with the popular movement generated in Cuba aromd culture.

Anything that creates artificial divisions between the people and the
artistic movement will in turn create barriers to the development of the
cultural policy of the revolution, he said.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Ilart added that there must be promotion of a very broad popular movement
around culture in such a way as to encourage rigor and aesthetic demands and
the broadest creative freedom of the masses and the intellectuals.

Everything that answers to that, he stated, will have our support and all
that hinders it will meet with our opposition.

Only the unity of those two sources, individual talent and the creativity
of the people will break the historic barrier built up around "serious"
and "popular" art. In our society, he asserted, all artmust be both
serious and popular.

By way of exanple of that synthesis between the popular and the polished
creation of individual talent, he cited national poet Nicolas Guillen whose
work meets the highest aesthetic demand and also has profound popular roots.

He stressed that in Cuba today the problems of art are not conditioned by
the demands of a minority but by the huge cultural-educational revolution
in the country that demands an increase in quality that will reach all layers.

He cited by way of exanple the 200,000 yomg university students and 9,000
university professors who represent a mass phenomenon in culture that
demands greater rigor.

He said that attention must be given to radio and TV due to their decisive
influence on people's taste and called for joint efforts by the UNEAC, the
Ministry of Culture and those media to find and apply methods to met that
need.

He praised the graduating classes of the art schools and said that the
highest quality cadre are needed in culture.

He mentioned an agreement signed with different miversities for the creation
of schools of arts and letters whose graduates will be able to work in the
different fields of culture in keeping with their vocation and the needs

of the country.

He spoke of the young creators and proposed the strengthening of the spirit
of cooperation between experienced artists and writers and their younger
colleagues.

There can hardly be imagined anything more alien to the individualism of
capitalist competition than that spirit of cooperation between our success-
ful, recognized creators and their colleagues of the young generation, he
declared.

C30: 3020/1105

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUHA

'PRBIA' REPORTS ON INTERVIB] WITH RQRICUBZ
BhOliOO Havana PRELA in Portuguese 1230 CHI 3 Jul 82

[Text] [No dateline as received] Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, vice president of
the Councils of States and Ministers of Cuba, has said that the USSR is the
most important foreign factor in Cuba's economic development.

The results of the [words indistinct] Intergovernmental Commission on Econ-
onic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation, Rodriguez told PREIA in an in-
terview, again prove Soviet solidarity with Cuba.

He said that all important aspects of Cuba's development were discussed.
Not only are our trade relations with the USSR the most important and de-
cisive, he said, but there is also much Soviet participation in basic de-
velopment programs of the Cuban economy.

During the meetings [words indistinct] USSR cooperation had been discussed,
Rodriguez added, especially the two great textile mills that will be opened,
one this year and the other in July 1983.

The first mill will fill Cuba's textile needs, while the second which will be
built in Santiago, will be one of the largest in the world. It will have a
productive capacity of 80 million square meters of material.

Another important project is the Punta Gorda Nickel Plant. This gigantic
enterprise will be the biggest construction project in the country's history.

Rodriguez said that Cuba's energy problems were also discussed at the meet-
ings. He mentioned the new units to be built in the country's eastern
sector and in [words indistinct] the Havana thermoelectric plant with a
capacity of 1 million kilowatts. When the Cienfuegos Nuclear-Electric Plant
starts operations, Cuba will have duplicated its present electric energy

production, according to Rodriguez. He stressed that the search for sources
of energy was discussed at the meetings.

Cuba has been systematically exploring for oil with USSR aid since the first
years of the revolutionary process. Small-scale production has been achieved,
but with greater technical facilities and experience, in the next few years

13
F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USl-Z ONLY

Cuba can depend on the help of the ministry of [words indistinct] to exploit
the maritime shelf.

Regarding transportation, Rodriguez pointed out that both parties will adopt
the necessary measures to improve further the organization of loading and un-
loading operations, which is a matter of great importance to Cuba.

Referring to Cuba's main economic problems, the Osban leader said that 1982,
1983, and 1986, will be very difficult years for two reasons: the low
prices of sugar and the spiralling cost of foodstuffs and manufactured
goods. He said that this would cause us to review our plans and to use our
foreign currency reserves very carefully.

He declared that our relations with the socialist world, especially the USSR,
will insure that Cuba's development will not be stopped. Our development
will continue [words indistinct] people's welfare. Our development will

mean more factories to produce staples and to make use of our natural re-
sources .

He denounced the systematic economic aggression that the United States is
waging against Cuba. This aggression has increased to such an extent that it
is now more intense than the struggle in the political-military field.

Carlos Rafael Rodriguez said that one of the forms of aggression used by the
United States is its campaign against sales of Cuban nickel. The United
States has systematically been waging an aggressive policy. It has made

agreements with several purchasers in Europe and is trying to do the same in
Asia.

He added that the United States has tried to prevent important loans from

being made to Cuba, and has tried to have banks from capitalist countries
withdraw their deposits from Cuban banks.

This economic aggression will hinder the economic plans laid by the Second
Congress of the Cuban Communist Party. However, it is believed that several
solutions will be found.

The Cuban vice president stressed the importance of Cuba's participation in
CEHA, which it joined 10 years ago.

He said that Cuba, Vietnam, and Mongolia are examples for developing countries
in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. These countries should understand that
the future will not be based on unequal relations with capitalist imperialist

countries, but on new relations to be established with members of the social-
ist coumunity.

He explained that care countries are at present engaged in studying new
forms of joint multilateral cooperation with developing countries.

is
FtHICNNNCJAI.USE¢NULV
He believes that in 1983 important initiatives will be concluded to improve
CBm's participation in the development of Asian, African and Latin American
countries.

Cuba, as a developing country [words indistinct] a valuable experience,
Rodriguez added.

cs0: 3001/ 179

15
FOI‘OFIICIRLIISI2CIULV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(”UNTRY SECTION EL SALVAIXJR

FOREIGN MINISTERS MEETING PART OF U.S. 'PLAN'
PAO7225’: Havana PRELA in English 2030 GMT 7 Jul 82

[Text] San Jose, 8 Jul (PL)--‘I‘he foreign ministers of four Central American
countries met here once again to formally set up the self-styled democratic
comunity of the area while Nicaragua charged it is a plan to destabilize it.

On hand for the meeting in San Salvador were the foreign ministers of Costa
Rica, Fernando Volio Jimenez, Honduras, Edgardo Pa: Barnica, Guatemala,
Eduardo Castillo and El Salvador, Fidel Cl'lavez Fans.

it was annomced officially that the meeting formally set up the new political
military pact after it was announced in January in the Costa Rican capital.

The reactionary bent of the grouping which political experts say is designed
to replace the defunct Central American Defense Council (CONDECA) was
denounced by Nicaragua as an attempt to surround the Sandinista revolution.

CONDECA was a military cooperation pact organized by reactionary regimes in
the area with Washington approval, under the inspiration of the Sonora
regime. Its foundations reached a crisis after the overthrow of that regime
in July 1979.

The initiative to create a similar body was adopted in January by the govern-
ments of Costa Rica, Honduras and El Salvador in view of the mounting advance
of the guerrilla movement in the latter country and the grave military-
poiitical tensions caused by the United States in the region.

Initially Guatemala was not invited to join because in the view of the
organizers, the regime of the time headed by Gen Romeo Lucas Garcia [words
indistinct].

Sergio Ramirez of the Nicaraguan Government junta recalled that Nicaragua
and Panama were not invited to the meeting and charged that the "demeratic
commity" was conceived by the United States as part of a plan to surround
the Nicaraguan revolution.

CS”: 3020/ 146

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION PERU

BRIEFS

BORDER INCIDENT HI‘IH ECUANRnLiiM, 5 Jun (SAPORI‘I‘I)-A recent border incident
with Ecuador was virtually admitted by Prime Minister Ulloa, when a newsman
inquired about a rumor on the nutter. The prime minister said, however, that
he was certain that it was one of those events that are often difficult to
verify because of the imprecise border line in some areas, to which is added
the bad weather, which can lead to raids without any importance, precisely
because there is no ill intention. The minister added that there is no
reason to suppose that at present there should be any motives for alleged
tensions between Ecuador and Peru. I am sure that anything that may have
happened is the result of some fortuitous circumstance. To a question by a
newsman whether Great Britain would artificially be promoting a border
conflict between Peru and Ecuador, Prime Minister Ulloa replied by asserting
that there is no information that can even make us think that it may have
been a border incident which may have major consequences because of being
originated from abroad. [Text] “”1052st Buenos Aires SAPORI'I‘I in Spanish
1736 GMT 5 Jun 82]

680: 3010/1771

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ROUTERSB CITES ACHIEVEMENTS ON LIPTING CURFEW
PA030100 Havana PRBLA in English 2310 Gﬂ‘ 2 Jul 82

[Text] Paramaribo. 3 Jul (PD—Commander Daysi Bouterse, leader of the
Suriname political process. said the revolution is a historic necessity and a
greater challenge for the people.

He recalled that the government has adopted several measures to benefit the
people since young any officers took power on 25 February 1980.

He cited among the gains farm policy. price control, a lowcost housing pro-
gram and a tax cut.

He also stressed that the well-being of the masses has been the central objec-
tive of all the steps taken.

At a ceremony to mark the abolition of slavery in Suriname, Bouterse also
announced the lifting of the curfew in force since March when a counter-
revolutionary group tried to pull a coup.

The throng gathered at the former Port Bomika, where Bouterse and his com-
rades met 28 months ago on the eve of the overthrow of the regime of Hench
Arron, hailed the measure and cheered the revolution.

Bouterse also spoke of the economic problems that continue to affect the coun-
try. which attained its independence from Holland in 1975, and stated that
they are due to the inherited economic and political structure.

Everyone has the right and duty to develop on the basis of their own effort.
111°refore the revolution is not an elegant word. but a historic need and, at
the same time, a greater challenge for the Suriname people.

In his speech, he harshly scored colonialism and imperialism and called on

the people to promote their own fem of development, learning from other
Third World countries.

(:80: ”25/1117 END

18
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY