FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10102
6 November 1981

Latin America Report

(FOUO 26/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/la
6 Novembe

LATIN AMERICA REPORT

(9000 26/81)
CONTENTS

COUNTRY SECTION

'PRELA' Consents on Causes for Attack on Sadat
("Cry Sim“; PR8”. 6 0C: 81) sssoossssosssoooasssn-sonsaao

wounded Ambassador to Egypt Cements on Attack
(Rafael Borges; PRELA, 10 Oct 81)...

Foreign Trade Hiniater Carbisas Visits Bulgaria
(Miguel bozano; PRELA, 28 Sep 81) .

u.s. Military Maneuvers in Caribbean Scored
(Ivonne Pastor Parra; PRELA, ll Oct 81).

CIA Accused of Operating Subversive Camps in Honduras
(Ana Leonor Diaz; PRELA, 15 Oct 81) .......................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SBCI‘ ION CUBA

'PRELA' COMMENTS ON CAUSES FOR ATTACK ON SADAT
PA070340 Havana PRBLA in Spanish 1602 GMT 6 Oct 81
[Commentary by Mary Simon]

[Excerpt] The attack today on Anwar al-Sadat confirms the existence of an ample
opposition movement to the policy of submission begun by the Egyptian President
when he recognized the Zionist state in 1977.

It was not by chance that "victory day" served a group of Egyptian soldiers to
attack the man, who after having arrogated the succession of Jamal 'Abd al-Nasir,

led the country to a strategic military alliance with the United States and
Israel.

The traditional 6 October parade commemorating one of the most outstanding .aoments
in Egypt's history, when it supported the Arab and Palestine cause and confronted
the Zionists had this year as a "main attraction" an exhibition of some of the

modern equipment supplied by Washington to facilitate Cairo's military presence
in the region.

Iherefore, paradoxically, it was from among the 0.8. M60A3 tanks on parade. that
the attacking military group appeared.

Today's events have special importance following a month of extreme repression
against the opposition forces in Egypt, due to marked religious differences.

In August al-Sadat accused the church hierarchy, and especially the Orthodox Copt
Church. of attacking national stability.

This accusation provoked demonstrations on 3 August in Cairo. where thousands of
Muslim. Coptic demonstrators and opposftion leaders, marched in the streets
protesting the Camp David policy and the increased cost of living.

The repression which rapidly extended to the leadership of the Socialist Labor

Party, the National Progressive Unionist Party. newsnen, lawyers and other sectors
apposed to the presidential line, caused the arrest of over 5,000 persons.

CSO: 3010/51

' 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm: SECTION CUM

WOUNDED AMBASSADOR TO mm cm 0" ATTACK
PA102312 Havana PRELA in English 2010 011' 10 Oct 81
[By Rafael Borges]

[Text] Berlin, 11 Oct (PL)--‘l'he Cuban asbassador to Cairo, Domingo Garcia, wounded
in the shoulder during the attack in which Anwar al-Sadat was mrtally wounded, stated
that this year's parade for the fourth Arab-Israeli war took place in the middle of

extreme security measures .

Garcia, who was brought here to the hospital, where he is recovering, agreed to give
PRENSA LATINA details of the happenings.

The Cuban official said that this year, the adoption of exceptinal precautions were
noted in the preparations for that cot-lemoration.

He manifested that this year the heads of diplomatic missions when attending such
ceremonies were not only given the traditional pass and the sticker for their autos,
but there was a triple control of their documents. before they were able to go up
to the reviewing stand.

Also. on the stairs leading to the reviewing stand. in the diplomts wing, their
photographic cameras were inspected and the shutters released.

This detail, he stated, was cemented with other colleagues because not only cameras
were inspected, but cases containing binoculars or other objects whereas weapon
could be concealed.

The adoption of the neasures mentioned by me, he went on, was also noted at the be-
ginning of the ceremony itself, in which al-Sadst should turn, salute the troops.
read the Koran and the defense minister would deliver his speech.

Apart from this, the 6 October parade, after the traditional salute to those who
feel in that war, opened with some innovations consisting in the intervention of
paratroopers, demonstration of assault positions in front of the reviewing stand and
the display of the most recent armaments acquired by Egypt in the United States.

As to the events that cost the life of al-Sadat, Massador Garcia related that
practically in the last third of the parade, and when acrobatic avaiation exercises

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

had begun, two snell explosions were heard anong the deafening noice of the turbine
of one of the aircraft that was flying very low.

He said that in that instant he observed a truck, with a 130-1- cannon in the rear,
halt and three or four men leaped off, who opened fire on the reviewing stand.

Right when feeling an explosion, he stated, it seemed to ne that I was wounded and
I felt myself falling to the floor, action that I i-ediately controlled myself.

There, he went on, in those conditions I was able to verify that I had been hit in
the shoulder, because I felt that any forearm was dislocated from the upper joint.

In this situation, and in the middle of great confusion in which shouts mentioning
al-Sadat were heard, I was able to pull myself together and aided by the Argentine
abassador left in search of an automobile that would take a to a nedical aid cen-
ter.

In those circumstances, Garcia said, I was taken to the hbspital by the Finnish am-
bassador in his car. In that hospital, 3 kilometers away from Cairo, he continued,
I underwent my first operation.

Thanks to the kindness of the comrades in the Ger-an Demcratic Republic Messy in
that capital, I was taken free the Cairo hospital to Berlin in an "Interflug" flight,
he stated.

Garcia estimates that the shooting, which resulted in the death of al-Sadat and he

himself being wounded, lasted approximately 102 seconds, and that one of the per-
petrators of the attack. numbered at four, was killed and the rest taken prisoners.

CSO: 3020/7

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY sacuon CUBA

FOREIGN TRADE MINISTER CARBISAS VISITS BUMARIA
PA282012 Havana PRELA in English 1856 GMT 28 Sep 81
[Report by Miguel Lozano]

[Text] Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 29 Sep (PL)--Cuba will sign contracts for 1982 with
Bulgarian firms for goods valued at 50.80 million roubles during the Plovdiv
international fair. announced Cuban Foreign Trade Minister Ricardo Cabrisas.

Cabrisas underlined in an interview granted to PRENSA LATINA the particular
importance of Cuba's participation in the Plovdiv fair, that is giving it the
opportunity to appreciate Bulgaria's economic boom. It also facilitates bilateral
integration in some sectors in accordance with medium and long-term plans.

On the other hand, he added, Cuba's presence per-its the results of socialist
collaboration related to the growth of new export areas in the Cuban market to be
exhibited.

The high-ranking Cuban official added that this permits the promotion of negotia-
tions between Cuban foreign trade companies and Bulgarian firms and he sverred
that the advanced state of these conversations would allow their conclusion and
signing.

Cabrisas also referred to the present state of trade relations with Bulgaria and
explained that they are going ahead in accordance with the plans accorded between
the top leaders of the two countries, Fidel Castro and (?Zhivkov).

Exchange of goods agreement for the 1981-85 period and the annual agreement for
bilateral trade were already signed in 1980. and talks for the singing of the 1982
trade agreement. that envisions Bulgaria's growing participation in different
Cuban economic-industrial sectors, will be started shortly.

Earlier Cabrisas conversed with the president of the Council of State and general
secretary of the Bulgarian Connunist Party, Todor Zhivkov, during the visit made
by the Bulgarian leader to the Cuban pavilion.

lo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Zhivkov asked about the present state of the industrial plants built or under
construction in Cuba with Bulgarian advice and technology and received a satis-
factory answer from Cabrisas, who praised the quality of the work of the technicians
in charge of putting the works into operation.

During his stay in Plovdiv, the mban minister also met with the vice president
of the Council of Ministers of Bulgaria, Andrei Lukanov.

During the meeting both sides evaluated positively the present development and
prospects of the econanic relations between the two countries.

The talks were attemied by the sinister of foreign trade of Bulgaria, Khristo
Khristov; the presidents of the chambers of comerce of Cuba and Bulgaria; Jose

Disz Hirsbsl and Peter Rusev, as well as the Cuban ubsssador to Bulgaria, Jose
Alvarez Bravo.

CSO: 3020/5

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI(NWHC1Al.USElDNLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUIA

U.S. MILITARY HANEUVERS IN CARIBBEAN SCORED
PA120332 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2141 CHI 11 Oct 81
[Article by Ivonne Pastor Parts of PREHSA LATINA]

[Text] The aggressive hawk view '81 military maneuvers that the United States

is jointly carrying out with Honduras in the Caribbean Sea are another provocation
against Cuba and a threat to Nicaragua and the liberation movements in Central
America.

The U.S. news agency. United Press International. UPI, reported that the maneuvers.
which began 2 days ago in the Caribbean coasts of Honduras. are aimed at "dis-
covering on the high seas and seizing arms that Cuba is shipping to Central
America."

In the meantime, U.S. Army Col Hark Richards. spokesman for U.S. Army Southern
Command Information Service in the Panama Canal zone. said that the hawk view
maneuvers in the Caribbean have nothing to do with Nicaragua.

The U.S. army officer said that the Honduran armed forces needs to practice "how
to take hypothetical eneuuea by surprise," and that "the United States will teach
them howtodo itJ'

Observers are saying that since the 0.8. Government increased its military inter-
vention in El Salvador by sending green berets. specialists in the art of killing.
it has not stopped referring to alleged Cuban intervention in Central America.

Alexander Haig. U.S. secretary of state. has said on many occasions that the
White House is studying a series of actions against Cuba. among them. a military
blockade of the island.

The observers say that the United States could take advantage of the hawk View
'81 maneuvers to set up a permanent air force and navy base on the Caribbean
coast of Central America. to complenent its aggressive strategy.

They say that 0.3. President Ronald Reagan. using as pretext an action to stop
the exodus of Haitian refugees to the United States. running away from Duvalier's
dictatorship, has ordered the 0.8. Navy to patrol the windward passage. near the
Cuban coast and Guantanann's navy base, in Cuban territory, illegally occupied
by the United States.

6
FOI:0FFK]AI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The observers recall that the 0.8. Government, referring to the alleged presence
of a Soviet conbat brigade in Cuba, set up in Key west. Florida, an assault
military command for the Caribbean, located 90 miles from Cuban territory.

Afterwards. the observers added, Washington will set up a rapid deployment
command in Tampa, Florida. which controls the waters of the Gulf of Mexico and
its passage to the Caribbean Sea.

Further on, they say that in order to support this military strategy against
Cuba, the CIA established a base on Swan Island, located near the Cuban coast.

They also say that the United States has increased its military units in the
Caribbean and also the military maneuvers in the zone. such as the ocean view

operation which was to practice an invasion of Grenada to be carried out from
Vieques Island. as well as a similar military operation against Cuba.

CSO: 3010/88

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COWl'RY SECTION CUBA

CIA ACCUSED 0F OPERATING SUBVERSIVB CAMPS IN HONDURAS
PAISZOlol Havana PRELA in Spanish 1454 CHI 15 Oct 81
[Article by Ana Leonor Diaz]

[Text] Havana, 15 Oct (PL)--The 11.8. Central Intelligence Agency [CIA] operates

seven counterrevolutionsry cm: in Honduras free which to stage aggressions
against Nicaragua.

This charge was leveled in Havana by Venezuelan journalist Freddy Balzan. executive
secretary of the Central American Anti-Inperialiat Tribunal, which sat in Managua
at the end of Septenber.

Balzan said that according to evidence submitted at the tribunal, uhich is coapoaed
of distinguished intellectuals and personalities of the region, Steadnsn Pagoth
heads these groups. At one tine Pagoth was leader of the Nicaraguan Nisurasata
Indian Organization.

Fagoth was arrested in Nicaragua last year for staging counterrevolutionary
activities. but was later released when he changed his attitude publicly and
before the press.

Balzsn added that according to the charges brought before the tribunal by several
of Fagoth's former followers. he then inediately fled to Bonduras. breaking
his promise to the Sandinista authorities.

In the Honduran city of Puerto Lenpira, 50 has fron the Nicaraguan border. Pagoth
set up the seven counterrevolutionary bases using CIA financing.

The continuation of the tribunala' work. entrusted to a permanent comittee led
by Nicaraguan journalist Xavier Chanorro, began today in every Central Aaerican
country with the collection of signatures for an accusation on acts of 0.8. inter-
ference in the region, which will be sent to the United Nations.

U.S. aggression in Central America, Balzan said, consists of threats of aggression
against Nicaragua vith the recent "hawk vied" ailitary naneuvers, support for

counterrevolutionary gangs in Bondures and pressures against the Sandiniat govern-
sent.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He added that in Costa Rica it involven economic black-ail from Hashington. In
Panama. it is the nonfulfillment of the canal treaties. ﬂare is also 0.8.
military assistance for the regimes of Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras.

The Central American Anti-Ilperialiat Tribunal. which trill meet again in Panama
at the beginning of 1982, began publishing the magazine "SOBERANIA" today to
denounce 0.5. intervention in the region and in other countries of Latin America.

CSO: 3010/88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(DUNTRY SBCl' ION HONDURAS

U.S., HONDURAS ACCUSED IN PLOT AGAINST REBELS
PA2221l9 Havana PHELA in Spanish 11021 GMT 22 Sep 81

[Excerpts] San Jose, 22 Sep (PL)--Several Honduras and 0.8. officials were named
as the masterminds of a region-wide counterrevolutionary plan based in Honduras.

Spokesmen for the Honduran coordinating board of solidarity with the Salvadoran
people charged that the main targets of the plan are the PSLH in Nicaragua and
the guerrilla movements in El Salvador and Guatesala.

The Agencia Independiente de Prensa (AIP) reported that high Honduran military
officers, an official of the 0.3. Bnbassy in Tegucigalpa, and a considerable
nunber of "green berets" are involved in the project.

According to the press agency, Crescencio Arcos, head of the United States Inter-
national Communications Agency (USICA) in Honduras, is one of the directors of
the plan against the peoples of Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Guatemala.

The press agency says that Capt Michael Scheehar, a West Point graduate, and
green beret Sgt David Thornton and Roberto Lopez, are also involved in those
activities.

Several members of the national Department of Investigations (DIN), such as
Adonis Carranza, Guillermo Duron, Bdilberto Marquez. together with Sonozist
Cesar Torre and the Cuban-born mercenary Mario Pusero, were mentioned as being
responsible for the activities the CIA is coordinating in Honduras.

Honduran Capt Miguel Angel Maya, military commander of La Virtud on the border
with El Salvador, where hundreds of Salvadoran refugees have fled, is also par-
ticipating in the plan along with former Somozist Col Carlos Rodriguez.

According to AIP, the activities against the Nicaraguan, Salvadoran and Guatemalan
revolutionaries include nilitary actions, kidnapping, and espionage.

At the same time, it was reported that 200 Puerto Rican mercenaries, trained by
the Americans, are stationed in Honduras.

The military-Christian Democratic junta of El Salvador is planning to cede to
Honduras the "pockets" in dispute along the border in the Salvadoran departments
of Chalatenango and Cabanas.

The report claims that this action by the junta is supported by Washington to
allow the Honduran army and mercenaries to attack areas where the Salvadoran

guerrillas operate .

C80: 3010/ 14

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION GUATBMLA

BRIEFS

BOMB EXPLOSIONS~San Jose, 15 Oct (PD—ﬂigh-power bombs have exploded in the
offices of the Army Bank and Military welfare Fund located 100 meters from the
presidential palace in Guatemala City, it was learned here. The bomb which
exploded in the Amy Bank caused extensive damage, principally on the first
floor. It also destroyed part of a supermarket, causing an estimated $500,000
damage. Eight other businesses in the vicinity were also damaged, as was the
national palace. Total damage is estimated at approximately $2 million, according
to Central American radio stations. Another bomb exploded near the air force
and honor guard installations, which is one of the main headquarters, in zones
10 and 13 of Guatemala City, a district where many soldiers live. [Text]
[PA171720 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0236 011' 16 Oct 81]

C90: 3010/88

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION NICARAGUA

TOHAS BORGE THANKS LOPEZ PORTILLO FOR SUPPORT
PA250256 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0230 GMT 26 Sep 81
[Article by Jorge Timossi]

[Text] Mexico City. 23 Sep (PL)-Commander Tomas Borge, PSLN national directorate
member and interior minister, said today that the upcoming U.S.-Honduran maneuvers
are a threat to peace in Central America.

Barge arrived here this afternoon heading a delegation that includes Welfare
Minister Lea Guido and Education Minister Ernesto Cardenal.

Adolfo Diaz Lacayo, Nicaraguan ambassador to Mexico, welcomed the delegation at
the airport. Tomas Borge is here to receive an honorary doctorate degree from
the University of Puebla.

In statements at the airport, Borge stressed the need to find a political solution
to the Salvadoran drama that will be in accord with the interests of the people.

He said that the French-Mexican joint declaration of August, which he said was
both unifying and respectful of the Salvadoran people's rights to self-determina-
tion, contained the primary foundations for a solution.

Barge said that Nicaragua has always stressed the need for a peaceful solution
to the Salvadoran conflict, but the United States has not shown any willingness
to find a solution.

He also referred, when asked by Mexican reporters. to the U.S. Government's can-
cellation of a $7 million loan. He said that Nicaragua is conducting successful
dealings with other nations.

He recalled that Libya recently granted loans to Nicaragua and that other countries
had already promised to grant (?open) financing and long-term loans.

The Sandinist leader said that the establishment of a U.S. military base in the
Gulf of Fonseca is illegal and that Nicaragua's approval is needed to establish
such a base, noting that Nicaragua "will never grant it."

Referring to the joint U.S.—Honduran maneuvers to be held soon. he said that "now
is a time for talks and not for confrontations."

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He warned that "peace in Central America cannot be reached through force."

He was asked if the Sandinist armed forces are prepared to face a possible inva-
sion by Sonozist groups training in Honduras and the United States.

Borge said: "If they come to Nicaragua they will simply get what they deserve."

At the end of his statements, Tones Borge thanked the Mexican Government and
people for their warm welcome and expressed the Nicaraguan Government and people‘s

respect for President Lopez Portillo's international stand on the Central American
and Caribbean issues.

The Nicaraguan delegation, which will be here until Priday, also met this after-

noon with Javier Garcia Paniagua, president of the Institutional Revolutionary
Party.

080: 3010/16

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION NICARAGUA

INTERVIEH WITH MEMBERS OF ANTI-IMPERIALIST TRIBUNAL
PA202035 Havana PBZLA in English 1915 GMT 20 Sep 81

[Article by special correspondent Eloy Concepcion]

[Text] Managua 21 Sep (PL)--The Central American Anti-Imperialist Tribunal that
opens here today will serve to condemn United States intervention in the area.

The watchword of the event is a statement by murdered Salvadoran Archbishop Oscar
Arnulfo Romero: "No to the United States intention of determining the future of
the peoples."

The tribunal of outstanding regional intellectuals will meet through 23 September,
with observers and guests from 12 Latin American countries.

The organizing committee confirmed the support of outstanding personalities such
as writer Mario Benedetti, and Cuernavaca (Mexico) Archbishop Sergio Mendez Arceo.
who voiced solidarity with the patriotic postulates of the tribunal in response
to U.S. aggression in the area.

The tribunal will name its executive committee and assess the prime goals to be
carried out by the top anti—imperialist investigation. denunciation and combat
organization in Central America.

Some people compare the body to the Russell Tribunal, which conducted warcrimes
trials in the case of the 0.5. war against Vietnam. PRENSA LATINA interviewed
Nicaraguan members of the organizing committee.

Mariano Piallos. rector of the Autonomous University of Nicaragua, said that the
"tribunal will have great importance for this country since a group of outstanding
intellectuals and political figures will denounce the maneuvers by the United
States in the world. especially in Central America.

"Those maneuvers are designed to neutralize and, if possible, change the orienta-
tion of the Nicaraguan process, its government system, its independence. to
subject it once again to a situation of dependency. such as existed prior to the
Sandinista victory."

For his part. Priest Uriel Molina stressed that the tribunal will compile all the
informationtnathe destabilization campaign against Nicaragua.
14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"For Christians. the existence of the tribunal and being able to for: part of it

is a vital question, in order to inplenent the task that the church must assume
in this historic novenent for Nicaragua."

Javier Chanorro, editor of BL NUBVO DIARIO, declared that the tribunal will serve
to strengthen the Nicaraguan process internally and to provide more thorough
knowledge on the actions of the CIA in Central America, especially in Nicaragua.
in its endeavor to destabilize and change this irreversible revolution." [quota-
tion mark as received]

He denounced the sending of 0.8. arms to the Salvadoran junta and recalled how
the Nicaraguan colbatants during the liberation var took from the Sonoaa National
Guard the weapons to be used for victory against the tyranny.

650: 3010/ 110 END

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY