FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPFIS L/10141
27 November 1981

Latin America Report

(FOUO 27/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the polis
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1(
27 Noveml
LATIN AMERICA REPORT
(FOUO 27/81)
CONTENTS
COUNTRY SECI'IN
BARBADOS

Government Plan's To Build Up Amy Continue

(DBPENSA, Aug-Sep 81)................................ ...... .

Briefs
New DLP Chief

COSTA RICA

Publications Reveal Local Terrorist Plans
(PRBLA, 7 Nov 81)...........................................

CUBA

Haig Seen as Promoting 'Hawkish' Views
(Eloy Concepcion; PRELA, 1 Nov 81) .....

'VBRDE OLIVO' Sees Haig Being Isolated by 0.8. Leaders
(PRBLA, 11 Nov 81)..........................................

'PRBIA' Relates Relations with 0.8. to 1961 Situation
(Eloy Concepcion: PRBLA, 2 Nov 81)..........................

Venezuelan President's Trip to China Criticized
(Walfredo Angulo; PRELA. 4 Nov 81).. ........................

Briefs
Official to Casa de las Americas
Armed Foxes Publication Sold

Soviet Defense Aid
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EL SALVADOR

0.5. Soldiers Accused of Harassing Refugees
(Pm, 8 NOV 81).0...l...OOOICOIOOOOIIOIIOIOOIIOIOOIOOOOOIOII

HONDURAS

'PATRIA' Scores Appointment of New U.S. Ambassador
(Pm, 3 “0V 81)0.0.00.00.00.00.to00o.loo-oooooooooooeoooeoou

JAMAICA

HPJ Condemns Seaga's Break with Cuban Regine
(PRBLA, 30 Oct 81)eaaaaaaeaaoaonoa.aeaseaaoaooeaaooeooaeaaaaaa

PNP Leaders Visit Cuban Embassy, Condenn Break
(PRBM' 30 Oct 81)O0..00.000.00.00.a...OIOOOOOOIIOOOOOoooee-oo

NICARAGUA

Briefs
Note for UN

SURINAME

Revolutionary Front To Be Announced 27 November
(PRBIA, 9 NOV 81)0.0.0.0....0....0.00.IOCOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOO

URUGUAY

Briefs
0.5. Policy Scored

VENEZUELA

Armed Forces Receive Modern Weapons, Equipment
(Hernandez Gonzalez: DEFENSA. Aug-Sep 81).....................
FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONE!

0mm SECTION mums

GOVERNMENT PLANS TO BUILD UP AM CONTINUE
Madrid DEFENSA in Spanish No 60-6L Aug-Sep 8! pp 152. 159

[Text] The government of Barbados will continue its plans for increasing the
strength of national defense, which consists at present of a lSO-man army, one
Cessna-402 and three fishing craft converted into patrol craft. A 37-neter patrol
craft. built in Great Britain, will arrive in BLrbcdos shortly as part of the gov-

ernment's plansto build for the possibility that some day an invasion of
this Caribbean island nay occur or a coup d'eta:.

The government's fears began 2 years ago when they discovered a supposed plot by
mercenaries to invade the country and they decideu to replace the Volunteer Corps
that paraded on holidays with its ancient weapons with an army.

The modest Barbadian Army would be part of a joint effort by other nearby Caribbean
islands that would assist each other mutudlly in cases like ship rescue and other
emergencies. Dominica. St. Vincent and St. Lucia, all less.than 350 kilometers
from Barbados, have come together on the need for a union of their resources to
protect their recently proclained exclusive economic zone (288).

St. Vincent bought a patrol craft and Donlnica announced that it will establish

a Coast Guard Corps, but the struggle for power in St. Lucia between the prime
ninister and the minister of foreign relations haa stopped that island's active
participation in the plan. The idea of uniting their air forces was stimulated

by the coup d'etat in Grenada in I979 and Barbados, St. Vincent, St. Lucia and
Dominica supported the fornation of a regional military force. but, with the change
of government in St. Lucia, that island made it very clear that it would not par-
ticipate in any attempt at overthrowing regimes in othercountries. There-

fore, the plan was reduced to joint defense of the fishing areas in the zone and

it has received the backing of the four countries. but Barbados was the one that
has been building up its army since then. Starting in 1976. the Barbadian de-
fense budget increased to $12.5 million used for putting up a new building as head-
quarters for the Coast Guard and transformation of the army with the help of the
United States and Great Brltnin.

common-r: Bdiciones Defense, S.A. nadrid 1981

10,052
C50: 3010/106

roa orrmnlt use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY samou

BRIEFS

NEH DLP CHIEF-Former trade minister Branford taitt has been elected president of
the opposition Democratic Labour Party. Parliamntery opposition leader Errol
Barrow, who declined noninetion for the preeidency, re-aina political leader of
the party. [Text] [London LATIN AMERICAN RIGIOIIAL REPORTS-CARIBBEAN in Englieh
25 Sep 81 p 3) (COPYRIGHT: Latin Aurica Regional Report, 1981]

650: 3025/36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWDR 0FF1C1AL USEZCHNLY

COUNTRY SECTION COSTA RICA

PUBLICATIONS REVEAL LOCAL TERRORIST PLANS
PAO72303 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1724 GMT 7 Nov 81

[Text] San Jose, 7 Nov (PL)--The Costa Rican press published new revelations
today about local terrorist plans, promoted by the United States, for a coup d'etat
in Costa Rica and for operations against Nicaragua.

The weekly UNIVERSIDAD supported the charges published this week by the newspaper
LIBERTAD about the presence in Costa Rica of an organization of forner Sonozist
guards, trained in the United States to carry out nilitary attacks at any moment.

The two weeklies agree that their subversive activity, also targeted at Nicaragua,
"coincides with the increasingly aggressive tone with which the Reagan administra-
tion is treating hemispheric matters."

Regarding the charges made by LIBERTAD about the presence in Costa Rica of over
6,000 Somozists, who received political asylum here after the Sandinist triumph
in 1978, UNIVERSIDAD says that they train along this country's Pacific coast
and in the northern provinces close to the Nicaraguan border.

According to this publication, this terrorist campaign was unleashed recently
with the hijacking of local commercial aircraft by former Sonozist guards.

They also note that the incident occurred after 0.8. information nedia unleashed
a publicity campaign against Nicaragua.

The Costa Rican commercial aircraft was hijacked on 30 October by several
Somozists residing here and was diverted to El Salvador.

UNIVERSIDAD recalls that some time ago, a similar group attacked Radio Noticias
Del Continente's shortwave station several tines. This station is now closed.

These terrorist activities will continue in Costa Rica, because the Somozists have

the support of the country's reactionary sectors and of the United States, the
publication adds.

CSO: 3010/291

FOR OFFKJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECT ION CUBA

HAIG SEEN AS PROMOTING 'HAHKISH' VIEWS
PA072018 Havana PRBLA in English 1856 GMT 7 Nov 81
[Report by Eloy Concepcion]

[Text] Secretary of State Alexander Haig, in his insane advance touardu a
war "any where and any how." has stated that the North Atlantic Trvarv
Organization (NATO) can 'huke an atomic bomb explode" with friendly poununuluu.

The statements made in the Senate subcomnission that is discussing the military
budget for U.S. nuclear rearmament confirm what President Ronald Reagan stated
previously that Washington considers possible a limited nuclear war in the
European continent.

According to Baig, the plans "are designed to maintain nuclear war at its
lowest level," which means in Europe, without U.S. territory being harmed
in any way.

The ex-comnander of NATO. turned into the secretary of state of the Reagan
administration, is apparently going through a process of “growing schizophrenia"
that is cause of concern even among the European allies of the 0.8.

According to observers, President Reagan has little knowledge of international
problems and in spite of the statements of his spokesman that "his health is
excellent," a medical report indicates some aural and visual deficiencies and
the beginning of organic troubles.

During his 10 months of government, Reagan and the group that controls power
have raised to the rank of military confrontation each and every one of the
problems that arise, no matter in what part of the world.

Apparently the tactic employed by the "hawks" is aimed at raising the figure of
Haig over that would like more moderate handling of world and local conflicts.

The secretary of state has already in less than a year a "brilliant" service

record that catalogues him as a competitor agency (CIA), Vice President
George Bush. [sentence as received]

FOI:OFFKJA1.USELONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The in-fighting was brought to light for the first time after the att-pt on
Reagan's life on 30 March this year, when ﬂaig "took over provisionally" the

presidency of the republic and declared to the world "that leadership was
safe in his hands."

Later on, competition was outlined in a mutual effort to exhibit an image

of 'hnvie tough" and. if Bush spoke in a warmongering tone. Haig used a
tougher one and seemed more like a "hawk" than the vice president.

The 10 months of Reagan have given a great deal of work to his spokespersons
who have had need to deny brusque remarks from both the president and Hsig.

The 0.8. Government has undertaken a race against time and its anachronic

policy has brought the world to the verge of a nuclear catastrophe. Thus the
Europeans have manifested their fear in the face of Reagan's threats and

look with horror upon the insane idcas of Haig and the group that controls power
in Washington.

(280: 3020/23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SRTION CUBA

'VERDE OLIVO' SEES HAIC BEING ISOLATED BY U.S. LEADERS
PA121904 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2237 cm 11 Nov 81

[Text] Havana, 11 Nov (PL)--The VERDE OLIVO magazine today carries a comentary
saying that 0.5. Secretary of State Alexander Haig seems to be on the threshold
of his political decline.

The commentary, signed by newsman Elpidio Valdivia, labels Haig as an .
"intellectually mediocre man, an opportunist politician, who was never elected
even for the simple post of municipal mayor. a military officer of scant
achievements and a cave-man mentality."

The comentary recalls that Haig resigned from his post as NATO comander in
protest over former president James Carter's policies. It was really due to
personal reasons because Haig 'Vanted to run for the presidency of the United
States, his old dream which was thwarted last year through lack of popular and
political support."

When Haig was second to Henry Kissinger, "his enormous ability was concentrated
in supporting and undermining his boss at the same time."

The VERDE OLIVO comentary says that "Alexander Haig's image has been. at least
until now. that of a sort of lone wolf clamoring for military measures against
Cuba and Nicaragua."

The commentary refers to Haig's controversies with Secretary of Defense
Caspar Heinberger and other top Hhite House officials, among them George Bush.
Richard Allen. and James Baker, White House chief of staff.

It recalls a report issued by Haig 19 years ago in which he strongly attacked
the executive branch for paying excessive attention to the State Department.
"ignoring the fact that the nation (the United States) is facing an
essentially military challenge." -

The writer mentions the U.S. magazine THE WASHINGTON mum“ which, in discussing

the secretary of state's political career said that "what made Haig so powerful
was his terrifying ability to look at a friend and an enemy at the same time."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it says, "while Kissinger was Nixon's theoretician and political strategist,
Haig was his side, a not too brilliant organizer but a reliable administrator
of the details which Kissinger did not bother with."

The commentary says that Haig was engaged in "intercepting telephone cells
and press dispatches from colleges and acumen. anions other similar chores."

It adds, "any observer of 11.5. politics can see that the four-star general is
gradually being isolated."

The VERDE OLIVO comentary says that, "even before the president assumed office
in January, some of Reagan's advisers regarded Hais as an outsider in their
teamwork operation."

C50: 3010/ 300

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECT ION CUBA

'PRELA' RELATES RELATIONS WITH U.S. TO 1961 SITUATION
PA030267 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2329 M 2 Nov 81
[Report by PRELA correspondent Eloy tancepcion]

[Text] The U.S. Government has further intensified its aggressions against
Cuba, which is reminiscent of the stage prior to the Bay of Pigs invasiOn
launched against the island in April 1961 and defeated in 72 hours.

Experience has made the Cuban people aware of the methods used by the various
U.S. governments against their country. They have begun to mobilize in massive

support of a recent statement by Fidel Castro, where he protested the threat
of an armed U.S. aggression.

Today, Cuba is a cauldron of groups in the streets chanting slogans and reaffirm-
ing their readiness to maintain the working tools and weapons at ready.

The evidence is obvious: The U.S. Government seeks to create the climate for
an aggression against Cuba and to continue its intervention policy in Central
America .

In order to prepare the U.S. people psychologically, the Reagan administration
blanes Cuba for almost all the evils occurring in the Central American region
and for this purpose uses the most barefaced lies.

For the United States, which has not overcome its Vietnam "syndrome,“ there is

now another fear turned into a nightmare and mentioned by its leaders in every
speech, news conference or family meeting.

For the Ronald Reagan regime. Cuba is to blame because Central America has become
the theater of peoples' struggles to reverse the "order" established by
Washington. That 'brder" began to crumble when the Sandinist "boys" arrived in
Managua in July 1979.

The sufferings of the hawks now ruling the United States has become more acute
following their foiled attempt to crush the Salvadoran struggle.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Huey helicopters, the military advisors and the millions of dollars in
weapons have not been able to crush the Salvadoran guerrillas. Therefore,

Washington now is trying to find the "causes" of its political defeat where
they do not really exist.

If the Salvadoran blow up a bridge, the U.S. propagandists say that "special
Cuban troops" using "sophisticated" methods participated in the operation.

Similar propaganda methods were used 20 years ago just before the April 1961
invasion of Cuba by mercenaries, armed and trained by the United States.

The idea is to sow, in the minds of peoples in the United States and other
countries, the idea that Cuba is increasing its defense unjustifiably and
that Cuba is the author of conflicts and that therefore, according to the
words of the U.S. rulers, Cuba "must be punished."

The steps announced by the U.S. Government at this time include a reinforcanent
of the blockade, attempts to isolate Cuba politically and diplomatically,
as well as threats that "other steps are being considered."

The Cuban people know this. It is not surprising then that the country. which

is now better prepared at all levels, awaits serene and unafraid the measures
announced by the yankee spokesmen, that is, if they are implemented.

CSO: 3010/226

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECT ION CUBA

VWEZUELAN PRESIDENT'S TRIP TO CHINA CRITICIZED

PA042118 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0140 GET 10 Nov 81

[Report by Halfredo Angulo] ’

[Text] [no dateline] Venezuelan President Luis Herrera Canpins demonstrated
during his official visit to China that he is capable of reaching the absurd

in an effort to make the foreign policy of his government coincide with the
guidelines set forth by the United States.

The president, who ended a 6-day tour of the Asian country yesterday, did not
waste any opportunity to try to attract the sympathy of the new ally.

Lacking bilateral objectives, the support of the Salvadoran military junta and
the attacks against Cuba and the USSR were the cannon feature among all the
meetings and documents signed.

Chinese and Venezuelan social christians fought it out to see who could be the
harshest in describing "the necessity of resisting the Cuba-Soviet bloc."

Both governments agreed to hold frequent exchanges of information and high-level
consultations in order to closely coordinate their international positions.

In the two rounds of talks between Herrera Campins and Chinese Premier Zhso Ziyang,
the two parties expressed their satisfaction with the progress in strengthening
their friendly ties and the first steps were taken regarding China's possible
purchase of Venezuela fertilizer. iron and steel.

For their part, the defense ninisters of the two countries, Geng Disc and
Haj Gen Bernardo Leal Puchi, held separate meetings, although there were no details
on the topics discussed.

However, Venezuelan opposition sectors have expressed their concern over the
statements made by the president during his tour of China and over the rapproche-
ment, including that in the military field, with the Beijing regime.

CSO: 3010/226

10

FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION CUBA

BRIEFS

OFFICIAL TO CASA DE LAS AMERICAs--Havana, 23 Oct (PL)--Sergio Ramirez, member
of the junta of the Government of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua,

has visited the Casa de las Americas here where he was received by Mariano
Rodriguez, president of the cultural institute. During the meeting they
exchanged views and experiences on the cultural work between the two countries.
The visitor toured the exhibition rooms of the house. Ramirez visited the
painting exhibit of Argentine painter Julio Le Parc in the Latin American

art gallery. Others present at the meeting were Roberto Fernandez Retamar,
vice president of the Casa de lasAmericas, members of the board of directors
of the institute and Le Parc. Ramirez, a narrator and critic, has cooperated
with the Casa de lus Americas on various opportunities. He was a judge for the
Casa de las Americas literary contest in 1978 and participated in the meeting
of Latin American and Caribbean writers held this year in Cuba. [Text]
[PA240218 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0020 GMT 24 Oct 81]

ARMED FORCES PUBLICATION SOLD-Havana, 29 Oct (PL)--Sa1e to the public of the
magazine EL OPICIAL, theoretical information organ of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces, began here today. Limited distribution of the publication
began in 1967. The issue put on sale contains, among other material, a
political-military analysis of Honduras, Peru's war industry and the tactical

symbols used by U.S. troops. [Text] [PA302308 Havana PRBLA in Spanish
0100 GMT 30 Oct 81]

SOVIET DEFENSE AID-—Mexico City, 6 Nov (PL)--The Soviet ambassador to Mexico,
Rostislav A. Sergeyev, said today that his country will use all of its
resources to maintain the independence and sovereignty of Cuba and of other
friendly countries if they are attacked from abroad. The Soviet ambassador's
statement, made at noon today after he placed flowers at Mexico's altar to the
fatherland in the monument to child-heroes, was published with banner
headlines by Mexico City's newspapers. The evening newspapers OVACIONES,
DIARIO DE MEXICO, ULTIMA HORA (of El Sol de Mexico) say in big frontpege
headlines: "The USSR Hill Defend Cuba"; "The USSR Hill Defend Cuba at Any
Cost"; and "To a Threatening Haig: Don't Even Touch Cuba--Horld Tension as
Result of U.S. Military Plans." The Soviet ambassador said that he is in
favor of general negotiations in the United Nations in order to solve problems
between developing and the developed countries. He said that the Soviet Union
avoids all military confrontations, "but the U.S. aggressions are becoming
increasingly frequent. He also referred to the possibility of a nuclear war,
though he noted that this would be inadmissible, as any confrontation of this
type would be fatal. [Text] [PA082110 Havana PRBLA in Spanish 0135 GMT

7 Nov 81]

C50: 3010/300 ll
FINICHWWCIAL.USEI)NLY
FOR OWTWCJAI.USE¢DNLN

COUNTRY SECTION EL SALVADOR

U.S. SOLDIERS ACCUSED 0F HARASSING REFUGEES
PA082015 Havana PRELA in English 1906 GMT 8 Nov 81

[Text] San Jose, Nov 8 (PL)--0ne fighting between forces of the Farabundo Marti
Front for National Liberation of El Salvador and government troops has
recommended in the city of Ierquin, department of Morazan. [sentence as received]

The rebel broadcasting station "Radio Venceremos' reported that the guerrilla
forces attacked for several hours soldiers stationed in Perquin. scene of
numerous combats in August.

It also charged that army helicopters opened fire on peasants in the cantons
of Rio Prio, Buena Vista and Achiote, on the banks of the Chinchontepec volcano,
close to the city of San Vicente.

It also reported the detention of peasants in the town of Jocoatique, department
of Horazan, in actions similar to the ones carried out by government forces
on 24 October in hamlets close to this city.

Meanwhile the "SALPRESS" agency reported the denunciation made by Honduran
doctors of the presence of 0.8. army officers in the town of La Virtud, where
there are Salvadoran refugees. '

'The officers, members of the special forces known as "Green Berets," are wearing
Honduran army uniforms and have gone into the refugee camps spreading alarm
amongst the Salvadoran peasants in that zone," indicated the doctors.

They added that up to new the presence in La Virtud of two Americans has been con-
firmed, but that "there could be more in other garrisons disguised by the
Honduran uniform."

The Independent Press Agency (AIP) disclosed the denunciation made by the national
representative of the "Caritas de Honduras" organization, Albe de Ramirez, that
the humanitarian organizations that are taking care of the Salvadoran refugees

in the border zone are facing a very difficult situation.

She pointed out that that institution is victim of a number of repressive
actions on the part of the security bodies and Honduran army.

12

FOR OFFNJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

She mentioned the capture of several representatives of that organization in
the border zone and the departure of the workers Luis Alonso Henge, who had
to leave the country due to the persecution of the Salvadoran authorities.

She also stated that the parish priest Vega Guarita, of a town close to La Virtud,
was detained by the Honduran army and that he has been prevented from visiting
the refugees camps.

She also accused the Salvadoran army of going into a refugee camp in Los Honges,

five kilometers ﬂeet of La Virtud. People living there said that the soldiers
threatened women and children and asked them to leave the place to the refugees.

CSO: 3010/291

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION HONDURAS

?ATRIN SCORES APPOINTMENT OF NEH U.S. AMBASSADOR

PA041934 Havana PRELA in Spanish 2156 GMT 3 Nov 81

[Text] San Jose, 3 Nov (PL)-The Honduran newspaper PAIRIA has charged that the

appointment of John D. Negroponte as U.S. ambassador to Honduras is part of
Washington's interventionist plans for Central America.

Negroponte, PATRIA reports, participated directly in the 0.5. aggression in Vietnam
and has a very bad record. The paper claims that the arrival of the diplomat in

Tegucigalpa is a bad omen for the struggle of the Salvadoran people and the
Sandinist revolution.

The newspaper referred to the systematic attacks that former Samozist guards
living in Honduras carry out against Nicaragua and to the coordination that exists

between the armies of El Salvador and Honduras to repress the Salvadoran people's
movement .

PATRIA, which is considered the mouthpiece of the Communist Party of Honduras,
noted that the United States wants to impose, through Honduras, an interventionist

policy in the region and for this reason it is sending one of its civilian experts
from the Vietnam war to Tegucigalpa.

According to other reports, Negroponte, who is replacing Jack Binns. was also a
member of the 0.5. National Security Council.

Central American radio stations have reported that a sister of Manfredo Velazquez,

a Honduran student who disappeared in September, has said that he is in a prison

of the National Investigations Directorate (DNI). Zeneida Velazquez claims her
brother has been subjected to physical and psychological tortures in various prisons
of the country, according to the sources.

Nanfredo Velazquez was first in a special prison for political prisoners in a
Public Security Forces (FUSE?) station. later he was taken to the lat battalion
of Lepaterique, near Gegucigalpa, and now he is in a DNI cell, the radio stations
have reported. These radio stations have noted that until now all the efforts
made to obtain the release of the young man have been fruitless because the top
authorities in the government and the armed forces deny he is under arrest.

C50: 3010/231

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0l:0FFKJAl.USEtDNLY

COUNTRY SECTION JAMAICA

HPJ CONDEHNS SEAGA'S BREAK HITH CUBAN REGIME
PA310310 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1625 GMT 30 Oct 81

[Text] Kingston, 30 Oct (PL)-Ths Jamaican Workers' Party (JHP) strongly condemned
the government of Edward Seaga for its unilateral decision to break diplomatic
relations with Cuba.

"It is an act designed to win favors from the u.s. Government in its undeclared
war on Cuba," said the JHP.

It noted that the step taken by Ssaga is also the beginning of an anticommunist
campaign designed to hide the continued government failure to improve the living
conditions of the Jamaican people.

It also seeks scapegoats to divert the people's attention from the growing
privation in the country.

Without filing charges before the courts as provided by law, where evidence is
required, without conforming to the rules that govern diplomatic relations, the
government of Seaga has abused the parliamentary principles by acting simultaneously
as prosecutor, judge and jury against the government and people of Cuba, the JV?
charged.

In a document released to the local and international media, the secretary general
of J“? points out that the break is against the interests of the people of Jamaica
and will lead us back to the worst times of colonialism.

He recounted the generous aid offered by Cuba to the people of Jamaica, as
evidenced in the construction of schools for Jamaican children, the medical
assistance and other cooperation activities which the revolutionary Cuban Govern-
ment has offered this island.

"We cannot forget the important role Cuba is playing in the defense of our black

brothers in Africa against the South African racists, who are supported by U.S.
imperialism, which Seaga now wants to please," the donvn¢ut ndd‘d.

CSO: 3010/199

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION JAMAICA

PNP LEADERS VISIT CUBAN WSSY, CONDEHN BREAK
PA310266 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1620 cm 30 Oct 81

[Text] Kingston, 30 Oct (PD—The National Executive Comittee of the People's
National Party (PNP) voiced total support and solidarity with the goverment and
people of Cuba in the face of Prime Minister Edward Seaga's unilateral decision
of severing diplomatic relations with Havana.

A high-level delegation headed by PNP Secretary General Donald Keith Duncan visited
the Cuban Esbassy here last night to express support and adherence in the me

of former Janaican Prime Minister and leader of the PNP Michael Manley, who is
travelling abroad.

In addition to Duncan. the Cuban diplomatic mission was also visited by Dudley
Thompson, PNP general coordinator; Hugh Small. former minister of finance and
member of the National Exect. :ive Comittee; and Beverly Manley, president of the
Jamaican Women's Movement, linked to the PNP.

The youth wing of the same party was represented by Paul Burke, its president,
and Sheldon McDonald.

The PNP vigorously condemned Seaga's decision on ending diplomatic bonds with
Cuba and the "fictitious allegations" wielded by Jamaica's ruling Jamaican Labor
Party [JLP].

Duncan told the press last night that the PNP Executive Comitt-ze had not immediately
to analyze the situation in connection with the break with Cuba ordered yesterday

by Seaga.

Previously, the PNP secretary general said: "We totally candeun both the .11.?
goverment's decision to sever diplomatic relations with Cuba and the false

argments expressed to parliament and the nation to justify its allegations of
interference."

C80: 3010/199

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECT ION NICARAGUA

BRIEFS

NOTE FOR UN--Hanagua, 4 Nov (PL)-The Central American Anti-Imperialiat
Tribunal has prepared a letter for signature supporting the proposal for peace
in El Salvador. This letter will be sent to Kurt Waldheim, UN secretary
general. Tribunal vice president Xavier Chamorro Cardenal has said that
100,000 Central Americans are expected to sign this letter, which denounces
aggressive imperialist actions against Nicaragua, El Salvador and the rest of
the region. Chamorro Csrdenal, who is also director of the Nicaraguan
newspaper EL NUBVO DlARIO, pointed out that there has been worldwide
acceptance of the tribunal, "which bases its charges on true, hard facts."

He warned that a danger of armed confrontation exists on the Central American
isthmus because of the warmongering policy of the current 0.8. administration,
a policy against which the European peoples have already staged mass demon-
strations. The letter will be sent for signing to the members of the
Nicaraguan State Council tomorrow. The Sponsors of this letter expect it

to be well received at the United Nations because, they said. it is a contribution
toward the attainment of peace in Central America. [Text] [PA082351 Havana
PRELA in Spanish 1541 GMT 0 Nov 81]

C80: 3010/291

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION SURINAME

REVOLUTIONARY FRONT TO BE ANNOUNCED 27 NOVEMBER
PA091618 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1218 GMT 9 Nov 81

[Text] Paramaribo, 9 Nov (PL)--The forthcoming proclamation of the "revolutionary
front," which will be comprised of the country's popular organizations, is consider-
ed to be one of the most important measures of the Suriname process that began in
February 1980.

Various political sectors have stressed that when the front is established on 27
November, it will centribute to the process of national unity.

The front, which is characterized here is unitary and anti-imperialist, seeks to
strengthen theprocess of national liberation of this former Netherlands colony and
eliminate frictions that hinder the country's development.

It is comprised of the four labor confederations and peasant, youth and political
organizations that in recent weeks have held meetings to organize this front along
with the government.

It has also been learned here that another of the front's objectives is to mobilize
the people against the destabilization and sabotage actions that have recently
emerged here.

The presidium of the front is made up of six national leaders headed by Col Deisy
Bouterse, commander in chief of the army and leader of the current Suriname process.

It also includes Roy Horb, chief of the army staff, and Ivan Graanoogst, president
of the national military council.

Other leaders include Fred Derby, a labor leader, Jiwen Sital, president of a
peasant organization, and Michael Nasrendorp, student and youth leader.

On 22 November, the revolutionary front will hold its constitutive congress. Mean-

while all the popular organizations as well as the rank and file "people's committees"
will discuss its program, structure and objectives.

CSO: 3010/311
18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000400070056-9
25x1

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070056-9
25x1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION VENEZUELA

ARMED FORCES RECEIVE MODERN HEAPONS, EQUIPMENT

Madrid DBFENSA in Spanish Aug-Sep 81 pp 159-160
[Article by Caracas correspondent Hernandez Gonzalez]
[Text] Army

The Venezuelan Air Defense will be strengthened with ground-air missile systems
and automated fire direction centers for missiles and nntiaircrait guns. Also
under consideration is the procurement of radars to be installed in strategic cen-
ters throughout the country.

The Army Artillery Forces will receive ground—ground missile systems. Presently.
the Venezuelan field artillery is equipped only with lOSqum and l55-mm towed and

self-propelled howitzers.
Navy

Thenﬂsslle-launching frigateF-ZZ ARV "Almirante Brion," the second of the six

ordered by Venezuela from the Italian CNR [National Research Council] shipyards
(see DEFENSA number 36), has arrived in Venezuelan waters. The third frigate.

F-23 ARV "General Rafael Urdaneta," is expected to arrive in October.

The Navy has announced that its new naval plan "contemplates funding for the
priority procurement of patrol and debarkation units," theoretical models of which,
based on Venezuela's requirements, have been furnished to British, French. Spanish,
and German builders. Apart from the foregoing announcement, the Navy had already
announced its interest in procuring threecorvettes, one oceanography vessel, one
logistical support vessel and, at some time in the future, new submarines.

The Navy is currently evaluating air patrol and reconnaissance systems for the
surveillance of the maritime 223 [Exclusive Economic Zone], as well as smaller
craft to strengthen the inland waterways commands. Presently, the maritime patrol
and reconnaissance functions are being performed by the 8-25 Trackers of Antisub-
marine Squadron No ll and, to a certain extent, by the AB-Zl? ASH helicopters
carried aboard the two "Hariscal Sucre" class frigates already received.

The Marine Corps Command, for its part, has announced that it plans to create two
new battalion—type UTC‘s [Combat TaCtical Units]. Presently, the Marines have

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

four UTC's, one artillery unit (mixed group), one amphibian vehicle unit, one
security unit (navy police battalion), one engineer unit, one communications unit,
one logistical support unit and two reconnaissance units (commando companies). The
units are grouped under two Operational Commands (Eastern and Western), under the
Marine Corps Command.

Air Force

The Venezuelan Air Force has received three Super King Air 200 light transport
planes. it has also ordered, for VIP use, one Gulftrean Ill and two Bell-216
helicopters, one of which has already been delivered. Two new C-l30H-30 Hercules
will also reinforce the fleet of five planes of this type which the FAV [Vene-
zuelan Air Force] is currently operating.

The FAV has decided to acquire “8 F-16 fighters to boost its air power. "The F-16
will maintain Venezuelan air superiority for another 20 years." said the com-
manding general of the Air Force. Gen Maximiliano Hernandez Vasquez, upon making
the definitive announcement. he also said that the FAV had evaluated all the
available procurement possibilities and had decided to purchase the F-l6's as the
best suited to Venezuela's interests. The other systems evaluated were: The
Mirage 2000. the Viggen, the Kafir CZ, and the Italian version of the Tornado.
U.S. sources indicated that Venezuelan pilots had evaluated the F-16 in February
ata Texas air base, and had indicated they were very satisfied with it at the com-
pletion of the flight. With this acquisition, Venezuela will be the first Latin
American country to use the P-16 fighter.

It has been reported that the FAV Reequipment Plan contemplates the acquisition
of some 100 aircraft for various uses:

Air Superiority: Acquisition of forty-eight F—l6's to reinforce the mirage III,
Mirage 5 and CF-S systems presently in use and to eventually replace the 29 Can-
berras, which have been used by the FAV since the beginning of the 1950's.

Tactical Support: The acquisition of a new lot of OV-iOE Broncos is planned. The
FAV is also evaluating the Thunderbolt A-lOA.

Transport: An increase in the fleet of C-l3OH Hercules currently in service, the
program for which is currently under way; replacement of the 6-1233 Providers, the
strongest candidate for which seems to be Aeritaiia's 6-222; replacement of the
Queen Air transports by the Super King Air 200; and standardization of the heli-
copter fleet with Bell UH-l's, presumably involving replacement of the Alouette
Ill's that are still in service.

Training: Replacement of the T-34A Mentors, possibly by the modernized version of
the T-JAC; and replacement of the TMK-SZ Jet Provosts probably by the also Brit-
ish hawk trainers.

National Guard

The National Guard has recently acquired motorized units in the United States,
especially for anti-riot operations.

COPYRIGHT: Edicionea Defensa, S.A. Madrid 1981

9399
C50: 3010/122 END

21