APPROVID FOR NIL-AII: 2007102100: CIA-RDPIZ-00080'000100040030-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040030-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8394

11 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON LATIN AMERICA
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000400304!
NOTE

JPrs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also free news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-tanguage
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
TRANSLATIONS 0N LATIN AMERICA
(rouo 5/79)

CONTENTS

mat-wrest: mus

Bccerre Views Argentine-Brazilian Relations
(Alfredo secom; m owns, 8 m 79)

ARGENTINA

Dissension Seen as Transition Period in Political Process
(Rodolfo Pendoli‘i; IA 0mm, 21 Feb 79)

Relations With 0.8. Take hvorsble ‘i‘urn
(3.1de J. Psredes; LA omxou, in Feb 79)

CUBA
Castro Releases Socialist Spaniard; Holds Gutierrez
Menoyo
(m1016'nhb n) 0.000...OOOOOOOOOCOOOOIOICOOI
USSR Publishes Statistics on Socialist Achievements
(mum smmsrncr, Ho 1, 1979)
PERU
Brie 1‘s
Discrimination Accuset ion by Communists
VENEZUELA

President Issues Statement on Middle Best Treaty
(m, 27 m 79) oeoeeooeosnoeoeeoeeooeooeeoseeeee

~a- [III-LA-la.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DEE-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

BECERRA VIEWS AROBNl‘INE-BRAZILIAN REMTIOIIS
Buenos Aires LA OPINION in Spanish 8 liar 79 p 1
[Article by Alfredo Beoerrs]

[Text] Despite the turd tone of the Argentine note to Brazil. diplomatic
relations are still norsal. Our foreign minister, Brig Gen Carlos ﬂashington
Pastor, attended a dinner last night which was held in his honor by the Bra-

zilian asbassador, Claudio Garcia de Sousa, at the Brazilian esbasey in Buenos
A1103.

Meanwhile, it was reported in Brazilian diplomatic circles that Itanaraty will
not respond to the latest Argentine note until 15 March, when the new adminis-
tration will take over. The inauguration cerenonies will also be attended by
Pastor, along with Undersecretary of Foreign Relations Carlos Cavandoli and
Argentine Ambassador to Brasil Oscar Cenilion.

The day after the new Brazilian foreign minister, Ramiro Saraiva (haerreiro,
takes office, he will neet with his Argentine counterpart to discuss in very
general terse the need to continue tripartite negotiations in order to reach
an agreesent on the Itaipu and Corpus projects.

These elements indicate that both sides are aware of the enorsous wetht of
of existing ties between the two countries in eoonosic and political terns,
aside from the conflict over Itaipu. This awareness is what has aade Itanara-

ty's stubbornness in delaying an agreenent in the tripartite negotiations even
more incomprehensible.

Argentine-Brazilian relations are going around each other in different lanes
which have no connection, as if they were isolated conpertsents. Meanwhile,
several setters, especially trade, have been dealt with peaceably and even
enthusiastically, while Itaipu has becose a center of open conﬂict.

Sonstines this situation has been considered to be the fruit of a peculiar
political style which reigns in this region. However, nothing indicates that
international relations in other parts of the world are exespt tron this di-
chotosy. In this case. however, the positive and negative points seen to be
more obvious, sore contrasting, due to the proxinity of the two countries
and the magnitude of the interests involved.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

It aeons that this relationship does not depend on general guidelines. hit
on the whims of things and circulstances, as if men could not control then

and were. on the contrary. oontrolled by then. Thus. for the present Itaipu
is presented as a conglomerate of interests which are very powerml and exert

strong pressure 0n everything. as if they were 11Ve beings or had sons sort
of unimaginable autonom/ which does not really exist, end therefore sake aw
pretense in that direction a more fantasy. an irrational idea.

If the controversy unleashed over Itaipu at least served to contribute to
the establish-ant of global criteria that could explain and regulate that
bilateral relationship. the waste of effort and ideas would not be in vain.

Copyright: LA OPINION, 1979

8926
CSOI 3010

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ARGNTINA

DISBENSION SEEN AS TRANSITION PERIOD IN POLITICAL PROCESS
ausnos hires LA comma in Spanish 21 Feb 79 p l9
[Article by Rodolfo Pandolfil

[Text] The relaxing of control is always the most complex stage of a poli-
tical process. At times reality forces governments to tighten control in
order to prevent the development of disintegrative tendencies. however.
the /escalation/ [in boldface] toward the maxim- ussful level of control
can, as a rule, be carried out without internal ruptures. m the contrary.
the escalation can serve objectively to strengthen the bonds among the ele-
nente of the governmental apparatus and to create conditions tending to
bring about the union of the community.

however. although strict control is often necessary-~end even salutary--fron
the point of view of the governing body. it is obvious that its extension
beyond a reasonable length of time become a growing danger. If the control
rigidities the social organism. the excess stress causes it to split even
more rapidly than does the lack of control.

As a result. in all processes the relaxing of control ultimately become
inevitable from a political point of view. However. every adninistration's
intention is to manage that process in . to prevent a bursting forth
which would coepletely undo what had bee.. eccowlished. A rapid relaxation
of control--es demonstrated by Argentina's own recent erperienceuonly makes
pest tightenings pointless.

At the same time. every government knows that however well controlled a
relaution process may be. there is always a political price to be paid
when the transition takes place. It would be childish to suppose that the
beginning of a thaw would not be mated by the usual criticism from two very
familiar sources: those who cmsider the relaxation unwise or hurried and
those who find its pace too slow. Converging complaints of this sort, which
form the classic political scissors (It is always said that to .lcut down/
[in boldface] a government, two blades are used at the same time) . can be
overcome if those in power have imagination, audacity. poise and, above all,
if they are consistent.

3
ma orncm. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In various Latin American comtries the relaxation of political control is
at different stages. In Uruguay. and to an extent in Brazil. this relaxation
is becoming visible.

Nevertheless. it should be mderstood that the stated, express and manifest
purpose of the relaxation is to allow the growth of individual liberties in
order to enrich society. which otherwise would oesify into a confornist rigid-
ity. Although some criticism may be motivated by opportmism, the appearance
of oriticism--nost of it constructiveushould be the goal sought by those in
power. No one can offer to expand liberties and not see them used. Freedom
does not exist to make room for praise. but rather for the interplay of
ideas.

Th0 process which Uruguay is undergoing at present has interesting charac-
teristios.

At the moment. the relaxation of official policy regarding civil liberties.
as well as categorical staterents by senior military officials. has led to
a demand for the expansion of this policy.

For example :

The latest issue of the liberal journal BUSQIBDA, edited by formr Secre-
tary of Planning Ramon Dia. contains a nusber of consents on the suaject by
its political columnist Danilo Arbilla. Arbilla discusses certain state-
msnts made by Lt Gen Luis Qusirolo, cotesander in chief of the Army, during
his most recent speech. Among other things. the general said, on assuming
his post, I'It's all right for the men and institutions currently directing
affairs to be criticized or shown their errors, for it would be short-
sighted and foolish to depend on praise and flattery.”

Arbilla says that the contender in chief's statement should be considered in
relation to "the full exercise of freedom of expression, which is still sub-
ject to certain limitations in this comtry.” “Freedom of information--
freedom of the pressuis the antidote to the problems noted (rmnors. slan-
dar) . However, its scope extends beyond its usefulness with respect to
these specific issues: There is only one mans of defending and supporting
the democratic system, and that is by keeping the public informed about
everything that happens. This is the primary, basic duty of the press, and
to carry it out it cannot be restricted. At times there is support for the
idea of establishing different categories of liberties. This idea carries
with it the belief that some of the citizens' rights can be limited or
taken away and yet their liberty will remain intact. It is solewhat like
saying that a woman can be partly pregnant. Freedom is a whole whose limits
are known to everyone.”

In the sons issue. oppOSition journalist Leonardo Guzman describes as cap-
tious the arguments which suggest that the establishment of couplets freedom

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

and democracy should be delayed mtil further economic development has been
achieved. he notes that on the contrary, there is no economic solution with-
out a political solution. he recalls the origin of liberalism and states
that the existence of legal principles is not a consequence of the wealth of
nations, "but rather often the cause of it.”

Another liberal journal, NOPICIAS, points out "the conprcnising of the
armed forces' honor," referring to General Queirclc's speech. In that sane
publication, Julio Cesar Espindola, vice chairman of the Comcil of state,
refutes the idea advanced in sons circles concerning the need to have a
single candidate. Espindola says, “The press now enjoys couplets indepen-
dence,” and that this is salutary. However, ccnceming the idea of having
a single candidate, as the Brazilians do, he answers, "Personally, I don't
like the idea. An election with a single candidate is technically possible,
but politically I don't think that it's advisable.” he adds that if the
citizens disagreed with the principle of the single candidate, many blank
ballots would be cast, ”and I suppose that no one would be able to prevent
it."

The daily 31. on. representing the Colorado viewpoint, published a supple-
ment about the political parties, "a subject with a past, a present and a
future.” 'Ihe material includes considerable information about jurist
Justine Jimenez de Arechagaa

All this information indicates the political opening-up now taking place

in Uruguay and, more or less simultaneously (although with other charac-
teristics) , in Brazil. It shows, in short, that the relaxation of control
necessarily entails debate concerning all subjects and that this debate is
--naturally--participated in by those who are participating in the process.
The manner in which this controlled thaw is being carried out constitutes
a clearly important experience for those living in the southern Cone, where
the phase of armed struggle against subversion has essentially cone to an
and everywhere, yet where restrictions are being maintained in order to
forestall an excessive quickening of a necessary relaxation.

Copyright: La OPINIGI. 1979

9085
C50: 3010

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ARGENTINA

RELATIONS HIT“ u.s. TAKE FAVORABLE TURN
Buenos Airss LA GPINION in Spanish 16 Feb 79 p 10

[Article b Eduardo J. Parades, "Relations With the United States Are
lmprovinpt

[feag7 Several apparently unrelated aigns indicate to observers that there
has been a perceptible change in the policies of American President
Jimmy Carter with respect to bilateral relations with Argentina.

The nest important is, undoubtedly, the decision by the Export-Import Bank
of the United 8tates--Bximbank--to return to its original policy of uncon-
ditionally accepting requests for direct credit from Argentina companies.

For the last 2 years the agency, on instructions of the State Department-
doubtless pressured by Congress-deferred that sort of request from countries
under question in the matter of human rights. That weapon of economic sanc-
tion works to abruptly cut off all econoimc support, if one remembers that

it was preceded by a previous elimination of credits for military aid. That

total ban is the one the United States is presently applying to Nicaragua,
for example.

Although the Carter Administration has been prudent with regard to definite
references to its relations with Argentina, diplomatic sotrces indicate that
the work of the embassies has been fruitful, both that of the Argentine
Jorge Ajs Espil in Hashington, and that of Dr Raul Castro in Buenos Aires.

Castro has developed an intelligent policy, essentially based on acquiring
good information and getting it to his country--sometimes in person--combined
with a solid element of analysis and comparison with previous periods. The
diplomatic sources evaluated that work and concluded that, in opinion of the
United States, the human rights situation in Argentina is normalizing. The
sources stressed the importance of the fact that lists of persons arrested
by the Executive Branch, the location of others, and the trials in ordinary
courts of subversive persons are being made public. Castro may have taken
it upon himself to make it clear to his government that a few episodes of
violence, isolated and repudiated by authorities, cannot be associated with
the will of those governing. '

6
FOR ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On his part, Ambassador Aja Espil had no respite in his difficult diplomatic
work in recent months. Although he operates within the obvious reserve
required by his service. sources indicate that he is clearly an executor of
the slow but successful policy of "thaw“ between the two countries. One
subject that is always hanging over those relations is not linked-~consider-
ing the complexity of international politica--aither to human rights or to
international credits. That is the American interest in Argentina's uncondi-
tionally signing the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and under that laudable
proposal, not developing its advanced nuclear technology.

In that matter. Argentina is maintaining an independent line of opinion
which still causes diplomatic friction with Hashington. The approval of the
nuclear plan with an investment of nearly $5 million and the construction of
four nuclear power plants based on natural uranium reflect Argentina's
decision to develop its nuclear technology for energy, with the intention
of incorporating Canadian and Heat German technology for the reactors.

Observers stress that the United States is gradually abandoning any strategy
of economic pressure against Argentina. although it hopes to one day see it
alined with the United States with regard to the ban on nuclear weapons.

Our country should give attention to those gestures of detante from Washington
without abandoning its plans for energy and its independence of opinion.

Nevertheless, the observers felt that Argentina's joining the convention
on the prohibition of development. production and storage of biologic and
toxic weapons, and on their destruction. was more important than it seemed.
The convention was set in motion by the United States in April 1972.

Joining the convention was considered a diplomatic step which. while it dses
not bind Argentina to sign treaties that may turn against it, is a clear
gesture of participation with the American intentions on disarmament.

Another sign of reciprocity with respect to American concerns is the Argentine
position of inviting members of the Human Rights Committee of the Organization
of American States to visit the country. '

The United States has complete confidence in the DAS' ability to observe
in the matter, and State Department advisers were pleased at the invitation.
At least they considered it a step in the direction of what is called goodwill.

COPYRIGHT: LA OPINION Buenos Aires. 1979

8587
050: 3010

7
roe OFFICIAL use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CUBA

CASTRO RELEASES SOCIALIST SPANIARD; HOLDS GUTIBRRBZ HENOYO
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 11 Feb 79 pp 30-31. 33
[Articles "Fidel Releases Spaniards. Except One")

[Text] Carlos Gutierrez Zebolata. Spanish socialist detained in Cuba by
Castro for years, is now in Spain, but without his son. His son,
Connander Eloy Gutierrez Hsnoyo, leader of the Cuban Revolution. is the
last Spanish political prisoner in a Castroite prison.

"I lost everything except my dignity.“ said 86-year old Carlos Gutierrez
Zabaleta on Garcia Horato Street, in Madrid. near the P808 [Spanish
Socialist Workers Party] headquarters barely 26 hours after arriving fron
Cuba, his enforced prison for the past 16 years.

He is a native of Madrid, is saall and lean, with a kind look. He has
lost his eyesight in one eye and hopes that suitable treatnent will
relieve his asthmatic bronchitis. However. his mind is still lucid and
his voice strong. He speaks a rich. pure Castilian Spanish that almost
30 years in that Caribbean island have not been able to corrupt.

Carlos Gutierrez is one of two Spaniards that Castro wanted to detain
against their will in the island. The other. his son. Eloy Gutierrez
Henoyo. coanander of the revolution, chief of the Second-Bacanbray Front.
is still in a prison in Havana, in underdrawers. he refuses to wear a
convict's uniforn and rejects the "rehabilitation prograa" that the Cuban
authorities offer him. If he had accepted it. he might now be free.

(See "Fidel Releases Spaniards: Except Two," CAHBIO 16. No 358).

"My son is like me." he said with spirit and with a flash of pride. ”He
thinks as I do and I an glad that he also sees things thus: one nay
lost everything, except dignity."

I had Forgotten About the Cold

Carlos Gutierrez Zabaleta, a doctor by profession, arrived Monday,
29 January, in Barajas. on a Spanish Air Force plane with 97 other repa-
triated persons, freed by Castro. thanks to the intervention of President

8
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suarez and the helpful efforts of opposition parties.
"I had forgotten about how cold it gets in my country," was one of his
first comments on returning to freedom, as he pulled up the collar of
his lightweight grey overcoat that he had bought 20 years before in
New York. when he referred to Madrid. he said "my country"-a country
that has changed a great deal since he left it at the beginning of

the 50's. "The traffic is really horrible," he repeated, trying to
identify the downtown streets. new full of tall buildings of glass and
aluminum and overpasses.

The overcoat and an old trunk full of papers and old clothing-"we had to
take it all." his daughter Sara said later-she had not seen her father in
18 years- It was his entire baggage. This was all that this old man

had been able to accumulate in almost a half century of struggle in
pursuit of freedom.

"I lost it all several times," Carlos Ortierrez said without emotion. "I
was in prison in l93b. I had to see how my own subordinates lowered the
republican flag in my office in Valencia. Then the Franco authorities
prevented me from practicing medicine. I lost 31 Retiro, my antirheumatism
clinic, which now is the Florida Park festival hall. All that I did again
in Cuba I lost."

And more. He lost his oldest son, Jose Antonio, in October 1937, who
died from a wound at the Hajadahonda front. He lost his son. Carlos,
struck down by bullets on the second floor of the presidential palace in
navana, on 13 March 1957, just a few meters from dictator Fulgencio
Batista. who narrowly escaped from the assault.

Today. all that he has are his baggage, his old overcoat. two daughters-
one in Oviedo and the other in Miami (U.8.A.)--and his son, Eloy. once a
hero of the Cuban Revolution and now a "counterrevolutionary," first
sentenced to death by the Castroite authorities; later, to 30 years in
prison; and, when tried again in 1976, once more to 30 years in prison.

"I Still Have My Dignity."

"I have experienced moments of anguish and desperation," said Carlos
Gutierrez. "but I still have my dignity and, as my son, Eloy, says. 1 do
not harbor hatred, nor rancor. I literally follow the old Chinese saying
of the Tang dynasty. "do not dwell on the past or what is over; think of
the present; and prepare for the future.“ be not think of the past or
what is over. He repeated this sentence constantly during his conversa-
tion with Pedro Parana, of CAHBIO l6.

9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Not the slightest semblance of conpleint against the government that kept
his: sway fron his fa-ily. living in freedon: not one curse against those
who fought with his son and who now keep his in prison. '.'They cannot ask
as to forget. because to forgot does not depend on the will of Ian. But

I do not harbor any rancor against anyone. neither here nor there.” "more"
and "here" eonetines bosons nixed up in Gutierrez zebalete'e Iaind on his
first day of freedon. There are tines when "here" is havens end ”there”

is Spain.

They ﬂake Life Enjoyable

his life in Cuba in recent years was difficult. "I lived on 130 pesos n
aonth." he said. "Seventy-nine belonged to no as a retired person;

and the rest cane iron the pension of my son. Carlos. who died in the
assault on the palace. Actually two pensions were not allowable; but I
had friends who succeeded in obtaining a legal neans to sake it possible
to add a part of Gsrlos'e pension to nine. And yet. with that anomt
there was not enough even for the nost basic needs. and any tines I had
to resign layeelf to one noel a day."

The psychosis of poverty accoapaniad Carlos Gutierrez on his first walks
in Madrid. The store windows clained his attention-"there aren't any
there." It did not setter if they were grocery stores where cleaning
products. fabrics. or photographic eaterial were sold.

"we gave his: a transistor as a present." said Sera-"and his obsession
was not to wear the batteries down. when we realized this and told his
not to bother about that. that when they were worn out. sore could be
bought. his reaction was to ask for a dozen in case the stores should run
out of then." Hervelling. Carlos Gutierrez said that he had seen a
toothbrush that stored toothpaste in its handle. and that only a slight
pressure was required for the toothpaste to appear anong the bristles.
”These things are not necessary." he said. ailing. "but it's true. isn't
it. that they sake life nore enjoyable and nore coafortable?

The sails and the amiable jest flashed into his narrative when he. recalled
the incidents of his life. however drastic.

Pro. Doctor to Black-Harketeer

"I did a little of everything in ny life. My profession." he said. "us
that of doctor. especially in the field of rheunatisn. Then I was a
soldier. During the Civil war. 1 was chief of the Carabineer Medical
Corps. I became chief of the central zone. Mdalucia and Levante. When
the war ended and l was barred frol exercising Iy profession. I bees-e a
receiving clerk for bananas in a warehouse in Valencia! how nisersble
were the wonen of the marketplaces in Valencia! Then I was also a clerk
in the central station in Valencia. I was a black-narketeer in rice.
because we had to live sonehow. l was a waiter. In Cuba I was a

10
FOR OFFICIAL [£58 08“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Via blanca clerk. when thie highway wee being built between llevana end
“atanrae: end leter. with the victory of the revolution. I returned
briefly to ey real profusion when I wee nede technical deputy director
of the Nationel Inetituta for hydrology end Hedicel Clinetology. Then I
worked in apae..."

The only thing that eeeee to heve been enduring with Carlee ﬂutierrer

ie hie faith in eocialien. Upon arriving in liedrid. before going to the
Red Croee to undergo an operation for cetarecte. before going to none big
atorea to acquire a very baaic wardrobe. Cerloe Gutierrez vent to the

P80! [Spanieh Socialiet Horhera Perty] headquartere. his vieit had nothing
to do with protocol. he wanted to deliver to the Peblo Igleeiee Eomdetion
an albt- of photoe end aignnturea of illuetriouc eocialieta. fron Lergo
Ceballero to the Generelitat governeent. collected during hie etay in
Model prieon. in 1936.

"It in my fether'e way of ehowing gratitude for the lettere that Luie
Yanee had been sending to hie in nevane in recent months." explained hie
daughter. Sara.

Enrique Hugice wee the one who received the docuent end heard with eur-
priee the offer of the old nen who had recently arrived fron Cuba: "If I
can be of any earvice to you." eaid Cerloe Gutierrez. upon eeeing the
huetlenend buatle in the building ceueed by the electoral canpaign, "count
m “a

but. when the freedon of hie eon again beta-e the topic of convereation.
the old aocieliat wearily cemented: "If I were young. I would think
about founding en eclectic party.”

Cerloe Gutierrez eaid goodbye to hie eon, Eloy. in prieon in Eavana two
daye before leaving for Madrid. Eloy ia in e prieon hoepitel. lie hae
chickenpox.

My Son Ie better.

"lie in now being treated well.” eaid hie father. "he in on a apecial

diet for a gaetric ulcer end apparently they ere conaidering the poeeibility
of an operation for a detached retine--the reeult of ill-treatnent in

the lele of Pinee. Now they are taking good care of hie." The treatment
accorded Eloy Gutierrez Henoyo and hie father changed redically ae a reeult
of Preeident Suarez'e vieit in Septenber and the efforte of the PSOE.

"For yeare I have lived ieolated free the world." he acid with eorrow.

"No one cane to ny houee. Many when I believed to be friende avoided no

ae eoon ea Eloy oppoaed Ceetro. Then thinge changed. A few Ionthe ago.
whereae I ueed to encounter only eilence. for exalple. when I went to aelt
the authoritiee for Iy departure per-lit. everything changed. They brought
Eloy hone eeveral tinea end Captain Andree. who alweya acconpanied hie.

wee eo kind that we regarded hin alnoet ae e saber of the fully."

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hie son's freedom is now his greatest obsession. "Eloy is not a terrorist.
Many tines in talking together we have consented that the consequences of
boobs and violence and by ruining those who utilize them. I an proud that
Eloy now says that he does not hate or feel rancor. I agree with that. as
I do with hie refusing to accept fraodoa if all political prisoners in
Cuba are not also siaultaneously set free."

"Fidel Is Quite Ready"

The old Spanish socialist believes that that aoaent is neat. "Cuba is

chsnging." he said. "perhaps isparceptibly for easy; but I have seen

thing: lately that forebode changes and I trust in then. for the good of
Cuba.

he knows Fidel Castro. For sols ties the Cuban leader confided in Carlos
Gutierrez. On one occasion. he went by helicopter to Santa Fe. in the
Isle of Pines. to talk for an hour with the person from Madrid about
establishing sane spas for the purpose of providice a tourist induce-ant
in the island. Upon the recent installation of the revolutionary govern-
uent. Eloy said to his father on a certain occasion: "what did you do
to Eidel that he speaks admiringly of you?"

And in the opinion of Carlos Gutierrez. who only characterizes Castro as
"quite ready." the Cuban leader scene to be up to soaething. Breezes of
freedoa are gently blowing over the island. it seems: and they light
effect Eloy Gutierrez Hsnoyo. co-ander of the revolution and the last

Spanish political prisoner in a Castroite prison. Castro will visit
Spain after the elections.

Copyright 1979. CAHBIO 16

C50: 3010

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CUBA

USSR PUBLISKBS 910191508 OI SOCIALIST ACHIBWS
Moscow VET}!!! STATISTIKI in Russian No 1, 1979 pp 6-9

ﬁexﬂ I. the Republic of Cuba for 20 Years

0n 1 January 1979 the working people of the Republic of Cuba and all
progressive unkind park the 20th anniversary of the victory of the
socialist revolution in Cuba. Cubs becane the first state to build
socialism in the Western Hemisphere.

In the past 20 years Cuba has turned from the backward. dependent. seni-
colonial, euro-industrial country that it was before the 1959 revolution
into an ecmouically developed asroinduatrial country in which
industry occupies a predolinant position. Since the victory of the
revolution the nation’s industry has grown 2.9-fold.

Socialist ownership of the Deans of production is predooinant in all
sectors of the nation's econony.

Given below are certain data which characterize the success of
socialist construction in the Republic of Cuba.

1. Territory and Population of the Republic of Cuba

Territory of cm Comtry 110,900 in!
Populstion at the end of 1977 9,669,000
including the city of Ravens 1,931,000
(within the limits of Greater Ravens)

2

Population Denﬁty per 1 km 87

13
P03 OFFICIAL use ouu
Natural Increase I ?I.I'| 21.0 I 27.9' 2|.sl 15.3! ”.2 '1“-
per 1.000

population
1. 1952

 

3. ktcnt of the Socialist Sector in the National Economy
(in percentages)

Gross Gross Retail Comm
Industrial Agricul- Trade
Produc- tural turnover
tion Produc- Including
tion Public

Catering
I ran I“

..—.— -- ”-—

IN:-

H-‘I I!"

noctrioal power. billions of huh... 3.0 L9 6.6 1.2 7.1
Petroleum. thousands of tons........ 35,4 150.: 9.25.1 211.1 mm

Steel, thousands of tonﬂssoasaaoasas 91‘.“ ”3.0 3L1.” am.“ QIOJ
Rolled metal products. thousg‘ds of ; 7M 9.1.! m.9 2-31.: :mﬁ

 

 

 

 

Railway freight Cll‘Ioassaasassssaos i .- - M2 1‘." “Sill

nu.e.00000.000000.000000000000000...I 2“). HIS I267 lam

Conant, thousands of tons.......u..d: m :r: 2m 2m! 2w;
Sulfuric acid in monohydratn) I

thousands 0 tons...............- ”J .m- nn 3:: m

Run-090 tMUInCSssoooaosssssoaoaosaI ILB' l'.'.' "3 NJ ISO

Television sets. thousands.......oul - 2.,,r. 25.! 31.0
I

Paper. thousands of tons ...........'

Fabric—total. nillions of sq. men
including:

cotton. millions of sq. 111......“ Km. ,5"- HMS m“ m.“

Footwear, I11110n8 of pairlooooasoos . IL’.“' "I.“ 2": 20.“ "'3
F18“, ””08de 0f m.0000000000000 :MLI‘I IMJ ”3.5 IN.“

Missal fat (imiustrial production)
thousands of MOssaaoosossaosaoos 3;.- m;, “'5 ”‘7 "5"

Canned vegetables, thousands of tons 2|.” I” 33.9 38.8 .12.:
Canned fruit. thusands of tons ssoa “.3: ”'9'. (".5 as“ ".2

I“ .13. I $3.0 71.7 62.9
In;- :s.o I N no In

 

 

 

Canned fish, thousands of toms..." 1.7 2.5 2.5 2.3
Cigarettes, billlﬂlacsooassoossssoas ".7. 20.2 '5', 15.] I5 2
Cigars, nillions.nun-nun"... N. m m m
Granulated mar (converted to white
MI“. 0, m. oooooooasoaoocoo 5;“, “W can 5m 3373
Is 1952
2a 1963

15
m orncm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Gross Harvest: and Yield of the nos}: Important: Agricultural Crops

Mr. um. Mr. I mu. Imr

Gross Harvest—thousands of tons

 

 

Grain and Loguninous Crops—Total. o o ... :79 no 468 470
including rice oooouoooooooo:onooo m! m “7 45' m

mumcﬂuoooooooo-coon-00000000000 ”.0 “.0 I" . ”9 I55
Sweet Potatoes 230 m 250

Sugar Cane (muons of tons)L'.'.".'.' I 47.5 . 02.9 55.2 52.0 57.0

Yields-quincals per hectare

Grain and Lccumlnous Crops—Total...
.ncludlne, rlcc 'oooooooonoooooooooo

... ”.3 2|.5 2|.l 2|.5

... ”.8 23.3 25.‘ ”.6
Potatoesooooooo-oo"0000000000000...I --- “.3 “’5 l5“ U”

SWO: Potatooaoo......"nun”..u ... 37 37 x

 

Sugar CMOco-uu-oooaoooooooououoor' ‘29 “I «7 420 we

6. Cattle and Poultry

 

Cattc

thousands 0‘ headcoooooooooooooou 877“ 5m 5m 5*” 5m 56"
"058, thousands Of hcadooooooooooooo ”5' I510 I4” I430 I!” I“
"0:303. musmdsoooooooo00-00000... --- W 7‘” 0'2. ‘“

 

Pbultry' mtlli°ns “""""" an: 1m: ILS IOJ I93 :9;
1. 1962
2. 1967
1. 1961
16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. Production of the Host Important Animal Products
m we I". I". MI

 

“cu...

 

 

Milk—total. thousends 0f MBoeeee 325 330 59' 68) :21
Chicken 888.. total. 3111101‘800een 9’6 ”55 '5‘“ ”:29 [3‘6

8. Rousing Construction

I I!“ I I”! I!!! I an INT

Apertnants built. thousands...u....l 5.0 i 4.0 Is,s ls.l 20.0

 

Apsrunmts built per 10.000 "'08

population. 0 o o e e

 

 

 

6.5 1.7 19.9 ”.9

9. Education

 

. -..-... ' .
I man .I mm Im'n win . r537: Ivan

General education SCMOISeeooeeeoeeolmm "“5 '5”: “W "2‘5 l.“

Elmentary and secmdsry school
WDIIB. CMUSMdSeeseooeseeeeeeeee H” I“? 3033 '37” 3m 39‘"

per 105933 WW1‘tionoeeeeooessee ‘“7 303' ‘ 2339 39“ 3'“ 3°27
ﬂigher educational institutions. . . e 6 3 0 5 21 27
Higher education students, thousands ”.5 26.2 35A 81.7 101.! I235

901‘ 10,000 population. soeeeosoese 27., 33.5 “J 91.0 "3 I27
Specialists graduating from higher

 

 

educationsl institutions 3.: 0.9 3.0 6.| 3.9 9.3 ‘
10. Culture
I?” I“ n I“ M: It?
Libraries, all typesl....u....ou.. as 5| :2: m as.

Total umber of books millions. . 0.3 1.! L7 2.3 :.I
meltcr8eeeeeeeososeoteooeeooooo:0:: o '9 m ' N . 6‘ 6"

Theater ”81:8. NillionSOooeeeeeoeoe u. 2.3 5.7 ‘03 IOJ 12.! ..
Number of ”V19 WOjOctorSeoseeeeet ‘3 - 5” 7'” [M I“ [W '

 

Huber of cinena visits. millions... 6.0 120.4 91.: 91,1” ”.61. .

1. Excluding techicsl and school libraries

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll. Health Care

I“

Physicians of all specialties,

thou: d3 J
Physicians of .11 Smith: 03 "on. | I

per 10,000 population..u L"
Rospital beds. tMulﬂndOoou-ouuu 3|.8

Hospital beds per 10,000 population. In

 

1. 1958

COPYRIGHT: Izdncal'stvo “Scubtlka”, 1979

8563
030! 8144

18

|ﬂl I ION | I” I I!!! "n
m 7.5 ll .6 13.1 ".0
9.5 a.» 2.3 I35 ‘ 17.0

42.4 MA 43.! 43.3 m

34 .1 65.2 43.9 45.1 48.6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PERU

BRIEFS

DISCRIMINATION ACCUSATION BY CWIS‘I‘SuLima. 31 Mar (PL)-'rhe Peruvian
Conunist Party today censured the goverment's refusal to authorize the
mobilization of the people in support of the construction of a columnist
party headquarters. In a public conunique the communist party amounted
that the prefecture of Lima had refused to issue a legal permit for a parade
of tool donors and a rally planned in the street where the party headquarters
is under construction. After pointing out that the prefecture decided to
relocate the rally to a park 4 In: from the site. the conunique said that
this maneuver is meant to frustrate partisan activity. It said that the
decision ”is part of diverse maneuvers against the freedom of expression

and mobilization of the conunista“ in favor of the electoral campaign of
reactionaries which is supported by newspapers. radio and televsion broad-
casting stations. {Text} [Ravens PRELA in Spanish 2147 GMT 31 Her 79 PA]

CSO: 3010

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100040030-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040030-3
STATINTEL