FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10490

4 May 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIG‘IT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OINERSHIP OF
MATERIALS RBPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
nPRK Diplomat Acknowledges Friendly Relations
(Victorio M. Copa; PRELA, 16 Apr 82) ................

official Denies Part in Nicaragua Canal Plans
(Jose R. Savall; PRELA, 16 Apr 82) ..................

Four Cooperation Agreements Signed Hith Ghana
(PRELA, 19 Apr 82) ..................................

DOMINICA

French Help Crucial in Thwarting December Raid on Police
(THE CARIBBEAN 6 WEST INDIES CHRONICLE, Feb-Mar 82) .

EL SALVADOR

'PRELA' Reports Post-Election Process, Rebel Action
(mam, 13 Apr 82)

-a— [III-LA-

CAD near-v . I v Icr as" u
GRENADA

Reagan Staff Accused of Histreating Journalists
(Arnaldo Hutchinson; PRELA, 16 Apr 82) ...........

GUATEMALA

TurinPaper Interviews Head of Guatemalan Junta
(Jose Rios Hontt Interview; LA STAHPA, 7 Apr 82) .

Guerrillaa Attack Police; U.S. Blamed for Coup
(PRELA, 13 Apr 82) ....... .............. ..... .....

NICARAGUA

Ramirez Calls for nonest Talks with U.S., Honduras
(Manuel Guerrero; PRBLA. 12 Apr 82) ............u

Leaders Inspect Northern Defense Sites
(PRELA, 9 Apr 82) ..............................u
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000500060003-7
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060003-7
STATINTEL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(DUNTRY SECTION BRAZIL

BRIEFS

LESSONS OF FALKLANDS mNFLICT—Brasilia, 19 Apr (SAPORITI)--"1‘he Malvinas
Islands question is showing the necessity for the navies of the Latin American
countries to mite. The South At. antic used to be a lake of tranquility,

but now the situation has changed. The navies of the South Atlantic countries
should unite themelves, modernise and strengthen themselves," Adm Eddy
Sampaio Espellet stated here. The former chief of the Brazilian Navy General
Staff also said that the lessons resulting from the conflict over the Halvinas
can really only be weighed later, praising the position adopted by the
Flgueiredo administration on the problem. The naval officer also said that
later there might be interferences with Brazilian interests in the Antarctic.
which are today limited to the scientific field. Recalling the theory of
meridians which would give Brazil a right to claim possessions in Antarctica.
Sampaio said that the meridians (?passing through) the Malvinas coincide

with the Brazilian meridians. This could possibly have future consequences
for Brazilian interests. [Text] [PY200333 Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spmiah

2253 GMT 19 Apr 82]

(ISO: 3001/120

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- norm SECTION CUBA

Ii‘ﬂK DIPLOMAT AOOIOWLEDGES F°IFNDLY RELATIGIS
’Al70307 Havana PRELA in English 2225 GMT 16 Apr 82

Report by Victorio H. Cops]

I‘e.xtl Havana, 17 Apr (PL)-The president of the Council of State, Fidel
:astro, attended here a reception for the 70th anniversary of the birth of
:orean leader Kim Il-song. The activity was organized by the ambassador of
.he Democratic People's Republic of Korea to Cuba, Yi In-shun, in the
Uplomatic mission of his country in this capital. Vice President Guillermo
larcia Fries and other top officials of the Cuban Columnist Party and

50V8m|nent also attended.

Jae Cuban state conferred on President Kim Il-song the "Jose Marti" Order,
ﬁne to his outstanding role in the liberation struggle of his people; also
Inc to his personal work in favour of the development of the fraternal
-clat ions between the peoples of Cuba and People's Korea.

In statements to PRENSA LATINA, Yi In-shun underlined Cuban recognition of
’resident Kim Il-song. and stressed that the Korean people appreciate it.

'Cuba has always manifested its most decided support and solidarity with
:he struggle of the Korean people for the peaceful reunification of Korea

v-itium: foreign interference," he aJded.

In -.- .cml as very sincere and fraternal the relations of friendship and
'01 Inboration existing betveen Cuba and the Democratic People's Republic

.)i' Kurt‘s.

(Lube. and Korea are sisters who are marching mited along the path against
2.51. imperialism. said the Asian diplomat.

f.- wished the Cubans success in the fulfillment of the resolutions of the
wanna congress of the Communist Party and came out in favour of the
II|:U"':SInf: strengthening and development of bilateral friendship.

CSO: 3020/101

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OHMTRY SECTION CUBA

OFFICIAL DENIES PART IN NICARAGUA CANAL PLANS
PA162252 Havana PRELA in English 2046 GMT 16 Apr 82
[Report by Jose R. Savall]

[Text] Havana, 17 Apr (PL)--The Academy of Science of Cuba denied United
States press reports claiming it is involved in studies on the building of
an interoceanic canal In Nicaragua. Gladstone Oliva, director of the Insti-
tute of Geophysics and Astronomy of the academy, told PRENSA LATINA that
specialists from the institution are now in Nicaragua to carry out geological
studies at the request of the Nicaraguan Government.

Since 1980 at the request of the Nicaraguan Planning Ministry, the Academy

of Science and its specialized institutes are providing cooperation in
different fields of interest for the Central American country. The assistance
has concentrated on three main areas, meteorology, tropical agriculture and
seismology. In the latter the Cuban specialists have worked with the
Nicaraguans on seismic risk studies in important economic objectives and in
human settlements. Nicaragua is an area of high seismic risk; in 1972 an
earthquake devastated the capital, Managua, especially its most populous,
poorer areas.

'nie Academy of Science official added that all the activity of the specialists
from that institution who work in Nicaragua is part of the effort of the
Nicaraguans to rebuild their national economy.

1he report that the Cuban Acadeuy of Science is cooperating in studies for
the building of a waterway in Nicaragua is an evident provocation, declared
Oliva. In carrying the "reports" the U.S. media are seeking to aggravate
Nicaragua's relations with Colombia, which occupies Nicaraguan islands and
at the same time hint at a purported "military threat from the Soviet Union
and Cuba."

They also refer to the present Panama Canal without mentioning how the U.S.A.
took over that area and the discriminatory conditions in effect until the
signing of the Torrijos-Carter treaties 5 years ago. And if they do not say
that, added the Cuban official, they likewise fail to point out that the
United States systematically violates those agreements and tries through

all ways to continue to wield absolute control in the canal area.

The report denied by the Cuban Academy of Science is part of U.S. maneuvers
against the Sandinist process and to create a climate of greater tensions
in the area.

C50: 3020/101

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

oouunw SECTION CUBA

FOUR COOPEMTION AGREEMENTS SIGNED WITH GHANA
PA200008 Havana PRELA in French 2226 GMT 19 Apr 82

[Text] Havana, 19 Apr (AFN—The Cuban and Ghanaian delegations have signed
here four cooperation agreements to develop several lines between the two
countries. he docunents establish a 5-year trade agreement, technical-
scientific cooperation, the formation of a mixed Cuban—Ghanaian comission and
the reciprocal free use of diplomatic real estate.

The texts of the docments contain the lists of articles to be exported by
the two countries, general conditions for channeling future cooperation.
the statutes governing the mixed comission, and matters pertaining to the
anbassadorisl residences.

Christ Bukari Atim, member of the Provisional National Defense Council. and
president of the Provisional National Coordinating Comittee, signed for the
Ghanaian delegation.

Ricardo Cabrisas, minister of foreign trade; Hector Rodriguez Llompart,
minister president of the State Comittee for Economic Cooperation; and
Vice Foreign Minister Jose R. Viera, signed for Cuba.

Jorge Risquet, member of the Politburo of the Communist Party of Cuba (FCC)
and Jesus Montana, alternate Politburo member. were also present at the
signing ceremony.

The Ghanaian delegation, which has just ended a 9—day visit to Cuba at the
invitation of the PCC, had a busy schedule during their stay.

The delegation met with Cuban President Fidel Castrop Carlos Rafael Rodriguez,
Cuban vice-president of the councils of state, and with the directors of
several state organizations [word indistinct] the city of Santiago de Cuba

in the eastern part of the country, and the Isle of Youth, one of the richest
citrus-producing regions in the country. Several hundred African students
are studying on the ilse of Youth.

(Ansa Asomoa), special adviser to the presidency of the council; (Kwesiamoako
Atta). mmber of the National Committee for the Control of the Economy;

and (Hahama have). a Foreign Ministry official, were also part of the Ghanaian
delegation.

CSO: 3100/555

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FRENCH HELP CRUCIAL IN 'I'HWARI'ING DECEMBER RAID (N POLICE

London THE CARIBBEAN 8 WEST INDIBS CHRONICLE in English No 1566, Feb/Mar 82
p 6

[Text] Three men were killed and a number injured in Dominica on Decenber 19
when a group of is armed men tried to seize the Roseau police station and free
certain persons held in the island's jail.

It is not clear whether the assault on the police station and prison were a
part of an attenpted coup or of a more complex plot aimed at seizing power at
a later date.

INSIGHT is informed that the French Government played a significant part in
assisting the DcIninica Government to restore order and have been intimately
involved in the subsequent security operations.

According to sources, the attack was probably co-ordinated through meetings
outside the island (as with the tortive mercenary invasion in early 1981--
se previous INSIGHTS). However, the difference on this occasion was that the
Dominica Government appeared to have no prior information as to what was
happening.

Piecing together reports (Dominica has re-imposed press censorship since the
attack), the attack began at 3 an on December 19 when about 16 armed men
stormed the police station in Roseau. 'lhe man entered the compound and
opened fire on the police there, killing one and injuring nine. mey then
attempted to enter the armoury, but having failed to do so, took up positions
inside police heackguarters. firing on police approadiing from the police sta-
tion (for three hours) before fleeing. Simultaneously with the attack at the
police station, another was mounted cm the prism in an attenpt to free those
on remand on conspiracy charges relating to a form: coup plot. During this
attack a policeman and two attackers Were killed.

According to sources in Martinique. the instigate: of this latest plot was
the cx-head of the now disbanded Dominica Defence Force, Major Frederick New-
ton. Major Newton was among a nunber of eat-defence force personnel arrested
following this latest attack.

Following the asault, the police began to caab the surrounding countryside
for those who had escaped. the nan, who had recently been freed after

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLI'

insufficient evidence as to his involvement in the earlier coup atteupt, was
shot dead by police after an exchange of gunfire.

Former Premier, Patrick John, and three others remain in jail awaiting trial
on conspiracy charges.

Opposition politician and leader of the Democratic Labour Party, Oliver Ser-
aphin---who is Chairman of Patrick John's appeal fund--expressed "genuine con-
cern" over the attack.

Among those seriously injured was the Commissioner of Police, Oliver Phillip,
who was flown to Guadeloupe for specialised medical treatment.

Following the atterpt a new state of energency was imposed with press censor-
ship, a curfew and the granting of wide powers of arrest to the police. Prime
Minister Charles appealed to loyal citizens to assist the police as special
constables.

Speaking later of the attack, Miss Charles said: ”The whole idea was to made
Dominica look unsettled...and to stop foreign investment (coming in). leaving
people dissatisfied, because that is the only environment in which their plan
could work.”

The intellectual authors of abortive assault by arsed insurgents on police
headquarters and the main prison, were of a different ideology from her own
right wing Dominican Preedcn Party (DFP) , Miss Charles said, and were receiv-
ing "payments from outside" to pmh this plan.

The Prime Minister declined to be any more specific, but she said that this
group ws also linked to another, whose aim was to have a more pliable govern-
ment in power that would give the narcotics trade a freer hand.

"The intention...was to take ovar...and rm the country the way they wanted
to...the way the Klu Klux Klan had laid down...they would make legitimate all
the things that we consider vicar-marijuana, casinos and even the building
of cocaine factories. This is where I presum the (Government) source of in-
come would be," the Prime Minister said.

Miss marles spoke of plans to improve security at police headwaters. and a
two year plan to add 200 more members to the 300 man force throng: a sd1eme of
intensive training.

During the attack Prime Minister Charles is understood to have been in contact
with a number of regional and extra-regional Governments all of when offered
security assistance should it have been needed. But significantly, because of
the island's location, it was the prefectures of Hartinique and Guadeloupe
that were able to offer the most immediate help.

Acting on the direct instructions of French Foreign Minister and Hinister of
Defence, a French military helicopter ferried arms and specialists to the is-
land from Martinique and undertook other action designed to assist the
Government.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ().\l.\

INSIGHT is also reliably informd that mder certain circumtances France
would have been additionally prepared to comit troops to the island.

It remains unclear as to whether the attack was a direct coup atteupt as no
reports of attacks on Government Ministers or on communication facilities
Here recorded. that, however, remains apparent is that those involved in
backing earlier coup attempts-wrganised crime syndicates (with political
friends) interested in using the island for drug refining and other illegal
operations-41am: not given up. Neither, it appears, will they as long as
those in jail act a a foot: for such attths.

But perhaps the amt significant lay-product of the latest atteapt will be the
strengthening of the resolve of regimal Governments to provia adequate 56--
curity and establish sub-regional or regional defence arrangements.
COPYRIGHT: Lmdon Caribbean INSIGHT, 1982

C50: 3025/222

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF'CIAL USE ONLY

(ENTRY SECTION EL SALVAIDR

'PRELA' REPORTS POST-ELBCI'ION PROCESS, REBEL ACTION
PA140323 Havana PRELA in English 2305 GMT 13 Apr 82

[Text] San Jose, 14 Apr (PL)-El Salvador in the next hours is to have a
rightwing constituent asseubly while the lhited States tries to solve the

election of the provisional president, in the view of Salvadoran exile groups
here.

Thirty-six ultrarightving members and 24 Christian Democrats, the party that
shares the present regime with the armed forces, were elected on 28 March
in Hashington-sponosred elections.

Fifteen days after the balloting the Central Elections Council still had not
released the credentials of the persons elected.

Behind the scenes, although often in public fashion, U.S. Ambassador Deane
Hinton pressed to have several Christian Democrats kept in the nev government.

What he apparently was mable to do was overcome the refusal of the four
ultrarightuing parties to the presence of Jose Napoleon Duarte.

In the past rev days the names of several politicians were mentioned for
occupying the post of provisional president but the most repeated names are
those of former Foreign Minister Antonio Rodrigmz Porth and lawyer Rene
l-‘ortin Hagana.

Rodriguez Porth was foreign minister during the deposed regime of General
Carlos Hunterto Romero and is a umber of the leadership of former Major
Roberto d'Aubuiason's National Republican Alliance.

Fortin, a lawyer linked with the western region coffee oligarchy, heads
the Democratic Action Party.

Also mentioned is Colonel Escobar Garcia for the vice presidency. lie was
Romero's minister of labor.

Despite the clash between the autistian Democrats and the other parties
that took part in the elections, they all agree on stepping up repressive
operations against the popular organizations.

9
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Notwithstanding Washington's large scale military and economic aid including
anti—insurgent specialists as advisers, the Salvadoran guerrillas continue
to demonstrate great operational capacity.

In the past 72 hours, reported A'IP [Agencia Independiente De Prensa], the
FMLN inflicted 25 casualties in El Playon and in Usulutan.

Central American observers of the Salvadoran crisis indicate that the armed

struggle will continue until the guerrilla advance obliges the United States
to sit down at the negotiating table.

080: 3020/96

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
REAGAN STAFF ACCUSED 0P MISTREATINC JOURNALISTS
PA170030 Havana PRELA in English 2349 GMT 16 Apr 82
[Report by Arnaldo Hutchinson]

[Text] Saint Georges, 17 Apr (PL)--The harassment and mistreatment of which
Caribbean journalists covering the recent visit by U.S. President Ronald Reagan
were the victim. are the object of numerous denunciations in the area.

The charges say that while carrying out their professional work, local press
people were relegated, discriminated against and even physically beaten by
the security personnel accompanying Reagan on his 7 through 11 visit to
Jamaica and Barbados.

This treatment. they said, contrasted with the facilities for the U.S.
journalists that accompanied the Reagan entourage.

The ADVOCATE NEHS of Barbados highlighted in an editorial that the local
journalists were treated by the Reagan security staff as if each one was
a potential assassin.

It reported that Barbadian press people were hit in the residence of Prime
Minister Tom Adams when they tried to reach the same area as their U.S.
colleagues.

The ADVOCATE NEWS stressed that the attitude of the Reagan security staff gave
the impressions that the Barbadians were intruders in their own country.

It went on to state that in view of such incidents, it would be very easy to
deduce that such an irrational attitude on the part of the North Americans
has a racist origin since most Caribbean journalists are black.

Another Bnrbadian daily, NATION. joined in the charges and demanded an official
explanation.

According to reports reaching here the Jamaican press was also the object of
similar treatment on the part of Reagan's security people. Caribbean
journalists who have arrived here for a regional conference to begin later

today said that such incidents point up the unfavorable conditions in which
the regional media must work.

030: 3025/1083

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm PAPER INTERVIEUS HEAD OF SHAW JUNTA
P3161509 Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 7 Apr 82 p 5

[Interview with head of Guatemalan Junta Jose Rios Heart by Igor Man, 5 April
in Guatemala City: “How I Will mange Guatenale"]

[Excerpt] Guatemala City- [Question] What are your plans?

[Answer] I have nrepared 15 main guidelines [cartelloni] which I will be
presenting and explaining on television in a few minutes' time. They are
the fundamntal points of the plan of action of the flute which. by God's
will. I lead. First, it must be clear that authority is at the service of
the people and not vice versa. In this spirit it is necessary to achieve--
and quickly—a reconciliation of the Guatemalan family for the sake of peace
and national concord.

[Question] When you talk about reconciliation are you also referring to the
possibility of an "mderstanding" with the guerrilla forces?

[Answer] we offer the guerrillas two options: Dialogue or open war. We
are ready for either: It is up to then to decide.

[Question] In your country nuch blood has been shed and unmentionable
atrocities have been connitted....

[Answer] One of our prime objectives is security and tranquillity based on
complete observance of human rights. Before, long ago, we used to be
distressed by the sight of a dead dog run over by a car, but then we became
accustomed to seeing human corpses scattered in the streets. Now we have
had enough. We have an obligation to guarantee hunan rights.

[Question] There is the tragedy of the Indiana. the prime victims of violence
from the opposite quarter; how do you intend to resolve it?

[Answer] By integrating the various ethnic groups. We are 20 nations in one.
By reforming the economy, but establishing peace, by putting an end to the
exploitation of the Lunpen proletariat, which has become a coarse form of
repression. rebellion stems from hmger and underdevelopment: Ideology has
nothing to do with it. Even cum: was a rebel, so to speak: He preached

12
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

peace but expelled the traders from the temle and wanted social justice for
the advancement of the poor and the tranquillity of the prosperous.

[Question] How will economic recovery be achieved?

[Answer] We believe in free enterprise, but we cannot accept excessive power.
The state must exercise suitable controls.

[Question] In your opinion, what are Guatemala's most dangerom enemies?

[Answer] Corruption, the wait-and-see attitude, institutionalized corruption
and violence. Nmnerous officials must be pmished and the corrupt must be
eliminated to improve the population's living standards. 'lhe contradictions
of our society must be eliminated. Democracy is our banner so that the
Guatemalans know what their duties, their responsibilities and therefore
their rights are.

[Question] When will there be elections? [Question ends]

'lhe general did not reply at once, then explained that before that a cleansing
operation must be carried out, otherwise there is a risk of a Salvadoran-type
outcome: "Priority must be given to the economic problem, to the people's
participation. Do you realize how many illiterates we have—people who

vote by making a thunbprint on their ballot paper? It is necessary to observe
the constitution, place the legal system on new foundations, guarantee
fundamental rights....A huge task awaits us, yet people want to move at
supersonic speeds. I say, however, that though some people travel in Mercedes,
there are others--the majority—who travel in carts. So we must adapt to the
speed of the majority."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Editrice LA STAMPA S.p.A.

C80: 3104/169

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GUERRILLAS AHAGK POLICE; U.S. BLAHED FOR COUP
PA140356 Havana PRELA in English 2300 (311‘ 13 Apr 82

[Text] San Jose, 14 Apr (PD—No Guatemalan national police posts were
attacked by guerrillas in that Central Amrican comtry, in actions that
took a toll of one regime casualty.

The Independent Press Agency [Agencia Independiente de Prensr-AIP] reported
that in the locality of Ixhuatan, in Santa Rosa, heavily armd insurgents
attacked the police station for nearly half an hour.

Regime sources confirmed the combat and disclosed that the guerrillas used
automatic weapons and withdrew to nearby mountains.

Another group of guerrillas stormed the control post in Santa Cruz del Quiche,
seizing numerous arms and munition.

Representatives of the Guatemalan ruling triumvirate admitted that the
regime lost one soldier.

Meanwhile. a church organization blamed the thited States for the recent
military coup in Guatemala where an increase in repression is expected.

Members of the "Vicente Henchu Revolutionary Christians" Organization
accused the CIA and the State Department of imposing a junta headed by
by Gen Efrain Rios Montt.

me Revolutionary Christians condenned the Guatemalan regime after setting

off two "leaflet bombs" in the Calvario parish in the heart of Guatemala
City.

C30: 3020/ 96

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION NICARAGUA

RAMIREZ CALLS FOR HONEST TALKS WITH U.S., HORDURAS
PA122200 Havana PRBLA in English 2052 GMT 12 Apr 82
[Report by Manuel Guerrero]

[Text] Managua, 13 Apr (PD-«Sergio Ramirez declared here that for talks
with the United States and Honduras to be positive, with a couplets result,
there must be honesty and seriousness in the formulations of those countries.

That position was set forth by the meters of the National Reconstruction
Government Junta of Nicaragua in an interview with PRENSA LATINA.

"Re have always stressed that for Nicaragua the road of dialogue and under-
standing must be open not only with the neighboring comtries such as
Honduras but with the United States Government," he said.

He added that the negotiations must be global according to the formulation
node in the United Nations by Comder Dmiel Ortega, junta coordinator,
and in Mamgua by Mexican President Jose Lopez Portillo.

Ramirez described as a positive step the visit made last Thursday to the
Nicaraguan Foreign Ministry by U.S. Albassador Anthony Quainton to speak
of the possibilities of dialogue.

He said that it is not only up to Nicaragua to determine the course, and
the mechmisns of negotiations with the United States but also to respect
the global framework that the lbxican Government has given then."

The nether of the junta recalled that in regard to Honduras, Nicaragua has
unsuccessfully proposed meetings in the respective ministries of defense and
foreign affairs and joint patroling of the border.

lie said that while there is a political and diplomatic correlation favorable
to the Nicaraguan position abroad, this country confronts aggression and
destabilization. He said that the situation in that regard is more cowlex
because "we seek political mderstanding while we are also aware that the
enemy hides an armed fiat behind his back."

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The movements of personnel and arms from the United States to Honduras,
where there are over 5,000 Somozist guardsmen and 16 comterrevolutionary
camps, have been stepped up, he indicated.

The state of national emergency decreed on 15 March for a 30 day period

will continue "so long as the basic issue is not solved through negotiations,
and that is, that the United States must end its attacks on us, it must stop
plotting to destabilize the Sandinist popular revolution.

"He cannot fall asleep, we cannot say that this is an easy situation, in
fact it is a very grave one" he stressed.

Ramirez Mercado indicated that the circumstances that led to the state of
emergency continue because "we cannot say that imperialism has finally
decided not to attack us...or that the 5,000 former guardsnen across the
border are no longer there..."

In regard to the possibility of calling a special UN General Assenbly, he
said the junta has still to decide whether or not to ask for such a call.

In speaking of the presence of Nicaragua at the nonaligned foreign ministers
meeting in Kuwait, Ramirez said that the support it receives will be decisive.

CSO: 3020/96

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION NICARAGUA

LEADERS INSPECT NORTHERN DEFENSE SITES
PA092319 Havana PRELA in English 2310 GMT 9 Apr 82

[Text] Managua 10 Apr [date as received] (PL)--Nicaraguan Defense Minister
Commander Humberto Ortega described any United States armed attack on this
country as a "desperate, stupid act, doomed to failure."

In the course of a visit to six military units near the Honduran border. he
urged the troops to stand as a wall to bar the way of the enemy.

"Wherever the invaders come, you must stand as doors of steel and fire" said
the commander in chief of the Sandinista popular army.

Humberto Ortega highlighted the importance of the units in the northern zone
because they will be the first to contain the enemy while other forces in the
country will go into action later on.

He was accompanied by the Deputy Minister of Defense Commander Joaquin Cuadra
and Commander Hugo Torres, chief of the political directorate of the ministry.

As part of the preparations for defense several commanders from the ministry
of interior visited key economic centers in this capital.

Brigade Commander Lenin Cerna, chief of the general directory of state security,
visited the cOuntry's only oil refinery, a target of a counterrevolutionary
plot to blow it up several months ago.

Cerna also visited the Augusto Cesar Sandino Airport, where in February an
explosive device placed in a piece of baggage on a flight from Honduras blew
up and took the lives of three airport workers.

Commanders Omar Cabezas and Olga Aviles inspected other centers of production,

where they warned of the danger of an aggression and called for redoubling
revolutionary vigilance.

CSO: 3020/95

17
F‘N!(”ﬂﬂ(lA1.lEﬂE(N§LY
LABOR PARTY LEADER WARNS 0P 0.5. AID PLAN
PA171716 Havana PRELA in English 2308 GMT 16 Apr 82

[Text] Saint Lucia, 17 Apr (PL)--President Ronald Reagan's Caribbean Basin
Initiative promises aid in exchange for political and military advantages
for the United States, warned George Odlum.

The former foreign minister and leader of the Progressive Labour Party (FL?)
of Saint Lucia referred here to the recent Reagan visit to Jamaica and
Barbados.

He said that the economic program under which Washington would grant
commercial incentives and encourage investments in some Caribbean countries
is part of the traditional policy of the carrot and the stick.

He also said that four Caribbean heads of state ran to Barbados just because
Reagan was spending a vacation there.

Odlum said that those rulers did not take into account the negative conse-
quences in the long term of the initiative, which, he warned, offers aid in
exchange for political and military initiatives.

He contrasted that haste to go to Barbados with the abortive efforts for
years to hold a summit meeting of CARICOH leaders.

Odlum called Reagan's meeting with the prime ministers of Barbados, Dominica.
Saint Vincent, Saint Kitts-Nevis and Antigua-Barbuda a "real pantomime."

CSO: 3025/1083 sun

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY