FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10544

26 May 1982

Latin America Report

(FOUO 8/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non

ms publications contain intonation primarily tron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials tron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. mere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was smariztd or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by s ques-
tion aark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. fines within itus are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
ciea, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

OOPYRICBT MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATIW

0P TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LATIN APERICA REPORT
crouo 8/82)

Comeu'rs

COUNTRY SIC?!“
INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

TACO Backs Military Aid for Argentina
(PW. 10 my 82) Coot0.0000000000000000...oto-oooooooooto

Briefs
Military Smport to Argentina

ARGENTINA

Her Coat Reportedly $300 Killian So Far
(um. 16my 82) 00.000.000.00.'0'...OOOOOOOIIOQOOOCOOOOUOO

Economic Changes “at on Political Decisions. Says Docuncnt
(Dm. I‘m, 82) 000.000.0000....IOOSOOOOIOOOOOOOOO00.00...

Inductrialist Predicts Arab Aid
(pm. lsmy 82) 000....00.000000000000000SOC-OOOOOOOOOOOOO

Lacrou States Grain Exports To USSR Normal
(0m. 18”, 82) C.OCOIOOOOOOOOOOODOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOI

BRAZIL
Brief:
Soviet Albacudor Uninjurcd
Ship In Conflict Zone
EL SALVADOR

Apolinario Serrcno Front Official Intervicvcd
mu.11hy82) IOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOCOQOOOCIOIIOOOOOOC

-a- [III-LA-INF

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GRENADA

Bishop Scores U.s. Deportation of Grsnsdisn
0m. 15 my 82) 00.000.00.00I...I...OOOOOOOOOOOOOO‘OOOODOO

NICARAGUA

'nzu' Highlights Baysrdo Arce Interview
(PM. 13 my 82) soossoosoosssssssosssoossoosooosoossacross

Moss-biqus's Kachsl. Danisl Ortasa Heat
(PM. 17 my 82) saasasoosssosssssoaotoossossoosoossoosssos

PANAMA

Briefs
Farming Agreement with Cuba

ST . LUCIA

PLP Charges 11.8. Intsrfsrsnca in Blsctions _
(Arnaldo Hutchinson; MA. 6 Kay 82) ......................

URUGUAY

Briefs _
Socialist Party Arrests

,ron omcm. usr'onu
TAG: BACKS MILITARY AID FOR mm
PAI11220 Havana mm in English 225‘ m 10 May 82

[Text] Managua. ll Hay (PL)-The Central American Caribbean Anti-Iaperialist
Tribunal (TACO) condemned the latest kitish attacks on the halvinas and the
United States military maneuvers in Guantanano, Cubs and Vieques. Puerto Rico.

It states in a declaration issued here that the "only explanation for the var-
like attitude of Great Britain is the political and ailitary support. supplied
by the United States Government.

The TACO reiterated its support to Argentina's legitimate right to maintain
its military forces in the helvinas and any initiative designed to bolster
those forces with Latin American araies.

The body voiced solidarity with the intiative of son. Latin Aaerican governments
to create a new continental body excluding the USA. which has always used

IAIRA [rung Inter-Amrican Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance] in its own inter-
eats.

At the seas time it asked Argentine President General Leopoldo Galtieri to
restore all public freedoas. release the political prisoners and supply infor-
mation on the fate of thousands of aiesing persons in order to build a cliaste
of full national and popular involvement.

It called on all the peoples of the world to "repudiate categorically the
imperial policies of Britain and the United States" that have expressed them-
selves in concrete fashion.

It highlighted in this connection the British aggressions against Argentina.
the ocean venture 82 maneuvers and the growing number of 0.3. military advisers
in El Salvador. Guatemala and Honduras.

Finally TAC backed the calline of a continental nesting to counteract "all
the unilateral. arbitrary aeastn'as adopted by the Reagan adainistration in
enacting regulations and protection systems that strike harsh blows at the
economies of the countries of our Aaerica."

cso: 3020/ 117

momaatussomv
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

comm: 830110! INTER-MIC“! AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

MILITARY SUPPORT TO ”MINA-14”, 2 Hey (“NERD—Peruvian Her Minister
Gen Luis Cieneros Vitqmrra, alias "Bl Gaucho," stated in a ceremcy in which
he participated marking "Artillery Day." that "Peru is not yet providing
ailitary logistical support to Argentina. We are waiting for the Argentina
to ask for then and for President lelsunde to decide." in his role as co-end-
er in chief of the arsed forces. He also stressed his position that the Peru-
vian Covenant has already expressed to the Argentine Government its deci-
sion to ”support it with all its resources." He also indicated that in case
our country were to participate silitarily in support of the Argentine cause,
it has not yet been decided vith which detachmta or mite it would he car-
ried out. hat added that in sun, the "am ad the arsed forces in general

are alwrya ready and well-prepared for any contingency." The war ninister
concluded that theil.s. logistical support to Great Britain has finished the
Monroe Doctrine of "Antics for Aaericane." and has practically taken itself
out of the inter-Andean reciprocal asasitance treaty." [rest] ' ["0230le
Buenos Aires 8003171 in Spanish new at: 3 May 82]

080: 3010/ 1695

I70. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UAR Cbs'l‘ REPORTED‘LY $300 MILLION 80 PA!
”161353 Buenos Aires m in Spanish 1225 GIT 16 May 82

[Text] Buenos Aires, 16 Hey (Mb-According to what the newspaper CLARIN
reports today. up to now the war with Great Britain over the mlvinas has
cost Argentina 3300 nillion, without counting the military eateriel that
has been lost.

In its Sunday political editorial the newspaper states that this expenditure.
and other economic disruptions caused by the Mslvinas conflict are a cause
of great concern among economic officials.

Noting the possibility of changes within the Economy Ministry, the editorial
notes that "important political decision-making levels admit that the leader-
ship of Economy Minister Roberto Alenann has never been so week end his
continuing in office so jeopardized."

The newspaper also nentione that sons govern-ant circles are studying the
possibility of adopting emergency economic neasures in view of the war with
Great Britain.

CIARIN reports that "there have been initiatives in goverment circles to
expand the awareness of the war although. it is not known whether these
initiatives will be listened to at the decision-nsking level."

The editorial adds "These levels maintain that the country is involved in
a war with an important power, but that the people are unaware of it since
the nonal way of life has remained unchanged."

CLARIN reports that anong the neasure "being promoted by these sectors are
the modification in schedule of public events. gas rationing and the

cancellation of sports events." ‘
The newspaper adds that these official sectors believe that "the people
must be prepared not only to face the unpredictable development in the

evolution of the conflict but also the surely serious consequences that it
will have in the econonic area."

C30: 3010/1538
3

P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CMY SECTION ARGENTINA

600N041!) CHAMBS um 0N POLITICAL DBCISIONS. SAYS DOCUMENT
“190603 Buenos Aires mm in Spanish 1869 GMT 14 Kay 82

[Text] Buenos Aires. 16 Hay (DYN)-A lengthy docuunt attributed to the econosic
leadership that "is circulating within military and political circles" notes the
urgent need for giving confidence to the nany national sectors and adds that
this can only be achieved through political decisions "even if this means the
replacement of the present team and by enforcing a populist and statist phil-
osophy.

The text of the docmnt. which is published this morning by the newspaper
M8110 FINANCIBRO. notes that "although the criticisms against the present
economic program have ceased for the time being in view of the present inter-
national situstion. it will have to face a critical period in the next couple
of weeks. The point of view that prevails will depend on the decision the
goveruent adopts since this and the weak points of the goverment economic
policy will be the center of the debate." '

The document adds that the majority of criticism is against the 1977 financial
reform which. according to its detractors. "has been the cause of financial
speculat ion. "

It adds that "the present economic program can meet these criticisms. but its
success is conditioned on the political stability of the team that is in power
at present."

The docuent states that "efforts are being made to try and avoid the Martinez
de no: experience" slang with his liberal policy which is condescending "and
has a strongly statiet attitude regarding public expenditures."

It adds that "it will always be good for the country if there is agreement
between the political policy and the economic policy in force. Our long-
suffering citizens do not deserve to be paying the high price caused by these
contradictions within the center of power. It will always be more fruitful to
adopt an economic policy that is in agreement with the govement'e political
guidelines even if this scans the replacement of the present teas and the
implementation of a populist and statist philosophy. Therefore. if there is
no contraposition between the political and economic policies the former will
necessarily support the latter."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

The document states that "the persistent high interest rates on bank loans have
caused an unusual increase in business liabilities to the point that business
profits are not enough to refund the principal and pay interests." Therefore
the economic program is being conditioned by the situation so created.

It adds that "in some cases this situation has already forced the Central Bank
to finance the return of savers' deposits with an inflation-caused tax and to
take over the accounts of said banks and financial companies.

"This situation has reached a point of immorality and lack of control that is
difficult to explain to third parties.

"The functionaires of the finance palace themselves lose the power of persuasion
when they limit reimbursements to industries or halt the construction of the 1
Bahia Blanca petrochemical complex. and simultaneously money should be printed
in comparable amounts to compensate for the funds that. as ”self-loans," have
been appropriated by the executives of the financial companies that have folded.

"The persistence of high interest rates is not only an obstacle to economic
reactivation. but it reflects the fact that the transfer of income continues

in the form previously mentioned. This circumstance exposes the weakest flank
of the current economic leadership," said the economic experts in their critical
document.

In proposing possible solutions "in a system of freedom." The docuent notes
that "there is in general terms a phenomenon represented by the transfer of
income" from the entrepreneurial sector to individuals or even to other enter-
prises. This is an undeniable phenomenon and the only solution is to rechannel
those resources to productive enterprises to permit them to rebuild their
capacity to operate as such.

"In a system within which markets must operate there is no worse obstacle to
the survival of such markets than the large transfer of funds which is deter-
mined by the public authorities, that is to say, 'the comings and goings caused
by decrees.‘ This causes uncertainty and the impossibility of adopting

decisions for the future.“

The document affirms that “we are opposed to heroic 'echanisms trying to solve
the problem being confronted through an inflationary shock or other measures
permitting the abrupt 'liquidation' of liabilities. because such a procedure
distorts the very essence of a free economy and represents the seed of sector-
ial or class struggles to take over power and to use the economic instruments
for the transfer of incomes without restraints or limitations."

"The question of enterprises' liabilities should be solved through the supply
of capital to enterprises in difficulties by a procedure of sharing losses
(reabsortion of liabilities) among all the individuals and enterprises con-
nected with the one in difficulties. This proc~dure of "reacconmodation' is
the only natural and just procedure since it permits a spontaneous accomda-
tion to the situation of a particular enterprise on a case by case basis,
without need to resort to impositions implied in authoritarian alternatives."

' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The capitalization of enterprises should be achieved through the incorpora-
tion of new partners, merger mechanisms or the sale of share portfolios. In
turn. the reduction of liabilities should be made through court procedures or
outside court arrangements. necessarily involving renegotiations on the
conditions for paying liabilities (debt reductions. waiting periods, new guar-
antees, extended deadlines)."

Then the document explains that "interconnection of the economic channels
will permit the orderly transfer to the entire system of the liabilities

accumulated by indebted enterprises. Thus the transfer via high interest
rates will return to the productive system in a piecemeal, dispersed and

voluntary form."

The document continues by saying that "from the standpoint of demand on loan-
ahle funds, the reduction of interest rates will be possible through a lesser
participation of the state in the financial market and the closedown of com-
panies which continue to receive deposits to finance them and which are in a
state insolvency or which continue to make self-loans. From the standpoint

of the offer of funds to the financial system, money supply can only be increas-
ed by creating confidence and stability. As long as the depositors believe

that there will be changes in policy and a 'softening' of current monetary and
fiscal measures, the inflationary expectations thereby created are responsible
for the prevalence of operations that are short term so as to permit the obtain-
ing of greater interest rates in the future as a hedge against the expected
higher inflation."

“To the extent that there is no certainty about policies it is impossible
to obtain positive results,“ emphasizes the document.

The officials of the finance palace stated that "if the political authorities
let it be understood that the solution 'by decrees' is possible, the business-
men's effort will be concentrated on the front of labor struggles so as to
attain the effective solution through that route, and it will not take any
action so as to obtain capitalization through voluntary procedures.

"This is how the entire financial system, which should be involved in a pro-
found and active process 'absorbing' debits through capitalizations, mergers,
stock transfers and operation atreamlinings, has come to a virtual standstill
awaiting a change in economic policy. or even a change of economy sinister."

The document then indicates that "although the current stage of the recessive
cycle offers investment opportunities at low cost and this shOuld normally
invite an interest in making investments in enterprises which are in diffi-
culties by those who have capital available. the uncertainty causes the post-
ponement of such investments and the adoption of a 'wait and see' attitude over
the short term.

"The same reasoning applies to the absorption of debits through the intercom-
nection of channels within the system."

FOIIHHHEIAleﬂEONlY
According to finance palace officials, the same thing applies to the interest
rates to the extent that depositors do not receive firm and convincing signals
that the economic policy will be respected and adhered to. The depositors will
not act in response to declarations by the economy minister, but will pay atten-
tion to the proposals of political leaders who have access to official spheres
and could possibly exert influence."

The document also says that "the financial system cannot be revitalized without
giving assurances, and no reactivation can be obtained without reassurances."

Summing up. the document states. "the alternative proposed by the Ongoing
economic program are strongly conditioned by the political context and, to the
extent that the political question is not tackled head on, the economic pro-
gram can be doomed to failure for reasons that are not intrinsic to the program
itself. Thus disrupting once again the application of liberal economic prin-
ciples and the possibility of their being restored in Argentina.

"There are many reasons why the authoritarian solutions are much more attractive
than the voluntary solution referred to earlier.

”The prolonged experience of a controlled economy in Argentina has caused the
majority of the population to be sold on that school of economic thinking.

"Secondly, the economic interests of those businessmen who have suffered the
consequences of the arbitrary transfer of income via the high interest rates
logically influence their preference for a system that will permit them to
rebuild their assets through government decisions rather than through a volun-
tary system of negotiations with the owners of capital.

"Thirdly, the politicians prefer to gain the support of the organized sectors,
even when the abrupt transfer of incomes is ultimately detrimental to those
who have no voice and who should normally constitute their electoral support."

In closing and after enumerating the "obnoxious effects" of the authoritarian
solution, the documents of the finance palace officials concludes by stating that
"the solution to the economic problem will not be obtained through theories.

but through the substantial transformations that can only be brought about by '
political decisions."

080: 3010/1540

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION mmm

moummts'r mmrc'rs ARAB an:
P1140325 Buenos Airs DYN in Spanish 1336 GMT 13 May 82

[Text] Buenos Aires, 12 Hay (DYN)--Upon his arrival this morning at
Bzeiza International Airport, financier Jorge Antonio, who held a meeting
with PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat to inform him on Argentina's position regard-
ing the dispute with Great Britain over the sovereignty of the southern
archipelagos, said that the Arabs "will give us everything we need."

Antonio noted: "today every Argentine has the duty of carrying out a
mission, it is even better if this mission is to support the country,
the government and the people."

He said: I believe I have fulfilled this objective. 1 have met with 'Arafat
who has offered his complete support for the Argentine Government and people."

Jorge Antonio added that 'Arafat "has denied many alleged incidents that had
deteriorated relations between the PLO and Argentina. He has supported
Argentina at the United Nations. The Argentine Government has expressed its
appreciation in this regard. lie has offered the Argentine Government every-
thing it needs and also to exert his influence on other Arab countries where
because he is highly respected he will be able to obtain what Argentina needs."

Asked which were the "nisunderstandings" between the Argentine Government
and the PLO. Jorge Antonio answered that "at one time there was talk that
some terrorists were photographed with him."

According to Antonio, 'Arafat, said: "l'his is absurd. I meet with all
individuals who come to see no. who are involved in a liberation process.
Everyone takes a picture with me. But I never have or will be against the
Argentine Government. 1 denand an opportunity to prove it."

According to Antonio, 'Arafat said: “1am interested in the Argentine
Goverth and the present situation. Argentina can count on the complete
support of our conunity'."

About the position of Arab countries regarding the Anglo-Argentine conflict,
Antonio notes: "He will have the support of all the Arabs."

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
He said: "In view of this situation in Argentina, which has caused a great

change in the international economic process, the Arabs have realized who
are their true friends."

Antonio noted: "He should realize who are our friends. They may be found
in the American continent and in Arab countries which want. aspire and
seek to establish bilateral relations with Argentina."

He added: "I have specific suggestions to lake and I will demand the making
of important decisions. He will have from then everything the country needs."

Later he added: "We have learned a lesson. Unfortunately, our friends are
not in Europe; we are not all aware that this is the case."

Asked whether he would hold meetings with official government representatives
to inform then on his mission, he said: "I suppose so."

Asked how this Arab aid will be carried out, he said: "they will give us
everything we need. 'Ihere is no doubt about that."

CSO: 3010/1525

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SBCT ION ‘ ARGENTINA

LACROZE STATES GRAIN EXPORTS T0 USSR MRHAL ' '
PY181565 Buenos Aires DYN in Spanish 1M6 GMT 18 Kay 82

[Text] Buenos Aires, 18 Hay who—Argentine cereal grain exporters spokesmen
noted today that the Soviet Union has already loaded nore than 6.5 million tons
of cereal grains and wheat during the first 5 months of 1982 and that now. as
is natural. it is awaiting the results of its own harvest before deciding on
whether to make more purchases in the country.

Moreover, today Livestock and Agriculture Secretary Raul Salabsrren informed
the newspaper LA RACION that David Lacroze. the under secretary of agriculture
and the interventor in the national grain board. will travel to Moscow before
'the end of the month to arrange new grain sales until the end of the year.

This infornation was disclosed here today almost simltaneously'with British
reports that stated that the Soviet Union may have decided to stop buying
Argentine cereal grains in view of the conflict with Great Britain and in
view of the possibility of obtaining better sale conditions from the United
States.

Grain exporters noted that the agreement with the Soviet Union for the sale
of 10.5 million tons of corn, sorghum, and soybeans per year, over a period of
5 years, has already been fulfilled up to May.

They also disclosed that during the first 5 months of the year an additional
2 million tons of wheat have been exported to the Soviet Unionbeyond the
terms of the agreement.

The spokesmen added that "it is normal" for the Soviet Union tolsuspend its
grain purchases in June and July since this is the period of its own harvest
and therefore, it will resume its imports afterwards, in keeping with its
needs.

Last year, the Soviet Union purchased from Argentina almost 13 million tons of
different cereal grains. thus becoming one of the main buyers of Argentine
products.

-Purthermore, the grain exporters spokesmen did not grant much importance to
British speculations that another reason for the cease of shipments to the

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet Union is that Lloyda of London has decided not to cover the insurance
of ships that transit the South Atlantic.

In this regard they added that the Argentine-Soviet grain trade "is almost
conpletely transported" aboard "chartered" third flag ships. particularly
Greek. Liberian and Panamanian ships.

As for governennt com-ants on the reports. Lacroze told La Nacion that these

reports "come from a country that is at war with us and that is trying to harm
us by any means."

Moreover he said that "the Soviet Union withdrew from'the grain market alnoat

1 month ago" and that this attitude "does not only affect Argentina but also
the United States. "

He added that the shipnent schedule ”is being carried out nor-ally." He said
that the decision of Lloyds of London not to cover the risk on ship that go
through the South Atlantic "caused an increase of $1 per ton in the cost of
insurance. Therefore, there is no problem in obtaining freight cargo."

080: 3010/1560

11

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

SOVIET AMBASSANR WINJURED-dlio de Janeiro, 16 May (SAPORITI)--A jet plane
in which the Soviet elbsssador in Brazil, his wife, the eabassy's first
secretary, two children and executives of Brazilian Mining Company were
traveling did not stop at the end of the runway and crossed a road at

the Uberlandia Airport. The anbassador and his wife were not hurt. The
president of the Brazilian Metallurgy and Mining Conpany and Russian
embassy personnel, including two children, suffered bruises. Pilot
Roosevelt dos Santos was also injured. The massador is Vladimir Ivanovich
Chernyshev. The injured Russians are the couple (Ladislav) and

(Narisa Kanekova). who have been adnitted to the Santa Cecilia de Uberlandia
Hospital, a secretary and the first secretary of the Russian Essay in
Brazil. and two Russian children. [Text] (“170212 Buenes Aires SAMITI

in Spanish 0115 GMT 17 May 82]

SHIP 1N CONFLICT ZONE-4110 de Janeiro, 11 May (SAPORITI)-The Brazilian
vessel 'Tioneiro" of the Transroll Shipping Company last weekend sailed
through the area in conflict between Argentina and England. Hashington
Barbeito. president of the shipping conpany. stated that the ship, which
sailed through the naritine corridor between the Malvinas Islands and
which already is near Buenos Aires, is expected in the port of Santos on
Thursday. Barbeito stated that the Brazilian ships comply with the rules
of the navy rhich determine that the vessels advise their position to the
fleets of the two countries in conflict. The maritime corridor is

1.0 niles wide, which nukes it quite safe for the nerchent ships. [Text]
[”112159 Buenoa Aires SAPORITI in Spanish 1950 M 11 May 82]

(:80: 3010/1546

12

POROI-‘FIGALUSEONLY
APOLINARIO 8m FRONT OFFICIAL INTERVIEW
PA11153l Havana PRELA in English 1252 our 11 May 82

[Text] Mexico City. 11 Hay (PL)-A United States regional strategic plan to
wipe out the Salvadoran revolutionary nave-ant and lay the groundwork for
launching an attack on Nicaragua was denounced here.

Guerrilla Co-ander Douglas, assistant chief of the Apolinario Serrano Front
in El Salvador, told POR asro tangerine that the plan is designed to counteract
the victory of the Nicaraguan revolution which opened a political space in
Central America in restricting the aims and interests of ﬂashington.

In regard to his country he said the 0.8. intervention takes the form of mili-
tary advisers, direct support to the army and the support of other governents.

He said that 0.8. ailitary strategy for El Salvador contains three main stages.
the first being that of attrition, and involves repression of the rural people
who can aid the guerrillas.

The second phase goes by the name of total annihilation of the revolutionary
movement.

These two stages explained Douglas, involve penanent defense in the cities
and other places where the guerrilla may find protection.

The final stage he indicated involves the installation of fixed garrisons with
a mobile combat unit to combine both types of forces, he added.

however, he indicated. the war in practice has shown that the enemy'is not able
to coshat successfully against the guerrilla which operates throughout the
country.

That is why they have had to have recourse to foreign troops nainly Honduran-
and Guatemalan.

The contradiction of their nilitary strategy. he concluded, is that they need
large forces to cover the whole country with both fixed and mobile forces.

CSO : 3020/ 119

13

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

com 83mm GRENADA

BISHOP 800828 0.8. DEPORTATION 01’ mm
PAlGOllO new-1a PM in Ingliah 2359 M 15 by 82

[Text] Saint George'a. 13 Hay (I’D—The Granadian Print Hinieter, Maurice
Biahop, aaid that the presence here of the Surinaleae top leader. Lieutenant
General Deai Bouterae. ia a proof of the unity between the peoplea of Gre-
nada and Surinane.

Similar relationa of unity have Been achieved with Cuba and Nicaragua, he
atreaaed.

Bishop headed a neeting of the popular nilitiaa in this capital, in which
participated aa apecial gueat, Bouterae, preaident of the National Military
Council of Surinane. who 1e paying a eeveral-day viait to thia country.

The preaier referred to the caae of the young Grenadian Catholic girl,
Suzanne Berkley, who was recently deported fro. Puerto Rico by the colonial
authoritiea of the United States.

The 0.8. officiala charged Suzanne of trying to enter the ialand to carry out
anti-0.8. activities, in apite of the young girl having a viaa fro. the 0.8.
Embassy in Barbadoe to attend a religioua conference.

That action ”ia a new examle of the lack of reapect with which the 11.8.
Governnent is treating the paoplee of the region." atated Biahop.

He called the attention on that from all the paraona invited to the conference,
the only one arrested, naintained in preventive cuatody. threatened, deported,
intinidated and aiatreated waa the Grenadina repreamtative.

he warned that thia proves that the Reagan adniniatretion will continue try-
ing to find the ways to preaaure and laminate Grenada, as well ae by taking
it victia of eoononic aggreaaiona and Iilitary thuata.

Biahop highlidlted an an exaqle of the courage of the Grenadian people the
attitude mintained by Suzanne Berkley in front of the frightening acta of
which ehe wee object.

"We are a poor country but a proud which will not go down on our kneea in
front of iwarialian.” underlined the prime niniater.

C80: 3025/1106

15
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLV
'PRELA' BIGHLIGEPS MYARDO ARC! INTERVIEW
“132030 Havana PM in English 1236 our 13 May 82
[Quotation narks as received]

[Text] Managua, 13 Hay (PL)-CoI-sndsr Bayardo Arce Castano warned that 'the
0.5. plans against the Nicaraguan revolution are still underway.

Due to that hostile policy, econonic difficulties are greater now and this
causes greater restrictions on our people and greater sacrifices for going
ahead with our revolutionary plans." he stated.

In an interview published by the Iagazine PATRIA LIN-4n its May nunbernthe
coordinator of the political comission of the Sandinist Front

warned that in spite of having obtained some political victories, that does
not mean to say that "we should look toward the future with too much optinisa.

When analysing the diplomatic efforts made by Nicaragua, he said that after
the victory meant by the discussion in the UN Security Council. it was decided
not to take the case to the General Assembly "since [words indistinct] want to
hmiliate 11.3. policy."

Nicaragua chose, he underlined, to preserve the need to begin direct negotia-
tions with the United States in a third country and proposes Mexico as the
neeting's venue. since it enjoys sufficient international respect and prestige
and besides has cordial relations with the sides in conflict.

After mentioning the 8 11.8. points and the 13 Nicaraguan, he nsnifested that
there had been (?no) concrete reply from Hashington for starting the talks.

He recalled that hostile actions against Nicaragua have taken place since the
neeting of the Security Council. such as the presence of mrships in its
territorial waters and the flying of 11.8. spy planes over its territory.

The Sandinist leader said that the United States played the card of ear-Conan-
der Eden Pastors because it was "the way to keep open the possibility of the
aggressive maneuver."

15

N! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He also referred to the possibility that it [word indistinct] attempt to fern
a "goverment in exile" with counterrevolutionary elements and he pointed out
that it would be no surprise if an alternative of that kind turns up. "in
which would obviously he Pastors."

Bayardo Arce alluded to the act that the Aaerican people are protesting in-
creasingly against the policy of the present adainistration and he predicted

that in next Novenher's parlia-entary elections that country will surely make
an aboutturn.

Concerning the chief watchword of the Nicaraguan labour aovasent on May Day
[word indistinct] are defending the revolution. for the construction of
socialise." lle asserted [word indistinct] not govern-ant or Sandinist Front
policy in this stage.

lie explained that the workers [words indistinct] and interests will be unable
to be resolved without the construction of socialism. "Obviously we respect
the feelings of the workers." Arce stated.

C80: 3020/ 121

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SBCT ION ' NICARAGUA

HOZAMBIQUB'S RACHEL, DANIEL OMEGA KEEP
PAl7l6llo Havana PRELA in English 1315 GMT 17 May 82

[Text] Managua, 17 Hay (PL)--1‘he president of Mozambique, Samora Machel,
stated that Sandinist's and Carlos l'onseca's nanea belong to the patrilony of
the glorious resistance against the imperialist dalination and exploitation.

These two heroeeuhe underlined—do not have tombs, they live in today's
struggle. in the victories we have already had, and they inspire the con-
solidation of the revolution in any continent.

he expressed his solidarity with the Nicaraguan people in their struggle for
the national reconstruction and against the internal and external enemies.

lie also stated that 0.8. imperialism is aggressing Nicaragua combining military
and economic actions, just like in Mozambique.

He should combine efforts in the canon struggle of our peoples, veterans of
the struggle for the liberation in Central America and southern Africa. he
underlined.

For his part, the coordinator of the Covenant Junta for National Reconstruc-
tion (JGRN), Col-ander Daniel Ortega seavedra. expressed that the revolutions
of Moznbique also has them and is moved and handled by a cal-on enemy.

lie referred to the two attacks carried out in Nicaragua last Friday from
honduran territory, and stated, that ﬂomhique is facing actions of similar
elements.

A short tine before that Hachel and Ortega war-1y eabraced when the African
leader arrived in a plane of the Mozambique Airlines which took him to
Nicaragua after a 20-hour flight.

This is the first visit to Nicaragua of an African head of state since the
revolutionary victory in July of 1979.

080: 3020/ 121

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nuns

Immune am m CUBA-Panana City. 17 hey (Pm—A vast ecientific-
technical cooperation progren in the farting eector for thie year vae signed
by Cuba and Panama. The agreenent part of a progran in exiatence aince 1979
van eigned by Panannian Agriculture Minieter lane Gonzalez and Manual
Gutierrez. vice president of the State Cooperation Conittee of cube. The
plan covere exchange of experiencee. reeearch reeulte and vieite by experte.
1he Cubans will eupply technical Ileana. inatallationa, docuentation and ex-
perts for training Pena-Iain techniciane in vegetable production and health,
irrigation eyetene and lane's-eat and nerketin; channele. Cube will alao
prove aend [as received] to Pana- technical pareonnel to learn about the
advanced eyetene need by Panannien aperta in quermtine control of import-
ing and to prevent the entry and wipe out hlighte in coffee. bananae and
cattle. [text] [PAIG2006 Havana PM in Bnglieh 1955 an 16 May 82]

cso: 30201122

18

MOWMONLY
MMLUSEONLY

COUNTRY 8301310“ 81? . LUCIA

PLP CHARGES 11.8. Immune: 11' mass
PAMO‘O‘ Havana PRELA in English 0021 Of! 4 May 82

[Article by Arnaldo Butchinson]

[Text] Castries, It May (PD—The top leader of the Saint Lucia Progressive
Labor Party. George Odlus. charged the 0.8. Government uith seeking to
influence the results of ‘his country's elections through the ocean venture
82 military aaneuvers.

In a speech right before the honday elections, Odlum said that with the
naneuvera near the island. Washington seeks to intimidate the population.

Reportedly activities related to the naneuvers took place just 25 ailee iron
this Eastern Caribbean island.

During the campaign the regional press highlighted the frequent visits to
Saint Lucia by 0.8. Embassy staff nsmbers in (marbados).

The eost recent of those visits said the sources was that of Milan Dish.
11.8. ambassador for the Eastern Caribbean. who net at length with John
Conpton. leader of the United Workers Party [WP].

The sources concluded that the topic of the election played a prominent
part in the talks.

Those factors anong others have led observers to stress that the 0.8. Govern-
ment has tried to wield its influence in favor of Conpton.

Meanwhile the voters began to go to the polls in the aidst of exceptional
security measures.

The Iain police station in the capital was surrounded by barbed wire while
the polling stations were protected by security forces.

The caepaign which began in March has been characterised by strong antagonisn
between the three parties. which gave rise to amorous acts of violence.

19

"WWWLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although during the final days of the canpaign there were no serious incidents,
the authorities fear that such incidents cannot he ruled out.

T

Over 75,000 registered voters will elect l7 nenhers of Parlianent iron 51
candidates.

The M of John Conpton, the Saint Lucia Labor Party of Peter Josie and the

Progressive Labor Party of George Odlua are the three groupings that are
vying for the favor of the voters.

The elections will deter-ins who will he the next prise sinister of Saint
Lucia. which since its independence on 22 February 1979, has had four heads
of govern-ant: Conpton, Allan Louisy, Rinston cause and Michael Pilgris.

however there is widespread doubt on the part of a broad sector of the
country that results of the process will do luch to solve the serious sco-

nonic and social prohlens of this island nation of slightly over 120.000
people.

The current prise sinister, Michael Pilgrim. called on the voters to cast
their ballots in favor of structural changes in the political syste- to
nake way for national unity and progress, in a statelsnt winding up the
cawaign.

080: 3020/ 113

20

mementos“
BRIEFS

socnus'r mm: musty-Montevideo. 29 Apr (WITH-JIM Uruguayan police
have arrested six neders of the outlawed Socialist Party. According to a
con-unique issued by the police headquarters in this city. the detained
Here involved in indoctrinating and convincing cadres in the working and
student sector end carrying out collections to finance the clandestine
organization. The police seized different kinds of nterials used by the
group to print and spread propaganda. These Interisls were found in a small
house located in the seaside resort srea of the country a few kilometers
from this capital. [Text] [HO-51818 Buenos Aires SAPORITI in Spanish

0210 GMT 29 Apr 82]

C80: 3010/1546 am

21

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY