RR WM USN 0N“

JPRS L/10179
10 December 1981

Latin America Report

(FOUO 28/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
scurces are translated; those from English-language saurces
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LATIN AMERICA REPORT

(P000 28/81)

CONTENTS

(DUNN SECI'IOR
CUBA

Castro Criticizes U.S. Policy on Red Sunday
(m. 16 NOV 81) O.IO...OOOUOOOIIOOOOOOIOOIOOIOIOIIOOOOOOO0"...

Herberto Padilla on Repression in Country
(ch0’ 120ct 81) OO0.0..0.I0.00IOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOIUOOOO

PLO Leader 'Arafat Sends Message to Castro
(Pm, 17 Nov 81) I.0UOIOOOOOOOOOOIIOOIOUOOOOOOOOOOCOOODOOIIOCOOI

Saharan Leader Sends Castro Solidarity Note
(Pm,16NOV81) Cl0....OOICOIOOIOOOIOOOOIOOOOCO...0.0.0.0000...

GRENADA

U.S. Policies Rapped
(Pm-IA, 16 ”CV 81) 0...00.0....00.00.00.00.00.0000000IOOOOOOOOOOOO

PERU

Domestic Manufacture of Military Arms, Equipment
(0m. Au.sep 81) 000.0.0.0.0.0.00.IOOOOOOOOOOIODOOOOO'OIOOOI.

Briefs
Soviet Delegation Visit

SURINAME

Rusland Hails Struggle of Salvadoran People
(CAIA, 18 Nov 81; PRELA, 20 Nov 81)

Celebrates International Students Day
Student Rally

11

13

1h

15
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080033-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘-’ ENEZUELA

S’rcsideat Discusses Outcome of [1.5. Visit
(PRELA, 21 50v 81) ..............................

n
u
A

oreiga t-tiniszer on President's Trip to PRC
(PRELA, b Nov 81) ...............................

- b -
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080033-3
CASTRO CRITICIZES U.S. POLICY ON RED SUNDAY
PA160346 Havana PRELA in Spanish 0121 GMT 16 Nov 81

[Text] Havana, 15 Nov (FL)--Prime Minister Fidel Castro said today that ”in

line with the spirit of these days. we must be prepared for two battles:
production and defense."

He made this remark at the end of a tour to various work centers in havens
and Havana Province.

Castro visited two hospitals under construction in two highly populated districts

of this capital, a metallurgical factory. a factory that makes various articles
and another that makes spare parts.

Castro's tour, which began early this aorning. was prompted by more than
2 million workers who participated in a Red Sunday of volunteer work in this
country. Red Sunday commemorates the October Revolution (7 November).

Speaking about the international situation. Castro said that a broad and intense
solidarity campaign in favor of Cuba was carried out throughout the world
"which uncovered the lying nature or 0.8. imperialism."

Castro added that the 0.5. Government is in a very embarrassing position because

it has not been able to rise to the challenge to submit proof of the alleged
presence of Cuban troops in Nicaragua.

"They said that they had proof and they have not been able to prove anything,
because it is all a lie. Even in the United States many people have taken
notice of these lies." Castro indicated.

"Not only has there been a wide international solidarity with Cuba. but also

wide disapproval of u.s. foreign policy. because it is evident to everyone that
such policy inevitably leads to a catastrophic war." he added.

“The U.S. economy finds itself stagnating between recession and inflation due

to Reagan's irresponsible economic policy which engages in an unrestrained
arms race," the Cuban leader points out.

1
F1)R‘DFF1C1AL.USEZCHULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are people who think that U.S. threats will intimidate the Cuban people.
who hJVc proudly faced 23 years of attacks, Castro said.

The vines: thing for a solution to the Central American problem is a negotiated
pclitlcul solution, Castro indicated. referring to the situation in this

reqiun of the continent. Any military action will only make the problem
worn”. he added.

they (the Sorth Americans) are opposed to a negotiated political solution to
the touflict, btcnuse they want a military solution in order to destroy the
revolutionaries to the last man, but this has never happened and it never will.

(ISO: 3()!0/ 342

2
FOR OFT1C1AI.USE¢)NLY
1133mm PADILLA 0N WEBSION 111 000mm
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 12 Oct 81 pp 118. 119

[Text] He is like a tornado of words. motions, feelings. memries and passions
constantly flowing in a conversation where his logic is as flawless as the words
which the poet selects with care and relish. herberto Padilla is 100 percent Cuban
and. therefore, the "critical mind" which he has exercised at the cost of having his
life ripped apart is encompassed within an extrovert and warm personality.

Taking puffs from a cigar which keeps on going out and wearing big glasses which
make his eyes sees disproportionately large and make his face look like a Caribbean
owl. Padilla confesses: "Man. I am tired of being a 'case' but no man chooses the

role assigned to his by history and this is why I trust answer questions, I must
bear witness to what happened to a."

The "Padilla case" started to flare up in 1968 when an international panel. which also
included prestigious Cuban literary figures, declared him the winner of the Julian

del Casal Prize for Poetry for his work ”Fuers de juego" [out of the gene].

The critical nature of Padilla's poetry isaaediately clashed with Fidel Castro's
regime. But the Cubs: Hriters Union [Blithe] had to publish his book although the
edition carried an introduction passing judgsent on the author.

Ten year ago. in 1971, Padilla was arrested and this was i-ndiately followed by a
barrage of statements, denials and confessions like in the "Moscow Trials." followed
by a decade of working in obscurity as a translator. Preedou came in March 1980 and
after an eloquent period of silence. Padilla launched his public attack on the
regime.

Now herberto Padilla is in Spain to present his novel "a: mi jardin pastan los heroes"
[Heron Are Grazing in my Garden] (Ediciones Argos Vergara) on the very sane day-and
Padilla has pointed out the happy coincidence-when the International m Club is
making for the first time the International Day of Isprisoned Writers. "In my view,
this initiative is a very positive step arid it is one of the reasons the 'Padilla
case' should be declared close. I did not really suffer. Those who are suffering
are the writers in prison. Prisoners are a much more iaportnt issue, as in the case
of Armando Valladares. the poet who has been in prison for 20 years in a wheelchair.
Or the cases of Angel Cuadra, Ernesto Dias Rodriguez. Vale and others."

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Valladares . a Hartyr

Vslladares' suffering is a particular source of irritation for Padilla: "He must get
hits out of prison as soon as possible by convincing the Cuban Government that it

is absurd to keep in hail a man who is paralyzed and has not done anything wrong.

It is even more abourd considering that 2 years ago there was an amesty in Cuba
which released former CIA agents who were active enemies of the revolution."

"Valladares is a moral giant. lie does not mind if he sacrifices hinself. This is
why it is pointless to victinize his so such. mat happened is that he made very
harsh statements. he spoke terrible truths. lie dared to write poetry which in days
to come will be remembered even in my country's textbooks."

Valladares is a hero. But Padilla's book is a heartrending portrayal of characters
who go beyond all heroic dimension. it starts with a preface rscomting Padilla's
imprison-eat and telling an anecdote which typifies the relations between the
conunist regime and the dissith intellectual: an official hits Padilla on the
head with the Ianuscript of his own bond sending his to the hospital. "Ila was.”
Padilla says with a bitter smile. “ey nost forceful critic.”

The characters of the novel--dissident intellectuals Julio and Gregorio; Luisa.
Gloria and One. representing the intervals of love and tenderness that rescue them
from dispairulive in a stifling ataosphere. ”This is what I as trying to convey:
the story of a stress. the account of feelings of suffocation. the lack of
cousunication between the stereotypes found in political life and the everyday life,
the personal adventure."

Julio--a translator who dreams of controversial interviews with Fidel Castro and with
Berbert Harcuse--snd Gregorio--a semialcoholic writer so such at odds with his social
environ-cut that he is suspected of being a ”snitcher"--embody the frustration of

two intellectuals initially conitted to the revolution but who turned to criticism
when that revolution went into its co-Iunist phase. Full of doubts. eager to go
back to being believers, they end up by getting drunk on a beach while pretending

to be Hare and Engels. But hidden in the twists and turns of the novel. there is a
code between the two characters and every reader oust seek it.

The theme of destruction is superimposed on the thene of the vital need for
participation. Julio dreams of conducting an interview with Fidel during which he
fearfully reproaches the latter for not allowing the people to participate in the
government's decision-naking process.

"Because the revolution is a collective GUI-0M and the people's ultinate goal is to
carry out a revolution to see their own insge reflected in it. If the people are not
allowed to participate. they feel manipulated. med. and they pull out. This act of
pulling out is not so such an act of negative Iilitancy as a wrenching. It cones

a time--and I mention this in Iy novel—when the people do not want to caused or

to obey. they want to escape."

Padilla remembers. as his characters do. the heroic early period when euphoria
per-sated everything. ”I disagree with those who criticize the entire process of
the Cuban Revolution. Our process we entirely justified from the historical
viewpoint. I think that the subsequent distortions are regrettable but they cannot
cancel the initial positive nature of the revolution.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"Cube had a revolutionary government which we all approved because it had brought

a new moral and social dinension to Cuba. That was positive. I approve and an in
favor of that." This is why 10 years after it happened. when I am asked to judge the
Padilla case, my thoughts are that from a personal point of view I as happy to be in
Spain and ready to carry on with my task.

"If I have one regret seeing what has happened, it is that the revolution has deviated
froa its ideals. Today. Cuba is a country which entirely subscribes to the policy of
blocs. We are associated with the USSR and the Soviet Union has its own interests."

Fidel. the African

"The lost terrible thing. for instance. is the African question. You get a telegram
telling you to report to your unit without fail. And you never see your family

again. Those who can. come back 2 years later. Many return sick, wounded or disabled.
People cannot understand. And this subject cannot be mentioned. It is a very
unpopular thing but nobody can discuss it."

This heartbreaking situation affects all the characters. "In Cuba, the intellectual
is an outcast. The columnist world has a Lsninist tradition of preventing
intellectuals fro. becoming the critical conscience of society."

Julio and Gregorio live through that persecution with the grevious feeling of being
betrayed, cheated. "It is a logical feeling among those who have played a leading
role in the revolutionary process and who refuse to completely abandon their hopes,”
Padilla notes. "But the bureaucracy eliminates all debate and prevents participation.
Any expression of ideas is curtailed even when they do not entail criticism. Then

you feel stifled. Such feeling is presented even in the cover illustration of my
book which shows a devastating tropical sun. The characters dream about the snow;
they want to plant a boob that will destroy the never ending sun. It is a symbolic
counterpoint to enhance the tiredness and suffocation which extend beyond political
life."

Apart free the regiae's oppression, there is also the oppression of the soleln fools
who cause so much here that one of the characters dreams of setting up an early-
warning office in Argentina or Uruguay. "The reason for it is that the expression
'serious or solemn fools' is used in the River Plate region and I find it most
suitable. In Latin America. a general or a terrorist are well defined extreaes in
the political spectrum. The solean fools are those intellectuals who become
instrulents of their own ignorance."

"The solemn fool is a puppet of the bureaucracy. He loves people in an abstract
sense. Hhen a popular leader turns into a tech Unless, the solemn fool disregards
his. The solemn fools love to go around hotels all over the world and it only takes
then a week to produce a book on what is happening in Cuba. In my book. they are
portrayed sitting by swimming pools and drinking daiquiris and 'nojitos.‘ The first
to turn up are the solemn frols from Italy and Trance then, after they sake their
favorable reports, come the Swedes, the Germans and so on. The solemn fools love a
colorful tyrant and their interest increases in proportion to the degree of cruelty

of a revolution."

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Personal and Literary Conitnent

The sole-n fool is always a racist. Denocracy is good for Europe or for his Latin
Anerican country of origin. But not for the Cubans. for the Chinese or for the Poles
who are "different." who are following a different "soul." This is why the solem
fools become the instrunent of the nest vicious policies in the ease of great
historical goals. "hat, 200,000 people nust be killed to "save" s revolution?

Then. let us do it; history will absolve us.

Gabriela Mistral. the famous Chilean poet, used to call these people "luxury
democrats."

These "advance warnings" which Padilla nentions also reveal that he wants his literary
work, his poetry and his life to go on being couitted. "In my view, the role of

the intellectual is essential in Latin America became people listen to hin. In
Europe. it is different. but for us. who labor under dictatorships. the novel oust
have other functions besides its purely literary one.

He must speak about urban life. we lust give advice. issue warnings, we not practice
a critical awareness. And we nust do this is Caracas in buenos Air-es. in Headco,

in Cuba. People must be told about their lives instead of just offering the.
wonderful pictures of the reality and grandiloquent descriptions of unusual things
which are usually intended for the European public."

13 it hard to be an exile? "I do not feel that I an an exile.“ answers Padilla.

"I teach in New York. I an in constant contact with my people and any country. And I
do not feel like an exile in Spain. this new Spain so full of good emples. I as
deeply moved by the discussions. the denonstrations. the naturity shown both by the
people and by the political parties."

what is the matter. Mr Padilla. haven't you heard people talk about their disenchantment?

"Yes. I have. How foolish. how wicked the disenchanted seen to no. The new Spain is
full of chart: and intelligence."

"But it has not been able to avoid the sole-1 fools. Preedon and dancracy seen
boring to these people. In any case. I think that what is happening in Spain is so
admirable that even the sole-1 fools are entitled to enjoy this denocracy which
they are trying to viciously fight with their disenchantmt."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 INFORMACION Y REWSTAS. S.A.

8796
C80: 3010/17].

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PLO LEADS! 'ARAFAT SW05 MESSAGE TO CASTRO
PA180236 Havana PRELA in English 1831 011‘ 17 Nov 81
[Quotation marks as received]

[Text] Beirut. Nov 18 (PL)--Yasir ’Arafat. chairman of the executive comittee
of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), sent a message to the president

of Cuba. Fidel Castro, in which he reaffirms his support in the face of the
0.8. threats.

The complete text of the message issued here follows:

Comrade Fidel Castro:

"I would like to express in the name of our Palestinian Arab people. in the name
of my brothers and sisters, members of the executive committee of the Palestine
Liberation Organization and in my own name. our firm and principled stand at

the side of friendly Cuba and its heroic people, against Cuba, that is construct-
ing socialism under your courageous and wise leadership.

“l‘hese threats, headed by U.S. imperialism, are none other than another link in
the series of conspiracies planned against the combative Cuban people and
against the friendly Latin American peoples who are struggling to reaffirm their
independence. their sovereignty and their freedom, and to end the domination
and the stealing of the wealth of those peoples by that enraged imperialism.

We have full confidence that the friendly people of Cuba and their arned forces.
under your courageous leadership will defeat these threats and anyone who may
try to harm the independence of Cuba. its sovereignty and its freedom.

Brother President. without a doubt these u.s. threats against Cuba are an
inseparable part of the 0.8. threats launched against the Arab nation. The
rapid deployment forces and the "Bright Star" maneuvers that are being held in
the region. as well as the formation of the "multicountry force" that will be
deployed in the Sinai. are aimed at bringing our Arab nation to its knees,
subjecting it to imperialist rule and robbing it of its wealth."

The military maneuvers that the Zionist enemy is carrying out in the north
of occupied Palestine. aimed against our Palestinian Arab people, against the
Lebanese sister peeple and sister Syria, are none other than a part of these
threats, that crown the declaration of U.S.-Israeli strategic cooperation.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our Palestinian Arab people that are carrying out inflexible resistance
against the new plan of slavery known as autonomy or self-administration.

will continue their just struggle with the support of our Arab nation and

the support of all honest and free men and women of the world. for the purpose
of recovering their inalienable legitimate rights; return self-determination
and the establishment of the independent Palestinian state in their national

territory.

I would like on this occasion to praise the relations of conbative solidarity

that unite our friendly Palestinian and Cuban peoples, in favor of the
interests of peace of our two peoples and of all the peoples of the world.

"I wish you good health and your people lore progress and well-being for
achieving their aspirations in economic construction, social well-being and

the defeat of their enemies.

Revolution until victory

Yasir 'Arafat, chairman of the executive conittee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, and conander in chief of the forces of the Palestinian revolution.

C30: 3020/29

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SAHARAN LEADER SENDS CASTRO SOLIDARITY NOTE
PA162268 llavana PRBLA in English 1949 GMT 16 Nov 81

[Text] Algiers, Nov 17 (PL)--Saharan leader Mohamed Abdelaziz sent a letter
to the chairman of the movement of nonaligned countries, Fidel Castro, in which
he denounces growing ".8. interference in the Western Sahara.

Abdelazlz, general secretary of the POLISARIO front and president of the Council
of Command of the Revolution of the Saharan Republic, draws the attention of the
movement to the seriousness for the region of Washington's decision to support
Morocco even more in its war of occupation in the Sahara.

"the United States is no longer content with merely supporting Moroccan
expansionism," the letter says, "it is devoted to encouraging Morocco and
equipping it with means of death and destruction, so as to subject to its
desires a small people who have been fighting without respite for almost

9 years to make their rights, universally recognized, to self-determination,
existence, freedom and national sovereignty, prevail."

"Since 1975," the Saharan leader recalls, "the United States has satisfied
promptly all the requests for arms made by Morocco in its war of plundering."

He underlines further on that in the face of Saharan tenacity, whose aim is to
install peace in the region, the United States is preparing to intervene even
more directly in the conflict, that is none other than a case of decolonization.

The document addressed to Fidel Castro as current chairman of the nonaligned
movement, sakes manifest the recent visit of a U.S. military delegation to
the Hestcrn Sahara for studying on the spot the military needs of the Moroccan

Army.

"As if its military advisers, its F-S-A, F-S-E, OV-lO planes, radar and other
perfected detection equipment were not enough," the letter adds.

The Reagan administration is now preparing to send to Morocco an impressive
arsenal of new arms, not to defend the undiscussed borders of Morocco, but to
allow that country to "continue its macabre work of destruction and extermina-
tion of the Saharan people and the occupation of their territory," it points out.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1M. USE ONLY

The letter, datelined Hausa, in the liberated territories, states that this
interference is aggravat ing tensions in northaest Africa and can lake all the
efforts of the international organizations to find a peaceful. fair and lasting
solution to the conflict, fail.

With its stand. it underlines, washington not only shows its acorn of the
international cmunity's desire for peace, but that it declares open war
on the OAU. the United Nations and the novenent of nonaligned countries.

Finally. Mohamed Abdelaziz launches an appeal to the noveeent of nonaligned
countries "to scene its responsibilities regarding a problen that directly
concerns it" and that "it unite its efforts to reinforce the possibilities
of peace in northwest Africa and for returning to the Saharan people their
natural rights to independence and national sovereignty."

CSO: 3020/29

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL
DOMESTIC MANUFACTURE OF MILITARY ARMS. EQUIPMENT
Madrid DEFENSA in Spanish Aug-Sep 81 p 156

[Text] The weapons Manufacturing Center (CBPAR) of the Industrial Service of the
Navy (SIHA) is series producing a light rifle. easily handled and very effective.
not only for domestic requirements but also for export.

These light rifles are the first of a series of weapons designed by SIHA specialists.
The light rifle in production is the HGP—79. weighing one kilogram less than imported
weapons. it is also much cheaper and easy to disassemble. since it is sade of fewer
parts. It has s rifled barrel with 12 grooves. instead of 5. which similar imported
weapons have; as s result. its fire is very accurate. It has two fire cadences.

of 600 and 900 rounds per minute. The HGP-79 is being produced at CBFAR in quanti-
ties of 3.000 units per month for equipping the Civil Guard and the Republican

Guard. and there is a contract to export 20,000 units for a value of 550 million
pesetas.

The "GP-70 is the culmination of 3 years of experiments. It will be folloued by
the production of an assault rifle. a 9mm pistol. a mortar. and sporting weapons.

An agreement in principle has been reached between the Italian firm Aeromacchi

and Peruvian authorities for the construction of a factory intended for the produc-
tion under license of the HB-339 aircraft. in its training version. HB-339A. and
tactical support version. HB-339K Velcro-2. Although economic problems remain

to be resolved. the figure of 70 aircraft of this type has been mentioned which.

in principle. will reportedly be produced.

5170
C80: 3010/138

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COLIITRY smou PERU

BRIEFS

SOVIET DEEGAIION VISIT -- Line, 21 Nov (PD-«The Peruvian foreign niniater
announced today that a delegation of the Soviet Union Suprane Soviet will
visit Peru, starting on Tuesday. The mission, which will rennin in Peru for
5 days 1’. headed by Antanas S. Barkauekaa. vice president of the Lithuanian
Soviet Socialist Republic Central Comittea. The visitors will be received
by Peruvian Foreign Minister Javier Arias Stella end by Lin'a Mayor Eduardo

Orrego. [Text] [PA212315 Havana PRELA in Spanish 1540 an: 21 Nov 81]

C80: 3010/ 366

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RUSLAND RAILS STRUGGLE OF SALVADORAN PEGLE
Celebrates International Students Day
FL181769 Bridgetown CANA in English 1760 cm 18 Nov 81

[Text] Parmriho, Suriname, 18 Nov (CAMP-A Suriname Goverment minister has
said here that the struggle of the people of El Salvador was not an isolated case,
but part of s worldwide movement for liberation and end to colonialism and for
economic emancipation. Minister of Education Harold Rusland made the observat-on
while speaking at s sass rally yesterday to sore than 10,000 school-children
following a march around the town to mark international students day, with the
these "solidarity with the people of El Salvador."

At the 0.5. anhassy. they presented a petition to an officer, calling for an end
to 0.8. intervention in El Salvador; the officer in ttttn gave the petitioners a
booklet entitled “Towards a Peaceful Solution in El Salvador."

The rally passed three resolutions, one to be sent to President Ronald Reagan,
another for the people of El Salvador and the third for the Suriname Govern-ant,
pledging support to the administration and the revolutionary process taking place
in the country.

Mr Rusland told the students he was pleased at their revolutionary fervor. What
is taking place in Suriname was part of a worldwide struggle, he said. adding it
was the sme way in El Salvador.

The students also offered to help the goverment in its literacy cmpaign and,
welcoming the offer, the minister invited those willing to do so to register their
names at the ministry.

The march and solidarity rally was organised by the Suriname-El Salvador Comtitee,
the People's Revolutionary Party and the recently-established revolutionary youth
movement.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Student Rally
PA201530 Bavana PRELA in Spanish 1451 GMT 20 Nov 81

[Text] Paranariho, 20 Nov (PL)-Eundreds of Surinsnese students gathered in front
of the U.S. hhassy here to protest the U.S. intervention in the dunestic affairs

of El Salvador.

The student protest joined that of Education Minister narold Rusland, who said that
the Salvadoran people's struggle is part of a vidsr vorldvide struggle for libera-
tion and is intended to put an end to colonialism

A message addressed to the FHLN and the Revolutionary Deaocratic Front which was
endorsed by thousands of Surinusss students, was read during the rally. In this

message, the students expressed "their admiration of the heroic struggle against
exploitation and oppression."

(280: 3025/1008

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400080033-3
STATINTEL