FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10306
5 February 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENERGY
(rouo 2/82)

CONTENTS
ELECTRIC POWER
Progress st Kola A28 in 10th Five-Yes]: Plsn Described
(A. P. Volkov, B. A. Trofinov; SWIMSKIYE
STANTSII, Nov 81) ........................................

Soviets Publish Hap Showing Electric Pover Ststions, Networks
(P. G. Grudinskiy; WICRSKIYE STANTSII, Jun 81) H...

Utilizstion of Nuclear Fuel
(V. K . Sedov; NOVOVORONBZHSKAYA AWAYA
EEHROSTANTSIYA IHENI SO-LETIYA SSSR - PLAGHAN
SOVETSKOY YADERROY ENERGB‘I'IKI, 1981)

Use of Floating Atomic Power Stations in Northern Regions
(A. I. Golovin, et sl.; momma manta, Aug 81)

Mobile 'n'snsfornsrs Moved by Sled
(A. G. Kucher; ELEMICKESKIYB STANTSII, No 11, 1981)

- a - [III - USSR - 37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PROGRESS AT KOLA ABS IN lOTH FIVE-YEAR PLAN DESCRIBED
Moscow ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 11, Nov 81 pp 2-5

[Article by engineers A. P. Volkov and B. A. Trofimov: "The Kola A35 in the 10th
Five-Year Plan")

[Text] The Kola nuclear electric power station, a pioneer of the nuclear power
industry, has been included among the operating stations for eight years. During
this period. the station's collective accumulated a great deal of experience in
mastering the output of the units which have been commissioned and the prototype
power equipment. The collective has gained experience in training operational
personnel and has occupied a leading position among the progressive collectives
in the industry.

Particularly significant successes were achieved during the years of the 10th Five-
Year Plan. In comparison with 1975, the generation of electric power from the

same power units increased by a factor of 2.7, the specific consumption of conven-
tional fuel was reduced by 23 g and the efficiency increased by 2.4 percent.

The qualitative improvement in the technical and economic indicators basically
came about due to the increase in the installed capacity utilization factor, which
in 1980 was 0.935 as opposed to the design figure of 0.8. Over the course of the
five-year plan, the cost per kWh of electric power was reduced by 62.1 percent.
The cost is 0.633 kopecks per th as opposed to the design figure of 0.717.

The expenditure of electricity for auxiliary power was reduced by 0.03 percent last
year, which made it possible to supply an additional 2.2 million hub of electric
power to the consumer. Over the five-year period, we conserved 53,795 t of conven-
tional fuel and 30.4 million hub of electric power.

In the 10th Five-Year Plan we implemented an important program for the construction

of housing and the commissioning of facilities for trade, health care. culture and
education. Living conditions for station workers were improved, and their professional,
general educational and cultural levels rose. The collective's successes were given

a high appraisal by the party, the government and the administration of the USSR
Ministry of Power and Electrification.

According to the results of All-Union socialist competition, the Kola ABS collective
in I978 was awarded the challenge Red Banner of the USSR Central Committee, the

1
FOR OPTICJAI.lEﬂE(NNLY
FOR OFFWCJA1.US£1DNLV

USSR Council of Ministers, the All-Union Central Trade-Union Council and the
Komsomol Central Committee, and the award was recorded on the All-Union Board of
Honor at the Exhibition of Achievements of the National Economy of the USSR. The
collective was 12 times awarded the challenge Red Banner of the USSR Ministry of
Power and Electrifitition and the Central Committee of the industry trade union.

A group of workers at the Kola ABS were presented with high government awards,
among whom were: loading-machine operator 8. H. Loginov—-Order of. Lenin; senior
reactor-compartment operator Yu. I. Begesh--Order of the Red Banner of Labor; cen—
tralized repair shop Supervisor L. B. $tuderikin--Order of Friendship of Peoples,
senior turbine machinist V. A. Novikov-~0rder of the "Badge of Honor"; decontamina-
tion specialist A. H. Pushkina--meda1 "For Labor Valor"; flaw-detector operator

N. P. Morokko--medal ”For Labor Excellence".

Labor productivity in the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan rose by a factor of

2.5 with a 39 percent average increase in salaries. The relative number of adminis-
trative and technical personnel has been reduced by 16.3 percent. while personnel
turnover has been reduced by a factor of 1.5 and in 1980 amounted to 3.3 percent.

The achievement of high technical and economic indicators is a result of the collec-
tive's persistent and systematic work, the active utilization of the achievements

of science and technology and progressive experience. In 1980 alone we implemented
nrganizntionnl and technical measures having an economic impact of l.5 million
rubles. rationalization suggestions having an economic impact of 595,000 rubles

and inventions with an impact of 554,000 rubles. During the 10th Five-Year Plan,

the overall impact of measures directed at increasing technical progress was 15.3
million rubles.

We implemented a system of operations to improve the water-chemical regime: we

have developed and introduced a new regime which makes it possible to improve the
corrosion-protection of the equipment in the stagnantuwater regime; we have developed
and introduced hydraulic processing of the coolant, which makes it possible to
extend the duration of the fuel cycles by 15 effective days due to the removal of
corrosive precipitates from the fuel rods: we have developed and introduced a new
operational water—chemical regime which has also improved considerably the radiation
state of the equipment in the first circuit.

Work is constantly under way at the ABS to improve operational maneuverability and
maintenance. Together with workers from the All-Union Institute of Heat Engineering
imeni l-‘. E. Dzerzhinskiy, we have conducted experimental research and introduced an
operational regime which makes it possible to stop individual operational loops for
repairs. This makes it possible to generate. on the average. an additional 120
million kWh of electric power annually.

The renovation of the seal connections on the high-pressure cylinder and the change-
over from nozzle Steam distribution to valved distribution has made it possible to
increase the reliability and economy of the turbine units and to switch from a
three~year to a four-year maintenance cycle. The automation of control over the
water-chemical regime in the second circuit made it possible to service newly com-
missioned power units without increasing the number of laboratory chemists. Work

is being done to create an automated system of production control (ASU AES). A com-
puter center will be commissioned in 1981.

2
FOR¢0FIWCJAI.IENE(NVLY
One of the major directions of the collective's activities is the protection of

the environment. During the 10th Five-Year Plan, we introduced more than 100 mea-
sures regarding the protection of the environment and the efficient utilization

of natural resources at a cost of 5.27 million rubles. He built and introduced
purification facilities for oil and grease—fouled discharges as well as other puri—
fication facilities for the settlement.

A considerable amount of work is being done at the ABS by members of the scientific
and technical society. a council of junior specialists, the All-Union Rationalizer
Societv and the "Znaniye" society. The economic impact from just the introduction
of personal creative plans on the part of Scientific and Technical Society members
amounted to 265.000 rubles in 1980. The plan of Yu. N. Pytkin, senior engineer

in the physics laboratory. was submitted for an honorary certificate from the All-
Union Scientific and Technical Society and the Central Administration of the Scien—
tific and Technical Society of the Power and Electrification Industry.

The overall economic impact from the introduction of rationalization proposals

and inventions amounted to 10.3 million rubles during the fivewyear plan. The
All-Union Society of Inventors and Efficiency Experts [VOIR] was awarded an honorary
certificate from the VOIR's Central Council "For Early Creation of a Savings Fund

in the 10th Five-Year Plan."

Based on the results of socialist competition, among the best rationalizers were:

N. V. 0vdin--machinist on the modular control panel and author of two rationalization
proposals with an overall economic impact of 43,000 rubles. V. P. Chernyy--electric
welder in the TPK shop [expansion not provided] and author of six rationalization
proposals to increase the reliability and operational efficiency of the equipment;

A. A. Hatveyev-wsenior engineer in the physics laboratory and coauthor of the inven-
tion "A Method for Increasing Fuel-Cycle Duration" (with an economic impact of

more than 600,000 rubles) and two rationalization proposals for operational control
over the burn-up of fuel.

The work team in the metals and welding laboratory was recognized as the beat crea-
tive team. The team is composed of senior engineer Yu. A. Rychkov, technician

N. P. Morokko and flaw-detector operator V. V. Klimov. They are all authors of
four rationalization proposals to improve metal monitoring and are the creators

of devices and equipment for remote monitoring of metals in the equipment.

Deputy chief engineer V. I. Pashkevich was submitted for award of the title "Honored
'nventor of the RSFSR."

At the Kola ABS. 46 studies were carried out in accordance with contracts for crea-
tive cooperation with scientific research operations.

The next scheduled generating unit has been built. It began generating power on

“4 March 198]. This is a great victory for the collectives of construction and
ustallation, start-up and adjustment. scientific, design and planning organizations
.3 well as the operational personnel at the Kola ABS.

3
ETHICMNWCJAI.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FKNRCNﬂHCJAl.US£1DNLY

In connection with this. we should note that the design of the new power unit,
developed by the Leningrad branch of Teploelektroproyekt, is qualitatively different
from the designs for units previously put into operation. Characteristic of this
new unit is the application of a modular system for the produccion equipment and
standard structural elements of precast reinforced concrete, the utilization of 650
newly developed pieces of equipment which. in the opinion of the design's authors,
should increase the reliability and operational economy of similar power units,
standardize the equipment and structural elements and reduce construction times.

The design for the third generating unit differs in its more extensive utilization
of automated production-process equipment. An automated control system for the
unit with new-generation data-processing computers is being used as the basis of

the system.

This automated control system includes a system of automatic regulation using auto-
matic electronic regulators, remote control devices and the full scope of operational
protection equipment as well as data-processing and control computers. This system
has made it possible to eliminate cumbersome control panels. since the machine
periodically "runs through" the sensors for all parameters and signals when there

is a malfunction in any of them. Hhile doing so, the machine automatically records
the time. the magnitude of the error and the number of the parameter. In addition.
the machine records a certain number of values using the basic recording devices.
lhis makes it possible to free the personnel from watching over a great many instru-
ments and recording their readings.

The data-processing computer also performs as an "advisor" for the operator. In
subsequent stages. the machine will also be charged with generating—unit control

functions.

The power-equipment builders also approached the delivery of equipment in a new
way. The new equipment differd in its high—quality manufacture, stemming from
the application of improved raw materials, better technological effectiveness and
intensified monitoring of manufacturing quality at its various stages.

There is no doubt that the operations personnel at the Kola ABS contributed much
to putting the station into operation. They worked hand—in-hand with the builders
and installation workers. solving the problems that arose and helping to carry

out the work.

The successful erection of the new power units at the Kola ABS has also been possi-
ble in recent vrnrs because this urgent All—Union Komsomol construction project

is at the center of attention of the Komsomol and party organizations. In a persis-
tent and effective manner, they helped to solve the most complex issues regarding
the supply of materials and equipment and, most important, qualified construction
and installation personnel.

The start—up of the power unit at the Kola ABS confirmed the tradition of advancing
development of the electric-power industry on the Kola Peninsula. This makes it
pusPlblr to solve problems regarding the further development of industry, transport.
agriculture. the electrification of home life and service spheres. It will also
imprOVe the fuel-and-power balance of our country's northwest sector.

h
FOR 0F11CJAI.USE‘0NLN
Even more complex tasks face the collective in the current five-year plan. Chief
among them are:

develop the design output of the third power unit. cmunissioned during the first
quarter of 1981;

complete the construction and insure the start—up of the fourth power unit in 1983;

insure reliable. economical and steady operation of all Kola ABS power units in
the power system.

The workers, engineering and technical personnel and staff of the Kola ABS are
filled with resolve to carry out these tasks successfully. we have all the necessary
conditions and resources for this.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Elektricheskiya stantsii", 1981

9512
C80: 8144/0431

5
ltﬂltﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USB¢MNLV
0V“ VEALU‘OW Vol.1 Vb‘hl

ELECTRIC PONrIR

SOVIETS PUBLISU HAP SHOWING ELECTRIC POHER STATIONS,NEuﬂmKS
Moscow ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 6, Jun 8| pp 70-7I

LKrticle hy P.G. Grudinskiy, professor, council of senior power engi-
necrs: ”Map 'Lenin's Path for the Electrification of the Soviet Union'EY *

LTeng The Soviet Union has celebrated the 60th anniversary of Lenin's
electrification plan - the famous GOELRO.

Prior to this date the Main Administration of Geodesy and Cartography
of the USSR Council of Ministers published a multi-color map of the
Soviet Union showing the most important electric power stations and
networks. The map is rightly called "Lenin's Path for the Electrifi-
cation of the Soviet Union."

V. 1. Lenin was keenly interested in maps that showed electrification.
In his comments concerning the publication of an atlas Lenin demanded
that it contain a map showing electrification. ** In a letter to G.
M. Krznizhanovskiy that dealt with preparation of documents to acquaint
members of the 3rd Comintern Congress with the electrification plan he
wrote: ”there must be included (in the lobbies of the congress) I) a
map showing electrification with a brief text in three languages; 2)
also. regional maps;... 1.) and a map of the more important local. small

and new electric power stations. And there must be a brief (I6 - 26
pages) brochure in three languages and an abstract on the "electrifi-
cation plan." ***

* Scientific advisors G. A. Illarionov and V. Yu. Steklov. Text by
v. Yu. Stcklov. Moscow. Hain Administration of Geodesy and Cartogra-
phy of the USSR Council of Ministers, I980

** V. l. Lenin. Complete works, Vol 52. pp I63. I65.

*** v. I. Lenin, Complete Works, Vol 52, pp 250-251.

6
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu
For several years the Main Administration of Geodesy and Cartography
has been performing a valuable service by publishing maps showing elec-
trification.

This new map reflects the status of electrification in the USSR as of
I980 and its development in the near future. It includes diagrams
which show the growth rates of the electric power industry, the consump
tion of electric power by the leading sectors of the national economy.
the electrification of railroads. and so forth. A diagram showing the
GOBLRO electrification plan occupies a special place in this publica-
tion.

The map shows the period or year that the power station was built,
what kind of power station it is (TBS. CBS. ABS). which power stations
have a rated capacity greater than one million kV. and what electric
power stations are being built and the high voltage electric power
transmission lines that are being erected. It also makes note of the
basic trends in Soviet power engineering - the powerful hydroelectric
power stations in Siberia, the atomic electric power stations in the
west and in the central regions of the Soviet Union. It also shows
the mainline lines for intersystem ties and the routes of the |.|50 kV
AC and the l,500 kV DC power lines.

The electrification map clearly reflects the status and future develop-
ment of the atomic power industry.

A quick glance at the map enables one to grasp the enormity of what
has been accomplished by the Soviet Union by pursuing Lenin's path
from the GOELRO plan to the present.

The Unified Power System has encompassed the entire Soviet Union, co-
vering the USSR with a dense network. The system's powerful electric
power stations are spread throughout the Soviet Union. Electric power
mainlines are being built which will be linked with power systems of
Asia and the Far East into the National Unified Electric Power System.

In l978 the National Unified Electric Power System's electric power
stations produced 75 percent of all power produced in the Soviet Union.
At the end of the IOth Five-Year Plan this indicator reached 88 per—
cent; and by the end of the llth Five-Year Plan it must exceed 95 per-
cent. Re are close to realizing V. l. Lenin's great idea on the cre-
ation of the National Unified Electric Power System. which has been
supported by directives from the 23rd. 26th and 25th party congresses.

The rich information of the map is augmented by the text in a separate
brochure. which was written by V. Yu. Steklov, who is known for his
publications on the history of electrification. The brochure provides
a brief review of the development of Leninist ideas on electrification.
It provides data on the more important stages in the construction of
electric power stations and networks and their joining together into
electric power systems. Emphasis is given to the dynamics of develop-
ing the electric power industry and to the leading principles for the
hey periods. There is an outline of the principles of Lenin's teach-
ings on electrification and their effect in the basic stages of creat-
ing the National Unificed Electric Power System.

7
ran orrrcm. use ONLY
FOR Ul'l'lLIAl. USE ONLY

The diahrnm and map of the development of the electric power industry
and the explanatory information make it possible to come up with a
complete picture of Soviet electrification.

The map and the explanatory brochure are especially useful for Soviet
propaganda agitators. students, technicians and engineers at power enr
tn"priscs. It would be uieful to display this map in each power indus-
trv organization and in each of their Red Corners for the education and

treining of Soviet power specialists and engineers.

COPYRIGHT: Encrgoizdat, “Elektricheskiye stsntsii". 1981

8927
cso: !822/52

8
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY
UTILIZATION OF NUCLEAR FUEL

Moscow NOVOVORONEZHSKAYA ATOHNAYA BLEKTROSTANTSIYA IHENI SO-LETIYA
SSSR - FLAGHAN SOVETSKOY YADBRNOY BNERGETIKI in Russian I981 pp 26-36

LTranslation of section entitled "Utilization of Nuclear Fuel" from
book: "Novovoronezh Atomic Electric Power Station imeni 50 Years of
the Soviet Union - Flagman of the Soviet Atomic Power Industry", by
v. K. Sedog7

ifextj The core of a reactor is an object of constant observations

and research directed at increasing the relative intensity of the fuel
elements. equalizing the irregularities in the radius and height of

the core and increasing the depth of the burning of the nuclear fuel.
As a result the thermal capacity of the core is increased from 760 HR
in the first power unit to l,37S MB in the third and fourth power units
without changing the size of the reactor's core. This became possible
primarily by equalizing the field of the release of energy and adopt-
ing a liquid regulation of reactivity using boric acid. The surface

of heat exchange of the core has been increased in power units 2, 3

and a. In each fuel assembly there are 126 fuel elements [tvel]wiﬂi

a diameter of 9.] mm instead of 90 fuel elements with a diameter of
I0.2 mm, which are used in the first power unit. The irregularity
coefficient of the release of energy for the radius of the core is re-
duced from 1.8 to l.25-l.35. The duration of the operating period of
the reactor is increased from 2|0 to 280-320 effective 26-hour periods,
which with consideration of the coefficient of use of the rated capa-
city and duration of the downtime of the power unit for reloading and
repair makes it possible to replace the nuclear fuel once a year.

Over the long period of time that the Novovoronezh ABS has been in
operation a significant amount of experience has been amassed in the
use of nuclear fuel in reactors.

Nuclear fuel is reloaded once a year in all power units. The yearly
planned preventive maintenance of the equipment is done at the same
time that the reactor is refueled. At the ABS they have successfully
assimilated the practice of refueling with the unloading of the nu—
clear fuel from the core and removal from the reactor of the internal
housing devices in order to control the condition of the internal sur-
faces of the reactor housing and the internal housing devices.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UIILLIAL UOL Uﬂhl

On the basis of their design features the water—cooled reactors require
a full stop for refueling in the core.

The fuel (nearly 40 tons of appropriate enrichment for each type of
reactor) that has been loaded into the reactor is adequate for the op-
eration of the power unit at capacity for 300 to 350 24-hour periods.
After using up this time and exhausting the supply of reactivity it is
necessary to refuel. On a reactor that has been stopped and cooled to
a temperature of 40 to 70 degrees C a depressurization is performed by
removing the cover and then using a reloading machine according to spe-
cial programs dOno on a computer the refueling operations are carried
out. The ins) assemblies which have the least remaining amount of

233U isotOpe in fuel elements, or the greatest burning of 2350, are un-
loaded from the reactor and fresh fuel is loaded into it. During the
refueling operation in accordance with an estimate approximately one
third of the fuel assemblies is reloaded. This is enough fuel for the
reac:or until the next refueling in a year. In this manner. each fuel
assembly works in the reactor over a three-year period.

Tho refueling operation is a rather complicated and important operation;
mistakes cannot be permitted to happen. For this reason the refueling
prugram is compiled on a timely basis; the correctness of executing
thif program is monitored by personnel from the physics laboratory.

Planned work on equipment repair of the first circuit and monitoring
of the metal of the equipment and pipelines are carried out during the
refueling operation. To perform these tasks within the necessary time
periods long before the power unit is stopped for refueling a network
schedule is compiled. which reflects all work to be done while the
unit is down. The schedule also displays the time periods and labor
expenditures required for the work. Measures for the organisational
and technical support of preparing for the refueling are also speci-
|'icd in the network schedule.

Very serious attention is given to compiling the documentation for pre-
paring for "etuuling at the Novovoronezh A35. The correctness of the
documents that are drawn up and the conduct of the preparations for
them are a suru guarantee for the qualitative execution of the refuel-
inn and repair work within the shortest possible time periods.

The zirst shutdown of the reactor of the first power unit of the Novo-
vc:unezn A55 for refueling and repair was performed from 29 October
through l2 December 1965. The shutdown lasted 43 days.

in" experience gained during the first refueling was carefully analysed
And used when preparing for subsequent shutdowns. The second refueling
of the first power unit was done in 1966; it took 4| days. The fourth
refueling was in I968 and it took 29 days.

A: the Novovoronezh AHS a great deal of experience has been gained in
clueling. One would expect that a refueling could be done in 20 to
15 days, but in connection with the one-time execution of planned re—
pair work and metal examination. refueling takes from 25 to 30 days.

I)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A 30-day period has been accepted as the standard shutdown for refueling
watervcooled reactor power units.

The designed depth of burning the unloaied, expended fuel in all reac-
tors has been exceeded through the adoption of measures to improve the
use of fuel.

Table a demonstrates that the designed average_depth of burning the
_unlosded fuel is equal to l2.85 kg of poison lshlak7 per ton of uran-
ium for the wen-210; 27.15 kg for the wen-33’s; In 28.3 kg of poi-
son per ton of uranium for the vvsn-aso. This depth has now been ex-
ceeded for all power units. In the reactor of the-first power unit
this has been achieved by using TVS quel assembly] with a 3 percent
enrichment (up to 30 assemblies), with a designed enrichment of the
loaded fuel at 2 percent. In the reactor of the second power unit an
increase in the burning of the uloaded fuel was provided basically by
adopting a TVS with a 3 percent enrichment without absorption elements
[pell. The actual burning of the unloaded fuel was able to exceed the
designed burning for the vvsn-aao reactor of the third power unit by
switching this reactor to a fuel feed of a standard enrichment of 2.4
to 3.6 percent for the VVER-ébo reactor. The use in the fuel sections
of the SUZ Lsystem for controlling and protecting the reactor? TVS
assemblies with a 2.4 percent enrichment in a mode of two refuelings
per operating period of these assemblies has had a definite influence
on burning.

The systematic use of the regime for extending the operating period
was also brought about to a certain extent by an overall increase in
the burning of the unloaded fuel for all of the AES's reactors. The
maximum depth of the fuel burning in individual unloaded fuel assem-
blies equalled for the first power unit 31 kg of poison per ton of
uranium (initial enrichment was 2 percent); for the sec0nd power unit
this figure was as.u kg of poison per ton of uranium (initial enrich—
ment was 3 percent); and for the third power unit the figure was 50.6
kg of poison per ton of uranium (initial enrichment was 3.3 percent
with absorption elements [pelL

To maintain an adequately low radioactivity of the cooling agent of the
first circuit and the timely discovery and rejection of assemblies
with non-hermetically sealed fuel elements [tvel] at AEs's with water- _
cooled reactors. special control methods are used, which are based up-
on the registration of the availability of fission products of the nu-
clear fuel in the cooling agent of the first circuit.

On a working reactor the condition of the fuel element jackets is eval-
uated using a radiOchemical analysis of the cooling agent and addition-
ally by looped control systems for the delayed neutrons. The purpose
of the radiochemical analysis is to evaluate the content of radionu-
clides - iodide, barium, strontium, xenon, krypton, cesium and neptun-
ium - in the water of the first circuit. To separate the nuclides from
the samples of the cooling agent use is made of radiochemical me-
thods for separating into tissue sorbents,_gartition chromatography and

extraction methods.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.uuuu: noson o:u no chases: ozu and >H I H "hzuxzoo

Esﬁcwu: no m:0u
\vo«uon usonucN snazzy:
3: .moaunatmmw u: mean \50muoq use:
vuuwogca “manﬂ>du ncN 32 .Hosu vwvaoH mmwv usosqu upmuw
law no codumanm0u 1:: on” a“ somumsn cw .coﬂuwuwao duqumcm
no zuumv aaaqxa: Isou mo suaou uwauo>< nae“ no sumac; no Mao»

     

 

 

 

 

 

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A method for controlling the isotope composition of the cooling agent
without taking samples has been adopted on power units III and IV at
the Novovoronezh ass. Using a gamma-spectrometer based onesemiconduc-
tor detector a direct measurement is accomplished in the pipeline on
the mixed action bypass-filter of the water cleaning unit of the first
circuit.

The continuous monitoring of the condition of the fuel element jackets
on an operating reactor is accomplished by looped systems. which make
it possible to monitor the dynamics of the development of the fuel el-
ement sealing process and to issue recommendations on the periodicity
of the radiochemical analysis of the cooling agent.

During the reloading of reactors extensive use is made of a method,
which is based upon the miscount of the activity of the gas sample,
which was selected from the hermetically sealed can with the TVS being
tested. This is the so-called dry method. Preliminary experiments
have been conducted on determining the speed of the TVS warm-up in a
dry can for determining the amount of time that the TVS can safely be
in the air. The experiment demonstrated that the amount of time is

IL minutes that the TVS can be in the air. The sensitivity of the
method is sufficiently high. The dry method. as a rule, identifies
all TVS's with fuel elements that are not hermetically sealed.

The dry method is relatively simple and does not require complicated
equipment; it make; it possible to combine operations for monitoring
the fuel element jackets with the technological operations for reload-
ing the core of a reactor, thereby reducing the time required for re-
loading fuel.

To precisely determine the extent to which the fuel element jackets
are not hermetically sealed in the TVS, which was divulged using the
dry method. the activity of the iodide in the water samples are deter-
mined when steeping the TVS in water. In other words, use is made of
the so-called wet method.

Experience in monitoring the hermetic seal of the fuel element jackets
of the TVS during the reloadings of the nuclear fuel in the reactors
of the power units and in the radiochemical composition of the cooling
agent of the first circuits and the results of TVS research in the
protective chamber attest to the high reliability of the TVS's that
are used at the Novovoronesh ABS.

At present the monitoring of the hermetic seal of the fuel element
jackets in a reactor that has been shut down is not conducted during
each reloading; the need to monitor is evaluated according to the re-
sults of monitoring the radiochemical composition of the cooling agent
and according to data of the system for monitoring the hermetic seal
of the fuel element jackets for delayed neutrons during the operation
of the reactor at rated capacity.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVI\ UL'A'I.\ILM Udh Ut‘hl

Controlling the Fuel Cycle

During the operation of the reactors of the Novovoronezh ABS a great
deal of attention is devoted to questions having to do with optimizing
the use of nuclear fuel. Based upon the planned amount of maintenance
and reloading work and also taking into consideration the power unit
shutdowns for current repair work the planned utilization coefficient
is determined for the established rated capacity of each power unit;
and the amount of time needed for the operation of the fuel loads of
the reactors is evaluated; and the amount of fuel to be ordered is
precisely determined.

Difficulties in planning the annual schedule for loading the power
units are to be found in the fact that the actual utilization coeffi-
cient of the established rated capacity can differ greatly from the
estimated as the result of unforeseen deviations from the planned work
regime. This leads to a lack of precision in planning the moment when
the supply of radioactivity is exhausted for combustion at a nominal
thermal rated capacity of the reactor. The error can reach ID to IS
percent when determining the utilization coefficient of the established
rated capacity, which in turn leads to an error in selecting the dura-
tion of the operating period up to 30 2b~hour periods. If the duration
of the operating period is estimated with an error of up to 6 percent.

the error amounts to 20 25-hour periods.

All of this attests to the need of controlling the fuel cycle of the
reactors, which makes it possible to minimize the consequences of
these errors.

The fuel loads of the VVBR-type reactors are selected using a set of
programs; moreover. several variants of the cartograms of the configu-
rations of the reactor core are estimated. The estimated duration of
the operating period is ensured by loading the determined amount of
fuel.

At the Novovoronezh ABS to increase the efficiency of using fuel sever-
al measures are taken. In particular. in the process of operating the
AES they use a regime for extending the operating period. The feasi-
bility of extending the operating period is connected with the freeing
and use of additional reactivity using temperature and capacity effects.
To do this it is necessary to reduce the temperature of the first and
second circuits and also to reduce the pressure of the steam as it

leaves the steam generators.

Extending the operating period makes it possible to increase the aver-
age depth of fuel combustion and to somewhat reduce the fuel component
of the cost of producing electric power. In turn, reducing the load
in the power unit results in some increase in the capital.component

of the cost of producing electric power and reducing the usefulness

of the power unit.

1h
FOR orncm. USE ONLY
For AES's, which have several power units. tne possibility oi lﬂclt
working in an extended operating period mode makes it possible to mOre
freely establish a time for commencing the fuel reloading, while mak-
ing a comparison with the conditions that have evolved within the po-
wer systems and with the possibilities of performing maintenance.

Specialists from the scientific-research department of the Novovoronezh
AES have devised a methodology for evaluating the optimal work time of
the power units with VVER-ZIO. VVBR-365, and vvsk-aao reactors at capa-
city and temperature effects. The power units in such a regime were
used repeatedly. From the experience of the work of the power units in
a capacity effect in a regime of the natural reduction of the parame-
ters of the first and second circuits with the turbine throttles fully
open (without an emergency supply of reactivity on the reactor's regu-
lating organs) and in connection with the by-stage reduction of the re-
actor's thermal capacity (with an emergency supply of reactivity on the
reactor's regulating organs) it follows that the maximum output of elec-
tric power is achieved during the natural reduction of the parameters of
the power units.

The regime for extending the operating period is especially expedient
when it is necessary to carry out capital repairs on one of the tur-
bines of the power unit, for which a longer stqnd-down is required
than for reloading the power unit. In this c as the turbine is re-
moved for capital repair after exhausting the supply of reactivity for
combustion; and the power unit is stopped for reloading with an esti-
mate that results in both turbounits being ready for operation by thc
end of its reloading. Our experience shows that in this case we
achieve the highest indicators for fuel use.

The regime for extending the operating period in actual conditions is
an important tool for raising the flexibility of planning the work and
improving the technical—economic work indicators of the power unit hav-
ing VVER-type reactors.

In Table 5 we see that when power unit No 2 at the Novovoronezh AES

is operating in the extended operating period mode for no more than 40
25-hour periods thr utilization coefficient of the rated capacity is
not reduced below to percent, which corresponds to the normative co—
efficient of rated capacity for an A25. The work of the power unit in
the extended operating period mode with an average coefficient of rat-
ed capacity below 80 percent is inexpedient.

The time of work in capacity and temperature effects for each power
unit can be changed depending upon the condition of their technical-
economic characteristics, which is connected basically with the time
of year and is determined by an estimate of the technical-economic in-
dicators of this mode.

The mode for changing capacity during the operation of the reactor in
capacity and temperature effects is of particular interest, when dur-
ing the hours of the morning and evening load maximum the rated capa-
city is raised to ICC percent by increasing the reactivity from the

15
you onrcm use can
Table 5: Ucncfiption of the work of power unit No 2 of the Novovoronezh
A68 in the extended operating period mode

—_-————-

   
   

   

   

Point of
reference

Indicator Operating period number

  
  
  

Calendar time of
power unit opera-
tion

 
 

24-hrs 32

  
  

Effective work
time

   

24—hrs 28

  
  

Additional out-
put of electri-
city

   

millions of
KH/hrs

249

    
   
 
  

Coefficient of
utilization of
rated capacity

   

percent

  
  

Average electri-
cal capacity

 
 

H"

  
  

Initial and final
electrical capacity

   

HH

  
 
   

Average value of
gross efficiency
of power unit

      
 
 
  

 
 

percent 26.6 26.9 26.’ 26.7 28.0

Average percen-
tage of electric
power consumption
[or personal needs

   

percent

  
 

reduction of the poisoning of the reactor during its operation at the
reduced capacity during the day-time and night-timedipsof loads in
the power system. Such a mode was tested on power unit No 2 in the
spring of I973. At this mode the output of electric power is less,
but a higher capacity is ensured during the peak consumption hours
from the power system than at a stable capacity.

In Table 6 we see the duration of the operation of the reactors
in a capacity effect in the years I972 through 1976. within just five
years 6.7 billion Kw/hrs of electricity was produced when operating in
a capacity effect; during this same time period 62.64 billion KH/hrs
of electricity were generated altogether.
Table 6: DuratiOn of the operation of reactors in a capacity effect
during the years I972 through I976

    
  
   
 

    
  

    
    
  
 
    
 

     
 

Operating Duration of Output of Reduction in
unit period operation electrici- capacity, in
ty in ca- HH/Zb-hra
pacity ef-

fect, KH/hrs

Eff. 26/hra
26/hra

     

UUU MUM) NNNNN NB)
“$0 NOW 9D~—UIU| 0°

 

Thus, when working in a capacity effect more than ll percent of the
electric power was produced, “hich ia a considerable bonus.

COPYRIGHT: Atonizdat, l98|

8927
C50: 8|64/0550

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC Pall-IR

USE OF FLOATING AMIC POWER STATIONS IN FORTE!“ REGIONS

Hoscou ATOMN—AYA BNERCIYA in Russian Vol 51, No 2, Aug 81
(manuscript received 26 Feb 81) pp 83-87

[Article by A. I. Golovin, V. H. Abramv, K. I. Koveleuko, G. V. Merslikin, Yu. A.
Sergeyev. G. A. Sosenkov. A. P. Suvorov, P. V. Sukhoruchenkov, v. H. Sheakmr and
A. T. Shularev] .

[Text] The operation of. drilling rigs used in deep exploratory drilling for oil
and gas is now supported, with one slight exception. by diesel drive and boiler
plants operating on fossil fuel. however, the use Hf electric motors is sore ef-
ficient for these purposes.

The advantages of electrifying exploratory drilling make it possible to reduce the
length of individual production operations and to increase the comercial rate of
drilling wells by an average of 15 percent because of this. to reduce the nmber
of workers involved in drilling by approximately 12 persons in each brigade and
the areas of basic equipment by 12-14 percent, to simplify installation and con-
struction and to reduce the excavation area occupied by construction of wells up
to 10 percent. The advantage of this Isthod is also the fact that the working
conditions and everyday life of the drilling brigades are inproved with ooeplex
electrification and the possibility of the soil and reservoirs being contaminated
by petroleum products is sharply reduced.

Many promising areas for prospecting for oil, gas and other minerals in the Arctic
are located in regions with an extensively developed system of large and small
rivers or in other difficultly accessible places. since transport mications
is difficult on these sections. the use of floating ABS (Atomic power stations] can
solve many problems of energy supply, organization and sanagenent of geological
prospecting work, especially operdons in deep exploratory drilling for oil and gas
related to considerable expenditures of labor, energy and materials.

The use of floating A35 in deep exploratory drilling for oil and gas also opens up
the opportunity to carry out couple: electrification and thus to significame in-
crease the overall efficiency of operations. Development of floating ass with out-
put of 6,000 kw (Figure l) and corresponding engineering and economic investiga-
tions were carried out in this regard that showed the real possibility of
developing these ABS and the effectiveness of using than.

1 8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The development and operation of floating A38, designed to provide production and
service facilities of geological prospecting organisations and drilling rigs with
electric power and heat, have the following characteristics:

-sise restrictions, primarily in draft. related to the need to pass through
shallow rivers, bays or gulf”

prolonged operation under conditions of great remoteness from industrial
centers and repair bases and the rigid requirements on reliability and autonomy
caused by this)

irregular loading regime typical for drilling wells, that places higher re-
quirements on the operation of the energy mit of a floating ABS under portable
conditions.

It was feasible Ami-1.5 water-cooled boiling-water reactors on floating ABS with
regard to the size requirements and some other concepts [1). Installation of two
independently operating nuclear power units (rest!) was provided on these ass. This
solution is the best to ensure the required reliability and uninterrupted genera-
tion of electric power. The output of each ram is 3,000 k" (of electricity).
which ensures that the users will be supplied with total peak power of S,000-6,000
kw.

ABV type reactors differ from ordinary W!!! [Hater-cooled power reactor] by inte-
gral configuration, i.e., by location of the core and steam generator in the same
strong vessel. Moreover, natural circulation of the coolant in the first and
second circuits of the nuclear steal-producing mit (YaPPU), self-regulation of
reactor power by negative temperature coefficient of reactivity and production of
saturated steam with variable parameters, steam-generator built into the reactor
vessel which consists of Field pipes separated into sections and that permit re-
pair (plugging the pipes) without unsealing the first circuit are typical for
them. all these solutions and also sons propositions adopted in development of
YaPPU of type ABV contribute to special operating reliability and simplicity of
maintenance.

comparison of the integrated and pclyunit configurations of YaPPU from the view-
point of economic indicators with output of 50 an (electricity) and below show the
feasibility of using integrated configurations [2]. YaPPU of type ADV with unit
output from 12 to 65 NW (heat) were developed in this regard [3]. An ADV-1.5
YaPPU with output of 14.5 m (but) was used in the project of the block transport-
able atomic m: Sever-2, designed to supply power to remote and difficultly ac-
cessible regions [1, 3]. Subsequent investigations showed that a WEE with inte-
grated ccnfiguration and natural coolant circulation of considerably greater unit
output (up to 200 am (electricity) and above) [4] can be developed for the YaPPU.
wed in stationary A28.

The developments confirmed that integrated YePPU that produce saturated steam can
be made with natural coolant circulation in the first and second circuits up to

output of at least 12 MW (electricity) for floating ABS, which are proposed for
operation on internal reservoirs.

1
FOR Oil-1C“ USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Thus. an .ntegratod configuration, natural coolant circulation and self-regula-
tion that ensure high operational reliability determined selection of the AMI-1.5
YaPPU for use on the floating ans Sever, designed for autonomous Operation in re-
mote Arctic regions. An extensive complex of. calculation and experimental inves-
tigations that confirmed the outlined conclusions and values of parameters of the
ABv—l.5 YaPPU in the project of the ABS Sever has now been carried out by special-
ized orga-ﬂrmt‘ons. A core with cluster reactivity coupmation system has also
bee“. devs'ogzeé whicr permits an .-.ncrease of ABV-lS. output to 18 MW (heat) and
thus to ensure that electric output of 3,000 m is produced from each of two energy
units of the f'oating A35.

The main steam generating unit of the ABV-l.5 ‘1an consists of four main parts
(Figure 2): a housing, cover with steam generator sections. radiation shielding
of the vessel with core basket and recharging cover with 802 drives.

 

Figure 2. Diagram of Steam Generating Unit of lav-1.5. l--expaneion tank:
2--core; 3~-stean generator: 4-402; $--aeparator; 6-—stean to
turbine; 7--£eedwater inlet; 8--cooling unit of decontamination
and cooling system Sums-p; lO--electmnagnetic filter: 11--ion-
exchange filter; 12--oernet filter; lit-«regenerative heat exchanger

Moreover, the REV-1.5 YaPPU contains:

a ntuam expansion tank equipped with electric heaters and designed to maintain
required pressure (72 absolute atnospheree - 7.26 ﬁlm) in the first circuit over
the entire range of coolant teupereture variation from normal to operating (approx-
mately 240‘C):

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a coolant decontamination system for the first circuit that includes mechan-
ical. electronagnetic and ion-exchange filters:

scheduled. mrgency and repair cooling system;

a separator drum with pipeline system that link it to the steam generator
section and that cuts off the natural coolant circulation channel of the second

circuit;

normal and emergency delivery system of the first circuit. storage of spent
fuel assemblies, a recharging machine and miscellaneous auxiliary systems and de-
vices that ensure operation of the YaPPU during prolonged autonowus operation or
a floating us.

A distance of 1,000 mm is provided between the core and the lower end of the steam
generator sections to restrict activation or‘ the second circuit. All leads from
the reactor are made without a cover. Based on the condition of locating two
ADV-1.5 YaPPU. two turbogenerators. starting diesel generators and miscellaneous
equipment on board a floating ABS, the main dimensions of the ABS Sever were taken
as follows (Figure 3).

Overall length 83.6 meters
width 21.0 meters
Depth to main deck 3.7 meters
Transport draft when travelling

along a river 1.94 meters
Draft during operation 3.03meters

The floating ABS Sever is not self-propelled. It is towed to the operating points
and is installed in natural dams or specially erected shore cuts protected from the
effect of water and ice and also partially from the effect of wind.

Taking established practice and the prospects for development of prospecting me-
thods into account, we proceeded from conditions of energy support for deep explor-
atory drilling for oil and gas when using two or three drilling rigs operating
simultaneously, separated up to 25-30 km from the A25 and supplied with electric
power by means of LBP [Overhead power transmission line] or cables designed for a
voltage of 6 and 3S kv when selecting the output of these as. It was shown that
the required output of a floating ABS should comprise approximately 6.000 low when
using drilling rigs for wells up to 5 km deep. This output will also be adequate
for supplying power to housing and production bases when prospecting for solid
minerals.

After prospecting or exploratory wells have been drilled in a given region or when
further drilling is carried out using mobile gas turbine electric power stations
operating on the fuel found (gas, condensate or oil) . the AES Sever can be moved
to new regions.

The necessary cowlex of machinery and devices that ensure fulfillment of adjust-
ment (preventive maintenance. repair and so on) operations, improving the

21
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
   
  

    
 
  

N Ii III I) [a
I '_--
”Ilia-iii
.Ikgglﬂ'
332-1“:

.III—.=.-..

      

Figure 3. Arrangement of Equipment on Floating ABS Sever: a--longitudina1
profile; tam-hold: o--upper deck: duslain deck; la--right YaPPO:
lbw-left YaPPU: 2--equiplsent room (room for regulating operations);
3--auxiliary room of YaPPU: 4—-spent fuel storage: 5 and 6--ap-
paratus for concentration and hardening of liquid wastes of high
and low activity, respectively; 7--ssnitation control point: 8--
turbogenerator section; 9--control station: lO--roou for electric
distributing devices: llo-cable room 12--rooln for waste tank and
air lift pumps: 13--auxiliary diesel electric station section:
l4--auxiliary boiler section: lS-mrkshops and stores: 16--labor-
stories; l7--service-housekeeping rooms: 18--observation station

recharging of spent TVS [Fuel assmbly] froe the reactor to the storage depot for
cooling and subsequent transfer for reprocessing or burial. is provided onboard a
floating ABS with regard to the prolonged period of automloue operation (no less
than 810 years with a possibility of redeployment every 2-3 years) under the com-
plex naturaieclinatic and economic conditions of the Arctic. The storage depot is
designed to receive three sets of spent TVS (two scheduled and one urgency). The
recharging machine, gantry and external crane and different technical accessories
ensure reception and loading of fresh fuel and unloading of spent TVS and solid
radioactive wastes.

The provided apparatus for concentration and burial of liquid radioactive wastes
are designed for total reprocessing and concentration of all high- and low-active
wastes to e dry state. They can be stored at the A35 in the form of a dry residue
and then removed from it as part of solid radioactive wastes to central burial
locations.

Coupler automation of the control end monitoring systems of YaPPU operation and
also the remaining systems and machinery is provided on the floating ABS Sever.
It is suggested that 42 persons will service this ABS. A total of five duty shifts '
of watch personnel-~four shifts of workers and me reserve-~is provided. Besides
the duty shift, the daytime shift includes supervisory and repair personnel.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As is known, a considerable part of the mass of any atomic-powered vessel is the
ram [Atomic power plant). The mass of the latter is determined minly by the
sass of the biological shielding, the presence of which leads to an appreciable
increase of displacement and consequently to an incmase of the draft of the ves-
sel. For exanple, the draft of the ﬂoating ABS sturgess (one water-cooled boil-
ing-water reactor with output of 10 MW (electricity)) constructed in the United
states is equal to 4.5 meters [5]. It is Obvious that this ABS can be used on a
limited nurbe'r o'f reservoirs, which sharply reduces the possibility of using it,
especially for the needs of geological prospecting.

Therefore, the principal difference of the functions of the Yam on an atomic.
powered vessel, where it is the propulsion plant, and on a floating ABS, where the
YaEU operates only when the station begins operation at a site, was taken into ac-
count when developing the AES Sever. This circmtance permits one to allocate two
main functions of biological shielding of a floating ABS to supporting the normal
radiation situation: during operation of one or both reactors at a required loca-
tion and with shutdown and cooled-down reactors during redeployment of the station
to a new site.

According to this, the biological shielding of the floating ABS Sever is divided
into two parts: an inherent accessory of the YaPPU transported during redeployment
as part of the station and reooved from the ABS prior to its redeployment and new-
ly installed after arrival at the new operation site.

Transportable shielding provides radiation safety during redeployment of a ﬂoating
has, i.e., with shut-down reactors, while total shielding supports the radiation
situation in rooms and in external surroundings that meets the radiation safety
regulations (MRS-76) with one or two operating reactors. with one operating re-
actor, fuel recharging and repair operations on a shut-down reactor are possible.

The transportable part of the shielding is designed with regard to the requirement
of redeployment of a floating ass every 40-45 days after the reactors have been
shut down. This time is considered as that required to prepare the station for
mvement. Transportable shielding is designed to attenuate the residual radiation
of the fuel assemblies in the reactor and during storage of spent TVS and also ac-
tivation radiation of the structures and equipment of the YaPPU. The active equip-
ment of the YaPPU is located in the vessel of the floating ABS as compactly as
possible and with regard to its use as biological shielding components to reduce

to a maximum the mass of the transportable shielding. The radioactive equipment--
reactors and storage of spent TVS located between then-are shielded by a layer of
lead and are located in a tank with borided water. This shielding also provides
access to the equipment and fittings of the first circuit for inspection and repair
when the reactors are shut down. The thickness of the lead layer is shaped as a
function of the direction, intensity and energy spectrm of the radiation and con-
prises 3-7 as. The thickness of the water layer varies from 85 to 170 cut. The
total mass of the transportable shielding is approximately 200 tons. The less ac~
tive equipment of the raw (expansion tanks, cooling system and so on) is used.

as was mentioned, as shielding coeponents of more active equipment.

The second part of the shielding resoved prior to redeployment is the main coupon-
ent that ensures attenuation of the radiation of operating reactors. when it is

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

removed. the draft of the floating ABS comprises approximately 2 meters, which
permits it to travel over many internal waterways 0f the northern and northeastern
regions of the USSR, especially during the period of high water levels, i.e., dur-
ing floods

According to the foregoing, the reactors are installed in special shafts located

in tanks of the transportable shielding, while the miscellaneous active equipment
of the YaPPu (expansion tanks, decontamination system for the first circuit, ion-
exchangc filters, evaporation apparatus of radioactive wastes and bubbling tank)

are configured into blocks and located in shafts located in the main part of the

shielding. The shafts are covered above by protective plugs. Top attachment is

provided for all the equipment to improve repairability.

The $02 drives are led directly to the reactor cowaroaent and are covered with a
special hermetically sealing cap. The volume of the cap is included in the her-
metically sealed space of unserviced rooms (shafts) of the YaPPU and prevents ac-
tive steam from entering the part of the reactor compartment being serviced during
emergencies when the pipelines of the first circuit are unsealed.

Deaerators are located on the upper deck to provide the required pressure head to
the feed pumps. All the remaining equipment is arranged in groups by designation
(see Figure 3). This arrangement permits a considerable reduction of the length
of the pipelines and improvement of operating conditions.

Workshops and laboratories and also an auxiliary diesel electric station with
output of 400 kV, emergency electric power station with output of 100 kV and an
auxiliary boiler plant operating on diesel fuel and used during distillations,
during installation of the station at a new site and suring preparation of it for
redeployment, are provided on a floating ABS. housing quarters for the crew on-
hoard during towing are located on the floating ABS. housing is not provided for
the operating personnel, based on the experience of developing the floating elec-
tric power station Severnoye siyaniye.

The advantages of electrified systems for exploratory drilling indicated above are
manifestcd regardless of the types of fuel used by autonomous energy sources. Ad-
ditional, very important advantages of electrified exploratory drilling systems--
a considerable reduction of the total volumes of work in transportation of fuel
and other goods, construction of production bases for expeditions and parties,
temporary housing villages and branch repair-machine bases and as a result a con-
siderable reduction of the need for a work force--appear when floating ABS are
used. As a result one can expect a reduction in the cost of drilling exploratory
wells for oil and gas in northern regions with the optiaum operating conditions
of floating ABS by approximately 20 percent compared to the diesel version and one
can expect an increase of labor productivity by 25-30 percent. Floating ABS can
satisfy the most diverse conditions of geological prospecting work.

Thus, the economic effectiveness, an increase of labor productivity, improvement
of environmental protection, operational autonomy and high reliability permit one

to conclude that introduction of floating low-power atoeic power stations into
geological prospecting work is feasible.

214
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Zhil'taov, V. A. et el. AWYA MRGIYA, Vol 26, No 5, 1969.

2. Andrew, P. A" A. H. Mannie): and Yu. A. Serqeyev, in} Proceedings of nu
Symposiun on Small- and Medium-Power Reactors, Vienna, MBA, 1971.

3. Abrenov, V. M. et :1, Report No 713 at the Fourth Geneva (inference, 1970.

4. Kotov, A. P. et el, 1n: "cpyt ekepluetetsii ABS 1 putt del’neyeheqo rezvitiye
atomnay energetiki" [Experience of Operating Atoaic Power Plants and "eye for
Further Development of Atomic Power mgineering] , Reports of Jubilee Conference
Devoted to the 20th Anniversary of Atom: Pater Engineering, Vol 2, Obninek,

Izc-vo PEI. 1974.

5. (211886, 6., TIE HILITARY ENGINEER, V01 58, NO 382, 1966.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. "Atomaya energiya", 1981

6521
C80: 8144/006

25
roe omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POWER

UDC 621.31l.42.027.3-l82.3(57l.651)
MOBILE TRANSFORMERS MOVED BY SLED
Moscow ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No )1. 1981 pp 70-71

(Article by A. C. Kucher. engineer. Hagadanenergo: "Sled-Mounted Transformer Substa-
tious"]

[Text] Under the conditions prevailing in the Far North the overwhelming majority of
35 kV substations have transformer capacities up to 6300 kV‘A. As a rule. customer
connections are few--three to five. But mining industry customers characteristically
employ mobile electric transducers. As a result we see 6 kV lines extending farther
and farther from substations, and it eventually becomes necessary to put in another
substation at a new location. which involves difficulties in planning and design, the
provision of equipment and the construction of a specifically zero cycle.

The construction process usually breaks up the surface layer of the soil, and the

permafrost thaws despite the gravel spread over the area around the ORU [outdoor dis-
tribution system] after the completion of construction operations. All strip founda-
tions and concrete slabs consequently begin to "float" and to sag and buckle; condi-

tions in Chukotka therefore require the construction of deep pile-supported foundations
and the expenditure of scarce construction materials and metal in order to preserve the

substation's zero cycle.

 

Figure I. General view of mobile Figure 2. Helicopter view of mo-
sled-mounted 35/6 kV substation bile sled-mounted 35/6 kV substa-
with I800 kV-A transformer (ver- tion with 2500 kV A transformer
slon without VM-35. on line-trans- (version with VM-35).

former unit).

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1f the substation has to be moved to a new location the equipment. switching devices.
busbars and metal construction can be re-used; but all the foundations have to be re-
built and the old ones left behind.

The northern electric-power systems of Hagadanenergo decided to conduct an experiment.
Together with the Bilibinskiy ore-dressing combine, the network production organisa-

stations. in Chukotka the equipment in outside installations can be repaired or painted
only in the summer, since the climatic conditions in the Far North do not permit this

in winter. The short summers. however. are periods of intensive operation for mining-
industry complexes. and they cannot permit substatioaa to be shut down and electric
power to be turned off. Switching this function to a mobile substation has made it

the ground circuit, which under permafrost conditions, as a rule. takes the form of a
deep shaft sunk by a special method employed by VNII-l Hintsvetmet [All-Union Scientific
Research Institute-i of the USSR Ministry of Nonferrous Metallurgy].

The Bilibinskiy ore-dressing combine has begun to fabricate mobile substations in place
of permanent facilities at the sites of new mines, and. withOut any decrease in relia-
hility, this has made it possible not only substantially to accelerate the installation
of new power-supply systems. but. by realizing a saving of rOughiy 60,000 rubles per
single-transformer substation, to do it more cheaply as well.

If it becomes necessary. the mobile substation is easily transported over winter roads
or over the tundra by one or two bulldozers. The substation receiving gantry is then
folded into a travelling position and does not interfere with movement. The substation
any be put into operation in a new location within minimal periods of time provided a
ground circuit is ready.

Advantages of the sled-mounted substation would also include the fact that the surface
soil cover under the sled remains unbroken. which insures preservation of the permafrost
regime and a stable horizontal position for the substation platform.

The minimum capacity of the transformer mounted on the mobile Substation is 35/6 RV.
6300 kv-A.

If it becomes necessary to increase the number of outgoing lines. external distribution
boxes may be mounted on supports attached to the sled platform.

CONCLUSION

stations.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Elektricheskiye stantsii“. 1981
6963
C50: 1822/3a END

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY