FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/10566
' June 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 8/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS W10566
7 June 1982

ussa REPORT
ENERGY

(moo 3/92)
CONTENTS

”(ERIC PWER

Methods of Calculating nuclear-Ml matures Discussed
(L.D. Otter-an; momma: armsn. Mar 82) ........... 1

Brief!
All-mien Contcmncc 9

FUELS

Ministries Involved Content on Roundublo Talks About Pipeline-

building
($1. Doagaryan. et 51.; WW I PRAVO, lo 12, 1981) H... 10

Book D13 amaca New Method: for Improving Recovery of 011, Gas ,
Gas-Condensate .
(Yuriy Vuil'ycvich chtaev, Yuriy Ayrapetovich Bmkirov;
mBYm "BHI I W, 1981) coco-cocootooooooooocoococo-000.000 15

- a - [III - USSR - 37 9000]
ZLBCTR 16 PM

U'DC 621.311.25:621.039.55:657Jo7l.l.001.26
METHODS OF CWTIRG WEAR-FUEL mmiwnns 318608830

Moscow ELEKTRICEBSKIYE STANTSII in Russian he 3. Mar 82 pp 6-9

[Article by 1.. I}. Gitel'nan. candidate of econosic sciences at the ursi'sltiy Poly-
technicel Institute: 'Tarticulai Features of Calculating and Planning Expenditures

for Nuclear Fuel "

[Text] Up until now. the matter of calculating and planning nuclear-fuel expendi-
tures has been a controversial question in the econoly of nuclear power stations.

To a considerable degree. this is associated with the specific properties of nuclear
fuel and the characteristics of its production consuwtion at us's. The calculation
of the fuel conponent in the cost of electric power fron AEs's is couples and differs
fmdseentally from the aethod enloyed st thersal electric-power stations. The cal-
culation is cmla, since it requires that one consider my constantly changing
fuel-cycle parameters. the depth to which the nuclear fuel burns. partial-recharge
operation of the fuel. assemblies. the presence of a transient period of reactor oper-

ation and the feasibility of reclaiming spent fuel.

The method used to calculate the fuel cosponent nust have the correct theoretical
basis. Up until now. the points of view regarding the economic nature of the re-
actor’s fuel load have been varied. In [1] it is shown that. theoretically. the
necessity of applying the fuel load to the fixed capital has been clearly estab-
lished for ABs's operating in an open fuel cycle. Recently. many practical and
scientific workers who previously held another opinion (the fuel load is to be ap-
plied to the working capital) have since changed it. Thus, the authors [2] believe
that the fuel load met first of all be applied to the “8's fixed capital. while
the fuel ease-bliss added during partial recharging must be applied to working capi—
tel. Such a "split" solution is theoretically incorrect. since. with the exception
of monies invested in the initial fuel load. capital is not required to carry out
partial rechargings. with a correctly fora-slated eethod for calculating the fuel
component. each group of fuel asaerblies transfers its cost to the cost of electric
power up until the nonent that aeseebly is replaced. we shall explain.

In the general case. the fuel couponent consists of 71 similar groups of fuel assen-
bliee (each sisilar group is taken to be a specific set of fuel assediliee possessing
identical cost and service life). The cost of each sisilar group is transferred to

_.._____.._._———..
In the fora of a discussion. Ed.

”MUSEONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the electric power in accordance with the group's service life. The first group
of fuel asseﬁlies transfers its cost per unit of time in the amount of 01/11; the
second is (31/ng the third 03/7,. and so forth. Thus. the initial advanced cost
of the fuel charge

is broken into parts from the moment the fuel charge enters the production process.
Each of these parts begins to be converted at a very specific rate.

Up until the moment any of the fuel-asseﬁly groups is replaced, cssh must be set
aside to accomplish recharging. This is possible if the amount of the cost trans-
ferred over a specific period of time corresponds to the amount of the fuel charge
burned. The letter is determined as the total burn-up of all fuel-charge comonents
of similar groups. Consequently. if this condition is met. partial rechargings do
not require additional expenditures. A portion of the initial advanced cost which
has returned to its initial point is spent for this purpose. If additional fuel
assesblies or assemblies more expensive than those previously located in the core
(it is possible. for example. in the transition period when fuel-assemblies of a
higher enrichment level are loaded) are'used during recharging, then additional funds
are required. In this case. these funds must come from capital investment.

The issue of the economic nature of the fuel charge is not only theoretical-ﬁt has
important practical significance. The application in practice of the fuel charge to
the working capital leads to a nutter of negative points. aside from the difficulty
in creating a method of determining the fuel component. In design practice, the
determination of the indicator for per-unit capital investment in construction is
based on the cost of the find capital created. When the fuel load is applied to
the working capital, the vaiue of this indicator is reduced considerably. In accord-
ance with the existing stand on financing the working capital of an enterprise under
construction. the necessary cash funds for manufacturing the first fuel charge are
allocated after a considerable delay. This complicates the mutual financial rela-
tionship of the client and the manufacturing plant.

The method employed for calculating the fuel component must meet the following re-
quirements:

it must provide for the feasibility of regenerating the fuel charge when the reactor
reaches its maxim-1 service life;

it must include in the electric-powercost the total expenditures for partial re-
charging;

it must be as stable as possible over the course of the period for which the release
tariff on electric power is established (over the course of the five-year plan. -
viously);

it must be simple and easy to use;

mmmmv
POI MAI. USE ONLY

it must be as universal as possible; that is. it must be suitable for making calcula-
tions at ABs's with various types of reactors and different methods of fuel-cycle
organisation (operating on "waste" or with regeneration. with "complete burning"

of fuel assadslies unloaded in the transition period or without their repeat utili-
ration).

In order to realize complete regeneration of the fuel charge. one must. in our opin-
ion. establish a depreciation rate for the renovation. This rate mat be determined
based upon the reactor's service life. As far as partial recharging is concerned.
there are a mater of specific features stening from the presence of a transition
period of reactor operation (as noted in [3], page 298. "in the general case. any
change in the technical-economic characteristics of the fuel elements used gives

rise to a transition period."). This transition period can reach 6 to 8 years for

a channel-type reactor. Fluctuations occur in the fuel assedalies during this period.
and they can be eliminated by only one method--by a proportional distribution of

the future recharging expenditures for any period.

Obviously. it is necessary to establish a five-year accounting period. The objections
of some operational workers based on the difficulties encountered in predicting re-
charging expenditures for 5 years in the future are not to be examined as a contrary
arm-ant, since the five-year plan for an ABS. just like for any other enterprise.

is developed according to a undatory procedure. The problem consists of achieving
the necessary degree of accuracy in the average term calculations.

Thus. expenditures for partial rechargings must be written off gradually according
to a fixed rate. despite the economic notion that the rate of depreciation for major
overhauls not approved in the state planning agencies is a local accounting entry.

As a result of the theoretical approach examined. we have developed a working method
that combines long-term fuel~assesﬁly planning (for the five-year plan) and current
fuel-assedaly planning (annual) and determines the actual fuel-assembly value.

In [2] it is suggested that the time factor be taken into consideration when deter-
mining the annual deductions from the initial fuel charge. we will note the method
used at “8'9 in capitalist countries: the annual totals for depreciation are dis-
counted by the amomt of income which these funds bring to the enterprise. These
funds remain in circulation until the moment when they are needed for total regen-
eration of the fuel charge. In our country. a number of economists propose that the
time factor be taken into consideration when calculating the depreciation deductions.
without going into a theoretical discussion. we note that. in our opinion, the exam-
[nation of this factor as applied to us'. is premture until the natter is resolved
for the economy as a whole.

The problem is more couple: when it comes to the regeneration of spent nuclear fuel
[1.]. In this case. production at AEs's must be considered as multipurpose: the
generation of electric power and the nanufacture of intermediate products in an effort
to extract plutonium-239 and the remaining uranium-235. Dual-purpose production

is examined for further simultaneous production of hot water and steam at an MES

(an A1113). The distilling of water and the carrying out of radiochemical processes.
etc.. are possible in principle.

MWUSEONLY
rm OFFICIAL use ONLY

The cost of fuel in dual-purpose production is split--one half is included in the
cost of the electric power. the other in the cost of the intermediate products.

Since the duration of the electric-power production cycle and the intermediate-product
cycle are not identical. the process by which each indicated part of the fuel-charge
cost is transferred to the output takes place in various ways.

The electric-power production cycle at AEs's is many times shorter than the period

of fuel-charge functioning. Consequently. a corresponding portion of the fuel-charge
coat is gradually transferred to the electric power and is likewise gradually re-
placed in cash form to the degree it is realised. Only fixed capital is sinilar

in nature with respect to productive consumption and cost turnover.

The production cycle for intermediate products is equal to the tine individual groups
of fuel elements are located in the reactor. that is, the operating period. Conse-
quently. the other part of the fuel-charge cost is transformed to the manufactured
product in one production cycle and is replaced in cash form after its realization.
(bviously. this part of the cost appears as working capital.

This is illustrated in the drawing for an individual fuel element in the fuel charge.

In bookkeeping practice, an individual accounting of the fuel-charge cost components
is not suitable. The following conclusions can be made in favor of including it
with the fixed capital.

In the first place. in a fuel cycle without regeneration, the issue of the economic
nature of the fuel charge as fixed capital is resolved clearly. as was shown. In the
general case. when the ABS operates in a cycle with regeneration as well as without
it. uniformity will be insured in accounting for the fuel charge.

In the second place. including the fuel charge in the fixed capital makes it possible
to consider the objective nature of the movement of the greater part of its cost

(the formation and utilization of the depreciation fund and the procedure for f inan-
cing regeneration). For fast reactors where the core and breeding blanket are sepa-
rated in the design, another solution is possible: the coat of the core is applied

to the AES's fixed assets, while the cost of the breeding blanket is applied to the
working capital.

The features noted for fuel-charge productive consuaption in an ABS reactor operating
in a closed fuel cycle must be taken into account when calculating the cost of the
power generated. The selection of a method of calculation depends on how the ABS
output will be classified according to the specific purpose of the production pro-
cess.

Obviously. the prinary purpose of production at an ABS with thermal reactors will

be the generation of electric power. Thus. in this case. this product will also

be the primary one. The spent fuel (intermediate product) in which plutonium is
accululated. formed as an unavoidable result of the production process, must be exam-
ined as a by-product. Since the latter is an unvoidable consequence of the produc-
tion process. one can some that only a portion of the past labor applied to the
cost of the raw material from which this by-product is derived and only a part of

the direct'expenditures in its manufacture (if there are such) take part in the
formation of its cost. All remaining expenditures in the given production process
are applied to the cost of the primary product.

we 0W“. USE ONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

The production process at ABs's with fast reactors is arranged so as to obtain two
specific products-«electric power and plutonium. Consequently, each of these is

a primary product. in such production. all expenditures (excluding direct) are ap-
plied to a certain degree to both products.

Taking this into consideration. the following methods of calculating the coat of
production can be proposed for “8's with thermal reactors.

l. The exclusion or write-off method. In this method. the cost of the bydproductm
the intermediate product-is not calculated.

The cost of the spent fuel elements at previously established prices is subtracted
from the overall expenditures. depending upon the depth to which the fuel has burned.
The remaining figure is applied to the fuel component of the electricdpower cost.

The prisary drawback to the exclusion method consists of the following. The costs
for the spent fuel elements can differ significantly from the actual A38 expendi-
tures for the formation of plutonium in the nuclear raw material, since many factors
that do not depend on the ABS influence the level of these costs. As a result. it
is possible that "in certain cases, the fuel component of the cost of electric power
can approach zero. and, seemingly paradoxical at first glance, a negative value can
arise for the fuel cosponent of the cost of electric power generated at an ABS."

[3. page 166). The appearance of such a "paradox" contradicts the labor theory of
cost.

0:: the other hand. the exclusion method is simple and in principle is not ruled out
for application at ABs's with thermal reactors where the price levels correspond.

2. The distribution method. Expenditures for fuel are distributed between the elec-
tric power and the intermediate product using some criterion.

Such a criterion can be selected based upon the physical nature of the production
process: proportional to the amount of neutrons in the core expended on f iasion and
radioactive capture. Or. the criterion can be economic. It can be, for example,
proportional to the cost of the co-odity output with respect to wholesale prices.
or it can be proportional to the average industry cost for each of its products.
All remaining expenditures are included in the electric power.

This method is more complicated than the first. but its important advantage is that
it makes it possible to calculate the cost of electric power with greater accuracy.
Moreover. in this case the possibility of the "paradox" we mentioned arising is ruled
”to

At Aﬁs'a with fast reactors. as was pointed out. the electric power and the inter-
mediate product are the primary products. This predetermines the methodological
features of the calculation. In out opinion. the cost of each product must be cal-
culated. This is only possible when the expenditure-distribution method is employed.
First of all. it is necessary to distribute the fuel expenditures with respect to

a specific criterion.

MWLIISEMV
,aﬂnkuumovaaime»
awbwu

 

Hypothetical Diagram of the ibvenent of Fuel-Blenent Coat
Key:

1. Initial coat of the fuel element

2. Portion of the coat applied to the cost of the intermediate product
3. Portion of the coat applied to the coat of the electric pouer

6. Realization

5. Acquisition of new fuel elements

6. Service life of fuel ele-ent

7. Spent fuel-~internediate product

8. Cash

9. Cash equal to the initial coat of the fuel element

FOI‘DIFIJAI.UBE1IVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another simpler method, however, is possible. If, in the precise-approximtion pro-
cedure. it is assmed that heat is formed in the core while plutonium is formed in
the breeder blanket. then it is logical that the cost of the core fuel be applied to
the electric power and the cost of the raw material in the breeder blanket to the
intermediate product. Thus method, of course. provides an approximte result. Con-
sidering the ease with which it can be applied. we must examine its feasibility.

All remaining expenditures can be calculated by a similar method used at TBTs's:

the direct expenditures and inediately applied to the product with whose generation
they are associated. The indirect expenditures are distributed proportional to the
values of the fuel and raw-material coqonenta of the cost of the electric power
and the intermediate product.

When the distribution method is applied, the matter of the relationship between the
level of prices according to which the spent fuel assemblies (the intermediate pro-
duct) are realized and the cost of the intermediate product itself is very isportant
for the economic activity of an A38. Since this price is established based on the
necessary expenditures for the production of plutonium (1’). three versions of the
relationship between its value and the cost of the intermediate product (01?) are
possible in the general case: I) P- ICU; + m; 2) P > 019+ P"; 3) P < 01? 4- Pg,
where PN is the normal profit for an ABS. When the prices established for spent fuel
elements correspond to the individual expenditures for production (version 1). A25
revenues are insured at the normal industry level.

If the price for spent fuel elements is considerably higher than the cost of the
intermediate product (version 2). additional revenues are generated for the ABS which
are not a result of any improvement in its economic activity. (bviously, the extra
revenues must be removed from the budget. Another method can be esployednone can
establish estimated prices for spent fuel elements at the level of individual produc-
tion expenditures at a given ABS.

Finally, with version 3. the utilization of a method of expenditure distribution
when calculating the cost of production can lead to systematically unprofitable ABS
operation. In order to avoid this. in the given case it is advisable to use the
exclusion method for ABS's with thermal reactors, especially since at such a price
level the possibility of the indicated "paradox" occurring is eliminated. As far
as “8'3 with fast reactors are concerned, such a method of relating the price and
the cost of the intermediate product is doubtful.

Conclusions

I. For an ABS operating in an open fuel cycle, the reactor's fuel charge must he
considered as part of the fixed assets. Applying the fuel charge to the circulating
capital causes a nunber of problems.

2. The method used to calculate the fuel component must examine the total regenera-
tion of the fuel charge and provide for an acctnaulation of cash for partial recharg-
ings. In the author's opinion, it is most advisable if the expenditures for partial
recharging are written off gradually according to a fixed norm determined for the

f ive-year plan.

3. Hith regeneration of spent fuel, the fuel charge of a nuclear reactor has a dual
economic nature—it simultaneously takes on the roles of fixed and working capital.

mmmmv
”OFFICIALUSEONLY

In practice, the entire cost of the fuel charge must be included in the AES's fixed
assets. The calculation of the fuel cosponent nuat be node in accordance with this.

6. At AES's with thersal reactors, electric power is the primary product, vhile
spent fuel elenents (the intermediate product) are considered a by-product. This
being the case, it is advisable to calculate the cost of production using the enclu-
sion method or the uthod of distribution of expenditures.

5. At AEs‘s with fast reactors, the electric power and the intermediate plutonium
product are the primry products. In this case, the calculation of the cost of each
of the products trust be carried out on the basis of the nethod of distribution of
the overall expenditures.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Batov, B. 1., Khanin. V. V. and Gitel'mn, L. D., "Certain Questions of the
Econony of Nuclear Electric Power Stations,“ BLEKTRICEBSKIYE STANSTII, No 12.
[971.

2. Brodov, D. I... et s1., "0n Calculating the Fuel Coqonent of the Cost of Electric
Power and the Efficiency of Fuel Utilization at AES's," Scientific Proceedings
of the Bnergiya Scientific Production Association of the USSR Hinenergo, No 2,
I975.

3. Batov. V. V. and Koryskin, A. PL, "Ekononika yadernoy energetiki" [The Economics
of Nuclear Power Engineering]. Atonizdat, Hoscow, 1969.

lo. Citel'nan, 1.. D. and Khsnin, V. V., "0n the Method of Calculating the Fuel
Component of the Cost of Electric Pover at ABS's Hith Regeneration of the Nuclear
Fuel." Proceedings of the Ural'skiy Polytechnical Institute, Sverdlovsk, No 212,
1973.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. "Blektricheskiye stantsii", 1982

9512
C50: [822/123

MWWONLY
roeommrustoutv

EIECTRIC m

BRIEFS

ALL-UNION CONFERENCE—An All-Union Conference organised by the USSR Ministry of Power
and Electrification. Sverdlovenergo. Uraltekhenergo and the Sverdlovsk (blast Admin-
istration for the Scientific and Technical Society of Electrification and the Power
Industry took place in Sverdlovsk. Representatives of loading scientific-research
and design institutes, installation and adjustnent organizations. manufacturing
plants. power stations and power systems took part in the conference's work. At the
conference, 65 papers and reports were listened to and discussed. In his address,
chief engineer of Glavtekhupravleniye V. N. Timofeyev esphssised that in the coming
years the aribastus fuel and power-production comlex will be developed further.

he also pointed out the urgency of questions associated with the burning of lkibastuz
coal and the set-up and mastery of son-m power mite. At the conference. opera-
tional experience gained from six power mite at the Reftinskaya and Troitshsya
GRBS's as well as the Ekibastuz 61138-1 was covered. The speakers noted that a great
contribution to the construction and mastery of power-unit equipment was made by the
collectives of the Podol'sk Machine-Construction Plant ineni s. Ordzhonikidse (210);
the Khar'lrov Turbine Plant (Kthz); the Blektrotyashmsh and Sibelektrotyazhnsh
plants; the Troitskaya, Reftinskaya and Bribastus GRBS's; Chelyabenergo.
Sverdlovenergo, Pavlodarenergo, Glavtekhupravleniye of the USSR Minenergo. the Kazakh
SSR Ministry of Power and Electrification, Teploelektroproyekt, the All-Union
Institute of Fleet Engineering ineni P. B. Dsershinslriy. Soyuztekhenergo. the Kazakh
Scientific Research Institute of Power Basineering, lasenergonsladka and enterprises
of Glavteploenergomontazh and Glavenergorenont. All power units of the Troitskaya
and Reftinskaya GREs's achieved their design-indicator levels. The per-unit expend-
iture of fuel at the best unit (No. 8 of the Troitskaya CRIS) was 328.8 g/m. The
utilization factor of installed capacity at the No. 8 unit of the Raftinskaya cans
reached 90 percent. The msximm period of uninterrupted operation at the GRBS's

No. 7 wait was 2,352 hours. In addition. the participants at the conference noted
that a under of inortant natters reuin unresolved. The accident rate on turbines
has risen considerably in recent tines. The low quality of power-unit equipment
delivered by plants of Hinelektrotekhpron. Hinkhimsh and Hinenergonash was noted.
In a nutter of cases. there are significant shortcomings in the design docuentation.
The problem of reducing the harmful nitric oxides released into the stnosphere has
not been solved. The conference adopted a further resolution directed at continually
improving the reliability and economy of 500-)!" units operating on Bkibastus coal.
[Text] [Moscow REKTRICHBSKIYB STANTSII in Russian No 3. Mar 81 p 78] 9512

COPYRIGHT: her-goisdat, ”Blektricheskiye stantsii". 1982
(:50: [822/123

memories“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS

. MINISTRIES INVOLVED com 0" ROUNDTABLE TALKS ABOUT PIPELINEBUILDING '
Moscow KHOZYAYSTVO I PRAVO in Russian "0 12, 1981 pp 81-83

[Replies by Deputy Minister of Petroleum Industry sh. nongaryan. Deputy USSR lini-
ster of Gas Industry A. Gudz (deceased) and First Deputy linister of Construction
of Petroleua and Gas Industry Enterprises Yu. Batalin to previously published
roundtable discussion report: "Work Zealously and Build Economically“: passages
enclosed in slantlines printed in boldface: for previous reporting on this round-
table discussion please see JPRS 80205, 1 March 1982, USSR Report Energy, No 91.
pp 21-44]

[Text] Information about a roundtable meeting organized by the
editors of the journals KHOZYAYSTVO I PRAVO [The Economy and the
Law], PLANCVOYE KHOZYAYSM [The Flaming Activity], MATERIAL“
NO-I‘EKHNICHESKOYE SNABZHENIYE [The Supplying of laterials and
Equipment] and SOTSIALISTICEBSKIY TRUD [Socialist Labor], which
was held in Tyumen', and at which questions of the rational use
of resources during oil and gas pipeline construction were dis-
cussed, was published in the journal's fifth issue this year.

The editorial board is publishing replies that have been re-
ceived from the Ministry'of Petroleum Industry, Ministry of Gas
Industry and Ministry of Construction of Petroleum and Gas
Industry Enterprises.

/Deputy Minister of Petroleum Industry Sh. Dongaryan/reports that a large number of
urgent problems on whose solution the ministry is working constantly were touched
upon in the information that was published.

One of the most important ways to increase capital—investment effectiveness is to
concentrate it, to reduce the number of construction projects. The capital-invest-
ment concentration that the ministry is now effecting is marked by the following
data. while the amount of work performed in 1981 increased by 38 percent over 1978.
the number of facilities being erected simultaneously was decreased.

Minneftegazstroy [Ministry of Construction of Petroleum and Gas Industry Enterpris-
es], winnefteprom [Iinistry of Petroleum Industry] and Hingazprom [Ministry of Gas
Industry] have also unified the dimensional schemes for production buildings for

various oil and gas industry facilities. Minnefteprom and Iinneftegazstro design
organization specialists have prepared a list of outfitted-module8(BKU's) at are

necessary for building the appropriate facilities.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ft“!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USEiJNLY

The industrialization of construction. based upon the use of outfitted modules,is a
basic Minnefteproa engineering policy. Today's construction volume is unthinkable
without further development of the outfitted-module method and the solution of
questions that participants of the Tyumen' roundtable meeting spoke about.

/These problems would be solved more successfully if they were included in inte-

grated systems programs formulated by the USSR State Committee on Science and
Technology./

Supplying outfitted-module production with the required equipment sh0uld be im-
proved. Minnefteprom and Iinneftegazstroy are working on solution of the question
referred to.

/But also directly connected with this is the overdue need to abolish the USSR Gos-
stroy decision of 30 December 1976 to include the cost of manufacturing outfitted
modules in construction and installing operations volume. The cost of the BKU's,
as industrial products. should, in our opinion. be included in equipment costs./

In 1975-1976. temporary prices that were supposed to be reexamined during the mas-
tery of large-scale module output were set for experimental BKU's. However, these
prices are still in effect now. In the opinion of specialists of Giprotyumennefte-
gaz Il‘yumen' State Institute for the Design of Oil 'and Gas Industry Enterprises] of Minnef-
tcprom. they have been overstated by 20-40 percent for various types of BKU's.

Articles produced by linnefteprom plants in Tyumen' average 25 percent lower in
cost than similar output by linneftegazstroy. USSR Goskomtsen [State Committee for
Prices], USSR Gosplan and USSR Gosstroy could participate in solution of the indi-
cated problem.

The roundtable participants expressed an interesting suggestion about including a
chapter, "The Organization of the Supplying of Materials and Equipment." in trunk
pipeline construction designs. It is desirable to introduce this also into the de-
sign for the buildup of oilfield facilities. If USSR Gosstroy produces a positive
solution to the question. the erection of facilities for furnishing supplies and
equipment to construction projects will be regularized.

The Ministry of Petroleum Industry also considered the proposal of the roundtable
participants to grant USSR Gossnab's main regional administrations the right to
redistribute above-standard surpluses of equipment and materials that exist at en-
terprises, regardless of the agency having jurisdiction, to be justified. This
will satisfy entirely the task of making rational use of supply and equipment re-
sources that was advanced in 26th CPSU Congress decisions.

The balancing of plans for production and for construction and installing opera-
tions in regard to all indicators is a basic for successful fulfillment of the
established tasks. Iinnefteprom is taking all the steps that are necessary for
this. However. it is still not possible to achieve a full balancing. Thus, only
the client ministry. not the contracting construction ministries. has to plan the
introduction into operation of fixed capital in production construction and of liv-
ing space inhousing construction. This causes great difficulties in the formula-
tion and realization of plans. Minneftegazstroy often breaks down for its organi-
zations tasks for introducing housing into operation that are different from the

Minncfteprom planning indicators. Planning organs should firmly adopt the measures
called for by the CPSU Central Committee and U SR Council of Ministers decree of 12

July 1979.

ll
IIIlCHHHCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

/Twicc winnefteprom has examined linneftegazstroy proposals to build trunk oil
pipelines turnkey style, and it considers this possible (in accordance with lin-
nefteprom designs) in regard to gas-treatment plants and repair plants. production
bases. supply bases, and centers for gathering and processing oil and gas./ The
turnkey construction of trunk oil-pipelines imunacceptable, since all the construction
and installing work on the linear portion is concealed. and even where there is
constant client surveillance. it is not always possible to get the necessaay’quali-
ty in laying them. In turnkey construction the client is eliminated entirely from
surveillance.

In order to coordinate with precision the work to develop the recovery of oil and
gas and to build housing and social and cultural facilities in West Siberia. lin-
nefteprom has created within its central staff a standing current-operations group
manned by highly qualified specialists. West Siberian sections have been estab-
lished within a number of administrations.

In 1985, drilling done by the expeditionary rotating-personnel method in west Si-
beria will increase 2.6-fold over 1980. and worker manning will be approximately
doubled. For those who work under the rotating-personnel regime. a summarized ac-
counting of worktime is being established. Brigade members work. as a rule. on a
12-hour schedule in continuous productiOn work and on a 10-12 hour schedule in
noncontinuous production. with the personnel changing each 15 days.

In order to provide for supervision over workers. additional posts for engineers.
technicians and workers have been introduced into departments, brigades and other
structural subunits. In particular. a second foreman is being introduced into the
drilling brigade, and a deputy chief for administration is being introduced into
the drilling-administration staff.

/In order to regulate rest time and worktime and to regularize mutual relationships
among drilling organizations, the ministry has recently developed the following
documents: "Temporary Regulation on the Rotating-Personnel Method of Conducting
Drilling Operations," "Instructions on the Procedure for Accounting for Worktime
and Time Spent en Route." and "Temporary Regulations on Worktime and nest Time for
workers Who Work Under the Rotating-Personnel Expeditionary Iethod." However.
there are no interindustry documents on organization of the rotating-personnel
method. Obviously. such documents should be developed and approved in the near
future./

Minneftcprom is working to introduce the brigade contract widely. For example. as
of I May 1981. out of 129 drilling brigades in Glavtyumenneftegaz [Main Administra-
tion for the oil and Gas Industry in Tyumenskaya Oblast] lie-«or 90 percent-—were
working under the brigade contract. In Tatneft' [Tatarskaya ASSR Oil Production
Administration] all drilling and construction brigades are under contract. Alto-
gether. 164 brigades converted to the brigade contract in 1980. 260 brigades in
1981.

with the severe shortage of labor resources in West Siberian Oil and Gas Complex
areas, the role of centralized sources for furnishing workers to enterprises is
growing. USSR Gosprofobr [state Committee for Vocational and Technical Education]
should solve more rapidly the problem of the possibility of sending PTU [vocation-
al and technical school] graduates from the various regions to west Siberia's oil-
industry enterprises.

12
FNII‘DIINCIAI.IJSEZ(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

/Considering the importance of the Nest Siberian Oil and Gas Complex, it is desira-
ble that USSR Gosplan. USSR Goskomtrud [State Committee for Labor and Social Prob-
lens] and USSR Gosprofobr authorize West Siberian oil-industry enterprises to per-
form the selection and training of workers in linnefteprom-aystem educational in-
stitutions that are located in other parts of the country./

The ministry has charged appropriate subunits, enterprises and organizations with

considering the preposals for practical work that were expressed at the reundtable
meeting.

/Deputy minister of USSR Gas Industry A. Gudz (deceasedV’noted that his industry
has attentively analyzed the information from the roundtable meeting. Insuring
that deadlines are met for high-quality construction and for the introduction of
gas—industry facilities into operation. and. in the final analysis, that estab-
lished tasks fer recovering and transporting gas are fulfilled, depends to a great
extent upon the precise solution of the questions raised.

Some Minneftegazstroy construction and installing organizations are not insuring
fulfillment of established tasks for introducing production capacity. housing and
facilities for social, cultural and domestic-amenity purposes into operation.

The ministry of Gas Industry, for its part, is doing everything possible to reduce
uncompleted construction. The plan for the current year includes the construction
of 44 fewer facilities than in 1980. Ninety-one percent of the capital investment
allocated is ained at construction projects that are due for early startup. This
will help to reduce the amount of uncompleted construction by 400 million rubles in
1981.

/The ninistry recently developed and sent to Minneftegazstroy for coordination a
draf1.of"Regulations for the Turnkey Construction of Gas-Industry Enterprises (and
Structuresh"which was approved 13 October 1980. and putting the indicated document
into effect will provide for actual conversion to the construction of facilities on
the basis of this principle./ Turnkey erection of the industry's facilities will
enable capital-investment effectiveness and the motivation of prime contracting or-
ganizations to introduce facilities into operation to be raised.

lFirst Deputy Minister of Construction of Petroleum and Gas Industry Enterprises
Yu. Batalin/ reported that the ainistry has examined the report about the round-
table meeting. and it considers that questions of making rational use of material
and labor resources during the construction of trunk pipelines are urgent in the
highest degree. In July 1931 these questions were discussed at a session of the
board and at a ministry party meeting.

"The Rain Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR During
1981-1985 and During the Period up to 1990" calls for implementation of a program
for boosted development of gas recovery, by accelerating the assimilation of
West Siberian gas fields. Realization of this program will be based upon broad
use of the newest achievements of science and technology. the falfillment of indus-
try and interindustry systems programs. the introduction of progressive methods for
organizing the perfonmance of construction and installing work. and the use of ef-
fective technological decisions through the whole construction cycle-from design
to the introduction of facilities into operation. The ministry is taking concrete
steps to carry this out.

13
FOI¢NHHC1AI.USE1ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USO; ONLY

More rational routes for laying trunk lines have been planned, jointly with lin-
gazprom. and questions about building them in one corridor have been solved. The
main rules about organizing the construction of trunk gas pipeline systems by large
flow-line operating groups. using the shuttle method. have been worked out. This
will permit the time lost by redeployment from Job to job to be precluded, prepara-
tory operations to be carried out in good time, and housing settlements with the
amenities to be created for the builders of compressor stations and for the linear
flow-line groups.

The outfitted method of construction will be further developed. Thanks to its use.
labor productivity during the last 5 years for "on-ground" construction was raised
by 23 percent, and the average time for erecting compressor stations was reduced 30
percent. This year more than 63 percent of all work on the building of compressor
and pump stations. installations for the integrated processing of oil and gas. and
other gas and oil industry facilities will be carried out by the outfittedqmodule
method.

[The ministry is at present formulating an industry program to improve systems for
the delivery and use of pipe./ Organization supervisors have been vested with per-
sonal responsibility for the use of pipe and other equipment. Intensive work is
being done to save electricity and heat and to suppress cases of wastefulness. 0r—
ganizations and enterprises of the industry have committed themselves to saving
11,000 tons of rolled metal. 25,000 tons of cement, 1,200 tons of standard fuel
equivalent. and 20 million kw-hr of electricity in 1981.

/The ministry has developed a master scheme for managing the construction of oil
and gas industry enterprises. It will enable systematic acceleration in the pace
of erecting trunk pipeline systems, building up gas field and oilfield facilities.
and constructing cities and settlements of lest Siberia in integrated fashion./

The industry is taking a number of steps to improve the organization of pay. A
third of the total construction and installing work volume has been carried out by
the brigade-contract method. As a result of introducing this method, construction
effectiveness has been raised. and the time taken to erect the most important fa-
cilities has been reduced.

/The board's ministry and the Central Committee of the Trade Union of oil and Gas
Industry Workers have approved a specific program for developing and improving the
brigade contract in Minneftegazstroy organizations during 1981-1985. By the end of
1981, 40 percent of all the work will be done by contract brigades./

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ekonomika". "Khozyaystvo i pravo", 1981

11409
cs0: 1822/143

1h
FOR‘DFFMJA1.USE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS

UDC 622.276.5«0622J79ob

BOOK DISCUSSEB IEH METHODS POR'INPROVIIG RECOVERY OF OIL, GAS, GAS-COIDEIBAT!
moscow DOBYCHA NBFTI I GAZA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 23 Sep 81) pp 1-4. 384

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents of the book, "oil and Gas Recovery." by
Yuriy Vasil'yevich Zaytsev and Yuriy Ayrapetovich Balakirov. Nedra. 4,400 copies,
384 pages]

[Text] A set of questions associated with drilling into the pay. completing and
studying wells. and operating oil, gas and gas-condensate fields and with the
equipment and technology for recovering oil and gas is set forth.

Methods for recovering oil and gas and for raising well productivity in the envir-
onment of the country's northern regions and offshore fields are examined. Light
is thrown on the chief directions of the work to preserve the environment during
the drilling and operation of oil, gas and gas-condensate wells. and the prospects
for developing the oil and gas industry are determined. .

The book is for engineers and technicians of the oil and gas industry. It will
also be useful to students of petroleum vuzes and departments.

There are 97 tables, 172 illustrations and a bibliography of 80 items.

Foreword

The Accountability Report to the 26th CPSU Congress stated: "...the successes of
the whole national economy will depend greatly upon an increase in the effective-
ness of the extractive industries. The way to do this is to accelerate scientific
and technical progress...."

Improvement of the equipment and technology for operating wells (in combination
with the various progressive processes for stimulating the formation) is the most
effective, accessible and high-speed method for increasing the formation's produc-
tive capacity. Unlike intrafonmation processes for stimulating the formation in
order to promote the flow of fluids. the use of the potential possibilities of the
well itself will enable a planned increase in the output of hydrocarbons to be ob-
tained with few resources and in a much shorter time. obviously. it is also
impossible to ignore intrafonsation processes for stimulating the collector; on the
contrary. only with creation of the best conditions for the movement of fluids in
the formation can flow from the well be intensified.

_15
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the last two decades new means for lifting the foraation liquid from wells.
taking various oilfield-geology and cliaatic and geographic factors into account.
and new methods for stimulating the bottoa-hole zone of oil, gas and gas-condensate
wells and for preservation of the environment in oil and gas recovering regions
have been tested and introduced at the industry's oil and gas recovery enterprises.
huch experience in developing and Operating offshore oil. gas and gas-condensate
fields and wells has been gained in our country and abroad.

The authors have strivento focus the reader's attention mainly on that information
that has not been generalised in publications of this nature,and. of course. they
have tried not to repeat inforaation that has been published in recent years.

The authors set themselves the extreuely extensive and iaportant task of setting
forth systeaatically a whole complex of questions associated with recovering oil
and gas. This task is extensive because one has to examine the whole technological
sequence of the basic aethod for recovering oil and gas, questions of design and
optimization and of technical and econoaic evaluation when forecasting operating
methods. and so on.

The authors express gratitude to their readers who will consider it necessary. first,
to introduce the inforaation about the most effective and new methods and ways
for recovering oil and gas at their own production sites or to use the information
when preparing scientific and design documentation. and second. to express their
desires and coments about the book they have read.

Table of Contents
Page

Foreml‘do.o..................oooco...oo..oc.oo.......u..............oouo.. 3

Part I-The Recovery of Oil
Chapter I. The Composition and Parameters of Drilling Fluids Used in Drill-
ing into Productive Horizons.................................. 5
Chapter II. Methods for Completion of Oil and Injection Wells.............. 13
Chapter III. Study During Nell Conpletion................................ 65
Chapter IV. The Iaproveaent of Pumping Jacks............................... 96
chapter V. Optimization of Computerized Pumped-Well Operations............. 119

Chapter VI. The Use of Snell Polyaer Additives to Increase Oil—Well
Productivity................................................. 160

Chapter VII. The Modern Technical status of the DevelOpaent and Operation
of Oil and Gas Fields of the Continental Shelf.............. 181

Part II—The Recovery of Gas

Chapter I . The Operation of Gas and Gas-Condensate Wells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Chapter II . The study of Gas and Gas-Condensate Wells and Formations. . . . . . . 264
Chapter III . Methods for Hydrochloric-Acid Treatsent of Gas Wells. . . . . . . . . . 285

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
Chapter IV. Inproveoent of the Buildup of cue-Field hoilitiee.............. 308

Chapter v. Preservation of the Environment During tho Development of on and
G“ 'iold..O0OOODOIQOOCDO0.00.0.0.0...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOICDill. 3‘3

Biblio‘mWooooooooeooooooeevveeeovooooaone.oe00oooooooeejveeevOOOCOOOOIOCOO 3.81

COPYRIGE‘I': Izdltel'ltvo “Nedre”. 1901

11409
cs0: 1322/1“ m

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY