FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10143
30 November 1981

USSR Report

ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT

(FOUO 7/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT
(F000 7/81)

CONTENTS
AERONADTICAL AND SPACE
Therlﬂl Design of spacecraft units.OOOIQIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCO00000 1

Power Supply and Control Systems for Electrical Rocket

Engines...ass-essencesesososso...00000000000000.0000...0.00000 9

NUCLEAR ENERGY

Experience with Bringing on Line and Operating Third Power
Unit With Past Neutron Reactor at Beloyarskaya AES............ 12

Selection of Safety Devices To Counter Excessive Pressure in
Primary and Secondary Loops of Nuclear Electric Power
Stations “1th Hater-cool“ Reactors-0000090000.-ossaaseosoases 17

Seismic Stability Evaluation of Nuclear Power Station
Electrical Equip-entOOOOOOO0.0COOOOOOOO'I'OOOOOOOOOC00.000000. 26

Brushless Exciters of SOO-HH Turbogeneratora in Atomic Power

station’ssaooeaseaassesseoseeoaeeaaeeaoooasoooooosoooeeeeooooo 32

Optimization of vvnn-aao Reactor Energy Distribution............ 39

Thermohydraulic and Physicochemical Processes in Nuclear
Power PlantSOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO0.0.0I...IOOOOOOOOOQOOOQ00.00.00... ‘2

NON-NUCLEAR ENERGY

General and Theoretical Magnetohydrodynamdcs.................... 50
Magnetohydtodyna‘ic "achine’t0.0.0000000DOOOOOOOOOOOOO0....0.000 SS

Reliability Prediction and Diagnosis of Power Equipment......... 59

- a - [III - USSR - 21F SST F000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOIDGY

Adaptive Control of Dynamic Syateaa.............................

TURBINE AND ENGINE DESIGN

Autmted urine Power Intan.t1°n.ooooooooo-ooootooooooooooooo

NAVIGATION AND GUIDANCE SYSTEMS

Gyroatabilizera for Inertial Guidance Syatena. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

notion Stability. Analytical Mechanics, Notion Control..........

FLUID MECHANICS

Elastic Shell Penetration Into Coloreaaible Liquid. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

MECHANICS 0P SOLIDS

Generalized Functions in Thermoelaaticity (Collection of
scientific Papers)loOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIO....OOIOOOOOODOOODIOOOOOO

Dynamics and Stability of Mechanical Syataa....................

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

67

76

100
103

109

111

120
ABRONAUTICAL AND SPACE

unc 629.78
THERMAL D310! 0? spacmn unrrs

Moscow TEPLOVOYE PROYMIROVANIYB AGRE'ATOV LETATE'W APPARATOV in Russian
(signed to press 5 Dec 80) pp 2-8. ”It-175

Annotation. introduction and table of contents iron the book 'Thernl Design of
pacecraft Units“, by Boris Hikhaylovich Psnkratov, Iadatel'stvo "Mincetroyeniye".
1100 copies. 176 pages]

[Text] This book presents sodern concepts on the thsrnl desigl of. spacecraft
unite (system for therml protection of apparatus for reentry. thernostatic
control of fuel tanks. power plants etc.). Papers on heat exchange. thsrnody-
naaics, aerodynamics. space physics. ballistics. dynanics. nuclear physics etc.
were widely used.

The book is intended for engineers who design heateintensive units for spacecraft.

Introduction

The investigation of theraal nodes of units and systels and the selection of
their characteristics. taking into account the effect of the environnent and the
limitations ilposcd by the paralsters of the spacecraft (u). are a part of the
omral probles in deeigxing heat-intensive designs and the apparatus itself. i.e..
therml design.

then the LA operates for a long tine in space. its design and several units and
system are subjected to the effect of the euvironnsnt and. as a rule. to rela-

tively high thermal loads fros external and internal heat sources. The problea

of optilal thersal design say be represented conditionally in several stages.

The basic design paraaeters of the cysts. are detersined to the first approxim-
tion by taking into account the special features of the trajectory and the dura-
tion of the flight. Then. for the selected u par-assters. the notion trajectory
of the spacecraft and the optiaal characteristics of the units under the effect
of the external and internal ther-l loads and of the environ-ant are defined
sore accurately.

Here the probles of the synthesis of the optinl control of the spacecraft my be
posed. using the criteria of the aini-In weight of one unit or another, the sini-

sun of integral heat flows during the flight. not exceeding the persitted

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NIX (”0“.th L'bl'. UNLI

temperature of the unit structures and providing for the optinl thorn]. node of
their operation. Sometines a conprehensive functional is used that takes into

account. for exanple. the surface tenperature as well as the thernl flows that
act on the unit etc.

The presence of radiation zones of solar and coeaic radiations amending the
earth poses an entire series of problem for the dynasic flight of spacecraft
(KIA). The consideration of such probless is related to the necessity of taking
into account the radiation dangers to which the crew. the units and the devices
aboard the space craft are subjected.

The choice of optimal power engineering in these problens not be ends by taking
into account the effect of intensive radiation sense. 0! interest is the fact
that. from the mthentical viewpoint. the nature of these liaitations is such
that they either eliainate entirely the possibility of using the classical nethods
of the calculus of variations and the minis principle. or require their essen-
tial modification. or interest in this case is the consideration of several

methods of calculation. for exanple. dynanic prograsing etc.

At the first stage of thorns). design. it is necessary to a first approxination.

but to a sufficient degree of accuracy. to detersine the basic power characteris-
tics of the spacecraft and the engine that will be the initial ones for the follow-

ing analysis and will be lads more precise at the following stages.

Essentially the problem is divided into dynasic and weight. Sons thernal ILA node
is established under the effect of external(eun radiation. direct or reflected
fron the planets. its own radiations of lanets and the earth. the effect of
streaas of nicronsteorites, protons etc. and internal (engines. potter system.
apparatus etc.) heat sources. by which. for exanple. my be understood the therml
field. variable in tins. in individual design cosponents of the units. systess
and the spacecraft as a whole.

The energy froa the external heat sources and the energy eaitted in the spacecraft
from internal sources are converted into thernal radiation. The latter is prac-
tically the only aethod for heat renoval in space fron heat-loaded ILA units. if
the netth based on ejecting utter are not considered.

his to the snall density of the nicronsteorites in space. they have little effect
on the thersal node of the spacecraft and should be taken into account only when
the m passes through a region with a very high neteorite content. however.
nicroleteorites and other cossic particles. when striking the skin of the space-
craft, may change the optical properties of the surface of the In (due to their
high energy) which. in its turn. my have considerable effect on the thernl node
of the spacecraft. In a nunber of cases. even when flying at great heights. it is
necessary to take into account the heating of the sheath of the spacecraft by the
ispacts of stone and molecules in the residual at-osphere of the planet. Thus.
the temperature of the spacecraft depends to a certain extent on its position

in space and its orientation with respect to thernal energy sources. and say vary
within fairly wide linits.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem arises or maintaining the then-.1 nodes of preserving fuel components
aboard the KLA which may be reduced to optimising the characteristics of the
thermostatic control system, the mass of the fuel compartments or the mass of the
entire spacecraft. Here it is necessary to take into account the heating of the
fuel components by the external and internal nest sources froa which there arise
a nuaber of effects related to the heat exchange between the liquid. the wall of
the tank and the gas. the boiling, the stratification of the conponent, steam
condensation. supercharge of the diffusion gases etc. (see chapter 5).

To preserve the cryogenic fuel cosponents in the liquid state during the entire
flight. it is expedient to use several types of thermatatic control sisultaneous-
1y ("passive' and ”active") or one of the more efficient of them. Many papers
are devoted to the problem of various thermostatic control systems. He used the
results of these for a thermal design to obtain approximate relationships. By
using these relationships to the first approximation. it is possible to determine
the area of application of the various thermostatic control systems and the ease
relationships between them.

In sose cases. thermal currents fros engine and power installations affect con-
siderably the thermal node of the KM. Hers heat transmission is implesented
primarily from the jet of the operating engine and. in sons cases, becomes the
determining factor in the structure of the ionizing radiation of the engine or
the power installation. The calculation of the heat exchange systems necessary
for the operation of the power installations that affect the thermal mode of the
spacecraft as a whole is a complex problem.

Already, at the very early stages of thermal design of the KLA units and systems.
there arises the necessity of carrying out a fairly detailed calculation of the
design of the thermal node. Thus. frequently we approach the problen of the
theoretical numerical simulation of the thermal mode of the design of the space-
craft. Two basic approaches are possible here. The first approach is investi-
gating the thermal node of individual design components. In this case, as a rule.
it is possible with some difficulty to take into account the mutual thermal ef-
fect of the design components on each other. The second approach involves an
investigation of the thermal node of the spacecraft by Issue of a thernal model
determined in a certain manner. The model describes the thermal model of the
most important LA design components and takes into account their sutual effect on
each other (chapter a).

In the process of mathematical simulation to describe the thermo-physical process-
es. experimental relationships and asthods obtained previously are used. as a
rule. The mathematical nodal prepared for investigating the LA thermal mode

makes it possible to investigate it for various conditions of external loading.

to take into account the variability of the thermo-physical characteristics of the
materials and coatings and. moreover. the changes introduced in the design solu-
tion.

Various proposals and methods are used in preparing the sathematical nodels. Re-
cently, methods based on using the theory of graphs components were introduced

in mathematical modeling. These methods lay be used successfully also in the
automated design of LA and other objects.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI-‘I-ICIM. USE ONLY

in a number of cases. mathematical simulation lakes it possible to investigate
thermn-physical processes, whose physical sodeling cannot be done under terres-
trial conditions. Among such processes are therlo~gravitational convection of low
boiling point liquids in LA fuel tanks under weak field conditions and several
others.

Mathematical modeling plays an important role in investigating problems of inter-
dependent heat exchange in the proposed cosplex configuration design because it
permits the consideration of the progress of the thermo-physical processes. in-
wntigates their mutual effect. solves the problem of optisising the thermal mode
of the design etc.

It should be noted that the LA thersal node optimisation is closely related to
the solution of inverse problems of heat exchange in complex shape designs.

Such probless include. for example. those of restoring the teraperature profile
in mutually related components of the considered design in accordance with the

known values of temperatures in individual coaponents. Although these problems
are complex even in the formulation plan, it is to be hoped that their solution
will be obtained in the very near future.

A completely specialsrea is the part of the thersal design of [LA operating under
the effect of intensive ionising radiation fros several power installation of the
spacecraft or cruising engines using nuclear fission energy.

Using the solutions of the problems for optimising the mass and shape of multi-
layer protection from the reactor radiation, taking into account the evaporated
fuel component. it is possible. in general. to solve the comprehensive problem

on choosing the optimal parameters of radiational protection. the geometry of the
fuel compartsent. the mass of the adapter between the KLA booster units and the
carrier and evaporated component.

0f considerable interest are problems related to the selection of basic parameters
for thermal protection systems for reentry, designed to deliver the crew and sci-
entific equipment to the surface of the planet. The spacecraft upon reentry to
the earth's surface is subjected to the strong effect of the environment. In
developing the design of such spacecraft a thersal protection system that pro-
tects the structure. units. devices. crew etc. from temperature loads plays a
considerable role. The investigation of the operation of thermal protection and
the choice of its parameters, taking into account the special feature of the en-
vironmental effects and limitations imposed by the parameters of the reentering
spacecraft. is one of the main parts of the problea of the thersal design of the
units and the spacecraft as a whole.

Among the many limitations priaarily imposed on the choice of spacecraft param-
eters in thermal design are the limitations on the choice of the shape. As a
rule. the shape of the spacecraft is selected to provide a given lift-drag ra-
t1°. stability. ease of control. nutm- density of the arrange-mt, minimum mass
of thermal protection and the spacecraft as a whole. its greatest reliability and
efficiency. comfort of the crew etc. Here it should be taken into account that

the shape of the spacecraft directly affects the type of thermal protection coat-
ing used.

FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

action between the heated gas and the therasl protection nterials is due to many
Iutually related processes. The solution of this problea in the general case is

based on the solution of a systel of differential equations that describe the
phenomenon of nonstationary heat-lass transfer in a gas-body systea and.at present.
represents great difficulties m: the nthenatical viewpoint. Therefore. in
studying such coaplex phenoaena (especially of nonstationary processes). the role
of experimental investigations. with the wide application of autontic coaplexes
for gathering and processing data. increases essentially. In Iany cases. the
bases of software for nonstationary thernl experimte are letth for solving

inverse problens of heat exchange: the deter-ination of limiting therlal nodes.

identification of the processes of heat and use transfer, the restoration of ex-
ternal and internal thermal fields etc.

The therml design of units. systeas and of spacecraft as a whole. is only one

of many parts of the general design of the spacecraft. However. this part differs
essentially from all the others by the fact that besides the solution of basic
problem of LA design. related to use and ballistic design. it dennds fro- the

investigator an extensive analysis of physical phenolena and the application to
this analysis of many related sect ions of science and technology.

than a short list of basic problene related to thermal design attests to the neces~
sity of applying a wide range of problelns in thernl physics. heat-use exchange.
thermodynamics. space physics. ballistics. dynaaics. nuclear physics. asthentics
etc. . needed at the present ties to solve the design problens.

convenient relationships. useful in deteraining a nulber of basic characteristics

of spacecraft system and the calculation of power and thermal pannetus at the
initial stage of design.

wherever necessary. concrete nunerical values are given in the book. 'Ihis nines
it possible to use the book as a useful reference nnual also.

Along with the bases and problem of thernl design of spacecraft. the book pre-
sents the concept of the modern level of investiations on the considered ques-

tions. The bibliography given in the book is intanded basically for further.
more extensive study of the individual chapters.

At the request of the author. subchapters “.3. 4.4 and U. 5 havo been written by

the senior staff worker. candidate of technical sciences. V. s. Khokhulimto who-
he expresses his sincere gratitude.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e an vs a I\-|I‘I¢ UJI‘. Vl‘hl

The author is especially grateful to acadenician V. P. lishin. who helped greatly
in the preparation and writing of this book. as well as to reviewer professor

in. V. Poleahayev. doctor of technical sciences, for valuable con-ants and sug-
gestions he ads vhen exaaining the lanuscript.

we are grateful beforehand to all readers who will Ike critical relarlu and sug-
gest iaproveasnts to the book. -

Table of Contents Page
Introduction 3

Chapter 1. Basic power characteristics of the engine
installations of the ascent units of spacecraft 9

1. General statement of the problel 9
2. aluations of notions 9
3. Basic sass relationships of spacecraft 11
1+. Relative leases of engine installations. fuel coapartaaits
and other units 13
Power characteristics of engine installations and their
effect on spacecraft 17
1.6. Selection of optimal control prom- for fixed para-stars

of the engine installation 19

nor-pt»

e-.

s
\

a

Chapter 2. Effect of external therml conditions and cosaic
radiation on the systea characteristics for a long

flight 23
2.1. Therml currents acting on the spacecraft 23
2.2. Therlnl node of units 2?
2.3. Primry cosmic radiation 30
2.“. Radiation zones 32
2.5. Solar cosaic radiation 35
2.6. Determination of characteristics of the ayatea for

protection against coalic radiation 37

2.7. Calculation of power characteristics of the systea for
ainiml radiation danger 51
Chapter 3. Basic thermal loads acting on reantering spacecraft 515
3.1. Notion equations of reentering spacecraft 5“
3.2. Ballistic reentry 55
3.3. Planning reentry 58
3.4. Aerodynamic heating of the reentering spacecraft 61
3.5. Soae problems in the thernl protection theory 6”

3.6. Approximate evaluation of therlal currents acting on a
reentering spacecraft 6?

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter h. Effect of currents fros internal heat sources on
the efficiency of unit design

. General statement of the problea

Engine installations -- sources of radiation

. Design of a thermal model and calculation of the
telperature distribution in the design fro: thernl flow
of engine and power systems

Ian. Algorithm for the solution of sinsle-disansional heat

conduction equations given in graph
“.5. Method for calculating the tesperature distribution in the
spacecraft design at an arbitrary thermal load

cf:
upr-

Shapter 5. Thermal design of units

5.1. General statement of theraal design problea of a couple:
system

5 2. Special features of then-ml design of fuel cospartsent

5.). Passive systems of theraostat control

5 h. Certain probless of heat and ass exchange in tanks for
fuel components being heated by external and internal
heat sources

5.5. Certain parameters of the fuel system (active system

of thersostat control)
5.6. Efficiency of thermostat control systes

Chapter 6. Systea analysis in thersal design of booster units
for spacecraft and sethods for autontionn

6.1. has relationships of the spacecraft taking into account
certain limitations

6.2. Protection of spacecraft cospartsents iron the radiation
zones of the earth. solar bursts. priury cosaic
radiation and other types of radiation

6.3. Optimization of basic characteristics for thernl design
of a flat shield

6.“. The determination of the optinl shape of the shield

6.5. Selection of efficient parameters and shapes of certain
units of the booster stages of the spacecraft

6.6. Autontion of the therml design process of spacecraft

units

Chapter 7. Principles of thernl design of reenter-ins spacecraft

Basic sssusptione

General statement of the probles

Certain systems for cooling units of reantering spacecraft
Selection of the reentry trajectory and control of the

emu-craft

S-‘wNv-e
0

VV}?\)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.5. has analysis of para-eters of the spacecraft and its units
7.6. Possible areas of application of inverse problem of heat
conductivity in the investigation of thernl nodes of
reentering spacecraft
7.7. General state-ant of the problea of experimtal
investigations on nonstationary destruction and heating of
thernl protection coatings (12?). Use of counters in
carrying out the thernl experimt

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo ”ﬁshinostroyeniye'. i981

2291
C50: 1861/21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'JDC 621.165.32
PG‘dEB SUPPLY AND CCNTRCL SYSTEIS ma WHICH. ROCKET BIGINB

Poscou srs'rm PITAMYA I UPRAVLBIHA mammm manual nvrmranm in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 30 Jan 81) pp 2-1;. 136

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contaits has the book "Power Supply and Con-

trol Systems for Electrical Rocket engines", by hrks hikhaylovich Glibitskiy.
isdatel'stvo "hashinostroyeniye", 930 copies. 136 pages]

[Text] Annotation

This book presents theoretical and engineering problem involved in producing
optimized systems for the power supply and control (SPO) of electrical rocket
engines (3RD) and spacecraft (KIA). The most developed types of £81) and functional
circuits for their power supply and control were considered. Questions of protec-

tion for various types of SP1; and BID were elucidated under anonlous and ener-
gency situations.

The book is intended for specialists in the investintion and develop-eat of elec-
trical rocket engines.

Foreword

The assiailation and peaceful utilisation of space for practical purposes was be-
gun by 3W1et cosmonauts on it October 1957 and are being developed and inproved

at a rate unseen in other sectors of science and technology. Low active power
engines -- electric rocket engines (BID) occupy a special and very important place
in the means and devices for developing Jet engines for spacecraft (KIA). The can
have a nunber of essential differences that place than outside the cospetition with
other types of jet engines. The advantages of the ED were confirned by long and

successful experiments in space on artificial earth satellites launched in the
USSR and the United States.

Broad progress were developed and published recently for further investigations

and assimilation of space. including the creation of orbital technological shops --
laboratories. global communications systels satellites. navigation and Ieteorolog-
ical satellites etc., in which it is proposed to use m. It is planned to use no
for cruising propulsion engines for interplanetary flights. and to investigate
distant space and conets. It is planned to use groups of ED with a total power

counted in hundreds of kilowatts as active power mgines of booster units

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the delivery of sections of solar space electric power plants into geosta-
tionary orbits. called upon to supply electric power to industry on the earth by
the end of the twentieth century. It is planned to launch scale sodels of such
150 kw power plants in 1983 L160].

Broad periodical literature and a nusber of sonographs of Soviet and foreign scien-
tists are devoted to the physical bases and principles of an operation. These
cover theoretical and engineering problem of developing the RD proper and the
primary power sources for the KIA. while the problem of the investigations and
developsents of ED power supply and control system were considered extra-sly
briefly only in a smll nusber of journal articles. This book gives a aystemtic
presentation of the theoretical and practical problem that arise in the develop-
sent and design of can power supply and control system.

The author is sincerely grateful to professor A. I. Horosov. doctor of technical
sciences,whose initiative and constant attention facilitated the appearance of the
book. to reviewer professor D. D. Sevruk. doctor of technical sciences. as well as
to R. K. Chuyan, doctor of technical sciences. and assistant professor V. Kin for
their helpful advice and fruitful discussions of the mnuscript that facilitated
its improvement.

Table of Contents

Page
Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Power supply and control system for electric rocket
engines 5
1.1. Electrical engines in space 5
1.2. Schematic diagram of an and their classification 6
1.3. anectric rocket engines 8
1.13. Systes approach and problem of optinising control of
an installations (saw) 10
Chapter 2. mp types and requiresents of power supply and control
system 1‘5
2.1. Thersoelectric plasma engines (PD) 145
2.2. Electric heating rocket engines 1“
2.3. Arc electric rocket engines 15
?.h. Pulse plasm engines 1?
2.5. ionic engines (ID) 19
2.6. In power supply and control a stem 23
2.7. Stationary plasm engine (SPD 2?
2.8. Front Hall engine (TKhD) 29
2.9. Grouped electric rocket engines 31

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 1‘. Secondary nan power supplies

I‘
o

.
0‘ meM

e n

t 3?}???

Chapter

mung-Una
m if?) tor-

0

Switching installations. devices and apparatus
Thyristor suitches and inverters

Transistor switches

Transistor inverters and converters

Transforsers and magnetic switches for ED power supply
and control systels (SPU)

specific characteristics of electronic system for
energy conversion

5. saw control and protection systess

Optimal control of KIA witn mp

saw optimal control

Anomlous and essrgsncy nodes in mm power supply systeas
Methods and teens for protecting inverters in mm
Protection of power rectifiers in nuclear turbogenerator
mo power supply installations

Chapter 6. Optinl design of SW for m
6.1. Problens of optimizing KIA with ED
6.2. criteria of quality in optiIul design of saw and
question of reliability
6.3. Probless and setth of searching for optissl design
solutions for SPU :31)
Chapter 7. Special features of any power supply and control systess
7.1. street of the space environ-eat on asterials and cosponents
of SPU an
7.2. Heat exchange under space conditions and theml nodes
of SPU HID
7.3. Electric rocket engines in the very near future
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Vashinostroyeniye'. 1981

2291

can. 1861/20
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

NUCLEAR ENERGY

UDC 621.311.25:621.039.004.l7

EXPERIENCE WITH BRINGING ON LINE AND OPERATING THIRD PONER UNIT WITH FIST
NEUTRON REACTOR AT BELOYARSKAYA ABS

Moscow ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 9. Sep 81 pp 12-17
[Article by v.1. Kupnyy and V.V. Budziyevskiy, engineers, Beloyarskaya ABS]

[Text] Power unit No. 3 of the Beloyarskaya AES with electrical capacity of
600 HR has three loops and is designed with a triple loop configuration for heat
removal from the reactor; in this case, metallic sodium serves as the coolant for
loops I and II, while water (steam) is used as the working material of loop III.

The type BN-600 fast neutron reactor with a thermal capacity of 1,470 HM has an
integral layout (tank configuration) for the loop I equipment. The reactor takes
the form of a cylindrical tank 12.8 m in diameter and 13.0 m high , which is mounted
on roller supports in the reactor shaft. The core is positioned in therreactor
tank as well as the three main circulation pumps of loop I, the six process heat
exchangers of loops 1 - 2 (two each for each 100?). the internal tank protection
with the thermal shields and the neutron channels. The control drives for the
control and protection system mechanisms and reloading are positioned on rotating
plugs installed in the upper portion of the reactor.

Each of the three loops includes the following: a once-through modular eight
section type PGN-ZOOH steam generator with a steam output of 660 t/hr having steam
parameters of 505 °C and 140 kgf/cmz, a K-200-l30 turbine installation with a
capacity of 200 H", a TGV—ZOOH generator, a DSP-800 water feed system with a
deaerator and three PE-380-200/185 electrical feed pumps.

The sodium is circulated in loops I and II by single stage centrifugal pumps. The
rotor of the pump is mounted in a cantilever bracket fashion on the lower end of

the shaft and has a hydrostatic bearing. The utilization of a main circulating pulp
with an asynchronous rectifier stage makes it possible to continuously vary the
r.p.m.'s of the pumps in a range of 250 to 970 r.p.m.

The high parameters of the live steam and the superheated process steam made it
possible in the design of the unit to employ standard turbine room equipment with
the 200 M" units of thermal electric power stations.

Power unit No. 3 is outfitted with a "Kompleks-Uran" information computer system,

which consists of the H-60 data subsystem, a computer subsystem designed around
the series produced H-7000 computer and "Orion" data displays.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

' Z J 4 5 5 I J unqu

Figure 1. Consolidated graph showing the bringing of the
capacity of power unit No. 3 on line at the
Beloyarskaya ABS.

The "Komploks-Uran" system calculates and analyzes the technical and economic indi-
cators (TEP) of the operation of the main and auxiliary equipment of the power
unit, records the preliminary and postsccident values of the digital and analog
parameters and the production process protection which has actuated. Special
programs provide for printout of the results.

The operation of power unit No. 3 started April 8, 1980 following the connection
of the turbogenerator to the Sverdlovsk power administration power system. Fol-
lowing comprehensive testing, the bringing on line of the unit capacity was started,
which was accomplished in the following stages: operation at a reactor power of

30 percent Nnom to check the operation of the turbogenerators under load, the
adjustment of the water supply mode, operational adjustment of the equipment and
power unit system as well as to perform investigative work; operation at a reactor
capacity of 40 to 70 percent of “non to more precisely specify the operational
modes of the core, the sodium loops and the major equipment as well as to perform
investigative work: operation at a reactor capacity of 80 percent of “non to more
precisely specify equipment operational modes at nominal steam parameters and to
perform investigative work.

A consolidated graph of the bringing on line of the capacity of power unit No. 3
is shown in Figure 1. Increasing the reactor power above 80 percent of when is
possible only after the core becomes steady-state following the execution of three
fuel reloadings because of the core physics.

Following comprehensive tests of the production process protection and interlocking
(T28) of the unit and tests of the disconnection of the internal loads of the unit,
the reactor was brought up to 0.1 percent of the nominal load. On April 2nd, 1980
following the filling of the steam generators (P6) with feed water and the estab-
lishing of circulation through the third loop, the reactor power was increased up
to five percent and the steam generators were brought up to steam operating condi-
tions. At this power, the setting of a large number of steam generator safety
valves was accomplished. On April 8th, the capacity of the reactor was brought

up to 30 percent of Nnom, the sodium temperature of loop I at the outlet from the
reactor reached 400 °C and the turbogenerators were sequentially connected to the

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USE10NLN

power system. To improve safety, the settings of the rate of change in the
coolant temperature during start was reduced by a factor of seven below the
design value while the coolant parameters and steam were lower than the nominal
values but provided safe operating conditions for the steam generators. During
the first three days of steam generator operation. the water chemistry conditions
in loop III were established in accordance with the norms for once-through steam
generator. In the first stage of bringing the unit capacity on line, the major
starting conditions were tested as well as those for shutdown and operation at the
steady-state power level. Tests were made of accident modes. including the actu-
ation of the fast reactor accident protection (BAZ). slow reactor accident protec-
tion (MAI) and the disconnection of one loop. In all operating modes, special
equipment was used to carefully monitor vibration and tensile and thermal stresses
in the components of the major equipment and piping.

The operational setting of the automatic controllers for the production process

was accomplished during this same period. The radiation status in the production
rooms and the environment was studied. As a result of the first stage of bringing
the unit capacity on line, a considerable number of design errors were ascertained
in the setting of the transducers for the rate of flow of the feed water and the
steam generator steam, something which created considerably difficulties in detern~
ining :he thermal balance of the unit. The thermal balance was determined from

the parameters of loop 1!, where the electromagnetic flow rate meters were graduated
by a correlation technique prior to the power start of the unit. Errors were also
discovered in the plan for the setting of the condensate level transducers in the
condensors of the turbines. which caused two shutdowns of the turbogenerators

(TC) because of overflow of the condensate collectors. The unsuccessful design
solutions for the steam supply for internal loads and the steam ejector installation
made the operation of the unit considerably more difficult. The large amount of
water passed through the fast acting emergency valves for water discharge from

the steam generators led to the undetected drying of the steam generators at low
power levels. Because of this. a decision was made to dispense with the utiliza-
tion of these valves and to dry the steam generator through the dump valves at the
outlet from the evaporation modules of the steam generators. Considerable rework-
ing was done on the turhogcnerator lubrication systems.

Fran May 14th to June 15th 1980. the unit was shut down to make changes and repairs
in the major auxiliary thermomechanical equipment. During this time, the feed
water and steam flow rate transducers for the steam generators were rebuilt. At
steam generator No. 6, the covers for the water and steam cavities of the evapor-
ation and steam superheating modules were removed to inspect them internally; in
this case, no deformations were discovered or corrosion damage and deposits.
Measurements were made of the energy liberated in the fuel packets and the sodium
flow rates through the packets of the main core were measured. The energy liber—
ated was in line with the design values. and sodium flow rates matched those
measured prior to the power start. Tests were performed to specify the hydro-
dynamic characteristics of loops I and II more precisely and to study the natural
circulation mode (YeTs) through loops I and IT. Additional safety valves were
installed on the steam generators at the live steam headers because of the inade-
quate carrying capacity of the safety valves called for in the design.

14

FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On June 15th 1980, the reactor was brought up to a power level of 40 percent of
Nnom and the second stage of bringing the capacity on line was begun. The gener-
ator capacity was specified from the thermal balance and was gradually increased up
to 50.6 percent of "now on June 21. The adjustment of the automatic controllers,
the automatic water chemistry monitoring system as well as the implementation of
programs for production process recording and calculations continued during the
operation of the unit. During the process of bringing the capacity on line, with
the suspicion of a break of the seal between the loops, four steam superheater
modules in steam generators Nos. 4 and S were cutoff by means of stop valve fit-
tings and brought out for repair. The work to remove the modules for repair
revealed the insufficient capacity of the system for feeding nitrogen into the
steam water cavities of the steam generators, something which following the dis-
connection of a defective module can cause sodium to get into the pipes of loop III.
This ispromotedby the long duration of the discharge of sodium from loop II, the
unreliable operation of the sodium fittings and the routing of the water and steam
headers below the modules. In the process of bringing the power up. a degradation
was observed in the quality of loop II sodium because of the inadequate capacity

of the sodium cleaning system. which did not provide for good retention of the
diffusion hydrogen liberated in the sodium, because of which, the cleaning system
operates at maximum capacity with the reserve trap filters inserted.

On August 22nd, 1980. the power of the reactor was increased up to 70 percent of
“non, and the temperature of the sodium in loop I at the outlet from the reactor
then reached 500 °C, while the electrical capacity reached 380 HR.

The third stage of bringing the power unit on line began on September 16, 1980:
the reactor power was increased up to 80 percent of Nnom (1,176 MW), and in this
case, the temperature of the loop I sodium at the outlet from the reactor reached
510 °C. while the electrical capacity 440 MN.

The unit was shut down on October 3rd, 1980 for scheduled preventive maintenance.
During the scheduled preventive maintenance, physical experiments were performed
on the reactor to precisely specify the effects of radioactivity. and tests were
made to determine the level of residual heat emission and heat losses in loop I.
The piping bundles for the high pressure-heaters (PVD's) were opened up and
flushed with feedwater, after which the high pressure heaters were connected to
the steam generator water feed channel. The excitation and the run-out units for
the block of turbogenerators were set up and adjusted and the permissible dispari-
ties in the rotational speeds of the main circulation pumps of loops 1 were
determined.

After finishing the scheduled preventive maintenance, the block was sequentially
run up to the 602, 70% and 802 of Nnon power levels.

Following the connection of the high pressure heaters of the steam turbines,
because of the increase in the feed water temperature up to 220 - 230 °c, the

iron content in the feed water ahead of the steam generator increased from 5 to 7
pg/kg up to 17 - 23 ug/kg by virtue of the naturally occurring process of the
formation of the protectivelaagnetite film on the internal surfaces of the pipe
bundles of the high pressure heaters. The connection of the high pressure heaters
increased the electrical capacity of the unit up to 460 MW.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFICIAI.USIZCNVLY

In the process of bringing the capacity on line, tests were made of the accident
and transient modes of the unit, including a test for the run-out of turbogenerator
No. 6 with the internal load applied. as well as tests of the skewing of the liber-
ated energy field, studies of the natural circulation conditions for loop 2; a
nondesigned circulation mode was tested for loop III with the return of the conden-
sate of the RR-l3 expander to the unit deaerators.

Operational experience with power unit No. 3 with the BN-600 reactor confirmed
that the actual parameters matched the design values. The major power engineering
characteristics of the power unit equipment matched the design values, the unit is
easily controlled and the operational modes are stable.

Production process protection systems, interlocking and the automatic regulation
systems were incorporated in the operation step by step in accordance with the
rise in the power level, providing for safe unit operation in each of the steps.

On April 16th, 1981, the power unit operated in a power generation mode for 240
days, and generated 1,841,522 KUH of electrical power. The nuclear reactor oper-
ated for 147 effective days and the maximum fuel depletion reached 3.5 percent of
the heavy atoms.

The radiation status is good in the unit: no loss of seal in the fuel rods was
detected, the ionizing radiation fluxes correspond to the design values and the
emission of radioactive isotopes into the ventilation pipes when the unit is in
operation amounts to 1 - 3 Curie per 24 hours.

During the operation of the unit, systems were prepared for operation which were
not included in the operation at the outset of the power start because of the

lack of the need for them: the gas purification system, the system for cooling and
cleaning the drum of spent packets, the system for cooling and cleaning the water
of the holding tank, the equipment of the holding tank and the fuel reloading
rooms.

The successfulmasterYof the nominal power level of the first reactor charge was

the result of the combined labor of the operating and repair personnel, as well as
the personnel of the set-up and research organizations. The success of the collec-
tive is the successes of the senior operator of reactor shop No. 2, Yu.D. Krutikov,
senior machinist of turbine shop No. 2, Yu.P. Fitsko, electrical shop electrician
L.V. Okulov, welder of the thermal automation equipment shop, V.N. Halygin, shift
chief of the electrical shop V.I. Batanov and shift chief of the station V.I. Anikin.

Experience with bringing on line and operating power unit No. 3 with the BN-600
reactor made it possible to check and work out the deSign and production process
solutions for the design of even higher capacity power units with sodium cooled
fast neutron reactors.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Elektricheskiye stantsii", 1981.

8225
C80: 8144/062

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC [621.311.25:621.039]-7

SELECTION OF SAFETY DEVICES TO COUNTER EXCESSIVE PRESSURE IN PRIMARY AND SECONDARY
LOOPS OF NUCLEAR ELECTRIC POWER STATIONS WITH HATER-COOLED REACTORS

Moscow ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 11-14

[Article by A.H. Bukrinskiy, candidate of the engineering sciences and E.Ya.
Chernikova, engineer, All-Union Institute of Thermal Engineering imeni F.E.
Dzerzhinsky]

[Text] The primary and secondary loops of a reactor installation are protected
against excessive pressure build-up by safety valves, which are installed on the
volume equalizer and the steam generators. The capacity of the safety valves is
chosen in accordance with the regulations of the State Committee of the Council
of Ministers for the Supervision of Industrial Safety and Mining Inspection [1].
This capacity should be sufficient. so that with the actuation of the valves. the
pressure does not exceed the design value by more than 102.

The safety function assigned to relief valves is an extremely important one. But
since it is possible for them to fail to close after actuation, the capacity of
relief valves should not be excessively high.

Primary Loop Safety Valves. He shall consider the major possible reasons for a
pressure increase in the primary loop. In general, the following three cases are

possible:

—-Primary loop overheating due to a mismatch between the heat produced in a reactor
and the heat delivery in the steam generators;

--Steam generation in the volume equalizers by the electric heaters;

I
-Pressurization of the primary loop by the pumps during its filling or during a
make-up feed.

The latter case is practically nonexistent at present AES's as well as those now
being planned, since the capacity of the piston make-up pumps being used, as a
rule. is low while centrifugal pumps are chosen from design calculations so that
the pressure head developed by them does not lead-to the actuation of the safety
valves. of the remaining two cases. the first is the most dangerous.

A mismatch between the heat delivery in a reactor and its removal in the steam
generators occurs in the case of disturbances which lead to an excess reactor

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

power or to a drop in the turbine load. However, the greatest mismatch between
the heat delivery in a reactor and the heat removed in the secondary loop will
appear with a complete loss of the capability of removing heat from the secondary
loop.

The elimination of the mismatch between the heat delivery and removal in the pri-
mary loop is accomplished by means of reducing the energy produced in the reactor.
something which is realized by the fast response accident protection for the reac-
tor. The fast response reactor accident protection (All) performs a safety func-
tion, and for this reason its reliability should be no less than the reliability
of the safety valves. Therefore, at ABs's, in contrast to how this is handled in
boiler facilities, there is no basis for failing to take into account the action
of the reactor accident protection when determining the capacity of the relief
valves.

Thus. the emergency reactor protection should be used for the reactor installations
as the first stage of protection against excessive pressure, while volume equalizer
relief valves should be used for the second stage when the heat delivery to the
primary loop is determined by the level of residual energy generation in the reac-
tor.

For emergency heat removal from the secondary loop, it is necessary to vent the
steam from the steam generators and deliver a make-up feed by means of the emer-
gency feed pumps. Since this system performs an important safety function, it

is usually designed in accordance with the requirements of the general principles
for the assurance of the safety of nuclear power stations in their design, const-
ruction and operation [2].

It is necessary to choose the capacity of relief valves by working from an analysis
of accidents with a complete loss of feed water. Such an accident can happen in
the case of a break in any feed water pipe. In the worst case, it occurs with a
break in the feed water pipe between the check valve and the steam generator, as
shown in the schematic of Figure 1. In this case, besides cutting off all of the
main feed pumps because of the pressure drop in the main pressure line, there will
be a leak from one steam generator. If for any reason there is a total failure of
the emergency make-up feed system for the secondary loop, as happened at the

Three Mile Island 2 ABS [3]. the accident will develop under conditions of a total
feed water loss.

Such an emergency situation has been analyzed for a power unit with a vvsn-Aoo
reactor [440 K“ water-moderated, water—cooled power reactor] using the mathematical
models described in [3. A] as well as the "Kontur", "Kompensator" and other pro-
grams based on them.

The results of the analysis are shown in Figure 2.

Until the complete evaporation of the water from the secondary loop, no dangerous
situation arises since after the actuation of the reactor accident protection. a
sufficient removal of heat from the primary loop is assured. However, after the

evaporation of the secondary loop water, the cooling of the primary loop ceases
and it begins to heat up rapidly. The heating of the primary loop is accompanied

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FF"JAL.USE(NNLY

.o>Ha> nouaou can: I 2&0

o>ua> mucuau .a
uo>H¢> huauuo oaaaaﬂw .w
“onwauaa .n

“noucuacou aamum .o

“youao: ousaauun swan

«mesa coon ouuuoouo
honounoai Huuuoaﬂuaasm

“mesa voou ouuuoouo aoaowuwam
“gang calm ouuuooum

muououuaoe

.n

.¢
.n
.N
.H

.uOuowou O¢¢|¢N>> a an“:
nouuuuo uoaon ouuuoouo uaoﬂuac a mo unanua nouaavuou can no ouuuaosum

“aux

.a ouamuh

 

19

INJR OFFICIAI.USIZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0: ._ .- cl
“emf. new“ “2

‘/.
52+ ,

1:234. 19 23. m zuv- 231mill't

  
  
 

 
 

 

3}
50.— :21
.3: Mi-
w' m
1:13 - - - - .
0 12.” u) 236 m In to 139 10%
"Ht?“ k8 f [c112 sec

. u) .
135

 

Figure 2. Feed pipe break between the check valve and the steam
generator.
Key: 1. Water mass rate of flow through the reactor;

. Pressure in the operating steam generators;

3. Total steam mass rate of flow;

6. Thermal power of the reactor;

5. Quantity of water in the operating steam generators;
6. Quantity of water in the emergency steam generator;
8. Water temperature at the outlet and inlet of the core

respectively;
9. Pressure in the volume equalizer;

10. Water level deviation in the volume equalizer from the

nominal value;
A. Bare exposure of the feedvater branch delivery pipes;
B. Actuation of the fast response reactor accident
protection.

by a rise in the pressure. This leads to the opening of the relief valves in the
volume equalizer. Initially, the steam reliefvalvesactuate and then after the
steam cushion is forced out through the relief valves, the hot water runs out. The
most dangerous moment begins when the primary coolant starts to boil. At this point
in time, the greatest volumetric rate of coolant flow is dumped through the relief
valves and this is the governing factor in the selection of the capacity of the
volume equalizer relief valves.

Because of the large water reserve in the secondary loop of AEs's with vvzn-aao
reactors. a dangerous situation can arise no earlier than 2.5 hours after the onset

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the feedwater loss accident. At AES's with the VVER-lOOO reactor. the relative
water reserve in the secondary loop per unit capacity of the reactor is somewhat
less, and for this reason, a dangerous situation with the boiling of the primary
loop coolant can begin approximately one hour after the start of a similar accident.
The operational personnel have this time available to take steps to restore the
feed for the secondary loop. We will note that at the Three Mile Island 2 the
emergency feed was restored eight minutes after the start of the accident.

The restoration of the feed is one of the conditions for assuring the operational
reliability of AES's. since otherwise the water will boil out of the primary loop,
something which in the final analysis can cause damage to the fuel assemblies in
the reactor core.

Settings were recommended for the actuation of the reactor accident protection with
respect to primary loop pressure and with respect to the water level in the steam
generators on the secondary loop side based on an analysis of accident situations
for AES's with vvsa-aao reactors.

Since relief valves perform an important protective function. the number of them
and their capacity should be chosen by working from the requirements of the general
principles for assuring AES safety.

The Capacity of Secondary Loop Safety Valves and BRO-A [Quick-Acting Reducers for
Atmospheric Steam Venting] Valves. The number and capacity of secondary loop safety
valves are likewise selected in accordance with the requirements of [1]. Usually,
two valves each with an overall capacity equal to the capacity of the steam genera-
tor are installed on each steam generator. If it is assumed that such a capacity

is needed to carry out the safety functions assigned to the valves. then the instal-
lation of two valves with a capacity of 50 percent each is inadequate to satisfy the
unit failure principle. However, this is not so in this case.

Numerous calculations performed at the All-Union Institute of Thermal Engineering
imeni F.E. Dzerzhinskiy for the engineering substantiation of the safety of AES's
in the process of designing them show that in all cases, the indicated capacity

of a single valve is sufficient to protect the secondary loop against excessive
pressure. Consequently, the second valve can be treated as a standby for the case
of failure of the first valve. This is due to the fact that in secondary loop ex-
cessive pressure modes, when the necessity of safety valve operation arises, the
capacity of the steam generators does not remain constant, but is substantially re-
duced.

If the steam generators are not disengaged in the emergency mode, then considering
the fact that one backup valve is installed on each of them. we come to the conclu-
sion that protection against excessive pressure in the secondary loop in this in-
stance is assured with a considerable redundancy. From this standpoint, a more
dangerous case in steam generator operation with false actuation of the cutoff
valve (see the schematic of Figure 1). However, in this case too. a reduction in
the temperature head by virtue of the pressure rise in the secondary loop reduces
the requisite capacity of the safety valves to such an extent that one valve proves
to be sufficient to limit the pressure in accordance with the requirements of [1].

The transient process in this mode is shown in Figure 3.

21

FOR 0FFKJAI.USEIDNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2
“€55.31

5., '10:": 1' lpdes

  
   
   

   

n-

55

\ﬁaurnur 6 n‘apulinon
napozenepa mop:

...,,,,,....,.,,
25‘5 .'.'1 29.1070 100 900:
seconds

Figure 3. False actuation of the cutoff valve of
an ABS with a WER-MD reactor.

Key: A. Pressure in the emergency steam generator.

  
   
 
 
  
    

kh/(nz
5.‘ 9’:

”‘80
57-60
'IS' W

«l- 23
95

1 234. m inﬂatiooll-nlw"— was

Figure lo. Screaming an ABS with a Willi-460 reactor.
Key: 1. Thermal power of the reactor;

2. Total steam mass rate of flow;
3. Mass rate of flow of water through the reactor;
4. Pressure in the main steam header;
5. Water temperature at the outlet fron the core;
6. Water temperature at the inlet to the core;
7. Pressure in the voluse equalizer.

In addition to safety valves. fast-acting reducers are installed for duping the

steam into the turbine header and the atmosphere, the BRU—K and BRU-A respectively,
to protect against excessive pressure in the secondary loop.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As numerous calculations have shown, the necessity of the actuation of the relief
valves in the secondary loop can arise only when the BRU-K do not work. Such a
situation is comparatively rare. Moreover. the probability of safety valve failure
can be substantially reduced if their operation in a pulsating node is prevented.

a condition similar to that shown in Figure 2. It follows from this that it is
expedient to assign this function specifically to a BRU-A.

As can be seen from the results of calculating total ABS shutdown, which are shown
in Figure lo, the safety valves close (.0 seconds after their actuation following the
start of the accident. The residual energy liberation amounts to no more than 5
percent by this time. This value can also be reconended as the requisite nininal
capacity of the BRO-A valves. The setting for the opening of the BRU-A can in prac-
tice match the setting for the actuation of the relief valves, while the setting for
the closing of the BRO-A should be significantly lower than the setting for the
closing of the safety valves. something which provides the capability of renoving
residual heat and cooling through BRU-A following the closure of the safety valves.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. "Pravila ustroystva i bezopasnoy ekspluatatsii oborudovsniys atomnykh elektro-
stantsiy, 0pytnykh i issledovatel'skikh yadernykh reaktorov i ustanovo " ["Regu—
lat ions for the Installation and Safe Operation of the Equipment of Nuclear
Electric Power Stations, Experimental And Research Nuclear Reactors and Instal-
lations"], Moscow, Metallurgiya Publishers, 1973.

2. Bukrinskiy A.M. , Tatarnikov V.P. , "Osnovnyye printsipy obespecheniya bezopasnosti
pri proyektirovanii i ekspluatatsii atonnykh elektrostantsiy" ["Pundamental Prin-
ciples of Safety Engineering in the Design and Operation of Nuclear Electric
Power Stations"], ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSIT, 1978, No. 8. o

3. Casto w.a., Cottrell n.3,, NUCLEAR sum, 1979, 20 (a).

4. Bukrinskiy A.M., Zadorozhnaya I.N., "Matematicheskaya nodel' dlys rascheta
perekhodnykh protsessov s glubokimi vonushcheniyani dlys bloka ABS s vodovodya-
nym enerteticheskim reaktorom" ["A Mathematical Model for the Calculation of the
Transient Processes with Severe Disturbances for a Nuclear Power Station with
a Water-Moderated, Water-Cooled Power Reactor"], TRUDY VTI [PROCEEDINGS OF THE
ALL-UNION INSTITUTE OF THERMAL ENGINEERING DIENI 17.3. DZERZHINSKIY], 1977, No 11.

5. Bukrinskiy A.M., Kol'tsova N.V., "Mstaatiche'skoye nodelirovaniye protsessov
v psrovon konpensatore 0 "years" ["Mathematical Modeling of the Processes in a
Steam Volume Equalizer"l, TRUDY VTI, 1977, No 11.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Elektricheskiye stantsii", 1981.

8225
050: 8144/1794-A

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC [621.311.25:621.039]:699.841
SEISMIC STABILITY EVALUATION OF NUCLEAR PONBR STATION ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
Moscow ELEKIRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 8-11

[Article by V.V. Piskarev, candidate of the engineering sciences, and D.K.
Ponomarev, engineer, Scientific Research Department of the All-Union Planning,
Prospecting and Scientific Research Institute imeni S.Ya. Zhuk]

[Text] One of the major requirements for the reliable operation of nuclear elec-
tric power stations being built in seismically active regions is the preservation
of the operability of the category I electrical equipment (8T0) during and after

an earthquake. The level of seismic activity can reach such values that. taking
into account the dynamic characteristics of the support structures for the electri-
cal equipment, there is the probability of failure of individual constituent com-
ponents and instruments. Methods exist for the evaluation of the seismic stability
of electrical equipment, which consist in vibration load testing of the equipment
using vibration test stands. The wide scale dissemination of these techniques is
difficult because of the use of special vibration test platforms, the necessity of
shipping the equipment to the test site and the simulation of the equipment oper-
ating conditions.

A method is described in this paper which makes it possible to.operationally evalu—
ate the seismic stability of electrical equipment directly in an ABS. The tech-
nique permits the determination of equipment operability under seismic loads. speci-
fied in the form of accelerometer graphs of earthquakes.

Both in domestic practice and abroad [1, 2]. seismic stability testing of electri-
cal equipment, as a rule. reduces to the following tests:

1. Panels, control boards and stands which are included in the electrical equip-
ment complement are mounted on a base made of steel channels which are rigidly
fastened directly to a VPZK-lOO vibration test platform. The platform is coupled
to a hydraulic drive, which generates harmonic vibrations in a frequency range of
l to 50 Hz. The equipment being tested is connected to electrical circuits which
simulate operational conditions, and its operability is registered during this.

The dynamic (vibration) load conditions are specified by working from the nature
of the design accelerometer recordings of an earthquake. In the case of failures

in the operation of the electrical circuits. the stiffness of the support struc-
ture is increased and the tests are repeated. As experience has shown, the costs

2b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of imparting additional rigidity to the electrical equipment being tested is signi-
ficantly less than the cost of engineering design work related to the replacement
of component parts or re-equipping.

2. Individual types of component parts (relays, contactors, instruments) which are
incorporated in a panel under test are mounted on a special vibration test stand,
for example, the VEDS-400 using the same method as when mounted in the panel. Then
the product being tested is connected to the electrical circuits and its operating
parameters are recorded. The vibration test stand sets accelerations in a range

of 2 to 50 Hz with a step of 1 Hz, at which the component fails. As a result. the
amplitude-frequency limit of operability of the given product is determined. The
panel in which the previously tested components are installed is rigidly secured to
a VPZK—lOO test platform. The vibrational platform sets the oscillatory load con-
ditions in accordance with the character of the design earthquake acceleration
graphs. The accelerations are recorded at the points where the components are fas-
tened. The seismic stability of the panel is evaluated by comparing the operability
limit of the product and the maximum acceleration recorded in the region where it
is secured during tests of the panel itself.

Tests of electrical equipment using the procedures given here are undoubtedly an

essential part of the work which makes it possible to evaluate equipment seismic

stability, and will serve as the basis for making the necessary recommendations.

A drawback to the indicated techniques is the fact that at each point in time, a

single frequency sinusoid acts on the product being tested rather than a spectrum
of frequencies, as occurs under actual conditions.

The fastening of panels in an AES is quite different from the fastenings on test
stands. This in turn leads to a variation in the dynamic properties of the support

structures of the electrical equipment. and is reflected in its seismic
stability.

In the final analysis, a comprehensive test of the electrical equipment installed
in the assigned locations in an ABS building is required, and where necessary, ad-
ditional steps must be taken to assure its seismic stability.

To resolve the problem posed here, work was done to design a comprehensive test
procedure for equipment under ABS conditions. This method includes both the ex-

perimental and computational portions.

The tests of electrical equipment for seismic stability under ABS conditions pro-
vide for the performance of the following work:

--The testing of relays, contactors. instruments and other products included in the
complement of electrical equipment under harmonic loads for the purpose of deter-
mining their amplitude-frequency limit of operability. Thus, for the RP-23 relay,
the curve of the operability of this product was obtained as a function of the
amplitude loading and frequency (Figure l). The failure curve was plotted starting
at 8 Hz, since the technical capabilities of the VDES-400 do not allow for set-
ting adequate accelerations in the range up to 8 Hz. however, under those
accelerations which were obtained using the vibration stand in this range, the
relay maintained its operability. As can be seen from the graph of Figure l,
exceeding a dynamic mode of 4 m/sec2 leads to failure of the RP-23 relay at a

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

frequency of 39 Hz. Working from this, the permissible loads on this relay for
its reliable functioning during a seismic event should not exceed 4 m/sec2 through-
out the entire frequency range;

 

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 55 90 “cm
I, Hz

 

Figure 1. Operability curve of the RP-23 relay. Figure 2. The device for dynamic

Key: Solid line is the failure curve; tests of structures.

Key: 1. Structure being-tested;
2. Two-link mechanism;
3. Support; 4. Ring;
5. Drive

Dashed line is the maximum
acceleration amplitude at which
the relay maintains its operabi-
lity.

—-The recording of the load applied to the lower part of the product being
tested, and the response to this dynamic load in the regions of the fastenings of
the component products;

-The calculations. which consist of the determination of the values of the
recorded loads on reactions and the determination of the transfer functions P(jw)
of the system formed by the base of the support structure being tested and the
region of the installation of the component product secured to this support
structure. This makes it possible to determine the maximum acceleration of
oscillatory motion of the product with a load specified in the form of a trans-
formed acceleration trace of the design earthquake. taking into account the
dynamic characteristics of the ABS building;

-—The evaluation of the seismic stability of the equipment by means of comparing
the amplitude-frequency limit of operability of the component products and the
maximum accelerations of their oscillations on the support structures of the
electrical equipment.

A special device was developed for the capability of specifying the shock dynamic
load in the base of the support structure of electrical equipment. The device
[3] takes the form of a two-link mechanism, the lengths of which are coupled
together in a hinged fashion, where the mechanism is positioned between the lower

part of the support structure of the electrical equipment and a support; in this
case. central hinge is tied to a ring which is coupled to the drive. The device
for dynamic tests of structures is shown schematically in Figure 2.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

The device operates as follows: the requisite aperture angle of the links of the
device is set and the coupling ring is moved by means of the drive: in this case,
the center hinge moves from the upper position to a position of unstable equi-
librium. As a result of the rapid removal of the force produced by the device in
the lower portion of the product, there is a jump~like change in the acceleration,
which is determined by the amount of the initial displacement and the rigidity of
the structure being tested.

The amount of force produced in the lower portion of the structure being tested

depends on the aperture angle of the linkage of the device, for which a provision
is made to adjust it.

The impact of an earthquake on the equipment housed in an ABS depends not only the
earthquake parameters. but also on the dynamic properties of the building.

He did not determine the acceleration of the floors, on which the electrical
equipment is placed. due to the action of the design acceleration graphs for
earthquakes, since this was specified beforehand.

The initial parameters for the determination of electrical equipment seismic
stability, using the LETO program, which was designed for this purpose. are:

x”(t) [x1(t)] is the impulse action at the base of the support structure for the
electrical equipment; y”(t) [y1(t)] is the reaction at the point where the compo-
nent product is located due to the action of the pulsed load; x5(t) is the acceler-
ation graph of the design earthquake at the installation level marker for the
equipment being tested.

By means of the LETO program and the output data needed for seismic stability
evaluation of each equipment unit, provisions are made for the output of the
results of the response of electrical equipment support structures at the points
where the component products are fastened. in the form of a time function yP(t).
The seismic stability of the electrical equipment is evaluated on the basis of a
comparison of the amplitude-frequency limit of the operability of each component
product incorporated in the equipment unit being tested, and the maximum amplitude
of yP(t).

Thus, the program for calculating the seismic stability of electrical equipment
includes the following steps. The two functions x1(t) and y1(t) are specified,
each of which is other than zero only in a certain range 0 g t 3 tﬁ; 0 g t ; ti.

The Laplace transformation of the indicated functions yields x1(u c). Y1(m,c) and
the absolute values and arguments of the functions respectively: IX1(w,c)I, ¢;(u¢);
|Y1(w,c)l, ¢;(u,c). Then the following quantities are determined:

R ('9. C) ' ‘ 'LAJ'EETI. F01). erg”: (U. C) _' $1; (”I C)

I'll. (“'- C).

The Laplace transform of the function x3(t) is realized:

27

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I
'\’n("’- CI =_' ‘0" no) IX.U)d'_
6

And the absolute value and argument of the function x3(t) are found:

|.\"' (as, c) I. 19(0). c)

Then the following functions are found:

Kim. (‘)=R(«). (”1"“). CH:
"mum. C)=F(w. c) +<p',(o.'c);

And the c”Flex-valued function:
Il’ (m, c) -.-—_ i K (a. c) [,1 "u. (c. I).

By performing the inverse Laplace transform of the function "(0,c), we obtain
the desired function yp(t) of the acceleration of the component product motion
due to the dynamic impact of xa(t). specified at the base of the electrical
equipment support structure.

The time needed to compute a single reaction on YeS 10-40 computer is S to 10
minutes. A flow-chart of the LETO program is depicted in Figure 3.

work was done on several individual kinds of equipment panels (KIPiA [control
and measurement instrumentation and automation equipment], 065 [expansion
unknown]) to determine their transfer functions. The transfer functions were
determined using vibraton test platforms in one case and a comprehensive tech-
nique in another.

The studies showed that with the same fastening for each product, the transfer
functions correspond to each other in a frequency range of 1 to 30 Hz. The
results obtained made it possible to recommend the comprehensive technique for
the esthnntion of the seismic stability of equipment.

So this technique is utilized in evaluating the seismic stability of the
electrical equipment of the "Kozloduy" ABS in the Bulgarian Peoples Republic,
where calculations and full—scale tests were run on 136 units of equipment, in
which the following were included: BShchU [expanswon unknown], SUZ [control and
protection system, R120 [expansion unknown] and the KRU-0.b [0.4 KM cubicle
switchgear]. He shall consider the procedure for performing the appropriate
work.

The RTZO panel is included in the system for the protection and switching of
the electric motors of the gate valve fittings and is located at the +9.6 m

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-- "\
-/-":¢'I_a.:F":: ‘.
\_ l5'_l'
:’;r.I—:' .eIAPfJII'II
' tum“: ,'

Illa" (3 cuttﬁt’ﬂauuv-i

__:/I-'3f""il I

Pounce-:1: max
I l u m") dwaod
L. "a "(VB I”.

5 l‘hI I!“ III: III-371;."

III sauna!” 1: www-
:JJU of CIﬂ‘f‘nﬂi (3-4
I‘m“, ufnpungphﬂc

y-r-mpnmrtuuvfi -
I I0): :dary'cJaw-

_— { “ya-Mk

 

 

   
   
  
 

 

[qr—r,- -n1Iu':.I 'IN'II'Ir “"t12A)

I

I urn,“ an“! I
' 6 onl- .nu tax.

I Lanny 9:” a_ I
' ELI If."
i Weadpairdauut I
I7 [an 'Iu J I
| I
I

: .nu-u-I-I-II

I a l Ian "are

| I nary/Ia!"
I ...... _

' IL—

I 7, agent: ll’

2 14-]: I ﬂu: I 'w .1"

I - J‘s. u... ..u
[uh-9 nu III-Ila I!"

h -_.._

 

  
  
 

.
_ .1 '
If": 'WU. 'Iauue |
I
l
l
E
I
.

73. Access to the REAKS procedure;
next unit of equipment being tested;
118. End of the macroexpnasion;

__.L.. _._

l and»: .Ioin III.- e
' III n/Iam
a: tuner/Ia I'm-

 

peanuuu III: as I

.191 m nova/II.

 

naxaxtM-Iue |
mar uhwptuul.

ruoup .Iynr H '5‘-.‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 3.

\9
Key: 1A.

  
 

  
 

. "turn ”an m I i
ﬂan/mm (M.
I To» "nu t
I ' , 5A

. O
”:12? H" 6A-
___:I_—
—_ 5. 5-3 -... —I 5 gA.
. I ‘ “11' -l. i A.
-_ _...',:-::-n‘.rr; ,Ifu. :IF'lll‘ells) 9A.

I 69 130;"- l «p:
t'

 

1_m~IIgI .

- --— -_ #1123) 10A.
111115;! nu nevam. 11A
-mr-rm:ﬂ:u amply-I .
[hauuu 00 :vﬂ’ 5
"0:! P uuuuc 0 0‘

I__ H. Maw: 12‘.
' -nII_p_u'Iu¢'Nue n 1 13‘

InnnIu-dynr mm
___ I ' 23.

lulu! no ﬁrm III. 33 .

Incatmnlhu u-OOI'
rmuuu ch "oped-cw 5

‘ (1mm (”Du (a unu-
“a 0:5 {0%9d‘d “do Nun I ‘3

{Mpg-l Ira—u: n 9
llﬁﬁb

stray” If":

53.

(35 an 63.

 

29

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Plow chart of the LBTO
program.

LBTO program;
Input: H1. N, M. A3. E,
El, E3, 84, ES, 82;

. Input: accelerometer graphs

[u2(m1) 1:
Finding the maximum in
u2(nl). Printout;

. Printout of the textual

information on the next
unit of electrical equip-
ment being tested;

Input: N1, N2, A1. A2;
response; impulse;
Response Laplace transform;
Impulse Laplace transform;
Derivation of the transfer
function; Printout;

To 3;

Access to the REAKS
procedure;

RBAKS macroexpansion;
Acceleration graph Laplace
transform;

Inverse Laplace transform;
Derivation of the acceler-
ation teat response;
printout;

Finding the acceleration
maximum which the equip-
ment vill experience;
Printout;

Printout of textual inform-
ation on the next unit of
equipment;

83. Printout of textual information on the
98. Access to the RBAKS procedure; 103. End;
128. Return to the LETO program.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

height marker. One of the weakest elements of this panel from the viewpoint of
Vibrational strength is the RP—23 relay. The amplitude—frequency limit of opera-
bility of this relay is shown in Figure 1. A failure in its operation was taken
to be any short-term openings of its contacts. It can be seen from the graph that

for a frequency of 39 Hz at accelerations of more than a m/secz. the relay loses
its operability.

Under natural full-scale conditions. i.e., taking into account the specific
features of the fastening of the ShANH33 panel. a dynamic load was produced in
the lower portion by the device described here. In this case, the accelerations
were recorded on type UF-67 recording paper using piezoelectric sensors, a SM-231
amplifier and a K-llS bifilar oscillogtaph. The maximum acceleration of the
SthM33 panel in the region of the RP-23 relay was obtained as a result of the

calculations; this amounted to 10.0 m/secz, for the case of exposure to the speci-
fied earthquake accelerometer graph.

A comparison of the amplitude-frequency limit of operability of the RP-23

relay and the maximum value of its oscillations for the case of the design earth-
quake demonstrated the necessity of increasing the stiffness of the support struc-
ture of the 4NH33 panel. Repeated tests which were performed after increasing the
stiffness of the support structure showed a significant improvement in the seismic

stability of this panel and the capability of its operation under the conditions
ofthe"Kozloduy" AES.

Conclusions

1. The seismic stability of M25 electrical equipment is evaluated by a comprehensive

technique, taking into account the specific features of its fastening under ABS
conditions.

2. The comprehensive technique enables on-the-spot evaluation of the seismic sta-
bility of ABS equipment under natural full-scale conditions and can be used in the

acceptance testing of equipment for operation following its installation in a
station.

3. The range of applications of the comprehensive seismic stability evaluation
technique is not limited to studying just electrical equipment. but also with a
particular approach. can be extended to the evaluation of the seismic stability of
several kinds of production procesa equipment: the primary loops, valve fittings.
piping systems.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. "Seismic Testing for Reliable Instrumentation and Control Systems". IEEE TRANS.
0N PAS. 1973, Vol. 92. No. I:

2. Budennyy V.N.. Kirillov A.P., Tatarnikov V.P.. "Opyt sozdaniya seismostoykikh
AES v Yaponii" ["Experience with the Design of Seismically Stable Nuclear Elec-
tric Power Stations in Japan"]. ENERCETICNESKOYE STROITEL'STVO 2A RUBEZHOM
[POKER ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION ABROAD]. 1078. N0. 4.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Patent No. 769383 (USSR). "Ustanovka dlya dinmicheskogo ispytaniya konstruktsly"
["A Dynamic Test Stand for Structures"], B.M. Bakhtin, V.V. Piskarev, E.S.

Saakov, Published in Bulletin No. 37, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Elckcricheskiye stantsii”, 1981 .

8225
C50: 8144/1794-A

31

FOR OFl-TCIAL USE ONLY
FIN!(”HW(]AI.USE(MULY

UDC[621.3ll.25:621.039]:621.322-8l:621.313.126.001.4
BRUSHLBSS EXCITBRS 0F SOO-HW TURBOGENERATORS IN ATOMIC POHBR STATIONS
Moscow ELEKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 16-18

[Article by engineers V. D. Vekshin, I. D. Dronov, N. A. Isakov and I. Ya.
Cheremisov and candidates of technical sciences V. s. Kil'dishev and Yu. A. Kozlov,
Scientific Research Institute of the Elektrotyazhmash plant at the Novovoronezhskaya

ABS]

[Text] In the past decade. the Scientific Research Institute and the
Elektrotyazhmash plant developed, manufactured and installed brushless exciters

for 200 and SOD-MW turbogenerators with a 3,000 min'1 frequency of rotation and for
SOO-HW turbogenerators with a 1,500 min" frequency of rotation at a number of ther-

mal and electric power stations.

A distinguishing characteristic of these exciters is the application of a rotating
multiphase AC generator with trapezoidal-waveform e.m.f. in the armature-winding
phase as a power source. This is achieved by means of a uniform air gap between
the armature and the inductor; the presence of two exciter windings on the inductor
whose electrical axes are perpendicular; the armature winding phases' arrangement
in coils having identical positions under the poles; and by means of their connec-
tion in a star [1].

The trapezoidal waveform of the e.m.f. in the armature-winding phase makes it im-
possible to present a clearly defined current distribution with respect to the max-
imum e.m.f. As a result, the simultaneous operation of several rectifiers and arms-
ture-winding phases is realized [2]. which undoubtedly is a factor in improving

the utilization of the rectifier and the resistive materials in the multiphase AC

generator.

These principles and features were realized in the brushless exciters for 200 and
300-MW turbogenerarors. Studies of these exciters have shown. however, that with

an incomplete number of rectifiers in the rotating rectifier assembly, for example,
if one accidentally becomes unserviceable, the overload on the individual rectifiers
remaining in operation is approximately 80 percent. This made it necessary to im-
pose restrictions on the operating conditions of the exciters.

In order to insure the serviceability of the exciter when operating with an incom-
plete number of rectifiers, an armature-winding arrangement using five parallel
paths in phase was employed during the development of a brushless exciter for

32

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
o e e

omwwubuwu—
. .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1. Electric circuit for connecting the armature
winding and the rotating rectifier assembly

(1)71
HI?

(I,
_;.-

   

   

Pig. 2. Block diagram of the bruahleas exciter system

Voltage transformer 10. Turbogenerator exciter winding

Automatic excitation regulator 11. Induction current moor

Measurement cabinet 12. Rotating rectifier assembly

Protection-unit panel 13. Armature winding

Control cabinet lb. Exciter field winding

Automatic voltage regulator 15. Thyriator converter

Magnetic sensors 16. Pilot exciter amture uinding

Current sensors 17. Pilot exciter field winding

Turbogenerator 18. Insulation-resistance and voltage meter
33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

500-515! turbogenerators with a 1,500 min”1 frequency of rotation. The electrical
connection of the parallel phase paths is on the side of the alternating current,
while the parallel connection of the rectifiers is on the arms of the rotating
rectifier assembly (fig. 1). This, together with the retention of the basic prin-
ciples, was a step forward in the direction of improving the operational character-
istics of brushless exciters.

No TGV-SOO-lo tutbogenerators with an output of 500 PM at a frequency of 1,500 min‘1
were installed at the Novovoronezhskaya AES. They are fitted with BTV-SOO-lo multi-
phase diode-type brushless exciters. the basic data for which are cited below:

 

Value
Nominal High-speed
Output. kw 2340 7740
Voltage, V 685 882
Current. A 4820 8760
Frequency of rotation. min'1 1500 1500
Frequency of e.m.f. in armature. Hz 125 125
Duration of operation. 3 Long-term 20

Figure 2 shows the block diagram for the brushless system of the exciter on the
TCV-500-4 turbogenerator at the Novovoronezhskaya ABS.

We will examine the purpose of the principal elements of the diagram.

The turbogenerator's excite: winding is supplied from the rotating unregulated rec-
tifier unit assenbled using a bridge arrangement. The rotating rectifier unit is
supplied from the armature winding of a multiphase AC—current generator. The ex-
citer's field winding is Supplied from a thyristor transformer connected to the
pilot cxciter—-a high-frequency induction generator, the current in which is main-
tained at a given level by an internal automatic voltage regulator through the
effect of the pilot exciter's field winding.

Monitoring of the turbogenerator’s excitation current i is accomplished in a contact-
less method with the help of an induction-current senso [3].

Control of the excitation voltage Uf and the insulation resistance R1; of the turbo-
generator's rotor is accomplished with a contactless insulation-resistance and volt-
age meter [4]. which. in addition to fulfilling its basic functions, signals when
there is damage to the winding insulation at a single point and provides for circuit
protection from faults to the turbine casing at two points.

The given measurements of the values for if, Uf and R1; arrive at the panel instru-
ments of the metering cabinet.

To insure continuous monitoring of the status of the rectifiers in the rotating

rectifier asseutbly, the exciter is equipped with a system of magnetic and current
sensors which make it possible to obtain continuous information about the rectifier's

31:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operation at the protection-unit panel. This protects the rectifier as well as
limits the exciter current if when there is an incomplete nutter of rectifiers in

the asseﬂﬂy .

The excitation of the-brushless exciter is controlled by an automatic excitatim
regulator which receives information about the turbogenerator's output parameters--
the voltage 00 and the current I0 with the help of voltage and current transformers.
Information about the parameters of the exciter is obtained with the help of the
meter cabinet and the protection-unit panel. The automtic exciter regulator, acting
upon the thyristor converter, controls the excitation of the exciter and the turbo-
generator within the required limits.

"hen the automatic exciter regulator malfmctions. the control over the excitation
is accomplished manually by using the apparatus in the control cabinet.

We will examine briefly the basic design features of the exciter.

The exciter is constructed on two pedestal-type sliding bearings. The multiphase

Ac generator, rotating rectifier. pilot exciter and the unit for contactless measure-
ment and control of the exciter's parameters are located in a cannon noise-suppression
housing whose design insures the circulation of the necessary volume of cooling air

in order to draw off losses emanating from the exciter's resistive portions.

The multiphase generator's armature is assembled from sheets of hot-rolled electrical
steel with an enhanced silicon content. In the grooves on the armature is bedded
the eight-phase lap winding with diametrical pitch and five parallel branches. The
winding leads are connected to the rectifier through a system of terminal buses.

In order to reduce additional losses in the winding. an end transposition is carried
out in the coils of the winding in the direction opposite the leads. The head por-
tions of the armature are protected from the effects of centrifugal force by binding
rings made from nonmagnetic material.

The inductor of the mltiphase generator is assenbled from sheets of hot-rolled
electrical steel. 1V0 distributed exciter windings consisting of multiturn sections
of the same dimensions are set in grooves in the inductor. In order to reduce the
excitation power and decrease the level of additional losses on the surface of the
armature, the grooves on the inductor are set with keys made from a magnetic dielec-

tric material.

The rotating rectifier is asseublcd on a supporting wheel which bears on a center-
ing ring. The wheel is hot-pressed onto the exciter's shaft. To the centering
ring are affixed the cooling elements--radiators which insure reliable elimination

of losses which emanate from the rectifiers.

The radiators are made from an aluminum alloy and have a distributed cooling surface.
Flange-type silicon rectifiers designed for a maximm current of $00 A and a reiter-
ative voltage of 2.000 V are attached to the radiators. They are mounted in such

a way that the plane of the rectifier's p-n structure is perpendicular to the radius
of rotation. The total number of rectifiers on the rotating rectifier assembly

is 80. In order to protect them from switching surges, an R-C network, designed

as a separate unit, is mounted on the end of the radiator parallel to each recti-

fier.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The rectified current is passed through a system of leads to the DC lead located

on the exciter shaft. It is then passed through an electromechanical coupling to
the lead of the turbogenerator rotor.

Below are cited the results of tests performed on the BTV-SOO-lo brushless exciter
mounted in a plant test unit.

Current distribution betweeen the rectifiers on the rotating rectifier asserbly was
studied under short-circuit operation with nominal current. This was accomplished
with the aid of a measuring current-collector and shunts installed instead of fuses.
In order to insure serviceability of the excite: under conditions in which there
were an incomplete number of phases. provisions were made for the installation of
five rectifiers in parallel in each arm of the rectifier assembly. These five rec-
tifier: which were selected had a voltage drop of 20.01 V accuracy. The results

of the investigation showed that the difference in the currents in parallel-connected
rectifiers was -8.3 to 6.7 percent with the complete number of rectifiers. and did
not exceed :10 percent of the mean value with one rectifier disconnected.

Under-load conditions were examined with the rectifier unit's ohmic-resistance equal
to that of the turbogenerator's rotor. In this case, the rectifier insures the
smooth regulation of the load current from 0 to nominal current and higher, up to
values corresponding to the high-speed values.

Men the rectifier unit was operating under resistive load, the efficiency was deter-
mined using the method of individual losses. The value for the efficiency was 89.3
percent. The efficiency obtained differs from the calculated efficiency. equal

to 90 percent. within the limits allowed by State Standard 183-710.

The determination of the rectifier unit’s high-speed response characteristics was
accomplished while running it under a resistive load in a two-stage high-speed test.
In this case. additional resistance in the rectifier unit's winding circuit was
absent. The rate of rise under high-speed operation was 7.72 a". The rate of
rise when operating on the turbogenerator rotor and in the presence of additional

resistance from the exciter's winding circuit should be expected to be not less
than 18.6 s"1.

In order to determine the elevated temperature in the active portions of the auxil-
iary generator and pilot exciter and in the elements of the rotating rectifier assem-
bly, temperature indicatorsucopper-constantan thermocouples--were installed during
the manufacturing process. The temperature of the cooling air was measured using
resistance thermometers installed in the hot and cold-air chambers in the exciter
housing.

The thermal state of the exciter was studied under set conditions for no-load,
short-circuit, under-load and high-speed resistive operation. Below are cited the
results from the measurement of the temperature excesses in the rectifier elements
and their maximum allowable values. Measurements were carried out with a nominal
load on the rectifier unit and with a complete nunber of rectifiers in the arm as
well as with the disconnection of one and two rectifiers in the arm.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Temperature excessz °C

Essen—me cum
Inductor:
Portion of the winding:
Grooved 63 115
Core 56 115
Armature:
Portion of the winding:
Grooved 6 7 .6 115
Head 99.2 115
Core 63.6 115
Binding ring 80 115
Clamping flange 20 115
Base of rectifier in assembly:
With complete nuuber of rectifier: 32.2 60
With one disconnected rectifier 39 60
with two disconnected rectifiers 39.4 60
Pilot exciter:
Grooved portion of armature winding 56 115
Armature core 55 115
Exciter winding 100 115

During the course of two hours of testing in the two-stage high-speed mode, addi-
tional heating in the amount of 11.8 °c was found in the rectifier base.

The results of the thermal analysis of the exciter cited indicated that the tenper-
ature excesses in the exciter's active portions were well within limits. This tes-

tifies to the correctness of the choice of the electromagnetic-load 1eve1 and the
adoption of the basic design solutions.

The results of investigation and preliminary analysis of the operation of the

BTV-SOO-lc brush‘less exciters at the Novovoronezhskaya ABS point out their high

degree of serviceability and confirm the necessity of the further development and

introduction of brushless exciters at our country's electric power stations.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Moskvitin, A. 1., Koval'kov. c. A. and Lutidze, sh. 1., "Besshchetochnoye

vozbuzhdeniye sinkhronnykh nashin" [Brushless Excitation of Synchronous
Machinery], Moscow. OVHIIEH, 1964.

2. Lototskiy, v. L., "A Study of Counutatorless Dc Machinery With Semiconductor
Commutators," TRUDY MAI. No 165, 1966.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY

3. Koval'kov, G. A. and Hashnev, A. Ye., "Rotor Current Sensors for Brushleas
Synchronous Machinery." Deponirovannyye rukopiai, VINITI, No. 8, 1978.

6. Kil'dishev, V. 8.. Nikitenko. D. P. and Savel'yev. Yu. Ye., "Hetody inereniya,

kontrolya, zashchity 1 signalizatsu v beeshchetochnykh sistenakh vozbuzhdeniya"
[Methods of masurement. Control, Protection and Signalling 1n Brushless Excita-
tion Systems], Moscow. Intormelektro. 1975.

COPYRIGRT: Energoizdac. "Elektricheskiye suntan", 1981.

9512
080: 8 1610/1796-8

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.039.566:621.039.517
OPTIMIZATION OF WEIR-440 REACTOR ENERGY DISTRIBUTION
Moscow ATMAYA ENERGIYA in Russian Vol 49, No 4,0ct 80 pp 254-255
[Article by V. V. Pobedin and V. D. Simonov in "Letters to the Editor"]
[Text] A method of minimizing the nonuniformity of reactor energy distribution
[1] was employed for the optimization of seven successive WEIR-440 fuel charges.
The composition of the first charge and the arrangement elements of control were
in accordance with the information given in [2]. At the conclusion of each succes-
siva run the most burnt-up fuel assemblies were removed and the reactor was replen-
ished with fresh fuel enriched 2.47. and 3.67..

Table l. Burn-up of. Fuel Charges

 

Run Nulnber
Characteristics 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
R 349 287 299 296 299 296 299
“me“ecmedm 355 m m m m m 755
Average accumulation of
poison in unloaded
fuel, Its/t U:
14.39 22.68 22.32 25.05 23.05 24.47 24.46

2-“¢““°‘““°“‘ m 72:55 2277: 25:25 m m m

. 31.77 31.70 31.85 31.79 31.87
3-6’-em°*"°°"t ' ' m m m m m

Average accumulation of
poison in the reactor
fuel, kg/t U:

13.26 12.76 15.18 13.50 14.25 13.65 14.18
2~“"°mc'mt I313 1:51: 11-75. $5.75 r5751 3.16 “3—71..

10:18 15:60 15.33 15.62 15.52 15.93 15.51
3-“ mum“ m . 13:52: 11:75 rm. m m W.

Note: Here and in Table 2: 1)n\merator-optimized charges, deminatoro-formed

according to system of operation in [5]; 2)all fuel enriched 1.67. unloaded after
first run; ”make-up fuel constituted: 36 and 84 asscnblies after odd-numbered
runs, 31 and 84 after even-nunbered at 2.47. and 3.67. enrichment, respectively.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The optimum fuel arrangements, corresponding the minimum of the coefficient of non-
uniformity of radial energy distribution K r' were determined for the start-up of
each run with maintenance of 30° core symmetry. The working group of control assem-
blies was, in this case, in the l7S-cm position since, for the active zones under
consideration here, the least nonuniformity of energy distribution within the lim-
its of movement of the control and safety rod assemblies correlates with that start-
ing position, according to calculations [3].

Table 2. Coefficient of Nonuniformity of Energy Distribution

Run Number
Characteristics 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

 

Coefficient of non-
uniformity Kr '

at start of run 1.238 1.236 1.249 1.245 1.211 1.255 1.256

1215! TT 18 12317; 11756 17517 17295
1.270 1.25 1.265 1.256 1.283 1.261 1.260

a

maximum

1.511 m 1.515 1317; 1.557 11515 1.551

“”e t" m‘” Kr' 60 287 299 296 299 20 20

effective days -°- 70- 70- T W E 26

Coefficient of non-

2215233153.. 1.867 1.663 1.695 1.752 1.626 _1__.706 1.609
1'33? ‘1'7'51. 1'63". 2 1. s 1769? T820 1661.
w mm 1.905 1.663 1.695 1. 793 1.606 1. 706 1.61.9
m. 9 "7751. 1—‘.682 ms 1". 721 m .7 3

“me ‘° ”W ‘9' 20 0 0 296 299 o 0
“mm “W 15' 2'87 0 T 2'87 266 265

Data obtained by means of the three-dimensional program BIPR [possible expansion--
bystrodeystvuyushchayaispytatel'nayaprogramma reaktorOVshigh-speed reactor test
program] [4] concerning the depth of burn-up of the fuel and the length of the suc-
cessive reactor runs with minimized Kr are presented in Table 1, and the radial and
volumetric coefficients of nonuniformity of energy distribution of the reactor are
presented in Table 2. The radial coefficient of nonuniformity at the start of each
of the seven reactor runs turns out to be in the range of values 1.211-1.256, and
the volumetric 1.626-1.867. The maximum values of these coefficients during the
burn-up time are Kr=1.283 and Kv-1.905.

Calculations were also performed with the BIPR program for a system of rearranging

assemblies during rechargings, which was proposed in [5] (see Tables 1 and 2). The
initial values for the radial and volumetric coefficients of nonuniformity in this
case are, respectively, l.281-1.318 and 1.673-1.992. The maximum values are 1.325
and 1.992.

When the data from the two series of calculations were compared it was found that,
as a result of optimization in the fuel charges under consideration, as compared
with the data in [5], a reduction is achieved of 2.6-6.7% for the initial values
and 1.8-4.51 for the maximum values of the coefficient of nonuniformity of energy

60

FOR 0FF“JA1.USE¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distribution m’rer the burn-up period. Along with this, there is e 4.47. reduction
in the maximum value of the coefficient of volumetric nonuniformity of energy dis-
tribution, the depth of burn-up of the 3.6%oenriched fuel is increased, and the
reactor-'9 total energy production for the seven runs rose by about 17..

1.
2.

3.

a.

S.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Pobedin, V. V. and Simonov, V. D., ANNA“ ENERGIYA, Vol 46, No S, 1979, p357.
Sidorenko, V. A., Ibid., Vol 43, No-5,« 1977, p 325.
Pobedin, V. V., Ptitsyn, V. A., and Simonov, V. 1)., in "Problemy ekspluatetsii
reaktorov ABS. Trudy VTI. vyp. 19" [J’roblana of Reactor Operation at Nuclear
Electric Power Stations. Transactions of the All-Union Heat Engineering Insti-
tute, No 19], HOscow, izd. VII in. F. E. Dzerzhinekogo, 1978, p 62.

Petrunin, D. M., Belyeyeve, Ye. 0., end Kireyeve, I. I... Preprint IAE-2519,
Moscow, 1975.

Kokhanovskaye, L. V., KERNENERGIE, Vol 20, No 10, p 307.

COPYRIGﬂT: Energoizdet,"At01maye energiye", 1980

5454

C80 :

8134/1895

(01

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFH3AI.USE(NULY

THERHOHYDRAULIC AND PHYSICOCHEHICAL PROCESSES 1N NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS

Moscow TRUDY HOSKOVSKOGO ORDENA LENINA I ORDENA OKTYABR'SKOY REVOLYUTSII ENERGE-
TICHESKOGO INSTITUTA, TEHATICHESKIY SBORNIK: TEPLOGIDRAVLICHESKIYE I FIZIKO-

KHIHICHESKIYE PROTSBSSY V YADERNYKH ENERGETICHBSKIKH USTANOVKAKH in Russian No 674.
1980 (signed to press 20 Jun 80) PP 2. 173-182

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from book "Proceedings of Moscow Power
Institute Honored by the Order of Lenin and the Order of the October Revolution.
Collection of Papers on Thermohydraulic and Physicochemical Processes in Nuclear

Power Plants", edited by P. A. Gorbatykh. Hoskovskiy energeticheskiy institut,
600 copies. 182 pages]

[Text] A collection of 28 articles on research done at the department of nuclear
electric plants of Moscow Power Institute. These articles present materials on
topical problems in power engineering: reliability and safety of nuclear electric
plants in loss-of—coolant accidents; water chemistry and cleaning of equipment
surfaces; corrosion resistance of structural materials under various thermophysical
and chemicophysical conditions; reactor calculations: axial profile of energy
release with continuous movement of fuel; compact shielding configurations;
kinetics of water radiolysis under power reactor core conditions; universal mathe-
matical model for calculating thermal arrangements of nuclear electric plants and
nuclear heat and power stations.

The materials of the collection will be of interest to specialists dealing with
nuclear power.

UDC: 621.311.25:621.039

INVESTIGATION OF DYNAMICS OF BOILING COOLANT TEMPERATURE UPON LOSS OF VESSEL
INTEGRITY

[Abstract of article by Dement'yev, B. A.. Kuznetsov, V. D.. skotnikov. A. P. and
Ionov. B. A.]

[Text] The article gives the results of investigation of the dynamics of tempera-
ture of a two-phase medium upon loss of integrity of a pressure vessel in the case
of unilateral and bilateral coolant leakage. An estimate is given of the dynamic
characteristics of the thermocouple and the influence that conditions of heat ex-
change of the thermocouple with the two-phase medium and the vessel wall has on

42

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(NULY
FOR OFFKJA1.USEIDNLY

readings when recording temperatures. Based on the resultant data. a conclusion
is drawn regarding the thermodynamic state of the steam-power mixture during leakage.
which is important in mathematical modeling of the process.

UDC 621.311.25:621.039

.-

ANALYSIS OF DATA ON THO-PHASE FLOHRATE FOR VARIABLE PARAMETERS

[Abstract of article by Dement'yev. B. A.. Ionov. B. A., Kuznetsov. V. n. and
Nikol'skaya. N. A.]

[Text] The paper analyzes the influence of various factors (steam content, rate

of pressure reduction, parameters preceding the discharge branch) on the specific
flowrate of a steam-water mixture upon loss of integrity of a pressure vessel.

An estimate is given of the error of calculation of the volumetric steam content

during the process of loss of coolant.

UDC. 621.311.25:621.039
TEMPERATURE CONDITIONS OF VVER REACTOR FUEL ELEMENTS DURING AFTEROOOLING

[Abstract of article by Kabanov. L. P. and Nikonov, S. P.]

[Text] The paper gives calculations of temperature conditions of the fuel elements
of a VVER reactor on the aftercooling stage. Principal characteristics of heat
transfer processes with repeated wetting were calculated by empirical formulas
based on processing experimental data of Moscow Power Institute. As a result of
calculations, the cooling water flowrates are determined that keep the fuel element
cladding temperature below the limiting level.

UDC Sbl.lS:539.12.04
KINETICS 0F HATER RADIOLYSIS UNDER POWER REACTOR CORE CONDITIONS

[Abstract of article by Hilayev. A. 1.]

[Text] It is shown that fast (ti 10-3-10'1 8) and slow (ti 10 s) processes occur
upon irradiation of water. The slow process is due to reactions giving rise to
H2, 0; or H101. For example for hydrogen peroxide this might be the reaction

“3 + "03+ “201.

The same reaction explains the existence of H303 at high temperatures (up to
610 K) of the irradiated water.

UDC 621.311
THERMODYNAMIC ANALYSIS OF IRON COMPLEXATE STABILITY IN AQUEOUS SOLUTION

[Abstract of article by Monakhov. A. 8., Voronov. V. N., Kotenkov. V. N. and
Hayorov. M. F.]

[Text] The article gives the results of calculation of thermodynamic stability
of iron complexates with EDTA anion. using initial data on the complexate

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR OFFICJAI.USEZ(MULY

concentration and stability constants. The results of calculation agree well with
previous experimental data. demonstrating the efficacy of the proposed technique.

UDC 620.193.001.5

INFLUENCE OF AQUEOUS COOLANT ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY 0N CORROSION MECHANISM IN
STEEL-ALUMINUM JOINTS

[Abstract of article by Gradusov. G. N.. Zhurenkov, B. A.Morozov. A. V. and Pro-
lov, N. 0.]

[Text] The authors give the results of investigation of the process of interaction
between steel-aluminum welds and low-temperature aqueous coolant at various values
of pH and specific conductivity. It is shown that foci of localized corrosion

in the form of isolated pits appear on the weld surface and in the aluminum alloy

zone of the welded joints if the specific conductivity of the coolant exceeds
S-lO' S/cm.

UDC 62l.039.534.4:734.001.5

TECHNIQUE FOR DEPOSITING POHDERED TITANIUM DIOXIDE ON THE VERTICAL FILTERING ELEMENT
OF A PLACER FILTER

[Abstract of article by Kuz'menko. N. A., Sharygin, L. H. and Shtin,A. P.]

[Text] An investigation is made of conditions of homogeneous formation of a filter-
ing layer from powders with specific weight of 2.50103 kg/m3 and granularity in

the range of 25-150 um. It is shown that it is possible in principle to produce

a uniform deposit on a candle filter cartridge of materials distinguished by high
specific weight and large fractional inhomogeneity of particles. The technique

and conditions of the deposition process are worked out.

UDC 621.3llz62l.39

UNIVERSAL MATHEMATICAL MODEL FOR CALCULATIONS 0F THERMAL ARRANGEMENTS OF NUCLEAR
ELECTRIC PLANTS AND NUCLEAR HEAT AND POHER STATIONS

[Abstract of article by Zorin. V. H. and Bisyarin. A. N.]

[Text] A mathematical model is developed for calculations of the thermal arrange-
ments for nuclear electric plants and nuclear heat and power stations with arbi-
trary number and location of components. Physical and logic parameters are standard-
ized. as are the computational elements of the model. Adiabat equations are given
for superheated and saturated steam in the form of relations for final enthalpy

as a function of initial pressure and enthalpy and final pressure.

UDC 62l.039.5

NATURAL COOLANT CIRCULATION IN PRIMARY CIRCUITS OF NUCLEAR HEAT AND PONER STATIONS
AND NUCLEAR TRANSPORT FACILITIES

[Abstract of article by Gorburov, V. 1.]

[Text] The author considers the feasibility of using natural circulation of the
coolant 1n boiling—water reactors for nuclear heat and power stations and nuclear

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transport facilities. An analysis is made of capabilities for getting different
modes of circulation for some combinations of geometric and thermophysical param-
eters of the circuit and the coolant. Advantages and disadvantages of the circula-
tion modes are compared as well as some ways to calculate these parmaetera.

UDC 621.039.53

SOME ASPECTS OF PIT CORROSION 0P PEARLITE STEEL
[Abstract of article by Tolstykh, A. N.. Belous. V. N. and Khafizov, I. A.]

[Text] The paper gives the results of studies of pit corrosion of grade 20 steel.
It is noted that there is an initial accelerated stage of growth in the depth of
the pits. that subsequently slows down. It is shown that the depth of the pits
on the surface of specimens after 3,300 hours of tests exceeds 160 um. and reaches
250 um under conditions with intermediate shutdowns. Analytical relations are
given for the increase in depth of pitting corrosion.

UDC 621.039.53

CORROSION AND CARRY-OFF OP CORROSION PRODUCTS 01’ PEARLII'E STEEL AS APPLIED TO TECH-
NOLOGICAL PARAMETERS OF Rm LOW-PRESSURE HEATER

[Abstract of article by Gromova, A. I., Tolstykh. A. N.. Izmodenov. Yu. A. and
Manayenkov, Yu. 6.]

[Text] The article gives the results of corrosion tests of grade 20 pearlite steel
that were done in a carbon loop in an atmosphere of condensate and saturated steam.
It is shown that the rate of corrosion of grade 20 steel in condensate after 3.300
hours of testing under nominal conditions reaches 0.039 g/(mz-hr). and with inter-
mediate SOO-hour shutdowns—0.070 g/(m2 ~hr). The carry-off of corrosion products
amounts to 602 and 702 respectively. Pitting corrosion of the metal surface is

noted.

UDC 621.311.25:521.039.002.5
CORROSION STUDIES OF ALUMINUM ALLOY UNDER THERMAL LOADING

'[Abstract of article by Rassokhin. N. 8., Kolobnava, L. 1.. Kuznetsov. A. D.,
Lipanina. A. A.. Ismagilov. R. Sh.. Golosov. 0. A.. and Hansyenkov. Yu. 6.]

[Text] An examination is made of the results of a study of almimn alloys of
the Al-I-‘e-Ni system under dynamic conditions at a coolant pressure of 6.86 We
(70 kgf/cm’) and saturation temperature in corrosionless water chemistry. An
analysis is made of the corrosion behavior of the investigated alloys as a function
of temperature and aggregate state of the coolant in testing specimens under thermal

loading.

(05

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:OFFKJAJ.USE(JNLY

UDC 620.193.001.5
INTERACTION 0P ALUMINUM-STEEL HELDS WITH LON-TEMPERATURE AQUEOUS COOLANT FLOW
[Abstract of article by Gradusov. G. N.. Gumileva. H. G. and Norozov. A. V.]

[Text] The article gives methods and results of studying processes of interaction
between steel-aluminum butt welds and moving aqueous coolant at temperatures up

to 130°C. The studies were done on the basis of tests lasting 10.000 hours. It
is ahountharzbutt-welded contact between dissimilar construction materials does
not lead to foci of local destruction.

UDC 621.039.53:620.l96.2.001.5

USING COMPUTERS T0 EXPAND THE APPLICATION OF QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF CORROSION
CRACKING

[Abstract of article by Rassokhin, N. 6.. Gorbatykh. V. P., Gerngros, H., Yorike. D.
and Khofman. V.]

[Text] The article gives computational formulas, computer programs and a name-
gram plotted from the results of calculations for estimating the time to corrosion
cracking of grade 18/8 steel as a function of concentration of chlorine ion, oxygen,
working temperature, metal thickness and mechanical stresses.

UDC 621.181.61:621.3ll.25:621.039.00I.5

TECHNICAL-ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF THE FEASIBILITY OF CONDENSATE-CLEANING FACILITIES
IN NUCLEAR ELECTRIC PLANTS WITH VVER REACTORS

[Abstract of article by Monakhov. A. 8.. Voronov. V. N., Dik. V. P. and Lebedev,
V. A.]

[Text] An examination is made of optimum conditions for using condensate cleaning
depending on the type of cooling water and water chemistry standards. It is shown
that for a number of rivers in the European part of the USSR. condensate cleaning

is advisable from the technical-economic standpoint. The optimum version is [001

condensate cleaning. Data are given on specific types of nuclear electric plants

and cooling waters.

UDC 621.039.58

USING THE DIFFUSION-REMOVAL METHOD TO CALCULATE A TEST PROGRAM 0N BIOLOGICAL
SHIELDING

[Abstract of article by Mikhny. K.]

[Text] The paper gives the results of comparison of data of calculation of neutron
transmission thrOugh compact shielding configurations by the diffusion removal
method with the results of measurement of neutron fluxes by integral threshold
detectors on the teaching reactor at Budapest Technical University. It is shown
that the diffusion-removal method can be successfully used for calculating compact
shield configurations.

66

FON.0FFKJA1.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.039.58
USING METHOD OF INTEGRAL KINETIC EQUATIONS TO CALCULATE HULTILAYER SEIELDING
[Abstract of article by Hikhay. K.]

[Text] An examination is made of an improved method of one-dimensional calculation
of biological shielding based on combining the integral equation method with the
diffusion approximation. considering inhomogeneity of distribution of neutron
sources. An attempt is made to account for the actual three-dimensional structure
of the field of neutron sources. The results of the calculation were compared

with results of changes in test problems simulating multilayered shielding.

UDC 621.1.013.537
COMPUTATIONAL FORMULA FOR DETERMINING HULTIPLICITY OP CIRCULATION

[Abstract of article by Raz'nyak, V.]

[Text] The author attempts a departure from consideration of steam generation

as a discrete process. Interpretation of this process as continuous yields ana-
lytical expressions for multiplicity of circulation Kc. The results of calculations
of Kc are compared with published experimental data.

UDC 621.311.25:621.039

EXPERIENCE WITH HIGH-TEMPERATURE RINSING

[Abstract of article by Tevlin, s. A.. Bogatyreva, s. V., Nosacheva. s. 1. and
Krivov, I. V.]

[Text] The proposed method of cleaning surfaces with complexon solutions can be
used to remove deposits from heat-transfer surfaces in the presence of high thermal
flux (1 HN/cm’). A reduction is noted in the rate of growth of deposits after
rinsing. The authors verify the feasibility of concentrating active wastes of
rinsing by using ion-exchange resins.

UDC 621.039.621.187.6:536.5.019.001.5

INFLUENCE OF POROUS IRON OXIDE DEPOSITS 0N HEAT-EXCHANGE CONDITIONS ON HEATED SUR-
FACES

[Abstract of article by Krivov, I. V. and Alkhutov. Ye. V.]

[Text] It is shown that formation of porous iron oxide deposits during boiling
does not increase the temperature of the heat-transfer surface thanks- to the spe-
cific structure of the deposits. Deposit formation causes a shift in the limit

of onset of surface boiling toward the coolant underheating region.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.039.53:620.19lo.2.001.5
HODELING QUASIS’I‘EADY NEAT FLOR 0N ELECTRICALLY HEATED FUEL ELDIENT SDIULAI‘ORS

[Abstract of article by Gorbatykh. V. P.. Yorike. H” Kislov. G. I. and Gramatikov.
P. 5.]

[Text] ln simulating thermochemical conditions of fuel element cladding in nuclear
reactors, it is sometimes necessary to account for the arisal of quasisteady heat
flow for studying hydrodynamics. heat exchange and corrosion. In the case where
specimens that are electrically heated by alternating current are used. the quasi-
steady state can be simulated by an oscillator described in this paper. using thy-
ristorized RNTO controllers for voltage regulation.

UDC 621.386.039

ANALYSIS 0? DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE HEAT EXCHANGE CRISIS POR DETERMINING
PERMISSIBLE POWER OF WER-lolaO REACTOR

[Abstract of article by Bartolomey. G. 6., Kharitonov. Yu. V and Tsimer. 8.]

[Text] The article compares the most widely used design recomendations on the
heat exchange crisis for coolant boiling in the fuel assembly of the [IVER-1.40 reac-
tor. Data are given on changes in the reserve factors K and the true reserves

with respect to the crisis 89 for reactor operating conditions with unsteady circu-
lation of the coolant as a result of failure of two and three of the six main circu-
lat ing pumps.

UDC 621.!81.532.5
CALCULATION OF TRUE VOLUME‘l'RlC STEAM CONTENT
[Abstract of article by Skachek, H. A. and Borzdov. Ye. 6.]

[Text] An examination is made of a nethod of extending the range of applicability
of the VTI [Heat-Engineering Institute] formula for calculating the average volu-
metric steam content under conditions of bubbling and forced circulation. It is
shown that under certain conditions the accuracy of the calculation can be improved
and the VTI formula can be used for practically any channel diameter by using the
limiting diameter of the channel instead of the true diameter in the correction
complex of the VTI formula.

UDC: 621.311.25:621.039
ACOUSTIC DIAGNOSIS OF BOILING UNDER PROCESS NOISE CONDITIONS

[Abstract of article by Ratnikov. Ye. F.. Vlasov. V. 1.. Radchenko, R. V.. shsga-
lov. A. c. and Ismagilov. R. Sh.]

[Text] The authors give a method of detecting boiling that is based on localizing
acoustic emission of the onset of vapor bubbles. The paper shows the dynamic be-
havior of noise spectra in the heat-release channel for weak and strong background
of processes noises. and also the feasibility of diagnosing conditions of weak
and developed boiling from spectral characteristics.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC: 621.311.25:621.039
CALCULATING DEFORHATIONS 0F FUEL ELEMENT CLADDING IN A wss-or-cooum' ACCIDENT

[Abstract of article by Nevzorov, P. F.]

[Text] The paper compares available experimental data on the temperature of burst-
ing of cladding as a function of internal pressure. For the transient process
typical of a loss-of-coolant accident. the results of cladding defamation calcu-
lation are given. The results of the calculation agree satisfactorily with experi-

mental data.

UDC: 621.311.25:621.039

REPEAT h'ETTING IN TUBES HIT}! COOLING BY FILM RUNOFF AND BY PRESSURIZED DOHNFLOU

[Abstract of article by Kobanov. L. P. and Khachatryan. 0. 11.]

[Text] Experimental data are given at parameters of: pressure 0.1 and 0.5 HPa,
maSS Elowrate 25<gw< 250 kg/(mz-s), underheating of water at inlet to the working
section 0-80 K. wall temperature 673-1073 K, generated heat loads with consideration
of losses O-loO kU/m’, in stainless steel and zirconitln alloy tubes 3.525 long.
Differences are determined between conditions of cooling by film runoff and pres-
surized downflow. and the conditions of deceleration of the runoff film.

UDC 621.039.52.034.3

ANALYTICAL METHOD OF CALCULATING AXIAL PROFILE OF ENERGY RELEASE IN REACTOR WITH
CONTINUOUS FUEL MOTION

[Abstract of article by Alkhutov. H. S. and Kantor. T.]

[Text] The article proposes an analytical method for determining the axial profile
of energy release in a reactor with continuous motion of fuel. The algorithm and
final form of solution are given. Comparison is made with the exact solution.

UDC 621.039.5z621.039.53

INTENSIPICATION 0F FORCED COOLAN’I' OSCILLATIONS IN CIRCULATION LOOP WITH VARIABLE
COOLANT COMPRESSIBILITY

[Abstract of article by Proskuryakov, K. N.]

[Text] Results of theoretical calculations are given as a formula for calculating
the gain of oscillations acting on a coolant. The relation for intensification
of oscillations as a function of geometric and flow parameters of the hydraulic
system can be used in designing stationary and transport facilities. and also for

seismic effects.
COPYRIGHT: Moskovskiy energeticheskiy institut. 1980

6610
C80: 1861 I29

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NON-NUCLEAR ENERGY

UDC 538.6

GENERAL AND THEORETICAL HAGNETOHYDRODYNAMICS

Salaspils DESYATOYE RIZHSKOYE SOVBSNCHANIYE P0 WITNOY GIDRODINAHIKE: I. 03--
SHCHIYE I TEORETICHESKIYE VOPROSY HGD (TEZISY WV) in Russian 1981 (Signed
to press 26 Feb 81) PP 222-231

[Table of contents from book "Tenth Riga Conference on Hagnetohydrodynamics: Gen-
eral and Theoretical Problems of MRI) (Abstracts of Reports)", Institute of Physics.
LaSSR Academy of Sciences. 500 copies. 231 pages]

[Text] Contents page
SURVEY PAPERS

O. A. Liyelausis. "Liquid-metal MED experiment and two-dimensional turbulence" 3
E. Ya. Blum. "Practical application of magnetic fluids" 8

TURBULENT FLOWS IN LONGITUDINAL FIELD

Ye. Yu. Krasil'nikov. "Turbulent flows in longitudinal magnetic field (survey)" 13
Ye. Yu. Krasil'nikov. v. s. Nikolayenko, I. A. Platniyeka. "Experimental

study of liquid metal flow in a tube in a longitudinal magnetic field" 15
S. l. Blinnikov, N. V. Nikitin, "HHD jet flow in medium with anisotropic
turbulence" 17

L. G. Genin, Ye. V. Kudryavtseva, Yu. A. Pakhotin, V. G. Sviridov, "Heat
exchange in flow of liquid metal on initial thermal section in longi-

tudinal magnetic field" 19
B. N. Baushev. Ye. Yu. Krasil'nikov, I. A. Platniyeks. S. F. Selyuto. "Study of
temperature pulsations in mm tube flow" 21

L. c. Genin. Ye. v. Kudryavtseva. Yu. A. Pakhotin. V. G. Sviridov. "Statisti-
cal characteristics of temperature pulsations on initial thermal section

in longitudinal magnetic field" 23
Yu. M. Gel'fgat. L. A. Corbunov, "Investigation of axisymetric turbulent
sharply inhomogeneous MHD flows by semi-empirical methods" 25

P010 STABILITY AND TURBULENCE DEVELOPMENT

Yu. B. Kolesnikov, "Nature of arisal and development of two-dimensional
turbulence in magnetic field (survey)" 27

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. G. Bershadskiy. "Cement on resonance effect in HHD stability theory"

N. A. Britov, "Stability of two-dimensional flows in strong magnetic fields"

A. B. Kapusta. "Problem of instability of steady-state flow in rotating mag—
netic field"

N. F. Bondarenko. M. 2. Oak. 'Magnetohydrodynamic method of excitation of self-

oscillations in a thin electrolyte layer"

Kb. 15. Kallis. Yu. B. Kolesnikov. N. N. Polyakov, "Arisal and Collapse of
vortex in swirling flow in longitudinal magnetic field"

Kln. E. Kallis. Yu. 3. Kolesnikov, V. B. Levin. N. N. Polyakov, "Experimental
Study of Stability of rotating free cylindrical layer in magnetic field"

H. Ya. Antimirov. A. A. Kolyshkin, "Unsteady MED convection in vertical
annular channel"

M. Ya. Antimirov. V. R. Liyepinya, "Arisal of Thermocapillary MN!) convection
in cylindrical liquid layer under ueightless conditions"

A. A. Klyukin. Yu. B. Kolesnikov. "Experimental study of turbulent transition
of shear flow in magnetic field"

V. D. Zimin. '1'. Ye. Shaydurova. "Hierarchical model of MHD turbulence"

FLOW AROUND BODIES AND BOUNDARY LAYER

B. P. Borisov, Ye. Yu. Krasil'nikov, "Experimental determination of condition
of unseparated flow around a cylinder in a longitudinal magnetic field"

V. l. Shatrov. V. I. Yakovlev. "Reduction of hydrodynamic drag of sphere put
into motion by electromagnetic forces"

V. l. Popov. "Particle dynamics of diaaagnetic heterogeneous medium in elec—
tromagnetic field at low Reynolds numbers"

V. Yu. Cherepanov, Yu. M. Gel'fgat. L. A. Gorbunov. "Hydrodynamic interaction
of particles in electromagnetic treatment of two-phase liquid metal melt"

L. P. Gorbachev, Ye. P. Potanin. A. A. Tubin. A. N. Burov. "HHD boundary
layer on rotating disk in the presence of suction"

K. B. Pavlov. A. s. Romanov. "Nonlinear effects in unsteady HHD flows of
non-newtonisn fluids"

5. 1. Semin. H. z. Sorkin. "Distribution of dispersed phase in cylindrical
vortex under conditions of combined action of gravitational and electro-
magnetic forces"

COMPLEX MllD FLOWS

M. N. Vasil'yev, E. Ye. Son, "Theoretical and experimental study of stability
of liquid metal jets in magnetic field"

5. V. Kozyrev, A. I. El 'kin. "Stability of flow of thin films of electrically
conductive liquid in transverse magnetic field"

Ye. V. Hursv'yev, A. V. Tananayev. A. I. Chekhonadakikh, V. V. Yakovlev. "Ex—
perimental study of mm flow with free surface"

V. A. Brislunan. V. C. Nevolin. "Paranetric excitation of surface MD waves
in crossed electric and magnetic fields"

6. K. Crinberg. M. Z. Kaudze. 0. A. Liyelausis. Ye. V. Murav'yev. "Trajectory
of freely falling conductive particles in inhomogeneous magnetic field"

6. M. Gekht, A. I. El'kin. "Magnetohydrodynamic flow in a periodic system of
tubes in a transverse magnetic field"

A. V. Tananayev. v. V. Yakovlev. "Study of MED flows in tubes of complex
geometry under the action of a strong magnetic field"

51

FOR omcm. USE ONLY

33
35

37 .
39
an
1.5
1.7
1.9

51
55

S7
59
61
63
65

67

69

71

73

77
79
81
83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L. P. Gorbachev. V. V. Nikitin. V. F. Pedorov, "Right-angle HHD flow in strong
magnetic field"

’1‘. N. Antov. A. 1. Kalyutin. A. V. Saltykovskiy, "Numerical study of three-
dimensional HHD flow in a channel with a step"

A. H. Trubachev. "Generalization of the problem of compression of magnetic
flux"

Ye. I. Bichenkov, "Diffusion losses in compression of magnetic flux"

V. I. Legeyda. Convective heat exchange as an inviscid liquid flows around
longitudinal profiles in a magnetic field"

A. D. Votsish. "Modeling MED phenomena in saline coolants"

0. A. Glazov. "Heat transfer through eddy flow"

DYNAMO MECHANISMS AND SELF-EXCITATION 0F MAGNETIC FIELD

E. P. Kropachev. "Generating constant magnetic field in system comprising a
shell and eccentric rotor"

Yu. S. Barash. E. P. Kropachev, "Collective properties of rotor models of
kinematic dynamo"

S. I. Vaynshteyn, "Problem of small-scale field dynamoa and intemittence"

A. K. Gaylitis. 0. A. Liyelausis. Ya. Zh. Freyberg. "Determining the threshold
of dynamo instability by extrapolating experinental data"

Yu. A. Birzvalk, Ya. Zh. Preyberg. A. Ya. Shishko. "Self-excitation of mag-
netic field in devices that simulate the m dynamo"

G. K. Grinberg, "Behavior of field intensification curves in determining the
threshold of dynamo instability"

G. K. Grinberg, "Refined calculation of a device for demonstrating the n-
effect"

METHODS OF STUDYING M111) FLOWS

S. F. Selyuto. "Method of studying the structure of MID turbulence"

N. N. Polyakov, "Calibrating a Pitot tube in a longitudinal magnetic field"

Ye. G. Abarinov, N. A. Britov, Yu. S. Musaelyan, V. V. 'l'ikhomirov. "Con-
structing a mathematical model of an electromagnetic velocity sensor"

V. A. Barnnnikov, V. D. 21min, "Reconstruction of Him fields from the results
of magnetic field measurements or electric potential measurements on the
boundary of a conductive fluid"

V. V. Bol'shakov. A. N. Kozak, A. G. Slavnyy. "Magnetic field distribution of
wedge-shaped electromagnetic velocity meter"

Yu. 8. Kolesnikov. V. B. Levin, N. N. Polyakov, mm circuit for studying
flows in a longitudinal magnetic field"

ELECTROHYDRODYNAMICS

V. V. Cogosov. "New electrohydrodynamics problems (survey)"

Yu. A. Yarmola, "Charge density pulsations in turbulent flow of poorly con-
ductive liquid"

V. V. Cogosov, V. L. Kholopov, L. ‘1‘. Chernyy, "Electrification of bodies that
are equipped with dischargers in aerosol flows with weakly conductive
dispersed solid phase"

L. '1'. Chernyy. V. N. Prihylov. "Study of electriﬁcation of weakly conductive
liquids in tube flow"

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

85
86

87
89

91

93
95

97

99
101

103
105
107

109

111
113

115

117
119

121

123

130

132

134
FORtOFFﬂJAL.USE1DNLY

L: T. Chernyy. N. L. Vasil'yeva. "Electrogasdynamics of aerosols. Principal
equations. shock waves and stability of one-dimensional flows"

V. M. Loginov. V. Ye. Shapiro. "Stabioity of conductive liquid surface in
fluctuating electric field"

Ye. I. Nikiforovich. "Study of electrification of weakly conductive liquid
in tubes under laminar flow conditions"

Ye. I. Yantovskiy, H. S. Apfel'baum. "Mechanism of isothermal electroconvec-
tion in a strong inhomogeneous electric field"

Ye. I. Nikiforovich. "Electrification of weakly conductive liquid flowing in
the neighborhood of a critical point"

I. L. Pankrat‘yeva, V. A. Polyanskiy. "Calculation of current-voltage charac-
teristics of cooled electric probe with consideration of actual transport
properties of the medium"

V. V. Gogosov, G. A. Shaposhnikova. Yu. D. shikhmurvayev. "Investigation of
electrohydrodynamic characteristics of weakly conductive liquids in cell
with planar electrodes"

ELECTROVORTEX PINS

V. V. Boyarevich. R. P. Hillere. A. I. Chaykovskiy, "Study of intensification
of azimuthal perturbation in flow with point source of electric current"

V. Yu. Sandler. "Numerical modeling of heat and mass exchange in slag bath
of electroslag melting furnace"

Ye. I. Shilova. "Linear source in radial current field"

R. Kh. Suleymanov. B. V. Shcherbinin. "Some problems of periodic electrovortex
flows"

Ya. Zh. Freyberg. "Electrovortex flow in toroidal tube with azimuthal current"

V. V. Boyarevich. R. P. Hillere. "Blectrovortex flow in class of Karman
solutions"

S. Yu. Khripchenko, "Limits of applicability of inductionless approximation
for electrovortex flows in a flat channel between ferromagnetic cores"

MATHEMATICAL PROBLEMS OF HACNETOHYDRODYNAHICS

V. B. Gorskiy. "Some integrals and lagrangian invariants of magnetohydro-
dynamics"

L. P. Terekhov, "Using the method of integral relations in magnetohydro-
dynamics"

N. A. Britov. "System of equations for approximate description of MED flows"

V. L. Rvachev. T. I. Sheyko. "Method of R-functions in problems of MED flow
in channels of complex shape"

Kh. E. Kallis. Yu. B. Kolesnikov. "Nmerical modeling of plane-parallel shear
layer in magnetic field"

A. A. Bolotov. Ye. V. Yeliseyev. I. V. Ufatov. "Calculating Steady-state flow
of viscous conductive liquid in the case of limited region of interaction
with magnetic field"

MAGNETIC SUSPENSION LAYER

H. K. Bologa, S. V. Syutkin. "Conditions of magnetofluidization of dispersed
systems in alternating magnetic field"

53

FOR‘OFFIJAI.USE(MVLY

135
137
139
140

142

143

145

147

149
151

153
155

157
159

161

163
165

167

169

171

173
S.

S.

H.

FOR!OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY

V. Syutkin. H. K. Bologa. "Particle dynamics in magnetofluidization in an

alternating magnetic field" 175
V. Syutkin. H. K. Bologa. "Some aspects of analogy between a magneto-

fluidized layer and a dropping liquid" 171
K. Bologa, S. V. Syutkin. V. N. Serditov. "Particle velocity distribution

in magnetofluidized bed" 179
K. Bologa, S. V. Syutkin. D. c. Osipov. A. S. Gutsul. "Some aspects of

using a magnetofluidized bed to intensify technological processes" 181

PROPERTIES OF MAGNETIC LIQUIDS

N. F. Bondarenko, Ye. Z. Gak, N. 2. Oak, "Transparent magnetic suspension” 182
B. B. Sviklis. "Magnetic properties of highly conductive magnetized fluids" 186
Yu. 0. Mikhalev. M. I. Trofimenko. "Rheology of silicone-based ferroliquids" 186
U. I. lvanov, "Transport in cross-linked suspensions" 188
A. N. Vislovich. G. M. Gordeyev, s. P. thevskaya. V. Ye. Pertman. "Electric

characteristics of concentrated magnetic liquid" 190
Hayorov. H. H.. "Magnetization curve of magnetic fluid and distribution of

magnetic laments of ferroparticles" 192
Yu. I. Dikanskiy, V. V. Chekanov. "Behavior of magnetic properties of magnetic

fluid in shear flow" 194
U. I. Ivanov. "Permeability of suspensions" 196
V. V. Chekanov. Yu. N. Skibin. "Experimental study of sound generation in

magnetic fluid in inhomogeneous magnetic field" 198
V. H. Kozhevnikov, N. I. Kryachko, V. V. Chekanov, "Hagnetosedimentation

potential in liquid dispersed magnetics" 200

HYDRODYNAMICS. HEAT AND MASS EXCHANGE IN MAGNETIC LIQUIDS

v.

S.

V.

V.
V.
E.

H. Suyazov. "Variational principle in electro- and magnetorheology of

dispersed systems" 202
I. Hartynov. N. c. Taktarov, "Controlling film flows of liquids covered
with magnetized surfactant" 206
I. Drozdova. Yu. N. Skibin. V. V. Chekanov. "Experimental study of oscil-
lation of droplets of magnetic liquid in nonmagnetic-medium" 205
. V. Kiryushin. "Torsional and pendulum oscillations of magnetized liquid in
magnetic field" 207
V. Kiryushin. "Flow of magnetized liquid between two coaxial cylinders
in magnetic field of axial current-carrying conductor" 208
O. Tsebers. ""Arisal of surface structures of magnetic liquid in rotating
magnetic field" 210
I. Vishnyakov, I. P. Sultanov, "Free-convection flow of ferromagnetic liquid
in vertical flat channel with nonisothermal walls" 212
A. Naletova. "Motion stability of magnetized dispersed media" 214

A. Hiroshnikov. R. Ya. Ozols. "Unsteady magnetophoresis in gradient flow" 215
Ya. Blum, V. A. Hiroshnikov. R. Ya. Ozols, "Thermomagnetophoretic
separation" 217

COPYRIGHT: Institut fiziki AN Latviyskoy SSR. 1981

6610
C80: 1861/26

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 538.4
HAGNETOHYDRODYNAHIC MACHINES

Salaspils DESYATOYB RIZHSKOYE SOVESHCHANIYE P0 MAGIITNOY GIDRODINAHIKB: 11. mn-
HASHINY (TBZISY DOKLADOV) in Russian 1981 (signed to press 29 Jan 81) PP 129-136

[Table of contents from book "Tenth Riga Conference on Hagnetohydrodynamics: II.
HHD Machines (Abstracts of Reports)“. Institute of Physics. LaSSR Academy of Sci-
ences. 500 copies. 137 pages]

[Text] Contents pages

HIGH-POWER HHD MACHINES

I. R. Kirillov. "Problems of developing HHD machines for nuclear power (survey)"

A. H. Andreyev, V. G. Danilin, B. G. Karasev. I. R. Kirillov, "Designing
electromagnetic pumps for nuclear electric plants with fast reactors"

I. R. Kirillov. A. P. Ogorodnikov. V. P. Ostapenko, "Investigation of local
and integral characteristics of a cylindrical induction pump at Rns>'l"

A. V. Gavrilov. V. G. Danilin. I. R. Kirillov. "Reliability of electromagnetic
pumps"

R. A. Valdmane. L. Ya. Ulmanis. "Influence of higher harmonics of magnetic
induction on HHD processes in induction pulp channel"

0. A. Liyelausis, Ya. Ya. Liyelpeter. H. V. Pukis, "Flow model in induction
pump channel with stepwise velocity distribution"

H. V. Pukis, "Method of calculating induction pump parameters with nonuniform
velocity distribution"

Ya. Ya. Liyelpeter, H. V. Pukis. "Method of predicting parameters of high-
delivery induction pumps"

INDUCTION HHD MACHINES

A. Ya. Vilnitis, A. c. Grechushnikov. G. Ya. Zvana. S. B. Krys'ko. s. R. Troi-
tskiy. "Theoretical and experimental study of limit-head pump"

I. Ya. Gavare. H. V. Pukis, "Criterion functional for designing cylindrical
induction pumpin the form of a linear combination of integrated quality
criteria"

V. P. Bocheninskiy. Yu. B. Yemelin, Ye. M. Kirisik. A. V. Tananayev, Yu. P.
Ushakov. V. s. Shmarov. "Experimental study of MED induction pump character-
istics under conditions of extreme energy intensity" .

T. x. Kalnin', A. v. Tsipiy. "Determining idling characteristics of NED machines
with transverse magnetic flux"

55

FOR‘0FFK]AI.USE(HVLY

3

9
11
13
1b
16
18

' 20

22

26

26

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R. A. Valdmane. T. K. Kalnin'. L. Ya. Ulmanis. "Influence of higher spatial
harmonics on hydraulic characteristics of MED machine with transverse
magnetic flux"

B. A. Zavitskiy. "Mathematical model of linear induction machine with trans-
versely closed magnetic flux"

V. A. Begalov, Yu. V. Baryshnikov. P. N. Sarapulov. "Noncontact measurement
of secondary body velocity in linear induction machine"

Yu. V. Baryshnikov. V. A. Ivanushkin. Yu. L. Hakhorskiy, "Two-flux supply
of linear induction MED machine"

E. S. Sorokina. "Calculating integral characteristics of linear induction
machine with consideration of finite core width"

3. I. Petlenko. "Electric simulation of MED induction machines with consider-
ation of secondary longitudinal edge effect

P. N. Sarapulov. H. G. Rezin. "Investigation of induction machine with asym-
metry of electric and magnetic circuits"

1. A. Krivonishchenko. B. A. Sokunov. Yu. S. Prudnikov. 'talculating forces
set up by short cylindrical inductors"

M. S. Drits. s. B. Krys'ko. "End forces in linear NED induction machines"

A. A. Ivanov, M. Yu. Rozova, L. L. Babkina, "Mathematical model of linear
induction machine with consideration of the finite length of the
inductor core"

SCREW PUMPS

Ye. 0. Adamov. E. V. Ambrozen. P. B. Kaygu, V. F. Keskyula. Ya. R. Pyayaren.
L. R. Reymal. B. s. Sazonkin, M. A. Simon, V. A. Teearu. N. N. Shkonov,
"Problems of standardizing a series of MED pumps with helical channel"

L. R. Reymal, "Improving energy parameters and working reliability of series
models of MED pumps with helical channel

L. R. Reymal. V. A. Teearu. "Calculating electric field of MED pump in the
case of mutual axi;i displacement of the inductor relative to the helical
channel in the regulation process"

L. V. Valdur, P. B. Ksygu, L. R. Reynal. "Method of calculating developed force
in liquid metal layer of the helical channel of HHD pump"

A. B. Kapusta, A. I. Likhacheva. L. R. Reynal. "Electromagnetic processes in
the channel of an induction screw pump"

CONDUCTION AND SINGLE-PHASE PUHPS

R. Ye. Kozyrenko. "Formulation and study of boundary value problems of the
theory of MHD channels at arbitrary Ru"

1. N. Hikryukova. A. Ya. Shishko. "Calculating electromagnetic field of
two-channel HHD facility in quasi-three-dimensional approximation"

Yu. A. Birzvalk. 6. Ya. Zvane. A. G. Grechushnikov, S. R. Troitskiy, "Investi-
gation of KN-82 low-power HHD conduction pump"

V. F. Vasil'yev, "Experimental studies of permanent-magnet micropump"

D. S. Kovner. A. N. Shmelev. "Calculation of normalized pump weight"

G. A. Baranov, V. V. Breyev, K. I. Dmitriyev, B. G. Karssev. I. V. Lavrent'yev.
”System of liquid-metal HHD energy conversion with inductive accumulator"

G. P. Bazarov, E. N. Kufa, ”Method of calculating series MED channels"

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

86

36
36
38

62
66
66

68

50
52

56
55
57

59
61
63
65
67

69
71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

E. Z. Asnovlch. G. H. Cekht. Ya. Ya. Zandart. K. V. Zimina, A. I. Klimenkn,

i. A. Liyepin'sh. V. Ye. Strizhak. l. M. Tolmach, A. I. Tuchinskiy, "Inves-
tigation of single-channel AC conduction pump with continuous electrodes"

V. V. Timov, S. Ye. Kolobov, “Method of calculating one-phase linear induction
machines"

A. V. Breyeva. "Comparing characteristics of HHD pump channels: three-phase
with traveling magnetic field. and single-phase with electromagnetic asym-
metry"

L. K. Brekson, Z. I. Glazkov, V. D. Yegorov. S. R. Troitskiy,"uorking character-
istics of single-phase MHD pump with electromagnetic asymmetry"

A. D. Barinberg, K. P. Donchenko, V. G. Oleynik. "Analysis and calculation
of single-phase protection relay MMD pump"

HHD CHOKES. UNSTEADY PROCESSES

l. V. Vitkovskiy, Yu. 5. Dolotov, I. R. Kirillov. H. V. Smirnov, B. C. Karasev,
"Problems of using MHD chokes in nuclear power“

I. V. Vitkovskiy, "Feasibility of linear p(Q) characteristics of MED chokes
with annular channels"

L. A. Gorbunov "Investigation of MHD devices with internal intersecting flows"

N. 1. Vatin, Yu. B. Yemelin. A. V. Tananayev, Yu. P. Ushakov, A. V. Chudov,
V. s. Shmarov. "Unsteady phenomena with operation of NED pumps in liquid-
metal circuits"

A. M. Andreyev, B. C. Karasev. l. R. Kirillov, V. V. Netlin. E. A. Tropp,
"Investigation of unsteady operation of induction pump"

Ye. A. Nor. .. V. Pukis. "Calculating transient processes in induction HHD
pump with consideration of edge effect"

Yu. P. Agafonov. A. G. Grechushnikov. Ya. Ya. Zandart. T. Ya. Zvane. s. L.
Ivanov. I. A. Liyepin'sh, S. R. Troitskiy. I. E. Upmanis. "Unsteady operat-
ing conditions of HHD pumps in closed loop"

HYDRAULICS 0? “RD MACHINES

V. P. Bocheninskiy, V. S. Shmarov, "Hagnetohydrodynamic cavitation“
V. P. Bocheninakiy. Ye. M. Kirisik. Yu. P. Ushakov. A. V. Tananayev, V. S. Shma-
rov. "Experimental study of cavitation characteristics of linear induction
HMO pumps"
P. Bocheninskiy. B. G. Karasev, "Hydrodynamics of DC induction HHD pumps"
. N. Shmelev, A. B. Gryaznov (deceased). S. S. Podobed. "Feasibility of
using strong magnetic field to improve nuclear reactor characteristics
with liquid metal cooling"
A. I. Arenshtam. I. I. Dovganchuk. G. N. Perel'ahteyn. "Notion of liquid
metal in gap of current collector of unipolar machine in strong magnetic
field"

:l’<

TEMPERATURE CONDITIONS OF MHD MACHINES

A. M. Andreyev. Ye. D. Bolotova. V. A. Divavin, I. R. Kirillov. "investigation
of temperature conditions of induction electromagnetic pumps"

0. Ya. Denitis. Yu. Ya. Mikel'son. Yu. P. Ushakov. Ya. R. Shmit. "Synthesis
of theoretical and experimental data of thermophysical research on MHD
machine"

57

FOR 0‘11CJAI.USEGDNLN

73

75

77
79

81

83
85
87

89
91

93

95

97

99
101

108

[10
FOR OfﬁCIAL USE ONLY

1. R. Vengerov. Yu. H. Starik, "Thermal calculation of pumps in HHD equipment"
MAGNETIC SYSTEMS 0F MHD MACHINES

M. Yu. Kanevskiy. V. P. Shuteyev, "Strong-field magnet systems for HHD
facilities"

Yu. A. Birzvalk, I. A. Dumin'. B. V. Luk'yanenko. ”Rate of electromagnetic
transient process in magnet systems of conduction MED devices"

N. K. Rykalov, "Sheet structure anisotropy of magnetic circuits in HHD ma-
chines"

H. Yu. Abritska. Yu. K. Krumin'. "Accounting for influence of magnetic circuit
saturation in calculating HMD machines"

M. c. Rezin. N. H. Pirumyan. M. G. Hurdzhikyan, "Simulating magnetic field
of edge zones of open magnetic circuit on conductive paper"

Ya. Ya. Valdmanis, "Accounting for saturation in the action of an alternating
magnetic field on conductive magnetized media"

Index of authors

COPYRIGHT: Institut fiziki AN Latviyskoy SSR. 1981

6610
C50: 1861/27

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

112

114
116
118
120
122

12!.
126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RELIABILITY PREDICTION AND DIAGNOSIS OF POHER EQUIWEN'I‘

Moscow TRUDY HOSKOVSKOCO ORDENA LENINA I ORDENA OKTYABR'SKOY REVOLYU'I‘SII ENERCE-
TICHESKOCO INSTITUTA. TEMATICHESKIY SIORNIK: SPHSIAL'NYYE VOPROSY PROGNOZIRDVANIYA
NADEZHNOSTI I DIAGNOSTIKI ENERGETICHESKOGO OBORUDOVANIYA in Russian No 501. 1980
(signed to press 14 Jan 81) pp 2. [69-158

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from book "Proceedings of Moscow Power
institute Honored by the Order of Lenin and the Order of the October Revolution.
Collection of Papers on Special Problems of Reliability Prediction and Diagnosis
of Power Equipment", edited by G. S. Vargin, Hoskovskiy energeticheskiy institut.
500 copies, 158 pages]

[Text] This collection contains the results of research by the department of
electric machines, the department of electric transportation, the power machinery
faculty. and also the department of electric machines of the Smolensk Affiliate
of Moscow Power Institute.

The collection deals with problems of predicting reliability of electric machines
and systems. diagnosis of the condition and workability of different components,
and with individual reliability prediction. Research results are given in the
area of parametric reliability. and diagnosing components of pulse-thyristor con-
verters of rolling stock of municipal surface transport. In addition. an exami-
nation is made of problems of accelerated tests. and reliability of mechanical
components of electric equipment.

The purpose of this collection is to generalize research results in the area of
reliability. prediction, and diagnosis of power equipment. and to project future
work in this area.

Docent .V. D. Kuznetsov of the department of electric machines prepared and edited
the manuscript.

U'DC 621.313l.62.019.3

EVALUATING QUALITY AND RELIABILITY OF ELECTRIC MACHINES ON THE DESIGN STAGE BY
MONTE CARLO METHOD

[Abstract of article by Kopylov. I. P. and Colubovich. A. I.)

[Text] It is shown that at estimate can be made of the influence that some param-
eters associated with change in technology. use of materials and the like can have

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the principal characteristics of machines without using full-scale tests on
the stage of coming up with an algorithm for machine design.

UDC 621.313.322.62.019.3
IMPROVING RELIABILITY OF ELECTRIC PLANTS UNDER OVERLOADS

[Abstract of article by Smolenskiy, A. V.. Panchenko, V. P.. Shaferyuk, A. I.
and Lapchenko, P. 1.]

[Text] A method is developed for matching the overload characteristics of an object
protected from overload and the characteristics of the protection device. The
method can be extended to any electrical device where temperature is the overload
criterion. The principle of designing a protective device is discussed.

In introducing this method of protection. a considerable economic effect can be
achieved by more complete utilization of the overload capacity of thyristors.

UDC 621.8.038:62-752

DETERMINING ORDERS OF MAGNETIC VIDROPERTURBING FORCES
[Abstract of article by Astakhov. N. V., Polukhin, V. F. and ll'ina, N. N.)
[Text] An analysis is made of known methods of determining the order of magnetic
vibroperturbing components. It is shown that existing contradictions cannot be
resolved within the framework of accepted models. It is proposed that a change
be made from lumped components to continuously distributed radial loads. as the
determination of deformations has been fairly well worked out for such loads.

UDC 621.165
CALCULATING DYNAMIC STRESSES IN WORKING BLADES 0F ARBITRARY HEIGHT
[Abstract of article by Samoylovich. G. S. and Antipin. A. V.]
[Text] A method is proposed for calculating dynamic stresses in working blades
of turbines with consideration of the influence of secondary flows on inhomogeneity
of the velocity field behind the guide blading.

UDC 621.833
STAND TESTS OF GEAR TRAIN DYNAMICS

[Abstract of article by Yershov. V. 1.. Kozintsov, B. P., Piksin. Yu. 1. and
Shuklin, Yu. A.]

[Text] The article describes a stand for dynamic tests of gear trains.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 539.412:620.l72
CHOOSING OPTIMUM CRITERION FOR EVALUATING UNIFORM DEPORMATION UNDER UNIAXIAL TENSION

[Abstract of article by Baranov. V. V.l

[Text] An analysis is made of different methods of estimating uniform relative
contraction for specimens made of ductile materials.

UDC 62l.039.534.25:621.039.58

CUMULATIVE MODEL OF FAILURES FOR SYSTEMS OF A LARGE NUMBER OF COMPONENTS OF THE
SAME TYPE

[Abstract of article by Chernov. V. K.]

[Text] An examination is made of problems of evaluating the reliability of struc-
tural elements of nuclear reactors that contain a large number of fuel elements

or heat-exchanging components.

UDC 621.039.5z042.7

CALCULATING RELIABILITY OF STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS OF POWER FACILITIES FOR SEISMIC
EFFECTS BY THE METHOD OF MOMENT FUNCTIONS

[Abstract of article by Chirkov, V. P. and Shcherbakov. A. N.)

[Text] An algorithm is presented for dynamic calculation of structural elements
of power facilities for seismic effects with consideration of nonlinear properties.

UDC 621.757

OPTIMIZING THE CONFIGURATION 0F ITEMS WITH ACCURACY ASSURANCE BY GROUP INTERCHANGE-
ABILITY METHOD

[Abstract of article by Moroz. S. F. and Chugunov, V. 1.]
[Text] An examination is made of the problem of dynamic optimization of the work
of the assembly section of a machine building plant. Algorithms are developed

that guarantee smooth operation of assembly departments and uniformity of the ac-
curacy characteristics of items.

UDC 629.113.6z621.119

AREAS IN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OF SYSTEMS FOR DIAGNOSING ROLLING
STOCK OF MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC SURFACE TRANSPORT

[Abstract of article by Yefremov. I. S. and Ozhigin, V. P.)

[Text] An examination is made of major trends in developing systems for trouble-
shooting rolling stock in municipal electric transport systems. Information is
given on experimental diagnostic stands for streetcars and trolley buses.

61

FOR 0FFM3AI.USE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of multipurpose diagnosis facilities and automation of the trouble-
shooting process will provde the basis for developing an automated system for con-
trolling the state of rolling stock of a municipal electric transport system.

UDC 621.337.!

DEVELOPMENT OF FACILITIES FOR TROUBLESHOOTING TEE ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT 0? THE
RVZ-7 STREETCAR

[Abstract of article by Kos'kin. 0. A. and Nikolayev, V. P.]

[Text] A system of equipment is proposed for diagnosing the pulse-thyristor con-
verter of a streetcar. The system is based on series 140 and 155 integrated cir-
cuits.

UDC 621.337.!

EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF RELIABILITY OF PULSE-THYRISTOR CONTROL SYSTEM OF RV2-7
STREETCAR

[Abstract of article by Yefremov. V. 1., Karasev. S. I. and Rhomenko, S. V.]

[Text] A method is proposed for experimental studies of reliability of the pulse-
thyristor control system of the RVZ—7 streetcar. The time of fail-free operation
of the stabilized voltage unit in the pulse-thyristor control system is determined.

UDC 621.216.]

RESULTS OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OF INTEGRATED-CIRCUIT DEVICE FOR DIAGNOSING
A CONTROL SYSTEM FOR A TROLLEY BUS

[Abstract of article by Kosarev. G. V., Glushenkov, V. A. and Komarov. V. 6.]

[Text] Devices are proposed for troubleshooting the control system of the pulse-
thyristor converter of a trolley bus. Operation of the devices is experimentally
checked under operating conditions of the trolley bus with pulse-thyristor converter.

UDC 62l.335.43:65|.53
SELECTION OF CONTROL POINTS FOR TROUBLESHOOTING TROLLEY BUS CONTROL SYSTEM
[Abstract of article by Arshinov. S. A.]

[Text] An examination is made of questions of practical selection of control points
in the control system of the ZIU-68ZB trolley bus for purposes of checking working
condition. finding problems. and forecasting the technical state of its equipment.

UDC 656.132:658.S3
STAND FOR DIANOSINC TECHNICAL STATE OF TROLLEY BUSES
[Abstract of article by Aksenov, N. 0.]

[Text] The paper gives the capabilities of a dynamic stand for functional diagnosis
of trolley buses. The design is described. and the functional purposu is given
fur the major components and subasscmbiics of the stand and electric circuit.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.313.333:621.3.042.001.S

CALCULATING VIBROPERTURBING FORCES 0F INDUCTION MOTOR IN CASE OF ECCENTRICITY

[Abstract of article by Malyshev. V. 8., Tityukhin. N. F. and Kotarba. 2.]

[Text] A method is given for calculating vibroperturbing forces in the case of
A recomendation is made on the advisable mnber of terms in the

Values of the coefficients of the expansion-are given.

UDC 621.313.322z616-07

eccentricity.
function expansion.

DIAGNOSING THE STATE OF COMPONENTS OF THE INTERNAL PROTECTION SYSTEM FOR THE STATOR
WINDINGS OF A HIGH-VOLTAGE HYDROGENERATOR

[Abstract of article by Abramov. A. I., Izvekov, V. I. and Serikhin. N. A.]

[Text] The paper describes a technique for diagnosing internal protection of

the stator winding of a high-voltage hydrogenerator. This method was used in certi-
fication tests of the machine for the Skhodnya Hydroelectric Plant. Electric circuit
schematics are given for the measurement equipment, and recommendations are made

on selection of components.
UDC 062l.3.3.333:62.014.3

ACCOUNTING FOR EFFECT OF TRANSIENT PROCESSES 0N RELIABILITY OF HINDING INSULATION
0F INDUCTION MOTORS

[Abstract of article by Vanigasuriy. D. 6.]

[Text] A method is proposed for calculating electrodynamic forces in transient
processes in the end parts of a single-layer concentric stator winding to develop

a mathematical model for predicting the reliability of an induction motor operating

under frequent startup conditions. The paper gives the time dependence of starting
forces, and the dependence of absolute maximum values of force at different starting

times.
UDC 621.216.632:658.562.001.5

DIAGNOSINC SEMICONDUCTOR POHER RECTIFIERS IN CONVERSION UNITS

[Abstract of article by Kalashnikov. B. G. and Stremovskaya. G. P.)

[Text] An examination is made of a method of estimating the load capacity of semi-
COnductor power rcctifiers by measuring the temperature increment of the p-n junc~
tion under certain constant test conditions.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.337.l

PREDICTING RELIABILITY OF PULSE-THYRISTOR CONTROL SYSTEMS BY NONLINEAR PHYSICAL
MODELING METHOD

[Abstract of article by Yefremov, V. 1.]
[Text] A method is developed for predicting the reliability of control systems
of pulse-thyristor converters. The time of fail-free operation of the voltage
stabilization unit of the pulse-thyristor control system is determined.
UDC 656.132
PREDICTINC INSULATION RELIABILITY OF TROLLEY BUS ELECTRIC EQUIPMENT
[Abstract of article by Chichibaba. V. E.]
[Text] Data are analyzed on the failure of insulation of trolley bus electric
equipment. A method is proposed for predicting reliability of the insulation of
electric equipment of transport facilities.
UDC 530.17.519.245+62:001.18
STOCHASTIC SIMILARITY AND FORECASTING PROBLEMS
[Abstract of article by Gordiyevskiy, I. G. and Kavchenko. G. P.]
[Text] it is shown on the basis of examples in the article that the use of sto-
chastic similarity and modeling yields fruitful results in solving forecasting
problems: in synthesizing a sound technique for evaluating mathematical models
for prediction. and in improving the accuracy of results of this technique.
UDC 621.3l3.2:62.001.18:62.019,3
INDIVIDUAL FORECASTING 0F RELIABILITY OF ELECTROHECHANICAL ENERGY CONVERTERS
[Abstract of article by Kuznetsov. N. L. and Danilov-Nitusov. A. N.]
[Text] An examination is made of major points in a system for individual relia-
bility prediction based on pattern recognition theroy. and in particular, one of
the main points-~solullon of the problem of compiling a vocabulary of forecasting
features.
UDC 621.313:61b-Ol7
SOLVING PROBLEMS OF DIAGNOSING ELECTRIC MACHINES IN THE EH AUTOMATED DESIGN SYSTEM
[Abstract of article by Dmitriyev. M. H. and Zaytaev. A. 1.]

[Text] An examination is made of an automated design system based on the SH-l
complex and information display device of Orion type for shortening time in designing

64

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electric induction motors. producing technical documentation. processing test results

and diagnosing an item. The proposed system assumes automation of up to 602 of
planning and design work.

UDC 7.021.2z62.001.18:62.019.3:530. l7
USING SCALING THEORY TO SYNTHESIZE GENERALIZ. WDELS 0F RELIABILITY PREDICTION

[Abstract of article by Gordiyevskiy. I. 0.. Kavchenko. V. P., Petrov. V. S. and
Stepanov, Yu. K.]

[Text] This method of determining reliability characteristics of analog objects
provides for refinements by combining forecasting data with results found in tests
and in operation assuming that they are stochastically similar.

UDC 621.8.038:62-752

CALCULATION OF VIBROPERTURBING DISPLACDIENT 0P INDUCTION MOTOR LUGS

[Abstract of article by Malyshev, V. 5.. Nesterova, N. 0., liedvedev. V. T. and
Kotarba. 2.]

[Text] A method is given for determining vibroperturbing displacement of lugs
of an induction motor. An algorithm is proposed for forming the coefficients of
the equation, and numerical values are given.

UDC 621.313.2:62.001.18:62.0l9.3
PREDICTING RELIABILITY OF COLLECTOR UNIT 0? ELECTRIC MACHINES
[Abstract of article by Kuznetsov, N. L. and Ryzhenskaya. B. H.]

[Text] Data of endurance tests of the collector unit of DC machines are need as
a basis for demonstrating the feasibility of individual reliability prediction
by test diagnosis. as well as calculation and prediction of necessary parameters
to ensure required reliability (reliability assurance).

UDC 621.822.8
STAND DIAGNOSIS 0? LARGE ROLLER BEARINGS (He‘dshaft‘ 200 Ill)
[Abstract of article by Baranov, V. V., Frolov. A. G. and Shuklin. Yu. A.]

[Text] The paper gives the results of stand tests of large roller bearings for
detecting items with defects.

UDC 621.791.96

INFLUENCE OF MECHANICAL DRIVE PARAMETERS ON RELIABILITY OF HIGH-QUALITY OPERATION
OF PORTAL THERMAL CUTTING MACHINES

[Abstract of article by Kudryavtsev, Ye. P.]

[Text] The author considers the effect of mechanical drive parameters on cutting
accuracy and discusses methods of optimizing these parameters.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOW1NCJAI.USEZONLY

UDC 621.662.39:513.75
AFFINE VODELING 0F STRESS-STRAIN STATE OF HULTILAYERED CYLINDRICAL SHELL
[Abstract of article by Batishev, H. I. and Salatcv. A. V.]

[Text] The paper investigates possibilities of synthesizing affine models by satia-
fying most significant dimensionless criteria.

COPYRIGHT: Hoskovskiy energeticheskiy inatitut. 1980

6610
C80: 1861/30

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

UDC 62-50
ADAPTIVE CONTROL OF DYNAMIC SYSTEMS

Moscow ADAPTIVNOYE UPRAVLENIYE DINAHICHBSKIHI OB"YEKTAHI in Russian 1981
(signed to press 10 Jun 81) pp 2-10

[Annotation, table of contents and foreword from book "Adaptive Control of
Dynamic Systems", by Vladimir Nikolayevich Fomin, Aleksandr L'vovich Pradkov and
Vladimir Andreyevich Yakubovich. Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 3900 copies, 448 pages]

[Text] This book is devoted to one of the new areas of cybernetics: adaptive
system theory. Methods of analysis and synthesis of adaptive regulators are
studied which assure achievement of the control objective under conditions of
slight information on the control system and the properties of external actions.
The main attention is devoted to approaches arising in recent years and dealt with
only in journal literature. The methods of recurrent specific inequalities, sto-
chastic recurrent evaluation and velocity gradient are examined in detail.

The book is intended for engineers, scientific personnel in the field of industrial
cybernetics and mathematics, and instructors and students of advanced VUZ courses
interested in adaptive system theory and its applications.

Contents
Foreword 8
Chapter 1. Formulation of Adaptive Control Problems 11
1.1. The concept of adaptive control 11

l.1.l°. Intensional (non-rigorous) definition of adaptive
system and adaptive regulator (11). 1.1.2‘. Problem of a
"robot bicyclist" (16). l.1.3°. Tlight control problem
(22). 1.1.4°. Other adaptive control problems (26).

1.2. Formal definition of adaptive system and adaptive regulator 28

1.2.1°. Formal definition in the simplest case for

discrete time (28). 1.2.2°. Adaptive systems of a general
form (36).

67

INDRIOFTHCJAI.IENE(HVLY
1.3.

Chapter 2.
2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

2.6.

2.P.

2.D.

FOR10FFNJA1.USE(MVLY

Scheme of adaptive control problem solution

l.3.1°. General description of adaptive regulator synthe-
sis procedure (61). 1.3.2'. Reduction of adaptive

regulator synthesis problem to construction of finite-conver-

gent algorithms of recurrent criterial inequality solution
(46).

Adaptation Algorithms

Finite-convergent algorithms of recurrent inequality solu-
tion. 2.1.1'. Basic definitions. Principle of construc-
tion of finite-convergent algorithms (50). 2.1.2'. Super-
position of finite-convergent algorithms (53). 2.1.3'.
"Poloska-l" algorithm (56). 2.1.6’. "Poloska-Z" algorithm
(59). 2.1.5’. Certain finite-resolving algorithms (62).
2.1.6’. Finite-convergent algorithms of recurrent linear
inequality solution (63). 2.1.7°. General case of re-
current inequalities separating convex sets (64).

2.1.8'. Vector variants of "Poloska" algorithms (67).

Stochastic approximation algorithms

2.2.1‘. Basic recurrent procedure of the stochastic
approximation method (70). 2.2.2‘. Application of
stochastic approximation method to the problem of learning
with a "teacher" (71). 2.2.3'. Use of stochastic recurrent
procedure as an identification algorithm (73).

2.2.4’. Adaptive optimal prediction based on stochastic
approximation procedure (75).

Recurrent modifications of the least squares method

2.3.l°. Basic recurrent procedure of the least squares
method (79). 2.3.2'. Properties of the recurrent procedure
of the least squares method (80). 2.3.3‘. Information
matrix (81) .

Velocity gradient algorithms

2.4.1°. Conditions of achieving the control objective
(83). 2.4.2'. Convergence of adjustable parameters to
"ideal" values (88). 2.6.3°. Coarsening velocity gradient
algorithms (91).

Appendix

2.P.l°. Sequences of random variables close to super-
martingales (98). 2.P.2°. Law of large numbers for
independent random variables (99).

Proofs of lemmas and theorems

2.0.1“. Proof of theorem 2.1.1 (100). 2.0.2“. Proof of
theorem 2.1.2 (101). 2.D.3°. Proof of theorem 2.1.1a (102).
2.D.é°. Proof of theorems 2.1.3 and 2.1.4 (102).

2.D.5°. Proof of theorems 2.1.5, 2.1.6, 2.1.6a (103).

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

61

69
51

70

79

82

98

100
Chapter 3.
3.1.

302'

3.3.

3.P.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.D.6°. Proof of theorem 2.1.7 (104). 2.D.7’. Proof of
theorem 2.1.8 (105). 2.D.8'. Proof of theorems 2.1.9 and
2.2.1 (106). 2.D.9°. Proof of theorem 2.2.2 (106).

2.D.10°. Proof of theorem 2.2.3 (108). 2.D.11'. Proof of
lemmas 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 (113). 2.D.12'. Proof of theorems
2.3.1 (114). 2.D.13'. Proof of theorem 2.4.1 (114).
2.D.l4°. Proof of theorem 2.4.2 (115). 2.D.15°. Proof of
theorem 2.4.3 (117). 2.D.16°. Proof of theorem 2.4.4 (118).
2.D.17°. Proof of theorem 2.4.5 (119). 2.D.18°. Proof of
theorem 2.4.6 (120).

Synthesis of Optimal (Nonadaptive) Regulators 121
Supplementary information from linear control system theory 122
3.1.1’. Equations of discrete control systems in "input-
output” variables and in standard form (122). 3.1.2’.

Stable. unstable. minimal-phase systems (126). 3.1.3°.
Controllability and observability (127). 3.1.4°. Linear
continuous control systems (128). 3.1.5°. Synthesis of
stabilizing regulators (130). 3.1.6’. Transfer functions
of a control system (134). 3.1.7“. Properties of disturb-
ing influences (noise) (137). 3.1.8°. Dissipative nature
of closed systems (138). 3.1.9“. Frequency theorems (140).

Optimal control in a case of limited disturbance 144
3.2.1°. Formulation of the problem (144). 3.2.2'. Synthe-
sis of optimum regulator in the simplest case (145).

3.2.3°. Synthesis of the optimum regulator in the

general case. 3.2.4'. Corollary: scalar system (148).

3.2.5°. Comments (148). 3.2.6'. Synthesis of optimal
regulator given disturbance with a random rational frac-

tion spectral characteristic (149). 3.2.7'. The case of

a system not minimal-phase (151).

Limit-optimal control in a case of stationary interference 153
3.3.1‘. Formulation of the problem (154). 3.3.2°. Linear-
ity of the optimum feedback (156). 3.3.3°. General scheme
of synthesis of linear optimal feedback (157). 3.3.4“.
Quality functional and transfer functions of a control sys-
tem (158). 3.3.5‘. Minimization of the quadratic functional
in the class of stable rational fraction functions (160).
3.3.6‘. Procedure for synthesis of limit-optimal control
(162). 3.3.7’. Synthesis of the optimal regulator for a
limit dispersion type quality functional (164). 3.3.8°.
Comments (166).

Appendix 167
3.P.l°. Spectral method of synthesis of optimal

regulators for multiply connected discrete control

systems (167). 3.P.2°. Synthesis of regulators in the

case of continuous time (176). 3.P.3'. Factorization

69

IKHIOFFNJALIﬂﬂEONLY
3.0.

Chapter 5.

6.1.

6.2.

4.3.

5.P.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of rational fraction functions (180). 3.P.4'. Equi-
valent transformations of rational fraction matrix
functions (183).

Proofs of lemmas and theorems

3.0.1'. Proof of lemma 3.1.1 (186). 3.0.2'. Proof
of theorem 3.1.1 (185). 3.0.3°. Proof of theorem
3.2.1 and comments 3 p. 3.2.S°. (185). 3.0.6.. Proof
of theorem 3.2.2 (188). 3.0.5°. Proof of the comment
on theorem 3.2.2 (190). 3.0.6°. Proof of theorem
3.3.1 (191). 3.0.7°. Proof of lemma 3.3.1 (199).
39D08°n Proof of that“ 3.302 (195). 30009.0 Proof
of theorem 3.3.3 (195). 3.0.10°. Proof of theorem
3.3.4 (197). 3.0.11'. Proof of theorem 3.P.1 (198).
3.0.12’. Proof of theorem 3.P.2 (201). 3.0.13’.
Proof of theorem 3.P.3 (202). 3.0.16'. Proof of
theorem 3.P.4 (203).

Adaptive Control of Discrete Systems (Method of
Recurrent Criterial Inequalities)
Adaptive suboptimal control of linear dynamic systems
4.1.1°. Suboptimal regulators (208). 5.1.2'. Scalar
system in the simplest case (210). h.l.3'. Adaptive
suboptimal control in the simplest case with additional
assignment of a limitation on control (218). 4.1.4'.
Scalar system given the presence of delays in control
or in measurement (222).

Problems of adaptive control of discrete system with
other methods of formulating recurrent criterial
inequalities

a.2.1°. Scalar system in the simplest case (235).
4.2.2’. Suboptimal control of a vector system without
delay in control and in measurement; matrix b1 is unknown
(262). 4.2.3°. First order system (266). 6.2.4°. Un-
stable system in terms of control (265). 6.2.$°. Synthe—
sis of adaptive regulator with a standard model (247).
4.2.6°. 0n nonlinear problems (25‘). 4.2.7°. Comment
on the possibility of using the results of this and the

preceding paragraphs in problems of synthesis of adaptive
control of a continuous system (255).

Computer simulation of a "robot bicyclist" self-teaching
process for riding on a bicycle

Appendix

4.P.1°. Dissipative nature of discrete systems (268).
6.P.2°. Proof of theorem 4.P.l (271). 4.P.3‘. Theorem
of dissipative nature for an equation of a random order
(274). 4.P.4°. Proof of theorem 4.P.2 (276). 4.P.S°.
Theorem of dissipative nature of a system stable in terms
of control (277).

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
40D.

Chapter 5.
5.1.

5.2.

5.3.

S.P.

5.D.

Chapter 6.

6.1.

FOR OFFKJAl.US£‘0NLY

Proofs of theorems b.1.l-4.1.3 279
6.0.1°. Proof of theorem 6.1.1 (279). 6.1.2'. Proof

of theorem 6.1.2 (280). 6.0.3'. Proof of theorem 6.1.3
(282).

Adaptive Control of Discrete Stochastic Systems 285
Optimal adaptive control in case of a minimal-phase
control system

5.1.1'. Formulation of the problem (286). 5.1.2'.

Solution of the problem of optimal control in a non-
adaptive variant (289). 5.1.3'. Selection of the regu-

lator given unknown parameters of the control system (290).
5.1.4’. Adaptation algorithm (292). 5.1.5'. Fundamental
proposition (292).

Synthesis of adaptive regulator is a problem of

dissipative nature 293
5.2.1’. Formulation of the problem (296).

5.2.2°. Synthesis of regulator given a known vector of
existing parameters (295). 5.2.3°. Description of

adaptation class (297). 5.2.6'. Adaptation algorithm

(298). 5.2.5.. Estimate validity (300). 5.2.6°.

"Shaking up" procedure (301). 5.2.7'. Fundamental

proposition (302).

Synthesis of adaptive regulator in a problem of

optimization of a stochastic system 306
5.3.1°. Formulation of the problem (30‘).

5.3.2‘. Synthesis of suboptimal controlling system

(306). 5.3.3'. Idea of controlling system construc-

tion (308). 5.3.6“. Synthesis of controlling system

(309). 5.3.5’. Optimal properties of adaptive con-

trolling system (311). 5.3.6°. Synthesis of stabilizing
regulator (313).

Appendix 314
5.P.1°. Synthesis of adaptive controlling systems with
correlated disturbances (315). 5.P.2‘. Adaptive control

of multiply connected systems (318).

Proofs of lemmas and theorems 319
5.0.1’. Proof of lemma 5.1.1 (319). 5.D.2‘. Proof of

theorem 5.1.1 (320). S.D.3°. Proof of lemma 5.2.1 (323).
5.0.4“. Proof of lemma 5.2.2 (326). 5.0.5’. Proof of

theorem 5.2.1 (326). 5.0.6'. Proof of lemma 5.3.1 (329).
5.0.7‘. Proof of theorem 5.3.1 (332).

Adaptive Control of Continuous Systems (Lyivunov

Functions and Recurrent Criterial Inequalities) 333
Method of Lyspunov functions in adaptive system theory 336
71

FIN!(MHWCJAI.USE(NVLY
6.2.

603.

6".

6.0.

Chapter 7.

7.1.

7.2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.1.1’. Synthesis of stabilizing regulators and
Lyapunov function (337). 6.1.2'. Direct adjustment
algorithms of regulator coefficients (360). 6.1.3‘.
Identification adjustment algorithms of regulator
parameters (342). 6.1.b°. Lyapunov function method and
recurrent criterial inequalities (366). 6.1.5’. Con-
tinuous adaptation algorithms "with a memory" (367).

Adaptive regulator synthesis based on the standard
equation method

6.2.1'. Formulation of the problem and conditions of
its solvability (353). 6.2.2’. Adaptive variant of
a control problem (354).

Synthesis of a controlling system using a confluent
Lyapunov function

6.3.1’. Formulation of the problem. Synthesis of
feedbacks and solvability of the control problem (358).
6.3.3'. Adaptive regulator synthesis (360).

Adaptive control of a linear system in a case where
the output derivatives cannot be measured

6.6.1’. Formulation of the problem (362).

6.6.2‘. Regulator synthesis given known system
coefficients (363). 6.6.3'. Adaptive controlling
system synthesis (364). 6.6.6'. Adaptation algorithm
(365).

Proofs of lelmaas and theorems

6.0.1'. Proof of theorem 6.2.1 (368). 6.D.2°. Proof
of theorem 6.3.1 (371). 6.D.3’. Proof of lemma 6.6.1
(372). 6.D.4’. Proof of theorem 6.6.1 (372).

Adaptive Control of Continuous Systems (Lyapunov
Functions and Frequency Theorem)

Adaptive control with complete measurement of the
system's state

7.1.1’. Formulation of the problem of synthesizing an
adaptive system with a standard nodel (377).

7.1.2'. Solution of the problem for the simplest case
(378). 7.1.3’. Filtration of discrepancy in the
adaptation algorithm (381).

Adaptive control with incomplete measurement of the
system's state

7.2.1‘. Adaptive stabilization of a linear control
object (385). 7.2.2°. Adaptive tracking systems (391).
7.2.3°. Adaptive stabilization of nonlinear control
object (396). 7.2.6°. Adaptive stabilisation of a
multidimensional control object (398).

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.3. Coarseness of adaptive systems with a standard model 401
7.3.1’. Coarseness relative to limited disturbances
(401). 7.3.2‘. Coarseness relative to dynamic disturb-
ances (405). 7.3.3’. Coarseness relative to quantization

of adaptation algorithm. Method of continuous models
(408).

7.0. Proofs of leanns and theorems 410
7.D.1°. Proof of lemma 7.1.1 (410). 7.D.2°. Proof of
theorem 7.1.1 (411). 7.0.3°. Proof of lemma 7.1.2 (411).
7.D.4'. Proof of theorem 7.1.2 (412). 7.D.5°. Proof of
theorems 7.2.1, 7.2.2 (413). 7.0.6“. Proof of theorem
7.2.5 (413). 7.D.7°. Proof of theorems 7.2.7, 7.2.8
(414). 7.0.8'. Proof of theorem 7.3.1 (416).
7.D.9°. Proof of theorem 7.3.2 (419).

Comments and References 420

Bibliography 429

List of Basic Symbols and Abbreviations 443

Subject Index 444
Foreword

This monograph presents methods of controlling a dynamic system under conditions
where a series of substantial parameters and factors determining its behavior are
unknown.. The required control law is sought by an adaptive regulator in the opera-
tion process from the system's reactions to the controlling actions supplied.

As soon as such a regulator is constructed. the entire system acquires the property
of adaptability: if the previously found control law ceases to be satisfactory
given a change in external conditions (this becomes known from the system's
behavior), then the adaptive regulator finds a new control law, with which the
system's behavior again begins to satisfy the required criteria. (The terms
"control law" and others are, of course, subject to a precise definition.)

The development of adaptive system theory is being stimulated by the requirements
of current technology. Practice provides an abundance of problems of controlling
various types of objects given one or another degree of ignorance regarding the
control system. its operating conditions, and disturbances. Adaptive control
methods are being increasingly used in solving a series of aerospace technology
problems. in controlling industrial processes. and in various sectora' automatic
control systems. The general use of computer technology. which creates greater

possibilities for achieving adaptation algorithms, is stimulating adaptive
methods' extensive introduction into practice.

Adaptive system theory is currently in a formation stage. Many different
opinions, directions and methods exist. This monograph essentially represents

73

FOR OFIHCJALVUSEiC”VLY
FOR OWTWCJALIJSEiﬂVLY

the direction developed by this book's authors. The basic original results
presented were formulated during the authors' joint work at a seminar in the
department of theoretical cybernetics of the mathematico~mechanical school of
Leningrad University and a seminar on adaptive systems at the LOSNTO [expansion
unknown]. Existing monographs on adaptive system theory do not overlap much with
this book's material.* The authors have not tried to give a historical review

of the special literature. A number of important and interesting studies tangential
to the monograph's main theme have not been mentioned.

The analysis of various engineering methods developed in the theory of self-
adjusting control systems has been very fruitful for the development of adaptive
system theory. In the current general understanding of the term "adaptive con-
trol system", a self-adjusting system belongs to the class of adaptive ones.

This book attempts to present adaptive control theory as a consistent mathematical
theory beginning with a formal definition of an adaptive system. Methods of de-
signing actual systems are not examined.

Striving for simplicity of explanation and mathematical strictness at the same
time, and aiming primarily at readers with an engineering background, the authors
in the basic text devote their main attention to the conceptual aspect, attempting
to explain the "recipe" for constructing adaptive control algorithms. The proofs
are written concisely; they are separated into individual paragraphs, and their
reading presupposes a certain mathematical training. Necessary supplementary
information and more complicated results are provided in the chapter appendices.

The authors hope that the book will also be of interest to mathematicians. The
problem of adaptive control, as it is treated in this book, is essentially a new
mathematical problem of defining an unknown function (it is an unknown control
law) in a unique and nonstandard situation. In contrast to the ordinary extrapo-
lation problem, where the function must be constructed from its values in pre-
determined points, the function here must be reconstructed from very indirect
information on the "quality" of its current approximation.

Using the adaptive control synthesis methods presented in the book (in particular,
using the recurrent criterial inequality method), a series of concrete applied
problems are solved. Unfortunately, an explanation of these problems and their
solutions was not possible within the scope of this book, since this would have
required a substantial increase in its volume. Solutions to several important
adaptation problems also could not be presented; the reader will find information
on them and on certain solved applied problems in the commentaries and the
literature at the end of the book.

Enumeration of formula is conventional. For example, within chapter 5 a
reference (3.12) means the 12th formula from section 5.3.

*The monographs "Applied Theory of Discrete Adaptive Control Systems" by

D. P. Derevitskiy and A. L. Fradkov and "Adaptive Control" by V. G. Sragovich,
put out by the "ﬂanks" publishing house in 1981, deal with this book's subject
matter. The former has a more practical orientation, while the latter provides a
survey of the current state of adaptation theory, primarily adaptive control of
Markov processes.

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOHlOFFNJAl.USE(NVLY

A triple nuneration is used for references to a fomla in other chapters:
(1.3.16) leans formula (3.1A) from chapter 1.

At the end of the book is a list of basic abbreviations and symbols.

The authors' work in presenting the book's material was distributed in the follow-
ing manner: chapters 1 and lo and sections 2.1, 3.1 and 3.2 were written by

V. A. Yakuhovich; chapters 5 and 6 and sections 2.2, 2.3, 3.3 and 3.? were

written by V. N. Ponin; and chapter 7 and section 2.4 were written by A. L. Pradkov.
The book's first three chapters were written in the authors' close cooperation.

The authors express their sincere gratitude to the book's reviewers:

A. A. Pervozvanskiy and 0. Yu. Kul'chitskiy, who made numerous cements which
were taken into consideration in the nannscript's final editing. as well as

Ya. z. Tsypkin, who was very helpful to the authors in conversations on adapta-
tion questions.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “ﬂanks". Glavnaya redaktsiya fitikonatenaticheskoy
literatury, 1981

9875
080: 1861/19

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFHJA1.US£INVLY

TURBINE AND ENGINE DESIGN

use 629.12~8(o7s.8)
mm mm rowan INSTALLATIONS

Moscow SUDOVYYE AVTUHATIZIROVANNYYE ENERGETICHESKIYE ”STANOVKI in Russian 1980
(signed to press 31 Mar 80) pp 34-40, 259-268, 321-322, 326-335

lﬁhapter 6, Chapter 19, Section 82 (Chapter 22) and Sections 84-86 (Chapter 23)
from book "Automated Marine Power Installations", by Pavel Fetrovich Akinov, lads-
tel'stvo "Transport". 7,000 copies. 352 page§7

£5bx£7 Chapter 4. Steam Cycles
9. Basic Cycle of a Steam Power Plant

In a steam power plant operating on a
Rankine cycle (Figure 15), steam passes
from steam boiler l. which is fitted with
steam superheater 2, into steam turbine 3,
where it expands. The turbine operates on
screw propeller 5 through reduction gear 6.
The spent steam is directed into condenser
6, where it is cooled by water and conden-
ses. The condensate is then pumped into
holding tank 8 by condensate punp 7. Fran
Figure 15. Diagram of steam power there the water is injected anew into the
plant operating on a Rankine cycle. steam boiler.

 

Let us discuss the Rankine cycle in coordinates V-p (Figure 16a) and 8-1 (Figure
16b). The water initially receives heat at a constant pressure p1, which for all
practical purposes is realized by heating it until it vaporises, after which the
steam produced in the boiler is superheated. This process is shown by line bd in
coordinates V-p and line shed in coordinates S-T. In the latter case it is neces-
sary to allow for the fact that the isobar of a liquid in coordinates S-T slopes
slightly more than the lower boundary curve, although for practical calculations it
can be assumed that they coincide.

After the heat is imparted, adiabatic expansion of the steam takes place (line de
in both diagrams). After the steaa expands to its final pressure p2, it condenses
(line ea in both diagrams). Finally, the feed pump again sends the water into the
boiler (the pressure on it is increased), which is shown somewhat conventionally by
constant-volume line ab in coordinates V-p.

76

FOR¢NHWCIAL.USE(HVLY
FINICNWHCJAI.IJSEZ(MQLY

(II; .1, J b) f 1-0; \J’II

t I \ d

  

'.

 

|

.J "
v‘hl ,.
ﬁ“1. ‘,
Figure 16. Graphs of Rankine cycle in volume-pressure and entropy-
absolute temperature coordinates.

The thermal efficiency of the Rankine cycle can be derived from a discussion of it
in coordinates 5-1. The heat that is converted into work during the cycle is rep-
resented by area abode. Expended heat is represented by area a'abcdd'. The ther-
mal efficiency is the ratio of these areas:

 

Area abcde can be regarded as the difference between areas anbcd' and anaed'.

The former measures the steam's enthalpy at point d and can be designated as i1;
the latter measures the enthalpy at point e and can be designated as i2. Area
a'abcdd' equals the difference between areas anhcdd' and anaa'. The first area
is i1, while the second represents the enthalpy of the water at point a. This val-
ue is designated as i5. Thus, the Rankine cycle's thermal efficiency is determined
by the formula

=-,l:',;' - (31)

The difference in enthalpies (thermal gradient) i1 - i2 during the adiabatic expan-
sion of the steam is usuallydeterminuiwith an 8-1 diagram. tor the same initial
and final temperatures, the Rankine cycle's efficiency is lower than that of a
Carnot cycle; this is obvious from a comparison of areas aa"de and abcde, which
represent the amounts of heat used in the Carnot and Rankine cycles.

A study of formula (31) shows that the Rankine cycle's thermal efficiency increases
as the steam's initial pressure and temperature do and as the final pressure de-
creases. It is necessary to allow for the fact that as the steam's initial pres-
sure increases, there is an increase in the numerator of the Rankine cycle's effi-
ciency formula (the value of the thermal gradient) only up to the value of an ini-
tial pressure on the order of 4 “Pa. however, the cycle's efficiency also increas-
es when there is a further increase in the steam's initial pressure. This is ex-
plained by the reduction at higher pressures (for the same superheating tempera-
ture) of the steam's initial enthalpy and the numerical value of the cycle's effi-
ciency formula's denominator.

Steam with increased (pressure: h-S Hrs. temperature: 723-773 K) and high (pres-
sure: 8-12 Hrs, temperature: 823-853 K) parameters is widely used to improve the de-
gree of economy in marine steam power installations.~ At electric power stations in the

77

FOR‘0I1HC1Al.lEﬂi(N'LY
ﬁUIlﬂﬂﬂlJAl.US£(ﬂVLY

Soviet Union, the use of steam with supercritical parameters (pressure: 2b Hrs;
temperature: 873 K) has now been mastered for turbogenerators with an aggregate
power of up to 1.2 million k3. Given the comparatively limited power of steam pow-
er installations, the use of steam with such high parameters cannot be justified
economically.

10. Cycles with Repeated Superheating of Steam and the Regenerative Cycle

"hen there is an increase in the steam' s initial pressure, there is also an in-
crease in its moisture content at the end of expansion unless there is a simultane-
ous increase in the steam superheating temperature. An increase in the steam' a
moisture content at the end of expansion lowers the degree of econdby of a steam
turbine and causes blade erosion in the final stages. Thus, when the steam' s ini-
tial pressure is increased, this makes it mandatory to increase its superheating
temperature at the same tune. However, when there is a significant increase in the
steam' s initial temperature, it is necessary to manufacture the circulating sec-
tion' 3 parts out of expensive heat-resistant alloys. Therefore, in high-pressure
installations the steam' s initial temperature is sometimes limited, but repeated
superheating of it is used.

I! I‘m Rx-v The cycle of a steam power installation
I i x d r operating with repeated (intermediate)
' I \ superheating of the steam is shown in 3-1
t/ ‘t coordinates in Pigure 17. As in a normal

Rankine cycle, the feed water (condensate),
which has enthalpy i;, is heated to its
‘4 9 boiling temperature in a steam boiler

%p{”' ”: :‘ (line ab in the diagram). The water is

erg I u then converted into dry, saturated steam
a““‘-—--——-—--t-jr-g- (line be) in the boiler, which steam is

then superheated (l1ne cd), with the en-

Figure 17. Graph of cycle with re- thalpy of the superheated steam reaching

peated superheating of the steam, in id. After this, the steam expands adia-
entropy-absolute temperature coordi- batically in a high-pressure turbine until
nstes. it reaches a state that is close to satur-
ation (line de) and is sent into a second
steam superheater, where it is again superheated (line ef). It then expands adia-
bstically in a low-pressure turbine until it reaches its final pressure (line fg)
and, with enthalpy is, condenses in a condenser (line ga).

Thus, a cycle with repeated superheating of the steam is represented by the figure
abodefg, the area of which corresponds to the amount of used (converted into work)
heat. In the absence of repeated superheating, the unit would work according to
the cycle represented by area abcdel, and the steam's moisture content at the end
of expansion would be higher. The secondary superheating increases the amount of
heat used by the value designated by area e efg, but an additional expenditure of
heat measured by the area egefgl is required. Designating the steam' s enthalpy at
points e and f as ie and i let us derive the expression for the thermal efficien-
cy of the cycle with secondary superheating of the steam:

, _. ’ j’ +’ i: (32)

i,4~(I,-I. -_..
78

FORIOFFKJAI.US£(NVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when there is multiple superheating of the steam, line def approximates an isotherm,

which increases the degree of economy of the cycle substantially (since it approxi-
mates a Carnot cycle). A single repeated superheating also produces some increase

in thermal efficiency. Under real conditions, the degree of economy of a steam
power installation with repeated steam superheating increases to an even greater
degree because of the reduction in losses in the turbine as the result of the de-
crease in the steam's moisture content in the final stages. Besides this, repeated
superheating increases the turbine blades' service life.

Installations with repeated steam superheating are very complicated because of the
presence of a second steam superheater and two additional steam lines. As a result

of the large volume steam in these lines, there is a sharp decrease in the maneuver
qualities of such installations, so until recently repeated superheating was almost

never used in marine steam power installations. In recent years, however, instal-
lations with repeated steam superheating have been used to a certain extent in sea-
going ships. The series of “Krym"-type large-tonnage tankers, with steam power
plants generating 30,000 hp, as well as all modern stationary power plants using
steam with high initial parameters, have repeated steam superheating.

’ ' ‘ '3'" Cycles in which the return to the working
I .' \\ fluid of part of the heat withdrawn from it
. - "/‘--———A' is provided for are widely used in marine
. _ ,/{‘\ steam power installations. Such cycles
-’ _ L41...“ \\ are called regenerative (or heat-return).

In Figure 18, Rankine cycle abce (for the
case of the use of dry, saturated steam)

. ., is depicted in S-‘l' coordinates. The
-" L" -' " ‘ 5 amount of heat withdrawn from the steam is
Figure 18. Graph of s regenerative indicates by area a'aec'. Let us assume
cycle. that during the heat expansion process,

part of the steam's heat is used, in an
infinitely large number of preheaters, to preheat the water fed into the steam
boiler. This can be shown graphically by replacing adiabatic expansion line ce
with the equidistant curve cf, which represents the preheating of the water.

The amount of heat withdrawn from the steam during its expansion is represented by
area f'fcc'. It will be imparted to the water and can be represented by area
a'abb', which is equal in size to area f'fcc'. Since areas ab " and fce are ident-
ical, area abcf of the cycle can be replaced by its equal area b"bce (a Carnot cy-
cle). Consequently, in the ideal case and when working with saturated steam, the

regenerative cycle's efficiency can reach that of a Carnot cycle. For all practi-
cal purposes such a cycle cannot be achieved, since the conditions for the continu-

ous withdrawal of the expanding steam's heat for the purpose of preheating the wa-
ter cannot be created.

In actuality, preheating of the feed water by steam taken from the steam turbines
is used to realize a regenerative cycle in marine power installations. A simpli-
fied diagram of a steam installation operating with such a cycle is shown in Figure
19a. One special feature of this layout, in comparison with that shown in Figure
15, is the presence of feed water preheater 2, into which is directed steam taken
from steam turbine l at some pressure Pot during the expansion process. In the

79

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 19. Diagram of theoretical steam expansion process in a
steam power installation operating with a regenerative cycle.

simplest case, this steam is mixed with the feed water and can preheat it to tem-
perature tot! which corresponds to the removed steam's pressure. The feeding into
the steam boiler of water at a higher tsmperature reduces fuel consumption for the
formation of steam, despite the slight increase in the total steam consumption in
the steam turbine as the result of its intermediate removal to preheat the feed wa-
ter.

If we use an S-i diagram (Figure 19b) to depict the process of adiabatic steam ex-
pansion in an installation operating with a regenerative cycle and a single inter-
mediate removal of steam, it is easy to determine the values of the steam's initial
and final enthalpies i1 and i2 and the removed steam's enthalpy iot- We will as-

sume that steam with a mass of 1 kg enters the steam turbine, and after partial ex-
pansion it is bled off to preheat water with a mass of“ kg. He can then formlate

the following thermal balance equation for the preheater:
(l -- 1)!) + a!“ —"u'.
where iét - enthalpy of the water preheated to temperature tot.

From this equation we determine the amount of steam removed:

a (33)
I -l.

I" u

The work done by 1 kg of steam in a regenerative cycle with a single intermediate
bleeding of steam is the sum of the work done by“ kg of steam, expanding from an
initial pressure p1 to the bleeding pressure Pot’ and (l - 00 kg of steam, expanding
from an initial pressure p1 to a final pressure pf. Thus, the work done by 1 kg of
steam--or the amount of heat converted into work in joules) is

--=‘x(l. 1..) --(! -:)(l. --!..).

In this case the regenerative cycle's thermal efficiency is expressed by the formu-
la

4., i-(i- "(II"I‘)
I _

,.
-:. ._ .. _....-.———-- (34)

’ "(or

For the same initial and final steam parameters, the thermal efficiency of a re-
generative cycle is greater than that of a Rankine cycle, it being the case that it
increases as the number of intermediate bleed-offs does (modern marine steam tur-
bine power plants operate with three or four intermediate bleed-offs). The degree
of economy of the regenerative cycle is explained by the return to the steam boiler

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the steam formation heat of that part of the steam produced in the boiler that
is removed Era the steam engine and uaed to preheat the feed water. At the same

tine the loases in the condenser are reduced, since a amaller amount of steam en-
ters it when bleed-offs are used.

Examples

Example 1. Determine the thermal efficiency of a Rankine cycle when the initial

steam pressure is S HPa. the initial temperature is 732 K and the final praaure is
0.005 We.

Using the S-i diagram, we determine the difference in enthalpies: i - i2 .'
- 3,320 - 2,080 I 1,240 kJ/kg. Using saturated ateam tables, we find that i: -
- 138 U/kg.

Then, according to formla (31),

l,—I. 11-10
_ j .. ———-' — .. 0.39 33:. )-
‘l '1—‘; 332“ -|.'|8 (or a

 

Bxaaplc 2. Determine the efficiency of a regena‘ative cycle for the same initial
and final conditions as in Example 1, providing that the steam is hled off at a
pressure of 1 Ma.

According to the s-i diagram the removed ateam'a enthalpy is iot -.2,760 Idling.
According to the saturated steam tables, i3: - 763 ”he.

According to formla (33), the amount of steam bled off is
1;,-I; 151—1.“ 525
' " [up-I; ”mo—m ‘L-sn'o'm n'
According to formula (34), the thermal efficiaicy is
u u. - - I...» + (I — s) (I. — h) _ (L318(‘£f10—?7&))_-|~_0,]G2(3§20_—20M)

"' ., - 4;, 33:0 461

".2_-:*§-_569+°-m?. I919

.. .. o -
255’ 0.4. (01,421.).

The increase in thermal efficiency gained by changing over to a regenerative cycle,
in comparison with the thermal efficiency achieved in kample 1, it

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Heat is drawn from the core by means of a cooling substance called the heat-
transfer agent - water, organic liquids, liquid metals and their alloys (potassi-
um, sodium, bismuth and so on), gasses (helium, nitrogen, carbon dioxide). Only
water is used as the heat-transfer agent in modern marine reactors.

When a reactor is in a steady-state operating mode, its core is in the critical
state. The intensity of the neutron flux and the number of fissionings per unit of
time are constant values in this case. In order to change the liberation of heat
in the reactor, it is necessary to regulate the intensity of the neutron flux and
the number of fissionings per unit of time; that is, to change the speed of the
chain reaction. A regulation system does this.

The basis of the regulation system is rods containing substances that are heavy ab-
sorbers of neutrons (boron carbide, cadmium). The position of the rods in the re~
actor is usually regulated by a special automatic device. In order to increase

heat liberation, the rods are withdrawn from the reactor, while to reduce it they
are moved into it.

Nuclear fuel is consumed (burned up) in the process of reactor operation. "hen the
fuel is burned up to a certain degree, it is necessary to replace the fuel elements;
The period between these changes is called the reactor run.

when a reactor is in operation. fragments and fission products having a great capa-
city for absorbing neutrons are obtained. Xenon (Xe13 ) is the strongest absorber
of neutrons. As a result, there arises a phenomenon known as "poisoning" of the
reactor. This phenomenon manifests itself most strongly after a reactor that has
been operating at high power is stapped suddenly. In order to start a "poisoned"
reactor, the presence and release of excess core reactive capacity or a long time
to reduce the xenon concentration is required.

The regulation system must insure not only the required generation of heat in the
reactor, but must also be able to release the reactor's excess power in case it is
"poisoned." Besides this. this system or a special protection system must instan-
taneously stop the chain reaction if an emergency situation arises.

During nuclear reactions, about 80 percent of the energy is converted into heat,
while the other 20 percent is in the form sfll-, P- and 1-radiation. No special
danger is posed by «- and ﬂ-radiation. since they have an insignificant penetrating
capability. However, Y-radiation and neutron radiation have a great penetrating
capability and cause secondary radiation in many materials. When acted upon by
such radiation, the human body is beset by serious illnesses, so a nuclear power
plant must have so-called biological shielding, for which metals, water and con-
crete (in stationary power plants) are used. Biological shielding facilities are
always quite large and heavy.

68. Layouts and Basic Characteristics of Nuclear Power Plants
The schematic diagrams of nuclear power plants depend on the type of coolant and
the type of engine or engines utilizing the thermal energy. Nuclear power plant

layouts can be either single- or double-circuit.

A single-circuit layout of a nuclear power plant using water as both the coolant
and the heat-transfer agent is shown in Figure 143a. By ccoling the fuel elements

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4)

 

Figure 143. Diagrams of nuclear power plants.

of reactor 1. water is converted into steam that expands in turbine 2 and is then
sent into condenser 3, where it is converted back into water. Pump 5 feeds the wa-
ter back into the reactor.

The advantage of a single-circuit system is its simplicity and the possibility of
using steam in the turbine at a pressure of up to 10 hPa and a temperature of up to
550°C, which insures high economy of operation of the steam section of the nuclear
power plant. In this case, however, the turbine, the condenser and the mechanisms
supporting them must be behind biological shielding, since the steam is dangerously

radioactive. Therefore, single-circuit layouts have not yet been used for power
plants.

At the present time the overwhelming majority of nuclear power plants (including
marine ones) are realized according to the two-circuit plan with water as the reac-
tor coolant and the engine's working f1u1d(Pigure lh3b). Hater leaves reactor 1 at
a pressure of 6-15 MPa and is sent into heat exchange unit 2. which is called the
steam generator. Because of the heat of the water in the first circuit. steam that
is no longer radioactive is produced in the steam generator. Pump 6 feeds the wa-
ter in the first circuit back into the reactor. This pump and the steam generator
are behind biological shielding. The steam from the steam generator expands in
turbine 3 and is then converted back into water in condenser 4. Pump 5 feeds this
water back into the steam generator.

The advantage of this setup is that the steam turbine, the condenser and their sup-
porting mechanisms are accessible for maintenance. however, the pressure in the
second circuit is always considerably lower than in the first because of the neces-
sity of providing a temperature differential in the steam generator. This pressure
is most frequently on the order of 3 Mrs. For this same reason, the superheating
temperature of the steam in the second circuit does not exceed 300°C (573 K). which
is another defect in this setup. As a result, the efficiency of the power plant's
steam section cannot be high.

In order to improve the parameters of the steam in the second circuit, it was sug-
gested that several liquids that are organic compounds be used as the moderator and
the heat-transfer agent: diphenyl, orthotriphenyl, metatriphenyl, paratriphenyl
and mixtures of these.

Organic liquid are explosion- and fireproof and nonpoisonous, are good neutron mod-
erators, are not very chemically active with respect to metals, are thermally sta-
ble up to temperatures on the order of 673 K, have a high boiling temperature at
atmospheric pressure (about 533 K), and are not very active when acted upon by nu-
clear radiation. All of this makes it possible to insure improved economy of

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 19. Nuclear Power Plants
67. Physical Principles of the Operation of Nuclear Reactors

The reserves of fuel of organic origin are limited, so the question of other energy
sources has arisen. The discovery of the possibility of obtaining thermal energy
as the result of the chain-reaction fissioning of the nuclei of such elements as
uranium (and several others) was an extremely important one. The energy reserves
in the uranium available on Earth are tens of times greater than the energy of all
the world‘s reserves of organic fuel. The energy generated during the full utili-
zation of 1 kg of uranium is approximately equal to that obtained by burning 1.400
t of fuel oil.

The obtaining of thermal energy by splitting the nuclei of fissionable elements
takes place in devices called nuclear reactors. Enriched uranium is used as the
nuclear fuel for modern reactors used for energy purposes. In natural uranium the
content of the easily fissionable isotope 0235 is about 0.7 gercent, while the oth-
er 99.3 percent is the practically unfissionable isotope 023 . Artificially en-
riched uranium with a U 35 isotope content of 3-5 percent is normally used in re-
actors .

In reactors used for energy purposes, the process of splitting uranium nuclei with
neutrons is realized. In connection with this. a U235 nucleus is split into two
fragments with the same charge and approximately the same weight and charge that,
being repelled by each other, move apart at extremely high speeds. When the frag-
ments collide with the atoms of the medium in which the nuclear fission occurs.
their kinetic energy is converted to heat. In each case of fissioning of uranium
nuclei, for each absorbed neutron an average 3; 2.5 neutrons fly away and, under
certain conditions, themselves cause other 02 nuclei to be split. This is the
essence of the chain-reaction fissioning of nuclear fuel. Such a reaction can be
steady state, dying out, or growing. Correspondingly, the reactor's status is
critical, subcritical, or supercritical. The chain reaction takes place in that
part of the reactor called the core, where the fissioning material is.

Reactors in which the neutrons' velocity is moderated to the velocity of their
thermal motion are used for energy purposes. They are known as thermal neutron re-
actors. In order to insure a chain reaction in them it is necessary to use en-
riched uranium and to introduce into the core a special substance known as the neu-
tron moderator. Hater (H20), heavy water (020), beryllium and graphite can be used
as the moderator. Although water is not as strong a moderator as the other materi-
als, it may also be used simultaneously as a heat-carrying agent.

Reactors are categorized as homogenous and heterogeneous, depending on the type of
core. In homogeneous reactors the nuclear fuel and the moderator are a homogeneous
mass. In heterogeneous reactors the nuclear fuel is arranged in the moderator in
the form of rods or plates that in this case are called fuel elements. Right now,
heterogeneous reactors are the only type used in nuclear marine power plants [53"].

A reactor's core must be surrounded by a reflector that insures a decrease in neu-
tron loss and, consequently, contributes to a decrease in the core's dimensions.
The reflector also facilitates equalization of the neutron flux in the core. The
same substances that are used as moderators are used as reflectors (in marine re-
actors it is usually water).

Ha

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
operation and reliability of nuclear SEU's while maintaining a low pressure in the
first circuit.

However. organic liquids also have flaws. When acted upon by heat and radiation
they tend to break down, which requires systematic purification and level mainten-
ance of the heat-transfer agent in the first circuit. The low thermal capacity and
thermal conductivity of organic liquids requires an increase in the heat-transfer
agent consumption rate and enlarged surfaces in the heat exchange units.

The question of the feasibility of using organic liquids as the moderator in nucle-
ar SEU's needs to be tested under regular operating conditions.

69. Utilization and Facilities for the Automation of Nuclear SEU's

Almost from the very beginning of the construction of atomic (nuclear) electric
power stations, work was begun on the use of nuclear power plants for transport
ships. This is explained by a number of circumstances.

First of all, it should be mentioned here that a marine nuclear power plant makes
it possible for a ship to sail for a practically unlimited length of time without
replenishing its fuel supply. The daily consumption of nuclear fuel in transport
ships is only tens of grams. The fuel elements in the reactors can be changed once
every 2-3 years.

The useful cargo-carrying capacity of ships with nuclear power plants can be in-
creased in comparison with ships having standard power plants and the same hull di-
mensions. Although the weight of nuclear power plants is quite high because of the
high weight of the biological shielding, an atomic-powered ship does not carry fuel
reserves. Therefore, the weight of a nuclear power plant is always less than that
of a standard power plant of the same power along with its fuel reserves.

The use of nuclear power plants can be regarded as an economically profitable way
of increasing the speed of transport ships. For standard power plants, an increase
in a ship's speed entails not only an increase in fuel consumption, but also a sig-
nificant reduction in the useful cargo-carrying capacity because of the increase in
fuel reserves.

Finally, cne exceptionally important advantage of nuclear 550's is the absence of
a need for air in order to function. Thus. the problem of the extensive use of
underwater transport ships (primarily tankers) can be solved. It is a well known
fact that less main engine power is required to provide high speeds during under-
water sailing. Underwater vessels with nuclear power plants can also sail beneath
the ice in the Arctic basin.

The reactor in the ship "Otto Can" (a cross-section of which is shown in Figure
144) can serve as an example of the layout of a marine nuclear reactor. The reac-
tor is designed for a steam-turbine power plant producing 7,600 k". Hater is used
as the moderator and the heat-transfer agent. A pressure of 6.3 HPa is maintained
in the first circuit. In the second circuit. 66 t/h of steam is produced at a
pressure of 3.1 up. and a temperature of 566 K.

The reactor vessel consists of cylinder 8. the bottom and cover 3 of which have a
hemispherical shape. Connecting pipes for supplying feed water and discharging

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 
 
 

    
     
    
  

-. ..'...' "'."' '
. §‘$:::=:&i$$'

   
  

if" '''''

4i-
[w

: §IWWHLIS E 3.1
. éI!!!!.HHI’€F[!},‘H_II; :

' IN I! "HI'IWI -! .=‘ f
IJ- mfwh; 1m; 9|
swwww‘

    

        
   
  

     
      
    

  

  
   

 

    

It contains 16 cells with rods
'ched with respect to 0235.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The rods are moved automatically or by manual control by means of drive 1, which is
mounted on the vessel's cover. The reactor's core is surrounded by thermal screen
9. The first circuit's circulation pumps 12 feed water into the core through con-
necting pipes 11.

Steam generator 5 consists of three independent sections formed by 54 spiral tubes.
Its total heating surface is 465 m2. The feed water is supplied to the steam gen-

erator through connecting pipes 4. The steam generator is fitted with heat insula-
tion 6.

The reactor under discussion has a unitized design, since the core. the steam gen-
erator and the first circuit’s three circulation pumps are in common container 7.
The entire reactor is surrounded by biological shielding shell 2.

During operation, a free water level is maintained in the reactor vessel. The

pressurized steam in the first circuit occupies the space above it. This steam
level a fulfills the role of pressure stabilizer.

 

Figure 165. Schematic diagram of the power plant in the icebreaker
"Lenin . II

The world's first, most powerful and technical perfect nuclear power plant in-
stalled in a merchant marine ship was the power plant in the atomic-powered ice-
breaker "Lenin" (Figure 155). The total power of the main power plant, on the
flanges of the A turbines, is 32,600 kw.

Reactor 1 is equipped with pressure stabilizers 2 in the first circuit. Ordinary
water is used as the moderator and heat-transfer agent. The first circuit's water
enters steam generators 3. Water circulation in the first circuit is provided by
electric pumps 11. In the steam generators, second-circuit steam is produced at
the rate of 360 t/h, at a pressure of 2.9 “Pa and a temperature of 583 K. The
steam then moves into four steam turbines L. The used steam is sent into conden-
sers lO and the condensate is used again to feed the steam generators. Each turbo-

generator drives two electric generators 9, which generate direct current at 600 V,
through reduction gear 5.

Through GRShch 6, electric energy is fed to main electric propulsion motor 8 and two
lateral engines 7. The electric propulsion motors operate directly on the screw
propellera' shafts. The central motor's power is 15,500 kw, while the lateral ones
generate 7.600 kw each.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fore and aft turbine rooms each contain two main turbogenerators that each gen-
erate 8,100 k". The turbines Consist of an active pressure-regulating stage and 15

reactive stages.

0n the icebreaker there are also five auxiliary turbogenerators. each of which has
a capacity of 1,000 k". They produce three-phase alternating current at #00 V for
the operation of all the auxiliary mechanisum. There is also a diesel generator
with the same capacity.

In order to provide the ship with steam while at anchor when the reactors are not
operating, there are two auxiliary water-tube steam boilers with a total steam pro-
ductivity of 10 t/h at a pressure of 2.9 “Pa.

The extended and successful experiment in operating the nuclear power plant in the
icebreaker "Lenin" has demonstrated the correctness of the principles on which its
construction was based. This has made it possible to realize even more powerful
power plants for the monotypical icebreakers "Arktike" and "Sibir'," which each
generate 56,000 kW.

The steam-producing unit on the icebreak-
ers ”Arktika" and "Sibir'," which was
realized according to the plan of the unit
on the "Lenin." differs from it only in

- J i steam productivity. In all other respects,
however, the power plants in these ice-
Cﬁ—J breakers differ significantly. A simpli-
fied diagram of the power plants in the

Figure 146. Diagram of power plant in "Arktika" and "Sibir'" is shown in Figure
icebreakers "Arktika" and "Sibir'." 166.

   

In the steam generators' second circuit, steam is produced at a pressure (before
the outlet to the turbines) of 3 HPa and a temperature of 573 K. The two turbines
1 each have a capacity of 27,800 k" at 3,500 r/min. The single-casing double-flow
turbines have anactive regulating radial stage and 15 reactive stages in each flow.
The pressure in the condenser is 0.007 HPa.

Each turbine is connected directly to three alternating-current generators 2, which
each produce 9,000 k" at 110-125 R: and 780 V. By means of silicon rectifiers 3
the alternating current is converted into direct current at 1,000 V. Three two-

armature main propulsion motors 4 operate on the direct current. Each main propul-
sion motor operates its own fixed-pitch screw. All of the electric motors have the
same power--l7,600/16.200 R“ at 130/185 r/min.

The icebreaker's electricity requirements are filled by five 2,000-kﬂ turbo-
generators. In addition to them. there is a 1,000-kw reserve diesel generator and
two ZOO-k" emergency diesel generators. In order to fill the requirements for
steam for heating and domestic needs when the steam-producing unit is not operating,
there are two automated auxiliary low-pressure water-tube boilers that Operate on
liquid fuel.

On the icebreaker there are systems for the automatic control and monitoring of the
power plant. These systems provide the following:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

freeing of personnel from constant watches in the power plant area;

automatic regulation of the processes occurring in the power plant, including emer-
gency situations; operational, centralized monitoring of parameters and remote con-
trol of the equipment;

signaling and automatic recording of the departure of monitored parameters from the
established norms;

high reliability in the automation facilities.

An integrated system for automating the power plant was developed for the icebreak-
ers "Arktika" and "Sibir'." It contains the following systems: automatic regula-
tion, control and protection of the steam part of the power plant: reactor control
and protection; collection, processing and presentation of information; remote and
automated control of onboard systems; automation of the electric part of the power
plant.

The automation systems are realized with the use of elements and circuits that have
already been tested operationally and new ones that are further improvements and
that insure the high reliability of the systems. The center for information col-
lection and the control of the equipment for the icebreaker's entire power plant is
the 1390. Registration of the parameters and deviations from their given values is
done with a special digital printing unit.

The cargo and passenger ship "Savannah," with a nuclear power plant generating
l6,000 kw, was built in the United States. It was not operated for long and at the
present time is laid up. In the FRG's merchant fleet there is a cargo ship (an ore
carrier) with a 7,500-kﬂ nuclear power plant. The experimental ship "Hutsu," with
a 7,600-ku nuclear po.!r plant, has been built in Japan. Eon-Jer, serious flaws
were discovered in the power plant during the first voyages and the ship is being
refitted. The Italian ship "Enrico Fermi" will be 175 m long and 22.5 m wide. Its
nuclear power plant will generate 16,000 k" and the vessel will cruise at 20 mi/h.
when fully loaded, its displacement will be 18,000 t.

At the present time, a great deal of experience has been amassed in the operation
of nuclear power plants of both the stationary and marine types. This experience
indicates that they are both highly reliable and safe. The improvement and simpli-
fication of the technology for producing nuclear fuel will result in a continuing
reduction in its cost. when the construction cost of nuclear power plants them-
selves is reduced, we can expect that in the near future ships with such power
plants will become much more connnn.

Section 6. Marine Auxiliary Mechanisms. Special Features of the Operation of He-
rine Power Installations

Chapter 22. Cooling and Evaporating Installations
82. Automation of Refrigeration Units

All modern marine refrigerating units, whether intended for cooling compartments

and cargoes and preserving perishable goods or for air conditioning, are equipped
with automation facilities. The extent of the automated processes depends on the

purpose of the installation, its special technical features and the cooling method
used.

89

FOR OFFICIAL Uoi ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic parameter for regulating a refrigerating unit is its cold productivity.
For the automatic maintenance of the temperature of cooled areas within given lim-
its, a balance must be maintained between the flow of heat into the area and the
refrigerating unit's cold productivity. Since the magnitude of the heat flow is

subject to change, the unit's c..d productivity must also change within the appro-
priate limits.

The best method for regulating cold productivity is a smooth change in the compres-
sor's rate of revolution. However, the complexity of regulating the rate of revo-

lution makes it impossible to use this method of cold productivity regulation ex-
tensively.

In marine refrigerating installations, the most widely used method is positional
regulation of the cold productivity by starting and stopping the compressor. in
this case the temperature in the area being cooled is maintained with certain given
limits. The difference between the temperatures at which the compressor starts and

stops is called the temperature differential. Its value must usually not exceed
2°C.

In a two-positional system for regulating
cold productivity (Figure 182), the sensi-
tive element is thermocylinder 7, which is
located in the area being cooled and is
connected by a pipe to bellows 6. The
bellows is compressed by spring 5, the
tension on which is regulated with con-
troller 4. When the temperature in the
cooled area increases, evaporation of the
volatile liquid in thermocylinder 7 inten-

HMN! 7
#311313an sifies and bellows 6 overcomes the tension

 

(1) on spring 5, lever 3 moves rocker arm 2
and closes contact 1, which turns on the
Figure 182. Diagram of action of two- compressor's electric motor. When the
position system for regulating a re- temperature drops, the process takes place

frigerating installaticn. in the reverse order, contact 1 opens, and
Key: 1. To the compressor's electric the electric motor stops.
motor

The temperature differential is adjusted
by means of screw 8. Tightening of the screw reduces the temperature differential.
The temperature in the cooled area is set with controller 4, by changing the ten-
sion on the spring that acts on the bellows.

In powerful refrigerating installations, the amount of automation can be increased
considerably. For instance, there can be automatic regulation of the level of the
cooling agent in the condensers and evaporators. the cooling agent's superheating

temperature. and the pressure in the condenser. The removal of air from the in-
stallation can also be automated.

Chapter 23. Special Features of the Operation of Shipboard Power Installations

86. Operating Qualities of Different Types of SEU's

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The technical operating qualities of different types of SEU's are evaluated accord-
ing to several indicators, the most important of which are specific fuel consump-
tion rate, weight of the installation, aggregate power, reliability, maneuvering
qualities and duration of the period between repairs.

When evaluating the specific fuel consumption rate, it is necessary to allow for it
not for the main engine alone, but for the entire 820; that is, to keep in mind the
operation of the auxiliary mechanisms and other fuel requirements. The total hour-
ly fuel consumption rate should be divided by the main engine's rated power. The
specific fuel consumption rate for the entire installation depends to a considera-
ble degree on the type of ship, since it is precisely this that affects the auxil-
iary engines' power and fuel consumption for heating and domestic needs. For exam-
ple, for the same type of main engine the specific fuel consumption rate for the
entire installation is considerably higher in a passenger ship than in a cargo ves-
sel; for diesel power plants it also depends to a considerable degree on the degree
of utilization of the heat of the exhaust gasses and the cooling water.

Below are some data on the average specific fuel consumption rate for modern SEU's
(in grams per kilowatt-hour):

Installation Specific Fuel Consumption
Steam turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 260-310
Diesel with direct drive and power up to 8,800 kw . . . . . . . . 220-240
Diesel with direct drive and power above 8,800 k” . . . . . . . . 200-225
Geared diesel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220-230
Diesel electric . . . . . . . . . . . .-. . . . . . . . . . . . . 260-270
Gas turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230-300

The lowest specific fuel consumption rate is provided by a power diesel power plant
with direct drive (low-revolution engine) that has a system for the thorough utili-
zation of waste heat (200-210 g/kwh). the specific fuel consumption rate of steam-
turbine power plants that is acceptable under modern conditions (260-270 g/kﬂh) can
be achieved only if they are quite complicated, with high initial steam parameters
(8-10 Mma, 773-823 K) and high power (22,200-37,500 kw). Gas-turbine power plants
that utilize the exhaust gasses' heat in the steam stage can have a specific fuel
consumption rate that approaches its value in diesel power plants. However, these
installations are quite complicated. ‘Ihe specific fuel consumption rate in gas-
turbine power plants realized from simple plans is still quite high, but should de-
crease as the installations are improved.

Reducing the weight of a power plant usually lowers its cost and increases a ship's
pure cargo-carrying capacity. Below are the average weights of power plants of
different types.

Installation Weight. kg £§ig7
Steam turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60-80
Diesel with direc: drive. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .60-100
Geared diesel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30-60
Gas turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15-20

As far as weight is concerned. gas-turbine power plants are unarguably in first
place.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present time, the greatest main turbogear assembly [GTZA] power in transport ships
is 52,000 kw. The highest-powered low-revolution diesel engines are approaching 37,000
RU, while for mediumvrevolution diesels the figure is 13,000 kw; gas-turbine installa-
tion power has reached 18,500 kw and will undoubtedly increase.

An SEU's maneuvering qualities are of great importance for operating a ship. They can
be evaluated by the following indicators: duration of preparation for operation of
steam-turbine power plants-3-S h; diesel engines-0.S-l h; gas-turbine units [GTU]--
no more than 0.5 h; amount of time it takes to reverse a GTZA-—lO-20 a; diesel-no more
than 10-12 s; a GTU with a variable-pitch screw [VRSh]--even faster. It should. how-
ever, be mentioned that regardless of the type of power plant, the ship's speed has

a strong influence on the amount of time it takes to reverse an engine (as the speed
increases, so does the amount of time it takes to achieve reverse). This is explained
by the fact that after the steam is shut down in a GTZA or the fuel pumps of a diesel
engine are turned off, the screw propeller operates in the hydraulic turbine mode and
develops considerable power when a ship is moving at a high speed. Only after the
ship's speed is reduced can the torque created by the screw propeller be overcome and
the engine started in the opposite direction.

During maneuvers, the possibility of maintaining a low revolution rate with the main
engine is of great value. A CTZA's minimum stable rate of revolution is 10-12 percent
of the rated level. For diesel engines this figure is higher and reaches 25 and even
30 percent, which has a deleterious effect on a ship's maneuvering qualities. In view
of the small amount of experience in operating them. this indicator has not yet been
firmly established for GTt's.

Steam and gas turbines, as well as internal combustion engines IDVS]. do not allow a
rapid transition from low to high speed. This limitation on maneuverability is related
to the danger of the appearance of thermal stresses in critical parts. Both steam
turbines and diesels do not allow extended. significant overloads: the allowable

power overload is only 10 percent above the rated power for a period of up to l h.

Trunk DVS's and crosshead ones with two-sided parallels can operate in the reverse mode
for an unlimited period of time at a power that is right up to the rated level. Steam
turbines can operate in the reverse mode for only a limited period of time because of
heating of the forward-running stages; at the same time, the reversecrunning stages'
power is usually only 40 percent of the forward-running stages'. A considerable im-
provement in the maneuvering qualities of steam-turbine power plants is achieved by the
use of a VRSh.

when screw VFSh's are used, the maneuvering qualities of diesel power plants are bet-
ter tlnn those of steam-turbine power plants. The use of a VRSh equalizes these
qualities to a considerable extent. The maneuvering qualities of a GTU are as good

as those of diesel power plants. of course, the best maneuvering qualities are achieved
in power plants with electromotion; the problem of remote control is also simplest to
solve when electromotion is used.

For modern low-revolution diesel engines and steam-turbine power plants, the periods
between repair (motor life) are practically identical and have reached 100,000 h;

for medium-revolution diesels it is 40,000 h; for the high-speed diesels used in sea-
going ships with electromotion, it drops to 20,000 h. In principle, CTU's can have

a motor life approaching that of steam—turbine or diesel power plants.

92

FOR OFFICIAL LSI-I ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

85. Effect of Changes in Operating Conditions on the Operating Node of SEU's, Fuel
Consumption and Transportation Costs

A marine main engine is connected either directly or through a transmission to a
screw propeller, so its operating mode and the operating mode of the entire power
plant always depends on the screw propeller's operating conditions. In any steady-
state mode, the power developed by the main engine -- after subtracting the losses
in the transmission (if there is one), the shaft line and the propeller - is used
to overcome the resistances to the ship's motion. If the amount of working fluid
entering the engine changes, there is also a change in the amount of power devel-
oped by it. This will cause a change in the rate of revolution of the engine and
the propeller, which leads to a change in the ship‘s speed and, consequently, the
establishment of a new state of equilibrium between the engine's power and the re-
sistance to the ship's movement.

Given a constant ship's draft, an unchanged state of the sea and the same wind
force and direction, there exists an approximately direct proportionality between
the engine's rate of revolution and the ship's speed; that is.

Ill I"
7;“,7- (100)

When the propeller is completely submerged, between the main engine's power N and

the ship's speed v or the rate of revolution n there exists, as is well known, an
approximately cubic relationship

”;=("—')' .471). (101)

For calculations that do not require high accuracy, fuel consumption can be asstnned
to be proportional to the main engine's power, so between hourly fuel consumption 3
in a power plant and the ship's speed or the engine's revolution rate we can also
assume a cubic relationship

8 1" n '3’
3%:(:_.) =47} . (102)

It should be mentioned here that for some types of ship, at reduced speeds the ex-
ponent in formulas (101) and (102) is approximately 2.5.

It is obvious that the total fuel consumption for a passage of 1' hours will be 6 I
= M kilograms. If a ship makes a passage of the same length at different speeds
and, consequent 1y. a different duration, the corresponding total fuel consumptions
will be 61 ‘ 811:1 and 62 - Bzfz. However, the duration of the passages will be in-
versely proportional to the speed:

so fuel consumption on a passage with different speeds. allowing for formula (102).
will be

0 51‘ _"i ”2 01:. i2
??aﬁ-q 7;. or za- (m). (103)
93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consequently, the fuel consumption rates for the entire passage at different speeds
are proportional to the squares of these speeds. Formulas (100), (101) and (102)
enable us to make the calculations that are constantly encountered in the practice
of operating ships in the maritime fleet.

Under conditions of daily operation, a ship is operated with different loads and,
consequently, with different drafts; that is, the resistance to its motion is dif-
ferent. For a constant speed, this requires a change in the main engine's power.
The resistance to motion also depends on the hydrometeorological conditions and
other factors (towing of non-self-propelled objects, sailing in shallow water or

ice, and so on). All of these circumstances affect the propeller characteristic,
which was discussed earlier.

The travel characteristic gives a quite clear picture of the interaction of the
main engine, the screw propeller and the ship's hull under various sailing condi-
tions. It represents the relationship among the main engine's power. the shaft's
rate of revolution and the ship's speed in steady-state modes. The travel charac-

teristic is constructed on the basis of calculations using the results of testing
of ships in a given series.

 

    

The travel characteristic shown in Figure

N H .-
i‘l‘” -- ‘4. l8lo shows the dependence of the main en-
all-l gine's power on the ship's speed when

 
   

 

5""

mﬂ:EI§¥ AI

gll!ﬁ!ll

"ease:
-4‘

7w
Jottrusqeu 0,4,1.

 
   
     

fully loaded for different constant rates
of screw propeller revolution. for each
given rate of revolution, this relation-
ship can be assumed to be linear. On the
characteristic it is possible to plot max-
imum power boundary curves and the screw
characteristics for different sailing con-
ditions. For instance, on the character-
istic shown in Figure 18h, the limitations

Figure l8b. Travel characteristic. on the magnitude of the torsional moment

on the main engine's shaft at rated (line
1) and maximum (line 2) overload power are shown, along with the limitation on max-
imum power (line 3).

The use of the travel characteristic makes it possible to establish the power
plant's mode for different ship operation conditions. A power plant's specific fu-
el consumption rate (per kilowatt-hour) depends on the power developed by the main
engine, and for some consumption rate optimum values are achieved. A ship operat-
ing mode corresponding to the lowest specific fuel consumption rate is usually the
best one for $80 operation. however, this mode normally corresponds to less than
full main engine power. The operation of a power plant in the lowest specific fuel
consumption mode leads to a reduction in a ship's speed, which is irrational from
the viewpoint of operating it, since it entails a reduction in the turnover rate
and, consequently, the cargo capacity and the speed with which carges are delivered.

In the final account, the basic fuel utilization indicator is fuel consumption per
unit of transported goods (the ton-mile), which is always lower when there is an
increased amount of cargo transported in a shorter period of time.

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the question of the choice of the rational SEO mode is always solved as a
function of the set of all ship operating conditions.

The amount of fuel expended depends on the work done not only by the engineering
staff, but also that done by the deck crew. First of all, the fuel consumption for
a voyage and, in the final account, for navigation is reduced when the time spent
at anchor is reduced. Consequently, the correct organization of cargo operations,
resulting in their acceleration, insures a reduction in fuel consumption per unit
of transported goods.

The nature of a ship's cargo and its correct fore-and-aft triamdng affects a power
plant's operating mode; the quality of the helmsman's work also has a noticeable
affect on fuel utilization. A ship's actual path is always a broken line, since
some yawing is inevitable; the distance traveled, however. is figured on a straight
line. Therefore, the more accurately the helmsman holds the ship on course. the
less the ship's actual path will deviate from the straight line and the lower the
fuel consumption per mile. In connection with this, fuel utilization improves when
an autopilot is used. This is explained by the fact that automatic operation of
the rudder insures less yawing on the part of the ship.

Finally, the correct choice of the ship's path affects fuel utilization. It is a
well known fact that the shortest ship's path is not always the most advantageous
one. The use of following currents, steering away from regions with stormy weather
and so on are of importance in reducing fuel consumption.

In connection with the increase in the speed of modern seagoing ships, at the pres-
ent time there has been a significant increase in 580 power and fuel consumption.
At the same time, there has been an increase in world prices for fuel. The share
of the fuel component in the cost of marine transportation is 25-30 percent, and
for certain types of ships it reaches 60 percent. Thus, fuel utilization is an im-
portant factor in the cost of shipments, and reducing fuel consumption is the goal
of a seagoing ship's entire crew.

In addition to reducing expenditures for fuel and lubricating materials, transpor-
tation costs are also affected by the amount of time consumed in repairing a ship's
power equipment. This tine is reduced when there is careful maintenance of the
mechanisms and improvements in their reliability. On the whole, good organization
of the crew's work and conscientious fulfillment of his obligations by each member
of the crew can insure the achievement of the highest ship operation indicators.

86. Principles of Normalization of Fuel Consumption in 530's

The correct establishment of 550 fuel consumption norns is of great importance in
organizing SEU maintenance, using the engines' theoretical power, and achieving the
best fuel utilization indicators. Fuel consumption depends to a large degree on
the power actually developed by the power plant, as well as the ship's speed.

Several standards have been established for normalizing fuel consumption in the

transport fleet:
specific fuel consumption per unit of indicated power, in kilograms per indicated

horsepower-hour:
fuel consumption per ship-hour, in kilograms per hour; fuel consumption is given in

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

weights of a conventional fuel; that is, a fuel having a combustion heat lower than
7,000 kcsl/kg; any fuel is converted into an amount of conventional fuel according
to its actual combustion heat;

actual power - main engine power, developed at full, half and low speed, figured
as the weighted average for a period of a month;

cruising power - the rated power at which an engine can be operated without any
time limitations;

the given main engine power recommnnded by the producer plant (or established by
the steamship line) for purposes of increasing the engine's service life and
achieving the lowest specific fuel consumption rate for protracted operation for a
given ship. The main engines' power is figured in kilowatts;

average speed, defined as the quotient of the division of the logged distance cov-
ered on a voyage, in miles, by the ship's travel time, excluding maneuver time and
time spent traveling at low speed (half, low and extreme low).

When calculating the actual speed from the distance covered and the ship's travel
time, the following periods are excluded: sailing in ice, fog and under storm con-
ditions; passage through narrows, canals and uncharted channels; other cases of
travel at reduced speed, as provided for in the rules of navigation.

For calculating and analyzing fuel utilization, the steamship line's heat engineer-
ing department gives each ship the following norms:

power, in kilowatts -- given (average) N“, when carrying cargo NC, when in ballast
Nb;

speed, in miles per hour -- given (average) v3, when carrying cargo vc, when in
ballast Vb?

Conventional fuel consumption rate -- at full speed (specific) bf (in kilograms per
indicated horsepower-hour), at medium speed BIn (in kilograms per fhour), at slow
speed 8, (in kilograms per hour), when maneuvering 3m (in kilograms per hour), at
anchor with cargo operations 8' (in kilograms per hour), at anchor without cargo
operations Bnc (in kilograms per hour), at anchor and ready to sail B' (in kilo-
grams per hour).

Calculation and analysis of the fulfillment of the assigned fuel consumption norms
are done on the basis of entries in the engineer's log and the engineer reports.
The latter contains all the materials that explain special sailing conditions
(sailing in ice, in stormy weather and so on).

The actual weighted-average power is determined from the results of indexing the
engine when carrying cargo and when in ballast. When indexing is impossible (for
turbine-powered ships, steamships with high-speed engines), power is determined ac-
cording to the screw characteristic or theoretically.

In order to determine the actual power when a ship is carrying cargo. we should
know the average rate of revolution when loaded (nc), on the basis of data in the
engineer's log, and the revolution rate when the indicator diagrams under load

(“ci) are read. The actual power when carrying cargo will be

C
NC .. "emf—R3, (101.)
C

where Nci - the power obtained by indexing.
96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When a ship is sailing in ballast, if engine indexing yields power "bi at a rate of
revolution "bi' the actual power in ballast for an average revolution rate of nb
will be

N. sNu (ii-Y- (10:)

ab; .

If, during a reporting period, the amount of time a ship carried cargo was tc hours

and the time spend in ballast was tb hours. the engine's actual average-weighted
power will be

«IV: ‘C+N§“ . (106)

If the specific fuel consumption rate norm for full speed is bf (in kilograms per
indicatoed horsepower-hour), the fuel consumption norm for full speed, given the
actual power, will be (in kilograms per hour)

Ash-ups". (107)

Taking into consideration the travel time and the time spent at anchor with and
without cargo operations, it is easy to calculate the fuel consumption according to
the norms and compare it with the actual consumption. As a result. the amount of
fuel savings or overconsumption will be determined.

Examples

Example 1. A ship with a steam-turbine power plant develops a speed of 20 mi/h
(knots) with a GTZA power of 22,200 k" and a screw propeller revolution rate of 90
r/min. and consumes 5.75 t/h of fuel oil. Let us determine the travel time and fu-
el oil consumption for a voyage of 3,000 mi, as well as the travel time, GTZA pow-
er, screw propeller rate of revolution and fuel oil consumption for the same voyage
at a.speed of 15 mi/h.

Travel time for a voyage of 3,000 mi at a speed of 20 mi/h:

2%?..150 h.

Fuel oil consumption:
arsaso..an In

Travel time for the same voyage at a speed of IS mi/h:

”103-200...

Required rate of screw propeller revolution:

ng-ﬂsﬂﬁm

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GTZA power:

,22mo(3)'-m kw.

hourly fuel oil consumption:

9
5.752% - 2,‘3 to

Fuel consumption for the entire voyage:
2.0.200 “a? t.’

Example 2. A steamship with a 6,660-kw main engine consumes 1.65 t/h of motor fuel
at full engine power and develops a speed of 16 mi/h. For an upcoming voyage of
8,000 mi the steamship has a fuel reserve of 730 t (not counting the usual marine
reserve of 10-15 percent). However, the first 3,000 mi are sailed under stormy
weather conditions that led to the additional consumption of 100 t of fuel. At
what speed and what main engine power must the steamship cover the remaining 5,000
mi in order for the remaining fuel to be sufficient for the voyage?

Since the steamship use: 1.55 t/h at a speed of 16 mi/h. for the voyage of 3,000 mi
it took 3,000/16 I 187.5 h and. under normal conditions 1.450187.S I 272 t of fuel
would have been consumed. Because of the storm the actual fuel consumption was

272 + 100 I 372 t. There remains 358 t of fuel

In order to cover the remaining 5,000 mi at the previous speed, it would take
5,000/16 - 312 h and 1.A5-312 I 453 t of fuel.

According to formula (103), fuel consumption on a voyage is proportional to the
squares of the speeds:

9‘ vi

72,-:

In this case, at a speed of 16 mi/h the fuel consumed for a voyage of 5,000 mi is
a53 t. It is necessary to find the speed at which the fuel consumed will be 358 t:

358 0‘
333135“

from which the unknown speed is

0-1/Wus Vat-14.25 mi/h.

The duration of the voyage will be

amo
.17.!5’3‘“ h.

According to formula (102), hourly fuel consumption at a speed of 14.25 mi/h is

:l4.25.3
B-l'“l\—'._6-i -l_02 t/h.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

In this node, the main engine's power can be coon-ed to be proportionnl to the fuel
consumption: I

N-m%—m kw.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Transport", 1980.

11766
CSO: 81hh/I883

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI<0FFKJAI.US£(NQLY

NAVIGATION AND GUIDANCE SYSTEMS

UDC 531.383(075)
GYROSTABILIZERS FOR INERIIAL GUIDANCE SYSTEMS

Leningrad GIROSTABILIZATORY INERTSIAL'NYKH SISTER UPRAVLENIYA in Russian 1979
(signed to press 19 Feb 79) pp 2-4, 149-150

[Annotation. preface and table of contents from book "Gyrostabilizers for Inertial

Guidance Systems". by Leonid Anatol'yevich Severov. Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo
universiteta, 924 copies, 152 pages]

[Text] The book considers gyroscopic stabilizers of uncorrected inertial guidance
systems for unmanned flight vehicles. Principal attention is given to problems

of analyzing and synthesizing the platform stabilization loop. A kinematic and
dynamic description is given of gyrostabilizers with various designs of Garden
suspensions of the platform. different arrangements of gyroscopes and stabilizing
motors. The problem of analytical construction of practically realizable optimum
regulators for gyrostabilizers is formulated and solved. The possibility of realiz-
ing large gains in the stabilization loop is analyzed both from the standpoint

of structural conditions of stability of a linear multidimensional system. and

from the condition of absolute stability of a system with typical nonlinear elements.

The book is intended for specialists dealing with the design of gyrostabilizera.
and may also be of use to undergraduate and graduate students in the appropriate
fields.

Reviewers: Honored Worker in Science and Technology of the RSFSR. Doctor of Physi-
cal and Mathematical Sciences. Professor N. V. Butenin (Military Engineering Insti-
tute imeni A. F. Hozhayskiy). Doctor of Technical Sciences. Professor Ye.ln Smirnov
(Leningrad Higher Engineering Naval Academy imeni Admiral s. O. Hakarov).

Figures 35. references 80.

Preface

Modern self-contained inertial guidance systems of flightcraft are constructed

with gyroscopic stabilization of the inertial sensing elements, most frequently
implemented by a triaxial gyroscopic stabilizer [Ref. 1-5].

As a rule. inertial guidance systems use inertial orientation of the trisxial gyro-
scopic stabilizer. The short working time of the system enables construction of

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

inertial guidance systems of open type (Ref. 6]. In more exact solution of the
control problem. consideration is taken of variation in components of the acceler-
ation due to gravity during flight (Ref. 1]. what has been said implies that the
error of inertial guidance systems will include errors introduced by the triaxial
gyroscopic stabilizer. Therefore in designing the triaxial gyroscopic stabilizer
particular attention is given to the solution of two major problems: 1) precision
initial deployment of the platform with inertial sensing elements; 2) assurance

of exact inertial orientation of the platform during flight.

It should be noted that triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers of the given type operate
during flight under conditions of intense vibrations and g-forces. This appre—
ciably complicates solution of the second major problem and requires construction
of a platform stabilization loop with large amplification factors. and adoption
of special measures to reduce instrumental drifts of the platform [Ref. 5].

This monograph deals mainly with problems of analyzing and designing the platform
stabilization system. A mathematical model of a multidimensional stabilization
system is developed that accounts for elastic deformations of elements. typical
nonlinearities. and a variety of configurations of gyroscopes and stabilizing motors.
An analysis is made of the makeup of perturbing factors. and the problem of ana-
lytical construction of practically realizable optimum regulators for the triaxial
gyroscopic stabilizers of inertial guidance systems is formulated and solved. The
possibility of realizing large coefficients of amplification in the stabilization
system is analyzed both from the standpoint of structural conditions of stability
of the triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers designed around two-degree gyroscopes and
from conditions of absolute stability of a nonlinear multidimensional system that
contains typical nonlinearities of the components.

It is the author's hope that this book will be of use in the solution of problems
of designing triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers of inertial guidance systems.

Contents page
Preface 3
Chapter 1: Statics and Kinematics of Cardan Suspensions of Triaxial Gyro-
stabilizers 5

1.1. Kinematic equations of motion of Cardan suspensions of triaxial gyro-

scopic stabilizers 5
1.2. Generalized moments for Cardan suspensions of triaxial gyrostabilizers 12
1.3. Coordinate trnasformation in triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers 16
1.0. Control of Cardan suspension in triaxial gyroscopic stabilizer with

additional degrees of freedom 18
Chapter 2: Equations of Motion, Transfer Matrices and Block Diagrams of

Triaxial Gyrostabilizers Based on Two-Degree Gyroscopes 29

2.1. Dynamics of Garden suspensions of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers 30
2.2. Equations of motion of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizer with conventional

orientation of gyroscopes 37
2.3. Equations of motion of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizer in the presence of

elastic deformations of its components 45
2.4. Block diagrams and transfer matrices of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizer

as a multidimensional linear control object 69

101

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
2.5.

3.1.

EOR‘OFF1C1AI.USE!0NLN

Equations of motion of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers with special

orientation of gyroscopes 58
Chapter 3: Analytical Construction of Optimum Regulators for Triaxial
Gyrostabilizers of Inertial Guidance Systems 65
Evaluation of perturbing moments of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers of
inertial guidance systems 66

3.2.

3.3.
3.4.

Particulars of formulation of the problem of analytical design of optimum
regulators of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers of inertial guidance sys-

tems 78
Analytical design of optimum regulators of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers
in the case of deterministic perturbations 86

Regularization of problem of analytical design of optimum regulators of
triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers in the case of deterministic pertur—

bations 96
3.5. Analytical design of optimum regulators of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers

in the case of deterministic and steady—state random perturbations 108
3.6. Minimizing dynamic drifts of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizers in the design

of optimum regulators 115
Chapter 4. Investigation of Conditions of Stability of Triaxial Gyroscopic

Stabilizers of Inertial Guidance Systems 122

4.1. Structural particulars of stability conditions of triaxial gyroscopic

stabilizers designed around two-degree gyroscopes 123
4.2. Structural representation of triaxial gyroscopic stabilizer in the

presence of typical nonlinearities of its elements 129
4.3. Methods of studying conditions of absolute stability of a triaxial

gyrostabilizer in the presence of typical nonlinearities 135
References 143

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Leningradskogo universiteta. 1979

6610
080:

I

8144/044

102

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFMJA1.USE‘ONLX

UDC 53l.3:62-50;519.9
MOTION STABILITV. ANALYTICAL MECHANICS. MOTION CONTROL

Moscow USTOYCHIVOST' DVIZHENIYA. ANALITICHESKAYA HERBANIKA. UPRAVLENIYE DVIZHBNIYEH
in Russian l98| (signed to press 6 Mar 81) pp 2. 302-306

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from book "Motion Stability, Analytical He-
chanics. Motion Control". edited by Associate Member of USSR Academy of Sciences
V. H. Hatrosov and Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences V. C. Demin, Si-

berian Power Engineering Institute, Siberian Department. USSR Academy of Sciences.
Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1200 copies. 304 pages]

[Text] The collection is devoted to the theory of motion stability and its appli-
cations, as well as analytical mechanics and motion control.

It includes materials of plenary and sectional reports of the most eminent Soviet
specialists in these fields delivered at the Third All-Union Chetayev Conference
on Motion Stability. Analytical Mechanics and Motion Control in Irkutsk.

The collection is intended for scientific workers in the field of mechanics, mathe-
matics and control theory. engineers. graduate students and upperclassmen.

unc 519.011
DEVELOPSENT 0F OPTICAL-MECHANICAL ANALOGY IN HORKS BY N. G. CHETAYBV

[Abstract of article by Rumyantsev, V. V.]

[Text] A historical survey of development of optical-mechanical analogy is given,
and research by N. G. Chetayev on this problem is presented. References 7.

UDC 519.9

OPTIMUM CONTROL OF GROUPS OF TRAJECTORIES
[Abstract of article by Anan'ina. T. F.. Kurzhanskiy. A. B. and Nikonov. 0. N.]
[Text] It is assumed that the initial data and some of the controls of the system

are undefined; optimization is carried out with respect to a functional that is

assigned on the group of trajectories. Conditions of optimality are given for
some problems. References 24.

103

FOR 0FFNJAI.1EHE(HNLY
IWJR OFFICJAI.USEGDNLY

UDC 519.5
BIPEDAL WALKING: MODEL PROBLEMS OF DYNAMICS AND CONTROL
[Abstract of article by Beletskiy, V. V.]
[Text] The paper reviews some late research on this problem. An examination is
made of questions of motion optimization and stabilization. in particular for under-
water walking and three—dimensional maneuvering. Table 1. figures 5, references 16.

UDC 531.3
EXTREHUH PROPERTIES OF RESONANT MOTIONS
[Abstract of article by Beletskiy. v. V.]
[Text] The author formulates a hypothesis of maximality of an averaged force func-
tion on stable periodic motions. He discusses the relation between this principle
and the extremum criteria of Blekhman and Poincare. as well as the Ovenden princi-
ple. Tables 2. figures 5. references 19.

UDC 531.3
STABILITY OF ORBITAL SYSTEMS
[Abstract of article by Blekhman. I. 1.]
[Text] The author formulates an integral criterion of stability of synchronous
(resonant) motions. Application of this criterion to a system of generalized vi-
bration exciters and problems of celestial mechanics is considered. Figures 5,
references [8.

UDC 531.39h

METHODS OF GROUP THEORY FOR CONTINUOUS TRANSFORMATIONS IN MECHANICS OF SYSTEMS
WITH FINITE NUMBER OF DEGREES OF FREEDOM

[Abstract of article by Bogoyavlenskiy. A. A.. Yemel'ysnova. l. 8., Harkhaahov.
L. H., Pavlovskiy. Yu. N. and Yakovenko. G. N.]

[Text] Survey on application of group theory methods for continuous transforma-
tions to problems of general mechanics and motion control theory. References 263.

UDC 531.3
NORMAL FORM AND THE METHOD OF AVERAGING
[Abstract of article by Bryuno, A. 0.]
[Text] The author discusses the relation between classical methods of averaging

and the reduction of an analytical system to normal form in the vicinity of a sta-
tionary point and an invariant manifold. References 17.

10h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAI.USE20NLN

UDC 531.011
CONDITIONS OF ABSOLUTE HINIHALITY IN THE PRINCIPLE OF LEAST ACTION
[Abstract of article by Velichenko, V. V.]
[Textl The set of examined detours is narrowed in accordance with the proposed
concept of the region of attainability. The direct route confers an absolute mini-
mum on the action. Figures 2. references 10.

UDC 531.38
DYNAMICS OF CYROSCOPE SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by Yegarmin. N. Ye., Zhbanov. Yu. K.. Klimov. D. H. and Steps-
nenko. N. P.]

[Text] A frame of gyrocompass type is used to stabilize a massive solid. free
motion of the system is considered, as well as notion in a circular orbit in a
newtonian force field. The process of transition to the stable steady state is
considered. igures 3. references 5.

UDC 531.38
SIMPLEST MOTIONS 0F MECHANICAL SYSTEMS AND THEIR STABILITY
[Abstract of article by Irtegov, V. D.]

[Text] A method is pointed out for isolating integral manifolds of differential
equations and their Lyapunov stability is studied. References Il.

UDC 531.38
STEADY-STATE MOTIONS OF A HEAVY SOLID HITH DYNAMIC SYMMETRY SUSPENDED ON A STRING

[Abs.ract of article by Ishlinskiy. A. Yu.. Malashenko. S. V.. Storozhenko. V. A.
Temchenko. .. Ye. and Shishkin, P. 6.]

[Text] Motion of a solid in a string drive is considered for substantiating a
method of rotor balancing. There are four families of steady-state motions. Their
bifurcations are studied. Research on experimental verification of the balancing
idea is described. Figures 6, references 16.

UDC 519.9
PROBLEMS OF CONTROLLING SYSTEMS HIT“ ELASTIC LAG

[Abstract of article by Kirillova. F. 1.. Gabasov, R., Zabello, L. Ye. and Marchen-
ko. V. H.I

[Text] Problems of relative. pointuise, complete and nodal controllability, spectral
finiteness and point degeneracy are studied for linear systems with delay. Refer-
ences 37.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢MHH€JAI.USE(MVLY

UDC 531.3

MISSING RESTRICTED SOLUTION PRINCIPLE IN ABSOLUTE STABILITY PROBLEM

[Abstract of article by Krasnosel'skiy. M. A. and Pokrovskiy, A. V.]

[Text] Theorems are presented on absolute stability relative to differential sys-
tems based on the principle of absence of restricted solutions as td-O. Abolute
stability of multiply connected automatic control systems is considered as an appli-
cation. Figures 2. references I].

UDC 519.9
SINGULAR PERTURBATIONS IN OPTIMUM CONTROL PROBLEMS
[Abstract of article by Kreyn. S. G. and Kurina, c. A.)
[Text] The Mayer problem and the classical minimization problem are studied for

a perturbed system of the type (A+cB))'t(t) -Cx(t)+Du(t). where A. B. C, D are
constant matrices. A being degenerate. and c is a small parameter. References 13.

UDC 531.3

RESONANT PROBLEMS IN MOTION STABILITY THEORY
[Abstract of article by Kunitsyn. A. L. and Markeyev. A. P.]

[Text] A survey of results and methods of studying stability of resonant systems.
both hamiltonian and nonhamiltonian. References 44.

UDC 521.1

TRAJECTORIES OF THE PLANAR RESTRICTED THREE-BODY PROBLEM THAT ARE BIASYMPTOTIC
TO COLLINEAR LIBRATION POINTS

[Abstract of article by Didov. M. L. and Vashkov'yak, M. A.]
[Text] Numerical methods are used to construct some of the mentioned trajectories
for the circular problem. Two of them are used as generating solutions for con-

structing families of the corresponding trajectories of the elliptical problem.
Table 1. figures 6. references 6.

UDC 62-50:517.9l7
COMPARISON PRINCIPLE IN DYNAMICS OF DISTRIBUTED-PARAMETER SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by Matrosov. V. M. and Vasil'yev. S. N.)

[Text] The authors use comparison vector functions that satisfy Chaplygin differ-
ential inequalities. and also differential comparison systems. A standardized

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

representation is proposed for definitions of dynamic properties of systems and
the comparison principle in dynamics of controllable systems by using quantor
formulas of mathematical logic. Algorithm of formulations and proofs are defined
and computerized for comparison theorems from the given formulas. Figures 2, ref-
erences l3.

UDC 517.931.
INVERSE PROBLEMS OF DYNAMICS
[Abstract of article by Hukharlyamov, R. 6.]
[Text] Methods are presented for solving these problems: direct construction

of differential motion equations with predetermined program properties. and methods

based on using principles of possible displacements and least constraint. Refer-
ences No.

UDC 519.5
DEVELOPMENT OF AN INTEGRATED UALKING ROBOT

[Abstract of article by Okhotsimskiy. D. Ye.. Platonov. A. IL, Gurfinkel', V. s.
and Devyanin. Ye. A.]

[Text] Basic principles are outlined for organizing operation of an integrated
robot. An examination is made of problems of synthesizing motion of a walking
machine. Stages of mathematical modeling of the motion and development of labora-
tory models are described. Figures 16. references 30.

unc 62-50:Sl9.9
SOME PROBLEMS OF STABILITY AND STABILIZATION IN DIFFERENTIAL GAMES
[Abstract of article by Reshetov. V. V.. Subbotin, A. 1. and Ushakov, V. 11.]
[Text] An examination is made of the use of guided control in various problems.
An improved procedure is described that is suitable for a process taken on an infi-
nite half-interval of time. References 12.

UDC 531.38

STABILITY OF STEADY-STATB RUTATIONS OF A FREE SOLID WITH ELASTIC CYLINDRICAL SHELL
CONTAINING A LIQUID AS THE SYSTEM IDVBS BY INERTIA

[Abstract of article by Rubanovskiy. V. N.]

[Text] Sufficient stability conditions are derived in explicit form for uniform
rotations of a free cylindrical shell with a sloshing liquid. References 5.

107

POROFHCIALUSEONLY
POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY

UDC 531.38
SIGNIFICANCE OF GEOMETRIC METHODS IN PROBLDiS 0F SOLID-STATE DYNAMICS

[Abstract of article by Kharlanov, P. V.]

[Text] An examination is made of problems involving geometric representation of
motion. The hodograph method is presented. Bxanples refer to the Poinsot interpre-
tation and the Lagrange solution. Figures 9, references 26.

UDC 519.9

OPTIMUM MION CONTROL PROBLEM FOR THE CASE WERE CONTROL IS A FUNCTION OF A PRE-
DETERMINED OUTCOME OF THE SYSTB!

[Abstract of article by Yakubovich. V. A.)

[Text] A_necessary optimality condition analogous to Pontryagin's "maximal princi-
ple" is proved. Figure 1. references 7.

UDC 531.38
ROTATION-STABILIZED SATELLITBS
[Abstract of article by Sarychev, V. A., Sazonov, V. V. and Hirer, s. A.]
[Text] A damping device in the Eon: of a two-degree gyroscope is considered for
ensuring constant orientation of the axis of the maximal Ionent of inertia in an
inertial frame of reference. Damping is by forces of viscous friction as the gyro-
scope noves relative to the body of the satellite. Figures 2. references 9.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka". 1981

6610
C80: 1861/25

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAL.UBE1DNLY

FLUID MECHANICS

UDC 533.6.013.52
ELASTIC SHELL PENETRATION INTO COMPRESSIBLB LIQUID

Kiev PRONIKANIYE UPRUCIKH OBOLOCHEK V SZBIHAYEHUYU ZBIDKOST' in Russian 1981 (signed
to press 12 Dec 80) pp 2, 160

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Elastic Shell Penetration Into Com-
pressible Liquid". by V. D. Kubenko, Institute of Mechanics. Ukssa Academy of Sci-
ences. Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks", 161 pages]

[Text] The monograph investigates hydrodynamic loads and the stress-strain state
that arises in solids and elastic shells upon striking a liquid surface. Higher
penetration velocities can be considered by accounting for compressibility of the
liquid. The analysis covers the early stage of penetration during which hydrody-
namic loads on the penetrating body reach a maximal. Approaches are given for
determining hydrodynamic pressure upon penetration of bodies of fairly general
configuration. The stressed and strained state of penetrating elastic shells is
determined. Some specific results are given.

For scientists. engineers and technicians working in design of structural compo-
nents for impact action.

Figures 62, references 39.

Contents page
Preface 3
Chapter 1: Principal Relations of the Dynamic Contact Problem of Hydro-
elasticity 7
1. Equations of motion of ideal compressible liquid 7
2. Equations of motion of beams. plates and shells 10
3. Formulation of boundary value problem of impact of a solid
against a liquid 19
A. Principal formulas of integral transforms 22
Chapter 2: Plane Problem of Penetration of Rigid Solids 23
1. Plate of finite width 23
2. Wedge-shaped solid 27
3. Cylindrical solid of gently curved profile 35
4. Approximate solution of the problem for a cylindrical body 63
Chapter 3. Unsteady Loads on Surface of Axisymmetric Rigid Solids During
Penetration _ 57
1. Disk 59
2. Conical body 66
109

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE‘0NLY
FOR‘0F11C1A1.USEGDNLN

3. Solid of revolution bounded by a second-order surface

6. Blunt solid of revolution

5. Approximate solution of problem for spherical body
Chapter 4: Planar Problem of Elastic Shell Penetration

1. Solution by simplified scheme

2. Approximate solution for cylindrical shell

3. Rotating cylindrical shell

4. Shell as inertial body
Chapter 5. Axisymmetric Problem of Elastic Shell Penetration

1. Solution by simplified scheme

2. Approxilate solution for spherical shell

3. Impact of sandwich plate against compressible liquid surface
References

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks". 1981

6610
C50: 1861/22

110

FOR 0FT1CJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MECHANICS 0P SOLIDS

UDC 539.377
GENERALIZED FUNCTIONS IN WWICITY (COLLECTION OF SCIENTIFIC PAPERS)

Kiev OBOBSHCHENNYYE FUNKTSII V TBRMOUPRUGOSTI (SBORNIK NAUCHNYKH TRUDOV) in Russian
1980 (signed to press 9 Dec 80) pp 2. 209-2l6

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from book "Generalized Functions in Thermo-
elasticity (Collection of Scientific Papers)". Institute of Applied Problems of

Mechanics and Mathematics. UkSSR Academy of Sciences. Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dunks".
950 copies. 216 pages]

[Text] The collection deals with questionsof using generalized functions in prob-
lems of thermal conductivity, thermoelasticity and magnetothermoelasticity of piece-
wise homogeneous solids. rods. plates and shells with stepwise changes in cross
section and thickness, solids with cracks. welded structural components and other
problems that arise in electronics. instrument making and other fields of industry.

The collection is intended for scientists, engineers and technicians. graduate

students and upperclassmen in colleges and universities who are interested in prob-
lens of the thermophysics and thermomechanics of deformable solids.

UDC 539.377

“MELASTICITY 0F INNOHOGENEOUS AND PIECENISB—MDGENDOUS PLATES THAT HAVE CYLIN-
DRICAL ANISOTROPY

[Abstract of article by Kolyano. Yu. H. and Protsyuk. B. V.]
[Text] Equations of the dynamic problem of thermoelasticity are derived for inhomo-
geneous and piecewise-homogeneous plates that have cylindrical anisotropy, based

on a linear law of temperature distribution with respect to the thickness of the
plate and the Kirchhoff-Love hypothesis. References 5.

"DC 539.377

EQUATIONS 0F THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY AND mmnasncm 0F LNHMOGENBOUS AND PIECE-
HISB-HOHOGENEOUS PLATES NIT}! RECTILINEAR ANISOT'ROPY

[Abstract of article by Kolyano. Yu. H. and Kushnir. R. H.]

[Text] Equations of thermal conductivity and the dynamic problem of thermoelasticity
are derived for inhomogeneous plates that have rectilinear anisotropy. and these

111

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(ﬂNLY
FORIDFFNJAI.USE(NNLY

expressions are then used as a basis for getting the corresponding equations of
laminar plates. The corresponding equations for composite plates are also found

on the basis of the equations of homogeneous plates and conditions of ideal thermo-
mechanical contact. As an example. the problem of heat conduction is considered
for joined infinite heterogeneous orthotropic plates heated by a linear source

of heat. References 12.

UDC 539.377

TEMPERATURE FIELDS THAI ARISE DURING FRICTION NARDENING OP FLAT PIECES

[Abstract of article by Babey. Yu. 1.. Didyk. V. 2.. Rorduba. B. H. and Haksimishin,
M. D.]

[Text] The quasi-steady temperature field is determined in a semi-infinite plate
with heat flux moving at constant velocity in a narrow zone along the edge. Tem-
perature fields are studied in steel and cast iron plates. Figures 3. references a.

UDC 536.12

SOLUTION OF THE ONE-DIMENSIONAL HEAT CONDUCTION PROBLEM WITH PREDETERMINED MEAN
INTEGRAL TEMPERATURE WITH RESPECT TO COORDINATE

[Abstract of article by Vigak. V. H. and Kostenko, A. V.]

[Text] The solution of the problem of thermal conductivity for a plate at a pre-
determined mean integral temperature is considered as applied to problems of speed-
optimum control of heating of a body. It is shown that when the appropriate condi-
tion of matching between initial and boundary conditions is applied. there is a
classical solution. and in the absence of this condition. the solution at time

zero is a Dirac delta function.

UDC 539.377

THO-DIMENSIONAL TEMPERATURE STRESSES IN PIECENISE-ROMOGENEOUS LAYER RESULTING FROM
ONE-DIMENSIONAL TEMPERATURE FIELD

[Abstract of article by Popovich. V. 8.. Malkiyel'. B. S. and Lisak. R. 8.]

[Text] Methods of Fourier-Laplace integral transforms and the apparatus of general-
ized functions are used to solve the quasistatic problem of thermoelasticity for

a layer with coordinate-dependent temperature coefficient of linear expansion in

the case of unilateral heating by a medium with time-variable temperature. The
resultant solution is used to study the temperature stresses inthe glass-pyroceram
cement joint of a color kinescope as a function of the thickness of the pyroceram
cement. Figures 5. references 3.

UDC 539.377
DETERMINING OPTIMUM HEATING ZONES IN LOCAL HARDENING OP THIN-HALLED COMPONENTS
[Abstract of article by Plyatsko. G. V.. Haksimovich, V. N. and Chabanenko. A. A.]

[Text] An examination is made of the problem of determining optimum heating zones
such that residual stresses will be induced that have the experimental values in

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

given regions. Constraints on plastic deformations are assumed in the heating
zone. A detailed examination is made of plates with an elliptical hole and with
a crack. Results of numerical calculations are given in graphs. Figures 3.
references 9.

UDC 539.377
TEMPERATURE STRESSES IN PLATE WITH DISSIHILAR HEAT-RELEASING ELEMENT
[Abstract of article by Kulik. A. N. and Prikhodskaya. Ye. 1.]

[Text] Assuming that the coefficient of heat transfer from the upper and lower
circular surfaces of a straight-through cylindrical heat-releasing inclusion is
constant. but different from the constant coefficients of heat transfer from the
remainder of the upper and lower surfaces of an infinite plate, the authors determine
and study the steady stressed state of the plate as a function of heat transfer.
coefficients of heat conduction. temperature coefficients of linear expansion and
elastic moduli. Figure 1. references 2.

UDC 539.4

DETERMINING OPTIMUM PARAMETERS 0F LONGITUDINAL CROSS SECTIONS IN CLOSED CYLINDRICAL
DAMPER SHELLS

[Abstract of article by Osadchuk. V. A.]

[Text] A method is proposed for determining the optimum dimensions and number

of slits in a closed cylindrical damper shell. The relations used as a basis for
determining optimum parameters are obtained by an energy approach, using an ex-
pression for the energy flow to the vertex of a cross section as normalized to a
unit of area of the cross section. References 7.

UDC 536.12-539.376

TEMPERATURE FIELD OF A LAYER UPON THERMAL ACTION OF AN EXTERNAL MEDIUM 0“ A REC-
TANGULAR REGION OF ITS SURFACE

[Abstract of article by Crits'ko. Ye. 6.]

[Text] A method is proposed for determining the temperature field of a layer
under thermal action of an external medium on a finite region of its surface
having two mutually perpendicular axes of symmetry. The technique is based on
representing the unknown temperature field in the region of thermal action as a
sum of functions that form an orthogonal system. A method is given for estimating
accuracy of the results. References 3.

UDC 539.3

AXISYMMETRIC STRESSED STATE OF CYLINDERS THAT ARE NONUNIFORHLY HEATED AND LOADED
ON A BOUNDARY SURFACE

[Abstract of article by Haksimovich, V. “.1

[Text] The author considers the problem of determining the stressed state of elastic
cylinders under conditions of nonuniform heating and loaded on a boundary. The

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY

principal results of the work are found by applying the Varshchenko-Zakharchenko
expansion formula to the symbolic solution. The resultant formulas can be used
in calculating the stressed state of both infinite and bounded cylinders. Refer-
ences A.

UDC 518:517.9&6/947

SOLUTION OF UNSTEADY PROBLEM OF HEAT CONDUCTION FOR A SPACE WITH SLITS BY THE INTE-
GRAL EQUATION METHOD

[Abstract of article by Berezhanskaya, Z. 5.. Lyudkevich. I. V. and Shinkarenko,
C. A.l

[Text] A technique is proposed for calculating a temperature field in a space

for multiply connected regions. The solution is sought in the form of a thermal
potential of a simple layer by reducing it to an integral equation of the first

kind that is solved by the method of collocation. The method used for approxi-
mating density gave a stable solution at large time values. The approximate solution
of the formulated problem in contrast to net-point methods is found in analytical
form. A numerical example is given of calculation of a temperature field. Figures
2, references 5.

UDC 539.377

STRESSES IN SEMI-INFINITE PLATE COVERED ON TWO SIDES EXPOSED TO EQUIDISTANT HEAT
SOURCES

[Abstract of article by Kushnir. R. “.1

[Text] The paper gives the solution of a quasistatic probl : of thermoelasticity
for a thin semi-infinite plate with bilateral covering when heated by a system

of equidistant lumped heat sources. Temperature stresses are studied in a steel
semi-infinite plate with molybdenum coating on both sides. Figures 4. references 3.

UDC 539.377
STRESSFS IN A STRIP PLATE CAUSED BY LOCALIZED HEATING
[Abstract of article by Gladunskiy. V. “.1

[Text] The author determines the temperature field and resultant temperature
stresses in a thin strip plate exposed to heat sources distributed through the
volume of the parallelepiped of aueh a plate with length coincident with the width
and thickness coincident with the thickness of a strip of the plate. The coef-
ficient of heat transfer from surfaces of the volume occupied by the heat sources
is taken as constant and different from the constant coefficient of heat transfer
from the remaining parts of the lateral surfaces of the strip of the plate.

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 539.377

GENERALIZED HEAT CONDUCTION 0F PLATES RITE TIME-VARIABLE THICKNESS

[Abstract of article by Pushak, Ya. 8.]

[Text] Equations are derived for the generalized thermal conductivity of aniso-
tropic plates of time-variable thickness. The temperature field is determined
for an infinite plate heated by an external medium and having thickness that varies

stepwise in time. References 3.

000 539.377

GENERALIZED DYNAMIC PROBLEM OF MAGNETOTHERMOELASTIGITY FOR A LAYER SUEJEGTED T0
BILATERAL MAGNETIC IMPACT

[Abstract of article by Kondratyuk, N, A.]

[Text] Laplace trnasformation is used to solve the generalized dynamic problem
of thermoelasticity for a heat-insulated layer that is free of external loading

and is subjected to bilateral magnetic shock. References 5.

UDC 536.12-539.376

NARROW-ZONE HEATING OF ANISOTROPIC LAYER

[Abstract of article b Koval'chuk. V. P.]
Y

[Text] The temperature field of an anisotropic layer is determined and studied
for the case of a piecewise-constant coefficient of heat exchange from its surfaces.
Numerical calculations are done for a quartz layer. and the results are given as

graphs. Figures 2. references 3.

UDG 539.377
TEMPERATURE STRESSES IN ORTHOTROPIC SEMI-INFINITE PLATE CAUSED BY LOCAL HEATING

[Abstract of article by Litvinova, A. P.]

[Text] The author determines the temperature field and the temperature stresses
for an orthotropic semi-infinite plate due to bilateral narrow-zone heating by
an external medium along a strip perpendicular to the edge surface. A study is
done on the influence that variability of the heat-transfer coefficient has on
the distribution of unsteady temperature stresses on the edge of the plate.

Figures 4, references 3.
UDC 539.377

GENERALIZED DYNAMIC THERMOELASTICITY PROBLEM FOR RADIANTLY HEATED HALF-SPACE

[Abstract of article by Semerak. P. V. and Borisenko. 0. 1.]

[Text] Generalized dynamic temperature stresses are determined in explicit form
in a half-space heated by radiant energy flux in accordance with Bouguer law. the

flux intensity being a function of time. References 2.

115

FOR 0P11CLALI£SE¢NNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

000 539. 376
CREE? OF A SOLID WITH LOAD RELIEF
[Abstract of article by Ivasyuk. V. V.]

[Text] Within the framework of the slip concept the author finds the analytical
dependence of creep deformation under stress lower than the cold hardening stress.
The solution is found in closed form in the class of generalized functions.
References 6.

UDC 539.3:538.6

TEMPERATURE FIELDS AND STRESSES IN ELECTRICALLY CONDUCTIVE LATER WITH INDUCTION
HEATING IN AN EXTERNAL MAGNETIC FIELD

[Abstract of article by Kondrat, V. P. and Lopushanskiy. Ya. 1.]

[Text] 0n the basis of an approximate solution of the problem of magnetothermo-
elasticity for an electrically conductive layer with induction heating in an ex-
ternal constant magnetic field. the authors investigate temperature fields and
stresses in a layer as a function of the parameters of external action. Figures 2.
references 4.

UDC 539.377

TEMPERATURE FIELD AND STRESSES IN A STRIP PLATE CAUSED BY A PLANAR BEAT SOURCE
WITH ACCOMPANYING PREHEATING AND COOLING

[Abstract of article by Yaritskaya, L. 1.]
[Text] Integral Fourier-Laplace transforms are used to solve the quasistatic prob-

lem of thermoelasticity for a thin strip plate heated by a planar heat source with
accompanying preheating and cooling. References 3.

UDC 539.377
TEMPERATURE FIELD AND STRESSES THAI ARISE IN A DIE DURING PRESSING 0? CLASS ITEMS
[Abstract of article by Semerak, M. H. and Yurchenko. P. Ye.]
[Text] A solution is given for the problem of determining the temperature field
and stresses in a die caused by sudden heating of its surface. The process of
molding a glass droplet is modeled by a stepwise increase in the radius of the

circular contact area, using asymmetric unitary functions. The temperature fields
and stresses in the die are studied. Figures 6, references 2.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

UDC 539.377
QUASISTAIIC PROBLEM OF THERHOELASTICITY FOR HULTISTEP PLATE

[Abstract of article by Pushk, Ya. 8.]

[Text] An examination is made of the quasistatic axisymmetric problem of thermo-
elasticity for a multistep circular plate heated by a source of heat. The solution
of such a problem for a two-step plate is given as an example. References 2.

"DC 539.377

GENERALIZED DYNAMIC PROBLEM OF THERHOELASTICITY FOR SEMI-INFINITE PLATE WITH
INCLUSION

[Abstract of article by Borisenko. 0. 1.]

[Text] Equations are derived for heat conduction of piecewise-homogeneous bodies.
and the generalized problem of thermoeldsticity of a half-space with an inclusion
is considered as an example. An investigation is made of the influence that the
thickness of the inclusion has on the distribtuion of generalized dynamic stresses
in a plate. Figures 2. references 3.

HBO 539.377
TEMPERATURE FIELD AND STRESSES IN HEAT EXCHANGER HOUSING
[Abstract of article by Gudyma, Kh. N.]

[Text] The author considers a cylindrical shell with one of the lateral surfaces
cooled with respect to a linear law in time. while the other is subjected to cooling
by a medium moving over a helical surface. Integral Fourier and Laplace transforms
are used to determine the temperature field. and analytical expressions are found
for the stresses caused by temperature gradients. References 2.

UDC 536.2:517.534:518.5
TEMPERATURE FIELDS IN A HALF-SPACE WITH LAMINAR INCLUSION
[Abstract of article by Romanchuk. 0. K.]

[Text] The temperature field is determined and studied in a half-space with a
dissimilar inclusion in the form of a thin plate for the case of harmonic thermal
action. As a result of representing the thermophysical characteristics of the
system in the form of asymmetric unitary functions and solving the corresponding
problem. the author gets a unified analytical solution for the entire investigated
region. A study is done on the distribution of the unsteady temperature field

in the half-space as a function of time, frequency and coordinate. Figures b.
references 3.

117

FOR 0511(JAI.USE1ONLN
FOR‘OFIWCJA1.USE(MVLY

UDC 539.377

QUASISTATIC TEHPERATURE STRESSES IN STRIP PLATE CAUSED BY A HEAT SOURCE MOVING
PERPENDICULAR TO ITS ENDS

[Abstract of article by Kalyniy. Ya. N.]

[Text] The author determines the unsteady temperature field and quasistatic tem-
perature stresses in a strip plate heated by a source moving perpendicular to its
ends. As a special case. the temperature field is found in a semi-infinite plate
heated by a linear heat source moving perpendicular to the edge of the plate.
References 5.

UDC 539.377
UNSTEADY TEMPERATURE STRESSES IN HULTILAYER CIRCULAR PLATE DUE TO HEAT FLOR
[Abstract of article by Kolesov. V. 5., Protsyuk. a. V. and Vlasov, N. H.]
[Text] The authors determine unsteady temperature fields and the corresponding
temperature stresses in a multilayer circular plate caused by heating by a heat
flux that varies in accordance with Gauss law. The temperature field in a five-

layer plate is studied. References 2.

UDC 539.377

EQUATIONS OF HEAT CONDUCTION 0F PIECBWISE-EOHOGENEOUS ANISOTROPIC PLATES WITH CURVI-
LINEAR INTERFACES

[Abstract of article by Protsyuk, B. V.]
[Text] An integral heat-balance method is used to derive equations of unsteady

heat conduction of anisotropic piecewise-homogeneous plates with curvilinear inter-
faces. References 3.

UDC 539.377
THERHOELASTIC PROBLEM FOR SQUARE PLATE WITH THO CIRCULAR OPENINGS
[Abstract of article by Lozinskiy, V. N.l
[Text] An examination is made of the static problem of thermoelesticity for a
square plate that is free of external loading, heat-insulated along the lateral
surfaces, weakened by two circular holes and subjected to the action of a linear
heat source. Constant temperatures are assigned on the contours of the plate.

Problems of thermal conductivity and thermoelasticity are reduced to solution of
quasiregular systems of linear algebraic equations. References 6.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 536.12
PLATE HEATING BY A CONICAL STATIONARY HEAT SOURCE
[Abstract of article by Khuda, 0. Z. and Podkova, Ya. 1.]

[Text] The authors determine the steady-state temperature field of a thin plate
heated by a stationary source in the form of a frustum of a cone. An investigation
is made of the influence that the vertex angle of the cone. heat transfer, and

the distance of the vertex of the cone from one of the surfaces of the plate have
on the temperature field. Figures 4.

UDC 539.3

USING THE METHOD OF INTEGRAL CHARACTERISTICS IN HEAT CONDUCTION 0F ANISOTROPIC
PLATES WITH PIECEHISE-CONSTANT HEAT TRANSFER COEFFICIENTS

[Abstract of article by Pryymak, V. 1.]

[Text] The method of integral characteristics is used to determine the steady-
state temperature field in an infinite plate that has rectilinear anisotropy and

is heated by an external medium over a rectangular region. A study is done on

the temperature in the center of a plate made of EAST-V glass-textolite. Figure I.
references 3.

BBC 539.377
THERMAL STRESSES IN A SPHERICAL SHELL DUE TO A HEAT SOURCE IN THE FORM OF LINBS
[Abstract of article by Khapko. B. S. and Zabolotnyy, V. P.]

[Text] A solution of the problem of thermoelasticity is given for a thin shallow
spherical shell of circular planform under the action of a momentary heat source

in the form of a line. The shell, with contour taken as freely supported. exchanges
heat with the ambient medium in accordance with Newton's law. Sources in the form
of an arc and a line along the radius are considered as examples. References 3.

UDC 621.385.832

CALCULATING REFLECTIVITY DISTRIBUTION 0N INNER FACE OF APERIURE—HASK COLOR PICTURE
TUBE SCREEN

[Abstract of article by Malkiyel', B. s. and Rykhlinskaya. s. 1.]

[Text] A method is proposed for calculating the distribution of reflectivity of
the inner surface of the screen of a shadow-mask color kineacope that is used to
balance the temperature over the surface of the shadow mask immediately after the
television set is switched on. Such a distribution of reflectivity can eliminate
warping of the mask toward the scrren in the middle, and the related displacement
of electron-beam traces relative to the phosphor dots. Surfaces of the_middle
part of the scrren and mask are given properties of absorption, while the edges
are given properties of reflection. Figures 4. references 3.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatei'stvo "Naukova dunks". 1980

6610

C80: l86l/23 119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

UDC Sl7+519+532+533+62
DYNAMICS AND STABILITY OF MECHANICAL SYSTEMS

Kiev DINAMIKA I USTOYCRIVOST' HEKHANICHBSKIKH SISTEH (SIORNIK NAUCHNYKH TRUDOV)
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 12 Aug 80) pp 2. 192—193

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Dynamics and Stability of Mechanical
Systems (Collection of Scientific Articles)", edited by Doctor of Physical and
Mathematical Sciences I. A. Lukovskiy. Institute of Hechanics. UkSSR Academy of
Sciences. 1000 copies, 196 pages]

[Text] The collection offers articles on the dynamics of solid and deformable
bodies with inner cavity containing a sloshing liquid; on development of algorithms
for Lyapunov's second method. and also the Routh-Hurwitz matrix problem in the
theory of motion stability as applied to multidimensional systems; some articles
reflect the investigation of instrumental errors of inertial guidance systems and
their stability.

Intended for scientists. engineers and graduate students specializing in the cor-
responding fields of mechanics and control.

Contents page

Lukovskiy. I. A.. "Using variational principle of Ostrogrsdskiy type in solving
nonlinear problems of solid-state dynamics for a body with cavities contain-

ing liqui " 3
Pil‘kevich. A. H.. "Constructing approximate solutions of nonlinear liquid

wave motion equations in vessel" 16
Barnyak. H. Ya.. "Determining natural oscillation frequencies and modes for

viscous liquid in horizontal channel" 22
Lukovskiy. I. A.. Zolotenko. c. F., '1hotion theory for solid with cavities

containing liquid and oscillating mass of pendulum type" 30

Komarenko, A. N., Shvets. G. A.. "Determining hydrodynamic coefficients for
motion equations of solid with oblique cylindrical cavity containing

liquid" 50
Luneva. S. A.. "Method of calculating variable-section waveguide with consider-
ation of singularities at corner points" 64
Boriseyko. V. A.. "Plane wave diffraction by circular disk" 69
Temchenko, M. Ye.. "Operational errors of single-component inertial guidance
system due to gyroscope drift and newtonmeter errors" 74
Storozhenko, V. A.. Korneyeva. A. 8.. "Instability study of spatial inertial
guidance system" 88
120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Korenevskiy, D. G. , "Construction of stochastic Lyapunov function by pertur-
bation method. 1. Linear dynamic systems with parametric quasiateady-
state random perturbations of constant spectral density"

Korenevskiy, D. G. . "Construction of stochastic Lyapunov function by pertur-
bation method. II. Linear dynamic systems with parametric quasisteady-
state random perturbations of rational-fraction spectral density"

Hazko. A. 6., Kharitonov. V. I... "Routh-Hurvitz matrix problem for class of
algebraic regions"

Mazko, A. 6.. "Control of spectral and optimum properties of linear systems"

Pustovoytov, N. A. , "Second method of Lyapunov and control system design"

Bigun. Ya. I.. Podchuk. V. 1.. "Stability in the presence of constantly acting

perturbations in systems with delay"

Bondarchuk. V. S. , "Periodic problem of variational calculus and deformation
of hamiltonian systems"

Bondarchuk, V. 5.. "Relation between spectral and oscillation properties of
the Jacobi matrix problem"

Sotnichenko. N. A., Feshchenko. S. F.. "Integrating differential equation
systems"

Berezovskiy. A. A., Boguslavskiy. s. 6., "Change of salinity and coefficient
of vertical diffusion in the Black Sea in connection with reduced river
runoff"

Berezovskiy. A. A., Bondarchuk. V. T., "Diffusion in sandwich film"
Berezovskaya, L. H.. "Unsteady temperature field in long coaxial thermionic

elect r ic ity-generat ing 2 lement"

COPYRIGHT: Institut matenatiki AN USSR. 1980

6610
C80: 1861/28 .. 3ND -

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

100

115
1210
128
1310
137
163
156
162
167
[78

181;.