APPROVID FOR R-LIAOI: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-000508000100040001-°
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000400015

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI‘RS !./8365
2 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL Armns
(FOUO 6/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00040001-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primsrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

deadlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
(I are supplied by JPRS. Processine indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of s brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

PRWREWT 0? P031. [CAT INS

Jpns publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield. Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is reconnended that the .1985 number. title. date and
author. if applicable. of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Coverment Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service. and are listed in the lionthly Catalog of
. 0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. ".5. Government Printing Office. Washington. D.C.

20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword. author. personal names.
title and series) are available through Bell 6 Howell. Old
Mansfield Road. Rooster. duo. “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service.
1000 North clebe Road. Arlington. Virginia 22201.
l-‘ﬂR OFFICIAL USII ONLY

ans L/OE
2 April 1

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE

Ecououlc AND INDUSTRlAL AFFAIRS
(rouo 6/79)

CONTENTS

' Ll-13IIGZIDVAKIA

But-rm Immutry uerlopmnt. Trendn Reviewed
(INVE'JI‘ICNI vvs'mm, No 11, 19:18)

Ttmrml Plant. Dwelowcnt, Stung, by Karel Curln
Prague-Inning“ Design Cooperation. by Josef Rekolny

How Plant. Dcolsno, by Jamal“ mm, Jm Value}.
momma}: that, nature, by Vaclav Krlpner

-a- [III-SB-64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZBCNOSLOVAKIA

ENERGY INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT MOS REVIEWED
Thermal Plant Development. Siting
Prague INVESTZCNI WSTAVBA in Czech No 11, 1978 pp 353-357

[Article by ling Karel Curin: "Prospects for the Develop-ant and the Siting
of “mental Power Plant Stations"!

[Text] Long-range Plans for Pover Plant Development

In recent years extensive and detailed analytical studies have been drawn up
in the power indmtry to serve as the buia for the formulation of basic de-
velopeent plans covering specific tine periods. These studies have character-
ized the putter industry development plan md have specified output duend
levels from the standpoint of the short-tern. “dim-tern. and long-tern
future. According to the prevailing View. the short-tern future repre-
sents a period of about five years, i.e.. the tine frame of our five-year
plans, while the medias-tern future covers a period of about 15 years and
the long-ter- future a period of 25 years, i.e.. fron now until the year
2000 or 2005. however. it may be seemed that the length of these tine
periods are subject to re-evaluetion, since the projected tine it takes to
build large-capacity nuclear power plants varies within a range of fro. 11
to 12 years. An avouness of this fact should be reflected both in the pre-
lininnry stages of capital spending. during the phnse vhen prelininary plans
and designs are being drawn up, and also in the long-range plans of produc-
tive plants engaged in the nenufacture of technological-equipeent and con-
struction-aquipaent installation enterprises.

The drafting of long-range resources developnent plans is a wide-ranging md
responsible task. Nork on the drafting of such plans nust be based on an
usreness of the prerequisites and of the factual interrelationships which
represent the all total of the findings of the any analyses and plans dravn
up by other sinietries or brmches of industry. Specifically. these are the
primary data that describe the required increase in the output capacity of
the entire systee of electric power generation and distribution. the
prospects for the acquisition of prinary energy resources. the output

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFIClM. USE ONLY

and Installation capacities of construction enterprises, governaent-to-gow
ernaent agreements on cooperation. siting possibilities, the assimilation
of new capacities into the generation and distribution system. and, finally.
the environmental impact of capital investments. including the manner in
which the problems created by the demographic and sociological consequences
r‘ capital construction projects are to be resolved. In light of the draft
plans that have been drawn up with regard to the future development of the
Czechoslovak power industry it is apparent that there are substantiVe and
quantitative differences of opinion as to the real prospects for this de-
Velopsent. This is due to the increases in unit performance ratings and.
in particular, due to the modification of the primary energy resources in-
(restructure.

a transition is taking place. and this is in line with the worldwide trend
that is taking place in the developed industrial countries. that favors the
increased utilization of nuclear power. For this reason. the construction
of nuclear power plants is taming out to be the cornerstone of plans for
the development of our power industry. At the ease time. however. it must
be realized that no fundamental change in the structure of power generation
resources will occur before the end of the 20th century. It therefore fol-
lows that during this transitional period we must continue to build con-
vential. solid-fuel-fired thermal power plants, and we sust do so to what-
ever extent is permitted by the production capacities of solid-fuel-produc-
ing industries. As far as power plants fired by refined fuels are concerned.
it is not possible at this tine to foresee what will actually happen with
regard to prospects for the procurement of these refined fuels.

Estimates of deaand leVels for increased power plant output and current
knmledge shout primary mergy resources were set forth in the working
papers submitted for discussion at the highest level of party and state
organs. The total output capacities specified in these recommendations can-
sist of the projected output capacities of thermal power plants that were
built and started up during the course of the Sixth Five-Year Plan and the
output capacities of power plants slated to go into service by 1990.

“line electric demand forecast plan projects a basic electric power consumption
level of 135 M by 1990. This projected consumption level and time frame
proved to be the most important factor that was taken into consideration in
determining the volt-It of new power plant generating capacities that should
be brought on line by 1990. The appropriate voluse is set at about 16,000
m. i.e.. the area total of increase in power plmt generating; capacity that
will be brought on line during the Sixth, Seventh. and fight": Five-Year
Plans. In accordance with resolution No 21/1978 of the government of the
(35!! the projected increaent in nuclear power plant generating capacity will
mount to 3,520 to: during the Seventh five-Year Plan and 5,760 h“ during the
Eiwth Five-Year Plan. At the seam time, more accurate versions of these
forecasts are oeing drawn up in light of the ongoing verification of demand

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

leve la. and based on these results certain revisions. which will not be too
radical however. aay be made in the plan.

in absolute teras this major increase in generating capacity will be clearly
reflected throughout the Cseehoslovak power generating systea. And it is at
this point that the problem of the siting of power pints comes to the fore-
front as a very important factor in aapping out the growth strategy of our
power industry.

Plant Siting Prerequisites and Criteria

in terns of the nuber of feasible locations for the siting of large indus-
trial plants. a cagetory in which power plants aost certainly belong. the
physical geography of the CSSR is not very suitable due to high urban popu-
lation densities and the intensive cultivation of the soil by agriculture. in
addition to being due to the high density of existing industrial plants and.
above all. the relative unsuitability of the terrain. This situation gives
rise to acne probleas that are very difficult to resolve who it comes to
the siting of thermal power plants. The task of selecting locations that
are generally feasible for the siting of power plants has been addressed in
the past and is being addressed now by TERPLANuthe state institute for
land-use planning. which is supposed to fulfill this task in response to
the goals set for the power industry at the ministerial level. Locations
have been rectal-ended for the siting of power plants on the basis of the
numerous reports prepared by TERPLM in which the suitability of various
areas was tested and verified in a systeaatic manner.

The power industry has selected some of the recommended locations as sub-~
jects for the preparation of long-rage land-use engineering studies. which
will serve as the basis for the drafting and publication of a capital con-
struction plan. These studies are prepared by the design md engineering
organization ENERGOPROJEKT. which even during the preliainsry planning stage
will sake a major contribution to the formulation of future capital con-
struction plans. "e scope and level of this doctnentation is determined
at the concern l: 7y directive No 1/1976 issued by the general director-
ate of the Bah-lien Power Plants Concern in Prague.

The selection of plant sites and the confirmation of invest-ant project
feasibility during the preliminary planning phase requires that froa the
very outset all work should be performed in a emner that consistently
abides by the principle of coeprehensiveness ad that general public inter-
ests should be taken into account both by the power industry I“! also by
all other concerned decision-aaking organs and organizations. Thus prior-
ities were clearly acknowledged in the effort that was rude to draw up uni-
versally valid criteria to govern the siting of power plate. In the ease
of conventional power plants such site selection criteria haye not yet been
published. nor is it likely that they will be published at any tile in the
near future. In the past, and at the present time as well. a basic

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

netlmdlcal approach is in use which for all practical purposes is tanta-
mount to a set of basic site selection criteria. Historically. the least
important criteria used to govern the siting of nuclear power plants has
been the detereination that such plants should be located a specified dis-
tance away from residential areas so as to provide for the protection of
the local population. Since this approach failed in principle to resolve
the problem of how to provide for the coaplete protection of the living on-
vironasnt. not to mention the fact that it could not be applied in a country
with a land area as snail as that of the 688R. it proved to be necessary to
take a new approach. A systea of criteria was developed for the siting of
nuclear power plants that addressed this issue not just strictly free the
standpoint of safety. but also in the broad sense free the standpoint of
land-use planning criteria. This systee was based on the experience that
was gained in connection with work on site planning for large-scale indus-
trial plents. especially conventional power plants. and also in connection
with the selection of sites for the construction of the first WER-“O-type
nuclear power plants. The first official documnt of this type was issued
by the Federal Ministry of Fuels and Power in cooperation with the
Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Comission in December 1972. 'ihie doctsacnt was
superseded in August 1976 by universally valid safety regulations issued by
the Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Coniseion under the heading "Criteria for
the siting of Nuclear Power installations." however. the criteria spelled
out in this docueent and, where applicable, the fulfillment of these
criteria do not supersede the site selection stateacnts aade by coupetent
official bodies that are required pursuant to the provisions of existing
Czechoslovak law (e.g.. the decree of the Federal Ministry. of Technologi-
cal md lnvestuent Developnent published in Shim ZAKOh'd No 163-1973 con-
cerning construction project documentation).

These criteria are used to evaluate the suitability of plant sites from the
following basic viewpoints:

--the technical feasibility of the construction and operation of nuclear
power installations,

--protectlon of the natural and living enviromsent.

--the relative social benefits to be derived frost using proposed construc-
tion sites for other purposo,

--the economic efficiency of the construction and operation of such in-
stalletioas.

in principle. these criteria consist of two basic groups which are:
«exclusionary (classes I and fl)

«and relative (for economic and other reasons).

a-s
roe OFFICIAL use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is assisted that these criteria will be supplemented and updated on re-
quired by the prevailing level of scientific and technical knowledge and
the pmsuge of new laws.

“me most iwortnnt criteria are the class-i exclusionary criteria which
preclude the construction of nuclear power plants in zones which are:

“subject to intensive lmdslides.
«presently undermined or slated to be undermined in the future.
"classified as nature preuerves,

--classii'ied as having a seismicity rating of VIII’ HCS [expmeion unknown]
or higher.

«designated as protected areas for the cultivation of natural medicines.
--in which as a result of the normal operation of nuclear power plants it
would not be possible to prevent excessive radiation dosages for individu-
als in accordance the relevant decrees of the ministries of health of the
CSR and SSR and where. in the event of a plant accident, radiation dosages
say not exceed specified levels for the most exposed individuals living in
the vicinity of a nuclear power plant (25 reso for the whole body. 150
run for adult thyroid glands. and 75 rams for the thyroid glands of chi l-
dron) .

--which are known to contain deposits of economically important raw eater-
ials.

«which are in the vicinity of superhighways and main railroad lines and
waterways that are under construction.

Class-ii exclusionerv criteria cover zones:

--with unfavorable geological characteristics,

«with soil load limits less than 0.03 ﬁlm2 at a depth of 7 meters.
---with sdsmicity ratings ranging between VI' and Vll' ms.

--with underwater tables higher than 2 meters below the surface,

"which are prone to flooding and which night be flooded in the event of
dam breaks.

--with ground relief elevations higher than 15 meters,

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mwhere it is iapossible to lay railroad track sidinge on the construction
site,

--wherc the permeability of substrata rocks would permit the contuination
of groundwater.

«which are designated as protected drinking water supply areas.
«which are designated as national natural preserves.
--with important cultural nonunents.

«where under normal operating conditions it is impossible to insure that
the target cumulative dosage level per unit of power plant output will not
exceed Io rams/HR per ennun and where, in the event of a plmt accident. it
is not possible to insure that radiation levels will not exceed the level
determined by the product of target cumulative dosage level prescribed for
normal operations and for the service life of the nuclear power plant,

--whe re the heating of watercourses by plant waste heat would exceed per-
missible biological limits,

«where exploratory work is under way for nineral natural resources,
--where there is agricultural land that lust be protected from annexation,
--which are designated as recreational and tourist areas.

-—which are designated as buffer zones around airports and radio beacons,
--which are designated as superhighway rights-of-way or as buffer zones for
superhighways, railroad lines, and transit gas pipelines, oil pipelines,

and other important couodity transport systems,

--which are considered to be suitable for investment projects with even
higher levels of land-use and technical exigencies,

--in which vehicular traffic collosions eight occur.
--which are considered to be unsuitable due to special national interests.

'lhese criteria exclude tracts of land as construction sites for nuclear
power plants for reasons that are essentially explicit or conditional.

The class-I criteria are explicit, while the class-II criteria are condi-
tional. If a chosen construction site does not meet one or lore of the
class-ll exclusionary criteria, it will be necessary in subsequent project
planning phases either to make required adjustments in the project plan, to
except the project from statutory regulations. or to modify the priorities

7
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ol’ the project sponsor. It is probable that sons statutory regulations will
hnva to be waived in all plant siting cases.

m thin the context of govemmnt-to-govetnnent cooperation nong the CHM
countries discussions have already taken place in appropriate commissions
crncernlng issues related to the feasibility of issuing regulations govern-
ing the selection of nuclear power plant construction sites that would be
enforced in all the GINA countries. Such discussions were held during bi-
lateral negotiations between delegations representing the CSSR and the USSR
in March 1977. and so it is to be expected that within the foreseeable
future regulations will be agreed upon and spelled out that will be sanda-
tory for both sides and that will supplement or supersede the abovcnentioncd
criteria. in essence, though. these criteria will not be stbjected to any
radical revision. rather they will be defined in greater detail and enlarged
upon in pace with the acquisition of new knowledge and experience.

Basic interrelationships Between Plant Site Selection and Land-use Planning
Registers

Pursuant to La No 50/1976 Shim ZAKONU on Land-use Planning and the Build-
ing Regulations (the building code) builders are required when selecting
sites for plant construction to refer to land-use planning registers dur-
ing the land-use forecasting and land-use planning phases. In this connec-
tion their work is to be based on long-range power industry development
forecasts. and for the purposes of the drafters of land-use planning
registers (hereafter abbreviated UPD) this data base consists of or should
consist of the findings arrived at in studies prepared by TBRPLAN mid
ENERGOPROJEKT. If a given construction site is written up in a UPI) and if
this site selection is approved, the conditions will have been met for the
trouble-free wrapping up of preliminary building project paperwork, includ-
ing land-use permits.

however. the fact of the matter is that during the phase when UPD's are be-
ing drum up no data are available on selected construction sites, and so
power industry capital projects, for the construction of conventional power
plants and especially for the construction of nuclear plants, are not men-
tioned in the UPD's. The principal reasons for this are attributable to the
effects of the growth of the power industry, especially the nuclear power
industry. where the standards of and modifications in nuclear plant engi-
neering plans, having to do with such things as power ratings, performance
parameters. land-use and technical exigencies. nuclear power plant equip-
ment safety systems, the environmental impact of plant construction and
operation. and so on, have an effect on the feasibility of selecting a given
site and writing it up in a UPD. It turns out that one way to get around
this problem consists in the gradual and regular amendment of UPD's for
given land zones which over the long run are slated to provide sites for

the construction of nuclear power plants while at the same time incorpor-
nting into these UPD's a statemnt of the demands and capital investment
projects which will be generated by or are necessarily related to this kind

8
FOP. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0" construction activitv. However. such amendments usually conflict with
the schedules for the pinning. design. and construction of nuclear power
plants. 'mis means that preliminary and final project planning documents--
and the resultant land-use planning decisions—must do a proper job of re-
conciling these conflicts. with reference to the appropriate UPD, in the case
of a given land zone.

This procedure is exemplified by the site selection process for the construc-
tion of the North Moravia nuclear power plant. Lipnik nad Becovou. one of
the alternative sites for the construction of this power plant which was
written into the land-use plan for the Rana region (the prosentday urban
agglomeration of Olomouc, Prerov. and Prostejov), does not meet awe of the
exclusionary criteria. and so at the present time two other alternative
sites are being closely studied:

«the Hajetin site (10 hi lometera south of Olomouc),
-—the Blahutovice site (north of liranice).

These sites were not written into the Rana UPI) or into the UPD's for the
Beskid and Vulassko regions. whidt were drum up between 1971 and 1972 and
approved by the North Moravia Kraj National Counittee between 1972 and 1973.
Some aspects of the site selection process for this nuclear power plant are
similar for all of the alternative sites, e.g., the tie-in with the reservoir
dam slated for construction at “replica nad Becovou, but there are other
factors—-and these are in the majority—that are clearly at variance with

and necessitate amendments to the U1") md revisions in the regional plan for
the development of this urban agglomeration. It turns out. therefore. that
on the basis of the new information that is coming in concerning the develop-
ment of the nuclear power industry nuclear power plant or nuclear center
site selection work should be viewed as the starting point for zone develop—
ment and administration during the phase when land-use registers are being
compiled for large territorial units. This would be a question of driving
up land-use forecasts as the starting point for the transition to the formu-
lation of land-use plans. Based on the links between individual types of
UPD's, large-scale capital investment PI'OJects woald eventually be trans-
ferred from the purely informational to the project-realization sections of
UPD's with regard to such areas as housing construction for plant construc-
tion and operational personnel, the provision of industrial water sources

and supply syscems, and so on. With regard to the impact of nuclear power
plants on the living environment UPD‘s will be a reflection of the knwledge
and depth of current information in this area which in turn should be clearly
reflected in the drafting of land-use forecasts for large territorial units.
In spite of the wide-ranging nature of the total volume of information that
will be needed it will be advisable to make sure that all this information

is taken into account during the appropriate UPD drafting phases so that it
will be possible for the subsequent zoning of capital construction activity
to proceed in an optimal manner.

9
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Plan for the Construction of Power Plants at Selected Sites and melt
Primary maracteriatics

11w plan for the construction of thermal power plnnts during the Sixth.
Seventh, and Eighth Five-Year plans. that is. through 1990, covers the fol-
J'wing installations listed in tables I and II.

 

 

 

Tab lo I .
( 1,0.ch tlcllrhny
-- '—_— IRE-.JJ ' -I ""'
‘I ah I . - at which!
(2 . llil (¥) v;:::'[';\\,~'l ‘bflh [imam
_________.__—-———
can-mm! I u an l Im -- 10
rum." II a 1 son Im -. 10
ml: III I It so. I IIII
I-mum II a x m I In a.» u
09-“ka II I I I u. _ I” r “
_______.___—————
Key :

1. Conventional power plants

2. Construction site/plant designation/

3. Projected on-line power rating (W)

II. Projected target date for plant atartup

Table II.

__—————————'——

(1) 1mm! «chutney

 

 

(2 )w'"" (I ”3:17.313“. 6‘) twat-32‘
VI )nl-ulo Iluhunko I - d. I." lm
V: [ml-nu III-Intake l 1 . ‘” I-I - In
l-Z "ah-VIII, ‘ ' ON I”: I I”
ll' Mmlmtul I d - d” IN I!“
w. IDIII rm, (Male-ﬂu) 2 I Iota Ian I”:
ll! Seven-saws» i I - In I mm I”
i I . Icon I 2.th I'm

"-1 h'hMN‘l II I I M. I I“
FOR IWFICIM. USE ONLY

In addition to those power plants. work was completed at the start of the
Sixth Five-Year Man on the construction of the mainice ii power plant
(10 pnwur generating units with power ratings of 200 HR each) and the
lletalnrovice power plant (‘0 x 200 W).

Some of the other possibilities under consideration with respect to the con-
struction of conventional power plants include the proposed installation of
a 200 NH power generating unit so as to expand the generating capacity of

the existing power plant at Porici near Trutnov. Another source for the
combined generation oi‘ electricity and heat will be provided by the installa-
tion or the Ervenice regional heating plant at the Brvenice site on the
grounds of the existing Ervenicc 11 power plant. ‘ihe output capacity of

this new heating plant should fall within a range of 2 - 3 x 250 - 300 M".

ii is a basic characteristic of sites chosen for the construction of con-
ventional power plants that they are limited to areas where construction
activity has not yet gotten under way. a prime exmaple of this is the power
plant slated for construction in the vicinity of Opatovice. The Opatovice
puwar plant. with a projected power rating of 2 x 500 PM, will be fired by
bruwn coal from the North Bohemia Brown Coal Mining District and will oper-
ate strictly by means of steam condensation; cooling will be circulatory
based on the use of cooling towers (one per power generating unit). The
plant will be built on the grounds of the existing Opatovice 1 power plant;
the most unusual feature of this plant will be the delivery of its fuel by
water. as in the case of the Chvaletice 1 power plant. the construction of
the Opntovice ii power plant will make it possible to proceed with the con-
version oi“ the condensation steam-turbine system in the Opatovice 1 power
plant so as to accna-odate the installation of heating plant equipment for
the supply of heat to the cities of Hradec Kralove and Pardubice. 'ihis con-
struction project will necessitate auxiliary capital investment work. in-
cluding making the Lube navigable along the section between Chvaletice and
Opatovice and. most likely, the construction of a water treatment storage
reserVoir at Pecin. However. the latter project will produce major benefits
In terns of water resources management.

The installation of a 200 Hi! power generating unit at Porici actually mounts
to an expansion of the existing power plants at this site. It will be neces-
sary to modify and recontour the grounds of this construction site to some
extent so that the new power generating unit can be built in the designated
area. “the most conspicuous auxiliary capi tel investment project involves

the construction of a smaller reservoir dun that will secure a supply of in-
dustrial water from the lips River. The design of the 200 H" turbine systems
will probably be identical to the design of the turbine generators used in
existing plants equipped with 200 nw generating units that are auetiaes
required to provide semi-peek-load service.

'ihe Ervenice regional heating plant is to be built on the grenade of the
existing Brvenice ii power plant, but in order to make room for the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction of this project it will be necessary to denolish the existing
Brvenlce ll plant. In addition to the denolition of the existing plant. it
will be necessary to unite allowances for the troublesoae building foundation
conditions or‘ this site in view of the fact that the terrain has been under-
mined. Ash storage and disposal will also pose difficult engineering and op-
e'ntlonai problems. The technique that is now being recon-ended calls for
the ssh waste to be deposited in a dry or semi-dry state on the outer over-
burden piles of nearby opencast nines. liowwer, there are questions about
this systen that have not yet been fully answered. In view of the need to
insure deliveries of an adequate value of coal fuel the construction of
the Ervenice heating plant will very likely depend on the opening of a new
coal mine. According to the long-range plans of the North l'oheaia brown
coal mining concern, the opening of a new mine at Bylany should units it
possible to increase coal production. From the standpoint of the long-
rnnge goals for the development of this region's power industry the com-
bined generation of heat and electric power appears in the long runto be a
very viable option. me construction of this plant is also intended as a
possible replacement for the existing Koaorany power plant (whose service
life will come to an end in the 1990's) and as a possible new heat supply
source for all of those areas that are still being served by this power plant.
However. it will be iaportant to determine how the operation of industrial
plants. including power plants, will affect the total living environment in
the North Bohemia Kraj. But it is also necessary to take into accotmt the
decided benefits that will secure from the siting of the erenice heating
plant directly in a coal raining basin, the availability of an industrial
water supply. the possibility of depositing waste nah on land that has been
torn up by strip training activities, the capabilities of an experimced ten
of operational personnel, and so on.

As in the case of conventional power plants. I do not intend to discuss the
basic characteristics of those nuclear power plant construction sites where
construction has already gotten under way. This is in reference to the V1
and V2 nuclear plants at Jaslovske Bohunice and the Dukoveny nuclear plant
with its was-“o reactor units.

The nuclear power plant at Hochovce is being considered as another power
plant that will be equipped with Mil-“0 reactor units. This site was
chosen as one of several other construction sites selected during 1972 for
nuclear power plants without shield walls. 'lhe Hochovoe site is in uvice
titres; in order to lake the necessary rose for the construction project it
will be necessary to demolish the shoe of lioehovoe; site preparation for

the plant's foundation will necessitate increased labor and costs. ‘lhe con-
struction of this plant is also giving rise to the need for auxiliary capital
investment. In addition to replacing the housing and public utilities stock
for the residents of Hochovce. it will be necessary to invest capital in the
construction of a den for the storage of the required voltane of industrial
water. The valley-like nature of this location will also have an impact on
the general costs plan of the building site. primarily in terns of ancillary

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction needs and also due to site preparation needs. Pour power gener-
ating units with output ratings of “0 ml each are slated for construction.
and allowances are to be made for the possibility of adding on additional
output capacity. it is expected that the plant will operate strictly by
means of stem condensation processes and that 1! will supply electric power
for the national power grid. For the tine being it is expected that the
turbine anaemblleﬁ w111 put out a unit load of 220 NH. Given the current
capabilities of the Czechoslovak power plant equipment industry and in view
of the final engineering designs for the No 3 and No 6 power generating units
at the Dukovsny power plant. the possibility that the unit power output rat-

ings of these turbine assemblies night go as high as “0 as is not being
ruled out.

According to the long-range plans for the development of the Czechoslovak
power industry, the tialovice plant in South bohenia is supposed to be the
first nuclear power plant in this country to be equipped with Will-1000
reactor units and shield walls. This construction site. lying on the border
of the Prachaticc and Ceske Budejovice okreses. was chosen as one of several
sites affording the possibility of obtaining process feedwater from the Vltava
River. Even though this site meets this criterion, it is still situated at a
rather considerable distance from the Vltava River, and the supply of water
to this plant will be relatively expensive both as a capital cost aid as an
operational cost. The microregion near the village of Halovice that was
originally recommended as a building site lay completely outside the bounds
of cultivated farmlands and was mostly forested, but geological survey studies
demonstrated the total unsuitability of this building site. For this reason.
considertion was given to moving the building site a certain distance to one
of two alternative nicroregioas where geological conditions were tolerable.
but where the construction site would encroach on farmlands with soil qual-
ity ratings in class 6 and class 5. Otherwise. this site proved to be suit-
able in terms of its position and area. The most costly auxillary invest-
ment project will be the installation of electric power transmission lines.
which is not a problem unique to this construction site. but is rather a
problem that must be dealt with at all power plant construction sites.

Energy denaad levels were also estimated recently from the standpoint of this
plant's capacity for supplying heat to Osaka Budejovice and to agricultural
and, possibly, food processing industries. in addition to the electric power
which it will feed in to the national power grid. however, it turns out that
the only way to supply heat directly to consumers is at the expense of a cer-
tain drop—off in electric power generation, that is. there is no way to
harness the power plant's low-potential waste heat. It is projected that
during the first 2 x 1.000 uw phase of constructioa the power plmt will be
equipped with four turbine assemblies with power output ratings of 500 NH
each end with a 100 percent steam condensation process. Preliminary studies
show that it is possible to equip the turbine systems with appropriate feed-
water heating stages. A very interesting situation will arise in connection
with plans for the construction of a cellulose and paper products combine in
Olesnik which is not far from the Haiovice site. liere, in relatively close

13
roe orncm. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proximity to Ceske Budejovice. a complex consisting of two major capital
projects is going to rise up that is bound to influence the need for a con-
prehensive plan (primarily regional in nature) governing both of these proj-
ects and all of their auxiliary and spin-off capital projects. It is likely
that there will also be sons demand for the heat that could be supplied by
the Halovice nuclear power plant, and this in turn could also lead to the

r. iification of the size of the plant's turbine systeas. In general it is
expected that the Halovice plant will have a total power output rating of
around 6.000 N".

Another nuclear power plant equipped with shielded With-1000 reactor units
which is supposed to be built and on-line before work is completed on the
construction of the Maloxice plant is the nuclear power plant serving North
Moravia known as the Hajatin nuclear power plant. In essence this site is
intended as a substitute for the Lipnik nad Beeovou site that was being
contemplated earlier. The Lipnik ned Becovou site is located at a point
between Lipnlk nad Becovou and the village of Tyn nad Becovou on the left
hank of the Becvs River in Prerov Okres. The land area of this site is rela-
tively small, and the site is located on a tract of land that is prone to
flooding. After the construction of the water storage reservoir st 'l'eplice
nad Becovou is completed, the flood hazard should he reduced considerably.
md it should be possible to raise the construction site terrain above the
disastrous floodstage level. However, the problem remains of dcvision means
to protect the building site (both of the due and of the power plant) from
these floodwaters while construction is under way. The construction of the
Teplice reservoir dam is a prerequisite capital project that must be con-
pleted first in order to make it possible to gain access to the necessary
volume of process feedwater. It is expected that the Hajetin plant will op-
erate strictly by means of steam condensation and that its four turbine
systems will have a power output rating of 500 as each. At the present

tine the Lipnik nad Becovou nuclear power plant construction site is regarded
sore as a less preferable. back-up plan in contrast to the Hsjetin site that
is now under consideration. The nest important reason cited to substantiate
this decision is the fact that the Lipnik nad Becovou locale does not meet
site selection criteria in view of the fact that. if it were chosen. the
nuclear power plant would be located downstrema from the reservoir den.

And in the event of some unforeseen development at the den site the power
plant site right be flooded.

The Hajetin plant construction site is located 11 kilometers south of the
Olomouc city center, roughly in the center of the trimgle whose points

are represented by the cities of Olomouc. Prerov. and Prostejov. In caper-
ison with the high-quality farmland soil of the area that surrounds it,

this site is located on less desirable farmland between the Horava River
and the Ole-ourl’rerov railroad line. One disadvantage of this site is the
relatively high groundwater level, the lowering of which will require the
undertaking of rather difficult technical and engineering eeasures. 0n the
other hand, the decision to incorporate the Hajetin nuclear power plant into
the thermal generating plant system supplying heat to Oloeouc and Prerov and

1"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possibly other cities as well appears to be very advantageous. At the same
tine, it is planned that after work is completed on the erection of the
power plant structures and its auxiliary facilities (and after it has been
furnished with the heat it needs for startup purposes). the Hajetin plant
will be linked up with the new heating plant now slated for construction to
supply heat to Olomouc and Prerov. This would make it possible to dispense
with the necessity of building a heating plant on the grounds of the Najetin
power plant. iiy virtue of its size and power output rating the iiajetin
nuclear power plant is similar to the alternative nuclear power plant that
could be constructed at the Lipnik site, whereby it is believed that for a
power output rating of 2 x 1,000 Hi! the electric power transmission lines
would have to be linked up with the rebuilt Prosenice distribution sub-
station coupled with the necessity of building a new ultra-high-tension
distribution substation to accmodate the additional output. Similarly.
consideration is already being given to the possibility of building a new
distribution substation concurrently with the construction of the power
plant. The construc: ion of the Tepllce nad Becovou reservoir dam is still
a prerequisite capital project that must be completed in order to provide
access to the necessary volume of process feedwater.

'ihe environmental impact of both of these nuclear power plant site alter-
natives were subjected to computer analysis. The results of this analysis
showed that it will be possible to abide by all current health and safety
regulations and norms. if stricter health and safety criteria should go
into effect at some time in the future. primarily with respect to population
density and growth, consideration is being given to the selection of still
other alternative sites for the construction of a North Moravia nuclear
plant in the area north of iiranice in the vicinity of Blahutovice Obec or

if need be in the vicinity of Starojicka Lhota Obec in Novy Jicin Ok'res.

No land-use planning documents have as yet been drawn up for these sites
that would approximate the level of those drawn up for the Lipnik and Hajetin
sites. but it is to be expected that to do so would pose no major obstacles
of s land-use planning or engineering nature.

(In the basis of the experience that has been gained to date from the draft-
ing of preliminary plans for the construction of high-performance nuclear
power plants it can be demonstrated that the further growth of our country's
power industry is closely related to tne making of timely decisions with re-
gard to the selection of nuclear power plant construction sites and to the

ensuing comprehensive determination of their inpact on general social inter-
ests.

15
FOR orricm. us: out?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prunue- Len inarsd Des i an Cooperation
Prague INVESTICNI WSTAVBA in Czech No 11. 1978 pp 357-359

[Article by Eng Josef Nekolny: ”Cooperation Between ENERGOPROJEK‘I‘ of Prague
and TBPLOBLBKTROPROJBKT of Leningrad"]

[Text] The Soviet Union's first nuclear power plant went into service in
1954. By the following year of 1955 the Soviet government was already
providing other countries with scientific, technical, and industrial aa-
sistance in connection with the development and research effort dedicated
to finding peaceful uses for nuclear energy. And by March 1956 an agree-
ment had already been signed between the governaents of the USSR and the
CSSR concerning cooperation and assistance to be furnished by the Soviet
Union on connection with the construction of Cuehoslovakia'a first nuclear
power plant designated "Al."

A close working relationship was established between Czechoslovak designers
and the Soviet design organization TEPLOENEROOPRNBKT U.ningrad. where in an
atmosphere of close cooperation work began on the development of design and
production plans for the Al nuclear power plant. Over a period of more than
20 years during which they have been engaged in cooperation with the Soviet
Union. starting with the first beginnings in 1956. when Czechoslovak de-
sign engineers started to build on their experience in the design of con-
ventional power plants, the design engineering staff of EUERGOPROJEKT has
laid a solid foundation for the drafting of complex and wide-ranging nuclear
power plant designs.

with the technical assistance of the Soviet Union ENERGOPROJEKT, in its
capacity as a general design contractor. is drawing up all manner of prelim-
inary and final design plans for nuclear power plants which are intended to
supply industry and the general public with electric and thermal power.

During the initial stages of the process dedicated to finding peaceful uses
for nuclear energy nunerous proposals were advanced for all kinds of nuclear
power plants (which is quite natural in light of the new scientific dis-
coveries and inventions that were being made) with reactors cooled with gas,
light water. liquid aetala. and so on, moderated with graphite and heavy
water. and so on and so forth with many subvariations and combinations of
various component designs. At that rise. when no one had any previous ex-
perience in the production of equipment for nuclear power plants and their
operation. it we very difficult to make objective judgments as to the
prospective viability of specific system designs in terns of the difficulty
of manufacturing and operational problems, the demands that would have to
be set by the scientific and technological infrastructure. or the denands
that would have to be met relative to the nershaling of scientific-techno-
logical. naterial. and financial resources. For this reason. a number of
different designs were drawn up for nuclear power plants that were intended
to be built as prototype system so that the feasibility of one design or
another could be tested in practice.

16
FOR OFFICIAL use may
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet aide offered the Czechoslovak side a design for a natural uranius-
fueled reactor cooled with carbon dioxide and Ioderated by heavy water
(deuterium oxide). The underlying physical principles governing the oper
ntion of this type of reactor were reconnended by the Soviet physicist
ncndemician Alikhanov. Soviet design organisations already had drum up two
alternative engineering designs for this kind of plant. (is soon as all
evaluations, recounendations. and final decisions had been made as to the
plant deuign alternative slated for construction Czechoslovak organs and or
gnnizations (scientific research institutes. design organizations, manufactur-
ing plants. and other institutes and management organs) went right to work.
with the cooperation and technical assistance of the Soviet Union. on the
drafting of blueprints. the gearing up of production capacities, and the
preparation of the plant construction site located in the obec of Jaslovske
Bohunice in Slovakia.

in conjunction with the drafting of engineering plans for the construction
of the Al '1...;iear power plant the production experience gained in this
count") and the knowledge acquired in other countries were also drawn upon
as a basis for an evaluation of Czechoslovakia's current and long-range nu-
clear power program, upon which the national ecmomy would depend for its
supplies of electric and thermal energy.

Detailed studies and analyses showed that in the long run the most suitable
option would be for the construction of additional nuclear power generating
capacities to be based on WEIR-type nuclear power plants equipped with
light-water reactors, the effectiveness of which had been demonstrated not
only in the Soviet Union but also elsahere in the world.

Basic Design Concepts of Nuclear Power Plants in the (2558 as Drawn Up by
BERGOPROJBCT with the Cooperation and Technical Assistance of the USSR

The Al Nuclear Power Plant

This pwer plant went into service in 1972. The total on-line power gener-
ating capacity of 150 m is provided by a single heterogenous thermal re-
actor which is fueled by naturally occurring uranius netal, moderated by
heavy water and a neutron reflector. and cooled by carbon dioxide gas.

Three condensing system turbine systems with power ratings of 50 fill each

are installed in the turbine room. 'ihe design of the main power generating
plant is patterned after that of conventional power plants. This leans that
the turbine room with its crosswise arrangement of turbine systems lies
perpendicular to the internediate Iachinery roo- housing the sun gener-
ators. beyond which lies the separate reactor containnent building housing
the reactor and its auxiliary active operations. conveyance and instalments-
tion channels, and fuel storage bays for fresh and spent fuel. ‘lhe heat-
balaace diagram is designed in the for- of a two-stage. high-low pressure
systes in order to insure optimal therIal efficimcy.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The V1, V2 and V3 Nuclear Power Plants

'ihe V1 and V2 nuclear power plants are under construction at Jaslovske
Bohunice. 'ihe V3 nuclear paler plant is under construction at Dukovany in
southern Moravia in the okres of Trebic.

un-line power ratings for the nuclear power plants:
v1-- 880 MW
V2-- 880 m
Vii-4,760 W

The conceptual design of these power plants is based on a wen-1.40 unit
equipped with V-230 or V-213 type reactors with a theml rating of 1,375
MW which are linked to two turbine systems with electrical power ratings of
220 NH each.

Nuclear power plants with Will-650 power generating units are based on a
tandem-unit design concept. 'ihe main power generating plant with its two
on-line power generating units (2 x 6100 HR) may be described as a function-
ally and systemically closed unit. which in terms of nuclear and fire safety,
the handling of fresh and spent fuel. the handling or radioactive wastes,
inputs and outputs of unit aonitored zones and their flow through aonitored
zones. including the design of the control building. constitute a closed-
cycle system. The design of the main power generating plant and the arrange-
ment of auxillary plmt operations and buildings meets all of these require-
ments. This applies in particular to the building that houses auxiliary
active operations, the plant building housing the health safety check

cycle. diesel generator stations, high-pressure compressor stations, and so
on. ibis closed-cycle relationship is patently clear whm one cowares
various construction blueprints for power plants equipped with Will-560
power generating units. An examination of the actual power plant design
shows that in order to insure the econonic efficiency of such invest-eats

it is necessary to build Mil-“0 power plants in accordance with the tendon-
mit design format.

'lhe aein power generating plant is operated in a series of runs with the
average length of a given run amounting to 3 x 7,000 hours, that is. with
one-third of the fuel load being replaced every year. The priaary loop is
designed to withstand a worse-case plant accident caused by the rupture of
the nain steaa piping with discharge from both ends of the piping systn.

The coin power generating plant consists of the reactor building. transverse
and longitudinal inter-ediate machinery buildings (stages). and the aain
turbine building. Special ventilation lines link the reactor containment
structure with the tiered arrangement of wet steaa condensers and the

1!:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intermediate machinery room. No reactors are housed in a canon reactor
containment building. and both reactors are housed in separate reactor ves-
sels with biological shielding and with adjoining hermetically sealed boxes
which contain primary loop equipment. i.e.. steam generators. main circula-
tion pumps. header fittings, circulation piping, and so on. The reactor
containment building also houses auxillary loops of the primary loop such as
the boron regulation system. safety system. primary loop back-up systems.
systems for continuous coolant purification. fresh and spent fuel storage
bays. conveyance and instrumentation systems. and so on.

“me turbine room contains two dry-steam-driven turbine systems for each power
generating unit, and each turbine has a power rating of 220 NH. The longi-
tudinal intermediate machinery room (18 meters wide) contains water heating
equipment and cooling water tanks.

Otherwise, the floor area of the intermediate machinery room is devoted to
providing space for electrical equipment, i.e.. internal plant power cir-
cuit switch gear with ratings of 6 and 0.6 W, connecting cable runs. and
certain ventilation and pneumatic support systems for the reactor contain-
ment building. The rest of the floor area in the intermediate machinery

room is taken up by connecting piping for the secondary loop section. re-
duction stations generating steam for internal plant use in various oper-
ational modes. and so on. The transverse intermediate machinery rooms are

reserved exclusively for electromechanical equipment and automated control
systems.

The automated WER-“O instrumentation control system comprises subsystems
for data read-out, the automatic regulation of control procedures, automatic
devices. and protection apparatuses. These subsystems, consisting of ana-
logue and digital system components. constitute a uniform system of control
and regulation. The plmt's operational modes. whose general rules are
predetermined. are designed in such a way that the control and regulation
system intervenes automatically so as to make sure that the plant functions
within desirable operational ranges under optimal conditions. Likewise.

in the event of breakdowns. the protection of plant personnel is assured.
and the control and regulation equipment is set to function automatically in
such cases. In spite of the system's high level of automation. the human
operator continues to be the most important component in the plant regulation
process. This is why operators are still required to meet such high train-
ing qualification standards.

With regard to the safe discharge of waste heat generated by the reactor
after it has been shut down. in conjunction with the engagement of back-up
cooling systems and emergency sources of electric power. a general plan has
been devised for the discharge of this waste heat and for supplying the plant
with auxiliary water.

Under the terms of this general plan provisions were also made for radiation
protection. which is focused on:

19
roe ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-—monitoring radiation levels in the plant environment (control, measurement,
evaluation, logging),

-~monitoring activity levels in plant system loops (levels, transportation,
accumulation, leakage, integrity of system sealing),

--monitoring radiation levels in the surrounding environment,

--monitoring and keeping records of personnel exposure to radiation and con-
tnmination.

--monitoring and keeping records of the contamination of work areas, equip-
ment, and transport vehicles,

--monitoring the effectiveness of decontamination measures,
--monitoring the level of radioactive emissions and waste,

--monitoring adherence to work safety regulations in the handling of radio-
nctive materials.

With regard to the performance of specific radiation protection functions
on plant preniaes it is expected that responsibility for the performance of
these various functions will be distributed according to principal plant
work areas:

--radiation checks of individual plant units, including the reactor contain-
ment building, the turbine room, and the building housing auxiliary active
operations, ventilation shafts,

--radiation checks of the surrounding environment,
--radistion checks of the plant control room building.
--radlation checks of waste water.

--geigcr comter checks of individuals and laboratory areas,

--radiation checks of the radioactive waste incinerator and radioactive
waste compaction facility.

Environmental radiation checks, special instrumentation checks, and plant
emissions checks are performed in part by the StJVAL centralized monitoring
system, by discrete monitoring devices, and by collecting specimen from the
central intake system. Portable devices are used to take ad hoc radiation
readings. 1he centralised radiation monitoring system could be linked up
with a computer. However, this possibility has not yet been taken into ac-
count in the plants where this centralized system was first put into prac-
tice.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the sake of thoroughness it is necessary to call the reader's attention.
at least briefly. to some of the other systass which safeguard the reliable
functioning and operation of power generating units. starting with those
systems that provide for the transportation of fresh and spent fuels. ven-
tilation systems. decontamination systems. high-pressure and low-pressure
air feed systems. radioactive materials scrubbing stations, laboratories.
switchgear. a nusber of other electrical installations and systems. the fire
protection system. the power transmission system. certain aspects of plant
startup procedures. operational modes. piping systems. equipment damage pre-
vention sneesures. and other systems and services which cannot be reviewed in
a general survey of this nature.

For us the Al nuclear power plant is a success story that belongs to the
past. while the V1 and V2 nuclear power plants in Jaslovshe Bohunice and

the V3 nuclear power plmt in Distoveny are all contemporary success stories.
since the MO Mir) unit of the V1 power plant has already entered the startup
and trial-run phase.

Hhile re lying on the technical cooperation and assistance of the USSR.
ENERGOPROJEKT. in its capacity as general design contractor for power engi-
neering construction projects. drew up the preliminary engineering designs
for the Al nuclear power plant. and other Czechoslovak contractors then pro-
ceeded to draft the operational designs for this plant and to make deliveries
of appropriate plant machinery and equipment.

in the case of the V1 nuclear power plant engineering designs were drawn up
by the Soviet design institute TEPIDENBRGOPROJEKT (leningrad branch). in-
cluding operational designs for the power plant's primary loop section. The
Soviet Union supplied most of the equip-ant required for the construction of
the primary loop section of this power plant.

with regard to the V2 and other nuclear power plants ENERGOPROJBXT has al-
ready drawn up the draft plans for this plant's instrumentation and structur-
al sections. and other Czechoslovak contractors are providing the operational
Instrumentation designs and are also responsible for deliveries of nost of
the equipment that will be installed in the plant's prieary loop section.

All construction labor is heing furnished by Czechoslovak partners. ad the
operatimal structural designs are being provided by ENIIGOPROJBKT.

With regard to the startup of this power plant and its individual power gen-
erating units ENERGOPROJEKT has been responsible for drafting the rules that
will govern startup procedures and the interface between equipment supplied
by other major contractors. various provisional arrangements. and so on.
During the construction phase ENERGOPROJEKT is to be responsible for furnish-
ing reword blueprints covering various provisional arrange-eats. charges.
modifications and additions. that prove to be necessary as a result of the
advancement of construction work and the requirements that arise in connection
with the completion of equipment installation work.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Contribution of ENERGOPROJDCT to the Construction of Nuclear Power Plants
in the CSSR

in all fields BNBRCOPROJEKT exercises its right to supervise the execution
of designs to which it holds patent. It does so not only by playing a co-
o dlnating role in connection with the drafting of operational designs.
but also hy neena of the significant direct participation of its enployaes
in the nanagenent of censtruction projects where. in collaboration with the
investor and appropriate subcontractors, they help to clarify design blue-
prints and to guide the progress lid enecuticn of specific construction
tasks. it collaborates closely with the investor in connection with the
performance of the investor's technical oversight Emotions. by means of
which the inventor Provides for the continuous supervision and requisite
quality of all construction and installation work. Hithin the context of
plant startup work and preparations for the full-scale testing of plant
facilities ENERGOPRNBKT specialists take part in the adjustment and setting
of the plant's coeplex control loops and protective systens free the stand-
point of the overall interface and functional interrelationship between
equipment and system delivered by major contractors.

Prior to plant startup ENEROOPROJBKT also takes part in the work of project
acceptmce emissions. in the perfornence of comprehensive trial runs. and
so on with a view to insuring the coaprehensive fulfillment of and compli-
ance with the design principles and goals.

Within the context of preliminary plant cmissionlnn preparations
ENERGOPROJIZKT cooperates with investors and contractors in the stipulation
of requi resents relative to special plant operational nodes. and it also
contributes to and supplements data in the pre-cmiasioning safety report
which define the operational rules of a power plant as a whole and in terms
oi the interrelationships that exist between its constituent cosponents.
ESERGOPROJEKT perform this function. together with the exercise of its
patent oversight rights, in direct cooperation with Soviet specialists.

5")
us

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Diagram 1. V2 Nuclear Power Plant in Jealovnkc Bohunice, Cross Section View
of the Main Generating Unit

r“. .
law In 1’
’u
— ..
liiil
‘ alllulaln
I ’nl'liﬂl'lﬂllllllllllllllnﬂvldv
II ‘MIIIIHI II IllIllIIIjlll

ml.“ mlllillllllulm.‘ "“91”.

m “m. Iai‘aﬂ’ﬁI. u r ' ,...._.'H:'., _
.. ‘ ”NIT-Ila “WWII” "" . C

may"! . .-..

   

I I
1;"... eioht'lm e uncut-m. mum. v2 . emu! M NW“ ”NW" WW"
Key:
1. Turbine roo- lo. intemdiete machinery room
2. Longitudinal intermediate housing pneuletic equip-ent
machinery tool 5. Net atea- condenser nodule
J. Reactor containment

bui Min;

23
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

lore’a—OL—n—oo:
' 77W5lllm

“A.-.

.. ' . n
u.-.—.‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Photo 1.

 

PHOTO CAPTION

A nuclear power plant In Jualovske Bohmlce; a View of feedmutcr treatment
facilities and coolﬁng towers.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Design work orders aubmlt:ed by LOTS? - Leningrad.
2. Research and development studies prepared by ENBRCOPROJEKT.

3. ENERGOPROJEKT b lueprinta .

2';
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New Plant. Designs
Prague lNVES'i’ICNI WSTAVBA in Czech No 11. 1978 pp 360-363

[Article by ling Jaroslev Plain and Eng Jiri Velasek]

[Test] it is generally well known that the world's fuels and energy supply
situation is unfavorable. Nor do the long-range forecasts for the production
of fossil fuels. especially in their refined form. during the reseining
years of this century give us any reason to be optiaiatic. On a worldwide
scale this state of affairs is asking it necessary to look for ways to pro-
vidc for the comprehensive utilisation of priaary energy resources and for
the efficient aansgesent of all their various fonts. One of the ways to ac-
coeplish this. an alternative which has been a focal point of intense inter-
est during the past five to eight years. is the conbined generation of elec-
tricity and heap-thermal engineering.

The Current State of 'ihsrnal Engineering in the CSSR

with the generation of electricity in conventional steaa condensing power
plants. at most only so percent of the prinary energy source cm be con-
verted into usable energy. The retraining 70 percent is usually discharged
back into the environnnt by the cooling water as waste heat. In the case
of nuclear power plants--in view of the lower stees generation parameters
that are currently being achieved in these plantsuthe ratio of waste heat
to usable energy is even greater. This is attributable to the physical law
governing the steam condensation worh cycle.

1he generation of heat accomts for approximately 55 percent of the can'-
total denand for prisary energy resources. ‘iherefore. this demand for
thermal energy represents a significant mtapped resource that could pave
the way for a reduction in the anoint of energy lost in the form of waste
heat and for an inprovesent in the thermal efficiency of power plants.

Simply put. the principle of the combined generation of electricity and heat
consists in the principle which proposes that at a suitable point that
portion of the steam used to drive a turbine is retrieved which has already
yielded the greater part of its energy for the generation of electricity
and is p-vt back to work for heat supply purposes. ‘ihe volume of stem flow-
ing into the condenser is reduced proportionately eccoapanied by a corres-
ponding reduction in the enount of heat discharged by the cooling water. A
conbined power plant work cycle of this nature could be employed to raise
the level of primary energy utilisation to iron 60 to 70 percent and thus
contribute to the conservation of that energy.

Thermal engineering enjoys a longstanding tradition in the CSSR: the growth
of this field has been especially rapid during the past )0 years. The de-
sign concepts incorporated into the industrial heating plants used by metal-
lurgical combines in Juncice and Kosice, the smovum chemical enterprises

13)
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Bratislava, the Vresov cosbine. and other enterprises have stood the
test of tine with good perforsanoe records in coeparison with foreign heat-
ing plants built during the sene period.

By the sons token. vith regard to the dovelopsnsnt of sources for the supply
of heat to the municipal and residential utilities sector a nunbor of design
concepts have been advenced that were quite advanced for their tine. To

cite just a fee of the soot typical exuples of the greet progress that has
been sade in this field one night nention the heating plants serving
Helesice. Kosioe. Cooke Budejovioe. Zilina. Karlovy Vary. end so on and so
forth. 11ne conditions that had to be set before the designs for these plants
could be drafted were such nore cosplex than those that obtained in the case
of industriel heating plants. 1he increased consuantion of heat as a
function of the progress that use node in the building of hosting plants for
residential srees node it necessary to spread out the construction of therenel
plants over several long intervals. The organisational dispersion of invest-
Inent in the heating supply industry proved to be a serious probles. Only
rerely did it prove to be possible to nount efforts dediceted to the pooling
of cepitel funds for the jointly financed construction of central heating
plants.

It is a characteristic feature of the abovenentioned heating plants thet
they vere sited as close as possible to so-celled coneuaption focal points.
as was dictated by considerations of econonaic efficiency.

I: see not until after the interest in clean air and living-environment on-
gineering energed as a prions concern of civil authorities that more sweeping
and snore coanrehensive designs began to be advanced for centralized hosting
supply systess. These are enesplified by the system serving the cities of
nlredec Kralove and Pardubice with a couch plant located .»t Opatovice. the
systes serving Hoot. Ono-utov and Litvinov vith a plant in Konsoreny. and the
Ostrave syotea vith a plant in Trebovioe. these plants are based on recon-
st ructod older steal condensing power plants in which additional equipnent
was installed peraitting the retrieval of then-anal energy. In the case of
these systeaa. with heating plants situated evoy fros the center of con-
snssption focal points. ecological considerations were taken into account as
a top priority. ‘lhese systeas represent a new develop-est in the hiotory of
thernsal engineering in Csechoslovakia. noely. the transportetion of heat
over greater distances.

The need to conserve ieported refined fuels as such as possible and to give
priority to the utilisation of the do-estic fuels base on the one hand and
concern over the need to isprove conditions affecting the heelth of people
living in densely populated urban centers on the other hand are giving rise
to the current trend that is casing into play in the Czechoslovak pover in-
dustry. Na-ly. it is being acknowledged that essentially every power gen-
ersting source oust be designed in a colpreheneive aenner aa a Iultipurpoee
facility. 1ho feasibility of seating canon-er deaand for heat is turning out

26
run omcm use onnu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to be one of the criterin that is being taken into account when searching
for building sites for the erection of new power plants. Consequently. the
distinction between an electric power plant and a heating plant is virtually
disappearing. since an electric power plant--in addition to perforning its
prisnry nisaion as a source of electric power—will now always serve as a
source of heat for areas lying within the technically feasible and economi-
cally acceptable range of thernai feedlines.

A study has already been drawn up attaining the feasibility of supplying heat
to the city of Koiin free: the utvaietice power plant. and designs are now on
the drawing boards for a systole that will supply heat to 'l'rneve free the nu-
clear power plents in Jaslovslte lohunics.

Nuclear Power Plants as n Source of Heat

Since the construction of nuclear pour plants is a key capital construction
progress of the Czechoslovak power industry. these plants have naturally been
singled out as an area of prise interest in connection with the application
of these. new principles. Under the contract tens of a cooperative venture
with the partner Soviet design institute WIPImROOI’RGi of Moscow a draft
study hes been drawn up for a prototype aultipurpose power generating plmt
equipped with Mil-i000 reactors. for its part. MIGOPROJBKT of Prague is
designing the plant's secondary section and equipnent related to the supply
of heat.

‘ihe iapact of plane for this section of the nuclear power plant with its
link-up with heat consunere will be aost striking. Initial projections—-
ceiling for the utilisation of high-perforlance power reactors of the type
sentioned above and all of the other cowonente of the prisary section-
reveal that the plant's operational sodas will display certain distinctions
in co-parison with a specially designed heating plant. Nucly. the veins
of on-iine heat gsnsratim capacity in the prisery section is predeterained.
and so the design objective lust be to arrive at an effective distribution
of load between both categories of energy to be supplied so that the load
denand placed on this plant by the national power grid will be set and so
that. at the ace rise. the dcaend loed placed on the auxiliary centralised
heating supply system will be accouodeted in a satisfactory aenner. in
light of these operational conditions alone the technical challenges posed
by the design require-ants of this kind of power generating tools: are ob-
vim.

in view of the relatively high inveataent costs of a nuclear power plant its
economic efficiency criterion consists in insuring the full-ties utilisation
of the on-iine generating capacity of its prisery section. Likewise. the
balanced application of load. devoid of rapid load variations. is sore cou-
patibie with the operational characteristics of wall-type reactors. Given
the predoainntly seasonal nature of heat consuwtion, these conditions can
be set by a secondary plant section equipped with .t!!! condensing extrac-
tion turbines. Under the terns of the request that was filed for the

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preparation of the oboveeentioned draft design for a prototype multipurpose
nuclear plant equipped with wax-moo reactors and acting in agree-ant with
the Soviet partner organisation. it is conteaplated that this plmt will be
equipped with a turbine nyaten with e power rating of 300 W electrical and
ndnptod for the retrieval of heat at a level of ‘50 W thernol coupled with
the capacity for the reheating of cycle voter free We to isn‘t. in the
use of the vast aajority of centralized heating supply systeae that are
slated for construction in this country a power plant equipped with two re-
nctor units (that. is with four turbines in the plmt'e secondary eection)
would be thoroughly capable of nesting peak-load heat deaend at a thereal
coefficient rating of - 1°. This neans that during peak-load periods it
would not be necessary to drew on the auxillary generating capacities of
fossil-fuel-fired heating plants. Since under the clisatic conditions

that prevail in this country the length of tiae during which estiaatad peak-
load thermal-energy input is being used for heating purposes varia at a
level of about 2,300 hours per annua. it aust be expected that plant capacity
will be emitted primarily to the electric-power-generotion operational
node for relatively long periods of title. Therefore. it is a basic require-
uent of turbine design that its operation in a strictly eteen condensing
cycle should be highly econoeical.

The retrieval of therIal energy generated by a nuclear power plant—at a
fixed level deter-load by the therIal generating capacity of its reactor
section-will of course result in a reduction in attainable electric power
generation capacity levels. The 81’0“" this reduction. the greater will be
the par-eters required of the steep drawn off the turbine. In order to heat
cycle water in a hotwater heating systes it is sufficient for the ate. in
the prisary heating stage to be at a pressure of approxiaately 0.1 Hrs
[Negepascal]. however. when an. is being retrieved for technological pur-
pose pressure require-ants at the point of consuption are usually ouch
higher. if. in addition to this. one factors in the pressure losses that
occur during long-distmoe steaa trmsaission and systee loss.. which con-
stitute a safety barrier preventing the containation of the trnseitted
stall with radioactive seterials. and also the require-ant calling for a
high degree of dependable yield when it coaee to supplying heat for exposed
industrial processa. the retrieval of thensl energy at higher para-attic
levels is always going to have a aejor ispact on the operational node of a
nuclear power plant and on the econeeice of the heating supply systee. 1his
le why the advantages and dieadvmtages of the retrieval of process steal
from a nuclear power plant out be weiyied with the utmost care. only both
free the standpoint of the theraal energy source and free the standpoint of
the consumer.

The iepact of any reduction in the attainable level of electric power gen-

erating capacity in nuclear power plants is felt eost keenly during the on-
peok period of a power distribution systea's daily load graph. to heating

system where hot water is the heat transfer edit. the possibility arises

of taking advantage of the natural storage capabilities of an extensive

?!\
70R OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

piping network or even using large-capacity storage plants. The postponement
of increased thernsl energy retrieval in conjunction with the charging of
storage systems until such tine as there is a dropoff in the power system's
daily load graph. especially during night hours. and. conversely. the util-
isation of stored heat to supply consuaers at tiaes when turbine steals eac-
traction systees are disconnected. that is. at tiacs when turbines are oper-
ating primarily in the steae condensing cycle during peak-load hours. would
sake it possible for power systae controllers to have access during this
tires to the full available electric paler generating capacity of a with
purpose power pint. This kind of operation is conparable to electrical
storage heating with its advantages steuing fra the pore balmoed loading
of a power plant during 26-hour periods. but this node of operation has the
added advantage of affording reduced losses of heat discharged by cooling

water. that is. the advantage of increased utilisation of prieary energy re-
sources.

Transitional Systea Designs

it is to be expected that nuclear power plants will not be used as heat sup-
ply sources until the 1990's at the earliest. in the aeentiee it is neces-
sary to went a search for those kinds of centralised heating supply syste-
designs which. while taking into accomt current fuel lid technological
capabilities. will lay a well planned groundwork for the future transition
to the ultieate configuration of these systees which will harness the theml
energy generated by nuclear plants. One ex-ple of such a transitional de-
sign is the dreft pin for the supply of heat to the right-bank section of
the capital city of Prague free the liaisik power plant. The conversion of
the iielnik 1 power plmt. the last plant to be built in the generation of
stems condensing power plants with power ratings of 55 iii. into a heating
plant. the priaary section of which will be devoted to heat retrieval. is
intended to bridge this n. gap by supplying heat to the northern and
cutern residential areas of the capital city through 1995. The ceqletion
of the first phase of this conversion progr- will put on-line generating
capacity with a theraal power rating of 600 NH. lost of which (approxiaately
570 m) is ear-arked for Prague with the rest going to iielnik and Iteratovice.
During the second phase. after 1995. when it is expected that this heat
supply systea will be linked up with the Helnik ll power plant. where four
are. condensing power generating units are on-line with power ratings of
no in! each. the systee's thersel generating capacity will he increased to
[$00 DH. By that tile it will also be possible to look forward to the coil-
ing on-llne of eultipurpose nuclear-theml plants. Diagra 1 shows a
sch-atic diagrel of one of the proposed design options.

29
Ion ontcm. use mm
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Diagram 1. 1h. mom]. Energy Trmuiuion Syue- Consisting of tho Helnik-
Pagan Power Plant Working in nude. with “union Power Plants

.; \\\\\§\ \ ,.

J.)

    

Key:
1. Ana omucd with hat by the ﬂclnik pm: plants 1 and ii
2. Ana supplied with hat by the nuclear we: plan: "Vychod"

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONLY

Long-distance Ilaot Distribution

[in isportont conponent of centralized heating supply systess is the equip-
nent used to distribute hcet iron its source of generation to consumption
points--the thernol nine network. the ilportenoe of this conpomnt is
further enhanced when heat is being distributed over long distances. For ex-
nple, thernal feedlines account for approximately 60 percent of the total
estieeted costs of the construction of the first phese of the )ielnih-Prague
oysters.

stle 1 shows the total operating costs of a long-distance heat distribution
systcn where the host trensfer nediun is hot water heated to 150/70. C lid
the effects of noxious utilization.

 

 

Table i.
(rein-bl «rows.
(1) (mum. hues. reruns r-mue
(2) (33:39?” mum saunas mum
«mom ' I. - -_- - _
(3) “ﬂair.
.In'l Mel!“ mum “do!“
(“gab-m ._. . ._.”- ....._.. .
513%.?!“
(‘) ($0.20” ,
(as-bu) (5)! same! ozone.» «mess
“In! ' . ”sum 0.01“.” ' 0.“st
~bn' OJIMOJOI “all“_ We...”
Key:

1. Joules per second passing 6. Total unit operating costs
through thermal feedline (Res per 6.) [gigajoule] per
pipeworlt ltilouter) at peek usage

2. 'l'her-sl enery output levels of:
trons-itted (nu) 5. hours per annu-

3. Total operation costs
(103 Res per onus per
lti louter)

M e basic concept governing the structural design of theml feedlines it
is necessery to insist upon the so-called surface pipeworlt option. which in
general is the lust capital-intensive way to construct the theml neins
network. Surfeoe lines (the new technical tern thst hes cone into use in
recent years) are pipevork lines running just above the ground surfece (the
easier. gep between die bottols of the pipework thernal insulation ad the
ground surface is 30 a) swported by low stenchions.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the ease tiae it is necessary to give top priority to the use of axial
expansion joints not only became of considerations having to do with pos-
sible ground shifts. but priaarily because of operational considerations.
Axial expansion joints are built-in (at designated intervals) hydraulic
resistors which. depending on the disaster of the pipe. compensate for from
? to 7.5 percent of line pressure losses caused by friction within the pipe
itself. while flexible U-type expansion bends. all other things being equal.
cowensats for fron 19.6 to 70 percent of these losses. At the e-e ties.
the use of axial expulsion joints will cut down on the length of the piping
by free 10 to it! percent.

'lhe structural and biological aspects of surface thernal feedline tulip are
discussed in the article by Eng Architect J. Janousdt on page 366.

Surface theral pipelines can be built to rest on articulated saddle sup-
ports (for both supply and return lines). on independent stanchione casted
nonolithicslly. in prefabricated sections. with drilled penetrations. did
so on). and on edaedded piles. ‘lhe lore widespread use of eabedded piles
is closely related for the nest part to the degree to which it will be pos-
sible to reduce the friction coefficient betwcn the pipe seat and the sup-
ports to a value of less than 0.1.

‘lhe Justifieations for surface thermal feedline runs are certainly self-
evident in light of the following cost coaparison sample. With the ease
capital outlay it is possible to deliver free 1.500 to 3.000 aaguatts
worth of therlal energy output by laying surface lines. while with the con-
struction of mdargromd lines (in "unautholed" subsurface conduits) it is
only possible to deliver free 350 to 700 m. Panerally speaking. it can be
said that the long-distance distribution of theraal energy is nore of a
econonic problea rather than an engineering problea. Orb-r planing consid-
erations also have a prowinent role to play in this regard.

In addition to using abovegromd theraal aains and the thorough industrial-
isation of their fabrication md erection, a general reduction in the costs
associated with the distribution of theraal energy night also be proaotsd
by the selection of lower operating teaperatures for cycled water. which in
the long rm would wake it possible to utilize new non-corrosive waterials
for theml Iain pipeworlt and thereby contribute to the sinplification of
their fabrication.

Control Systea Arrange-ants for heat Supply Systeas

One of the lost iaportant taslts that nust be addressed in connection with
the long-distance distribution of theml energy is the establishaent of a
central control systea to oversee the operation of heat supply systene. in
my event. full sutoaation is a basic prerequisite for the reacts control of
such a systea. Ideally. this leans either the full autonation of individual
consu-ers (individual entering) or at least the full auto-anon of all inter-
change stations (aggregate watering). However. in the case of individual

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heat uole metering it is still necessary to arrange for some netering that
will alvays take place at interchange stations (for esnple, the metering of
hydraulic ratios. the tesperature regulation of heat-transfer sedia by scans
of blending. and so on).

with regard to the setered regulation of heat supply systess it is necessary
to start with centralised qualitative setering supplesented by individual
consusar (quantitative) securing that takes place directly at the site of
individual heat consusers. 'ihie is esseplified by the successfully operated
systes used in bratislava in the retreallte residential housing project.

in light of this brief overviev of this problen it can be deduced that as
far as the dispatcher in charge of an entire heat supply systen or thsrlal
sains district is concerned the relay station is still the terninue of my
resote control netvorh (vith regard to the back and forth flou of inforsa-
tion). At the present tile relay stations are being built to operate in a
fully autosated nods. inasmuch as this is also dictated by the growing labor
shortage.

The resote control systes sust also sake provisions for the operation of
pusping stations along thersal nain routes. sectional shut-ol‘f points and
isportant line Junctions. and othu' diverse special installations.

It is in light of these basic considerations that a pin is beginning to take
shape for the resotc control of heat supply systoss in the £888. The lost
isportsnt factor in this systes is the central dispatcher in charge of the
heat supply system who works together vith the dispatcher in charge of the
electric power systen. Regional control centers and peak-lend heating plants
are subordinate to the central dispatcher. Provisions are to be made for the
osteblishnent of regional and central control centers in the case of large
citiu served by a large nt-ber of cooperating heating plants and their as-
sociated heat supply stains or in places where a large power plmt supplies
bent to several cities at the sale tine.

It is also advisable to take advantage of consolidated resote control sys-
tems for heat supply systess. Thus far. the city of Kosice has reads the
greatest progress along these lines in the sansgesent of its heat supply
systes. when it cones to the long-distance distribution of thereal energy,
especially in connection vith the harnessing of sultipurpose nuclear power
plants. voter is still by far a sore advantageous heat-transfer nedius than
those used in existing systess.

33
ton ontcm. use ONLY
ma (WHCMI. USE! ONLY

ENERGOPROJEKT Past, Future
I'rague men-1cm WSTAVBA in Caech No 11. 1978 pp 363-365
[Article by ling Vaclav Kripner. CScl

[Text] No Iajor. guiding trends are reflected in the developeent of elec-
trical engineering in the power industry. 'ihe first trend was a product of
econoeic influences which originally were a function of the development of
the electric power systen in the CSSR and later on of the integration of

the electric power systems of the socialist countries into the intercon-
nected ‘hir" power grid systee. lhe second trend was a product of the
ispact of the new technological vistas opened up in the field of electrical
engineering. in the field of power electrical engineering these trends led
to the naxiealitation of the parameters of and to the winding up of the
mechanization phase of virtually all of the process. involved in the gener-
ation and distribution of electric power. In the electronics field they led
to the Iininturiration and mlcroniniaturieation of equipment and to the un-
paralleled growth of the infornstion science and autonation fields. More
than my other design organisation in the CSSR. ENERGOPROJBKT probably played
the largest role in the promotion of thee two trends.

In the text which follows i will present a brief survey of developeent trends
in the individual electrical engineering fields as they unfolded within the
fraaeworlt of MRGOPROJEKT, and at the seas tine I will also survey md fore-
cast the developments that are eaoectod to take place in thus fields in
future years.

Power Plants

‘lhe first period of ENERGOPROJEKT'a involvesent in the field of power plant
electrical engineering can be characterized as encompassing the development
of and the finding of concrete applications for units equipped with alter-
nating-current electric generators with power ratings ranging between 50

and 55 HR. The installation of these units was spread over two generations
of power plants. The first generation is represmted by the power plants
Tmbovice l, liodonin. and Porici ll. while the second generation included
the power plants Tisova l. Opstovice l, and Helnilt I. The first generation
of these plants was designed strictly on the basis of domestic technological
expertise and it was an extension of the experience gained in this country
by the plants of the Sheds and am [Ceslto-noravska Kolben Danek] enterprise.
At that ties Czechoslovakia was the first country to successfully resolve
questions surrounding the construction of the largest 50 HR ac-generators
and 63 W block transformers and internal plant power circuit problens. A
50 in! am hydrogen cooled prototype aegenerator was used for the first tine
in this fora. in those days conventional cubicle-type 6-ltV switchboards
were still being used in power plants for internal power use requirements.
Designers tapped the knowledge that had been gained in the field of

3';
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production engineering and resolved theoretical questions surrounding the
autosatic starting of electric drive mechanisms so as to insure the fail-
aai‘e operation of power plants in the event of voltage drops or losses in
the power plant itself or in transmission lines. The second generation of
power plants equipped with 55 in: power generating units were already being
designed with a view to taking advantage of cooperation with sister design
organisations in the other socialist countries. Each of these power plants
produced technological innovations such as high-voltage box switchboards,
up-to-date circuit schematics for internal slant power use. progress toward
the semi-automatic operation of electric drive mechanisms in place of inter-
locking nechanises. the elimination of heavy switches in ac-generator branch
lines. and so on.

1he next generation of 110 W power generating units began with the proto-
type 110 m generating unit at the Tisovs 11 power plant and continued to
grow with the installation of similar units in the Tisova Ill. Tusinice l,
ledvice l, Vojany. Novaky, and Prunerov I power plants. Here too a number
of prob less were resolved affecting the design of heavy-duty electrical en-
gineering equipment. working. together with the former Power Engineering
Research Institute. 6-H sheathed conductors were used for the first time.
ENEROOPROJEKT also cooperated with Oil) on the development of lo M" turbo-
motore i' or electrically driven feed punps, and innovations were made in the
development of high-voltage and low-voltage switchgear equipment.

It was during this stage that work had already gotten under way on the con-
struction of nuclear power plants. ‘Ihe design for our first nuclear power
plant (the A1 with three 50 W power generating units) already served as an
indication of the qualitative changes that had taken place in both the power
generation and control aspects of power plant design. First of all. it was
necessary to make sure that the operational safety of nuclear power plants
was placed on a higher level than that of conventional power plants. This
led to the application of 5 ii“ synchronnous motors together with the re-
arrangement of internal plant power circuits, which were ranked according
to their degree of relative importance to internal power use requirements.
‘lhis was accmspanied by the installation of more complex control mechanisms.
which led to the first use of sequential automatic devices. which at that
time were incorporated into the instrumentation base of the "nulte" [trans-
lation unknown, possible typographic error] generation.

The advent of 200 iii! power generating units we marked by the startup of a
test prototype unit at the Ledvice power plant. The Pocerady 1 power plant,
which for test purposes was built outdoors. was one of the first plants to
be equipped with 200 ii" power generating units. After a fairly long inter-
val work rest-led on the construction of the well known 4 x 200 ii" power
plants 'i‘usimice ll. Detmarovice. and Chvaletice, which now represent state-
of—the-art technology in the field of power plant electrical engineering.
These plants can be described as being equipped with ac-generator: with a
hydrogen-cooled rotor and stator coil and a water-cooled rotor. three-phase

35
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

235 NRA block transformers. sheathed and fully shielded iO-M generator con-
ductors, an up-to-date circuit sdnesatic for. internal plant power circuits
coupled with the use of low-lubrication high-voltage circuit breakers and
low-voltage box swi tchboards.

At the present tile a prototype 500 W power generating unit has already
been designed and is now under construction, and work is under way on the
drafting of a design for the 2 x 500 not Optovice 11 power plant. Once
again, the one-generators used in these units are cooled by both water and
hydrogen; a single-phase 570 MM assembly is planned for the prototype unit.
while other plant projects will incorporate three-phase units with the sue
power rating. A qualitative change in electrical systea designs was brought
about by the advent of nuclear power plants, in which these designs are
called upon in particular to account for the impact of nuclear safety
measures on electrical equipment. line first design problem revolves around
the transmission of power plant output, and in this respect it is neces-
sary to ninieite as much as possible drops in plant output being fed into
the transmission line network, which in our countny usually carries a load
of 600 kV. Consequently, a design is being introduced for switchboards
with i-l/2 or 2 circuit breakers per branch line. and where necessary a
polygon design is being used. The second design problem revolves around
snaking provisions for internal plant power circuits that will be available
under all cirenanstances for reactor recooling. Modern equipment is .now be-
ing used. especially in the case of large-scale diesel power plants, as an
emergency power source. This technique was used for the design of the new
V1, V2 6 x 220 nu, and Dukovany 8 x 220 as nuclear power plants.

A new stage in the development of power plant electrical engineering began
with the application of 1.000 ml power generating units for nuclear power
plants. where in nest cases we can look forward to quantitative changes in
the for! of enhanced equipment performance parameters. In this case the
most typical power plant electrical circuit schenatic characterized by the
interlocking connection of the achgenerator and transformer with the branch
line feeding internal plant circuits. with a possible ac-generator circuit
breaker installed ahead of the unit transformer and internal plant circuits.
is still unchanged. in the case of conventional power plants, which are
gradually being phased out in our country due to the fuel shortage, the de-
velopment of power plant electrical engineering equipment came to an end with
the installation of 500 H" generating units. and no future plans are being
eade for any increase in conventional rrwer plant power ratings.

«eating Plants

During its 30-year history ENERGOPROJEKT has drawn up designs for a large
number of heating plants with power ratings ranging between 3 H" and 55 HR,
and these heating plants were designed to serve both the general public and
industrial custoeers. The design format of public heating plants has gradu-
ally evolved into a standardized design plan with output being transmitted by

36
ton orrrcuu. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one or two parallel transformers (e.g., l x 121/6.3 W + 1 x 23/6.3 RV),
most of which are equipped with a generator circuit bredter and a branch
line for internal plant circuits. ‘lhis public heating plant design format
was used for practically all kraj towns and for some okres towns.

In its early days ENERGOPROJEKT was engaged in the drafting of designs for
industrial heating plants for large industrial complexes (the Klement
Gottwald Nu Metallurgical Works, the East Slovakia Ironworks, Staza, the
Kladno United Steelworks National Enterprise, and so on) . The electrical
systems of these heating plants represented one of the biggest jobs ever
undertaken by heavy-duty electrical engineers involving the use of heavy-
duty medium-voltage switchboards capable of handling large operational and
surge current loads and, at the same time, the large recovered voltages,
which are caused in particular by the widespread use of reactors to reduce
power lossa in the distribution of high-voltage loads. ENERGOPROJBKT tried
to reduce the problems associated with the use of heavy-duty switchboards

by means of an original design for industrial distribution based on junction
feeding: by-pssa transformer--industrial transformer—reactor, to which an
ac-generator is hooked up via a circuit breaker. his design was used in
the heating plant serving the Vresov combine, and its effectiveness has been
fully demonstrated.

A special problem for both public and industrial heating plants is posed by
internal power circuit requirements, and internal power consumtion is twice
as great in heating plants as it is in steam condensing power plants: this
led to the development of a boiler-headers-high-voltaga/low-voltage bus-bar
schematic. the use of this scheastic for the feeding of headers or their
lengthwise interconnection in half-headers can accomodate even the most
cowlex requirements.

At the present time work is under way on the development and planning of
specific applications of heating plants equipped with heating units with
power ratings as high as 135 m. The possibility is also being studied of
harnessing the waste heat that could be recovered from nuclear power plants.
1he electrical components of such a system would be more analogous to those
used in conventional power plants.

Electric Power Substations

Hhen ENERGOPROJEKT was just getting started on its work in the field of
electric power substation design it relied on the experience gained in this
area by the plants of the Sheds and cm enterprise, but shortly after it
was founded MCOPROJEKT started to go its own way and developed a number of
original desima.

with regard to 22 kV swi tchgear modules ENERGOPROJEKT, already during the
first years of its existence, had succeeded in consolidating switchgear
design standards that had been diversified by a variety of other enter-
prise, and it was the principal author of the stmdards adrpted later by

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Czechoslovak State Standardization Board for the box-clad design of
22/35 IN switchgear. Later on ENERGOPROJBKT cooperated intensively with
manufacturers in the development of cabinet-clad switchgear.

In the case of 110 kV switchgear too ENERGOI’ROJBKT drew up similar guideline
standards which are now used nationwide. As time went on, other questions
were resolved having to do with the gradual increase in demands for equip-
ment performance parameters capable of handling short-circuit currents rang-
ing between 16 11A to the present day level of 30 RA. The resolution of
these problem celled for the drafting of a amber of theoretical studies
both in the field of electrical contact resistance phenomena and in the
field of electromechanical engineering. Contemporary 110 kV switchgear is
fully standardised and is designed to eccoemodste all required operational
conditions, and considerations pertaining to construction economics have
also been taken into accomt. Depending on where they are to be installed
in the electric power system. 110 RV switchgear schuetics have been drum
up that range from simplified sthmastics (ll-connections and the like),

through simple bus-bars, to dotble and triple systems of bus-bars with an
auxiliary bus-bar.

One of the first tasks assigned to ENERGOPROJBKT after it was founded was
the development of switchgear for the newly built 220 W power system,
which at that time served as the country's main transmission system and was
interconnected with the power systems of Hungary and Poland. Some original
designs were developed in this area that were used in particular in the
substations located at Vyskov, Opoeinek, Liskovec, Sokolnice, Bystritany,
and Krizovaay. At the present time, given the introduction of higher volt-
age loads on power transmission lines, the 220 kV system is no longer being
developed.

Deaigners working in the power line and switchgear fields were confronted
with a challenging [.rcblem in the form of the need to plan and construct a
1.00 RV transmission system. Here too, after resolving all of the theoreti-
cal problems that were involved, ENERGOPROJBKT developed a number of original
designs that were first put to use in the manufacture of 600 RV switchgear
for the electric power substations st Lemesany, liredec, Vyshov, Prosmice,
Sueany, and elsuhere. The scholastic designs selected for this system con-
sisted mainly of double busber systems with one auxillary bus-bar. A
polygon schematic was also used, and for substations which were to be linked
up with high-performance power plants, especially nuclear power plants. a
schnatic was employed that provided for 1-1/2 and 2 circuit breakers per
branch line. At the present time work is underway on the standardization of
these switdwgear designs taking into account all of the latest requirements
pertaining to operation and construction. It is expected that the short-
circuit currents will attain a maximise level of 30 RA; this equipment is re-
quired to net strict standards with regard to performance parameters (e.g.,
the breaking of close shorts, and so on).

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further. ENERGOI’ROJEKT is asking preparations for the next voltage step-mp
level of 750 W. which is slated to become the transsission voltage load for
our power system. this ties on m international leval as an integral part of
the iii-1M potter grid ”Mir." In this regard ENERGOPROJEKT has already pre-
pared a study which surveys the switchgear capabilities of substations in

the CSSR. however. in addition to the technical problems that are involved.
750 kV voltage loads also give rise to more difficult problees of an ecologi-
cal and sociological nature. Moreover. it say be that 750 kit will not be the
last word in voltage load step-ups. so the engineering offices of muco-
i’ROdEKT are gradually gearing up to draft studies that examine the problees
posed by voltage loads of 1.200 in]. which appears to be a realistic prospect
as far as our country is concerned.

Encosed switchgear insulated with SF-G [expansion unknown] gas is another
innovation in the field of electric power substation design. ENERGOPROJBKT
responded very quickly to the challenges posed by this design problea area.
and it has drawn up a nuaber of studies whose findings can be put to use in
the 08511. At the present time work is under way on the drafting of specific
designs in this area (e.g.. designs for the Iiolesovice station. the Praeaclta
110 kV station. the Vyuhov (.00 kv station. and a proposed 750 kv station).
and technical materials are being prepared for other applications. in the
area of 600 IN voltage loads and higher it is to he expected that encased
switchgear insulated with sr-o. especially in view of the ecological con-
ditions that prevail in our country. will eventually coopletely take the
piece of conventional outdoor switchgear.

Distribution transformers used in electric power substations gradually
evalvad from having a unit power out of 16 WA to a unit output of 63 WA

nt voltage loads of 110/22 RV and from being single-phase units with a power
rating of 3 x 33 am (at the Opocinelt substation—3 x 210 mm) to three-phase
units with a prospective power rating of 500 ms at input voltage loads
ranging between 220 and ‘00 RV.

Electric power substations. which constitute a systee consisting of switch-
gear apparntuse and integrated and auxiliary equipoent. are run free con-
trol rooms. The develop-eat of these facilities by ENERGOPROJD‘T started
with conventional high-voltage direct control at voltage loads of 220 W
and eventually tended toward the utilization of indirect controls at sedim-
lcvel voltages and selective controls. At the present tine larger control
rooms are equipped with a small computer serving as at international systes.
Substations supporting voltage loads of 110/22 W are being designed for un-
attended remote control. An autoeated control systee has been designed for
the Guest substation incorporating the use of sequential autolsatic devices
for operational Ianipulation and CRT displays. Electrical protection.

which was originally based on the use of relays. is now being converted to
a semiconductor-based system. and plans are being sade to replace this sys-

teo with progressed control cowuters to be installed in all electric power
substations.

39
ron orncm. use mm
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electric Power System Control Centers

‘ihe abovementioned integration of Crochoslovnkia‘s electric power system
necessarily led to the systems-approach managcnont of the generation and
distribution of electric power with respect to the capabilities of the power
industry and consumer demand levels. This in turn led to the gradual
establishment of power system control centers. which at first were in charge
of the macroregions of Bohuis. horevia, and Slovakia. but later on control
caters were established for smaller regions as wall. According to the con-
ventionsl designs. the equipment used by these control centers consisted al-
nost exclusively of data reporting systess. which transeitted input data

to a system controller who. depending on the decisions he made, would issue
orders calling for changes in generation levels and grid load configurations.
ENIIRGOPROJBKT played a highly active role in the planning and designing of
system control centurs. At the present time it is also deeply involved in
drawing up plans for the cosputerisation of power system management through
the introduction of an integrated. hierarchial autosated dispatch control
system. ihe designs that have been twisted and the designs that are in
the drafting or planning stages are setting up this system on an international
and national level, and they also provide for control centers that will be
in charge of regions. hrajs. and districts and that will be equipped with
computer systems and co-mication trunk lines. To start with. this equip-
ment will serve as a data-reporting and cousnd system. Hort is also con-
tinuing on the refinement of this system in the area of machine decision-
oaking. so that in future years we can look forward to the nearly complete
automation of the electric power system.

Electric Pow" System Design

During the initial stages of the integration of the electric power system,
that is. at a time when there were adequate suppliu of prisary energy re-
sources. when industrial wastes and emissions did not have ouch of ll effect
on the environment. and when laid for power plant construction sites was in
plentiful supply. it was not necessary to go into a great deal of detail in
substantiating decisions concerning the capital construction of power plants.
electric power substations, and trnsmission lines. At that ti. economic
considerations played an especially important role. Consquently. decisions
concerning the development of the power system were made intuitively. often-
times according to the personal preferences of individuals. however. it
was possible for things to go on like this only for a limited period of time
before the adverse effects of this situation bag-I to make themselves flet.
mainly in terms of the pollution and destruction of the environment. For
this reason. it we not very long before mmmm‘r started to dru up
systems-approach studies in which regions ad power systems were viewed as
an integral whole not just from a technical standpoint. but also in terms
of the growth of energy consumption and the supply of energy resources and
the inact on the envirouent. ‘lhe technical side of the problem was also
subjected to a cowrehensive analysis in terms of the computation of trans-
mission loads, load faults. system stability. and minimal and maximal loads.

300
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

lntuitivo concluoiono aro gradually hoing roplaood by oporational analyaio.
which it ouhotmtiolly nhancing tho quolity of ouinooring. ocononic. and
sociological docioion-ulting.

Dooign Hothodology

Aa oorly as tho otart of tho l960'o troditional dooign tochniquoo in tho
fiold of oloctrical onginooring woro oupplooontod and rofinod by tho uoo of
cooputoro for tho making of aciontific ond toohnicol calculations. A anchor
of high-quality progrua woro dovolopod for oaking oloctricol onginooring

ond oloctrooachonical calculation with roapoct to conductoro. drivo
oochonialo. and oloctric pouor ouhotation functiono. At the prooont tioo
work io in ptogrooo on tho dovolopoont of a highly Ioticulouo program for

tho calculation of intornal powor pint powor conm-ption roquitononto that
ontaila tho application of 9ork'o quationo. and thio progr- io boing writton
up in cooporation with tho Ouch lnotituto of 'rochnology in Praguo.

'lho Ioat odvmood lovol. that haa boon ochiovod to doto in tho sodomitation
of tho dooign procoao in roproamtod by tho SAPRO autoootod dooign oupport
oyaton. In thio oroo uneconomi- io working on o dovolopoont took which

will once-polo tho outolotion of Roy docioion-Ialting procooooa rolotivo to
ooloction of ocho-atico and ouhotation conotruction oitoo. onginooring

calculationo. tho drofting of tochnical drawings. and tho writing up of
utoriolo opocificntiono, including notoriolo hudgot cooto. Solo oopocto

of thio progral, o.g.. tho cowutoritod drafting of dooim drowingo. havo
olroady boon put into proctico.

In futuro yooro MROOPROJBKT will ho working on tho fulfill-out of nunor-
ouo took. which oro quolitativoly unprooodontod no highly cooplox. ‘lhooo
tosho will ontoil finding now woyo to gonoroto oloctric powor, tho otudy of
tho uagnotohydrodynooic principle. color onorgy, md finding now waya to con-
oorvo oloctricol onginooring fabricating Iatorialo that an bocooiog in-
croaoingly ocorco throughout tho world. including tho harnoaoing of cryo-
gonic tochnological procooooo. It will be noooooary to finioh work on tho
dovclopnont of control oyatou hoaod on tho utilizotion of new gonorotiono

of coqutcro. BRRGOPROJm'o paat porforumco rocord cortoinly boaro wit-
none to tho fact that it will fulfill thooo now tacks without fail.

OOPYRIGI‘I‘: sun-Noxiodotolotvi 'rochnicho Litorotury. mp. Praguo 1978

1131
CSO: 2600 ' END '

'51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY