FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10700

30 July 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 13/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPIS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

ENERGY
(P000 13/82)

Coutenrs

ELECTRIC Pm

Power and Electrification Minieter on llth Five-Year Plan
I P s. lepororhnyy: EMGE‘I‘IGBSKOYB STROITEL'STVO,

‘0' 81) U0......’OOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Power and Electrification Fir-t Deputy Hinieter on
Construction Projects
(v.9. Palaleyev; meanwnsxwe snorm'srvo,

NW 81) .0.0.0.....0000000..0......OOOOCCOOCOOOOOOOOOO

Atomic Power Station Conatruction. Must Accelerate
(Ll. Senerov; ENERGETICBBSKOYB STROITBL'STVO,

Nov 81) O...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'OOOOOO0.0000COOOOODOOIOQOO

Ate-1c Power Generation in 11th Five-Year Plan
(L.H. Voronin; BMGBTIGIBSKOYB STROITEL'STVO,

NOV 81) 0.000..I0.00000UOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.000...

Prob len- of Energy Production
(Deco Zhi-rin; TBPLOENBRGBTIKA, My 82) o e o c o e e o o o o o e

ENERGY CG‘SBRVA‘I’IN

Chelyabenergo Economizer
(NJ. Shishkin; BLEK‘I’RICHBSKIYB STARTS“, Key 82) ....

- . - [111 - ossa - 37

FO'I OPTICIAL USE ONLY
POUER AND BLECTRIFICATION MINISTER ON 11TH FIVE-YEAR PLAN
Hoscow ENERGBTICBBSKOYB STROITBL'STVO in Russian No II. Nov Blpp 3-5

LXrticle by P. S. Neporoshnyy, 0888 Minister of Power and Electrifica-
tion and corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences: "The
0588's Power Industry in the Forthcoming Five-Year Period17

LText7 The historical 26th Party Congress tallied the results of the

10th-Five-Year Plan and deternined the targets of the party end govern-

ment for raising the well-being of the Soviet people and developing the
national economy.

The rapid growth of production forces end the solution of the tasks

for the social and economic development of the Soviet Union would

not be possible without the deepening end expansion of electrification.
which is based upon the rapid growth of the electric power industry

as a sector of the national economy.

During the past I5 years the development of the national econony has
required an increase in the production of electric power amounting

to I50 percent. During this same time frame the installed rated ca-
pacity of electric power stations has increased I30 percent, anounting
to nearly 267 million k". In I980 the USSR generated I.29£ billion
kH-hours of electricity altogether: I,038 billion kR-hours at ther-

nal electric power stations. I83 billion kR-hours at hydroelectric
power stations. atomic power stations accounted for 73 billion kH-hours.
The installed rated capacity of TBs's in I980 was 20I.9. GBS's was

52.3, and ASS's was I2.S million RH.

In I980 there were 72 power stations with an individual rated capacity
greater than one million k" in operation in the Soviet Union; this
included 32 power stations with a rated capacity greater than two
million k9 each. The total length of high-voltage power transmission
lines today is more than four million kilometers. including 768,000
kilometers of power lines with a voltage of 35 kV and higher.

In the past five-year plan the Kurskaya ABS and the Chernobyl'akaya

ABS were put into operation; they have RINK-I000 reactors. Also
put into operation was a VVBR-IOOO power unit at the Novovoroneehskaya

FOI(NWRJALlEI(ﬂﬂN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.E5. the first fast breeder BN-600 reactor at the Beloyarskaya ABS,
power units with vvsn-aao reactors at the Kol'skaya ABS, and the Ar-
myanskaya and Rovenskaya ABS's. It is necessary to emphasize that

the accomplishment of this extensive program of construction of atomic
power stations was one of the most significant achievements of the 10th
Five-Year Plan: while at the start of the five-year plan the total
rated capacity of then existing atomic power stations was only 6.9
nillion k“, by the final year of the five-year plan there were in oper-
atiun ten power stations with a total rated capacity in excess of 12
million kw and construction was underway on II more ABS's with a total
planned capacity of 50 million RH.

Gas and fuel oil power units with a total rated capacity of 800 RH each
were put into operation at the Zaporozhskaya, Uglegorskaya and Ryazan-
sknyn CRES's; coal-dust power units with a rated capacity of 500 HH
each were started up at the Troitakaya and Reftinskaya GRBS's; and the
first 500 HH power units were put into operation at the Bkibastuzskaya
GRHs-l. The latter power station is the first station of the Bkibastus
fuel and power complex . A unique |.200 NH power unit was put into
operation at the Kostromskaya GEES. ‘

In the 10th Five-Year Plan the series production of central heating
turbines with a per-unit rated capacity of 250 HR was assimilated, as
was the series production plant manufactured gas and fuel oil TBTs's -
the TETs-ZIGN. The first central heating unit with a T-l75/2I0-l30
turbine was put into operation; this unit is designed to use low-grade
solid fuel. A plant manufactured TBTs designed to burn solid fuel -
a TETS- ZlTT - was developed as a section with a T-lBO/ZIO-l30 turbine
(with the intermediate reheating of steam) and a boiler with a steam
uruorating capacity of 670 tons per hour. The first such power units
are to be put into operation during the Ilth Five-Year Plan at the
Gumol'skaya and Khabarovskaya TETs's.

Thu first hydrounits with a rated capacity of 640 MR each have started
generating electricity at the Sayano-Shushenskaya CBS, the largest in
the world. Similar units are producing power at the Ingurskaya CBS, and
the Nizhnekamskaya and Cheboksarskaya GBS's. The final units have been
put into operation at the Nurekskaya, Ust'llimskaya and Zeyskaya GES'a.

Put into operation were 750 kV LBP's: the substation for the L3? be-
tween the west Ukrainian and Al'beitirsha (Hungary). Leningrad and Hos-
cow, the Chernobyl'skaya ABS and the West Ukrainian substation, the
Kurxknya ABS and the Novobryanskaya substation. Also put into opera-
lion were 500 kV LBP's: Tselinograd - Yesil'-Sarbay, Toktogul - Frunze,
Nuvuvoronczhskaya ABS - Donbasskaya substation, and others. Construc-
tion was started on unique power transmission lines with a voltage of
l.500 k" and a direct current and |,l50 kW and an alternating current
from the future Bkibastuzskaya GRBS's to the central portion of the
Soviet Union and to the Urals.

FOR(NTKJALIH“EONLY
A significant increase in the scale and the switch to qualitatively

new ways of developing the electric power industry in recent years has
provided the power industry workers with complicated tasks, which for
the most part they have managed to handle. At the same time we cannot
close our eyes to the serious shortcomings that we have experienced

in recent years. Of the planned introduction of capacities in the I0th
Five-Year Plan, which amounted to 6| million k", a total of seven mil-
lion k“ of capacity was not put into operation.

In spite of the fact that the pace of constructing atomic electric
power stations was better than 200 percent of what it had been in the
9th Five-Year Plan, the pace was inadequate in present-day conditions:
the state plan assignment for the start-up of capacities at atomic po-
wer stations was fulfilled by the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrifi-
cation by only 65 percent in the IOth Five-Year Plan.

There were several reasons for this. As we all know, in the previous
years the basic efforts of the designers and builders were directed
chiefly at improving the construction of thermal electric power sta-
tions. As a result, the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification

was not prepared to undertake an extensive ABS construction program in
the 9th and IOth five-yrar plans; this was caused by the lack of an
adequate number of skilled construction workers who were familiar with
atomic power station construction and the shortage of specialized ma-
chinery and equipment, industrial and the repeated use of concrete forms.
Disruptions in the time periods and completeness of deliveries of equip-
ment by several ministry-level suppliers had a negative effect on the
timely start-up of ABs's, etc. Ultimately, this resulted in the non-
fulfillment of the five-year plan for the introduction of ABSYs.

Another problem was the underutilisation of the installed rated capa-
city of units for thermal electric power stations due to unfinished
construction work. the under delivery of fuel and a worsening of the
quality of the fuel.

In the construction of the electric power network nearly 27,000 kilo-
meters of power transmission lines were not put into operation; this
amounted to nearly IS percent of the power network construction work
that was to have been completed during the five-year plan. The main
reasons for this situation were the inadequate effectiveness of the
design solutions for the foundations and supports of the power trans-
mission lines and, as a consequence, significant amounts of manual
labor. and also incomplete deliveries and nonfulfillment of the stan-
dard time periods for construction.

in power-related construction there was a significant dispersion of
capital investments for numerous projects, which resulted in the ex-
tension of construction time periods. The assignment for labor pro-
ductivity growth was not fulfilled.

F0l¢ﬂ$KJALlHNIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lw lhc llth Five-Year Plan the power industry workers and the power

s'atinn builders must not only make up for lost ground, but achieve
nrw successes.

The "Basic directions for the economic and social development of the
USSR for the years I981 through 1985 and for the period up to I990".
which was approved by the 26th Party Congress, call for the generation
at electricity in I985 to reach 1,550 to I,600 billion kH-hours. For
the AES's the target is 220 to 225 billion kH-hours; and for the 638's
the target is 230 to 235 billion kH-hours.

To fulfill this program it is necessary to assimilate capital invest-
ments and to fulfill an amount of construction and installation work

which exceeds by 20 percent the appropriate indicators for the 10th
Five-Year Plan.

In the years I98! through I985 it is planned to obtain more than 70
percent of the growth in electric power generation at ABS‘s and 685's.
In the European portion of the Soviet Union nearly all growth in the
production of electricity is to come from atomic electric power sta-
tions. for which it is planned to introduce from 26 to 25 million k"
of new capacities at ABS's.

A significant (more than 200 percent) increase in the production of
electric power at atomic power stations in 1985 as compared with I980.
the accomplishment of an essentially new trend in the centralized
hearing of large cities through the construction of powerful ATETs,
particularly the Odesskaya ATBTs with a planned rated capacity of two
million kw, and also the designing and construction of atomic power
and heating plants (AST) in Gor'kiy and Voronezh - all of these de-
vrlnpments promote the improvement of the fuel and power balance of
the Soviet Union and make it possible to substantially raise the
quality of the electrification of all sectors of the national economy
and way of life.

An extensive program for the construction of atomic power stations
was brought about by the need to conserve fuel and power resources,
including the best kinds such as oil and natural gas, and to improve
the structure of the Soviet Union's fuel and power balance.

In accordance with the planned development of the Ekibastuz and Kansk-
Achinsk fuel and power complexes the rated capacity of power stations
near the Bkibastuz coal basin by I985 must be six million kH, while
(Mr rated capacity of the power stations for the Kansk-Achinsk complex
is to be |a6 million k".

The inclusion of the Kansk-Achinsk and Ekibastuz coal in the power
balance of the European regions of the Soviet Union and the Urals has
been complicated by the inadequate carrying capacity of the railroads.
By I985 it is planned to complete a direct current I,500 kV power
transmission line between Ekibastus and the Center and an alternating

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
current |,l50 hV power line from Bhibsstus to the Urals. The lhibastus
to the Center line will be 2.¢00 kilo-stars in length. the coupletion
of these power transmission lines will nake it possible to transfer
each year into the European portions of the Soviet Union and to the
Urals no less than 50 billion kU-hours of electricity; this is the
saae as transporting 35 million tons of Bhibastus coal. which would
require 600,000 railroad cars.

Reducing the shipments of fuel is provided in several instances by the
efficient use of local resources. In the Central Asian region. for
eaaaple, this task is solved by constructing the Angrenshaya and Tali-
mardrhanshaya 6338’s. which burn locally available coal and natural
gas, which will nahe it possible to free as many as 200,000 railroad
cars. The use of tyumen'skaya Oblust natural gas from the oil fields
for the production of electricity will make it possible by I905 to
bring the rated capacity of the electric power stations of the Tyumen-
shiy power complex to 5.5 million kw. In the Ilth Five-Year Plan as
regards the subsequent power units at the already operating Surgutskaya
CRIS-l it is planned to introduce capacities at the Surgutskaya CRIS-2
(l.6 million h“). as well as powerful power and heating plants in the
cities of Tobol'sk and Tyuman'.

One of main directions in optinising the fuel and power balance of the
Soviet Union is central heating. since it provides a substantial reduc-
tion in the relative expenditures of fuel for the generation of electri-
city. The development of central heating and the further centralisation
of heating supply systems for the Soviet Union will be accomplished as
in the previous period, by increasing the capacities of power and heat-
ing plants and the per-unit capacity of the primary and auxiliary equip-
ment at increased parameters of steam and the gradual elimination of
inefficient power equipnent and small boilers. During the years of the
Ilth Five-Year Plan it is planned to introduce lb nillion k9 of capaci-
ty at Tlrs's of the USSR Hinistry of lower and Electrification.

The task of conserving fuel and power resources is being solved by the
construction of large hydroelectric power stations on rivers of Siberia,
the Far East and Central Asia. The rated capacity of the Soviet Union's
largest 638, the Sayano-Shushenskaya crs, will reach 5.2 million 3".
Construction will get underway on new giants of the hydroelectric power
industry - the Boguchanshaya 638 (‘ nillion kw). the Rogunskaya 635

(3.6 million RH), the Bureyskaya CBS (2 million ha). and the 638's of
the Naryn' River cascade and others. The construction of the lishne-
kaaakaya CBS (l.25 million kw) and the Cheboksarskaye CBS (l.b million
kw) will conplete work on the hydroelectric power stations of the
Volga River cascade.

To fulfill the program for the intensive assinilation of hydroelectric
power resources it is necessary to accomplish several measures:

~inprove the design solutions of the primary facilities. providing for

a reduction in consumption of naterials, use of labor and production
cost;

FOI(IUK1ALIEE(HHN
F08¢HWIJALIEI1MNLY

-tho extensive adoption of retaining facilities conprised of earthen
materials;

-tho naxieue use of the durable properties of concrete and rock for
foundations. and also the lore conplete inclusion in the work of the
rock mass, which hold the underground chanber outputs and tunnels:

~Cumbiniug the functions of various elenents of the hydrounit into a
single facility;

-reducing the anount of land that is flooded;

-using technologicbl structures, which lake it possible to nechaniee
work to the fullest extent possible.

The require-ant to force the construction of 638's in the I98! to I990
time period is caused not just by the tightness of the Soviet Union's
fuel and power balance but by the need to regulate the run-off of
rivers for the comprehensive utilization of water resources. and also
by conditions for covering the changing portion of the load schedule.

Ensuring the reliable operation of an has in a balanced. base node is
possible only by introducing within the western regions of the Euro-.
pcun portion of the Soviet Union in the near future soee 8 to IO nil-
lion kw of capacity at water storage electric power stations. For

this reason the construction of CABS must be considered an inportant
aspect of the progran for the developnent of the construction of atoeic
power stations (in the USA, for exanple. at present the capacity of
GABS's is 20 percent of the capacity of etonic power stations). Along
with the GAES's it is necessary to build other naneuverable power
plants - particularly the stean and gas power plants.

The efficient developnent of power colplexes in the eastern regions

of the Soviet Union depends largely upon the timely production of
equipment for the above-mentioned l.500 kV and l.|50 kv power trans-
mission lines. There are no barriers preventing the USSR hinistry of
Power and Electrification fron assinilating the new power transeission
lines: the necessary design documentation has been prepared and the
basic solutions for the line portion of these power lines have been
developed. However. the lag in assieilsting the production of equip-
nent for the. by the electrical equipment industry is threatened by

a delay in the efficient use of power resources. The builders of the
USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification nust speed up the construc-
tion of plants for the manufacture of this equip-ent.

It the present tine the USSR Unified Power Systen (ress) has been
created. The availability of power connections between the power sys-
tens significantly increases the econonicalness and reliability of the
power supply to the national econony. The joint operation of the

power systens in the Yels has nade it possible to install units with a
naxinun per-unit rated capacity and to enlarge the power stations. ln-
creasing the per-unit rated capacity of power stations nakes it possible

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to reduce the anount of naterials used in than and to nora efficiently
use the production capacitiesof the power nachine building plants: it
also pronotes an increase in labor productivity in construction.

The Unified Power Systen has nade it possible through the use of the
optinal loading of jointly operating power stations and increasing

the generation of electricity on inproved equipnent to raise the
econonicalness of the operation of the electric power industry as a
sector of the national econony. During the years I97! through I980
the relative expenditure of fuel per kH-hour of electricity. which

was produced at thernal electric power stations for the Unfied Power
Systen. was reduced fron 366 to 328 grans per hU-hour. which provided
a savings of nore than lOU nillion tons of conventional fuel. Hora
than 60 percent of these savings were obtained due to the optinisation

of operating nodes in all parts of the Tels - power‘stations, power
networks and power consuners.

Not yet included in the USSR's TeBS are the operating power systens
of Central Asia and the Par East and several power systens of dis-
tant regions of the Soviet Union.

The unified power systens of the Suropean CIHA nations are operating
in parallel with the USSR's Teas: Bulgaria. Hungary, Poland. Bast
Ger-any, Czechoslovakia. and Ronania; and in the Best, Hongolia.

The USSR's Yeas provides electric power to several capitalist nations:
Finland, ﬂorway. and Turkey.

During the years of the IOth Five-Year Plan the USSR's 1e88, which
accounts for nore than 85 percent of the Soviet Union's production of
electricity, was further developed. The unified power systens of
Siberia. the Gur'yevshaya power systen, the Kotlasskiy power junction
of the Arkhangel'skaya power systen were connected with the national
power systen. The Central Asian Unified Power Systen was conpleted.

In the Ilth PiveJTear Plan the process of increasing the per-unit
rated capacity of power units and power stations will continue. as
will the creation of large power conplexes. Increasing the per-unit
rated capacity of power stations and the rated capacity of flows and
long-distance power transnission fron power conplexes in the eastern
portion of the 0888's Yels, and also the need to increase the relia-
bility of the 1.23 requires a significant increase in the throughput
capacity of the basic network as conpared with the present level.

On the nain lines (Northwest - Center - South. Center - Volga River
area d Urals - Kazakh SSR - Siberia) the throughput capacity of the
intersysten connections of the USSR's recs nust reach 6 to 6 nillion
k“. The 750 kV electric power networks in the Northwest. the South
and partially the Center will be further developed; enphasis will
be put on electric power networks for carrying and distributing the
capacities of atonic electric power stations. -

FOI(HWKJALUSE(HHX
FOItNWKJALUSEONlV

Problems having to do with the reliability of the national economy's
power supply and ensuring the stability. efficiency and economicalness
of the Unified Power System take on special importance. To efficiently
monitor the Operation of the rats in normal modes considering the sig-
nificant growth in the rated capacity of power stations, the length

and load of intersystem transits. an automatic mode regulation system
is being created for the frequency and transfers of capacity.

Existing means for an automatic system to prevent emergencies have

made it possible to increase the throughput capacity of the basic net-
wbrks of the USSR'a Yeas and to prevent quite a few serious emergencies.
The further improvenent and development of anti-emergency control will'
proceed toward completing the system using centralized computer systems
for nnti~emergency automation in various regions of the USSR's YeBS.and
the development of anti-emergency control systems on the scale of the
power associations and a central coordinating system of emergency pre-
vention for the entire USSR YeBS.

A great deal of attention must be devoted to increasing the technical-
economic indicators of the operation of the electric power networks of
the power systems and. in particular. to reducing power losses and im-
proving the quality of voltage for the consumers. To accomplish this
it will be necessary to raise the degree of compensation of the reac-
tive loads by equipping the network with compensation devices for the
reactive capacity. Thus, the introduction of compensating devices for
just one million kilovars will make it possible to reduce power losses
by 300 million kV-hours per year and to conserve no less than [00,000
tons of conventional fuel.

The USSR Hinistry of Power and Electrification is devoting a great
deal of attention to including new sources of energy within the fuel
and power balance of the Soviet Union. The next 5 to 10 years will be
years of the experinental-industrial assimilation of the first HUD
imagneto-hydrodynamig7 units, and geothermal and solar power units.
The use of solar energy for providing heat in the southern regions of
the Soviet Union can provide an annual savings amounting to 20 to 25
million tons of conventional fuel. Solar electric power stations in
the distant future can provide an output of electricity amounting to
IO percent of all electricity generated in the Soviet Union. In I985
an experimental solar electric power station with a rated capacity of
5 HH will be put into operation. A decision has been made to construct
a large geothermal electric power station in Kamchatka.

The words spoken by the General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee
and Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, L. I. Brezhnev.
must become definitive in our work. The following words were delivered
by Brezhnev in his report to the Party Congress: "The new five-year

plan will be a serious examination for the builders. A special feature

FOI(ﬂTﬂJALUSEONLY
of the five-year plan will be the universal concentration of forces

on the rapid conpletion and start-up of those enterprises, which are
able to provide us with the greatest growth in product output and to
open up the bottlenecks. Re have already embraced this path and we

must follow it without fail."

In conclusion per-it ne'to assure the readers that the Soviet Union's
power workers are handling the tasks posed by the the 26th Party Con-
gress with honor.

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdat, ”Bnergeticheskoye stroitel'stvo", I98!

8927
680: l822/ll9

FOR(MWK]ALUSEONLY
FOR‘OFFK]A[.USE(NVLY

ILHuTRIC PORER

PHHER AND ELECTRIFICATION FIRST DEPUTY MINISTER 0N CONSTRUCTION PBOJECTS

Moscow ENERGETICNESKOYE STROITEL'STVO in Russian No II, Nov 8| pp
6 - ll

LKrticlc by P. P. Falaleyev, First Deputy Minister of Power and
Electrification: "Decisions of 26th Party Congress and the Tasks of
the Power BuildersZY

[Tcxg7 In the llth Five-Year Plan the power industry workers and the
builders of power industry facilities face important tasks in the fur-
ther development of the power industry as one of the base sectors of
the national economy.

In his report to the 26th Party Congress, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev said,
"a mandatory prerequisite for solving all national economic tasks -
both of a production and social nature - is the development of heavy
iLduslry. This concerns its base sectors and primarily the fuel and
energy sectors.”

Nilhin the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification a great deal of
experience has been accumulated in the construction of power industry
facilities; the efforts of the power industry builders have resulted
in the creation of a powerful energy potential for the Soviet Union.
The Reftinskaya, Zaporozhskaya and Uglegorskaya GRBS's, the Bratskaya,
Krasnoyarskays, Ust'-ll'imskaya, Nurekskaya, Zeyskaya, Ingurskays,

and Chirkeyskaya CES's, the Kurskaya, Chernobyl'skeya. and Beloyarskaya
AES's, and many other electric power stations are the pride of the
Soviet Union's power industry.

Quite a few successes in the power industry construction program were
achieved during the IOth Five-Year Plan. New, efficient draft designs
were realized; and the technology for rapid construction was assimi-
lated. Based upon the analysis of the experience that has been accumu-
lated in the area of rapid construction of the Ladyzhinskaya and
Zaporozhskaya GRES’s, designs for powerful thermal electric power sta-
tions have been created, which have 500 and 800 HH power units. The
construction of these power stations is to be done at a rapid pace.
This is particularly true of the Bkibastuzskaya 6885's and the Beret-
ovskaya GREs's of the Kansh-Achinsk Fuel and Power Complex (KATBK).

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'FOIlI‘KJALtSE(NﬂN

The flow-line technology for erecting the nain buildings of the les
using new types of installation cranes. the SIR-22008! end the SIR-
35008!. has been approved for the construction of the lkibastusskeya
cuss-I. The cran es are to be nenugsctured at plants subordinate to
the Blevenergostroynekhanisatsiya [lain Adninistration for the Mechani-
ration of Power Industry Construction7. At present these cranes are

basic to the construction of atonic electric power stations and power-
ful GRBS's.

The construction of series-produced plant-readied gas and fuel oil

thereal electric power and heating plants Lilia-21657 has been essini-
lated.

A beginning was nade for the industrialisation of the construction of
atonic electric power stations. A technology for eanufacturing end
installing sectional panels and reinforced concrete forn units has

been developed and is now being adopted. The concrete for. units are
nade of precast reinforced concrete for the reactor roons and the spe-
cial housings of an AIS. Concrete punps are now being used extensively.

In hydroelectric power station construction - at the Sayano-Shushenskaye,
lngurskaya. Zeyskaya, Chirkeyskeya and other Gls's - advanced experience
in the conprehensive nechanisation of concrete work has becone quite
connonplace. This includes preparing the units for concrete pouring.
transporting, snoothing and thickening of the concrete nixture; it

also includes the use of tents for the pouring of concrete during the
winter, etc. At plants of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrifica-
tion they are now nanufacturing powerful concrete pouring cranes, the
KBGS-IOOO. concrete punps and other nechanisns for concrete work. All
of this has nede it possible to reduce labor expenditures for concrete
work by as nuch as 2.5-fold to 3-fold as conpered with sinilar indica-
tors achieved in the 9th Five-Year Plan.

In the construction of the Kurpseyskaye 633 the so-celled "Toktogul'-
skiy" coeprehensive nechanised nethod of layered concrete pouring has
been further developed. In conbinetion with the use of construction
industry base and the housing built for the Toktogul'akaya 63$ - the
upper stage of the cascade. and the conprehensive nechanisation of
work, they were able over a period of five years (I976-l980) to con-
plete the basic work and to introduce the first unit of the Kurpsay-

skaya CBS. This experience of cascade construction nust be further
developed.

A step forward has been taken in the construction of the electric po-
wer network. the flow-line-rapid technology was successfully adopted
during the construction of the 750 kv high-voltage power transnission
line between Leningrad and Moscow, the Hestern Ukraine substation and
Al'bertirshe (Hungary). the Chernobyl'skaya ABS and the Western Ukrsine
substation, and others.

11

FOIKNWIJALIEEINRJ
FOI¢NFKJALIE£1MNLY

New. industrial support and foundation designs are now in use. This
includes anchor-angle supports with reinforced concrete columns, light
metal supports for the 750 kV power transmission lines. In the con-
struction of substations extensive use is made of sections of rapidly
installed buildings (3H2). Also, the batch transformer unitised sub-
stations (KTPB) of a high voltage are now in extensive use.

nuring the past five-year plan in accordance with the plan for the
adoption of new equipment the industry of the sector hes manufactured
more than 600 new designations of machines. mechanisms, structures

and equipment. which are being used both at plents of the construction
industry and at the construction sites.

It is difficult to enumerate all that the power industry builders have
done that is progressive and efficient. Their experience and achieve-
ments have been given a great deal of publicity in the pages of the
journal BRBRGBTICRBSKOYB STROITBL'STVO and in other publications of
the USSR Hinistry of Power and Electrification. At the same time this
leading experience is often not used on an extensive basis; many me-
negers and the collectives that they oversee at construction projects
continue to work in the old way; this results in a worsening of the
ministry's work indicators overall. This situstion is one of the rea-
sons why the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification failed to
fulfill its assignments for the IOth Five-Year Plan.

During the period I976 through I980 the annual introduction of new
power capacities for the USSR Hinstry of Power and Electrification
amounted to IO to 12 million kw. which was below the planned assign-
ments (such a level was achieved as early as the 8th Five-Year Plan).

The assignments for the introduction of power capacities at the Ski-
bastuzskays GRBS-l were not fulfilled; and the needed pace of con-
struction at the Berezovskeya GRBS-I of the KATRK and the Permskeya
CRES, the Surgutsksya GRBS-I, was-not achieved; and the construction
or power industry projects in the Far Best and Siberia continues to
lag behind.

Construction of atomic electric power stations proceeded very unsatis-
factorily. Throughout the entire five-year plan there were serious
shortcomings in design work. in the delivery of equipment, and par-
ticularly in the organization of work. For this reeson the timely
Completion of power capacities at the Chernobyl'skaya, Kurskaya,
Smolensksya, Yuzhno-Ukrsinskaya and Rovenskaya AES's was not eccomp-
lished; and they did not menage to create started projects for the
fulfillment of the l98l assignments.

The time period for the realisation of a scientific result remains
great - from the concept to its adoption takes from 7 to 9 years.
sometimes longer. As examples of this we can cite the prolonged

time periods for the adoption of continuous methods of doing concrete
and ground-rock work during the construction of dams for hydrounits.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the conhine digging of hydrotechnical tunnels. the technology for in-
stalling power trans-ission line wires under stress, and so forth.

According to estinates of the designers. the use of such an inportant
reserve as the ease adoption of new equipment will wake it possible to
each year assinilate 300 to £00 nillion rubles worth of construction
and installation work without bringing in additional lahor resources..

In the course of the entire five-year plan the allocated funds for the
electric power industry sector were not assinilated. especially for
newly started projects and new construction undertakings; this has
resulted in a reduction in the construction start-up and irregulari-
ties in the introduction of power capacities (as a rule. the introduc-
tion was acconplished at the end of the year).

in spite of the reduction in the level of the use of production capa-
cities of construction industry plants. the schedule for the delivery
of construction structures was largely observed; however, there were
instances when the equip-ent sets were not couplete. In addition.
there was and continues to he a lag in the output of structures of an
increased plant readiness. inventory and rapidly-erected buildings.
inventory concrete forns and other structures.

It nust he noted that the planned assign-cuts for such a key indicator
as the growth in labor produztivity were not fulfilled - the figure

was only I3.6 percent rather than the planned 28.5 percent. This situ-
ation evolved prinarily as the consequence of the unsatisfactory organ-
ization of work, the inefficient use of equip-ent and also significant
losses of work tile. -

During the years of the IOth Five-Year Plan the cost of operating na-
chines and nechanisns increased by ‘6 percent in conjunction with a
growth in the anounts of contract work anounting to 9 percent and a
l3.b percent growth in labor productivity, which attests to unused
reserves in operating the construction equip-eat and leans that are
poorly nechanised.

The percentage of manual labor in the power industry construction ef-
fort was 39.I percent in I980. weaning that it was reduced by only

three percent as conpared with I975. learly 200,000 workers are still
engaged in manual operations within the construction and installation

organisations of the sector.

Up until the present the losses of work tine have renained high; in
this regard. nearly half of the losses take place as the result of
internal prohlels: due to the lack of a work front, the late delivery
of concrete and other materials, and also violations of labor disci-
pline.

The level of adopting the brigade method in I980 was 25 percent as op-
posed to 30 percent called for by the plan; we lag behind the other
construction ninistries for this indicator.

13

FOI¢NWKJALIEI<HHN
FOI(”FKJALIEHEONLY

Such sound forms of socialist competition as the "workers' relay race"
are not being used adequately. The creative cooperation of the scien-
tific-research and design organisations and industrial enterprises
with the builders, which was proven at the Sayano-Shushenskaya GIS. is
not being emulated.

The reduction in the pace of the growth of labor productivity in the
power industry construction is to a large extent caused by shortcom-
ings in work with personnel. Due to the underevaluation of the impor-
lance oi constructing housing during the years of the 10th five-Year
Plan. the plan for the completion of |.300.000 square meters of floor
space and social and cultural facilities was not fulfilled. This ac-
counts for the turnover of labor.

It is necessary to note that the pace of power industry construction
was delayed by several objective reasons as well. These factors must
not be overlooked. The most important of these reasons is the unsatis-
factory provision of the power industry construction projects with ma-
terial-technical resources. During the past five-year plan some
9|5.000 tons of metal. 790,000 tons of cement, and 2.9 million cubic
meters of lumber were not supplied. The supply of materials by quar-
ters was uneven; there were delays in the delivery of certain rolled
metals and pipes. which disrupted the assembly of the structures being
manufactured.

The ministry was not fully supplied with construction machines and mo-
tor transport, particularly powerful, highly-productive machines. 00-
mestic industry still has not assimilated the series production of the
powerful bulldozers, tractors and pneumatic-drive cranes which are so
needed within the sector. Nor can Soviet plants produce complete con-
crete plants with concrete mixers capable of handling 750. 1.200 and
2,500 liters of concrete. concrete mixer trucks, concrete pump trucks
with s high feed of 100 meters or more of concrete mixture, piledriv-
ing units, powerful vibrorollers. plaster and painting units. and
other equipment. including mechanization means for work in the northv~n
regions of the Soviet Union.

The USSR Hinistry of Power and Electrification was equally poorly sup-
plied with machine-tool equipment, welding equipment and materials.
spare parts for the construction machines and motor vehicles, and the
means for low-level mechanization. the need for which was satisfied by
only fifty percent.

There were and now cantinue to be serious shortcomings in providing
key construction projects with both primary and assembly technological
equipment. The violation of the delivery schedules for equipment.

the lack of complete equipment sets and the poor quality of the as-
semblies that are delivered have a negative effect upon the time peri-
ods for the completion of projects; this leads to an increase in the
number of installers amounting to 15 to 20 percent (due to the need

to eliminate defects) and the duration of the installation.

14

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
There is no need to continue the list of shortconings and their reasons
which are hindering our work.

In his report to the 26th Party Congress. L. I. Brezhnev noted on this
score that. "...the chief reason is that the force of inertia. tradi-
tion. and custon. which evolved at a tine when quantity wee nore inpor-
tent then quality. has not been overcone.“ Por this reason our nost
iwportant task is to eliminate outdated traditions end cuetons.

As the Chair-an of the USSR Council of Ministers U. A. Iihhonov pointed
out in his report "Basic directions for the econonic end social devel-
opnent of the USSR in the years I98I through I285 end for the period

to I990“. "the IIth Five-Year Plan will be the first stage in the real-
izetion of L. l. Brezhnew's energy progren, which was developed at hie
initiative. the growth in the production of electric power will take
place largely through the use of nuclear fuel, hydroelectric power.

and the use of coal in the eastern regions of the Soviet Union. In

the years I98! through I985 the atonic power stations and hydroelectric
power stations will account for nore than 70 percent of the growth in
electricity generation; in the European portion of the Soviet Union
these sources will provide elnost ell growth in power production. The
construction of large thernal electric power stations is to be based
upon inexpensive coal. extracted by the strip-nining nethod in the
Kensk-Achinsk and Bkibastue coal basins.” Thus. the party congress
docuncnts clearly define the tasks for the developeent of the power
industry end hasic changes in its structure.

In the IIth Five-Year Plen the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrifica-
tion nuet:

-introduce new power capacities enounting to 70 million k", including
25 million kw et eto-ic electric power stations;

-introduce at full capacity the akihaetueahaye GRBS-I (eight power
units of 500 NH each), the first power units at the GRBS-Z and the
first 800 HR power unit at the Beresovskaye GRBS-I;

-speed up the construction of the Surgutekeya GRBS-Z. having ensured
the introduction at this power station of the first 800 HR power units;
and to undertake work on other electric power stations in this region:

«couplete the construction of the'Seyano-Shushenskeya, Nizhnekalskaye.
Chehohaershaye 688's and to continue work on the other hydroelectric
power stations; to complete work on the Zegorskaye CABS Lwater storage
electric power station? - the first powerful water-storage electric
power station in the center of the European portion of the USSR;

-continue the canstruction of electric power stations in Siberia. the
Far East. and Central Asia considering the need to ensure the inten-

sive growth of power consunption and the conprehensive use of water
resources;

15
FORilmkﬂALIEHIONLY
RORCFFHJALlEE(”ﬂN

ntu put into operation the largest. intersysten alternating current
|,I50 kV power transmission line between the cities of Bkibastuc -
Kustanay - Chelyabinsk; and to continue the construction of direct
current l.500 kV power lines;

-to continue (using the forces of the USSR ninistry of Power and Blee-
rrilication's construction organisations) the construction of indust-
rial projects for other ministries.

The overall program of contract work while preserving the load on in-
dustrial construction at the level of the current year will increase
to 36 billion rubles, with an actual fulfillment of the program in the
IOth Five-Year Plan of 30 billion rubles.

The fulfillment of these tasks is connected with several specific fea-
tures and difficulties.

The thermal electric power stations that are now under construction
and which will burn coal require a higher consueption of naterials
than do the gas and fuel oil power stations. which were built pre-
dominantly in the previous period. The atomic electric power stations
according to design solutions and production technology of the construc-
tion and installation work. as is known, are more complicated and ma-
terials-intensive than are the therasl electric power stations. In
constructing an ASS there is a significant increase in the relative
labor expenditures; and the workers and engineering and technical
personnel must have a higher skill level. in connection with this

the physical volumes of work in the llth Five-Year Plan will increase
significantly as compared with similar volumes in the 10th Pive-Year
Plan (See Table).

u...— ._.—__———_—_——

Actually fulfil- To be fulfilled
led in IOth PYP in Ilth PYP

m

Ground clearing

(cubic meters) 6,0I8,3$3 b.805.266
(ll926 percent)

Loading and unload-
ing (thousands of tons) 865,105 l.068.7|6
(12!.2 percent)

Installation of construc-

tion structures (thousands

of tons) l06.833 129.872
(123.9 percent)

Concrete and reinforced

concrete (thousands of

cubic meters) 50.662 50.662
(l|$.6 percent)

16
FOI(MTIJALUSBONLY
Pbastering, thousands of
square meters 109,565 125,326

(Ilb.6 percent)
Painting, thousands
of square meters 298,7!1 36$.l6l

(ll5.2 percent)
Roofing from rolled
materials. thousands of
square meters 36,|77 $6.806

(l3l.l percent)

* The growth in volumes of work is given as a percent enclosed
within parentheses.

The fulfillment of such volumes of work will require large expenditures
of labor and an appropriate increase in the number of workers, if there
is not a substantial improvement in the organisation and technology

of construction and a sharp increase in labor productivity is not ob-
tained.

The majority of the power industry construction projects of the llth
Five-Year Plan are being built in uninhabited regions far from the
existing large construction organisations and construction industry
bases. In connection with this to fulfill the established assignments
for volumes of construction and installation work and the introduction
of power capacities at these projects it is necessary to do more work
to strengthen existing and to create new construction collectives.
after carrying out an extensive program of building housing and cul-
tural and social facilities.

Raising the technical level of the engineering and technical workers
and the skills of the workers takes on special importance. It is
necessary to also take into consideration that in the 1980's there
will be a reduction in the growth of labor resources, which in turn
will create great difficulties in the assembly of new projects by
personnel brought in from the outside.

These and other difficulties for accomplishing the power industry pro-
gram of the llth Five-Year Plan require the search for effective ways
to overcome them. Comrade L. I. breshnev provides a clear and precise
answer to this problem in his speech to the 26th Party Congress: "Bach
sector faces its own pressing tasks and specific problems. But there
are problems which are common to all spheres of the national economy.
One such problem is to complete the switch to the predominantly in-
tcnsive path of development.” It is precisely on the basis of the
intensification of construction and installation work during the
construction of power industry facilities that we can successfully
solve the tasks that we face. For their practical realization it is
necessary for us to:

17
FOI(MWKJALUSIONLY
FOR(M$NJALIﬂﬂZONLY

-4ll construction and installation organizations must more extensively
adupl the advanced experience that has been accumulated within the
power industry construction program;

-pr1ctical measures must be taken to implement the scientific-techni-
cal developments, which ensure the adoption of more efficient design

solutions and progressive technology for the execution of construction
and installation work;

-more attention must be given to questions having to do with conserv-
ing labor resources and their rational use; and s reduction in losses
oi work time must be achieved.

Stemming from the basic assignments of the 26th Party Congress, with-
in the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification specific measures
have been developed to raise the efficiency of construction work and
to improve the organization and technology of power industry construc-
tion during the years l98l through 1985 and to conserve material and
labor resources. The most important of these measures are the follow-
ing.

-raiaing the organisation level of planning. management and economic
work in accordance with the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and
the USSR Council of Ministers "regarding the improvement of planning
and strengthening the influence of the economic mechanism upon raising
the efficiency of production and the quality of work."- To solve this
problem as quickly as possible within the current five-year plan it

is necessary to:

-to accomplish the planning of capital investments and construction
and installation work on power industry projects in strict compliance
with the norms for the duration of construction and the plant stan-
dards; to decisively fight against the dispersal of capital invest-
ments. by concentrating funds primarily on the key projects. for
which it is necessary to reexamine the title lists of power industry
projects for the years I98! through 1985;

-to provide in conjunction with the five-year plan and annual plan-
ning a balance of the plans for construction and installation work
with the capacities of the contract organisations, and also with the
labor. material, and financial resources;

-to develop a plan of action for raising the labor productivity in
power industry construction during the years I981 through I985;

—to develop and realize measures aimed at improving the economic work
at all management levels of the USSR Hinistry of Power and Electrifi-
cation;

—to conclude the development of a general plan for sector management,
including power industry construction, and to hasten its adoption:

l8

FOI(MFKJALLBE(NHN
-to create a network of all-union construction and installation and
industrial associations and to strengthen small-scale construction and
installation organisations; to organise additional specialised sub-
elements. which specialise in certain types of work at the ABs's.
ones's. 638's and Ghts's which are under construction; to improve the
structure and specialisation of the construction and installation or-
ganisations. which construct power networks; and to eliminate suhele-
ments which are functioning in parallel;

-to develop existing and create new automic control systems within the
construction and installation associations, trusts. organisations and
construction industry enterprises; to improve the quality of manage-
ment and engineering preparation at the projects under construction;

-to develop and accomplish a system of meesures to strengthen control
and personal responsibility of auhelement managers of the central ap-
paratus and construction and installation associations and organise-
tions fbr fulfillment of the assignments for power industry construc-
tion.

A radical improvement in the work of the design and scientific-research
organizations. raising its efficiency, reducing the time periode for
adopting progressive developments. Improving the designing based upon
the standardisation of components. structures and equipment, the unit-
ised assembly of buildings and facilities, the use of construction-
technological assemblies and construction structures of a high plant
readiness. To solve these problems it is necessary to:

~to develop and adopt standard, unified designs of thermal electric
power stations with power units having a per-unit rated capacity of
500 NH. which burn Bkibastus high-ash content coal; and with power
units having a per-unit rated capacity of 800 HH which burn Kansk-
Achinst coal. as well as the natural gas and by-product natural gas
from the Surgut oil fields;

-to create and adopt a standardised ABS design with VVBR-IOOO reac-
tors and n design for a series-produced ABS with RluK-IOOO reactors;

-to use the economic advantages of constructing power complexes within
the composition of the ABS's. GABS's. and 638's as was done at the
Yuzhno-Ukrainskaya complex;

-to bring the level of using industrial prefabricated structures in
the above—ground portion of en ABS to 60 - 70 percent;

-to conclude the designing of the series-produced coal dust plant-
nanufactured TBTs as it applies to ell kinds of turbine equipment;

-to cone up with standardized designs for GABS's with hydrounits with
a per-unit rated capacity of 200 HH, rated for a pressure of 80 to
l20 meters;

19

FOI(HWK1ALLNE(DﬂX
FOI(”WKJALUSEONLY

-tu provide for the total standardization and a high degrees of plant
readiness of prefabricated reinforced concrete form units and panels
fir AES's, reinforced concrete and steel supporting structures, wall
enclosures, roofing, partitions, pipelines and structures for the
buildings of the 6885's, ABs's and GABS's that are under construction;

-to stipulate the use of new types of foundations and footings (includ-

ing pile-supported). and also the use of the "wall in the ground" me-
thud;

-ta more extensively adopt in the construction of underground facili-
ties and hydrotechnical tunnels lightened forms (using pre-stressed
anchors. vibro-pressed and poured concrete, etc.);

-to achieve the maximum standardisation of structures used in the con-
struction of power networks. considering the specific nature of region-
al conditions: to develop special structures of foundations beneath
the supports of power transmission lines (including for rocky. perma-
frost. and heaving soils). and also the thermal pilings; to create

new types of steel and reinforced concrete supports for power trans-
mission lines;

-to develop end adopt new types of rapidly installed substations, in-
cluding the assembled 220-!!0 kV transformer substations. and also the
35/!0 kV unit-type assembled transformer substations for supplying
electricity to rural areas;

-to expand the adoption of efficient materials and structures and sises
of rolled metal, fireproof coatings for steel structures. polymer rol-

led materials. grade 500 and higher claydite-concrete. and the ash and

slag from TBs's.

Improving the organisation and technology of construction and instal-
lation work by exp nding the use of high-speed and flow-line methods,
the adoption of efficient design-technological solutions. new types of
construction equipment and special attachments; raising the quality
of construction and installation work. To improve the organisation
and technology of construction it is planned:

-to adopt a set of measures aimed at initiating the continuous flow
line in construction of the GRBS's for the Bkibaatus and Kanak-Achinsk
fuel and power complexes with the creation and assimilation of the
capacities of regional production-assembly bases (RPKB);

-during the construction of ABS's with VVBR-IOOO reactors according

to a standardised design to realise the experience available at the
Zaporoshskays ABS in organising the high-speed and flow-line construc-
tion, and to assimilate an efficient high-speed technology for erect-
in; protective casings for the reactor sections: to adopt a progres-
sive technology for the installation and concrete work of large rein-
forced concrete ind steel compartments of an increased plant readiness
for well structures, and also pre-stressed coatings for special hous-
ings and AES reactor sections;

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-to develop and use automatic equipment for the welding of vertical and
horizontal seams in the steel facings of reactor sections;

-to improve the volumetric reinforced concrete cells of structures
without welded connections of the fitting and to adopt them in the
construction of RINK-type reactors;

-to assimilate the highly industrialized technology for the production
of monolithic concrete work using modern concrete pumps. concrete mix-
ing trucks. conveyor transport, etc.;

-to develop and adopt highly-efficient methods and means for monitor-
ing the quality of basic construction and installation work;

-to create the mandatory technology of construction and installation
work for projects being constructed at thermal electric and atomic
electric power stations, including series-produced stations. having
planned for the expansion of the frequency of using inventory concrete
forms. the use of construction and construction-technological fully
plant-prepared units. the use of rolled coverings for floors and fin-
ishing of facilities, etc.;

-to adopt a progressive technology in the execution of special and
installation work (in particular in the installation of thermomechhni-
cal equipment). and also the optimising installation units of equip-
ment. and to use new installation mechanisms, to adopt industrial
structures. to assimilate the method of spray-coating compositions on
coverings; in the installation of electrical equipment and means of
automation to accomplish the enlargement and adjustment of equipment
outside of the area of installation, and to make more extensive use

of volunetric units;

highly efficient inventory prefabricated. container and mobile build-
ings. to develop and adopt mobile and transportable boilers for a tem-
porary heating supply systems to housing and construction industry
bases at power stations under construction, a transportable concrete
mixing unit with a |,500 liter capacity, rapidly installed cement
storage facilities. concrete mixing units and other projects for the
concrete mixing work;

-to create and assimilate highly-mechanized equipment sets for carry-
ing massive concrete jobs for the construction of hydroelectric power
stations, including the continuous conveyor pouring of concrete in
complex reinforced facilities;

-to adopt cyclical-flow-line methods for erecting rock and.dirt dams.
which require the use of conveyor transport and special equipment for

the layered vibro-compacting of earth, and also to assimilate the con-
tinuous technology for backfilling earthen masses;

21

FOI(ﬂWKJALI£ﬂf0NLY
FOICWFKJALIEHEONLY

-in the construction of GABS's to assimilate the comprehensive mechan-
izvd technology for manufacturing and installing preassembled steel
reinforced concrete large diameter pipelines. to develop and adopt

the technology for preparing and pouring fine-gravel concretes, high
speed methods for developing and reinforcing power unit trenches in
soils that are not water saturated. and also the comprehensive tech-
nology for the year-round erection of dams out of local materials us-
ing continuous transport;

-in the underground hydroelectric construction to develop and assimi-

late light-weight structures for facilities. new technological methods
(ur the construction of projects using blast-hole and combine methods

of tunneling and highly efficient ventilation systems. new technology

for rigging large-span drifts, which call for the use of the rock

mass and anchors with a high support capacity;

-in electric power network construction to develop and adopt a progres-
sive, highly-mechanized technology for constructing the first section
of a I.SOO kV direct current power transmission line between Bkibsstuz
and the Center and a l.lSO kV alternating current power line between
Ekibastus and the Urals;

-to assimilate methods for the flow-line and flow-line-high-speed con-
struction of electric power network projects;

-to develop and use progressive highly-efficient work technologies
for laying foundations, installing supports, wires and cables in the
construction of high voltage power transmission lines of different
voltages;

-to create and adopt the technology for the construction of power
transmisison lines using new design solutions - foundations beneath
the supports of new types, special foundations for permafrost, heaving
and Soil soils, foundationless securing of supports in rock. thermo-
pilings. and also new efficient support designs; to adopt the tech-
nology for the rapid construction of substations using 3H2 sections.
UTsB units and other progressive solutions;

-to develop and use standard technological documentation for electric
power network construction;

-to create and adopt an efficient system for supporting power trans-
mission line and substation construction with material-technical re-
sources in the form of technological equipnent sets.

The extensive use of progressive machinery and mechanisms. the devel-
opmcnt of special means of mechanization and transport, the further
mochanisat’on of heavy and labor intensive processes. reducing the
percentage of manual labor. In the area of improving the nechaniza-
tion of work it is planned:

22

FOICWTKJALUSE(”HN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-to increase the capacity and productivity of construction machinery
now produced by industry, which will make it possible by I985 to free
8,000 to 10,000 highly-skilled machine operators;

-to more extensively adopt special machinery, including mobile concrete
mixing cyclical-action units. capable of operating at minus 30 degrees
c.. concrete mixing trucks with a capacity of 1.7 to 8 cubic meters,
concrete pumps, heavy vibrorollers, machines for mechanizing the con-
struction of 750, I,ISO and l,500 kV power lines;

-to adopt for power industry construction no less than 50 designations
of new highly-productive construction machines, mechanisms and equip-

ment, not now supplied by Soviet industry, including new machines and

mechanisms for the construction of power transmission lines;

-to manufacture during the five-year plan at plants and repair enter-
prises of the USSR ministry of Power and Electrification the means for
small-scale mechanization, mechanized tools and attachments amounting
to not less than 350 million rubles; to develop and assimilate at
plants of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification not less than
80 types of new efficient means for small-scale mechanization; to
modernize and construct plants for the production of small-scale me-
chanization means;

-to raise the efficiency of the operation of the trailer park through
the intensive use of trailers for shipping fillers, brick, thermal in-
sulating materials, and large reinforced concrete articles;

-to ensure an annual reduction in the inter-shift idle times of ma-
chines amounting to not less that 2 to 3 percent by improving the or-
ganization of construction and installation work and raising the level
of the technical readiness of machines.

The growth in industrialization through the adoption of progressive
design solutions, the development of the construction industry, the
use of new structures and materials. It is planned:

-to provide the allocation of capital investments, material and labor
resources for the development of a base for the construction industry
primarily for the construction of atomic electric power stations,
energy complexes, and also hydroelectric power stations in Siberia
and the Far East;

-to develop and execute a program for the modernization and equipment
refitting of the enterprises of the construction industry in order to
fully realize available reserves, to bring the level of the use of
production capacities of plants of the construction industry to 90
percent:

-to expand the production of architectural parts of a high plant rea-
diness for housing and cultural and social construction projects;

23

FOR(”WKJAL[EE(NVLY
FORlOFFKJAl.USE(NNLV

-lu raise the quality and degree of plant readiness of construction
stluctures, to adopt a system of comprehensive deliveries of metal
and prefabricated reinforced concrete structures, including parts for
larue-panel house building (KPD):

-lu organize the mass production of structures for the construction of
:u.nﬁr electric power stations, by providing (starting in 1982) for

th manufacture of not less that 70,000 tons of reinforced metal struc-
turus of walls and facings and not less than 150,000 cubic meters of
reinforced concrete form spatial units per year;

-to speed up the construction of atomic power station construction com-
bin-'8;

-to increase the annual volume of manufacturing of light-weight struc-
tures; by I985 to raise the output of "sandwich" type panels made of
polymers (especially as substitutes for metal pipelines, which are sub-
ject to the agressive environments) and to raise the production of

such panels to l0,000 tons per year;

-to accomplish the construction of 22 units for the recovery of ash
and slag wastes and to provide for the extensive use of ash in power
industry-related construction;

-to increase the amounts of prefabricated housing construction, pri-

marily for atomic power stations that are under construction. by pro-
viding by I985 for the growth in capacity for KPD production through-
out the ministry to 6,000,000 square meters, and to provide an 85 to

90 percent useof large-panel houses; all plants are to switch to the
production of an improved series of houses.

For conserving material resources based upon an improvement of planned
norms and production expenditure norms, the adoption of economical
design solutions, improving the organization and technology of con-
struction work it is planned to reduce (as compared with I980) the ex-
penditure of rolled metal by 7.2 percent and cement by 6.2 percent.

It is necessary to accomplish several measures to improve the material
technical support system. to strengthen control over the timely reali-
zation of allocated funds and also to deal with pressing problems that
arise at the construction sites.

Control must be improved over the expenditure of materials in construc-
tion and at construction industry enterprises.

0n the basis of these measures for raising the efficiency of power in-
dustry construction the ministry must ensure the growth of labor pro-
ductivity by 2| percent, including in I981 - on the average by 6.3
percent through the adoption of progressive design solutions (4.6 per-
cent), mechanization of work (6.3 percent), improving the technology
and organization of production (7.5 percent), and improving the organi-
zation of labor (0.8 percent).

24

FORIHWuJALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Special importance is attached to problems having to do with the more
efficient use of the work force. In the I0th Five-Year Plan it was
planned to emphasize a reduction in the number of workers engaged in
construction and installation work and an increase in workers in the
services and related areas. Thus. the percentage of workers engaged
primarily in construction was reduced from 68.3 percent in I975 to
65.6 percent in I980, while workers in the services and related areas
increased from 3|.7 percent in I975 to 35.5 percent in I980.

During the 10th Five-Year Plan the number of workers engaged in pri-
mary construction increased by 7.650 men, or I.5 percent, while those
engaged in services and related areas increased by 36,000 men, or by
l3 percent.

The numbers of engineering and technical workers (ITR) are increasing
more intensively as compared with ordinary laborers. During the five-
year period the number of ITR and employees increased by I3,600 men.
while the number of workers of ordinary laborers fell by 7,000 men.
The number of ITR and employees per I00 laborers increased from 21

men in I975 to 24.7 men in I980.

This trend is the consequence of shortcomings which exist in the struc-
ture of organizations and in numerous management elements. The entire
growth in the work force must be directed at construction and instal-
lation work and more work must be done to improve the structure of
workers that has evolved.

Expanding the sphere of the use of the brigade method. the adoption of
new forms of socialist competition, improving the forms of moral and
material incentives, improving the work with personnel and reducing
the turnover rate. the realization of plans for housing and cultural
and social facility construction, and raising the skill-level of work-
ers - these are the crucial problems of personnel policy. ror the sol-
ution of which it is planned:

-to accomplish measures for the more efficient use of material and
moral incentives, which will tend to keep workers on the job;

-to develop and accomplish a program for the rapid construction of
housing and cultural and services facilities for the fuel and energy
complexes, atomic power stations and power industry facilities which
are located in remote and sparsely populated areas of the Soviet
Union;

-to develop and organize in each organization the adoption of a sys-
tem of social measures aimed at reducing labor turnover and stabiliz-
ing the labor collectives;

-to provide for a reduction in the percentage of manual labor from

39 percent in I979 to 35 percent in I985 by reducing labor-intensive
basic kinds of jobs;

25

FOR(HWK]ALUBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-to develop and adopt in power industry construction practice a system
oi mobile construction and installation organizations, expeditionary
and watch construction methods;

-to raise the efficiency of the system for raising skill-levels on
problems having to do with the economics and manageaent of power in-
dustry construction for the managers of construction and installation
and industrial associations, trusts and production organizations, by

devoting special attention to the training of workers and ITR for the
construction of atomic power stations.

The realization of these vital measures as well as the proposals of

the collectives of construction and installation organizations, the
design and scientific—research institutes, the design bureaus. the
onlvrprises of the construction industry. the operating services,

the start-up and adjustment elements and other subelements will make

it possible to successfully fulfill the assignments spelled out in the
decisions of the 26th Party Congress and the State Plan for the econo-
mic and social development of the USSR for the years |98| through I985.

To achieve these goals for the development of power industry construc-
tion and construction work will require a great deal from the forces
oi all labor collectives of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrifi-
cation. It is necessary to critically review its possibilities. to
identify additional reserves, to eliminate existing shortcomings, and.
what is particularly important, to improve the style of engineering
and technical and administrative management.

"we are speaking of a style of work, which organically combines
assiduity and discipline with bold initiative and enterprise. Prac-
ticalness and efficiency - with an aspiration to accomplish great
deeds. A critical attitude toward shortcomings - with an unwavering
conWidence in the historical advantages of the path that we have se-
lected." These are the instructions of the General Secretary of the
CPS" Central Committee, Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme
Soviet, Comrade L.l. Brezhnev. And they must become the foundation
for the practical work of each manager of the sector's enterprises
and organizations.

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdat. "Bnergeticheskoye stroitel'stvo", I98!

8927
030: l822/Il9

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POUBR

ATOMIC POKER STATION CONSTRUCTION MUST ACCELERATE

Moscow ENERGETICRESKOYE STROITEL'STVO in Russian No II. ﬂov 8| pp lb-l?

LArticle by A. N. Semenov, Deputy Minister of the USSR Ministry of
Power and Electrification: "Tasks of the Design, Construction and In-
stallation Organisations in Reducing the Amount of Time for and Rais-
ing the Efficiency of Constructing Atomic Electric Power stationszj

LiestT In the IOth Five-Year Plan the construction of atomic electric
power stations (ABS) was developed at a rapid pace. The annual volune
of construction and installation work in AES construction increased
from 2l0 million rubles in I976 to £60 nillion rubles in I980. The
average annual growth of this indicator was 2‘ percent during the
years of the IOth Five-Year Plan.

Experience in AES construction has demonstrated the full complexity
of the tasks associated with the development of a new field of the
power industry. The high requirements upon the skill level of con-
struction and installation personnel have resulted in the need to
create specialised collectives of builders and installers.

The carrying out of a large program of ABS construction has made it
necessary to come up with some serious measures to ensure the conpre-
hensive material-technical supply. organise the manufacture and de-
livery of special prefabricated reinforced concrete and steel struc-
tures. equip the constructiOn organisations with large-capacity in-
stallation cranes. concrete pumps and other construction equipment.

and also observe time periods and completeness of equipment deliveries.

Putting an A85 in areas that are far from the large populated areas
has required the construction of well-appointed settlements for the
many thousands of construction workers and AES operators.

In the IOth Five-Year Plan subeleaents of the USSR Ministry of Power
and Electrification devoted a great deal of attention to the creation
of a production base for the further undertaking of AES construction.
The Zaporozh'ye house building conbine and the Southern-Ukrainskiy and

Smolenskiy KPD llarge-panel house buildingT plgnc. wet. put into opera-
tion, with capacities of l50,000 and £0,000 square meters of articles

27

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FORCNTNJAL.USE(NNLY

per yvar, respectively. The Chernobyl'skiy, Kurskiy and Burshtynskiy
house building combines were modernized. The Kurskiy non-standard ABS
equip-en: plant was put into operation; and construction was started

an the Zaporoshskiy non-standard equipment plant. The specialized con-
struction structures combine at the Zaporozhskaya ABS began manufactur-
ing product; similar combines are now being built at the Chernobyl'skaya.
Kurskaya, Balakovskaya and Khmel'nitskaya ABS’s. Other prefabricated
reiniorced concrete and steel structures plants are now being modernised.

In addition, during the years I976 through I980 at A38 settlements some
l.367,000 square meters of housing have been built; schools for l2.020
students and kindergartens for 5,470 children have been built. Other
social and cultural facilities have also been constructed.

However. in spite of the significant amount of work completed by the
subelements of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification, the
plan for completing AES's during the IOth Five-Year Plan was not met.

The nain difficulties encountered by the ministry had to do with the
lack of balance between the assignments for introducing power capaci»
ties and the funds, material-technical and labor resources, and the
capabilities of the construction-installation organizations that were
earmarked for this work. The inadequate undertaking of construction
and installation work and housing construction has resulted in an in-
crease in the amount of time required for AES construction. It has
also disrupted the pace of introducing capacities during the year (ca-
pacities are chiefly introduced in the fourth quarter) and has result-
ed in an extreme concentration of workers in the pre-start-up and
start-up years. This has had a negative impact upon the quality of
construction and installation work and the labor productivity of the
workers.

Thr principle of the rapid construction of housing and cultural and
social and service facilities has been violated. The design organi-
zations have taken a formal attitude toward designing ABS settlements -
they have not taken into consideration the real changes in the demo-
graphic cOmposition of the settlements. This has made it impossible

to create needed conditions for the placement of A35 builders, instal-
lors and operators on a timely basis.

The lack of a smooth pace in carrying out work has hindered the ration-
al utilization of construction-installation equipment. which. it should
be noted, the All-Union Association Soyusatomenergostroy does not have
enough of. The amount of machinery available to labor within this
association is 3,300 rubles L per workegj. which is half the amount
available in the better equipped main administrations: Glavgidroener-
go and clavenergopromkompleksstroy.

There have been serious shortcomings in the designing of AES's. Tep-
loelektroproyekt and Gidroproyekt imeni S. Ya. Zhukov are the two main

institutes, which were given the job of designing atomic power stations.
They have not always provided the development of technical-economic

28

FOR(”$“JA1.USF(MNLY
justifications and the technical designs for start-up and initial
sets of work for several Als's. At present there are soae projects
scheduled for coapletion during the IIth Pive-Tear Plan for which
there are no technical designs.

The quality of the designs has. not always been satisfactory.

There are delays in work connected with the creation of standardised
ABS designs. The individual designing of alaost every ABS in connec-
tion with changes in technological equip-ant has aade it necessary

to nade systeaatic revisions to designs. which has coaplicated the
engineering preparation work. These prohleas and the factthat the ABS
construction sites are not adequately supplied with aodern, nobile
construction and installation equipsent have delayed the adoption of

a progressive technology for executing work.

The inadequate industrialisation of ABS structures and the fact that
industrial enterprises are not prepared to manufacture structures for
Als's have aade it inpossihle to achieve the needed level of labor

productivity.

In addition, in the years I978 through I980 there were significantly
increased deaands placed upon ensuring the safety of operating atonic
power stations and protecting the environ-cut. In connection with
this several reserve and other systens were put into operation. which
ensure ABS safety. Appropriate changes. which ensure AIS safety in
conditions of the strongest seisaic activity. were incorporated into
the designs.

These circunstances have resulted not only in the need to rework a
significant aaount of design docuaentation but also in the increase
in the aaount oi construction and installation work on the start-up

sets of power units.

Mention lust also he made of the shortage of skilled personnel, includ-
ing both the designers and builders of atoaic power stations.

For exanple, at the Gidroproyekt Institute ineni 5. Ya. Zhuk they re-
ceive significantly fewer young specialists than they did five years
ago; this is true even though the anount of work for designing ABs's
with RBHK reactors has increased aarkedly over the past two five-year
plans. The nunher of leading specialists, technologists and builders
engaged in ABS designing at Gidroproyekt has fallen rather than gone
up. Thus. in I976 at the Moscow, Leningrad and Ukrainian depertnents
of this institute there were 600 specialists engaged in designing;

at present there are 670; sore than 800 men are needed for this work.
A sinilar situation exists with personnel engaged in ABS designing at
the Teploelektroproyekt Institute.

The prohlea of nanning ABS construction sites is particularly compli-
cated. Today at ABS-related construction and installation work there

29
FOI(NWN3ALISI(nﬂN
FOI(NVKJAllSEIHﬂN

are no aore than three percent of the engineering and technical workera
who ponaeaa a apecial technical education in ABS conatruction, only 25
percent of the workera have any experience in the conatruction of AIS'a.
and all othera are working on an ABS for the firat.

This is true even though it haa been evident over the paat two five-year
plan: that the USSR Hiniatry of Power and Electrification had actively
begun to build atomic power atationa. Soviet inatitutea could have
started graduating aome good apecialiata.

In |98l in Moacow. Leningrad, Odeaaa and other citiea eome 300 apeci-
aliste in ABS conatruction will be trained. However. thia amount will
form only a email portion of the requirement for deaignera. buildera
and inetallere. The USSR Hiniatry of Power and Electrification muat
help all aubalementa engaged in deaigning and conatructing ABS'a to
acquire the needed epecialiata, including the young apecialiata.

No less important ia the problem of work quality at ABS'e. To enaure
the reliable and aafe operation of etoaic power atationa increaaed de-
mands are placed upon the quality of the conatruction and inatallation
work. there ie a need for repeated monitoring of all operationa. for
example a 100 percent monitoring of the denaity of all welded jointa.
since the leeat deviation from the norm can reault in the appearance
of defecta. which nuet be eliminated. lt needa to be pointed out that
the equipment being delivered often haa defecta, elimination of which
in construction conditiona requirea additional labor expenditurea and,
an a consequence. leada to the work taking longer to do.

when doing concrete work there are often problema with the geometry of
atructurea; their aurfacea are rough and uneven and there are leaka
in spots where the monolithic concrete atructurea join other atruc-
turcs. Leaka in welded eeama lead to aerioua loeeee of time and ad-
ditionel labor expenditurea and the need to eliminate them.

Start-up and adjustment work are among the moat complicated and impor-
tant tasks, during which the quality of the inatallation of thermome-
chanical and electrotechnical equipment. and management and control
systems is revealed. The complexity of organizing the atart-up and
adjuatment work in found in the fact that it ia neceaaary to combine
and coordinate the actiona of numeroua atart-up and adjuatment organi-
zationa. Thua, in the atart-up and adjuatment work on power unit No

S at the Novovoronezhakaya ABS there were 23 participating organiza-
tiona. The total amount of time required for thia work (from the hy-
draulic teata andthe circulatory fluahing to the atart-up) can reach
one year and aometimea aignificantly exceeda the norm.

A certain lag in ABS conatruction during the 10th Five-Year Plan can

be attributed to the fact that the USSR Hiniatry of Power and Electri-
fication approached the aolution of taaka for organizing and managing
the conatruction of ABS'e from traditional miniaterial poaitiona, with-
out coneidering the apecial featurea dictated by the apecific nature

of atomic power atationa.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A complicated situation has evolved in the construction of atomic power
stations this year. Over the past eight months only 89 percent of the
planned work volunea has been completed. And although as conpared with
this same time period in I980 this represents a l23 percent increase.
the situation cannot be considered satisfactory.

Today one of the key tasks is to do everything possible to concentrate
the efforts of the 083R Ministry of Power and llectrification's sub-
elements on the start-up projects for the current year. This includes

the construction of the Chernobyl'shaya. Rovenshaya and Ssolenshaya
ABS's.

The All—Union Soyusatonenergostroy Association has not fully resolved
the problem of supporting these projects with needed numbers of work-
ers. At the sane time the construction projects are not making
full use of material-technical and labor resources at their disposal.
At many construction sites (Smolenskaya, Kursksys and other ABS's)

they are still failing to fulfill the plan for growth in labor pro-
ductivity and ere using construction equipment somewhat inefficiently.

The association needs to work more diligently to fulfill the assign-
nents for the current year.

To fulfill the assignments handed out by the 26th Party Congress for
the construction of atomic power stations during the years I981 through
I985 and on to I990. the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification

has developed a special program. In accordance with the accepted
long-term rapid development of the atomic power industry. during the
years of the Ilth Five-Year Plan Soviet atomic power stations must re-
ceive 2|.3 million k" of new capacities and three million square meters
of housing. The percentsge of installed rated capacity of atonic power
stations in the l990's must reach 20 percent of all power capacity:

the installed capacity of ABS's is to surpass that of the hydroelect-
ric power stations. By this time as much as 60 percent of electric
power in the European portion of the USSR is to generated at atomic
power stations.

The increase in the installed rated capacity of Soviet ABs's over the
next ten years will be accomplished through the construction of power
units with two types of thermal neutron reactors: encased with water
under pressure - the VVBR-IOOO. and the channel RINK-1000 snd RBHK-ISOO.
The construction of AES's with fast neutron reactors. the Bl-BOO and

thc BN-I600,will be continued.

In acconplishing the program for the introduction of capacities at
atonic power stations there are dozens of ministries, departments,
equipment and material supplying plants. collectives of designers,
builders and operators and other organisations participating; for
this reason it is essential to ensure a balance between the assign-
ments for the introduction of power capacities and the financial, la-
bor and material-technical resources. Particular attention lust be

31

FOIIMFKJALIEE(NHN
FOICHWKJALlﬁﬂiﬂﬂN

given to questions having to do with the tinely delivery of equip-ent.
increasing its quality and conpleteness. and the rapid construction of
housing and cultural. social, and service-related facilities.

while constructing the Iain power units with RINK-1000 and VVlR-IOOO
reactors. the collectives of design. construction. installation. ad-
justing and operating organisations of the ainistry adopted several
progressive solutions. the use of which at the ABS's now under con-
struction will make it possible to significantly reduce labor expendi-
tures and length of tile required for the construction of power unite.

A progrsa for the flow-line construction of Als's has been developed,
which ensures a reduction in the amount of tine required for their
construction with a simultaneous reduction in labor expenditures and
the use of aeteriale. The first stage in the realisation of this pro-
gram was the creation of a standard design for a series-produced AIS
using VVBR-IOOO reactors.

The technical-economic indicators of this design are better than for

the design of the Yushno-Ukrainekaya A38: the aaount of space required
for the station has been reduced by I0 percent, the relative volune of
construction of buildings by 12 percent. the nunber of operating person-
nel by l8 percent. and the cost reduced from 3l8co 265-280 rubles per
RH. The Zaporoshskaya. Rostovskaya. Balakovskaya. Khnel'nitskaya.
Krynskaya, and Baehkirskaya ABs's are being build according to this
design. as are the second sections of the Yushno-Ukrainskaya and
Rovenskaya ABs's.

Work is continuing on standardising the design solutions of atonic
power stations with RBHK-IOOO reactors, which will ensure a reduction
in the cost of Als'e by as much as IO to l2 rubles per kilowatt. This
year the main work on creating standardised designs nust be cowpleted.
At the sane time the Teploelektroproyekt and Gridroproyekt ineni:S: Ya.
Zhuk institutes must constantly improve the quality of the design so-
lulions.

At the same time it nuet be enphasized that there is a need to provide
the designers with a solid and unaltered plan of construction and in-
stallation work and financing in accordance with their designing of
projects. which will aake it possible to inprove the quality of the
designs and to release technical docunentation within the established
tine periods.

The "designing" year starts l8 Ionths prior to the construction plan-
ning year. by this time it is necessary to have not only an approved
amount of construction and installation work, butthe inter-structural
construction title lists for the construction planning year.

This rule nust be stable. Execution of this rule will not only sin-
plify the designing of ABS's. but the construction of atomic power

stations as well. since the builders will have an opportunity to eval-
uate, plan and justify the resources that they will need to fulfill

32

FOR¢Hﬂﬂ€1Ai.USE(HNLY
their planned assign-ents. In view of the conplexity of this natter
the All-Union Soyusatonenergostroy Association (custoner) and ClevPBU
Lpain planning and econonic adninistratiog] nust do everything posaihle
to hasten its solution.

It is apparent that it is necessary to rely upon the proposals of the
design organisations and to introduce within the 0883 Ministry of Power
and Electrification a systen, by which the design and surveying work
plan for each AIS would he approved three nonths prior to the start of
the "design" year along with the appropriete finencing of the work.
This plan should he coordinated with the deputy ninisters who are in
charge of designing and constructing Als's.

clavniiproyekt LFain scientific-research and designing instituts7 needs
to reexanine the load on institutes and the sequence of the wort that
is being carried out.

The All-Union Soyusatonenergostroy Association is the pain organisation
responsihle for the construction of atonic electric power stations for
the USSR linistry of Power and llectrificstion (this organization does
85 percent of all ABS construction and installation work). The USSR
Ministry of Power and Electrification has planned neasures to further
strengthen this organisation.

At the sane tine clavtsentroenergostroy (Kalininskaya and Kostronsksya
ABs's) is also involved in the construction of atonic power stations;
Glavsavodspetsstroy-organisations are also partially involved in such
work.

To raise the level of specialisation. ensure the high quality of work
in the installation of construction structures it is planned to expand
the sphere of work of All-Union Association Gidrospetsstroy and the
Gidronontash Trust. hy giving then the task of doing special work at
the construction sites of all Als's.

Hessures are planned for assisting the workers and engineering and
technical workers who are assenhling the atonic power stations under
construction.

The USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification is also taking several
other steps ained at sharply inproving the construction of atonic power
stations.

A special role in ensuring the annual introduction of 5 to 6 nillion
k“ of capacity st Als's is played by specialized installation organi-
zations of Glavteploenergonontash. Glavelektroaontaeh, and Soyurener-
gosashchita. These organisations within a very short period of tine
nust prepare the needed production bases and increese the collectives
of installers for ensuring a 2- to 3-fold increase in work volunes.

33

FOI¢HWNJALLBE(”“J
HMIOFFKJAL|£HEONLY

within Soyuzatomenergo a specialized start-up and adjustment suhelement
should he organized. which could do start-up and adjustment work at
AES's on a comprehensive and skilled hasis.

The creation of large collectives. which perform large annual volumes
of work at A38 sites. requires a significant amount of housing con-
struction with all facilities for cultural and social purposes. It

is necessary to improve the work of the Soyuzenargozhilstroy Associa-
tion and to speed up the construction of new house-building combines
to meet the needs for housing construction. To create normal living
conditions for the builders and operators of the ABS's, the Glavnii-
proyekt and Soyusatomenergo need to complete the work that they under-
took with Goagrazhdanproyekt to clarify the norms for designing hous-
ing at ABS‘a.

The USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification has done a lot of work
to equip ABS construction projects with modern mechanisms and trans-
port, including those of their own manufacture - SIR-2200 and SIR-3500
cranes. equipment for the preliminary stressing of concrete, concrete
pumps. etc. however, to ensure theplanned annual introduction of capa-
cities this is insufficient and Glavenergostroymekhanizatsiya Imain
administration for the mechanization of power- industry construction7
must solve the problem of providing Aﬁs'a with construction equipment
as required. The Inergomekhanizatsiya Trust must achieve a more com-
plete mechanization of labor-intensive jobs and a reduction in manual
labor outlays.

In addition. the USSR Hinistry of Power and Electrification is plan-
ning several measures to improve the organizational work and to raise
the quality of planning. designing. the technology and organization
of construction.

It is necessary to disseminate the recently CPSU Central Committee
approved initiative of the Gidroproyekt Institute imeni 8. Ya. Zhuk,
which is aimed at raising the quality of the scientific-technical
level of designing in order to ensure a reduction in material and la-
hor expenditures. as well as the estimated cost of construction. It
is also necessary to generalize and widely adopt such experience of
socialist competition of the enterprises and construction projects as
the "workers' relay race", the "agreement of the 28” and others.

The USSR Hinistry of Power and Electrification faces difficult tasks.
Everything possihle is being done to organize the work of the design.
construction. installation. start-up and adjustment, operating, and

scientific-research suhelements to fulfill the assignment for the in-
troduction of new capacities at ABs's during the llth Pive-Year Plan
and all pledges connected with the solution of tasks for the develop-
ment of the atomic power industry posed by the 26th Party Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdat. "Bnergeticheskoye stroitel'stvo". I981

8927
CS": l822/ll9

36

FOI1OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
ATOHIC POUER GENERATTO” IN 11TH FIVE-YEAR PIA“
Moscow ENERGBTICHBSKOYB STROITEL'STVO in Russian No II. Nov 8| pp 23-25

Lirticle by L. H. Voronin. candidate for the degree of doctor of tech-
nical sciences: "Development of the Atonic Power Industry in the llth
Five-Year Plan27

Lfexgy The extensive construction of atonic power stations within the
USSR has become an important task, without the solution of which it is
becoming increasingly difficult to ensure a fuel and power balance for
the Soviet Union.

At present within the USSR there are l2 ABS's in operation; their to-
tal rated capacity is nearly IS million h", including:

-with encased water cooled reactors (VVBR) - the Novovoronezhskaya

ABS (total capacity of all power units is 2,‘so.ooo k8). the Kol'skaya
ABS (I,320,000 k"), the Armyanskays ASS (8l5,000 kw) and the Rovenskaya
AES (560,000 k");

-with channel uraniua-graphite reactors - the Leningradskaya ABS ,
(4,000,000 kw). the Chernobyl'skaya A88 and the Kurskaya ABS (2,000,000
kw each). the Bilibinskaya ABS (£8,000 k"), the Sibirskays ABS
(600,000 kw). and Beloyarskaya ABS (300.000 kw);

-with fast breeder reactors - Shevchenkovskaya ABS (I50.000 kW) and
the Beloyarskaya ABS (600.000 k");

-with VK-SO and 30R-60 reactors - the Ul'yanovsksya ABS (62.000 k").

The production of electricity at ABS's is increasing from year to
year. In I980 alone atomic power stations generated nearly 73 billion
kw-hours of electricity. this is sore electricity than was generated
at AES's throughout the entire 9th Five-Year Plan. Altogether from
the year I976 through I980 atomic power stations produced nore than
230 billion kH-hours of electricity.

3S

FORCNTKJALLEE(MHN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hulln“ the years of the IOth Five-Year Plan a new important step forward
was taken in the development of the atomic power industry. New capaci-
ties were put into operation at the Kurskaya. Chernobyl'skaya, Lenin-
gradskaya, Armysnskaya, Bilibinskays and Rovenskaya ABS's. Hork got
underway to start-up new power units (primarily large units with a
per-unit electrical capacity of 1,000 NH) at the Chernobyl'skays,
Snolensuaya, Yuzhno-Ukrainskaya. Kol'skaya. Kalininskaya AES's and se-
veral other ABS's.

During this same time period work was successfully completed on the
construction of the main power units with VVBR-IOOO and BN-600 react-
ors at the Novovoronezhskaya and Beloyarskaya ABS's, which is of much
importance for the further development of the atomic power industry.

The construction and start-up in April I980 of power unit No 3 with

a BN-600 reactor at the Beloysrskaya ABS made it possible to accumu-
late valuable experience in the construction, installation and adjust-
ment of the world's largest reactor unit with a liquid metal (sodium)
cooling agent. During the installation of the primary technological
equipment progressive methods were devised for the enlarged preassembly
or the reactor housing, large-size and other technological equipment,
and also the technology of welding, thermal processing and monitoring
the quality of welded joints of unique equipment and pipelines. Hell
thought-out planning and organization of work in adjusting and testing
the equipment and systems of this power unit made it possible to as-
similate within a relatively short period of time (nearly five months)
the basic modes of operation of the power unit at a level of 80 per-
cent of the nominal capacity.

Considering the experience gained in the designing, constructing and
start-up the power unit with the Bl-600 reactor, at present work is
in progress to come up with new, more improved equipment designs and
systems of series-produced power units with fast breeder reactors,
with an electric power capacity of 800 and I.600 IV.

The start-up in I980 at the Rovovoroneshskaya ABS of power unit No 5
with the first model of the VVBR-IOOO reactor unit demonstrated the
correctness of the main design and planning developments.

The experience gained in constructing, starting up and assimilating
[hr designed capacity of the power unit provides a basis for relying
upun the successful consrruction of series-produced ABs's with VVBR-
I000 reactors and upon the further improvement of their technical-
economic indicators.

In order to reduce the amount of time required for the construction
and assimilation of planned capacities of large power units with VVBR-
I000 reactor units the designs of new ABS's call for the design of

the fuel assemblies to be modernized (the so-called uncovered fuel
assemblies are used) and for the number of $02 regulatory organs to

be reduced from I09 to 6|; also the lay-out decisions are to be im-
proved ior several facilities of the main housing: rather than two
500 aw turbines there will be a single 1.000 NH turbounit, etc.

36

FOR(NFKJALIEHEONLY
The 26th Perty Congreee defined e new progren for the further repid
development of the etonic power induetry within the Soviet Union.

"The beeic directione for the econonic end eociel develop-ent of the
USSR for the yeere I98! through [985 end for the period up to 1990"
cell for the inteneive increeee in the generation of electric power

et etonic electric power etetione. Thue. in I985 the generetion of
electricity et ABs'e will reach 220 to 225 billion kU-houre, which

will be lb percent of ell electricity produced in the USSR end will
elnoet equel the totel generetion of electricity et hydroelectric power
etetione. This will neke it poeeible to free lore then 70,000,000 tone
of conventionel orgenic fuel from the fuel end power belence of the
Soviet Union eech yeer.

In the Ilth Five-leer Plen the pece of introducing new cepecitiee et
etonic power etetione ee conpered with the level of the peet five-year
plan will neerly double. During the period fron I98] through I985 et
ABS'e it ie plenned to introduce 2‘ to 25 nillion k" of new cepecitiee.
New power unite with eeriee—produced VVBR-IOOO reectore ere now being
built end will eoon be put into operetion et the Kelininekeye, Zepo-
rozhekeye. Yuehno-Uhreinekeye, Khnel'nitekeye. Rowenekeye, Krynekeye,
Roetovekeye. end lelekoveheye Als'e end et the Odeeekeye ATBTe. New
power unite with RbMK-IOOOO reectore will be put into operetion et
theChernobyl'eheye, Swoleneheye end Kurekeye ABS'e. Work on the firet
section (of two power unite with powerful RINK-I500 reectore) of the
lgnelinekeye ABS, with enelectric power cepecity of 3.000 MB. will be
completed.

During the Ilth Five-Veer Plen it ie expected to realize en eeeentielly
new direction in the centrelired heeting eyeten of lerge citiee. We
are epeeking ebout the conetruction of eeverel powerful etonic electric
power end heeting plente (ATBTe) end etonic heeting eupply etetione
(AST). which will be eble to reliebly neet the neede of houeing con-
plexee for heet. Since e eignificent enount of ecerce fuel (1.5-fold
more then for the neede of electric power) ie required for the produc-
tion of low-potentiel heet“ required by the induetriel enterprieee end
populeted ereee. the exteneive edoption of Ast'e end ATBTe'e ie ex-
trenely inportent end edventegeoue for the netionel econony.

he noted previouely, et present the Odeeekeye ATBTe ie being built;
it will heve en electricel cepecity of 2,000 HI. It ie the firet
lerge etonic power etetion, which will generete both electricity and
ee nuch ee 7.560 gigejoulee of heet per hour for coneunere. At euch
ATETe'e it ie planned to inetell eeriee-produced VVBR-IOOO reectore
end two (per power unit) TK-SOO turbinee with epeciel heeting eupply
eteen eeperetore, which eneure the nexinun output fro. eech turbounit
of ee nuch ee l,890 gigejoulee of heet per hour end 650 I“ of elec-
tricity.

Two lain AST'e (Gor'kiy end Voroneeh) ere now under conetruction. The

first power unite of theee etetione heve e heet cepecity of 500 HR end
will be put into operetion during the Ilth Vive-Yeer Plen.

37
FC“NWKJAL£SE¢NWDY
FORlOFFKJA1.USEIDNLY

lmpurtant new tasks for the further development of the atomic power
industry, which evolve from the decisions of the 26th Party Congress,
require the development and execution of urgent measures to improve
lhu designing, construction, installation, start-up and assimilation
of new capacities at the AES's.

1he USSR Hinistry of Power and Electrification'a design organizations
must in the near future complete the development of designs for stan-
dJld, multi-unit Ats's with VVBR-IOOO and anus-1000 reactors and create
u dvsign for a series-produced ASS with fast breeder reactors. In
lhtnc designs there must be the extensive dissemination for the pro-
nrossive construction structures and naterials, as well as lay-out and
lochuulogicel solutions, which make it possible to use industrial me-
thods of construction and installation.

The projected construction of a large series of multi-unit ABS's
(Zaporozhskaya, Balakovskaya, Rostovskaya, Khmel'nitskaya, and
Rovrnskaya AES's) with VVER-IOOO reactors according to a unified stane
dardized design will promote a substantial rise in the quality of con-
struction and installation work and a reduction in labor intensiveness
and length of time required for the construction of an ABS.

One of the important tasks of thespecialists of the design institutes
is to adopt into the practice of designing and constructing ABS'a,
ATFls'a and AST's the modeling of the basic projects, which will make
it possible to improve lay-out solutions. to improve the quality of
design documentation, to raise the quality and efficiency of instal-
lation work, to decrease the probability of errors in designing, there-
by eliminating the need to do significant amounts of construction and
installation work (for rerouting pipelines and cable connunications,
Ior making openings and holes in walls and coverings of facilities,
etc.) When releasing the working technical documentation the tech-
nolugy and by-stage nature of construction, installation and adjust-
mvnt must be strictly taken into consideration.

The AES construction collectives face serious tasks. They must develop
and realise special measures for increasing the capacities of the con-
struction organizations, who are in charge of ABS construction.

Each large ABS that is under construction nust be equipped with a con-
grant and adequate collective of skilled builders in all speciality
areas (including finishers), which provide for the rapid (in regard to
the installation time periods and the adjustments) and qualitative
construction of buildings and other ABS engineering facilities.

An urgent problem is also the need to raise the level of engineering

preparation for the construction of an ABS and the quality of the de-
signs for the organization of construction work.

38

FOItOFFﬂJALlﬁiioNLY
The successful and timely fulfillment of tasks for the introduction

of new capacities at ABS's in the llth Five-Year Plan will to a large
extent depend upon the power machine builders. The timely and complete
delivery of equipment and pipelines is one of the main conditions re-
quired for reducing the time periods of construction end for ensuring

the timely start-up and assimilation of the new power units at the AES's.

The introduction and sssimilation of planned rated capacity for the
first section of the Volgodonsk Atommash Plant and the planned signifi-
cant increase in the production capacities of several other plants
which manufacture equipment for AES's will make it possible to solve
this important task. An important role in providing the ABs's now
under construction with equipment is being played by contracts that
were made for the llth Five-Year Plan with several CBHA-member nations
(within the framework of long-term tsrget programs for cooperstion

up to the year I990) for cooperation and production specialization in
equipment for atomic power stations.

Thus, the power industry builders have every opportunity to successful-
ly fulfill the key assignment of the CPSU - to provide for the rapid
development of the atomic power industry in the llth Five-Year Plan

and for the period up to I990.

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdat. "Bnergeticheskoye stroitel'stvo”, l98|

8927
050: I822/II9

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIioFH(1ALlE§ZONLY

ELECTRIC POWER

PROBLEMS OF ENERGY PRODUCTION
Moscow TEPLOENERGETIKA in Russian No S, May 82 pp 2-5
[Article by 0.6. Zhinarin, Corresponding Member, USSR Academy of Sciences]

[Text] The energy crisis in the Rest consists essentially of the fact that the
economy of the industrially developed capitalist countries (calculating for maximum
profit) is oriented toward unjustifiably broad utilization of liquid fuel, mostly
imported. As a result, the proportion of liquid fuel in the overall energy con-
sumption of the industrially developed capitalist countries grew from 32.6 percent
in 1955 to 51.8 percent in 1973. The share of oil within the structure of the
energy balance of the industrially developed capitalist countries was almost 50
percent in 1979.' Of the 1 billion 826 million tons of liquid fuel consumed by
this group of countries in 1979, only 628 million tons (a little more than one-
third) was obtained by the countries themselves; over 1 billion 200 million tons
were Imported. mostly from developing countries in the Near and Far East, Africa,
[ntin America and Indonesia.

The amount of industrial production (especially military) delivered to the develop-
ing countries was extremely high, and increased systematically.

The actual concept of "energy crisis" is quite arbitrary, since the geological base
of organic fuel in many capitalist countries is sufficient to meet their needs.

The essence of the matter is that artificial reduction in oil prices led to a drop
in the utilization of local solid fuel. For example, between 1955 and 1979, the
share of coal accounted for in the total energy consumption of capitalist countries
dropped from £9 to 23 percent.

The almost 10-fold increase in oil prices in recent years equalised the relationship
between the prices of fuel and industrial articles to some extent. As a result,
the developing countries of the Near and Far East (Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman, etc.)

rccc ived huge monetary sure which, in turn, led to the appearance of masses of
so-called "Petr0d0118rs" on the world money market. All of this had a destabilizing

influence on the economy of the western countries, and led to a drop in production.
reduced business activity and a sharp increase in jobleasness.

The governments of the industrially developed capitalist countries undertook

40

FIHRCNW1C1AL USEiJNLN
Conwlsive searches to find ways to overuse the energy crisis and to adapt their
econowy to the new energy situation.

These ways included the following:

“accelerated reduction in the connmtion of liquid fuel by replacing it with
other power resources;

«increasing the proportion of lining and cmwtim of solid fuel. even if
degraded enviroI-ental conditions resulted;

«an all-out reduction in the specific consuption of all types of fuel in the out-
put of industrial and agricultural production;

—developnent and accqalislnent of broad aeasures to create and introduce nu
technological processes, especially so-called lowbenergy and pollution-free tech-
nologies;

-direct reduction in the consmtion of lidtt petroleul products, prisarily by
Iotor vehicle tramportation, by switching over to sore econoeical mtor vehicles
and sharply increasing gasoline prices;

«intensive search for econonically jmtified production processes for obtaining
liquid and gaseous products frol solid fuels;

--accelerating work to bring renewd>le energy sources (solar, geothernsl, wind)
into the fuel—energy balance;

--fuller utilization of the hydroelectric potential of rivers;

"expanding the use of atosic energy.

The Socialist countries, which developed their econosy on the basis of state plan-
ning for the dmlopnent of the fuel-energy couples, are not threatened by the
energy crisis. Nonetheless, this does not seen that Socialist countries have no
energy proble- at all. There are such problem. although they are conpletely
different in nature. me USSR. as well as other can ne‘er countries, have devel-
oped and inle-ented neasurea for nore econolical consuaption of liquid fuel.

In contrut to the capitalist countries. the USSR and otur Socialist countries
have both increased the proportion of liquid fuel consmed within the fuel-energy
balance, and increased the lining and commtion of solid fuel. Systeastic work
is underway to reduce the specific constnption of fuel at power plants. and of
heat and electricity in industrial technological processes and public utilities.

The Soviet Union is first in the world in the developnent of centralised heat
supply based on codined production of electrical and heat energy at Ma.

Public transport is widely used (subway. buses. trolleys and trans). The production
of econonical light trucks has been arranged.

The USSR leads the world in the scope and extent of electrified railroads. These
carry lore than 50 percent of all freight handled by the country's railroads.

It nust also be eaphasised especially that the Soviet Union is one of the world
leaders in the area of atoaic energy. Nuclear power plants nake it possible to

reduce the consulption of organic fuels increasingly.

41

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDI‘DFFICIAI.IISE2(HULV

Cunxldcring the new energy situation which has come about in the region covered by
the European Economic Couldssion of the United Nations, the Soviet Union introduced
a proposal to discuss the problems of the existing fuel-energy situation and to '
plan collective neasures in this area.

Thu hurnpesn Economic Commission of the United Nations (8!!) then created a ten-
rotary organ to prepare for a conference - a group of Senior Government Advisers

an -u-rgy.

1hin organ of the rec was tasked to gather as Inch information as possible in the
ltru of fuel and energy resources and to analyze it thoroughly; to draw up a working
plan for the Senior Advisers; and to determine the most inportant energy problels
for discussion at the all-Europe conference with participation of representatives
from the US and Canada.

Since then, the Senior Govern-cut Advisers on Energy have received detailed infor-
mation from the EEC member countries on the current status and prospects for devel-
opmcnt of production and consunption of fuel-energy resources.

This information has been presented for 1973, 1979. 1980, 1985, 1990 and 2000.

All of this extensive information was analyzed carefully by the staff of the
Secretariat of the EEC with the participation of leading scientists and specialists
from various countr..s.

The general conculsions coming from the data and planned programs of the European
countries, US and Canada can be reduced to the following position.

All of the countries, without exception, put forth the basic task of reducing oil
consumption by conserving it as rigorously as possible and replacing it in the
production of electricity and heat and in industry with solid fuel. hydroelectric
power, nuclear power. as well as non-traditional types of energy resources.

A number of large countries have put forth the task of obtaining liquid fuel fron
solid (coal, shale).

All of the countries believe that it is time for fundamental improvements in the
area of energy consumption, and in developing and introducing those technological
processes which lake it possible to reduce fuel and energy consulption significantly
in the output of production. meeting transportation needs. etc.

The trends in the area of power consumption by the European countries. the US and
Canada are unavoidably reflected in the world energy balance, since these countries
consume 58 percent of the entire world's production and 72 percent of the consump-
tion of fuel-energy resources.

The structure of the untapped energy reserves in these countries does not correspond
to the structure of their consumption: 86 percent of these reserves of mined fuel

in these countries is made up of coal. while coal makes up only 26 percent of the
fuel-energy balance. In contrast to this, only 5 and 8 percent, respectively, of

42

FOR‘0F51C1AI.(£SEZCHVLY
the overall reserves are aade up of oil and gas, while their commtion within
the fuel and energy balance snout to 63 and 22 percent. respectively.

It is apparent tron the data presented by these countries that the rate of growth
of consumtion of basic energy resources has dropped off in recent years in
western Europe and the BS.

The average annual increase in power consI-ption in these countries during 1965-
1973 was 6.9 percent; this figure dropped to 1.7 percent during 1973-1980.

Absolute oil calm-ption in western Europe and north Anerica had dropped to the 1973
level by 19m. and the proportion of oil in the overall energy consuntion also

began to drop.

As concerned production. nany BBC countries have taken steps to increase the- produc-
tion of local energy raw naterials by adopting rules regulating the “port of
energy resources. Considerable Ioney has been allocated for expanding scientific
research. and international cooperation is being developed. As a result, the

total production of prinary energy resources during 1973-1980 increased ahead of
the densnd in all of these countries.

‘Ihe analysis of the Secretariat indicates that the 330 countries are traditional
iqporters of energy resources. with western Europe as a whole iaporting oil, coal
and gas; north Anerica - oil; eastern Europe (except for the USSR) - oil and gas;
the USSR is a njor exporter of oil. gas. coal and electricity.

Analysis also indicates that the countries in western Europe are importing coal.
even though they have reserves of their own; the anount of coal imported in-
creased fron 13' percent in 1973 to 19 percent in 1980.

During 1971-1980 the USSR increased its export of energy resources, which to a
significant degree promted the developnent of trade between the Best end the Rest
(between 1975 and 1980 the shout of net export iron the USSR increased by 101.8
nillion tons).

The data presented and their analysis indicate that although there was an increase
in energy consuption in lost countries between 1973 and 1980, energy resources
were utilized nore efficiently. since the denand for energy per unit of output

product dropped.

All of the participating countries presented detailed infomtion on the development
of energy resources and leasures to iqrove their structure.

The table presents sone basic data presented to the BBC of the United Nations by
the Soviet Union and the US.

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(HULY

Forecast Data for Develop-ant of Energy
Production in USSR and US

1985 1990 2000
Indicators 0883 US 0888 US USSR 03
Production of basic 2350-2660 2153-2508 2685-3125 2313-2996 3260-6130 2827-3995
fuel-energy resources
(total). million tons
Comprising: .
solid fuel 565-565 696-797 675-865 836-1--- 760-1150 1283-1566
liquid fuel 880-910 587-696 880-990 551-725 870-1025 596-868
gaseous fuel 720-750 565-638 860-975 536-703 1150-1350 666-703
nuclear energy 65-70 181-225 160-160 266-319 300-600 268-507
hydraulic energy 70-75 116-123 80-85 116-130 85-100 130-160
other types of
energy 70 7-29 70 - 95-105 -
Net trade of fuel- 320-2160" 361-66“ 295-665* 130-507 330-669 ”ﬁr-239”
energy resources
Internal consunp- 2020-2080 2690-2916 2390-2660 2769-322- 2910-3685 3096-3770
tion
Delivered to con- 990-1025 1967-2099 1230-1385 1963-222‘ 1370-1575 2071-2667
suners
*export-net
**lmport-net
Nolv. Data for the USSR froa Academy of Science menbers, as presented to rec;

US figures - Energy Department estinates, also presented to BBC.

Sunnlng up the energy indicators for the European countries. 08 and Canada, the
Secretariat 01 the EEC reaches a number of conclusions. which consist of the follow-
ing:

--the total denand for basic energy resources during 1980-1990 will continue to
increase. by 30 percent in western Europe. by 23 percent in eastern Europe (except
for the USSR). by 61 in the USSR, by 13 percent in North America and by 26 percent
for the EEC region as a whole;

--it is expected that the deaand for oil during the 1980s will rennin stable; an
absolute decrease in demand for oil is possible in North Anerica (16 percent).

It is suggested that the oil replace-eat policy will be especially successful in
the area of electricity production. where the proportion of oil as a raw aaterial
in the EEC region as a whole will drop free 20 percent in 1973 to 9 percent in
1990, the proportion of auto-atic energy will increase accordingly fro. 3 to 21
percent, and the proportion of coal will drop froa 66 percent in 1973 to 61 percent

66
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.US£‘0NlJ
in 1990;

--local production of fuel-energy resources will exceed significantly the present
levels of production in all parts of the EEC region in terms of types of energy

raw material, including, oil. By comparison with 1980, the proposed increase in

the total volume of production by 1990 will be as follows, on the average:

about 27 percent in the EEC region as a whole. 18 percent in North America, 36percent
in the USSR, 13 percent in western Europe and 35 percent in eastern Europe. It is
also believed that the most substantial relative increase in local energy production
will result fron atomic energy (260 percent), coal (32 percent), hydraulic energy
(24 percent) and gas (22 percent, primarily in the USSR);

--in 1990 coal will become an important local energy source in the EEC region. and
will conprise 32 percent of the total production of primary energy resources, while
all will have a 25 percent share. The proportion of renewable energy sources
(except hydraulic) will still be very small, below the possible levels;

--increased production of energy resources will engender an absolute increase in
capital investments with respect to national products in all parts of the EEC region.
--the increase in oil imports in the EEC region as a whole will drop off; however,
the proportion of imported oil in 1990 will remain high - 79 percent in western
Europe. 80 percent in eastern Europe (except for the USSR) and 34 percent in North
Anerica;

--the replacement of oil and other factors will promote increased coal imports to
western Europe, the proportion of which within the overall consumption of solid

fuel in this portion of the region will increase fron 19 percent in 1980 to 32

percent in 1999;

--trade in natural gas will expand further. It is expected that the demands of
western Europe for imported natural gas will increase by a factor of 3 or 6, and
the proportion of imported gas within the overall consumption will increase from
1h percent in 1980 to 37 percent in 1990.

Analyzing the development of fuel and energy resources up to 1990 and beyond, the
EEC Secretariat emphasises the special position and increased influence of the
Soviet Union on the formation of the energy situation in western Europe.

In its calculations and estimates the EEC Secretariat uses as a basis the fact that
the USSR will further expand the export of natural gas and electricity during the
period up to 1990.

Considering the above, all of the European region countries. the US and Canada
consider the universal conservation of fuel. heat and electricity to be the most
urgent task for the entire upcoming developmental period.

Special attention has always been devoted to the problem of reducing the specific
consunption of fuel. electricity and heat in this country. A whole complex of
measures in this area are provided inthe current five-year plan as well.

Based on the resolutions of the Party and government, Gosplan USSR. the USSR

State Committee on Science and Technology and the USSR Academy of Sciences have
developed neasures to conserve fuel and energy resources over the five-year period
on the scale of 160-170 million tons, including 70-80 million tons as a result of
inproving technological processes and employing new energy-consuming equipsent.

45

FOR 0F1‘C1AL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thcrr are plans to reduce the specific consumption of fuel for electricial produc-
linn from 328 tons of conventional fuel in 1980 to 3190320 tons of conventional

fuel in 1985. As a result, 8—10 nillion tons of conventional fuel will be conserved
in I985.

The development of atonic power engineering is of aajor importance for reducing
the consumption of nineral fuel. There are plans to increase the production of
electricity by A88 in the Soviet Union to 220-225 billion kﬂh by 1985, which will
make it possible to reduce the annual (for 1985) consumption of mineral fuel by
50 million tons of conventional fuel as compared with 1980.

There are plans for measures to reduce electricity losses in power networks from
9.1 to 8.6 percent (1985), which will make it possible to save approximately 3
million tons of conventional fuel per year. Capital expenditures for the start-up
of power capabilities will be reduced accordingly.

Major savings can be obtained by using secondary energy resources. There are plans
to conserve 60-70 million tons of conventional fuel at the 1985 level.

Measures to save fuel and energy resources are based on scientific-research devel-
opnunts and the proposals of scientists. There are plans to use the developments
of new methods of fuel ignition in boiling-layer furnaces. utilisation of low-
potcntlal heat fron ventilation installations. use of the heat from thermal and
atomic power plants. etc.

It should be enphasized that the employ-eat of secondary energy resources and nodern-
ization of technological equipment require approxinately half the capital expenditures
which are required for expanding fuel production.

Renewable energy sources - solar, wind, geothermal - nust be included in the fuel-
euergy balance.

Hydraulic sources resulting fron building large-scale CBS in Siberia, Central Asia
and the Transcaucasus will make a significant contribution to the fuel-energy
balance.

There are plans to accelerate the construction of CABS. which will provide coverage
for peak loads and will equalize the operating schedule of thermal electric plants
at night.

A reduction in expenditures for producing prinary energy resources and iaprovement
of the fuel-energy balance can be obtained by iaproving the methods and scans for
producing coal. oil and gas and for transporting liquid and gas fuels.

The coal industry will expand coal production using the open method, which is most
highly mechanized and cheapest.

The petroleum industry has plans to increase oil production Iron 43 to 50-60 percent;
in 1985 an additional 8 nillion tons of fuel will be obtained as a result of in-
creasing production.

66

ﬂDR(MﬂﬁC1Al.USE(MVLY
The construction of Iain pipelines for transporting gas at pressures of lO llPa
instead of 7 111’s will increase the throughput capacity by 33 percent (for the sane
type diueters).

He must recall the attenpts of any countries (USSR, US, FIG, mm) to process coal
in order to obtain liquid, gas and chemical processes.

A USSR report on work done on power technological processing of Estonian shale and
Kansk-Achinskiy coal in order to obtain shale oil, resins and gas, as well as
chenical products in the future, received great attention fro- the Senior Energy
Advisers.

A najor role in increasing energy utilization efficiency is now played by the
introduction of electronic computing facilities and automation systems in technolo-
gical processes within energy management as well as indmtrial consuners of fuel
and energy.

Scientific research and extensive practice have shown that automatic control systens
provide an increase in the efficiency of all machinery. nechsnisms and processes,
all other conditions being equal, which is accompanied by a drop in the specific
aaterial expenditures per unit of production. At the sans tins, strict observance
of the paraneters and assigned norns result in inproved product quality. In addi-
tion, the productivity of social labor becones higher, its social nature changes;
physical labor becones a variety of nental labor.

All of the above measures to achieve technical progress in our country are laid
out in integrated state prograas for 1981-1985 developed by scientific-research
institutes, design bureaus, enterprises, ministries and confirmed by the USSR
State Connittee on Science and Technology, Gosplan USSR and the USSR Academy of
Sciences.

The task is now to ensure unconditional fulfillment of the assign-eats of the
integrated programs and to raise the econony of the USSR to s new, higher and nore
efficient level.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. "Teploenergetika", 1982

6900
C80: 1822/196

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY CONSERVATIOF

CHELYABEN'BRGO BCOWIZBS
Moscow ELKTRICHESKIYE STANTSII in Russian No S, May 82 pp 8-11

[Article byle. Shishkin, Director. Chelyabenergo, "Manage Bconoaically".]

[Text] The Soviet people are working unceasingly to carry out the resolutions of

the 26th Party Congress. Our continuing novenent ahead, as the Sui-nary Report of
the cc CPSU to the Congress eaphasiaes, will depend increasingly upon skillful and
efficient utilization of all available labor resources, basic funds, fuel and raw

material, as well as produce of the fields and far-s.

The unceasing growth in social production and the satisfaction of the various re-
quirenents of the workers are directly associated with planned increases in produc-
tion of raw aaterials and all types of fuel and with increasing the output of elec-
trical and therlal energy.

In order to execute the broad program of econoadc and social developlent of the
country which has been planned for the llth five-year plan and the 1980s we nus!
usc the huge raw aaterial, fuel-energy and other aaterial resources in produc-
tion. The power workers in the Chelyabinsk power systea have no more ilportant and
honorable task than to ensure uninterrupted high quality electricity for industry,
agriculture, transport and the domestic needs of the population of the South Urals,
the mobilization of existing resources to conserve fuel-energy and other resources
and increasing the efficiency of energy production and the quality of work.

The tasks facing the power aystea during the llth five-year plan are not easy ones,
but they can be carried out; the foundation for their execution is provided by

the results achieved by the collectives of the Chelyabenergo enterprises during
the 10th five-year plan.

During the 10th five-year plan. the electrical and heat-producing capacity of the
power systea increased significantly. The following were brought on line:
--830,000 k" of turbin capacity, including a second $00,000 k" single-shaft turbine

at the Troitskaya GEES. This has brought the Traitskaya GEES to its final capacity

of 2 million 500 000 k";
--boilers with a total steaa output of 3,060 tons of steal per hour, and 7 water

heating boilers with a total heating capacity of 700 Goal/h.

b8

FOR‘OFFﬂJAl.USE(MNLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1980 55.2 percent of all electricity produced by the atelyabinsk power syst-
wu obtained fro. 200-, 300- and 500' it units.

During the 10th five-year plan over 10,000 In of power trn-ission lines carrying
all volteges, as well as 2 sillion 717,000 km of transfornr capacity, were put '
into operation. The sqply of electricity for agriculture in the Chelyabinskaya and
Kurganskaya oblssts was inroved significantly. It is sufficient to point out: that
of the 10,000 kn of power transeiseion lines carrying all voltages built during the
10th five-year plan, sore than 9,000 is consist of VI. [probably bigh-voltsge lines]
for agriculture.

During the five-year plan, the consmtion of electricity by agriculture in the
South Urals and Transurals increased by a factor of 1.7.

During the 10th five-year plan, power workers in the South Ural coqleted a substan-
tial snout of work on conserving fuel and energy resources. During this period,

the specific consumption of conventional fuel was reduced to 13.2 g per each kilowatt-
hour produced, providing a savings of over 600,030 tons of conventional fuel.

A asjor contribution to reducing the specific consqtion of fuel was provided by
workers at the Troitskaya Gus. where a specific fuel comuption of 329 g/(k‘lh)

ha been achieved on 500-1! units. This indicator is one of the best in the country
for analogous coal-burning equip-est.

During the 10th five-year plan, intensive work was continued to further centralize
heat supply. llcat was provided for the city of ‘l'roitsk after rehabilitation of the
uneconoeical phase-I turbines at the Troitskaya CRIS.

'lhe realization of narketable products during the five-year plan resulted in a profit
of 7.5 sillion rubles over those called for in the plan.

New capacities were broudat on line during the 10th five-year plan without increasing
the o‘er of personnel. The following data speak to this fact: the specific nder
of industrial production personnel at electric power plants and m [expansion not
given] during the five-year plan was reduced by 0.35 people, coaprising 1.61 people
by the end of 1980 per 1000 kl! of established power; for power networks, a personnel
reduction of 0.47 people was achieved, resulting in an end figure of 2.6!: people per
100 conventional mite.

During this period, 778 new technology aeasures were introduced, providing savings
of over 11 nillion rubles.

The introduction of neasures for scientific organisation of labor freed 255 people.
Hodern coquter technology is widely used in the power system. The second phase of
en sutoested control systea was put into production operation in 1980. This systen
esploys a third-generation colputer to carry out Iore than 150 tasks involved in

line dispatcher control, planning, bookkeeping and accounting, energy sales and other
subsystees. bro-thirds of these tasks- were developed at Chelysbenergo.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The annual savings iron the introduction of the second phase of the Chelyabensrgo
automated control systen euunt to 3.566 lillion rubles; these savings are
achieved basically by solving problels oi optiliring the nodes of the power
system for active and reactive power and voltage levels. optimising the phoning
of specific iuel coast-prion by power plants and reducing energy losses during
selection of optinl section points in the circuit of the power oyster and cal-
culation of optimal operating para-eters of 9M! equip-ant.

Automation of accounting and statistical tasks and the introduction of an operational-
Information autonstsd dispatcher control couple: helped to reduce the labor involved
in gathering and processing production-msgenent information. to increase the ties-
liness and quality of analysis of the energy production and distribution process,

and to ease conditions for inlenenting power oyster control functions while holding
down increases in the nuﬁar oi nanagenent personnel.

The automated docueent execution Innitoring systen has been i-proved end continues
to operate.

The struggle to increase production efficiency. to utilise uterisl resources ration-
ally and econoeically. and to observe conservation conditions was developed further.

Execution of the neesures planned during the All-Union Social Inspection of the
efficiency of utilization of raw end other neterials and fuel and energy resources
during 1978-1980 resulted in savings of 71.8 nillion kﬂh of electricity, 3800 Gcal
of heat. “.082 tons of conventional fuel and 2106 cubic esters of wood.

A greet deal has been done to fulfill social development plans end to i-prove working
and living conditions of power systen workers, as well as their tine off.

Over 71,000 square neters of living space. 580 places in pre-echool institutions.
s 960-place school, a lZO-bed treat-ent clinic and an 8S—plsca rest facility were
put into operation during the five-year plan.

The llth five-year plan has placed large. couple: tasks before the South Ural
power workers, which we are obliged to resolve.

According to the five-year plan for the developnant of the Chelyabinsk power systen
for 1981-1985 developed in the light of the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress
end encowaseing all aspects of activity. we nuet nelte about 280 million rubles of
capital invest-ents which will be sited toward building Tris-3 at Chelyabinsk.

which is to be brought on line during the present five-year plen. water heating
boilers with a total cspecity of 960 Gcel per hour. a umber of Iejor 500-35 kV
substations with total transformer capacity of 500.000 kV-A. end over 3300 kilo-stars
of power transniesion lines, of which over 70 percent are to serve the needs of
agriculture. There are plans to build 66,000 square neters oi living space. a

sports couples and a pioneer camp.

The expected increase in power consulption in the syst- by the end of the llth
five-year plan will grow by nore than 20 percent.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Due to a under of objective reasons, and because of the lack of sufficient

water resources. the Chelyabinsk power system cannot add power capacity by comtruct-
ing new therlal power plants. and will have to coapensate for the imfficient
generating capacity by obtaining power fro. the USSR Unified Power Systen. This
will force us to be involved even lore deeply in question of conserving electricity
and fuel during the llth fivedyear plan.

It is expected that over 300,000 tons of conventional fuel and 168 aillion kilowatt
hours of electricity will be saved during the llth five-year plan due to technical
improve-nt of the production of electrical and heat energy at plants in the systel,
fulfill-ant of the integrated progral for the introduction of energy conservation
technology which has been planned for 1981-1985. and the application of secondary
fuel-energy resources for rational utilisation of fuel and electrical and heat
energy by enterprises within the power systen.

The following are the Iain directions of this program optinisation of the operating
nodes of turbine and boiler installations, reducing the amount of low efficiency
equipnent used, introduction of new and aore efficient equip-eat in the local power
plant circuits, iwrovenent of the heat circuits at power plants based on new
scientific develop-ent, and iQroving the efficiency of boilers and turbines by
Iodernizing then.

Equip-en: operating and pressure of 90 has/ell2 installed at the power plants of
Chelyabenergo have already lived out their calculated service life (having operated
for 200,000 hours): they have becone obsolescent and physically worn out, so that
their hours of operation nust be curtailed as much as possible, and they met be
replaced. By putting the 90 kgs/cn2 turbines used for heat production during the
winter into reserve for the miller, it is planned that about 35.000 tons of conven-

tional fuel will be saved annually.

The replace-cut of obsolete and worn out STs-lO supply pulps with PE—270-150 pumps
will provide najor savings. Unfortunately, all of our efforts to replace these
puns during the 10th fivryear plan did not user with success.

The coefficient of utilization of the steady state power of the 300 all units at the
Troitshaya 6883 is high enouya - 81-82 percent. It is not believed possible to
increase this any further, and if we consider that these are early turbines. the
only basic way to reduce specific fuel consulption is to modernize the equipment.
Modernizing the turbines in the 300 nil units will nake it possible to increase their
econony by 1.5-2.5 percent: we are to receive help in this fron Glavenergorenont
and fro. the turbine asnufacturer.

The coefficient of utilization of the steady-state power of the 500 a" units is
74-75 percent. Increasing this figure will depend upon eliainating a under of
bottlenecks - iaproving the operation of electric filters, eliminating erosive

wear of the coils in high-pressure boilers, preventing clogging of RV? [expansion
not given] sections with ceked ash and increasing the service life of induced-
draft fans. For turbin generators. it is necessary to increase the service life

of the rotor water line and to modernize the sealing of the stator end-box connector
in order to reduce hydrogen leakage.

51

[’0' OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill (DI-'l-‘K'MI. IISF. ONLY

ﬂlu "Hicktrotyazbmash” plant at Khar'kov is not meeting its obligations to deliver
mi a:,-:.cnt for rebuilding these units.

'Hnu boilers serving the zoo-nu units at the Yuzhno-Ural'skaya GRBS are unreliable.
Those are PK—33 210 head boilers which were installed at the plant in 1967. During
their operating life, over 1000 emergency stoppages have been recorded. More than

10 million rubles have been spent to repair these units over the past 10 years.

rhv 1‘0 must provide a cardinal solution to the problem of rebuilding or replacing

i. hum .

Improving the reliability and economy of the ZOO-mu units will provide annual savings
.,r up to 20.000 tons of conventional fuel.

During the five-year plan, the production of heat throughout the power system is to
Increase by 16.6 percent, which will increase the proportion of electricity produced-
iu the heat cycle. This also will provide a major reserve for reducing specific

f uel consumpt ion .

Like during the 10th five-year plan, the appropriate attention will be devoted to

developing the system—formation network, primarily through the instruction of 220-
and SOO-kv power transmission lines. The supply networks for rural users will be

primarily llOkﬂ; employing simple 110k” substations. The length of rural distri-

hurlng networks will be over 55,000 km by the end of the 11th five-year plan. The
reliability of power supply to rural users will be improved by using the length of
h-l”k\'0utgoing distribution network lines, subdividing and sectioning lines, con-
-;lructing 6-10lemigh voltage lines for cross-feeding, providing backup power for

55—ll0kV substations and replacing overloaded transformers at 10—, 35- and 110-kV

substations.

Hark Is to be completed during the 11th five-year plan on providing dispatcher cen-
tralization of 0.6-10kv distribution networks, creating dispatcher points'in each
rvnlﬁn of the electric networks and centralizing their service by outside operation-
al crews and centralized repair crews.

Relay protection and automation facilities will continue to be improved during the
llth five-year plan. The total number of protective and automation sets will
increase from 32 to 39-60,000.

in addition to the extensive use of solid-state relay protection and automation de-
vices, there are plans to introduce new devices employing integrated microcircuits
:nnd microcomputers. There are plans for particularly intensive development of
anti-emergency automation facilities which will make it possible to increase
transfers of electricity over existing power transmission lines. A computer-based
500 kV centralized ring system in the Urals was put into operation in late 1981;
automatic metering equipment was installed at the Troitsksya GRES, and there are
plans to introduce the same automatic equipment at the Shagol PS [expansion not
given]. Development has begun on problems of emergency automation equipment asso-
ciated with the introduction of 1150 kV transmission.

52

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Work will continue during the llth five-year plan to improve operational-dispatcher
and organizational-economic management based on a multilevel organizational-tech-
nological automatic control system combining the functions of a process control
system and a management information system.

Work will continue to develop a system for gathering, preparing and transmitting
data; computer equipment will be replaced with more sophisticated systems.

in addition to such questions as improving operating reliability, which becomes
particularly important in connection with the wearing out of some of the reserve
equipment, major importance is given the prevention of environmental pollution.

it is sufficient to say that there are plans to spend 45 million rubles on rebuild—
ing technological power plant circuits in order to reduce environmental pollutiOn,
and to reduce the output of solid substances into the atmtsphere by 2000 tons.

and polluted runoff water by 170 million cubic meters during the five-year plan

by introducing closed processing technical water supply systems.

During the llth five-year plan, at least 85-90 percent of the increased national
income will be achieved through improved labor productivity; therefore, problems

of improving labor productivity are being given special attention within the power
system.

He are to free 315 workers within the power plants and enterprises of Cyelyabenergo-
remont alone during the five-year plan, and this considers the addition of personnel
to bring new capacities on line. Increased labor productivity is achieved by
intensifying production, introducing an integrated program, reducing the amount

of manual labor and introducing progressive forms of organization of labor. Chel-
yahenergo has developed an integrated program for reducing manual labor and labor
under hazardous conditions for the llth five-year plan.

A permanent central committee headed by the chief engineer of the power system has
been established for methodological and organizational supervision of the develop-
ment and monitoring of the integrated program for reducing manual labor.

As part of the work of the committee,,385 accounting cards for manual labor and
labor under bad conditions encompassing 52.7 percent of all workers in the system
were drawn up; all workers involved in manual labor were considered. In order to
reduce manual labor, 592 measures have been planned, among which are 296 measures
inrludud in the integrated program for the llth five~year plan. The execution of
these measures should result in mechanizing the labor of 262 workers. freeing 280
workers and improving the working conditions of 907 workers.

The introduction of collective forms of organization and payment of labor serves
as a powerful accelerating agent in the growth of the economy. The position put
forth in the decree of the CC CPSU and USSR Council of Ministers "improving plan-
ning and strengthening action of management mechanism and increasing efficiency

of work production“ that the brigade form of labor organization and incentive shall
become fundamental during the 11th five-year plan reflects the course of the Party
toward strengthening the connection between payment for labor and the end result

of production.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0le
FOR OFF“ 1“. US}: ONLY

"h.|-ahrnergo began to work on introducing the contract brigade in 1978. The
~xlwrual—repalr boiler shop of Chelyabenergoremont initiated the introduction of
uh" rnntrart brigade, and used this method in 1978 to repair a nuaber of important
I .nmhlicx which were on the critical path of capital repair. A total of eight
wnrh brigades were organized. The labor savings amounted to 1570 man-days, with
labor productivity of 125 percent.

In 1030. 61 brigades used the contract brigade method; the number of brigades in
repair shops at power plants increased significantly. 14,254 man—days were saved,
frv-ing an average of 33 workers and providing savings of over 80,000 rubles.

rhv svstem now contains 89 brigades made up of 682 workers, with 65 of the brigades
using the piecework method. employing the labor participation coefficient. There
arc many difficulties involved in organizing and introducing brigade forms. and
these difficulties are not becoming any fewer. It is necessary to improve planning
and material-technical supply and technical support and to work on a large group

of organizational matters.

One of the basic conditions for the successful introduction of the brigade form is
detailed technically founded norming. A thorough check was made in October 1981

of the status of norming of labor at enterprises in the power system involving the
participation of enterprise and structural subdivision supervisors, social organiz-
ations. production leaders, rate fixers, NOT [scientific organization of labor]
workers and economists. There are now about 60,000 technically founded standards
in force in the power system. The level of standardization of labor, defined by
the labor consumed in completed projects, was 60 percent on the average for the
puwcr system, while the normative base in power engineering can standardize the
)nbnr of up to 80 percent of workers. The insufficient level of standardization of
labor in the power system is explained by the low availability of the machines

and mechanisms provided for in the branch standards. There is a severe shortage

at rate fixers at power system enterprises. The system has no capability for
increasing the rating staff. since these are AUP [expansion not given] individuals.
This question must be resolved at the ministry level.

Likr during the 10th five-year plan, a great deal of attention is being devoted to
improving pe95onnel work. There are plans during the 11th five-year plan to incrc. e
the qualification of 20,000 workers, 2700 engineering and technical workers and

to train 810 new workers. The economic education network will train over 25,000
workers and laborers, over 5,000 mid-level supervisors and 300 top-level supervisors
during the five-year plan.

In addition to plans for technical development and improving efficiency of energy
prndnrtion, a great deal of attention is devoted to social development plans of
the power systen enterprises for 1981-1985 aimed toward further development of
nrndnvtlon. better satisfaction of the material and spiritual requirements of the
rnllcctivc members, improving the working and living conditions and increasing the
{dubiogical-political and cultural-technical level of workers in all aspects.

The results of work done in 1981 indicate that a good start has been achieved.
Fulfillment of the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress has become an internal

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
need of the workers of our power system. The resolutions of the November (1981)
Plenary Session of the CC CPSU have inspired then to extensive new work.

The plan for electricity production was fulfilled by 100.2 percent, and the heat
production plan by 100.6 percent, in 1981. The profit plan was fulfilled by 102
percent, with profits of 2.2 million rubles above the planned figure reached.
The savings from reducing the prime cost of marketable product amounted to 1.7
million rubles.

The plan to reduce the specific consumption of conventional fuel was fulfilled.

The specific consumption per kilowatt hour was reduced by 1.‘ g from the 1980
level, and by 0.1 kg per Goal. The plan to reduce the specific amount of personnel
per megawatt, comprising 1.‘ workers, was fulfilled.

Pulfillnent of the basic technical-economic indicators for 1981 inspires the certain-
ty that the collectives of Chelyabenergo enterprises, actively engaging in Socialist
competition to meet the 60th anniversary of the formation of the USSR in a fitting
nanner, will fulfill the plans for 1982 and the entire five-year plan with honor,

thus making a worthy contribution to increasing the economic strenth of our
Motherland.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Elektricheskiye stantsii", 1982

6900
C30: 1822/192 m

55

FOR‘OFFMJAI.USE(NVLV