FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10013
25 September 1981

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 17/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10013
25 September 198

USSR REPORT

ENERGY
(P000 17/81)

CONTENTS

ELECTRIC pom

Planned Developnent. of USSR Power Industry Outlined
(P. S. Neporozhniy; WCHESKIYB STANTSII, Jul 81) ........ 1

Developnent Stages of Novovoronezhskaya ABS Described
(V. A. 2verev, et 31.; BIBKTRICRSICIYE STANTSII, Jul 81)....... 9

Kalininskwa ABS Construction Progress -
(ENEMBTICHESKOIE STROI'I'E'S‘I'VO, Jun 81) .... 1h

Controlling Process of Exploring for 011 and Gas Deposits
(Valentin Borisovich Vasil'yev; WWIYB PBOTSBSSO!
RAZVBIKI “MIME! I GAZOYIKH HBS'IOROZIWIY, 1980).......... 16

- a - [III - ussn - 37 F000]
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POWER

PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OF USSR POWER INDUSTRY OUTLINED

Moscow BLBKTRICHESKIYB STANTSII in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 2-5

[Article by P. s. Neporozhniy, minister of USSR Power and Electrification and
member-correspondent of the USSR Academy of Sciences: "New Horizons for the Devel-

opment of Power Production in the USSR")

[Text] In 1981. s most important event took place in the life of our party and
the peopleuthe 26th CPSU Congress. The document of historic importance adopted
by the congress, "Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the
USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period to 1990." reflects the economic strategy of
the Communist Party for an extended period, the highest aim of which is the reali-
zation of a program to improve the public welfare.

Lenin's brilliant formula "Commism is the Soviet government plus the electrifica-

tion of the whole country" concisely and graphically expresses the main path of
co-nunist construction. It was embodied in the specific resolutions of the 26th
party congress regarding the further development of the country's fuel and power
complex and the accelerated growth of power production as an indispensable condition
for carrying out the economic tasks set by the party.

The start of construction on the world's largest fuel and power complex was pre-
scribed by the plan for the State Col-lission for the Electrification of Russia
[608130], developed on the initiative of V. I. Lenin and whose 60th anniversary

was noted at the end of 1980. In 60 years, the power production of the country

of the Soviets has gone far in its development. At present. about 4 billion kWh

of electric power are generated daily in our country. This is half the yearly pro-
duction establist by the some plan. In 1980 the rated output of the USSR's
electric power stations reached 267 million k9, while the annual production of elec-
tric power in the last decade doubled and in 1980 amounted to 1,295 billion Win.

In addition. it is important to note that the increase in the production of electric
power at atomic electric power stations is even greater for the years of the 10th
Five-Year Plan.

The mighty electric-power base which has been created in the USSR has made it possi-
ble to realize the re-equipping of the country's economy on the basis of progres-
sive. modern technology and to increase the amount of power available per worker.
The nature of electric-power consuption in industry is gradually changing: 10 to
15 years ago. the greater portion of the electricity produced went toward power pro-

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POROFHCIALUSEONLY

cesses. Today. however. there is a systentic increase underway in the constwtion
of electric power for production processes.

Today one can uses an entire under of new processes, including those which are
capable of influencing significantly the efficiency of donestic industry, such as
the direct reduction of iron ore. plane production and refining of netals, plana
synthesis in chenistry. etc. These processes are already being developed on an
industrial scale.

A consuaer of a considerable portion of the electric power is agriculture. whose
anomt of power available per unit of production is increasing at a rapid pace.

Thus, one has good reason to say that we are living in an age of growing energy
consulption. Apparently. the rate at which consumption will increase in the future
will also be kept at a high level. According to available estimates, the consump-
tion of energy in the USSR by the end of the century will increase by a factor of
2.5 in conparison with ”No-this is considering measures which have been taken

to economize and to conserve energy.

Up until recently. the development of the electric power industry did not encOunter
fundamental difficulties. The increase in the production of power was provided

for chiefly due to the increase in the extraction and consumption of oil and gas.
At the present time, the contribution of oil and gas to worldwide power production
exceeds 60 percent.

A sharp increase in the prices for oil and the expansion of its production applica-
tions. the increased attention being paid to problems and protecting the environment
and the gradual exhaustion of organic fuel deposits is making it necessary to re-
structure the world's power balance.

Calculations suggest that deposits of cheap oil will be exhausted in the near future
and it will become necessary to develop deposits of high-viscosity oil. requiring
heating of entire seams of hard rock. It will be necessary to extract the oil in
the shelf at depths of 300 to 500 m.

Oil's share in our country's fuel and power balance comprises about 50 percent.
Although the predicted reserves of oil in the USSR are still sufficiently large,

a considerable portion of this oil is located, unfortunately, in deposits that are
considerably inferior with respect to their size and the efficiency with which they
can be exploited at the present time. The cost for this portion, therefore, will
be higher.

The limited nature of the oil reserves in large-scale exploitable deposits and the
tendency of its price to rise cause a reduction in oil's contribution to the fuel
and power balance and force us to switch to using it chiefly as a raw material

for the chemical and nicrobiological industries. of course. energy sources which
are capable of replacing oil and gas are numerous: coal. atomic power. solar, wind
and geotheml power. the energy of the sea, fusion power. biomass energy. etc.

In addition. even if sole of these sources are not renewable, sole of then at least
are inexhaustible (solar, geothermal). If one examines all the primary energy
sources. it is easy to come to the conclusion that there are no physical limitations

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to meeting our energy needs. The lack of inexpensive engineering solutions for
the utilization of such forms of energy as solar. wind. geothemal and tidal. how-
ever. make it impossible to orient on them as on the basic power sources, at least
in the next 50 to 100 years. Hith regard to the develop-eat of fusion power using
light nuclei and its possible role in the energy industry of the future. despite
the successes already achieved. far from all aspects of the problem can be consi-
dered practically solved. We lust still solve a number of very complicated engi-
neering and technical problems. including the construction of fusion-power units
for demonstration purposes and their check-out in actual operation. This means
that several more decades will still be required for the creation of commercial
thermonuclear electric power stations.

At the present time, one of the most practicable sources for increasing the genera-
tion of electric and thermal power in atomic energy. It is expected that atomic
power's contribution to the overall production of electric power by the year 2000
can reach a level of 30 percent in developed countries and approximately 15 percent
throughout the world as a whole.

The llth Congress of the World Power Conference which took place in Munich, Hest
Gernany, in Septeaber 1980 made it possible to conduct a discussion concerning the
demand for atomic power production in developing countries. The power production
problems of these countries were one of the main themes of discussion. The over-
whelming majority (.5 participants spoke out in favor of the necessity for a broader
application of nuclear power in order to curtail the consunption of oil.

The generation of electric power and heat on the basis of fossil fuels is unique
with respect to the scale of the material and energy exchange with the environment.
The material resources are practically entirely converted into production wastes
which enter the environment in the form of gaseous and solid combustion products.
It suffices to say that more than 200 million tons of carbon monoxide, more than
50 million tons of various hydrocarbons, almost 150 million tons of sulphur dioxide,
more than 50 million tons of nitric oxides and 250 million tons of finely dispersed
aerosols are released annually into the earth's atmosphere. Over the last several
decades. the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has increased by

10 to 12 percent, and the content of dust particles has increased by 12 percent

in the last 10 years alone.

The advantages of atomic power production are already being confirmed in practice.
In contrast to electric stations which employ traditional forms of fuel, atomic
electric stations operate without ash wastes or harmful sulfurous gases and nitric
oxides, that is, for all practical purposes. they do not pollute the environment.
Atomic electric stations do not require the transport of great amounts of fuel and,
subsequently, can be located in the iuediate vicinity of the electric power con-
smer. The cost of electric power at an ABS. as a rule, is lower than the cost of
power generated at thermal stations.

As far as negative aspects associated with the development of the atomic industry
are concerned. one must single out from among them the problems of ABS safety from

the point of view of the effects on peoplea' health and the environment as well
as the problem of the accuaulatim and storage of radioactive wastes and the risk

of nuclear weapons proliferation.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOItOFFﬂJAl.USE(NHLY

For people not acquainted with the problems of power production. the notion of an
"atomic station" is frequently associated with a feeling of hazard from radioactive
effects. Many years of experience in the operation of a great r'ny Aﬁs's shows.
however. that the level of radiation around an A23 is practically no different from
the level of naturally occurring background radiation--the sane background radiation
which is a normal condition of peoples' existence. Unfortunately. the media still
do not explain such facts sufficiently, such as the absence of even a single case

of radiation exposure with serious results in the course of almost 2.000 reactor-

One can assert that at the present time the problem of economical and safe power
production at ABS's has already been solved. It still remains, however, to solve

a number of practical problems associated with the processing of spent nuclear fuel
and the storage of radioactive ABS wastes. although there is in worldwide practice
sufficiently great scientific and technical experience in binding radioactive wastes
in solid blocks (bituminization. cementation and other methods) for their safe and
protracted storage.

Objections to the broad development of atomic power which are associated with the
danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons derived from spent nuclear fuel from
AEs's are not justified. An important step in the development of effective measures
against such a proliferation of nuclear arns is the Nuclear Arms Nonproliferation
Treaty. already with [13 participating States, and the real feasibility of monitor-
ing compliance with this treaty.

In compliance with the Treaty, the States possessing nuclear arms were obliged not
to transfer them to anyone whomsoever, while States not possessing them were not
to manufacture nor to acquire nuclear arms. Certainly. a most important step in
expediting the universal recognition of the conditions of the Nuclear Arms Nonpro-
liferation Treaty is the soonest possible conclusion of a Total and Universal
Nuclear weapons Test Ban Treaty.

At present. nuclear power production in many countries is developing as an indepen-
dent sector of the electric power industry. Atomic power stations are now operating
and are being built in lore than 30 of the world's countries. At least another

20 other countries have announced their plans to commence construction of ABS's.

It is obvious to the majority of the world's power engineers that to refrain from
the broad introduction of atomic power would lead unavoidably to an acute reduction
in the pace of development of electric power production, for it would require con-
siderable additional expenditures and capital investment for the development of
alternate power sources.

The Soviet Union, as is well known, bases the development of its economy on its own
fuel and power resources. Our reserves of fuels for power. however, are not unlim-
ited. Our country's fuel and power complex requires ever greater capital invest-ent
and labor expenditures. We have to go farther and farther to the north and east
into inaccessible and difficult to settle regions in pursuit of coal, oil and gas.

In the Soviet Union. more than 70 percent of all the denand for fuel and power oc-
curs in the country's central regions. At the sane tine, the potential for growth
in the extraction of fuel and power resources in this region is limited. The major

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

potential reserves of all types of fossil fuel are concentrated in Siberia and 'other
of the country's eastern regions. Electric power production in these regions is
slated for development on the basis of local reserves, chief smmg which are excep-
tionally inexpensive coals from open-pit nines of the Ekibastuz deposit in
Kazakhstan. the Kansko-Achinsk deposit in Siberia, natural gas from lyumenskays
Oblast as well as the hydroresources of rivers in Siberia. the Far East, Central
Asia and Kazakhstan.

Calculations show that, under the conditions now developing, it is most advanta-
geoua to develop the electric power industry in the central and western regions

of the country on the basis of nuclear fuel. A task has been set to insure prac-
tically the entire increase of electric power in the region by means of atomic elec-
tric stations.

Hith this as its goal. a major economic program of operations has been developed
based on results achieved in the comercial utilization of atomic power in the USSR.
There are 18 atomic electric stations with an output of 4 to 6 million It" already
operating or being built in various regions from the Kola Peninsula to Armenia and
from the Baltic States and the western Ukraine to the Povolzh'ye.

During the years of the 11th Five—Year Plan-~the first stage in the USSR's power-
production program developed on the initiative of 1.. I. Brezhnev—the output of
atomic electric stations will grow by 24 to 25 million It . This will make it possi-
ble to meet this region's growing demnd for electric power without increasing the
expenditure of fossil fuels toward this end. The consumption of such fuels will
even be reduced somewhat. As soon as the next few years, 5 to 7 million R“ of new
capacity will be introduced annually at ABS's. 0n the whole. plans have been made
to construct large-scale AES’s with a total output of 4 to 7 million It" using slow
reactors having unit outputs of l to 1.5 million kw. Provisions have been made

to expand the Kurskaya and Chernobylskaya AES's as well as to construct the
Smolenskaya and Ignalinskaya azs's with RINK-1000 reactors. The South Ukraine.
Kalininskaya, Zaporozhskaya. Rostovsksya, Balskovskaya, Khael'nitskaya. Rovenskaya,
Crimean, Bashkirskaya and other atomic electric stations are being built with_WBR-
1000 reactors. The start-up of the first phases of mny of these will be accom-
plished during the current five-year plan.

The scientific and engineering developments accomlished in recent years have made
it possible to utilize nuclear fuel not only for electric power supply. but also
for a centralized heating supply for the economy. The expenditure of fossil fuels
for low-temperature heat supply exceeds by a factor of approximately 1.5 the expen-
diture for the generation of electric power, being that low-efficiency units re-
quiring the most valuable forms of fuel are employed to a considerable degree for
the generation of heat. Their replacement with atomic power would have great sig-
nificance in the economy.

The construction of the first atomic Me is slated to begin near the city of
Odessa.

He have also begun construction of special atomic stations for heat supply in
Gor'kiy and Voronezh.

FOR OFFICISAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Long-range plans for the development of atomic power provide for the introduction
of new capacities at us'. to be increased in the 12th Five-Year Plan and for the
output of AES's in the country to be brought up to 100 Iillion k" in the 1990's.

We must keep in mind tint the scale of atomic power production with slow reactors
utilizing only I to 2 percent of the mined natural nuclear fuel will in the long
run be limited by the naturally occurring reserves of uraniun. A significant ex-
pansion of atomic power's fuel base will be created by introducing fast reactors
into the power industry. These reactors will make. it possible to insure expanded
breeding of nuclear fuel and will include in the fuel cycle practically all mined
uraniun. including that which is now disposed of as tailings.

Hith regard to the technical aspect, these installations are more complicated than

thermal reactors. Therefore. their mastery requires considerably more time and
effort.

In order to obtain the necessary industrial experience, co-ercial breeder reactors
have already been built and are in operation. These Bil-350 breeder reactors are oper-
ating in Shevchenko. while in 1980 the most powerful reactor of this type. the
BIG-600. was introduced at the Beloyarskaya ABS. Development is underway of breeder
reactors with electric outputs of 800 and 1600 H".

The planned construction of powerful atomic, thermal and hydroelectric complexes

in our country is based upon the accelerated development of domestic machine con-
struction. which in the 11th Five-Year Plan must be raised to a new level. The
"Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985
and for the Period to 1990" makes provisions to insure a considerable increase in

the production of equipment for atomic, hydroelectric and thernal power stations,
including atomic reactors of l to 1.5 million kw. Plans have been made to manufac-
ture and deliver the first atomic reactors for heat supply and to develop new designs
for power units with breeder reactors and equipment for highly controllable power
units of 500,000-kﬂ capacity.

Thus, at this modern stage. electric power production is undergoing considerable
structural and technological rebuilding associated first of all with increasing

the contribution of atomic electric stations and coal-fired thermal stations. This
rebuilding is likewise expressed in the further development of power systems on a
countrywide or multicountry scale. For example, the 0583's Unified Power System has
already made it possible to efficiently coﬁine various types of electric stations
and better utilize the country's fuel and power reserves. Re have achieved in our
country a noticeable savings of fuel due to the unification of power systels and
streamlining of the operation of power equipment.

A specific characteristic of the USSR's power industry is the mass application of
the combined generation of electric power and heat. Electric stations which provide
cities and industry with electric power and heat now comprise more than one-third of
the rated power of the country's thermal stations. The centralization of heat
supply on the basis of heat-and-electric power stations results in a considerable
saving of fuel and is efficient from an ecological point of view. These advantages
will increase even more with the comissioning of stonic heat-andrpower stations
(ATBTs) and atomic heat-supply stations (AST). Thus. the developnent of central

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heating is becoming one of the most important directions in the purposeful energy-
conservation policy being carried out in our country.

An increase in the scale of electric-power production requires its further concen-
tration and the development of intersysta and inter-State electric lines. At the
present time. there exist in Europe several large-scale inter-State power amalgama-
tions (NORDBL', SYUDBL', SRPPB [Expansions not provided.], etc.). Over the course
of a nudaer of years. the "Mir" power system has been functioning successfully as
a large-scale power association of the newer nations of cm. 'lhis syata unites
the power systems of Bulgaria, Hunﬂl'y. East Germany, Poland. Romania, the Soviet
Union and Czechoslovakia.

From our point of View, the need to unite the power systems of different countries,
particularly the countries of Europe, has been coming on for a long time. Among
other things. this problem has for a long period of time been discussed within the
framework of the Economic Comission for Europe of the UN. The task of unifying
the power systems of the countries of Eastern and Western Europe certainly has great
economic and industrial-technical significance.

Trade and exchange of electric power between different countries is a mutually pro-
fitable affair. Electric power arrives in the form of a commodity--an energy car-
rier possessing extremely great value to the consumer and accmlating in itself
the greatest investment of manpower and reified labor. calculated in thermal units.
The presence of powerful international electric lines makes it possible for the
participating sides to realize a nuber of advantages. such as: the offering of
multilateral assistance; the guarantee of mutual reserves in the power systems and
the capacity to realize an exchange of peak output based on the time of day and
the season as well as differences in climatic and natural conditions, etc.

Additionally, the creation of electric communications of sufficient capacity and a
system for the trade and exchange of electric power between the power associations
of Eastern and Western Europe would make it possible to reduce considerably the
demand for the installed power of electric power stations in the associations and
to produce electric power there, where it is most convenient and profitable. An
important aspect of the cooperation would be the construction of large-scale power-
production installations through the joint efforts of the participating nations.
These would be installations of systemwide significance; for example, electric power
stations with high-output units and electric transmission lines of great capacity.

During the 11th Five—Year Plan. the first superhigh-voltage electric transmission
lines will be connissioned in the USSR--the 1.500-kV direct-current Ekibastuz—Center
line and the 1.150-kv alternating-current Bkibastuz-Urals line.

The further development of the USSR's Unified Power System will facilitate the
shunting of outputs and will increase the reliability of the power supply to the
consumers.

Hydroelectric power stations primarily will help to cover the variable portion of
the daily load schedules. They resolve this problem fully in regions rich in
hydrore sources .

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the northwest. the south and the center of the country's European sector where
the construction of efficient 638's is limited, ahuntable hydroelectric pulped stor-
age power stations (CABS) and gas-turbine installations will be built. The CAES's
successfully equalize the operational nodes of base stations by covering the pooh
portion of the load and consuning power during the nighttine. Moreover, a CABS

is an efficient and nobile back-up when disconnecting large power units of thermal
and atonic power stations or intersysten lines.

The further growth of electric-power production and the planned, expanded construc-
tion of power networks in the llth Five-Year Plan will elevate the electrification
of all sectors of industry, agriculture and domestic life to a new, higher level.

The course taken by the 26th CPSU Congress toward rebuilding the structure of the
fuel and power balance and of the power industry will lake it possible to insure
the necessary rate of growth of electric-power and heat production, based upon the
planned develop-ant of all sectors of our country's economy.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat. "Elektricheshiye stantsii", 1981

9512
C80: 1822/216

8
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POWER

UDC [62l.3ll.25:621.039].004
DEVELOPMENT STAGES OF NOVOVORONBZHSKAYA ABS DESCRIBED
Moscow ELEKTRICBBSKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 13-15

[Article by engineers V. A. Zverev, V. K. Sedov and V. A. Vikin: "The
Novovoronezhskaya A133 at a New Stage of Development") >

[Text] The 17 years of experience in the operation of the Novovoronezhskaya ABS
make it possible to single out certain characteristic stages in the development
of atomic power production in the USSR through the use of water-cooled power
reactors.

In the first stage (1966-1969), the accuracy and viability of the scientific and
techical principles embodied in the first power unit with a water-cooled reactor
were checked. Primary attention at this stage was directed toward developing the
conditions for safe and reliable operation of this type of nuclear steam-generating
unit and the demonstration of its teclnical and economic possibilities.

The second stage (1970-1973) marked the development of a test comercial prototype
nuclear steam-generating unit of increased output in the second power unit and pro-
totypes of a series of power units with wax-41.0 reactors (second-generation reac-
tors).

The primary tasks of this stage were the transformtion of the Novovoronezhskaya
AES into a powerful energy-supplying source of the RSFSR'a central chernozem region
and a large-scale commieations center for the power systems of the south and cen—
tral USSR: the significant increase in the economic effectiveness of the station's
operation; and the achievement of a competitive status for the station with the
thermal electric power stations in the European sector of the USSR.

In the third stage (1974-1980). problems were solved regarding further improvement
in the station's operation, the search for reserves of all equipment and the devel-
opment of techniques of quality overhaul and the reduction of the time necessary

for overhaul. A major goal of this stage was realized on this basis--a considera-
ble improvement in the indicators for the economy of operation of all four operating
units. At the same time, this was the stage of construction and start-up of the
first prototype of a l million-kw atomic generating set with a third-generation
WEE-1000 reactor.

Having realized the resolutions of the 25th CPSU Congress, the Novovoronezhskaya
ABS power engineers and operators carried out the start-up of the fifth unit on
30 Hay 1980 in conjunction with planning. scientific research and design organiza~

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tions and equipment-manufacturing enterprises. The installed output of the five
units at the Novovoroneahskaya ABS reached 2.65 million W.

The fifth unit was brought up to its design level of thermal output on the eve of
the 26th CPSU Congress, 20 February 1981.

In the llth Five-Year Plan. beginning with 1981, this electric power station must
insure an annual generation of 15.7 to 16 million kWh. which will amount to about
1 percent of all the electric power to be generated in our country.

At this moment. the operators of the Novovoronezhskaya ABS have entered a new, fourth
stage of development for the stationufsniliarization with the design indicators
of the first prototype of the WEI-1000 series.

The dynamics of the increase in the station's indicators and the primary character-
istic indicators are illustrated by the data in table 1.

In proportion to the growth in the unit output of the equipment, there has been

an increase in the safety and reliability requirements for ABS's. These require-
ments have been realized to the maximum extent possible in the fifth power unit.
The presence of active and passive independent three-channel safety systems in com-
bination with a reliable, hermetically-sealed jacket for the entire reactor compart-
ment of the unit make it possible to insure localisation of the maximum design emer-
gency with a breach of the largest-diameter pipeline.

Unique electrical equipment, much of which is not similar to anything in Soviet
atomic machine-construction practice. has been installed and is being operated as
part of the fifth power unit.

Table l
Indicator wan-210 WER-365 wan-440 VVER-IOOO
Unit No. 1 2 3.6 5
Year of introduction 1966 1969 1971-72 1980
Reactor output, MU:
thermal 760 1320 1375 3000
electric (gross) 210 365 660* 1000

Pressure. kg/cmz:
heat exchanger in first

circuit 100 105 125 160

saturated steam ahead of

turbines 29 30 Mo 60
Mater of turbogenerators 3 5 lo 2
Turbogenerator unit output 70 73 220 500
Portion for auxiliary power, Z: 8.0 7.3 6.8 L7
Efficiency. 1:

gross 27.7 27.6 32* 33

net 25.5 25.7 29.7* 31.7

* with a pressure in the condenser of 0.035 ltg/cm2

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Great experience was accumlated during the course of operation of the power units
at various stages. This experience made it possible to inprove the designs and
transfer those isprovenents to other azs's. either already operational or under
cmstruction. It was also possible to achieve continuously. fron year to year.

an iuprovenent in the technical and econonic indicators for the operation. reliabil—
ity and safety of AEs's.

Table 2 presents figures for the generation and output of electric power and the
growth in these figures for various stages in the operation of the Novovoronezhskaya
ABS. Without going into a detailed analysis. we will note that a considerable ill-
provelnent in the indicators was achieved during the periods of the second and third
stages at an mchanging level of installed output. as well as during the 10th and
11th Five-Year Plans. This reflected the work of the operators collective on in-
creasing the level of ABS equipnent operation on the whole, on raising the level

of thermal econouy and reducing the expenditures for auxiliary power.

From 1975 through 1979 as well as during the 10th Five-Year Plan--the period for
mastering the operation of the four operational units-«the most stable operation
of the station was achieved with an output of 9.7 to 10.5 billion mm. In this
case. deviations this way or that from the annual average (10.1 billion kWh) can
be explained by planned downtime of the units for overload and scheduled preventive
maintenance.

Table 2
Stage of work Electric-power generation Electric-power output
billions kWh _z_ billions m l
1 Oct 1964 - 1 Oct 1969 6.44 100 5.87 100
1 Oct 1969 - 1 Oct 1974 24.72 380 22.67 390
1 Oct 1974 - 1 Oct 1979 49.92 780 46.11 790
1966 - 1970 7.22 100 6.58 100
1971 - 1975 34.92 480 32.14 490
1976 - 1980 51.6 710 47.56 720
1.1 on the
fifth unit
1981-1985 (planned) 78.4 1090 71.87 1090

Note: From 30 Hay 1980 to 1 January 1981, the power of the fifth unit was developed
to a level 75-80 percent of noninal.

In order to maintain a high level of readiness to accept the loads of the operation-
al power units which have been working for 16. 11, 9 and 8 years. correspondingly,
modernization. the quality and methods of repair and the renovation of equipment

and the engineering systens acquire great significance.

These operations are carried out according to plan at the Novovoronezhskaya ABS.
For exauple. during the last two years of the 10th Five-Year Plan:

two 30-phase turbogenerator stators were replaced with type TW-220-2A 60~phase
stators. Replacement is planned for the stators of two lore generators;

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the upper mit of the reactor in the fourth power unit was renovated. with the
sheathing pipes and drives for the control and safety system (8112) being replaced
with comercial equipment of increased reliability;

s production-line method was applied to repair a great amomt of pulping equipment
and my electric motors;

the complete replacement of the tube banks of the PHD-S. the turbine condensers

and the oil coolers with K-ZZO-M tubes was carried out; the modernization of the
condensers and the PND on the “-70 and [-75 turbines is being carried out according
to plan;

a method of vacuum drying and cleaning the pipe still of the condensers was intro-
duced in two Alt-70 turbines and four of the K—ZZO-lolo's;

the Willi-660 reactors were converted to replenisInent with standard-enrichment fuel.
These and many other measures have provided a saving of more than 1 million rubles
per year due to the reduction in unplanned downtime and the increase in the economy
of the equipment.

The ever-growing requirements for safety at atomic electric stations can be guaran-
teed through the profound theoretical knowledge and on-the-job skills of the opera-
tional personnel, the high degree of operational efficiency and equipment mainten-

ance and the application of computers and automatic means of monitoring and control.

The operational personnel who control and maintain the reactor yearly undergo train-
ing, a check of their skill in controlling the reactor and on-the-job training at
the Novovoroneshakaya ABS training center on a WEE-460 simulator.

In addition to the Novovoronethskaya ABS operators, foreign specialists and per-
sonnel from ABS's currently mder construction in our country undergo training on
the simulator and in classrooms on equipment mock-ups.

The first four power units do not differ significantly from one another with respect
to the equipping of the units with automatic control devices in view of the fact
thatit is these units that were the objects of research and development of test
prototypes of devices and instruments for the automatic systems used at present

on the fifth unit. A highly accurate automatic power regulator for the reactor
(ARM-S). the "Oran-V" computer control complex, the reactor's internal monitoring
system "Gindukush," the AsUT-SOO automated control system and the input of informa-
tion to the telecranes in a color display concerning the "on" status and operational
conditions of the engineering systems make it possible for the operations personnel
to analyze correctly and in a timely manner the operation of equipmt and to take
the necessary measures and actions in order to insure a high degree of safety and
economy.

As was noted earlier, an atomic electric station can exert an influence on the en-
vironnent under emergency conditions when there is a breach of the maximum-diameter
conduit in the first conduit. Such a failure has almost zero probability of oc-
curring and its constancy is insured through the periodic monitoring of the metal
and recalputstion of its stability, based on the influence of various factors spe-
cific to the ABS.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under normal or other emergency operational conditions. the Rovovoronezhskaya ABS
exerts no negative influences. as observational experience over its entire period

of operation has sham.

During the development of long-term plans for the station based on the rich exper-
ience accumulated during the operation and servicing of the equipment and the sci-
entific research done on the reactors at hand. it was recognized as expedient to
build a nutter of scientific and industrial swdivisions and enterprises at the
Novovoronezhskaya ABS:

an engineering laboratory building for research into spent fuel and irradiated con-
struction materials;

a VVER-IOOO simulator and an expansion of the training center. with consideration
being given to long-range plans for the development of the USSR atomic power in-
dustry in the llth Five-Year Plan and up to 1990;

a production repair enterprise for the ABS;

an automated ABS control center with the installation of back-up control panels
for the power units;

an expansion of the set-up shop and the organization of a start-up and adjustment
enterprise on its basis.

Aside from developing the rated power of the fifth power unit and bringing its tech-
nical and economic indicators up to the norm. the fourth stage of development of

the Novovoronezhskaya A38 includes plans for a broad complex of measures directed
at further increasing the level of operation and improving the repair service. the
realization of which will make it possible to increase the efficiency of utiliza-
tion of steels power.

The station‘s specialists in conjunction with planning and design organisations
are examining the issue of modernizing the reactor of the first unit. which pos-
sesses a relatively small output. There are several possible methods for utilizing
it which in any case will provide positive results:

its utilization for research purposes;

its continued operation with parameters for the generation of electric or thermal
power for the daily needs of the population and the economy.

The implementation of a central-heating project for the power workers' housing set-
tlement using the operational power units has already begun at the station.

The introduction of the first phase of a fishery utilizing the heated waste water
is planned for 1982-1983. Thus. the resolution of the USSR Council of Ministers
regarding improvement of the operational economy and efficient utilization of fuel
and power resources is being implemented.

The Novovoroneshskaya power-workers collective is full of resolve and creative
forces for the successful fulfillment of the tasks set by the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Energoiadat, "Blektricheskiye stantsii". 1981

9512 13
680: 1822/216 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INNlOFFKJAl.USIZONlY

ELECTRIC POWER

KALININSKAYA ABS CONSTRUCTION PROGRESS
Moscow ENERGETICHBSKOYE STROITEL'STVO in Russian No 6, Jun 81 pp 78-79

13r§%cle: "At the Construction Projects of the Five-Year Plan: the Kalininsksya
ABS

lier§7 One of the most important power projects in the central region of the coun-
try is the Kalininskaya ABS with a rated capacity of 4 million k" and VVER-lOOO
reactors. The first block of the A85 should be put into operation next year.

It was begun in April 1981. The concreting of the containment vessel of the reactor
with the use of a sliding concrete form designed by Orgenergostroy is under way; the
well of the reactor is being concreted, work is being performed in the compartments
within thereactor; the frame of the turbine house has been erected along the 10th
axis, the deaerator stack has been erected along the 13th axis, the underground

part of the block pump house has been built and the precast reinforced concrete
structural members of the underground part of the engineering and general building
have been erected.

Since the start of construction 102,965 m2 of housing have been put into operation,
3 kindergartens, a school for 1,176 pupils, a trade center, a drugstore and 3 cafes
have been built.

The amount of work performed by the construction workers during the first quarter
of 1981 increased by 37 percent as compared with the same quarter last year.

At the construction project there are good labor collectives, which invariably ful-
fill both the plan assignments and the increased socialist obligations, for example,
the section of the administration of mechanization and special operations and the
section of the Sevzapenergonontazh Trust. At the Kalininskaya ABS there are also
outstanding brigades and crews. Thus, the crew of communist labor of bulldozer
drivers of V. I. Rodonezhskiy by the day of the opening of the 26th CPSU Congress
had fulfilled the plan of 2 months by 160 percent; the crew of excavator operators
of N. H. Novozhilov also exceeded the socialist obligations.

It would seem that it is possible only to rejoice at the achievements of the con-
struction workers and installers. who are building the Kalininsksya ABS.

Unfortunately, it just "would seem."

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The house newspaper of the Kalininskaya ABS on the threshold of the new year'éf'
1381 reported:

"Let us also keep in mind our shortcomings. The plan of the construction of the
facilities of the nuclear electric power station, housing and social, cultural and
personal facilities is not being fulfilled. There are many unfinished projects.
The managers of the construction and installation sections and the administrations.
the secretaries of the party organizations and the communists must take decisive
steps to improve the construction of purification facilities. the hospital complex.
the dormitory, apartment houses and the main projects of the ABS."

To know the shortcomings and to remember them means to act energetically in the
direction of the improvement of matters at the construction site. However, things
have not budged an inch.

Of course, it is possible to find objective reasons-the lack of skilled personnel
at such facilities as the reactor department, the transfer to the start-up Kol'skaya
ABS of the collective of the construction administration of the Novovoronezhskaya
ABS, which had earlier been sent here, to the Kalininskaya A38, and so on and so
forth.

But are there really few still undiscovered reserves at the construction project
proper? The competition at the construction site has been organized, to put it
mildly, not in the best way: a pitiful number of brigades are covered by such an
advanced form of labor as the brigade contract, labor productivity as a whole at
the construction project is low, hence such a very unpleasant fact-the plan of the
first quarter of 1981 was fulfilled by only 53 percent.

A field collegium of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification, which was held
on 10 April 1981 under the chairmanship of USSR Minister of Power and Electrifica-
tion P. S. Neporozhniy, was devoted to the analysis of the formed situation at the
construction site of the Kalininskaya A38.

The collegium noted that the construction of the Kalininskaya A38 is being carried
out without the proper engineering preparation, with a serious lag with respect to
the main directions of work and with a low standard of performance. The nonful-
fillment of the plans on the placement into operation of housing and social, cul-
tural and personal facilities is causing additional difficulties in the build-up of
the collective of construction workers. All this is threatening to upset the time—
ly placement into operation of the first power block of the Kalininskays A35.

The collegiul outlined urgent and effective steps on assisting the collective.

It is the duty of the construction workers and installers of the Kalininskaya ABS
to take all the necessary steps and to utilize the available reserves in order to
fulfill the plan assignments and to place into operation the first power block
with a capacity of 1 million k" in 1982.

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Bnergeticheskoye stroitel'stvo", 1981

7807
C80: 1822/219

15
POI! OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 65.011.56:[550.8.553.98l/982]
CONTROLLING PROCESS OF EXPLORING FOR OIL AND GAS DEPOSITS

Moscow UPRAVLENIYE PROTSESSOH RAZVEDKI NBFTYANYKH I GAZOVYKN HBSTOROZHDENIY in Rus-
sian 1980 (signed to press [6 Mar 80) pp 1—9. 174—176

[Annotation. introduction and table of contents from book "Controlling Process of
Exploring Oil and Gas Fields.“ by Valentin Borisovich Vasil'yev. Izdatel'stvo
"Nedra." [300 copies. 176 pages]

[Text] The book examines procedural questions of exploring oil and gas fields in
terms of the possible application of economic-mathematical models and computers to
controlling the process of exploration.

The main procedural concepts are analyzed with regard for the main trends in explora-
tion and the geological characteristics of the country's lost promising regions.
Questions are examined of evaluating the long-term reserves uith the help of
statistical models. determination of the well arrangement systems and minimization
of their number. Parameters are defined for controlling the process of oil and

gas exploration. A plan is suggested for controlling exploration of oil and gas
fields using a computer. Characteristics are presented of the economic-mathematical
model and an algorithm for solving the problem. elements of information. mathe-
matical and technical support for realization of the plan. The simulation poten-
tialities of the model are shown.

The book is designed for specialists involved in exploring oil and gas fields.
Seventeen tables. 57 illustrations. 86 bibliographic entries.
Introduction

The strategy of geological exploration for oil and gas for the near future follows
from the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress. Subsequent developments of these most
important decisions stipulate concentration of the chief monetary, material and
labor resources in the main directions, which include:

concentration of exploratory-development drilling in the promising regions of the
country where there are real prerequisites for obtaining increments in oil and

gas reserves (west Siberia. East Siberia. Far East, Timano-Pechora province. Central
Asia and the Caspian syneclise);

guarantee of the maximum increase in oil and gas reserves in the regions of the
European sector of the USSR (Komi ASSR. Arkhangel'skaya. Orenburgskaya. Permskaya

and Astrakhanskaya Ohlasts. Udmurt ASSR, Ukrainian SSR. Belorussian SSR. Georgian
$53) in order to maintain the extraction levels attained here;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increase in the volumes of regional and exploratory geophysical work and drastic
improvement in their technical level. in the first place. in the new promising but
poorly studied regions of East Siberia. Far East. Uzbek SSR. and Turkmen SSR.

The scientifically substantiated selection of the main trends in exploratory-
development work will create the prerequisites for the most efficient arrangement
of the work and the corresponding increase in oil and gas reserves for each
promising region.

The Rest Siberian oil and gas province is one the country's leading regions for
extraction of oil. natural gas and condensate. Increase in the reserves of these
minerals in all regions of the country, including "est Siberia is becoming the most
important national economic task.

L. I. Brezhnev stressed the enormous importance of the heroic accomplishments of the
Siberian oil workers in his speech at the 18th Komsomol Congress.

"We are faced with living on the Tyunen reserves for many years still. In the next
10 years. the primary increase in extraction of oil. gas and the valuable chemical
raw material that is produced from them." stated L. I. Brezhnev. "we are counting
on obtaining precisely because of Tyumen'. Consequently. a new and more complicated
stage of development of West Siberia is approaching. or more correctly. has already
approached. We are faced with doubling and tripling the volumes of this work
there.‘

Realization of the program planned by the party will require further evolution of
exploration and simultaneously with the industrial exploration of new areas, comple-
tion of exploration on the started areas in the shortest possible times. as well

as start-up of new fields.

A primary measure is increase in the economic efficiency of exploration by
searching for and introducing new techniques of exploration. There is also the
problem of creating highly effective methods of systemitiaing and processing
information. as well as working out methods to reduce outlays for exploration
and the efficient arrangement of wells.

lntensification of the geological exploration process entails a definite rise in
the volumes of drilling operations. This in turn determines the need to improve
the system of control. In addition. when exploratory work for oil and gas is done.
it is necessary to improve its quality. Guarantee of a reliable geophysical base
for the planned indicators and the maximum thoroughness in determining the
exploration network are an important starting condition for the successof the
exploration process. Since it is carried out under conditions of indefiniteness
and each new information source can significantly alter the concept of the facility.
it is expedient to model the different versions of its condition so that decision
making is simulated and the need for outlays of some material resources is elimina-
ted. But the actual process of conducting exploration must be under constant con—
trol which guarantees conditions for making timely and optimal decisions regarding

its development.

 

1L. I. Brezhnev. "Speech at the 18th Komsomol Congress 25 April 1978." KOHHUNIST.
No 7. 1978. p 13.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The concept of the quality of geological exploration does not have a distinct
quantitative expression. This usually infers a multifaceted complex of conditions
which are difficult and practically unformalizable. Some of them can be expressed
quantitatively. For example. hydrocarbonreserves are considered to be prepared
more qualitatively if they suit a higher category with other conditions equal. Cer-
tain economic factors further come into operation. Higher quality work should be
considered that done in which a lower cost of a unit of explored reserves was
attained. The latter is possible with a reduction in the number of wells with low
information content.

The problem of improving the efficiency of geological exploration is associated

in the closest possible way with minimizing the number of development wells. Work
in this direction has been underway for a long time.

There are a considerable number of developments whose usefulness is undoubted. It
is promising to apply to the solution to the problem of optimizing the exploration

process the main principles of systems analysis in combination with economic and
mathematical models and computer equipment.

If we conceive that the expediencey of developing a field in any one of its links
is determined by the quantity and quality of the prepared reserves. then the
meaning of exploration can be seen in evaluating the parametersof the system which

governs the calculation of reserves and other geological. technological and
economic indicators. '

Exploration of oil and gas wealth is a great national economic problem. It cannot
be solved in one approach. however. it can be divided into parts that are more
accessible for study and resolution. Parts of the problem in descending order are
conducting of exploration on the territory of the oil and gas province. oil and
gas oblaat. and finally. typical groups of fields. individual fields and beds. A
large problem is to define the situation which characterizes the difference be-
tween the necessary output.the attainment of the planned volume of reserves pre-
pared by some schedule. and the existing output. the current state of the reserves.

Thus. the problem of exploration is the desire to obtain industrial reserves in the
predicted or higher volumes with limited allocations. The exploration system is
that tool used to solve this problem completely or by parts. Following S. Optner
[58], by control is meant that state of the system where it is under control.

Control of the exploration process is first of all resolution of questions of
operational control. This is therefore a decision making process to a considerable
degree. It is assumed that it is reserved for man. In the "man-machine" system
which needs to be realized for control. the machine only prepares information for
decision making with the help of a mathematical tool.

Based on this concept. it should be assumed that the model of control contains
elements of behaviorality. In the "man-machine“ system. human activity is the
most important component. Hodelling this activity is still difficult, because it
is inadequate to the real process. Man or a collective of people working in
technical or social systems. implement basically different procedures of activity
which include acknowledgment and realization of meanings. goals and values of
their own work. They critically rethink it by using the broadest set of cultural
and social norms. values and ideals. These aspects of human activity are not
successfully considered in the language of systems equipment [30].

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ye. S. Venttsel' [18] defines a decision as "any definite selection of parameters
which depend on us." while she calls the optimal “decisions which are preferable to
others for some reasons." In studying the decision making mechanism, 1. P. Shubkina
[83] notes that the process of decision making and situations in which decisions
have to be made are, on the one hand. common concepts, and as such they are in-
distinct and do not have clearly defined boundaries. 0n the other hand. these

same concepts are used in the theory of studying operations and in other areas of
science. and therefore. they require formal, or at least more precise definitions.
However. in the decision making process. two parts are isolated in its mechanism:
one which can still only be defined on a qualitative, nonformal level (in particular.
analysis of information regarding the process or final selection of a decision). and
another. for example. compilation of a model of the process whose description re-
quires quantitative, formal methods.

This approach to studying the decision making mechanism can be viewed as a combi—
nation of methods used in analyzing large systems and in studying operations. In
analyzing large systems, the main aspect is to search for the actual decisions among
which a selection can be made. while in studying the operations, the main aspect is
the methods of selecting the decisions that are permissible or the best.

3. Kveyd [41] notes that although systems analysis often uses the same mathematical
methods, it is associated with that class of problems whose difficulties consist of
the need to decide what should be done, and not simply how to do it.

The statement of Ye. Z. Hayminas [46) is also important. It asserts that even in
those cases where in the process of making control decisions, quantitative analysis
plays the chief role. the system that is oriented on the use of the methods of
studying operations canneveryield information that is sufficient for selecting a
method of actions.

The decision making process consists of formalizable and nonformalizable stages.
Therefore the problem of searching for rational limits of converging these stages
and the mutual transition of them without losing quality has not yet been solved.
The main path to solving it is for nonformal description to organically precede

the formal calculations. and for their corresponding interpretation to be completed
in the act of final decision making by man.

It is expedient to select approximately this path in solving the problem of control-
ling exploration. It is first of all necessary to find the criteria which define

the condition of exploration of the field. the main parameters of control, their
change in the process of exploration. degree of influence on the results of work so
that:

we approach resolution of the question of limiting the numberof development wells and
the resources invested in exploration of oil and gas fields;

a computer is connected to control of the process of exploring oil and gas fields.

The author has shown the possibility and expediency of formalizing the functional
part of the task of controlling the process of exploration and its presentation in

the form of an economic-mathematical model with subsequent program support and
realization on a computer [16). It is known that economic-mathematical models and

19
son orucm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

computers are applicable in those cases where the problem has an optimization
nature and possesses multiple versions of solutions. Here a change in any
parameter of the system which is governed by the possibility of a fairly broad
maneuver of resources in a temporal respect. causes its new condition. while the
latter determines the conditions for the development of different versions of the

condition of the system. and correspondingly. making of a controlling decision.
It also provides for simulation of the exploration process with playing out of its

individual stages on the computer in a search for the quantitatively defined best
version of well arrangement.

Thus, the essence of the base economic-mathematical model is control over the
condition of the changes in the main geological and technological parameters of

the bed and the economic characteristics of the process that are recorded at some
stage.

Computer control gurantees the output of objective and adequate information, but

the final judgment regarding the condition of the system and making of the con-
trolling decision are reserved for man.

The majority of books on the technique of exploring oil and gas fields to a con-
siderable measure treat the geological aspects of the problem. Questions of

optimizing and controlling the exploration process have not been sufficiently
examined.

The increasing rates of development of the oil and gas industry force us to make
a new and more attentive examination of the need to use new and progressive
techniques and methods of controlling the exploration process.

It is becoming obvious that further introduction of quantitative procedures and
characteristics into the exploration technique. and improvement in the level of
adequacy and objectivity of informationarean important reserve for intensifying
exploration for oil and gas.

This book has analyzed method questions of exploration and the possibility of
quantitative forms of solving them. It covers the possible minimization in the
number of development wells and suggests planning solutions to controlling the
exploration process which stipulate the extensive involvement of computers.

Based on a comparative analysis of the outlook for oil and gas content, the first
chapter defines the main trends in exploration for oil and gas in the country. It
presents geological characteristics of the regions in which search and exploration
for oil and gas fields have been primarily developed. As in the entire work. this

section gives considerable coverage to the West Siberian oil and gas province. It
examines certain features of the oil and gas fields.

The second chapter analyzes the method concepts of exploration for oil and gas.

It makes a concise survey of the works on optimizing the exploration process. It
examines questions of evaluating the long-term geological reserves of the field
before the beginning ofexploration. It presents a technique for applying regressive

models for this purpose. It analyzes the stages in exploration and covers tasks
that can be solved at each stage.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kased on the geological characteristics for the main conditions of occurience'of
oil and gas, systems are examined for the arrangement of development wells. and
preference is given to the profile system. Certain methods are presented for
determining the distances between the profiles and wells in the profiles. Examples
are given from the experience of exploration work on certain fields in Heat Siberia.

The preliminary conclusion is drawn that the use of an efficient technique and
control of the condition of exploration of the fields will permit reduction in the
number of development wells.

The third chapter covers the selection of parameters to control the process of oil
and gas exploration and their changes during exploration. as well as determination
of the necessary number of wells. It analyzes the dependence of field reserves on
the change in calculated parameters. It presents graphs showing the fluctuations
in individual parameters in the exploration process. as well as the statistical
models to determine the minimum number of wells needed for exploration.

An analysis is made and the dependence of the stateof preparation of the oil and gas
reserves by categories on the number of development wells is established.

The fourth chapter suggests a plan for controlling exploration of oil and gas
fields using computers. It examines the logical-economic and method concepts of

questions of developing control of exploration, and defines the concept of the
object of control, and the technical-economic indicators necessary for control.

It presents the characteristics of the economic-mathematical model and algorithm
for solving the control problem.

Elements are presented of the information, mathematical and technical support of
the plan realization. Simulation potentialities of the model and its realization
using computers in specific examples are shown.

The conclusion formulates the main conclusion on the presented material.

All the method recommendations presented in the book are aimed at further improve-
mentin the effectiveness of exploration for oil and gas.

The presented material is based on personal developments of the author. experience
accumulated by him during work in Heat Siberia. in the Irkutsk amphitheater. and
in the Caspian basin. as well as on the use of domestic publications.

The author is grateful for assistance in collecting materials, mainly on questions
of information. technical and mathematical support of the control project, as well

as for supply of test calculations on the computer to engineers S. N. Zenkov and
V.N. Ivanova. The author considers it his pleasant duty to express his gratitude

to corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Professor I. I. Nesterov

for valuable advice and assistance which promoted the creation of the book.
Contents Page

Introduction 3

Chapter 1. Characteristics of the Main 011 and Gas Regions of the USSR
and Certain Features of the Oil and Gas Fields 10

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Technique of Exploration Work for Oil and Gas

1.

Questions of evaluating the long-term geological reserves
of the field

Stages in conducting exploration

Systems of arrangement of development wells

Profile system of well arrangement

Triangular system of well arrangement

Ring system of well arrangement

Base levels and objects of exploration

Experience of exploration on certain oil and gas fields

Chapter 3. Parameters of Controlling Exploration and Technique of

l.
2.

3.

Determining the Necessary Number of Wells
Selection of control parameters and study of their change
in the process of exploration
Determination of the number of wells with the help of statisti-
cal models
Analysis of the condition of preparation of oil and gas reserves
by categories and its dependence on the number of development wells

Chapter 4. Plan for Controlling Exploration of Oil and Gas Fields with

the Help of a Computer

1. Main concepts in questions of developing control of the explora-
tion process
2. Statement of the task and development of the algorithm to solve it
3. Processing of information and characteristics of the output data
4. Certain suggestions on technical support of the control system
5. Simulation of control of the process of exploring fields with the
use of the suggested solutions
Conclusion
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nedra", 1980

9035
050:

1822/225 END

22

22

24
35
40
41

-47

£8
50
52

66
68
97
104

116
116
120
140
165
150
167

169