FOR OFF“ IM. USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOGlH
25 JUNE 1982

USSR Report

ENERGY

(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was smarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS
25 .111

USSR REPORT
ENERGY
(F000 9/92)

CONTENTS

ELECTRICW

Power Hechinebuilding Minister Krotov Reviews Progress
(V. V. Krotov‘ mm, Jan 82)....0000

Minister Gowns-ate on Future Development of Power Industry
(P. S. Neporozhiniy; mommy: STANTSII,

M 81) I...DCCOOOOOCOCOOOOOUOO0.0000000IOIOI‘......O...

Develop-eat of Nuclear Power in 08$
(I. Is. Ismel'yenov, V. A. (:hemyeyev; mum,

Jm 82) OOOOOIO’IOCOIIIOOOOOOOOC0.00IUOOOOOOOUOOCOOOOOO

Power Development; in 1981, Plans for 1982
(Yo. I. Boris”; WEI“, Feb 82) ooooeoeeeeoco

Constructim at Zaporozhskey ABS
(A. B. Recharge, et e1.3 mmcmmn STROITEL'S‘NO,

J” 82) OIDOOCOOOOCOOOOOIOOCOCOOO'CODIOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOU

Methods for Modernizing menial Electric-Power lete
Described

(V. I. Gorin, et a1.; WCHESKIIB STANTSII, Feb 62)
New Book Discusses Developnent of Electric Power Industry

(v. A. Ryl'skiy; sscxount'lrrs Paxnnzum RAZVITIYA
ENERGBTIKI I ELEKTRIFIKATSII, 1981) ...................

- e - [111 - ussa - 2

POI OFFIﬂAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POWER

POHER HACHINEBUILDING MINISTER KROTOV REVIEWS PROGRESS

Hoscow ENERGOHASHINOSTROYBNIYB in Russian No I Jan 82 pp 2 - 6

[Krticle by V. V. Krotov USSR minister of power machinebuilding
”Basic Reference Points:

LTexi/ The successful development of the Soviet Union's fuel and
power complex, as noted at the 26th Party Congress and in Comrade

L. 1. Brezhnev's speech at the November (1981) Party Plenum, is one
of the key tasks involving the entire national economy. In his re-
port at the Party Congress, Brezhnev indicated that the problem of
improving the structure of the fuel and power balance is becoming
increasingly urgent; he also emphasized that "it is necessary to
cut back on the amount of petroleum used as fuel and to substitute
coal and natural gas for it and to more rapidly develop the atomic
power industry, including the use of fast breeder reactors. And, of
course, life requires that we continue to look for essentially new
sources of energy, including the creation of the fundamentals of the
thermonuclear power industry."

In his speech at the November (l98l) Party Plenum, Brezhnev, refer-
-ing to the future, reported that "the recently conducted review of
the reserves of gas, petroleum and condensate in West Siberia has
again demonstrated that nature has not neglected us. The resources
available to the Soviet Union enable us to look into the future with
confidence. We need only to be thrifty and to use them with intelli-
gence. we cannot let up in our efforts to develop the fuel and power
complex, including the development of new sources of energy. At the
same time we must adopt energy saving equipment and technology as
quickly as possible."

At the Sixth Session of the USSR Supreme Soviet of the Tenth Convoca-
tion in the report on the state plan for the economic and social
development of the USSR for the years I981 through I985, it was noted
that the 26th Party Congress, having confirmed the basic direction

of the Party in the area of the economy for the primary development
of the socialist industry, especially heavy industry, devoted parti-
cular attention to the further increase of the potential of the base
sectors of industry, especially the fuel and power sectors. Accord-
ing to the plan in the llth Five-Year Plan the output of electricity

1

FOR OPYICIAL USE ONLY
in I985 is to reach I,555 billion kilowatt-hours, an increase of 260
billion kilowatt-hours as compared with I980.

Horeoever, the production of electric power at atomic and hydroelectric

power stations will reach £50 billion kilowatt-hours. an increase of
more than l.7-fold.

The llth Five-Year Plan calls for an increase in the extraction of pe-
troleum and gas condensate to 630 million tons by the year I985.
Along with the introduction into industrial exploitation of new pe-
troleum deposits it is planned to expand the use of intensive methods
of influencing the petroleum-bearing strata in order to increase their
yield. It is planned to continue the development of the gas industry
at a rapid pace. In I985 the amount of natural gas extraction must

be 630 billion cubic meters. which exceeds the I980 level by 45 per-
cent 0

To speed up delivery of the blue fuel to the customer in the IIth Five-
Year Plan major gas pipelines must be built with a total length of
58,000 km. including from the fields in Tyumen' Oblaat to regions of
the Center and the Urengoy to Uzhgorod gas pipeline, which will satis-
fy export requirements.

The associations and enterprises of the USSR Ministry of Power Machine
Building must work more diligently in the second year of the five-year
plan than they did in the first. It meet the plans of the Party and
government for outfitting faeilities of the fuel and power complex
with equipment, which became law at the next session of the USSR Su-
preme Soviet, the production of power units for atomic electric power
stations will be increased by more than 2-fold; steam turbines by
nearly 30 percent; hydraulic turbines by about 26 percent; boilers
with a steam generating capacity of more than I0 tons per hour by 2|.3
percent; the production of gas pumping units will be doubled; and
the manufacture of consumer goods will be increased by 66 percent.

The tasks facing the sector require a great deal or organizational
work at all levels of management and a lot of responsibility is put
upon the shoulders of everyone participating in the solution. Mean-
while. the results of the production and economic work and the econom-
ic indicators of the Ministry's associations and plants for the first
yvar oi the Ilth Five-Year Plan cannot be viewed as satisfactory.
EVury quarter the industrial organizations of the Ministry worked un-
dvr a great deal or pressure; the targets for meeting assigned tasks
wvrv not always met, which led to additional difficulties. This is
why in I982 it is necessary to significantly activate efforts to meet
the plans called for by the Party in the field of developing power
machine building and primarily for implementing the decisions of the
26th Party Congress and the November (I98l) Party Plenum.

"The Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the
USSR in the Period I981 through I985 and for the Period up to I990".

2
FOR OF¥ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which were approved by the Party Congress, call for the power machine
building industry to "significantly increase the production of equip-
ment for atomic, hydro-, and thermal electric power stations, includ-
ing atOmic reactors with a rated capacity of I to 1.5 million kV and
power units with a rated capacity of 500,000 to 800,000 kV for thermal
electric power stations burning low-grade coal." At the same time it
is planned to manufacture and deliver the first atomic reactor which
will provide heat to large cities, to develop new designs of power
units with fast neutron reactors with a rated capacity of 800,000 to
l,600,000 kV, and to create an experimental-industrial steam-gas tur-
bine with a rated capacity of 250,000 kV (PGU-ZSO) with the intercy-
clical gasification of solid fuel.

The associations and enterprises of the Ministry of Power Machine
Building need to increase the production of equipment, which will
make it possible to efficiently use secondary power resources in me-
tallurgy and other sectors of industry, and also to organize the se-
ries production of gas pumping units and mainline gas pipelines at

a pressure of 100 atmospheres.

The Ministry of Power Machine Building has developed a set of practi-
cal measures to acc0mplish the decisions of the 26th Party Congress
and the decrees of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of
Ministers. Thus, in the Ilth Five-Year Plan it is planned along with
with a growth in the amounts and pace of manufacturing the basic pro-
duct to substantially improve other indicators of the production and
economic activity as well. It is planned in 1985 to ensure the
growth of the amounts of standard net product in an amount exceeding
62 percent, and for commodity output by not less than 42 percent.

The average annual pace of increase of product output will be greater
than 7 percent. Approximately 90 percent of the growth in product
output (excluding the Atommash Production Association) is to be ob-
tained by increasing labor productivity, which must be more than I34
percent for the five-year plan.

Along with this it is planned to conditionally cut back on the number
of workers by several tens of thousands, including by substantially
raising the technical level and improving the organization of produc-
tion; to obtain a profit from reducing the cost of production in an
amount of IO million rubles; to attain a machine shift coefficient
of l.55; and to obtain economic savings on the order of 20 million
rubles through mechanization and the maximum reduction in heavy and
manual labor.

The basis for achieving these results is the significant speeding up
of scientific-technical progress in the sector and the adoption into
production of the creative achievements of scientists. inventors. ra-
tionalizers, the experience of leading production workers; the fur-
ther expanSion of the brigade form of organizatiOn and pay; raising
the level of comprehensive mechanization and the automation of tech-
nological processes; the use of progressive methods of processing
metal; the equipping of shops with modern control and measuring

3
son current. use 0qu
f‘lﬂ III‘I‘I‘ IAI. NBC. \Il‘l.)

equipment; the adoption of rational procurements; the maximum re-
duction in the use of steel castings in equipment designs; the use
in production and their control by computers; and the more efficient
use of available and newly created capacities.

The ways and means for solving these important tasks have been tho-
roughly discussed in the labor collectives of the Ministry of Power
Machine Building and in the Ministry's associations, enterprises and
organizations.

Based upon these measures, recommended by the Ministry, each associa-
tion, enterprise and organization. deriving from the established
assignments, the specific nature of production and the nature of
practical work, must come up with their own set of specific measures.
The management of the associations and enterprises in concert with
public organizations must constantly direct the labor collectives to-
ward the efficient use of fixed assets, capital investments, the in-
tensification of public labor; they must raise the responsibility

of each worker for the task at hand.

In the power machine building sector we continue to take measures to
further carry out the provisions of the CPSU Central Committee and
USSR Council of Ministers decree "regarding the improvement of plan-
ning and strengthening the influence of the economic mechanism upon
raising the efficiency of production and the quality of work"; the
brigade forms for labor organization and pay, which now includes
67.5 percent of the sector's workers, are being developed.

At present it is necessary to further improve the organization of
production and labor. Order No 22! of l3 July l98l "concerning mea-
sures to increase the efficiency of production at sector enterprises
in conditions of limited labor resources" the associations and enter-
prises wcre given the assignment of using the experience of the Pro-
duction Association Kaluga Turbine Plant. Several enterprises have
already started to do this. As it applies to the specific features
of production brigades are being created. which are called upon to
assimilate the experience of the Kaluga plant workers, and a system
of needed measures is being developed. The departments of labor

and wages and the departments for the scientific organization of la-
bar are involved in this important undertaking. Measures are being
taken to rework the technical documentation and to straighten out

the technological paths. The managers of the associations and enter-
prises are now faced with the task of speeding up the process of as~
similating the "Kaluga variant".

In his speech at the November (l98l) Party Plenum. Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev devoted quite a bit of attention to raising the efficiency
of the national economy and its intensification. He emphasized.

"It is necessary to work better. It is necessary to compile plans
better and to do a better job of fulfilling them. It is necessary
to better organize production and to produce better. In a word, it
is necessary to work more efficiently. This, comrades, in the final
analysis is basic and decisive."

1:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present in the associations and enterprises of the Ministry of
Power Machine Building we are continuing to adopt the unified system
for the operational production planning; and we are executing a

set of measures to improve this work. Annual, integral schedules
for the manufacture of orders from start to output according to an
established plan are being developed, as well as for interministeri-
al and intraministerial cooperation considering the stocks for the
next period; network, cyclical schedules are being prepared for

new articles and for articles that take a long time to produce. A
system is being adopted which provides for the distribution of the
annual plan depending upon the number of working days in a month;
and control over the output of norm-hours by the shops of the enter-
prises is being tightened, etc.

Starting with the fourth quarter of 1981, the associations and en-
terprises of the power machine building industry are being assigned
the task of improving the technical-economic indicators by making
use of production reserves. which are discovered through the analy-
sis ot their production and economic activity. These assignments
have become the basis for justifying counter plans made by the col-
lectives of the enterprises. Along with this it has been deemed
wise to use the functional-cost analysis method for making more ef-
{icient use of the reserves that are discovered for increasing la-
bor productivity, reducing production cost, and raising profit.

The functional-cost analysis is an efficient system for managing
expenditures in conditions of scientific-technical progress, which
promotes growth of output of high-quality product with a decrease
in expenditures for its manufacture.

The managers of the associations and enterprises in order to improve
the organization and intensification of production must speed up the
realization of measures connected with the adoption of a system of
operational production planning and increase their control over
their full execution and for the use of the functional-cost analysis
method.

In his speech at the November (I98!) Party Plenum, L. I. Brezhnev
noted that the llth Five-Year Plan calls for a l.5-fold increase

in the rates of renovating equipment. Of course, this poses a large
number of problems for the scientific-researach and design insti-
tutvs. "Unfortunately," indicated L. I. Brezhnev, "far from all of
them function as required by the present stage of scientific-techni-
cal progress. The proposed technical and technological solutiOns

do not always respond to this level."

The scientific-technical and design organizations of the sector are
making a considerable contribution to the improvement of the equip-
ment that is being produced and to the creation of new power mach-
inery, as evidenced by the hydroturbines being supplied for the
Sayano-Shushenskaya 658. These turbines have a rated capacity of

660 NH. Additional proof of this claim are the 1,200 MW steam turbines

5
son omcm. use ONLY
PUK UrrlLlnl. var. Una.-

fnr the Kostromskaya GRBS and the 1,000 MW turbines for the Yuzhno-
Ukrainskaya ABS. The )6 and 25 MN gas pumping assemblies, which are
now being tested at experimental-industrial compressor stations, are
yet another example of the contribution of the institutes. In the as—
sociations and at the enterprises of the sector they are adopting pro-
gressive technological processes and expanding and improving metallur-
gical production; they are introducing capacities to obtain large
ingots and forged pieces made of high-quality steel.

Nonetheless, our researchers and scientists are faced with the need

to significantly speed up the solution of those pressing problems,
which are directly linked with technical progress in the field of

power machine building; and to increase the output of the means need-
ed to expand the scientific-research and designing sectoral base; and
to concentrate the creative energy of the designers, scientists, pro-
duction specialists on solving specific, real long-term tasks for cre-
ating new equipment and improving production.

The State Plan for the economic and social development of the USSR

in Lao years I98! through I985. which was accepted by the 6th Session
of the USSR Supreme Soviet, 10th Convocation, called for a reduction
of 30 billion rubles in allocations and material-technical resources
for capital construction. The limits on money for these purposes in
our sector were also affected. This is why it is so important that
we do everything possible to assimilate the capital investments allo—
cated to us in the five-year plan, especially in I982, and why we must
efficiently distribute and concentrate on the construction projects
slated for completion in the near future and also the assimilation of
newly introduced capacities. He must substantially speed up the in-
stallation of equipment presently awaiting installation at the enter-
prises and increase the turnover of funds in order to make use of

the internal opportunities for further developing production.

The 26th Party Congress pronounced that the "economy must be economi-
cal". In June I98] the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council

of Ministers passed a decree "on strengthening work to conserve and
make rational use of raw materials, fuel and power and other material
resources." In the labor collectives of the power machine building
industry this decree was perceived as a specific, real program for
reducing production cost and raising the efficiency of all pul'ic pro-
duct. ion .

In executing this decree, the Ministry of Power Machine Building de-
Vulnped and delivered to the associations and enterprises a compre-
hcnsive program of measures for conserving material and fuel and power
resources during the years I98! through 1985. Most of the savings in
the llth Five-Year Plan is to be obtained through the production of
progressive power machinery with a reduced relative expenditure of
materials; by improving the structure of the equipment that is pro-
duced; the modernization and production of manufactured articles

with an icreased service life, which will significantly reduce the
demand for them.

6
FOR(NWKJALLBE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A substantialcontribution to the overallsector's conservation fund

will be the replacement of outdated designs by progressive designs and
the improvement of technological processes estimated to better, more
wisely make use of equipment and metal in all stages of its processing
and especially in the billet production. in order to conserve fuel,
thermal and electric power. Finally, an important contribution to the
conservation fund will be the more extensive use of new progressive ma-
terials and the use of experience gained in the sector in substituting
other materials for metal.

The labor collectives of the power machine building industry, in par-
ticipating in the all-union effort to conserve, are looking for ways
to fulfill the established assignment to reduce the norms for expend-
ing metal, particularly rolled metal, fuel, thermal and electric power
for the production of a unit of product.

The struggle to conserve material resources in the national economy is
not a short-term capaign. This is one of the main directions of the
Party's economic policy. For this reason the managers of the associa-
tions, enterprises and organizations of the sector along with the Party
and public organizations must systematically study the organization of
this important undertaking and monitor the progress in fulfilling the
set measures aimed at the conservation and rational utilization of all
material resources.

in these times the scope of socialist competition is expanding in all
sectors of the national economy to overfulfill the assigned planned
tasks, to increase the quality of manufactured articles, to reduce
outlays for their production, and to increase labor productivity and
the efficiency of all public production. The power machine building
workers are actively participating in the all-union movement for high-
ly-productive labor. Production leaders and innovators are being at-
tracted to all initiatives to further improve the organization of la-
bor. Socialist competition is being developed on the sound, proven
principle of the "workers' relay race". In evaluating the labor con-
tribution of each worker to the common good, the instructiOn of the
Party regarding the fact that one cannot tolerate even isolated cases
of wage equalization and the undeserved awarding of bonuses, which has
a very harmful effect both on production indicators and on the morale
of people. At the 26th Party Congress, L. I. Brezhnev said, "Conscien-
tious workers must be encouraged and loafers and shoddy workers must
not be given any loopholes for a good life when they are doing poor
work. He who wants to live better must work more and harder." This
principle must be persistently used in our labor collectives.

In the associations and enterprises of the power machine building in-
dustry a set of measures is being taken to reduce the turnover of la-
bor. to strengthen labor and production discipline. and to provide for
a regular pace of product output. In view of the demographic situa-
tion in the next five years, this important and very responsible task
must be decisively activated, The managers of the enterprises along

7
903(MﬂﬂCJALlﬂﬂEONLY
0 teen ass a an nu. yum. M. O...

the Party. trade union and Komsomol organizations must achieve the
maximum possible stability of labor collectives, using such an impor-
tant factor as improving the social and daily living conditions of the
workers toward this goal.

with each five-year plan the demand of the USSR national economy for
reliable power machinery of various types and for different purposes
increases. There are also a sizeable number of export orders. In
order to meet all orders, it is necessary to work even harder and to
continue to look and efficiently use internal reserves. In the final
analysis, the well-being of the government and each man depends upon
the conscientious labor of everyone.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hashinostroyeniye", "Energomashinostroyeniye"
I982

8927
USO: l822/I20

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHRCHﬂHCJAI.USE<0NlN

ELECTRIC POWER

MINISTER COMMENTS ON FUTURE DEVEIDPHENT 0F POHBR INDUSTRY
Moscow ELEKTRICHBSKIYE STANTSII in Russian No 12, Dec 81 pp 2-5

[Article by P. S. Neporozhiniy. USSR minister of power and electrification: "The
Electric Power Industry in the 11th Five-Year Plan"]

[Excerpts] Work has begun on the utilization of nuclear power for the generation
of heat. Nuclear heat-supply stations (AST’s) with outputs of 860 Gcal/h each
are being built.

Pumped-storage hydroelectric stations of 1.200 and 1.600-HU capacity are under
construction.

The construction of new high-voltage and superhigh-voltage lines has made it possi-
ble to insure the further growth of the USSR Unified Power System.

The Siberian Integrated Power System was connected to the USSR Unified Power System
during the five-year plan. The formation of various power systems into a Central
Asian Integrated Power water: was continued on the basis of the powerful
Syrdar'inskaya GRBS and the Nurekskaya and Toktogul'skaya GES's.

The on-site practical utilization of Bkibastuz coal has begun. Four power units
or 500.000-kw capacity each are in operation at the Ekibastuz GREs-l, now under
construction.

The technical and economic indicators of power-system operation have improved on
the whole. The per-unit expenditure of fuel has been reduced from 340 to 328 g
per kWh during the 10th Five-Year Plan. This has nade it possible to insure a
fuel savings of 36 million tons of conventional fuel over the 5 years.

Plans have been made to raise the production of electric power in the country to
[.555 billion kWh. In this case. the generation of electric power at nuclear and
hydroelectric stations will amount to 450 billion kWh.

The increase in the production of electric power over the five-year plan will amo.nt
to more than 20 percent; that is. the high growth-rate of consumption will be main-

tained on the whole. At the same time. about 70 percent of the planned growth

of electric-power production will fall to nuclear and hydroelectric power stations.

F0810FFHJA1.USEi0NlY
rw ul’l'lttnl. UM VI‘LI

The percentage-share of newly introduced capacities (not requiring fossil fuels)
will increase from 35 percent in the 10th Five-Year Plan to 53 percent in the llth.
Due to this. about 75 million tons of fossil fuel will be freed in 1985 as compared
to I980.

The installed capacity of electric-power stations should reach 334 nillion kw.
taking into consideration the decommissioning of equipment which has reached the
end of its service life (6-7 million k").

ln the near future. the development of electric—power and heat supply will be accom-
plished according to the following guidelines:

A nuclear-power system will be created in the ecuntry's European sector which will
cover the growth of consumption in this region of electric and. to acne degree.
thermal energy.

The introduction of 23 to 24 million kw of new ABS capacities is planned for
1981—1985. This trend is based on a considerable intensification of nuclear-power
equipment construction. the development of the construction industry as well as
the production of nuclear fuel.

Plans have been made to comission 17 power units of l million-k" capacity each
as well as several 1.5 million-kw units at nuclear electric-power stations.

Construction will continue on hydroelectric power stations, mainly in the country’s
eastern regions. as well as in Central Asia with integrated utilization of reser-
vnirs. These will include the Saysno—Shushenskaya. Bureyskaya. Boguchanskaya,
Rngunskaya, Kurpsayskaya and Baypazinskaya GES's, as well as others.

In the European sector, construction will be completed on the two latest hydroelec—
tric stations in the Volga-Kama cascade--the Nizhne-Kanskaya and Cheboksarskayn
CES's. Construction will continue on hydroelectric stations in the Northern and
Transcaucasus. and construction work will cormnence on pumped-storage hydroelectric
stations lCAES's]--the Zagorskaya. Dnestrovsksya and Kayshyadorskaya GAES's.

Plans have been made to commission a total of 12 million k" of new capacities at
CES's in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

we must mention certain system requirements for the operational utilization of
hydroelectric stations.

In connection with the massive construction of base-load nuclear condensing power
stations. there has arisen an acute need for peak and semipeak capacities in the
European sector of the USSR.

The research and design studies which have been carried out attest to the fact
that it is expedient to have 200 and SOD-MU steam-turbine units operating at sub-
crlticul steam parameters as maneuverable semipeak capacities. A coabination of
(:AES's and gas-turbine installations is the most economical for a peak source.

The guarantee of reliable ABS operation in the base-load regime with the most effi-
cient utilization of fuel is possible only with the introduction of a sufficient

10
FOR m1. USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

number of CAI-18's and gas-turbine installations which will smooth out operating
conditions for base-load electric-power stations. covering the peak portion of

the load and raising the load to AES's during nighttime hours. For this reason,
the construction of GAES's and gas-turbine installations must be considered an
indispensable part of the program for the development of the nuclear-power indus-
try. By 1990 it will be necessary to comission maneuverable units with an output
of more than 16 million kw. including 8 million RH at GAES's.

Unfortunately. the equipment to be used for such purposes, particularly the gas
turbines. is being manufactured in limited quantity, and this delays the solution
to the problem.

Plans have been made to emission 32 million kw of new capacities at thermal elec-
tric-power stations in the llth Five-Year Plan.

The introduction of power units possessing high per-unit capacities will increase
considerably. Provisions have been nude to comission 7 power units of 800.0004“!
capacity each, 9 units of 500,000-kw capacity, 26 units of 210,000 to 300.0004“
capacity and other equipment.

The most important tasks in the area of thermal-power engineering are the following:

the further improvement of the Ekibastuz fuel and power-production complex. Now
under construction within this complex are two power stations with an output of
10 million It" each from 500,000-kH generating units;

the creation of the Kansko-Achinsk fuel and power-production complex, made up of
the largest open-pit coal mines and thermal electric-power stations. The reserves
of Kansko-Achinslt limite are huge and amount to hundreds of billions of tons,

of which about 130 billion tons are suitable for open-pit mining. The first
800,000-kw power units at the Berezovskaya GRES in this complex are slated for
introduction in the llth Five-Year Plan. In the future, 10 electric-power stations
of 6.4 million-k9 capacity each will be built here;

the further development of the Western Siberian fuel and power-production complex
through the construction of a group of powerful electric-power stations utilizing
local. casing-head gas. In order to provide electric power to the rapidly growing
gas and oil industrial region here. plans have been made to construct a mater

of electric-power stations with 800,000-kw power units.

The role of centralized heat sources, particularly heat-and-electric power stations
and large-scale boiler plants. will be increased in the economy's heat supply in
the llth Five-Year Plan.

The total heat output from centralized sources in our country will amount to about
2,700 million Gcal, half of which will be due to TETs's.

Considerable attention will be devoted to involving new sources of power in the
fuel—and-power balance. The coming years will be the years in which we master

the first magnetohydrodynamic installations, as well as solar and geothermal power-
prnduction installations.

11
FOR OFFIOAI. (.8! ONLY
Ives U...~la|~ we... 95‘..-

An experimental 5-H" solar electric-power station will be commissioned during this
five-year period, while a SO-HH unit is planned for the future. It has been decided
to build geothermal electric-power stations in Dagestan and on Kamchatka.

As a result of the realization of th;se trends, the utilization structure of fuel
and power resources has changed considerably, and the consumption of petroleum
products has been significantly reduced. The scale of fossil-fuel consumption,
however. remains substantial. The great volume of consumption and the increase

in the cost of extraction and transportation require a more economical expenditure
of fuel and all types of energy.

In electric-power engineering. we must reduce the per-unit expenditure of fuel
to 319-320 g/kwh.

An active energy-conservation policy must become the primary direction for the
development of the entire fuel and power-production complex. There is a potential
for saving in all sectors of the economy and it must be mobilized.

One of the most important conditions for improving the efficiency and reliability

of electric-power production is the further growth and formation of the USSR Unified
Power System. Plans have been made to insure the connection of the Central Asian
integrated grid to the USSR Unified Power System in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

The primary electric network of the Unified Power System should provide for the
distribution of power from newly constructed electric power stations and cover

the overcurrents associated with the realization of an intersystem effect from

the combined operation of the integrated power system and associated with the effi-
cient utilization of power resources.

The establishment of system-forming networks will be accomplished through the con-
struction of networks of higher voltage.

The rise in unit outputs of thermal and nuclear power stations to 6-6 million kw
and the increase in the magnitude and range of overcurrents generate great require-
ments for a further improvement in the reliability of system-forming communications.

In the western and southern regions of the country, plans have been made to construct
750-kV electric transmission lines, while provisions have been made to make the
transition to a new class of 1,150-kV lines in the Siberia-Urals region. The length
of 500 to 1,150-kV lines commissioned in the 11th Five-Year Plan will amount to

more than 17,000 km.

Plans have been made to construct a 1,500-kV direct-current line to transport elec-
tric power from the Ekibastuz complex to the European sector of the country.

Thus. the development of the power industry in the llth Five-Year Plan is an impor-
tant plan for the introduction and mastery of new equipment and new developments.
as well as the realization of the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress and a power
program directed at the further improvement of the welfare of our country's people.
To insure the implementation of these tasks is the most important duty of the power
engineers.

COPYRIGUT: Energoizdat. "Elektricheskiye stantsii", 198!

9512
CSO: [822/121

12
FOI!OFUKJA1.USEGIULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POWER

DEVELOPMENT OF NUCLEAR POWER IN USSR
Hoscow TBPLOBNBRGETIKA in Russian No I, Jan 82 pp 2-7

LArticle by 1. Ya. Yemel'yanov. corresponding member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences, and V. A. Chernyayev. candidate for the degree
of doctor of technical sciences: "Implementing the Decisions of the
26th Party Congress: Development of Nuclear Power in the USSRZY

LExcerPtgj The basic economic, engineering and scientific-technicrl

tasks for the further development of the nuclear power industry over
the next ten years and beyond are:

expanding the scale of adopting nuclear power into the national econo-
my by the continued mass construction of industrial atomic electric
power stations (ABS) with standardised reactors using thermal neutrons:

raising the efficiency of nuclear power sources based upon thermal
neutron reactors;

the development and assimilation of full-scale nuclear fast breeder
reactors for the expanded reproduction of nuclear fuel in converter
and breeder modes within the industrial ABS's;

the assimilation of the controlled reaction of thermonuclear synthe-
sis, and also the development and sssimillation of the technical means
which provide for the efficient use of the energy of thermonuclear
synthesis for energy purposes;

and the development of a general strategy for the long-term develop-
ment of the nuclear power industry.

The scale of ABS construction in the USSR in the Ilth Five-Year Plan
was specified in the decisions of the 26th Party Congress. (7) Dur-
ing the period from l98l through I985 it is planned to introduce

26 to 25 million kilowatts of new capacities at atomic electric power
stations, bringing the generation of electricity at ABS's in 1985

to 220-225 billion kilowatt-hours.

In the l980's the USSR will continue to cooperate with the socialist
nations in the field of nuclear power within the framework of target
programs approved by the 32nd Session of CEHA.

13
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY
By the end of the l980's the overall scale of nuclear power development
in the USSR and the OSHA nations will grow considerably as compared
with the end of the 1970's.

In proportion to the increase in the amount of electric and thermal
energy produced by ABS's, ATETs's and AST's, the practical importance
of nuclear power will increase. To increase the efficiency of nuclear
power sources based upon thermal neutron reactors it is expedient to
do work in two directions.

1. Increasing the efficiency of nuclear thermal neutron reactors
(RBMK and VVBR) for the production of electricity at the base AES's.
This can be accomplished by enlarging the per-unit capacity of the
nuclear power units and increasing the initial parameters (efficiency)
of the AES's power cycle, and also by increasing the efficiency of
using nuclear fuel as the result of increasing the depth of its burn-
up and recycling at an ABS regenerator of the spent fuel.

2. Expanding the range of the use of nuclear thermal neutron reactors.
UhiLJ can be done in several ways.

First - the use of an ABS to participate in meeting the alternating
zone of the electric power load schedule.

Second - the extensive use of nuclear power sources for municipal
hosting and industrial central heating systems.

Third - the use of nuclear reactors to provide energy to high-tempera-
ture and energy-intensive industrial technological processes.

The channel uranium graphite reactors of the RBHK type possess the
possibilities to enlarge the per-unit capacity and to increase the
initial parameters (including the efficiency). Available scientific-
technical experience in the production in a nuclear reactor of steam
at a pressure of ID to l3 MPs and superheating it to 500 - 550 degrees
C (the first and second units of the Beloyarskaya ABS) attests to the
possibility of increasing the initial parameters and efficiency of an
AES's power cycle with channel reactors.

Increasing the per-unit capacity of an AES's power units with channel
reactors and raising their efficiency can provide significant nation-
al economic savings, which will be manifest in the economy of expend-
ituros for a unit of useful capacity, metal, cosntruction materials.
and labor resources. Moreover it is possible to reduce the number

of construction and ABS operating personnel and workers engaged in
the extraction of nuclear fuel and the manufacture and processing of
luol elements £Evel7 for ABS's.

There are also reserves for increasing the efficiency of the use of
nuvlcar fuel in RBHK-type reactors. Experience in the operation of
eight power units with RBHK-IOOO reactors led to the discovery of re-
serves for the linear loads on the fuel elements and the maximum

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(according to crisis conditions of the heat exchange) capacities of
the channels. This makes it possible to rely upon the stable and re-
liable operation of the tvels and the TVS at higher enrichments of the
oxide fuel. (8)

Another method for improving the fuel cycle of RBHK reactors is to re-

duce the average fuel enrichment in the core during the first loadings

of these reactors. Reducing the expenditure of uranium can be achieved
by cutting back or completely eliminating the parasitic seizure of neu-
trons in the additional absorbents (DP) during the initial period of

a reactor's operation.

Estimates show that during the first loading of a reactor the fuel
(according to the conditions of the criticality) can have an enrich-
ment of approximately I.3 percent. The loading can be from a TVS
containing uranium of one or two enrichments - stationary and reduced.
A TVS with natural or depleted uranium can be used for the reduced en-
richments.

The savings from reducing the enrichment of the fuel during the first
loadings must be evaluated for the entire system forming the RBHK
with consideration given to the rates of its development.

A significant increase in the depth of fuel burn-up can also be anti-
cipated by substituting the steel spacer grids with zirconium grids,
which corresponds to a reduction in the expenditure of uranium for
feeding the reactor by approximately 5 percent.

The axial profiling with the use of a fuel of two enrichments will
make it possible to increase the depth of burn-up and to reduce the
expenditure of uranium for feeding the reactors by 3 to 5 percent.
Rotating the TVS in order to eqaulize the fuel burn~up results in a
similar savings.

There are plans to modernize the VVBR-IOOO reactors, which is to be
accomplished in two stages. (9)

The first stage in modernization is to be accomplished on the power
units now being built at the Yuzhno-Ukrainskaya and Kalininsksya ABS's,
and also on the third power unit of the Rovenskaya ABS; moreover,

they are making substantial changes in the design of the reactor. Es-
sontially these changes call for the switchover to the uncovered de-
sign for a fuel assembly. As the result of this change the core can
hold I63 fuel assemblies rather than l5] while retaining the internal
diameter of the housing and the step of the tvel placement. The num-
ber of control organs can be reduced to 6| and the number of absorp-
tion elements in a cluster can be increased from l2 to IS.

15
m omcm use ONLY
The second stage in the modernization program is to be accomplished
by using improved equipment, simplifying the overall layout of the
ABS. optimizising the thermotechnical parameters and reloading modes,
and adopting systems for monitoring the durability and servicesbility
of the equipment.

For the VVER-IOOO reactor a specific improvement of the fuel cycle
is possible in optimizing the reloading modes, improving the design
of the fuel assemblies. and improving the operational control over
the operation of the core, etc. In particular, they are planning
to switch to two fuel reloadings per year with a reduction in the
fuel cost for electric power of 8 to 9 percent.

VVER-type reactors have a high content of fissionable isotopes in the
unloaded fuel; for this reason it is important to obtain a uranium
regenerate from the spent fuel and its recycling in a closed fuel cy-
cle. In connection with this it is important to reduce the amount of
time that the reprocessed nuclear fuel is held in the external fuel
cycle. With a three to four year delay and longer the expenditure

of natural uranium in the VVER reactors. which operate in a closed
fuel cycle, remains at the level (or somewhat higher) as its expend-
iture in RBHK reactors without the processing of fuel during the adop-
tion of the measures we have discussed for improving the fuel cycle.

in using an ABS for alternating loads one of the most important pro-
blems is to ensure the hermetic seal of the tvel casings in connec-
tion with the repeated changes in their load. For this reason it is
advisable to take measures to develop and assimilate materials and

a technology for manufacturing tvel casings with an oxide fuel that

is resistant to large deviations in temperature; fuel compositions

with an increased thermal conductivity and on their basis tvels for

thc maneuvering ABS's; and equipment for the nuclear power units of
the maneuvering AES's.

When using nuclear thermal neutron reactors for a central heating
system and industrial heating supply systems it is advisable to in-
crease attention to the following research:

that which provides the possibility of rigging central heating tur-
bines (type T and TK) of the planned or under construction power
units of the ABS. the sites of which are found from 50 to 60 kilo-
meters from the large users of heat with a concentration of thermal
loud at a level of é,000 to 6.000 Gj/hour and higher;

that which is directed at the creation of an AST and also specialized
ATHTs based upon channel reactors with increased initial parameters
or the central heating power cycle;

that which promotes the creation of atomic industrial heating supply
plants (ASPT), which in contrast to the A51 can generate steam at a
pressure of l.S to 2.5 HP, and possibly as much as 6.0 MP for indus-
trial needs.

16
sort OFFICIAL use out»:
The savings from the adoption of the results of this research will

be seen both in the replacment of the scarce fuel oil by nuclear fuel
and in the increased efficiency of the production of electricity using
nuclear sources as the result of the combined generation of electricity
based upon thermal consumption.

To ensure the opportunity to bring nuclear thermal neutron reactors
into the supplying of energy for highatemperature and energy inten-
sive industrial technological processes it is necessary to conduct
research in these areas:

the creation of high-temperature nuclear reactors capable of operating
reliably at a cooling agent temperature at core outlet of up to 900
to l.300 degrees C;

the creation of technical means for transferring high-temperature
heat from the core of a nuclear reactor to the technological flows,
while providing the required level of radiation shielding of the
final industrial product, technological equipment and operating per-
sonnel.

At present work is underway to develop an experimental industrial
high-temperature nuclear reactor, the VG-AOO. with a thermal capaci-
ty of 1,000 HR, which is cooled by a gas cooling agent - helium.

For the conditions of the USSR the most pressing problem has to do
with using high-temperature nuclear reactors for the chemical indus-
try, in particular for the production of ammonia and methanol. This
is caused by the following three factors:

the chemical industry is already an established and intensively de-
veloping consumer of natural gas;

the chemical industry has already assimilated the materials and struc-
tures of high-temperature equipment, which have an operating resource
of up to 100,000 hours at a temperature of 850 degrees C;

it is based upon the high-temperature and power intensive process
for thc conversion of methane.

Later on it is possible to adopt nuclear fuel resources in such sec-
tors of industry as petrochemicals, ferrou. metallurgy, coal gasifi-
cation, the production of hydrogen, and so forth. We are also think—
ing about the possibility for long-distance transporting of heat in

a chemically connected state, based upon the storage of the heat from
the nuclear reactor during the methane conversion process and upon
its transport as a cold converted gas and separation at the place
where the heat is used through the accomplishment of a reverse reac-
tion — methanization. It is economically advisable to use the ATBTS
and AST on the basis of assimilated reactors for servicing the con-
sumers of heat at a capacity of 6,000 Gj/hour and higher, and the

1?
son orncm. uss ONLY
atomic—chemical sources of heating can serve the smaller consumers of

heat, the percentage of which is approximately 60 percent of the total
consumption of heat.

also of substantial interest is the matter of constnucting aluminum
and alumina complexes in regions near the sources of the raw materials
for aluminum. These complexes would use the thermal and electric
power from ABS‘s, which does away with the need to spend large amounts
of money for transporting fuel and raw materials, for the construction

of high-voltage power transmission lines and transformer substations
for the three-stage transfcrmation of voltage.

In the I980's work will continue on the creation and assimilation of
power units using fast breeder reactors such as the B“ with an elec-
trical capacity of 800 and i,600 million kilowatts. The effort to
simplify the technological layout of an ABS (at an ABS using sodium
fast breeder reactors the layout consists of three cirC'its) and to
increase the operating time of the nuclear fuel was the reason for
conducting research and development work on the creation of fast
breeder reactors with a gas cooling agent (helium) - the BGR. Reac-
tors of this type may become a good augmentation to the fast breeder
sodium reactors and promote the more efficient solution of the fuel
problems of the nuclear power industry.

At the same time at present fast breeder reactors (RN-350 and 83-600)
are operating in a convertor node, i.e.. in the consumption of natural
uranium. For this reason the most important scientific-technical

task in the area of fast breeder reactors is the creation of fast
reactors - breeders, which use in their core a secondary nuclear

fuel - plutonium.

Ir summarizing all that has been said, we can with complete justifi-
cation assert that the nuclear power industry in the USSR is even
now becoming the basis for the growth in the production of electri-
city. It possesses great promise and significant possibilities for
further improving. At the same time its development is giving birth
to new questions no less complicated than those already solved. But
(his is the natural process of development.

The decisions of the 26th Party Congress spell out the foremost
practical tasks and basic directions for scientific research in the
field of nuclear power. There is every reason for confidence that
Soviet scientists, engineers, designers. workers. builders, and all
atomic industry workers will be able to handle the tasks assigned

by the 26th Party Congress and to ensure the successful development
of the nuclear power industry in the USSR. This also pertains to
such an important field of the future development of the atomic po-
wer industry as the thermonuclear industry. the problems of creating
of which require a separate examination.

18
ron OFFICIAL use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REFERENCES

I. Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th Party Congress
end the subsequent tasks of the Party in foreign and domestic policies.
Moscow. Politizdat. I98I. pp 5l-52.

2. Channel Hater-graphite reactors. Atomnaya nauka i tekhnika v SSSR.
Moscow. Atomizdat. I977. pp 26-62.

3. Fast breeder reactor: with a sodium cooling agent. Atomnaya
nauka i tekhnika v SSSR. Moscow. Atomizdat. I977. pp 50 - 56.

a. Kruglov A. K.. Atomic science and technology for the national
economy of the USSR. Atomnaya energiya, l98l. vol 50, edition 2.
pp 76-87.

5. The peaceful atom in the nation of socialism. Moscow. Atomizdat,
I979.

6. Voronin L. M., Gordina V. H.. All-union conference "60 years of
th Lenin GOELRO plan", Atomnaya energiya, l98l. vol 50, edition 3,
pp 230~23l

7. Basic directions for the economic and social development of the
USSR in l98l-I985 and for the period to I990. Moscow. Politizdat.
l98l, p 26.

8. Increasing the efficiency of the use of uranium in an RBMK-IOOO.
1. Ya. Yemel'yanov. A.D. Zhirnov, V.I. Pushkarev. and A.P. Sirotkin.
Atomnaya energiya. I979. vol #6. edition 3, pp 139-162.

9. The VVER-IOOO reactor unit - design features and results of startn
ing the fifth power unit at the Novovoronezhskaya ABS and ways to
lurther improve the reactor. Yu. V. Vikhrev. V. A. Vozneseuskiy. v.9.
nvnisov and others. Atomnaya energiya, I981. vol 50. edition 2. pp
87-93

COPYRIGHT: Energoizdat, "Teploenergetika". I982

8927
C50: I822/l22

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Powrzk DEVELOPMENTS IN I981, PLANS FOR 1982
Moscow TEPLOENBRGBTIKA in Russian No 2. Feb 82 pp 2-3

LXrticle by Ye. I. Borisov, first deputy minister of the USSR Ministry
of Power and Electrification: "Implementing the Decisions of the 26th
Party Congress: Results of Power Industry Development in I98I and the
Tasks for I98217

LTcx£7 The first year of the Ilth Five-Year Plan has been noteworthy
as a year in the struggle to fulfill the historic decisions of the
2bth Party Congress, which defined the strategy and tactics for the
social and economic development of the Soviet Union at a new stage in
thc building of communism.

A great deal of attention was devoted to the problems of the power in-
dustry in the CPSU Central Committee's report to the Party Congress,
which was presented by General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee
and Chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. and
in the Basic Directions for the economic and social development of the
USSR for the years I98! through I985 and for the period up to I990.

Tho importance of the tasks facing the power industry workers was em—
phasized strongly at the November (I98I) Party Plenum. The approved
pru4rnm Ior the further development of this branch of industry calls
Inr an increase in the generation of electricity in the USSR in I985
amounting to 1,555 billion kilowatt-hours, total. During the five-
year plan it is planned to introduce equipment with a rated capacity
ul 69 million Kw. The planned increase in the production of electri-
rity in the European section of the USSR will come from atomic elec-
tric power stations.

Puwrrful thermal electric power stations will be built at a rapid
erv; these stations will burn coal from deposits in the Bkibastuz
and Kansk-Achinsk basins, the natural gas of Western Siberia, and
casing head gas from oil drilling. Large hydroelectric power stations
are to be built on the rivers of Siberia, the Far East and Central
Asia. taking into consideration the comprehensive use of hydrore-
sources. The extensive development of water storage power stations

in the European section of the USSR will be reflected in the construc-

tion program.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scale of centralized heating for domestic and industrial consumers
will grow significantly. The generation of heat for consumers in I985
will reach 2,670 million Gcal.

It is planned to put direct current power transmission lines into
operation at a voltage of 1,500 KV between Bkibastuz and the Center
and alternating current lines at a voltage of 1,150 KV between
Rkibastuz and the Urals.

In the Ilth Five-Year Plan the Central Asian unified power system will
h» joined with the National Electric Power Grid; and in the 12th Five—
?v~r Plan the Far Eastern system will also be tied in with the national
rrid. Thus, by I990 the formation of the National Electric Power Grid
will almost be complete.

N~nk is planned for the practical adoption into the national economy
-! experimental units using renewable sources of energy, as well as
(ho experimental—industrial units for the comprehensive power—techno-
lnricst reprocessing of solid fuels.

in fulfilling the decisions of the 26th Party Congress and the assign-
ments of the national economic plan. the Soviet power industry workers
rvmrlrted a “iguificant amount of work in I981 to supply the national
*tnuwmy with electric and thermal power. Electric power output in

the power stations of the Soviet Union amounted to 1.325 billion kilo"
watt—hours, of which nearly 80 percent was produced at thermal elec-
luic power stations. The output of thermal energy from the thermal
n!nctric power stations of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrifi-
cation amounted to nearly 900 million Gcal.

"wring the past year at Soviet electric power stations equipment
ratud at|0.5 million KV was put into operation. The increase in
rnwvr capacities was accomplished largely by putting large units in»
'r vyeretion. The following power units were introduced: 800 H" at
the Ryazanskaya GRBS; 500 MW at the Ekibastuzskaya GRBs-l; 300 MW

nl capacity at the Stavropol'akaya, Azerbajdzhanskaya, and Syrdar'in-
ﬂgdiJ CRES and the Navoiyskaya 6885 and others. Large central heat"
Inn units with a rated capacity of 250 NH each at an initial steam
pressure of 26 MPa were put into operation at TETs—25 of Hosenergo
and the Southern TETs of Lenenergo.

In I9“! work continued in introducing hydrounits at the under-con-
;luncrion Sayauo—Shushenskaya CBS (unit No 6 with a rated capacity

«I hho HR). the Nizhnekamskaya (No 6-78 NH), the Cheboksaiskaya (No

2 - )8 M"), the Gazalkentskaya (No 2 - 40 M"). The first hydrounits
with a rated capacity of 200 MW were put into operation at the Kurp‘
rayshavn “ET. And the first two hydrounits with a rated capacity u‘
I00 MH each were put into operation at the Dneatrovskaya 638.

Last year to further develop the Unified National Power System more

thin II,000 kilometers of high-voltage 220 K" power transmission

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lines were completed, including 750 RV lines: the Smolenskaya ABS to
the substation at Novobryanskaya and the Chernobyl'skaya ABS to the
Vinnitsa; 500 KV voltage: Kostromskaya GRBS to Vologda, the Ryazan-
skaya CRES to Tambov, Chusovaya to Severnaya, the Surgutskaya GRBS to
Tarko-Sala to Urengoy, the Ust'-Balyk to Dem'yanskaya, and others.

As before a great deal of attention was given to the development of
distribution electric networks at a voltage of .6 to 20 RV, particu-
larly those connected with the further electrification of agriculture.
Altogether during the year more than I60,000 kilometers of such power
transmission lines were completed.

To raise the degree of electrification of agriculture in the non-
chernozem zone of the RSFSR in 198! the USSR Hinistry of Power and
Electrification put into operation l,600 kilometers of 35 RV and
higher power transmission lines and 23,000 kilometers of .6 to 20
Kv power lines.

In the first year of the llth Five-Year Plan further work was done

to raise the efficiency of fuel usage. The relative expenditure of
fuel for the electric power produced was reduced by .9 g/per kilowatt—
hour and amounted to 327.l g/ per kilowatt-hour. The conservation of
Incl as compared with I980 was .9 million tons of conventional fuel.

ln l98l the relative expenditure of fuel for a group of power units
at 800 MW was 328.6, at 500 HH — 363.2, at 300 HH — 335.5, 200 MH -
356.8 and ISO MN - 367.6 g/ per kilowatt-hour.

Ihv least relative expenditures of fuel were as follows: the 800
MN power units at the Zaprozhskaya GRES - 319.9, the Uglegorskaya
URES - 321..2 g/ per kilowatt-hour, the 500 HH power units at the
Rentinskaya GRES (the fuel was Bkibastuz coal) - 330.5, the 300 H"
pnwrf units at the Sredne-Ural'skaya GRBS - 315.6, the Koatromskaya
nuns - 317.0, the Iriklinskaya GRBS - 318.0, the Kirishakaya GRES -
326.7, the Lukoml'skaya GRES - 320.2, the 200 HH power units at the
Belovskayu GRES - 336.5 and the Surgutskaya GRES - 336.0 g/ per ki-
lowatt hour.

Al the same time the collectives of several electric power stations
npvraled below their capabilities and overexpended fuel as compared
with established norms: the Ekibaatuzskaya GEES-l (a 500 MW power
unit). the Yermakovskaya, Ladyzhinskaya, Pridenprovskaya, and Troits-
[Jya GRHs's (300 MW power units), the Voroshilovgradskaya, Staro-
hushevskaya, Berezovskaya, and Snolenskaya GRBS'a (200 MR power
units), and the Noviyskaya, Yajvinskaya GRES's and the Severnaya

cuts (150 nw power units).

The collectives of these power stations need to take all steps to
ensure the economical operation of the equipment.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The generation of electricity by the central heating cycle at the USSR
Ministry of Power and Electrification's heat and electric power plants
(TES) increased last year by .l percent, reaching 22.3 percent. At

the TETs equipped with live steam at a pressure of I3 MPa, the relative
expenditure of fuel was at a level of 260 g/(kilowatt-hour). At the
Yefremovskaya, Kachkanarskay TBTa's, Hosenergo's 635-], the Ufimskaya
TETs-I and the Chelyabinskaya GRBS in conditions of operating equipment
on the central heating cycle, the relative expenditure of fuel was ISO
to l60 g/(kilowatt-hour).

In the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers' decree
"concerning increasing efforts to conserve and make rational use of

raw materials, fuel and power and other material resources" special em-
phasis was given to the need to accomplish a set of measures to signif—
icantly increase the efficiency of utilizing all types of fuel 5v! rt
resources in industry and agriculture, in transport, in construction,
4nd in housing and municipal services.

To realize these important instructions in l98l a plan of "basic mea-
sures of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification for the rational
use and conservation of fuel and energy, material and labor resources
and for increasing the efficiency of the operation of power systems in
the years l98l through I985" was developed and implemented.

In the plan are more than 200 key measures for the modernization and
rebuilding of equipment, improving the modes of its operation, and for
bringing the technical-economic indicators of the existing equipment
up to the designed values.

Thus, on I29 turbines of I50 HH and above power units a set of measures
must be taken to prevent the contamination of condensors. On 149 boil-
ers it is necessary to bring the air infiltrations into the combustion
chambers and gas conduits up to the normative values, which will make
it possible to conserve nearly three million tons of conventional fuel
during the five-year plan.

One hundred sixty-three turbines and I33 boilers require modernization
and rebuilding, which will raise their reliability and provide a fuel

savings of nearly l.3 million tons of conventional fuel. More than

9 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity will be additionally produced

by reducing equipment stand-downs in repair and by raising the quality
0! the repair work.

Many oi the planned measures have already been initiated and have
yielded a positive effect at individual enterprises of the sector.
The distribution and adoption of the experience of leading electric
pownr stations alone will make it possible to conserve more than one
million tons of conventional fuel.

23
ron orncm. use ONLY
In all collectives of the ministry's enterprises and subelements it is

necessary to take steps to fulfill the assignments called for in this
plan of action.

In l08l construction work continued at the Berezovskaya GRES-l - the
lirst of the electric power stations within the Kansh-Achinsk Fuel and
Power Complex. The first power unit of the station with a rated capa-
city of 800 MN is to be put into operation in 1984. Altogether at the
Bnrozuvskaya GRBS-l they will install eight such power units. This
will be the most powerful thermal electric power station operating on
coal.

The Kazakh SSR Ministry of Power and Electrification must do a great
dVJl of work to speed up the assimilation of available capacities at
the Hkibastuzskaya GRES-l, where four 500 MH power units have already
bevu put into operation; but this power station is still operating
poorly due to problems with equipment and is the construction and in-
stillation, the poor organization of the power station operation, and
personnel shortages.

Thv hydroelectric power industry has been subjected to further develop-
mrnl. Thv percentage of hydroelectric power within the Soviet Union's
puerr balance is nearly 20 percent by capacity and nearly IS percent

by generation of electricity. The basis of the USSR's hydroelectric
Donor industry is comprised by 65 large and medium-sized hydroelectric
pUer stations with a rated capacity greater than 100 MW, representing
93 pvrrunt of all installed capacity at hydroelectric power stations.
Thrrv are l4 hydroelectric power stations having a rated capacity of
euro than one million Kw now in operation.

rhv vuneructiun of the Zagorskaya water storage electric power station
nrJ- Moscow marked the beginning of carrying out the 26th Party Con-
groui' program [or using large GAES Lwater storage electric power sta-
tiun/ to raise the economy and reliability of power systems in condi-
tions 0! the rapid growth of atomic electric power stations, operating
in 4 base mode. The creation of water storage stations will make it
ph:stblu during the olf—hours to use atomic power units to a small ex-

lrrl. At the same time it is necessary to speed up the creation of
Spnnldl, very maneuverable equipment of the thermal electric power
stations (GTU igas turbinesY. PCU Lgas-steam turbingj, and semi-peak
sltJu power units). and to work on improving the maneuvering charac-
tvrislirs and determining the reliability and service life of existing
Pvdl' units, including s.k.d. units during their operation in the semi-
prJ' pJvtion of the load schedule.

In Icvunt years a lot of attention has been devoted to the introduction
and assimilation of new capacities at stamic electric power stations.
Tn lullill the tasks decreed by the 26th Party Congress it is necessary
to do a great deal of work to strengthen the pace of ABS construction.
for the production and assimilation of equipment, the creation of

Zn
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

buses for the construction of housing and cultural and services facili-
ties, and for the training of skilled personnel. The rapid development
of the atomic power industry poses new, serious tasks for the operating
personnel to ensure the reliable and safe operation of the atomic power
stations.

At present the installed capacity of all atomic electric power stations
has reached IS million K“. This significantly exceeds the entire amount
of electric capacities for the Soviet Union in the year I960. At nine
existing atomic electric power stations (Armyanskaya, Beloyarskaya,
Hilibinskaya, Kol'skaya, Kurskaya. Leningradskaya, Novovoronezhskaya,
ROVenskaya and Chernobyl'skaya) 25 power units with various types of
reactors are in operation. In I981 the Leningradskaya ABS, the largest
in Europe. reached full capacity (a million K"). The Chernobyl'skaya

(3 million KW). Novovoronezhskaya (2.5 million K"), and the Kurrhnya

(2 million KW) atomic electric power stations are functioning smoothly.

In the first year of the Ilth Five-Year Plan new ABS capacities were
introduced, including power unit No 4 at the Leningradskaya ABS. unit
No 3 at the Chcrnobyl'skaya ABS, unit No 3 at the Korbkaya ABS, and
unit No 2 at the Rovenskaya A38.

The pace of construction work has been picked up at the Zaporozhskaya,
Balnkovskaya, Khmel'nitskaya and other atomic electric power stations,
where power units are to be put into operation during the Ilth Five-
Ycar Plan. During the past year atomic electric power stations generat-
od 85.6 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity; in I982 the output is

to reach l07 billion kilowatt-hours. This represents a 3-fold increase
in the production of electricity as compared with the amount generated
by all Soviet electric power stations in the year 1960.

A Special feature of the development of the atomic power industry in
the Ilth Five-Year Plan will be the extensive ad0ption of large per-
unit power units of one million KH each and the use of atomic energy
fnl providing central heating to large cities from atomic heating and
power plants (ATETs) and atomic heating plants (AST). Work has already
gotten underway on the Odesskaya ATETs and the Novovoronezhsksya and
Gnr'kovskaya AST'a.

Snviat power industry workers are faCed with important tasks in I982.
The production of electricity for the USSR must reach l,365 billion ki—
lowatt-hours and the generation of heat from the TETs of the USSR Mini-
stry or Power and Electrification to 925 million Seal. The relative
pxpvuditure of fuel must be reduced to 326.5 g/(kilowstt-hour).

The Ministry has outlined specific measures to successfully fulfill
lhvsv assignments.

COPYﬂlGNT: Energoizdat. "Teploenergetika". I982

8927
csn: I822/I22

25
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
CONSTRUCTION AT ZAPOROZHSKAYA ABS
Moscow ENERGETICHESKOYE STROITEL'STVO in Russian "0 I. Jan 82 pp 5-9

LKrticlc by A. V. Kocherga, L. N. Rukhmanov, A. P. Andriyevskiy. and
l. V. Zhartovskaya, en ineera: "Construction and Installation work at
the Zaporozhskaya A85:

LTex£7 From the editors: In the periodical ENERGBTICHBS-
KOYB STROITEL'STVO No 7 for I981 there was a collection of
articles dealing with the design, lay-out and structural
decisions on the Zaporozhskaya ABS.

In this issue we acquaint the readers with problems having to
do with the engineering work that is done to prepare for the

installation of equipment. we also commence the publication

of materials regarding the experience of organizing and exe-

cuting construction work at the Zaporozhskaya ABS.

The decision to build the Zaporozhakaya ABS was made in I977; in I979
by nrder of the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification this atomic
electric power station was declared the leading experimental. show-

cunn project in a series of atomic electric power stations being built
in accordance with a standardized design. In building the Zaporoshskaya
AHS it is proposed to develop structures called for in the design of
alumic electric power stations with the modular lay-out of the main
housing and also the technology for executing construction and instal-
lalinn work in order to disseminate the experience gained during the
construction of subsequent atomic power stations in this series.

Thr technical design work for the Zaporozhskaya ABS was developed by

lhv foploelektroProyekt Institute in cooperation with the designing.
Cnnslruction and installation, and installation-technological organi-
zations. This has undoubtedly had a positive influence upon the se-

lection the configuration and structures of the buildings of the power
station. which made it possible to ensure the optimal conditions for
organizing the construction.

26
P03 OFFICIAL use ONLY
in developing the technical design the stages in the construction of
Lb“ basic production facilities were specified; these stages ensured
the introduction of the power units within one to two years. Problems
having to do with the construction of the reactor room were examined
in particular detail: the physical volumes of construction work; the
distribution of material, financial. and labor resources for each year
01 the construction for both the first power unit and all later units.

“uring the development of the technical design the Donetsk branch of
tho Atomenergostroyproyekt Institute prepared and coordinated the
:lructural and technological assemblies of the ABS production facili-
airs and the design-estimate equipment sets with the general contrac-
er: this made it possible to later regulate the working design work
nnd the pace of the construction.

L- first power unit of the Zaporozhskaya ABS was planned for intro"
-“riinu in 1983 with later units to be put into operation in one~year
intervals.

rhv All—Union Association Soyuzatomenergostroy's Administration for
:hu nonstruction of the Zaporozhskaya A83 is building the electric
"nu“? station. This organization is using its own resources to build
Ihu AES's main housing and to do the excavation and concrete work on
All lucilitiea; it is also doing the roofing and waterproofing work
on the industrial construction facilities. In addition it is doing
the construction work at construction industry enterprises (ABSK

[KHS construction conbing7, DSK ihouse building conbine7, the KVO
hlnnt and the N50), the construction-installation, finishing and sani-
ler engineering work at housing, cultural and social facilities; ,it
.‘ also in charge of the planning and provision of public services and
nmvnities for the housing settlement.

Spvrinliand organizations have been called in to work on the A85, in—
-- Int! inn:

'he installation administration of the Yuzhenergonontszh Trust is inn
~|4|ling the preassembled reinforced concrete and metal structures fan
ILv reactor rooms, the machine rooms, the unified auxiliary housing,
'“v administration building and others; in addition, in its own on—
cil- yards it is manufacturing preassembled reinforced concrete struc-
unres and reinforced concrete form units for the reactor room;

;h installation sector of the administration of the Donbassencrgomon-
[42h is installing the preassembled reinforced concrete and metal
structures of the special housing, the reserve diesel-generator plants
And other Iscilities and. in addition, in its own on-site yards it is
nunulncturing the preassembled reinforced concrete structures and Ir
inloiced concrete form units for these facilities;

rho installation administration of the Yuzhtcploenergomontazh Trust
is installing the thermal mechanical equipment of the reactor rooms,

2?
son OFFICIAL uss ONLY
the special housing and the diesel-generator plants. It is also in-
stalling the stainless steel facings for the construction structures:

the installation sector of the Teploenergomontazh Trust is installing
the thermal mechanical equipment in the machine room. the shore pump-
ing station and the unified auxiliary housing;

the administration of the Soyusenergosashchita Association is working
on the protective special coatings for the construction structures.
the equipment and thermal insulation for the equipment and pipelines;

the installation sector of theElektroyuzhmontash Trust is in charge
or installing the electrical, dosimetric and control and measuring
systems and automation systems;

the administration of the Soyuzenergomontasbventilyatsiya Association
is installing the special ventilation system in all facilities of the
atomic electric power station and is doing the sanitary engineering
work at the industrial site and the plants of the construction indus-
try;

n stctor of the Gidromekhanizatsiya Administration is working on the
hydrutechnical facilities.

The subcontractor organizations are also participating in the expan-
sion of the construction base and the construction of housing.

Preparatory work at the Zaporozhskaya ABS began in 1978. In connection
with the proximity (2.5 km) of the site of the Zaporozhskaya ABS to
th existing Zaporoahskaya GRES, which was put into operation in 1977,
luvnrablc conditions for the construction of the ABS had been created.
Thun, following comparatively inexpensive work to modernize and ex-
pand it. the GRES's construction and installation base was used to
hurt the needs of the AES now under construction. The existing trans-
purlalion systems (a waterway with freight handling moorings, railroad
lines and highways) are also being used. In addition, upon the com-
plrlion of the Zaporozhskaya GRES, construction was undertaken to
build a house building combine and an atomic electric power station
Chuilruclion combine (DSK and ABSK) near the location of the indus-
trial site. Work was also started on a boiler-auxiliary and non-
standard equipment plant (KVO and N80), which made it possible to

kHup the construction and installation workers at the construction
ullv an that later they can be transferred to working on the facili-
'ivJ at the AES (the house building combine was handed over for oper-
ulenn in 1980 and the atomic electric power station construction com—
bine is to be completed in I982. i.e., during the period when the
greatest amount of work is to be done on the AES ).

All of this made it possible to reduce the amount of time required
for the preparation work by nearly one and a half years.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the preparation period the existing concrete plant. the

asphalt and bitumen facility. the roads to the river mooring. and a

new road to the industrial site of the ABS were modernized and expanded.
The construction of new and the expansion of existing temporary build-
ings and facilities for the subcontracting organisations were also com-
pleted.

In view of the compressed time periods for the construction of the ABS
as early as I979 they proceeded to work undertakings of the basic
period, starting with the zero cycle Lground clearin‘T of the main
housing.

According to data of geological surveys near the main housing of power
unit No l the ground water level is between S to 6 meters. For this
reason according to the PPR iplan for execution of work7 issued by thr
Donetsk Branch of the Atomenergoatroyproyekt Institute: the foundation
pit beneath the main housing was dug in two layers: to the two meter
level with the installation on organized berms of water draw-down wells
every 25 to 30 meters and APVM-35 deep pumps; and to the 7 meter mark
after lowering the level of ground water. The porous earth that was
detected was replaced by a pillow of earth and crushed rock l.5 to 3
meters thick.

After campleting the earthmoving work on the main housing of power

unit No l they began preparing the foundation at the 2.8 meter mark

(or the special housing. The excavation of earth was done for the
entire depth of the foundation pit in one layer; the porous earth

was replaced for the entire construction site at a depth of l.5 meters.

Then the workers began to prepare the foundation pit beneath the
pipelines of the responsible consumers near the the basic transport
lines. In order to preserve the approaches to the power unit No I
that was under construction, work was started from the direction of
power unit No a (near the 30th axis of the special housing) and was
performed in a single layer to the full planned depth (from the marks

«59 — 5.5 meters). The plan for the execution of work called for
work to he done in two stages: from the 30th axis of the special
housing to the deflection angle on the sprinkling basins (behind the
first axis of the special housing) and from the deflection angle to
the sprinkling basins to the diesel-generator plant No I along the
reactor room of power unit No I.

It was proposed to dig the foundation pit beneath the underground
communications between the reactor room of power unit No l and the
diesel-generator plants No l and 2 after completing the underground
portion of these facilities. However, in connection with the need to
install the basic construction cranes during the construction of the
underground portion of the reactor room of power unit No I it was de-
cided to carry out the second sta e of the earthmoving work in two
substages: first to dig the founfation pits beneath the diesel~ge-
nerator plants "0 I and 2 and the pipelines between them and the re—
actor room of the power unit No I, and then the foundation pit from

29
son orncm. use can
axis I of the special housing to the deflection to the communications

between diesel-generator plant No I and the reactor room of power unit
No I.

After completing the first substage of the earthmoving work the undet-
ground portions of the diesel-generator plants No I and 2 were built.
Also, the retaining walls of the reactor room of power unit 80 I to
the zero mark. the underground communications between these facili-
ties. the backfilling, and the crane suspension tracks were completed.
At the same time SKR-2600 and SKR-3500 cranes were installed on tem-
porary tracks, coaxial with the main tracks (from the direction of the
reactor room).

The second substage of work was performed after transferring the
cranes to the main tracks and the disassembly of the temporary tracks.

Excavators equipped with a drag-line bucket with a capacity of one
cubic meter and bulldozers on an S-I00 tractor base were used to work
the earth in the foundation pits of the main housing, the special
housing and the communications corridor and the diesel-generator
plants.

The amounts of earth removed at the facilities in thousands of cubic
meters were as follows: I84 for the main housing, “8 for the special
housing, I47 for the communications corridor (first and second stages).
and 94 for the diesel generator plants.

The time periods for working the earth by facility were as follows:
Scp'cmber I979 through March I980 for the main housing; and March
through June I980 for the special housing; the communications corri-
dor, first stage - June through September I980; second stage - Janu-
ary I980 through March I98I and October through November I98I; the
diesel-generator plants - January I980 through March I98I.

In March I980 work was started on the concrete pouring in the machine
ruom beneath the foundation of the turbounit and the framework of the
building.

In accordance with the planned annual introduction of power units and
(he accepted pace of work equal to one year. by the end of I980 work
was underway on power unit No 2. Thus, the pouring of the monolithic
concrete into the slab of the reactor room of power unit No 2 was

started on 1 April I98I (exactly one year after the start of this
wurk on power unit No I).

Ihc amounts of work completed at the Zaporozhskaya ABS as of I Sep-
tember I98I are characterized by the indicators cited below:

Start-up complex Completed
(according to design)
Est. Cost, mill. R 3Sb.429 59.560
lncl const./instal work l69.987 69,b79
30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The status of work on the basic facilities for the period is as
follows:

for the reactor room of power unit No l - the foundation portion to
the I0.8| meter mark is being completed and the reinforced assemblies
for the overlap are partially installed to the 13.2 meter mark;

for the machine room with the deaerator stack of power unit No l -
work is coming to an end on the underground portion to the zero mark;
work has been started on the installation of the framework; and the
reinforcement of the upper plate of the foundation for the turbounit
is being completed;

for the reactor room of power unit No 2 - construction structures are
being installed to the zero mark;

lor the machine room with a deaerator stack of power unit No 2 -
concrete has been poured beneath the foundations of the framework and
the turbounit; and the lower slab of the turbounit's foundation is
now being reinforced;

for the special housing - in the assembly of the workshops the instal—
lation of the framework to the l3.2 meter mark is being completed;

and for the sanitation and services assembly the installation of the
construction structures to the 9.6 meter mark is being completed;

and for the special water cleaning assembly the foundation portion

is complete and installation of the construction structures has been
started;

for the diesel-generator plants No l and 2 - the construction of the
underground portions has been completed;

for the remaining facilities - the installation of the underground
lines near the main transport lines is being completed and the back-
filling is underway; the underground lines near the main housing of
the power unit No I are in place; the crane tracks are installed;
work is in progress on the cooling pond, the ORU Lopen distribution
device/ 750 kV, the administration and engineering and laboratory
buildings; and the construction of the temporary facilities is being
completed.

The flow-line construction of the ABS requires an essentially new
approach to the organization of work: each type of work must be exe-
cuted in a way that permits work to get underway on the next kind of
work as quickly as possible ; and what is more the pace for all
types oi work must be the same.

In the construction of the Zaporozhskaya ABS two types of flow-line
work are used:

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
for facilities to be used primarily for production purposes of all
power units - the reactor rooms. the machine rooms and the deaerator
rooms, the diesel-generator plants. the shore pumping stations (facil-
ities common to all ABS power units are not included in the flow-line
approach);

for structural-technological assemblies of each facility to be used
primarily for production purposes.

The greatest imerest is in theorganization of the second type of
work flows, particularly for the reactor room, because there is no
experience as yet in constructing atomic power stations with a modular
layout of the main housing.

in developing the technical design for the Zaporozhskaya ABS the
Atomenergostro proyekt Latomic electric power station construction

and designing Institute and the Teploelektroproyekt Lthermal electric
power station designing7 Institute in concert with the Administration
or Construction have come up with a breakdown of the construction por-
tion of a reactor room into structural-technological assemblies, in
accordance with which the following work flows are defined:

eurthmoving (working and displacement of earth, the preparation of
the foundation, backfilling);

the foundation slab to the 6.2 meter mark;

the foundation portion to the l0.8 meter mark;

the hermetic slab to the 13.2 meter mark;

the internal structures of the reactor room to the reactor support;

the internal structures of the reactor room to the floor mark of the
evnlral room;

the cylindrical portion of the hermetic casing;

lhv dome of the hermetic casing;

th cornice with a system of preliminary stressing of the casing;
the building of the reactor room.

Fur the machine room with a deaerator stack the following flows are
slipulated:

earthmoving work;

concrete preparation beneath the foundations of the turbounit and the
framework of the building;

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the lower slab of the turbounit'a foundation;

the foundation portion of the building to the 3.6 meter mark;
the lramework of the building;

the upper portion of the turbounit's foundation;

the internal structures of the building;

the interior walls and spans of the machine room and the deaerator
urnck.

in urdet to generalize and further disseminate experience in the con-
n-"ction undertaking, analysis is performed on everything completed
u" ouch structural-technological assembly - on the labor intensiveness.

.hv uost and duration; and the optimal compositions of the production
Hrinudes are also determined.

Jung the more complicated and important structural-technological as-
-Lmblivs. the work on which has already been completed on the first
vower unit of the Zaporozhakaya ABS, are the foundation slab of the

Enactut room and the slab beneath the foundation of the turbounit.
’ﬁve Drawing I.)

 

”raving I. Foundations of the main housing

33
FOR OFFICIAL usx ONLY
.vn vma-umaam- ya... vnua

Key to Drawing I: l) Preparation from MIOO concrete with thickness
of 250 mm; 2) Equalizing layer with a thickness of 20 mm; 3) poly-
ethylene waterproofing; 4) Protective tightening device from M50
concrete with a thickness of 100 mm; 5) Monolithic reinforced con-
crete slab; 6) Coated waterproofing made of hot bitumen.

The foundation slab of the reactor room (See Drawing l, cross-section
A-A) is a monolithic reinforced concrete structure, framed by preaa-
sembled concrete form slabs, in the manufacturing of which they are
waterproofed.

The physical volumes of work in constructing the foundation slab are
characterized by the following data:

Prcasscmbled reinforced concrete structures, cubic meters ...... 60
Metal structures (fittings and fastenings). tons ............... lb90

Monolithic concrete, cubic meters:
in preparation ............................................ l9l8
in the slab OCOCOOOOI.00.00.000.000...O...OOOOOOOOOICOIII001'072

Waterproofing (not counting the waterproofing concrete form
slabs). cubic meters ............................. 4800

Steel facing. tons:
carbonaceous .............................................. 2.9!
stainless steel ........................................... 2.23

In order to analyze the indicators characterizing the accepted design
and design-technological solutions are studied: the ratio of the mass
of the metal in the monolithic reinforced concrete structure to the
nmnunt of concrete in it. t/m3; the ratio of the amount of fastening
‘lcnvnts in the metal or reinforced concrete structure to its total
volume. items per ton or items per cubic meter.

Thv PPR in order to cut back on labor expenditures for the reinforce-
men! of the foundation slab called for the upper and lower grids to
hv consolidated into the adapters to a length of 36 meters and for
the bath welding of the fittings to be replaced by contact welding,
us a result of which according to the PPR the following indicators
wcrv obtained: the use of metal was .I3 tons per cubic meter; the
cuvrficicnt of construction with prefabricated parts was 2.89 parts
pvr [on and .005 items per cubic meter.

In connection with the performance of work during the winter and the
need to cut back on the firmness of the concrete as compared with
what is called for in the design it was necessary to raise the grade
0! the concrete: in the cooling layer using HIOO to HISO. in the
protective layer from M50 to H300; moreover the cement coupler is
eliminated.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one to the fact that the line for the waste-free welding of the fit-
tings was not ready and that there were no transportation means for
delivering the adapters the slab was fitted with individual rods of
a length of 9 to [2 meters, which were connected after they were in-
stalled in the design position of the bath welding.

The light-weight installation elements of the fittings were installed

by DER-25] cranes rather than the DBK-SO cranes called for in the de-
sign.

The actual relative labor expenditures and cost of each type of work

in building the foundation slab of the reactor room are cited in
[able I.

._ -—.————_——-—————-———

 

.___.—-__—-u——

lypv of work Unit of Labor expendi- Cost per unit
work tures per unit of work, in
of work, in thousands of
man-days rubles

 

 

___—___—_-—-————

 

.—.——

installation:
preassembled
reinforced
concrete

structures H3 .6 .24

Metal struc-

tures (fitting

and fasteners) T 2.73 .24
Concrete pouring: H3

preparation be—

neath the foun-

dation slab .23 .034

foundation

slab .17 .03
waterproofing M3 .03 .004
Installation of
ratings of steel: T

carbonaceous 7.2 .48

stainless 32.7 2.|S

 

 

 

 

Aw rhu rosult of analysis of the work c0mpleted an opLimal compositiOu
nl construction brigades (men) was recommended per shift by types or
work: installation of preassembled reinforced concrete structures -
o: installing of fitting: and fasteners - 30; concrete pouring - l2;
and waterproofing - 4.

35
ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In this regard the length of the work on the foundation slab will
amount to 167 or I00 days respectively with a two- -shift or three-
shift operation. The opening of the front for the carrying out of
subsequent work can be expected in 56 and 38 days depending upon the
work shift configuration chosen (Drawing 2).

£0 -
3'0
. \_l p ‘
III. _"_;,

WELL %Eiﬁiﬁﬁl‘@m 3'13“

0’ (0 50 ill I! 50 R? m an '20 U0 '“l'r-‘I

r:lllI'L. 4 '2

"SW“ «Q!

‘0 m N! am up:

  
  

  

    
       

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Drawing 2. Recommended schedules for doing work in the building of
the foundation slab for a reactor room. Key: a, b - for a two-shift
and three-shift operation respectively: I) concrete preparation de-
vice; 2) waterproofing work; 3) reinforcement; 6) concrete
pouring for the slab; 5) total labor expenditures.

Based upon the analysis of the work completed one can reach several
conclusions.

For the design solutions. It is necessary to decrease the list of
the materials that are used. In particular, there is no justifica-
tion to use various grades of concrete in a single structural assem-
bly. since this considerably complicates the execution of work, es-
pvtially in small amounts. It is wise for the concrete preparation
beneath the foundation slab to be done with grade H200 concrete, i.e.
the same grade used for the slab itself.

For the technological solutions:

I) the inclination toward large-unit assembly in order to reduce
labor expenditures is natural; however, these matters must be viewed
as they apply to the conditions of work performance at a specific
site;

36
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) in plans for the execution of work the pace of work must be evalu-
ated for the specific assembly and the time for the most rapid opening
or the front must be determined for subsequent work.

The lower slab of the foundation for the K-500-65/ISSO turbounit is a
monolithic reinforced concrete structure (Zee Drawing 1, cross-sec-
Lions 3-3 and c-c). It is an important structural-technological assem-
bly, which must operate as a dense flexible body to absorb the dynamic
loads of the turbounit.

Thr physical volumes of the construction and installation work during
'hv construction of the slab are characterized by the following data:

Warn! structures (fittings and fasteners), t ............... 422.6
unnulithic concrete, cubic meters .......................... 5165
'uinrproofing (bituminous covering). square meters .......... 73S
:hnmical coatings of the fasteners, square meters ......... 55

rhvrma] insulation, square meters .......................... 2592

Ihv natio of the weight of the metal in the monolithic structure to
the amount of concrete in it is .082 tons per cubic meter; the ratio
-l lhu number of enlarged metal structures in the monolithic reinfor—
-vd concrete to their total volume is 1,303 items per ton.

In developing the plan for the execution of work the most complicated
problem is deciding how to organize the pouring of the concrete for
the slab, since the required density of the slab can be ensured only
during the continuous pouring of the concrete mixture.

In connection with the requirement that restricts the mobility of the
rnncrolc mixture (cone settling of 5 cm) the use of concrete pumps was
not possible; for this reason the concrete pouring was done by scoops
with a capacity of three cubic meters using two DBK-SO cranes at a
pouring rate of the concrete mixture of 35 cubic meters per hour for
each crane.

Tho concrete mixture was poured using the continuous-by-atage method
in transverse horizontal strips which were screened by netted mem-
branes forming stages with a step of 1.5 to l.8 and a height of l to
.3 meters. In each stage the concrete was poured in two layers at

n drpth of .5 to .6 meters.

Al the anorozhskaya ABS the method of concrete pouring that was used
and the favorable mode for the hardening of the concrete mixture made
it possible to remove the thermal insulation after one month after
rumplerion of the work (instead of the six months according to recOm
mvndntions), which reduced the time required for opening the front
for the execution of the subsequent work (waterproofing and others).

37
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
—_———a—-——-—_g——-———__———

rype of work Unit of Labor expendi- Cost per unit

 

work tures per unit of work volume,
volume of volume, thousands of
man-days rubles
Installing of
fittings and
fasteners tons 3.!2 .2!
Concrete
pouring cubic m .28 .033
waterproofing cubic m .023 .0007
Laying of
thermal .
insulation sq. m .097 .007
Painting of
fasteners sq. m .07 .002

 

___—————————————_——

The clear organization of work - the creation of a one-hundred per-
ceut supply of cement and fillers at the concrete plant, the continu-
nus operation of the plant, the availability in the installation area
at a back-up crane - all of this made it possible to complete the
pouring of concrete for the slab in less than seven days.

The actual indicators of the relative labor expenditures and the cost
or each type of work completed in building the slab for the founda-
Linn beneath the turbounit are cited in Table 2.

rur the execution of this work on the subsequent power units one can
recommend the following brigade compositions (men) for each shift:
reinforcement - 20. concrete pouring - IO, waterproofing - 2, and
the laying of the thermal insulation - IO.

Hurcover. the length of the work will be Ill and 8| days respective-
ly tor a two-shift and three-shift operation. These recommendations
wvrc taken into conside:ation when compiling the work schedule for
laying the foundation slab beneath the turbounit of power unit No 2
(Drawing 3).

In order to make use of the experience accumulated at the Zaporozh-
skaya ABS to the degree of completion of the structural and techno-
logical assemblies it is necessary to analyze the work that was done
on them.

38
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     
  

U”
I

   

 

Drawing 3: Recommended work schedules while building the foundation
slab beneath the turbounit. Key: a,b - with two-shift and three-
shift operations respectively; I) Installation of the concrete form;
2) Reinforcement; 3) Pouring of the concrete; 4) Installing of
the thermal insulation; 5) Lag over a 30-day period; 6) Removal

of the thermal insulation;; 7) Disassembly of the concrete form;

8) waterproofing.

Both the center of the Bnergostroytrud and the design-technological
institutes of the subcontractor organizations must be involved in the
performance of this work to improve the methods of analysis and the
vumprehensive generalization of the experience.

In connection with the fact that the construction and installation
work at an ABS is performed by many subcontractor organizations (ther—
mal installation, electrical installation, those doing work on special
ventilation systems, chemical coatings and thermal insulation), it

is necessary at this time to do a detailed analysis of all work in an
amount if only of planned-estimated sets.

Such an analysis will make it possible:

to rationally assemble the structural-technological assemblies for
all kinds of indicators;

to use the best technology for performing various kinds of work;

to correctly organize flow-lines for all kinds of work considering
their length and narrow specialization;

to optimize the intervals between the start-up of power units;

39
you orncm. use ONLY
and to develop recommendations for further improving the planning and
design solutions called for in the standardized design of atomic po-
wer stations with VVBR-IOOO reactors; and consequently. to reduce
the indicators for the use of materials, the use of labor and the
cost of the construction of on entire series of atomic electric power
stations now being built according to this design.

COPYRIGHT: Bnergoizdat. "Energeticheskoye stroitel'stovo". I982

8927
030: I822/I20

ho
FOR orncm. use om!
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE(HVLY

ELECTRIC POWER

UDC 621.311.22.006.69
METHODS FOR MODERNIZING THERMAL ELECTRIC-POWER PLANTS DESCRIBED
Moscow ELEKTRICEESKIYB STANTSII in Russian No 2. Feb 82 pp 2-5

[Article by engineers V. I. Gorin. I. H. Vol'kensu. V. G. Zhizhokin and V. V.
Ptushkina of Glavtekhupravleniye Hinenergo USSR--Bnergoset'proyekt: "Methods of
Hv-equipping Thermal Electric-Power Plants"]

lTextl Thermal electric-power stations have formed the basis of the Soviet electric—
puwcr industry at all stages of its development. Over a long period of time. the
relative contribution of thermal electric-power stations to the country's installed
capacity has held firmly at the 80-percent level.

The development of the USSR electric-power industry has been accompanied by an
increase in the technical level of thermal electric-power stations. This has made

it possible to increase the efficiency of thermal electric-power stations and to
reduce considerably the per-unit expenditure of fuel. The first thermal electric-
power stations were built for low and medium steam parameters. In the 1940's we
began building thermal electric-power stations for high steam parameters--90 kgs/cmz
:nt temperatures of 510 to 540°C. Elevated parameters-l30 kgs/cmz at temperatures
tn 56S°C--were used in the 1950's. while in the middle of the 1960's we began commer-
cial production of power units designed for supercritical steam parameters of

240 kgs/cm2 at temperatures up to 565°C [1.2].

In accordance with these stages. the structure of the thermal electric-power stations'
output was also changed. and the relative amount of higher-pressure equipment has
increased. At the present time, the relative contribution of equipment for a stream
pressure of 260 kgs/cm2 is 33 percent; for 130 kgs/cm2 it is 63 percent; for

90 kgs/cm2 it is about 16 percent; and less than 5 percent for nedium pressure.

In the past 20 years. the individual output of GRBS power units has risen from

200 to [.200 H", while that of TBTs units has risen from 50 to 250 HR. The indivi-
dual output of GRES's has risen from 1.050 to 3,800 NH and that of TETs's from

100 to [.250 M". There are 54 thermal electric-power stations which have individual
outputs of more than 1 million kw, and their total output comprises more than 50
percent of the installed capacity of thermal electric-power stations.

11m improvement of the structure. the rise in steam parameters, the increase in
the individual mit outputs, the perfection of their operation and the increase
in the portion of electric-power generated in the central-heating cycle made it
possible to insure a steady reduction in the per-unit expenditure of fuel [from
590 g/kwh in 1950 to 328 in 1980].

bl
INIItOIIICJAI.IISII(IVLY
m u.. v. .--..-- c—v- enven-

During the operational process, equipment at thermal electric-power stations be-
comes physically worn and grows obsolete.

Physical wear is caused by active operation and physicochemical processes which

take place in the metal under the influence of mechanical loads under high-tempera-
ture conditions. During minor overhauls, work is done to keep the equipment in

a state of operational readiness and to maintain the normal level of production
capacity and the necessary level of performance. In doing so. worn parts are recon-
ditioned and replaced (condenser tubes and preheater pipelines; blades, diaphragms
and other parts of the turbines; water economizer coils, firebox seals and boiler

fines, etc.) and measures are implemented to improve the reliability and economy
of the equipment's operation.

Changes in the physical and chemical properties of the metal accumulate in equipment
:ussenblies which cannot be replaced (cylinder housings, shutoff and actuator valves.
cylinders. bindings and other boiler elements and fixed pipelines). The operation
of such equipment becomes unreliable after a certain operating time is reached.

A service life of 100,000 hours or [5 years is used to establish standards for
determining the operational soundness of the major assemblies in thermal electric-
powcr equipment. of our present installed capacity. 35 percent has been in operation
IS years or more. This includes 3.5 percent of units which have been in operation

30 years or more. The service life of the most important elements of the basic
equipment depends primarily upon the temperature and pressure at which the equipment
is operated. Operational experience shows that equipment service life at steam
temperatures to 450°C is quite long and amounts to 40-50 years. When steam para-
meters are increased. the service life is reduced considerably.

The actual service life depends both upon the operational conditions and the equip-
mvnl's specifications (the actual safety margin, the brand of steel and the calcu-
lated temperature level at which the metal must be used) [3.4]. As a rule. the ac-
tual service life exceeds the calculated life by a factor of 1.5 to 2. This is the
su-called maximum service life.

”used on operational experience and special studies carried out by the Central
Scientific Research Institute of Heavy Machine Construction, the Central Committee
ur Heavy Industry, the All-Union Institute of Heat Engineering imeni F. E.
imerzhinskiy, Soyuztekhenergo and other organizations. the maximum service life

or the basic equipment at electric-power stations can be assessed in combination
uslng the values cited in the table.

Type of station Steam pressure. Maximum service life
kgs/cm2 Years Thousands of hours

Klzti :uul 1151's 45 To 100 270

90 30-34 200-220

THTs 130 25-30 170-200

KES 130 25-30 l70-200

RES and TETs 240 25 [70

he
mmmmv
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

At the present time (data for the end of 1980). the total installed capacity of
equipment at USSR Minenergo thermal electric-power stations which reached its maxi-
mum service life and has since been decomissioned is about 6 million kw. For

the most part, this is equipment that operates at a pressure of 45 kgs/cm2 and
includes some imported equipment.

In the current decade, the output from equipment that has reached its maximum service
life will increase sharply. It is estimated that it will amount to 50-60 million k“
by the end of this period. This can be explained by the fact that since the middle

of the 1960's the major portion of capacities introduced comes from equipment that
operates at steam pressures of 130-250 kgs/cmz. Such equipment has a shorter ser-
vice life than that operating at lower parameters. The relative share of equipment
operating at a steam pressure of 260 kgs/cmz will be more than 30 percent. For
equipment at 130 kgs/cmz, the figure will be more than 50 percent. More than 60
porcent of the old capacity will be made up of condensing electric-power stations
|KHS'sl of all types; approximately half will be stations with modular-type equipment.

Thus, the aging of the primary equipment at thermal electric-power stations brings
about a number of new. important challenges in electric-power engineering with

respect to the further utilization of about 160 million k" of capacity installed
at ulectric-power stations before 1975.

Together with the physical wear there is the obsolescence of the equipment. entailing
low economy and a higher degree of labor required to operate existing equipment
which is physically suitable. The advisability of keeping it in operation is deter-

mined by comparing the yearly outlay for an existing installation with the calculated
expenditures for a newly constructed one.

Speaking at the November (1979) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee. Genral Secre-
tary of the CPSU Central Committee Comrade L. I. Brezhnev noted that "modern power

engineering relies more and more on the achievements of science and high-output
i‘flll lplnent .

However. since the economy's growing requirements are being satisfied at an accele:
nted rate. it is necessary time and time again to think over the entire complex
0f power-engineering problems.

No matter what the pace we establish for the development of the power industry.
the conservation of heat and energy will henceforth be a most important statewide
tank. Therefore it is necessary to incorporate in our plans the growing tasks
regarding the replacement of obsolete and extremely energy-intensive equipment."

The Basic Guidelines adopted by the 26th Congress emphasize: "We are to direct
capital investment primarily toward the reconstruction and re-equipping of enter-
prlses and toward the completion of construction begun previously."

Technical re-equipping is a specific system of measures provided for in the techn!
cal—development plan for an enterprise. It is designed to improve the technical
lrvcl and increase or maintain a level of production through the replacement of
obsolete equipment with new equipment, through mechanization and automation and
through the introduction of new production methods. Reconstruction is the total or
partial re-equipping of industry on a new technical basis with the construction

FOI‘OFFHJA1.USE(NVLY
(where necessary) and expansion of existing auxilliary facilities. This has a most
direct bearing on existing thermal electric-power stations at which a great amount
or worn and obsolete equipment is installed.

Since the demand for heat continues unabated over the course of the year and, more-
over. since some enterprises are supplied with electric power directly from the
generators at electric-power stations, it is not possible to take an electric-
puwer station out of commission for extended reconstruction and stop all its power
units. This creates great difficulties in organizing reconstruction work at electric-
pnwer stations and is one of the reasons why the scope of technical re-equipping
and reconstruction operations in the electric-power industry is insignificant (less
than 30 percent of capital investment). This being the case, reconstruction is
carried out by building a new phase (addition) on the site of an existing electric-
power station with the subsequent transfer to this addition of the functions of

the old equipment and the decommissioning of the latter.

The absence of sufficient power reserves also hinders the implementation of large-
scnle work on electric-power station reconstruction.

Up until now, these circumstances have determined the relatively small volume of
obsolete equipment which has been decommissioned.

hy the middle of the 1980's. the aging of the primary equipment at thermal electric-
pnwer stations will become one of the most important and complex problems in power
engineering and will acquire an economic significance, since its solution requires
nut only the organization of a great amount of work at electric-power stations

In dccnmmission and, correspondingly, to introduce additional new equipment or

tn implement a massive exchange of complex parts and assemblies. but also the addi-
linunl production of new equipment at power-equipment construction enterprises as
well as the manufacture of parts and assemblies which have already been removed

Irnm production (to replace existing equipment).

The most efficient solution would be the decommissioning of this equipment and

the substitution of new equipment for it. This is dictated by the fact that its
considerable share-—about 25 million kw--has per-unit fuel consumption figures

that are more than 30 percent higher compared to average values within the USSR
Minvnergo. A portion of the obsolete equipment is concentrated at small (to
l00.000—kw) electric-power stations where the relativernmber of personnel is high.
Thr replacement of the equipment. however. would require the volume of new equipment
huiun Introduced to be increased by 40 percent with an outlay of more than 15 million
rubles. This is not practicable with respect to the volume of construction work.
lhr allocated capital investment and the capabilities of the power-machine construc-
tinn industry. For many electric-power stations located in the construction zone.
lhr necessary building sites are lacking, for all practical purposes.

Based on the equipment's technical status. the following program of operations
is advisable:

lhu nmst vital assemblies of thermomechanical equipment to reach maximum service
life are to be replaced with assemblies of similar design in order to extend the
electric-power station's service life. This relates primarily to TBTs's and power
units from ISO—MW capacity and up;

his
FOIthWCIAl.USE(NNLY
POI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

.1 certain number of units that have achieved uximum service life are to be disman-
Llud. and the portion that has quit producing power is to be replaced with maneuver-
able equipment. Sections of the stations' working areas are to be used to build
power-systen repair enterprises;

a portion of the power units are to be modernized in an effort to improve the econ-
()I‘Ily of their operation.

The dismantling of worn and obsolete equipment will, in the final analysis, make
it possible to release fossil fuel, lower the number of operational personnel and
reduce the nuﬂ>er of repair operations at electric-power stations.

Dismantling was begun as early as the 8th Five-Year Plan. In the 9th Five-Year
Plan 2.7 million W of installed capacity were dismantled and 3.9 million kid in
the [0th. The amount of dismantled equipment in this decade is estimated at

In million It". including 7 million It“ in the llth Five-Year Plan.

In the long-range, the scope and ratio of dismantled equipment and the equipment
subject to modernization in an effort to extend its service life will depend to

.1 considerable degree upon the organization of the growth rates for the measures
previously mentioned. as well as upon the equipment's service life after the replace-
ment of worn-out parts and assemblies which, due to a lack of experience in such
ﬂutters. is estimated at [0 to 15 years. Depending upon the service life. the
volume of dismantled equipment could remain at the same level or could increase
approximately by a factor of two. In this case, it will be necessary at the same
time to continue replacing asselblies to extend the service life of power-production
equipment.

Plans have been made in the current five-year plan to replace major assemblies
(steam pipes and f ittings, stop-valves, cylinders and high-pressure turbine rotors)
with new equipment at units totalling about 9 million It“ in output. Units totalling
40 million I" are to have equipment replaced in this decade.

Work on technical re-equipping gives the best results in those cases when it is
planned ahead of time. Delays cannot be allowed in this work when the engineers
begin preparing their plans after a unit has experienced significant malfunctions
due to physical wear and obsolescence. An urgent task for the power systems is
the timely organization of work in designing and replacing heat and electric-power
sources on the basis of a detailed prognosis of the equipment's teclnical status.

An analysis of the structure of the dismantled equipment points out the following:
”n the whole. the equipment dismantled in the 9th Five-Year Plan was equipment
that operated at medium steam parameters and equipment of 50,000-W unit outputs
and less from foreign firms.

During the 10th Five-Year Plan we began dismantling equipment which operated at

.1 steam parameter of 90 kgs/cmz (its relative contribution to the structure of
dismantled equipment was 38 percent) and possessed unit outputs to 100,000 In".

The relative share of dismntled equipment operating at a steam parameter of
90 kgs-xlcn2 will increase in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

monulﬁuszmv
The introduction of these measures will make it possible to insure the further
improvement of the equipment's operational reliability and the reliability of the

power supply to the consumers.

In addition to the indicated measures to insure the further improvement of the
efficiency and quality of power production, it is necessary to modernize and reno—
vate power-generation equipment. Modernizing and renovating this equipment dimin-
ishes the effects of obsolescence and increases the equipment's reliability.

There are at present about 400 power units of 150 to 1.2004!" capacity operating
in the electric-power industry. Studies of the equipment in these units has estab-
lished that some of this equipment possesses reserves for increasing economy through

improvement of the design of individual assemblies in the turbines and boilers.
Specific designs have been developed for new, more economical assemblies which can be

installed to replace units now in operation. Power systems have the capacity to
modernize 180 steam generators and 164 turbine units with a total output of (00
million It“. The potential savings from this work could amount to 10 million tons
of conventional fuel over the 11th and 12th Five-Year Plans. The realization of
these measures depends upon the capabilities of the power-equipment construction
plants to deliver the corresponding equipment assemblies.

The execution of technical re-equipping at electric-power stations will require
the solution of many complex economic problems, including matters of financing,
mtcrial supply, personnel. the manufacture of parts and assenblies, etc.

The problem of utilizing the work sites at the electric-power stations likewise
arises.

The All-Union Scientific Research and Planning Institute of the Power Engineering
Industry [VNlPIEnergoprom] has completed a number of plans for the construction

ur boiler plants on the basis of old electric-power plants with the utilization

”I individual structures and equipment. At large-scale electric-power stations

It will be possible to locate new equipment with a maximum utilization of existing

structures after the primary equipment has been dismantled.

‘l‘oploelektroproyekt and VNlPIEnergoprom have implemented a complex of planning
and design work to create small-scale solid-fuel fired boiler-plant equipment for
K-2I0 and T—l80 turbines. This will broaden possibilities for utilizing structures

.1: uld electric-power stations.

when electr ic-power stations are decomissioned. it is advisable in a number of

ruse-s to mnintu in their generators. switching them to synchronous-condenser opera—
li--u. This will make it possible to increase the voltage level considerably. The
im-hnicnl feasibility of using the generators at old power-plants in such a fashion
hm.- received preliminary approval from the manufacturing plants and Glavtekhpravleniye
"1' the USSR Minenergo. The start-up of a generator without its turbine requires

the creation of a start-up circuit. since the stations do not have special equipment

fur starting a synchronous condenser.

Thus. the utilization of work sites at old electric-power stations for locating
new equipment must be considered one of the directions which insure the most effi-
clent solution with respect to construction-organizerional as well as system condi-

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tions. This makes it possible to have power sources near the consumers and thereby
reduce power losses and maintain voltage levels in power networks. This is the
most suitable method of situating maneuverable equipment used only part of the

day. since the construction of individual power stations for this purpose causes

a number of technical and operational difficulties. According to data from
Teploelektroproyekt. the utilization of the work sites at the dismantled electric-
power stations of even medium output will insure a savings of capital investment
for construction of more than 10 percent in comparison with construction on new
sites and. moreover. considerably reduces construction times.

Conclusions

I. Technical re-equipping in the electric-power industry is a complex engineering
and planning problem in providing a reliable power supply to the economy and must

be insured through the coordinated efforts of the USSR Hinenergo and the power-
equipment construction ministries.

2. The basic directions for solving the problem are the renovation of equipment
through the replacement of major parts and assemblies which have reached their
maximum service life. the decommissioning and disassembly of a portion of the equip-
ment and the installation of new. more improved equipment, including peak and semi-
peak, to replace the old equipment at a number of sites.

In order to conduct work on renovating the equipment, it will be necessary to de-
commission the equipment and the corresponding capacities in the power system for
n considerable period of time in order to replace it.

The realization of these measures requires the corresponding financing and a supply
of parts, assemblies. materials, manpower, etc.

1. The systematic renovation and decommissioning of obsolete equipment will require
.1 great many design and scientific studies be done to analyze the status of equipment
at old electric~power stations. It will also require a determination of the most
cfricient solutions to these problems: the renovation of equipment; its disassembly;
the utilization of buildings and structures for repair bases and boiler plants;

the feasibility and suitability of installing new, more modern equipment; the
selection of its type based on regional conditions (district-heating, semipeak,
peak); a method for replacing equipment (in old or new buildings constructed on

lhe site of an old electric-power station); etc.

it is necessary to develop standard plans for the various types of work at electric-
pnwer stations. It is likewise necessary to standardize plans for the organization

of construction under complex conditions at an electric-power station being disman-
lled.

A. It is necessary to accelerate the work being done to create new types of small-
scnle condensing and central-heating equipment to replace that which has reached
the end of its service life.

5. The decommissioning of a number of electric-power stations delivering their
output to the power system on 110 to 330-kV lines will cause difficulties in supply-
ing electric power to the regions where these stations are located. In such cases.
therefore, the replacement of worn-out equipment with new is more preferable.

h
l!!!(lﬂﬂ€ld§.l§li(ﬂﬁly
B IN. 106“?!"

Neporozhniy, P. 3.. "Lenin's GOELRO Plan—40 Years." ELBKTRICHBSKIYE STANTSII,
No 12, 1980.

Goneharov. S. P.. "The Development of the Theml-Power Industry Prom OOELRO
to the Present." ELBKTRICHESKIYB STANTSII. No 12, 1980.

Zorev. N. N., Kryanin. I. P. and 'l'rusov, L. P., "On Reserves for Extending
the Service Life of Metal in High-Temerature Elements of Powerful Generating
Units," TBPLOBNERGETIKA. No 10, 1976.

Wurin. P. Ya and Gulyayev, V. N., "On Extending the Service Life of ale-eats
in Thermal-Power Equipment Operating Under Metal-Creep Conditions,"
TEPLOBNBRGETIKA, No 6. 1972.

(ZOPYRlcm: Energoizdat, ”Elektricheskiye stanteii”, 1982.

95l2

C80:

1822/l21

he
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POWER

NEH BOOK DISCUSSES DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY

Moscow REGIONAL'NYYE PROBLEHY RAZVITIYA ENERGETIKI I ELEKTRIFIKATSII
SSSR in Russian 1981 (signed to press 27 Aug 81) pp 1-2, 168

Linnotation and table of contents from book "Regional Problems in the
Development of Power and Electrification in the USSR", by V. A.
Ryl'skiy, Izdatel'stvo "Ekonomika", 2,000 copies. I68 pages?

Annotation

£Tex£7 This book examines the influence of the electric power indus-
try upon the development of the USSR's production forces and provides
an analysis of the extent of the influence of the energy factor upon
the improvement of proportions of the placement of production in con-
nection with the long-term prospects of the power picture of regions.
The book also examines the regional problems of electrification and
the influence of the power industry upon the condition of the environ—
ment. Based upon the analysis of the achieved levels of development,
trends in the development of the power industry as a component part

of the national economic complexes of the union republics are justi-
(ied.

The book was written for a broad circle of specialists who are
studying the problems of the development and placement of the USSR's

production forces.
Table of Contents

Chapter I. The role of the power industry in the development
0‘ the USSR'B production force. oososssoooesooooococo-ooooovoo 3

l.| The power industry as a factor affecting the placement
of industrial production ..................................... 3

|.2 The power-economic description of the USSR's economic

regions soc-sooa.sooosomossoosoooo-esosoooesooeoosssssssssoose '9

l.3 Regional problems of electrification ..................... 3t

h9
FOR omcuu. use ONLY
I vs. vs s oust-on. Huh vnua

|.4 Ecological problems of the development and placement
0‘ the Power indust:y seeooosooooeonsousooo-oooooooooeoeooo

I.S Methodological approaches to developing a plan for the
development and placement of electric power ...............

Chapter 2. The power industry in the national economy of
USSR republics O.IOIOOOOOIOOOOOCO00.00.00.000...0.0.00.0...

2.I The present status and basic trends in the development
of the Pouer industry...........-.......................-o-

2.2 The power industry in the RSPSR ......................

2.2.1 The power industry in the European sections
of the RSPSR 0.00.00.00.00.0...OIO'OOOIOOOODOOOCCCCOO

2.2.2 The development of the power industry in the
eastern regions of the RSFSR ........................

2.2.3 The role of electric power in the comprehensive

development of the production forces of the northern
regions of the RSFSR ................................

2.3 The power industry of the Baltic republics and the
Belorussian SSR ...........................................

2.4 The power industry of the Ukrainian SSR and the H01-

davian SSR ooeoooooosoosoeoooooeoseesoseoooosoooooooseeoo-o

2.5 Th' power industry of the Caucasian republics ........
2.6 The power industry of the Central Asian republics ....
2.7 The power industry of the Kazakh SSR .................

COPYRIGHT: -Izdatel'stvo "Bkonouika", 198!

8927
650: l822/Ib9 END

50
non omcut use ONLY

50

62

77

77
96

97

IOb

I20

I30

I36
Iél
I46

I60