APPROVID FOR NIL-A.- :

2°OTIOZIOO:

CIA-RDPOS-OOOBOR0001 000300254)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030025-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8322

8 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030025-0
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE WT DISSEHINATION
0F I‘llIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFPICIAL USE ONLY.
l. lepsn No.

  

DIOLIOORAPNIC DiTA
91!!!

d. «can > Hue

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES,

-—
open on
(P000 5/79) 8 March 1979

valsrt/Tsstl'ovl Us»! No.
II. Connect/Gent No.

I). Type cl Report a Paid
Coveted

ans Li 8322

   

  
 

       
     
  
 

 
  
  
 

O. Pellet-mm Own-issues Nune ssd Address
Joint Publicstions Rnsesrch Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginie 22201

     
 
 

l2. Spouoaisg Otgsnlutios New sod Men

  
    
 

As shove

IS. Smleoesmy Notes

 
 
   
 

. Asmara

This serial report contains information on energy. fuels and related equipment;

fishing industry and marine resources; water resources, sinersls. timber. and
electric power.

 
   
   
    

. Key Voids sod
USSR

Natural Resources
Electric Power
Energy

Energy Conservation
Fisheries

Fuels

Minerals

Tisber

Water Supply
m Heualms/O'ee-Eeded Tom

loses-sec Analysis.

  
 

 

 
       
   
   
   
   
   
      
 
 

  

l7e-(OSAYanH/Grsup 5c, 10, 21b. 20, BC. 2?

II. Auulabdny Sumac-t

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Lisited Number of
Copies Avsilsble From JPRS

 
     
    

s on any“ ulcv. 1-".

tons you an s: sevsooucro ”"°“‘°‘ ""'""
FOR OFFIC [AL USI-i ONLY

.3918 Us.
8 March 1

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(moo 5/79)

Comm

BLEXH‘RIC mum AND mm mm

Ualng man-Temperature Cow-Cooled Reactor:
0.. A. Icauov, et :1; mm mm, Dec 78)

m1 Utilization in Power Production
(3. Ye. mum; mm mm, Dec 78)

Biographic Sketch of Mn. Petrokovnkiy
(WICMVO, wt 76) ococoon-coo.too-nooognouooobo

FUELS MD MED 90mm

Reguluuon of Gas Consumption nonunlromty
(F. 'r. Agaer; et «1.; moan momm' .
3mm W W0! KIWI, Jun 79)....

Distribution of Batu-01w: Reserves and 01]. Recovery
ko- the Uzen' Field

(u. L. auguctnv; et .14 0301mm um: I am,

Aug 78) oonto...noooooucooooooooOIo.oooootoooloouooaoo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POWER AND POWER EQUIPMENT

UDC 621.039.52.036.3
USING HIGH-TEMPERATURE GAS-COOLED REACTORS
Moscow ATOHNAYA BNBRCIYA in Russian Vol 45 No 6. Dec 78 pp 411-618

[Article by V. A. Lagasov. N. N. Ponoaarev-Stepnoy. A. N. Protsenko. Yu. P.
Charnilin, V. N. Crebennik. and A. Ya. Stolyarevskiy: "Prospects of Util-
isation and Basic Problees of Adoption of High-Teepsreture Gas-Cooled
Reactors in Technological Processes and Electric Power Engineering"]

lText) The widespread and coeprehensive discussion of various proble-a of
the prospective developeent of power engineering has cone about due to
increasing difficulties of supplying the country with cheap energy and
power resources. the level of consuaption of which has reached a massive
scale.

Difficulties involved in developing power engineering are due chiefly to

the fact that organic resources are becoeing increasingly sore expensive.
eapecially petroleua and gas. the scat convenient and widely used sources

of eneYBY. reserves of which are lisited; also the necessity of taking ac-
count of ecological factors. which sake energy production sore costly and
iapose additional restrictions on the scale and location of energy-producing
installations; and, finally, the considerable "inertia" of power engineering
--rhe east labor-intensive and capital-intensive sector of the econosy.

no a result of which it is essential to develop prototype installations

long before the widespread adoption of plants of new energy profile in

the T83 [Fuel-Energy Balance].

All of this requires expending the domains of application of nuclear power
in the country's fuel-energy structure, and the nsxiuul effectiveness of
its utilization (l. 2]. 0f great iaportsnce in power deVeiopeent in the
near future is the gradual replacement of liquid and gas organic fuel

ll. 3. 41.

At present. nuclear power is being used in practice to generate electric-
ity. thus replacing organic fuel neceassry to generate it. The develop-
mental nuclear power in the European part of the Soviet Union will sake

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it possible to substantially reduce the deficiency of energy resources in
that region. However. the functions of ABs's in reducing the deficiency of
hydrocarbon fuel are relatively limited. Since assimilated power reac-
tors are designed primarily for use in the base portion of power system
loads. their adoption is driving coal-fired condensation power plants out
of the energy balance.

Table 1 shows that the greatest consusption of fuel-energy resources. in-
cluding oil and gas. is necessary in the generation of medium and low-
potential heat and steaa and high-potential heat for technological pro-
cessss (metallurgy. chemistry. and so on) and also to supply the national
economy with sotor fuel. In addition. gas and oil fuel is utilized to gen-
erate peak and semi-peak energy.

The consumption of gas and liquid fuels in some of these domains can be
reduced in part through the use of AST's [Nuclear heating Plants] to gen-
erate low-potential heat. and assimilated azs's in certain technological
processes for the integrated supplying of low-potential heat and electricity.
Possibilities of utilizing nuclear power on the basis of assimilated reac-
tors to supplant gas and liquid energy resources are limited. Broader
perspectives are opened up by the development and adoption of VTCR'a [High-
Temperature Gas-Cooled Reactors].

The characteristic features of VTGR's is the generation of [cat at tempera-
tures of around 1.000 degrees C or more. Such a temperature will make it
possible to adopt these reactors in various central-heating. power-
technological. and other processes to replace scarce hydrocarbon fuels.
Tables 2 to 4 indicate the domains of potential application of VTCR's.

The potential scope of development of VTCR's is examined on the example of
utilizing high-tesperature heat for the steam conversion of methane. and

is presented in Table 2.

About 20 percent of all organic fuel that will be produced in 1980 will
have to be consumed to generate high-temperature heat. Moreover. 60 to

70 percent of the fuel consumed for these purposes will consist of scarce
hydrocarbons. and this share will not change substantially over the next

Is to 20 years. The high-temperature potential is essential in the produc-
tion of a-onia and a-onia fertilizers. synthetic alcohol. hydrogen. and
so on, also in metallurgy for the direct reduction of iron. blastwfurnace
processes. and so on.

The key problem in sost high-temperature processes is the production of
various reducing agents. especially hydrogen. which can be obtained by
scans of VTCR'a. From organic fuel. hydrogen as a raw material is obtained
by steam conversion of methane or coal gasification (see Table 2). In the
long-run. thermochemical or thermoelectrochemical decomposition of water
may provide an unlimited source of hydrogen (Table 3). The production of
reducing agents. especially hydrogen. by means of VTCR's makes it possible

to replace all the organic fuel consumed in this sphere of energy produc-
tion.

2
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
11
12

(13
(1h

(15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table I.
Fuel-Enemy Mlnncu

Ctmnypa We ”mane-remain m 96 1’38

 

Structural Conmmptlm of Fuel-Energy Resource». Percent of

Taonena I

  

on "10-10” rr. u. - . We” unmet-emu ma
( 1) 2 5 8 mean
«my W (3) m (7) (10)
. ~ km. £0121.“ «ea $2.)” nea- new: $22.... m
mfg- u rue
n 6m: am no m 25 I: 33—35
ﬂatulence "supra; tpeuero I 32 22 25-3
wluuoro nmlunua
Ilupnéorua ueoaoameuusaoto 19 M “—10
"min-m I mmaapaue cuoeue se 1‘ 10
yen-cane I
n lawn-mun. maneuvered 8 5 10
«panama-amt a m rupee
Been (22) I am I 00 I 100 I
0 onwlllnrmum.
0- “a 3:?!“ mmwpcomg eryru nomen- were I you an We“) a lacunae ee-

u-lemum name-meter.
000' "meow wagon: (083'. mm.

 

l. Doaain of consumption 16.
2. 1970-1980 17.
3. Total. 18.
a. Share of oil and see (aa 19.

of end of period)“ 20.
S. Proapectiveﬂt 21.
6. Total 22.
7. Share of oil and sea 23.
8. Potential ahare of

nuclear power 21..
9. URN“.
10. W61!
11. Generation of electricity
12. Generation of heat and

steam of nadir- and low

potential 25.
13. Generation of high-

potential heat
I6. Hobile and atationary

power plants 26.
IS. Ae raw material in the

cheaical and petro-
chenicnl industry

3

nan-u m I am. near-Io m.

' Up to 20-25

Up to 8-10

Up to 25-28

Up to 25

Up to 12-14

Production of aynthetic fuel
Tbtal

ﬁAccording to [5). average for
period.

**According to authore’ eetinatea

nude on the baeia of the etruc-
are of conaunption of petroleum

and see in accordance with [5] and
scale of coneuaption of petroleum
and sea for 1980 according to [6].
***Authora' eetinatea on the

haeia of main tendencies of util-
ization of 168 and forecaeta.

for example [3].

*‘**Light-water reactore (water-

cooled reactore. high-power

boiling-water reactore).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Nuclsnr Power-Technological Processes with VTGR's on the Basis
of Methane Conversion

Mun-c alumnus-me spam-ecu e ll‘ﬂ'l’ us «use museum Imus no"... 2

(1) <2) (3) *wmm" (7) am”... m...

0‘5“” 1n ”IIOJMI- Ill-um nonma- '” "m mm" m In: “mmtﬁ.

mmmm an 1 .3 _ t. a. , m c 811?..." v 2:. v.
I m

"a M

0
spam nos- mﬂ . mm {.1 Cum eds- 30— M?” A9112.

aspen mass m sum ymﬁpuun. a 15-20 an. 1 cu-
uosyuuu lup- cmumun mun: ysoopeulu)

you cum. sons-u:

lips}: ms- 2—3( I g . 1' 11-6-
soussu pnu mono m)

In npupoauom ru-

Bocnligousus Was”) 144.0 1.7-2.0 Ho OWL 5—0 (no—‘0 us. 1
”an s noun: (20) Pym) (21)

(23) 53‘)
tonne I‘m-Qantas. o 60- (:8. ms-
csmtn- Onmn nu. t
venom nu)
wanna

A
N
N

Solmpuau- Rpm-Imam 1.3-1.0 1.0—I .8 no... ”nouns ”—120 (50% um-

aponu sou-loo “Home a In. ml ACT I: muons-om mu-
npouusmsm mos-nu soc-36mins e

“um cuézm- > 20-” an «new mu: P

no (29) ’ n uncanny)

Xoumpluuc- nuns-s new 13—2.! 2.‘-2.6 Ho onus-uses 32-35(ycnsouu-
no. snylyupo- woo-opus us now use-
ssm atoms (34) mm

(32) (33) "' 2° "3" (35)

3mm: nmmuocmto
Will-u

36)m — am autumn-um um.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Table 2 Continued]

Ice

ll.

l2.
l3.

1‘.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

Stean conversion of
sethanc to produce
hydrogen

A-onia. amnia fer-
tilizers. synthentic
alcohol, hydrogen

10 to 15 percent re-
duction in prise cost
30 to 50 (in the case
of ABTS's. 15 to 20
nillioa tons of enonia
fertilizers)

Direct reduction of
ore

Slaw iron

Not eetinated

No to three (20
million tone of sleuy
iron)

Reduction of are in
blast furnaces

Pig iron

hot evaluated

Five to air (30 to £0
million tons of pig
iron)

Production of syn-
thetic fuel

Coal gasificstion

5

26.
25e

26.
27.
28.

29.

31.

32.
33.
3‘.
35.

36.

Synthetic sea

40 to 50 rubles per ton of stan-
dard fuel

60 to 70 (in the case of gesifica-
tion of 50 trillion tons of coal)
Replacement 0! gas and liquid
fuel

Che-ethereal transmission of
energy

Decentralized doeeetic and in-
dustrial heat supply

More econosicsl than AST'e at
distances of more than 20 to 30
kilometers

80 to 120 (50 percent of decen-
tralized heat supply of the
European part of the USSR over
the long-tern)

Che-ethereal energy storage
Peak electricity

lot evaluated

32 to 35 (installed capacity of
neneuverabls AES's roughly 20
gigauetts)

ARTS-«nuclear power-technology
pleat.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. Nuclear Pover-l‘eclnological Processes Hith were on the Basis

of Various Methods of Decomosition of Hater

Arc-nus nag-cream Tadasna 3
m e I? a sense: pans-m

m0”. mums-a I”

    

Key:
1. Technological process 5. Millions of tons of standard fuel
2. Efficiency. percent per year
3. Production of hydrogen 6. Tm, degrees C
in A215 of 3.000 nega- 7. Thenochenical cycle
watts capacity (heat) 8. met-eclectrochenical cycle
6. Billions of cubic 9. Bigh-tenperature electrolysis

esters PE? year

Thus. the use of V'rGR's in energy-intensive technological operations opens
up broad prospects for the developeent and use of nuclear power; this can
have a positive effect on resolving the problen of environment.

As nentioned earlier. nest of the organic energy resources being produced.
including hydrocarbons, are censured to produce Iediula and low-potential
heat and steal. Sense of the concentrated consuners of low-potential heat
could be supplied by AST's based on assinilsted reactors. A high propor-
tion of gas and fuel oil is essential for decentralized doneatic and in-
dustrial heat supply characterized by low concentration of energy consmp-
tion, the conversion of which to coal is nade difficult by technical-
econonic and ecological factors. One possible way to resolve this proble-
is provided by ASDT's [long-distance nuclear heating plants]. In this
case. the V161! is used for the steel conversion of nethane. with trans-
niasion of the cooled conversion products (00 and Hz) (Figure 1) through
gas utility lines to the places of heat consumption. where the reverse
reaction of nethanization takes place to release heat. The tenperature

of nethanization is roughly 650 to 650 degrees C. In the process, the
00 and H; are converted alnost wholly into methane. which can be returned
to the reactor through the pipelines.

6
Ion omcm. use ouv
FOR OHIOIAL USE ONLY

  

'aal.0ssssnasessreasmm

Figure l. Schenatic of bong-Distance Chenetheraal heat Supply

Key:
n. ASM‘ based on VTGR d. Heating of housing and industrial
b. so to 70 Raf/m2 manna
c. Hethanator (10 to 200 e. Technological steam consular

negawat ts (heat)

All of these schenatica for the use of V'l'GR's in power-technological pro-
ceases call for using some of the heat generated by the reactor to pro-

duce electricity. Thanks to the high tenperatures of.the heat-carrier in
this case it is possible use stean turbines with contemporary high steas

parameters (550 degrees c and 170/240 bar) and an effective net efficiency
of about 1.0 percent. -

‘nue ability of VTGR's to generate heat of higher parameters nakes thee
highly pronising in the development of ABS pover engineering with direct
gas-turbine cycles. Gas turbines are beconing econonicsl at teaperatures
of 800 degrees c or lore. In this case. the direct gas-turbine cycle will
be superior to the steam cycle both in terns of high efficiency and by
virtue of reduced metal-consumption of the equipment and reduced capital
outlays. Other advantages of the direct-cycle ABS are the considerably
lower consumption of cooling water and the probability of conversion to
air cooling. higher maneuverability of the hrs. and the possibility of
using it in regulating conditions. Various alternative uses of VTGR's

in electricity generation are presented in Table It.

'-

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4. ABS’a with V'i‘GR's

Moms mun-cl"? Ta6nnaa ‘

“raglan-«e copanlur napotypﬁnac
aux (mouos. neupuuop Is 170 Gap a as
$532.. gunman. unseen: cﬁpocos Is

aux-ma WMHHO magnum met-ma encore: Kim.

I to» queue npu ucnoauosaaau onupsux

(6) news. Canaan-us mamas-ax super.
noaumeune neat-sponsor“ A36. swoon:-
aom» apnea-onus «yam rpasapea I
ﬂchmIInl oipocaoro me (no 250+
+3m 'C) an acumen-m

50—55 (c ymou amnemm-n- Bucoxna mm. mom leuoauo-

pounon a: noun m Ilusaoro mam-canon) nun «:yxnxo rpm-pea.
sumo a P W I: 80-90 (on yam anuonoma- HeaGroanu season assume-on

anus-ore unannoason) (100—150 '0 mm

 

Key:

1. Energy cycle 6. Closed gas-turbine

2. Efficiency, percent 7. Possibility o' achieving high

3. Characteristics efficiency. including through

6. Steam-turbine the use of binary cycles. Reduc-

5. Use of series-produced tion in capital outlays, higher
steals-turbine blocks, for maneuverability of ABS. possibil-
exasple of 170 bar and ity of using "dry" cooling towers
565 degrees c. 30-35 and the use of waste heat (up to
percent reduction in 250 + 300 degrees c) for central
heat eaiasions heating.

8. Enclosed gas-turbine with them-
sorption comression

9. $0 to SS (counting loll-potential
heat supply); 80 to 90 (not count-
ing low-potential heat supply)

10. High efficiency, possibility of
using "dry" cooling covers.
Necessity of supplying low-.
potential (100 to 150 degrees 0)
heat.

8
roe on-‘xcw. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11w devolopnent or nuclear power should be based on a reliable solution to
the problem of fuel supply. The development of a helium technology for
thermal mR's will speed up the resolution of the problem of gas-cooled
breeder-reactors Ill.

As Academician A. P. Aleksandrov hen noted. " . . . evidently. the devel-
opment of high-temperature reactors on par with breeder reactoro will be-

come a characteristic tendency of change in the structure of nuclear power
by the 1990's.

"it may turn out that the development of breeder reactors cooled by sodium
will prove to be cowllcsted and unfeasible in the case of a four to nix-
yenr doubling time. because the appreciable degradation of the neutron
spectrum by sodium reduces the breeding ratio. In this case it may be
feasible to have a gas-cooled reactor. although the necessity of a very
high calorific intensity of the fuel will lead to high pressures and com-
plicated emergency shut-down cooling systems. It appears. nevertheless.
that this trend should be followed up. especially considering that reduc-
ing the doubling time in metal-cooled reactors will require conversion from
oxide fuel compounds to denser carbides. nitrides. or metal compounds. the
stability of uhich is easier to ensure in chemically inert helim than in
sodium" [1].

One of the outstanding and substantial advantages of the whole V'l'Gll con-
cept is the commonality and uniformity of the basic technical. technolog-
lcnl. and design solutions for all of the above-listed thrusts of develop-
oent. This applies to the design of the fuel elements, the basic equipment.
the design of the reactor housing. structural and heat-insulating materials.
the regulating system. and so on. This kind of cos-onality and uniform-

ity of basic solutions makes it possible {.0 reduce the volume of scientific-
research and experimental-design work and to shorten implementation times.
This advantage of the WGR's will also undoubtedly have a positive effect
on the development of the production base.

Among the most inortant scientific—technical problems in developing V'rGR's
are: Development of the design and technology for the melting of fuel.
high-temperature radiation- and corrosion-resistant graphite. high-
tesperature materials for the equipment. fittings. conduits. and so on.

and heat-insulating materials and structures: designing of the basic tech-
nological equipment (heat-exchangers. gas blowers. fittings. steas gen-
erators. and so on) and high-pressure multi-chedaer housings aade of pre-
stressed ferroconcrete; and also assimilation of helium technology
(control. cleaning. mass-transfer. and so on).

Rent-arch is under stay on practically all of these problems in order to
realize characteristics meeting VTGR requirements for the production of
high-potential heat. High requirements are ioposed on reactors of this
type. and meeting these requirements simultaneOusly resolves problems for
other reactors of the V‘l‘GR type as well.

9
roe orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present. research snd develop-ant is underway on numerous uses of
V'l'Gll's. 0n the one hand. this characterizes the extensive interest in
mm. as s new source of energy and. consequently. prosotes the develop-
sent or this thrust. On the other hand. the use of ma'. creates the
problem of seeking the develop-ant and optimal scheastic of a reactor in-
stellntion designed for various sectors of the national econony. Host of
the current research in AB‘rs's with Hell's desonstrates the close link
between the doaain of application and the design. layout. and parsneters
of AB‘I‘S's. It follows that in principle a particular optimal design and
installation layout could be developed for each doaain of application
(see Tables 2-5). So for it is iapossible to unequivocally single out
free all this great variety of applications the basic directions that are
neat pronising both in terms of the national economy's needs and in terns
of technical feasibility and scone-y. This can be done only in the process
of further research. study. sccunulstion of operating experience, and so
on.

It should be cautioned that sons conponents and paraaeters of V'DGR's for
different thrusts (active zone. gas blowers. control and safety rod drives.
heliun input and output paraseters, and so on) can and rust be standardized.
Depending on the donsin of application and the technical and schenstic
solutions adopted. however. there say be substantial differences in such
vital elesents and parsnetera of the installation as the heat-exchangers,
stess generators. ratios between the capacities of these heat-exchangers
and. consequently. the hydraulics of the first circuit, the design of the
housing of prestressed ferroconcrete and so on. The psrsneters of VTGR'a
of various types are shown in Table 5.

Table 5. Basic Thermotechnicsl Paraneters of V'rGR

 

 

 

A25 with as with gas- ABS with
steaa- turbine in- fast halit-
Parssetcrs power cycle stallstion Am reactor
lie . 650-750 800-1000 900-1000 600-650
t . C
ass up to 800
t3" . '0 300-350 300- 350 300- 350 250-300
p. bar SO 50- 80 50 120-160
10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another problem is that of providing high reliability. redundancy. and
maximum utilization of the reactor's capacity. For VTCR's with ball fuel
elements running on the OVAZ [single passage of active zone] principle
there are hopes of achieving a high KlH [coefficient of capacity utiliza-
tlonl. For example. in the ease of experimental AVR high-tenperature
reactor. which operates for a long time at a helium output temperature of
950 degrees c. this coefficient has been 0.85 to 0.90 in recent yeats.

We cannot anticipate, however. that the VTCR's KIN will be substantially
higher than in the case of installations with other reactors. Evidently
we should aim at a KIM of 0.80 to 0.95.

At the same time. in the metallurgy and chemical induetry operating load
coefficients approach 0.95 to 0.98. Many specialists in these sectors
believe that this load level should also be achieved in nuclear power
being utilized in technology. Although it is not obvious that the most
economical solution for ABTS'a is the provision of energy in which the
load coefficient of the technological operation would be 0.95 to 0.98 (for
example. by increasing the reliability of individual elements of the reac-
tor. supplementary redundancy. and so on). nevertheless there is the prob-
lem of the discrepancy between load coefficients for nuclear reactors and
certain technological operations.

Rather closely linked to this problem is the question of reliability.

Some technological processes are carried out continuously. Emergency
stoppage can lead to disruptions which require subsequent repair and res-
toration work (for example, blast furnace operations) for after which it
is necessary to have a lengthy tune-up period to reach steady-state condi-
tions. in this case. the nuclear energy source must meet the condition
of providing highly reliable energy supply--thst is. the coefficient of
operational readiness of the reactor shOuld approximate 1.

In a number of domains of application. the "scale discrepancy" problem

may arise. For example. in utilizing an A218 for the direct reduction of
iron ore. with a productivity of five million tons per year. the required
thermal capacity of the reactor for technological heat amounts to roughly
1.000 megawatts [7]. Thus. even for a plant of that productivity the
necessary thermal capacity of the AEU [nuclear power installation] does

not fall within the domain of the economic capacities of the reactors. but

a reactor of the same thermal capacity could turn out roughly two million
tons of ammonia per year.

At present we have no unequivocal recipes for resolving problems of V108
development. The developmental process. from the experimental test-stand
installations and reactors to the prototype industrial models. will provide
answers to all problems. It is possible here to indicate only the pos-
sible thrusts of research and the solutions which must be verified. includ-
ing: Development of maximally standardized reactor installations suitable
for use in various technological processes; facilities for the centralized

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production of hydrogen for distribution to various consumers; accumulators
of intermediate AETS products (gases of various composition for metallurgy
and chemistry); AES's with several nuclear reactors of medium capacity;
formulation of specifications for maintaining technological installations
in operating condition by means of emergency power sources.

At present. several types of ABTS's are being developed. The most accept-
able. however. is the VG-GOO schematic shown in Figure 2 [8. 9]. the main
characteristics of which are the combined generation of heat and electricity
and the use of the intermediate circuit to draw off high-potential heat.
tht are the advantages of this layout?

In the USSR. as has been mentioned. in the selection of the development of
VTGR's for technological processes as a thrust of high priority. the devel-
opment of prototype installations to generate electricity is ruled out as
an independent stage of development. Nevertheless. it is essential to
assimilate temperatures sequentially in time: 660-750 degrees C and then
900 to 950 degrees c [9l. The VG-bOO layout provides this possibility:

in the first stage. the unit can operate to generate electricity with the
maximum temperature up to 750 degrees C in the first circuit. By means of
special devices installed in place of the heat-exchanger of the inter-
mediate circuit it is possible to conduct tests at high tesperatures
without having to bring the intermediate and technological circuits in.

if necessary. technological operations based on such an installation can
be postponed to subsequent stages in order to ensure operation of the
reactor devices themselves at high temperatures. Another possible variant
utilizes both the intermediate circuit and a special steam generator in
the technological part to feed steam into the steam-turbine unit.

The use of the intermediate circuit in the prototype installation intro-
duces several useful properties. The nuclear portion. ruling out explo-
sion hazard. is separated from the technological chain, can be operated
practically without any consideration of radiation hazard. Constant or
accidental penetration of the first circuit by products of the technolog-
ical circuit. primarily hydrogen. is practically ruled out [10]. The
replacement and repairing of the experimental technological equipment does
not entail any measures to deactivate it. It is possible to install tech-
nological heat-exchangers after the reactor itself is work-tested; this
simplifies their replacement during operation.

The use of several loops of the first circuit in the VG-400 makes it pos-
sible to investigate various technological processes in them. The capac-
ities of prototype industrial installations of this type range between
1.000 and 5,000 megawatts (heat). while the capacity of a prototype 1.000-
scgawatt unit will be 20 to 30 percent; this can be considered the optimum
level. The VG-bOO. one of the first prototype AETS's. will make it pos-
sible to study and resolve the above-listed problems of both a technical
nature and problems relating to the adoption of the concept of high-
temperature nuclear power engineering.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”"50“" ""9 arms-n'g'sw‘?)

m“

m paw-Tum?” "m"

'1

  
 
  

           
   
   
  

  

   
  
 

_..J

o.) i
rm" |
moans-(u)

{9 V

M: (s)

Peutm erase names..-

e W. uses-«aux unseen
are” I... luv (re-1." Wrens
uuwnmtosa-za'cz wee-ll“

muse-sen no W}. ‘2’, elm; Isn-

EC
:
l
:
i

i-_-______

L—_——_-—_—l e.---——_.._—__—

Figure 2. Via-500 arts for the production of hydrogen and electricity.
Parameters: Reactor capacity l.000 negovatts (nest); teeper-
ature of heliu- at reactor outlet roughly 950 degrees c; pro-
jected hydrogen productivity 100 tons per day; turbogenerator
unit capacity 300 uegavatts (electricity).

Key:

1:. Heliua g. water

I». Rent-exchanger 6x90 eega- h. Turbogenerntor unit Hex. 600 nega-
uatte (neat) watts (electricity)

c. 1,000 megawatts (heat) i. Stems generator roughly 35 (90)

J. Steele generator “0 aege- legavatts (heat)
untts (heat) 1. Theroolyrer azso‘ roughly 55

e. Stesn legavatts (heat)

f. Condenser k. Roughly 2.0 “Pa 850 degrees c

[Key continued on the following pege]
13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key for Figure 2 continued]

1. Evaporator q. Dru-separator
a. Stean generator- r. Separator
separator s. Roughly 2.6 We
n. Intarnediate container t. Blectrolyrsr "280 roughly 25
o. Coepressor roughly 5.0 Ie awatts (electr city)
We u. nla lhr
p. 302: 02 roughly 2.0 We v. m3/hr

Conclusion. here than 20 years of developeent of nuclear power in the
USSR has led to the widespread adoption of us'. in electric power engin-
eering. and their role will continue to grow. WBR and RB!!! reactors have
served as the basis for the develop-exit of large power blocks with high
technical-econoaic indicators which will nuke it possible to substantially
reduce the deficiency of energy resources in the European part of the USSR.
“the present structure of the country's energy balance and long-range pros-
pects of this developnent indicate that ABS's in existence and under con-
struction are priasrily displacing in the energy balance KES's [condensa-
tion power plants] intended for use in the base portion of power syste-
loads. The main K38 fuel is coal. At the sale tile. because of the high-
er costs of hydrocarbon types of fuel it is essential to seek ways to re-
place oil and gas with nuclear energy in such donains as the generation of
nediue- and low-potential heat and stone. the production of synthetic types
of fuel. the provision of energy for large-scale technological operations.
and the generation of peak and seai-peslt electricity.

In part. this problen can be successfully resolved by building AST’s- on
the basis of already-assimilated reactors, also through the opti-al utiliza-
tion of such reactors for the provision of heat and electricity for tech-
nological operations. Even broader possibilities for the displace-ant of
oil and gas in the energy balance will cone free the developlent and ex-
tensive adoption of VTGR's capable of eating lore effective use of the
capabilities of nuclear energy. At present. the optieal donsins of adop-
tion of MR have been lapped out and the possible scale evaluated; tech-
nical solutions aaking it possible to ensure their adoption have been
worked through. He nay anticipate that about two-thirds of the potential
donnin of application of high-teeperature nuclear sources of heat can be
handled by Home. and with substantial national-econonic effect. In con-
nection with this. it is essential to step up the pace along these lines
in order to accelerate the development of the first industrial AMS's.

The eain task at the first stage is to develop an experinental-industrial
A215 with a VTOR of 1.000 ecgawatta capacity (heat) and a heliun tewera-
ture of roughly 950 degrees c at the outlet fro- the active zone. In an
experinental-industrial-and in sone cases in industrial AZTS'snit is
advisable to lake integrated use of mu energy for the conbined genera-
tion of high-potential heat and electricity. “this solution will unite it
possible to carry out the staged work-testing of the plant under purely
power-producing and power-technologiﬁal conditions. Moreover. in the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experimental-industrial installation it will be possible. by stages or
simultaneously. to investigate power-technological processes based on
high-temperature processes of thermochalicsl or thersoelcctrocbemicsl
decomposition of water. high-temperature electrolysis of water, high-
temperature steam catalytic conversion of lethane. and also promising
power cycles. for example enclosed gas-turbine.

The experiment gained in the operation of such systess in the provision
of energy fros VTcR's will serve as the basis for the development of atomic-
industrial complexes serving various purposes on the basis of VTGR'e.

1.

3.

b.

S.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

6856
C80:

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aleksandrov. A. P.. "Atonnsya snergetiks i nsuchno-tekhnicheskiy

progress" [Nuclear Power and Scientific-Technical Progress]. Moscow.
Nsuka. 1978.

Aleksandrov. A. P., Ponomsrev-Stepnoy. N. N.. in: "Atosnoy ensrgetike
20 let" [Nuclear Power is 20 Years Old]. Moscow. Atomisdat. 1974.

Legasov. V. A. et sl.. in: "Voprosy atounoy nsuki i tekhniki. Ser.
Atoono-vodorodnsys energetika. Vyp. 1." [Problems of Nuclear Science
and Technology. Series Atomic-Hydrogen Power Engineering. No 1].
Hoscow. led. Inn, 1976.

Grebenaik. V. N. et a1.. "Perspektivy prissneniya VTGR v energotekh-
nologicheskikh protsessakh" [Prospects of use of VTCR's in Power-
Technologicsl Processes]. Vienna. IAZA-TC-109/2. 1977.

blent'yev. 1.. AL. nrmncertn No 11, 1974, p 8.

"Energetiks SSSR v 1976-1980 gg." [USSR Power Engineering in 1976-1980],
edited by a. H. Nekrasov and H. c. Pervukhin. Moscow. Energiya. 1977.

Pononsrev-Stspnoy. N. N. et a1.. in: "Voprosy . . .", Hoscow. Isd.
1A2. 1976.

"Sostoyaniye i perspektivy razvitiya rsbot po V168 v SSSR" [Status and
Prospective Development of VTGR Projects in the USSR], Vienna. IAZA-
TC-109/3. 1977.

Hitenkov. P. H. et al.. in: "prrosy . . ." No 2 (3), Moscow, Isd.
IAE. 1977.

Protsenko. A. N.. Stolyarevskiy. A. Ya., in: "Voprosy . . ." No 1 (2).
Moscow. Izd. 1A3, 1977.

1822
15

FOR GFFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POHBR AND POWER EQUINE”

FUEL mun-non IN PMR PRODUCTION
Moscow AWAYA ENERGIYA in Russian Vol 45 No 6. Dec 78 pp ‘69-‘70

[Article by B. Ye. Novikov: ”Probleas of Fuel Utilization in Power Engin-
cering"]

[Text] The doainating role played by large AES's operating in the base
node to supply energy to the European part of the USSR is leading to a
situation in which substantial fluctuations in the daily loads on the
power systems must be covered by renodelling existing highly-saneuverable
power blocks running on organic fuel and building new ones.

The larger role played by coal in supplying energy is giving rise to certain
vital probleas. The Iain reserves of hard and brown coal are located in
the eastern regions of the comtry. In order to reduce the cost of long-
distance transportation of fuel and energy iron the East to the Heat a
progran of construction of large-scale fuel-energy cowlexes will be inle-
aented in the eastern regions.

The resolution of these problems Isust be directed toward the develop-ent
of new aethods of burning and processing solid fuel in order to reduce the
setsl-consuaption of boiler units. increase fuel econosy. and reduce harl-
ful eaissiom into the ataosphere.

‘lhese problena were the focus of an all-union conference ”New lbthods of
Fuel Utilisation in Power Engineering.” held in Moscow 29-30 May 1978; it
was organised by the scientific comcil of the USSR Ministry of Power and
llectrification's Glavniiproyekt [Kain Meinistration of Scientific-
Iesearch and Project-Planning Organisations] and mm [Power Engineering
Institute i-eni 0. ll. lrshishanovakiy]. It was attended by score than 120
specialists iron 67 organizations. Sose 33 reports were presented and dis-
cussed.

Survey reports at the conference dealt with prospective neth of burning

solid fuel. the sechenisn of the forastion of her-Eul eaieaiona in the
burning of organic fuel. and problels of environental protection.

16
roe orncm. use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The remaining reports can be provisionally divided into three groups.

Turbulence-chamber furnaces. Reports in this section of the conference
dealt with the experience of firing turbulence-chamber furnaces with peat.
pulverized brown coal, and shale at relatively low temperatures (the
temperature in the combustion nucleus drops by 100 to 200 degrees C).

This makes it possible to substantially reduce slag buildup in the furnace
and on the convective heating surfaces. also to reduce the formation of
nitrogen and sulfur oxides. At present, furnaces of this type are used
for boilers of up to 500 tons per hour productivity. Some of the reports
dealt with the use of the high-temperature furnace process in s special
turbulence chamber. It was noted that for furnaces of this type it is
possible to build powerful steam generators of half the height.

Combustion of fuel in "fluidized bed." Recently. extensive work has been
under way on the development of steam generators burning pulverized coal

in a fluidized ued. Thus. a steam boiler with a fluidized bed and a pro-
ductivity of 10 tons of steam per hour has been started up. Project studies
of powerful steam generators of this type are under way.

The burning of fuel in a fluidized bed intensifies heat-exchange substan-
tially, reduces the formation of nitrogen oxides considerably, and makes
it possible to reduce sulfur compound emissions by 90 percent compared
with chamber combustion. Such steam generators are considerably smaller
in size and correspondingly cheaper.

Processing and gssification of fuel. burner devices. At present. substan-
tial importance attaches to efforts to make integrated use of thermally-
enriched fuel. The BNIN report presented the results of operating
experimental-industrial installations for the integrated processing of
Kansk-Achinsk coal. also shale. Also of interest is a method developed in
the Institute of Mineral Fuels for the thermal processing of moist Siberian
coal to make thermal coal with a combustion heat of 7.000 kilocalories per
kilogram.

Substantial efforts are under ray on the development of various methods of
cool gasificstion. Mention should be made of highly-promising studies of
processes with plasma coal gasificstion (an ERIN report) and coal gaaifics-
rion in a reactor with fluidized bed. with heat energy fed into the reac-
tion zone from a high-temperature external source of heat-a furnace
chamber. and eventually a nuclear reactor.

Also worth noting is a report concerning the development of gas burners
operating by the method of double-front ignition of gases of maximally
low combustion heat. These burner devices ensure steady combustion of
large quantities of low-calorie gases that were formerly not utilized as
fuel and polluted the air. In evaluating the work of the conference. it
should be mentioned that many important and interesting findings were pre-
sented; they will make it possible to develop and expand research into new
methods of fuel utilization and will help to promote their adoption in

power engineering.
17
6856

CSO: 1822 ,v FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.rs‘E
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

amen PM!!! AND roam EQUINE}?!

BIOGMPHIC SKETCH 0? am. PETROKOVSKIY
Moscow ELEKTRICIIESTVO in Russian No 10, Oct 78 p 93

[Article by a "group of conradee" commemorating the 70th birthday of
Alekeandr Hikhaylovich Petrokovekiy]

[Text] A. H. Petrokovekiy, deputy chief of the Power and Electrical Tech-
nolegy Department of the 0858 State Connittee for Science and Technology.
hea celebrated hie 70th birthday.

Petrokovakiy began his career ea an electrician at the Hoacow electrical
plant. where he worked for eeveral yeare. In 1930. he wae eent to etudy
at the Hoecow Power Engineering Inetitute and reeained there after gradua-
tion (he wee a graduate atudent and a lecturer in the Electrical Equip-ent
Depart-ant, and then he heceee a leader in Koeaomol affaire.)

Pro- 1939 to 1957. Petrokovekiy worked on the etaff of the CPS" Central
Coo-ittee and the USSR Council of hinietere. where he was concerned with the
prohleee of the electrical equipment induetry for neny yeara; during World
Her II. he helped to evacuate electrical plente to the Eeetern part of the
country and to organize production in the Urale and Siberia. For the oxen—
plary nanner in which he fulfilled the aaeigneenta of the State Defenee Con-
nittee during Horld Her 11. Petrokovakiy wee awarded the Order of the Red
Star. the Order of the Red Banner. and the Order of the Great Patriotic

Var. Firat Claee.

Free l957 to 1965. Petrokowekiy worked ae the chief epecialiet. deputy
chief. and chief of the Power and Electrical Technology Departeent of

the State Committee for the Coordination of Scientific Reeeerch of the
RSPSR Council of Hinietere. During this period the connittee eccoepliehed
a great deal of work in organizing. planning. and introducing new electrical
power and equipment technology in the kraye. obleete and autonoeoue repub-
lice of the RSPSR.

In 1965, Petrokovekiy wee traneferred to the State Coemittee for Science
and Technology of the USSR Council of Hinietere (now the USSR State Com-
nittee for Science and Technology). and for 13 yeare he held the poet of

18
roe ontcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deputy chief of the Power and Electrical Technology Department; he was
concerned uith making scientific and technological advances in electrical
engineering. he did a great deal to inprovc the scientific and technical
level of the electrical equipment industry. He took a direct part in the
development of proposals to accelerate scientific and technical progress

in the national economy. and they Here reflected in the resolution of the
C980 Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers entitled "Measures
to improve the efficiency of scientific organizations and to accelerate the
introduction of scientific and technological advances into the economy" and
in the resolution of the USSR Council of Ministers entitled 'lkasures to
improve the efficiency of scientific research. design and planning. and
technological organizations of the Hinistry of the Electrical Equipment

Industry and to accelerate the introduction of their advances into produc-
tion."

 

The practical implementation of a number of major organizational and pro-
duction arrangements to improve the management of scientific and technologi-
cal development in the electrical equipment industry in which Petrokovskiy
took an active part allowed the innovations of this segment of industry to
be extended to many other segments of the national economy of the USSR.

For many years Petrokovskiy played an active and fruitful role in the scien-
tific councils of the Committee on the problems of "Semiconductor Power

Engineering and Electrical Power," being the deputy chairman of these councils.

0n 9 September 1971. by the order of the USSR 3upreme Soviet Presidium. Petro-

kovskiy was awarded the Badge of honor for his services in the development of
science.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Enargiya." "Blektrichsstvo." 1978

9370

CSO: 1822 19

FOR 0!?ICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLS AND RBLA‘I'. NUIPHKN'I‘

RmUlA‘l'ION 0? 6A8 OONSWI‘ION WPORHITY

Hoscov GAZOVAYA PWSHLENNOST'. SBRIYA: BROOM“ GAZOVOY PRGIYSIILBNNMI
in Russian No 1. Jan 79 pp 13-20

[Article by P. r. Agayev. n. I. Konyushev. and R. Ye. Glikina. VNIPIgaz
Institute]

[Text] 0n the basis of an International Agree-eat between the USSR and Iran
a contract was concluded by which Iran gas in the mount of 10 billion cubic
asters per year began to flow into the Soviet Union through the Transirsnian
Pipeline fro. the Persian Gulf to the Soviet-Iranian border (Astara) in
October 1970.

The autually advantageous agreesent between six countries (Iran, the USSR.
Czechoslovakia. the Federal Republic of Ger-any. France and Austria) signed
in Tehsran on 30 "ember I975 guarantees the delivery of Iranian gas in the
mount of 13.6 billion cubic neters per year to Czechoslovakia, the Federal
Republic of Gamay. France and Austria for 23 years beginning in 1 January
1981. In addition. a contract was concluded between Iran and Czechoslovakia
according to which 3.6 billion cubic neters of gas per year nust be delivered
to Czechoslovakia through the territory of the USSR [1].

All of the gas delivered by Iran in the count of 27.2 billion cubic aetera
per year will be consued by the republics of the Transcaucsaus, the developed
econonic areas of the Northern Caucasus and the Eastern Ukraine. In place
of Iranian gas. the Pederal Republic of Ger-any. Austria and France will
receive gas Iron the Oranburg Deposit and the deposits in the northern rayona
of the l’yuen' Oblast across the territory of Czechoslovakia [2].

In order to transport the indicated solutes of gas iron the Transcaucasua to
the Northern Caucasus a plan has been ude to expand the existing gas line
Ira Astara to Kasi-hagosed and lay a new gas line iron Kazi-Hsgoaed along
the west coast of the Caspian Sea to the north through the towns of Susgait.
Siasan', mum. Derbent, Hakhachlrala. Grosnyy. and hozdolt. cutting into
the existing systsn of gas lines of the Kavknrtransgaz Association. The

gas supply to the indicated areas will in the future provide a basis for
all-around develop-eat of industry. In order to increase the anount of gas

20

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

received from the Transcaucasue and the capacity of the 0rdzhonikidze Hozdok
Gas Line to 3 billion a3 per year across complex. rugged terrain. the con-
struction of a pumping station has been started in 0rdzhonikidze. A dis-
tribution line is being constructed, as a result of which it will become
possible to supply gas to users in the Nakhichevsnsksya ASSR and the Na-
gorno-Karabakhskaya autonomous oblast. A result of expanding the existing
gas line system and laying new ones will be increased capacity of the gas
flows in the territory of the CaucasuseTranscaucasus region, cross feeding
of the Transcaucasus and Northern Caucasus Gas Line systems permitting
additional gas to be supplied in emergencies for users not having reserve

fuel and connecting the basic gas users of the Ongcstanskaya ASSR to other
regions.

At this time the demand for gas in the republics of the Tranecaucasus and
the regions of the Northern Caucasus is being met by gas extraction in
Azerbaijan. the Checheno-Ingushskaya ASSR. the Stavropolskly and Krasnodar-
skiy Kraya and importing gas from Iran.

The gas extracting regions of the Northern Caucasus are characterized by
decreasing extraction as a result of which by 1980 these regions will convert

from being suppliers of gas to consumers. Reformation of the flows from the
Transcaucasus to the Northern Caucasus is required for this.

In the future of the power of the gas flows in the most stressed parts of the
Transceucasus economic region will increase significantly. Under such con-
ditions the organization of flexible and reliable operation of the investiga-
ted system of gas lines represents an important problem which can be solved
by several methods. The underground gas storage which can be created on the
basis of the exhausted beds in the investigated region will be capable of
solving the problem with the greatest cost benefit.

In the Caucasus and Transcaucasus economic region at the present time there
are two operating (Kalassskoye and Yerevan) storages and one storage in the
construction stage (Northern Stavropol'). The first two perform the functions
of a regulator for "smoothing' the nonuniformity in the gas consumption of

the Transcaucssus republics. The Yerevan PKhG [underground gas storage]

has been designed to eliminate the gas shortage for stressed periods only

in Yerevan.

The Northern Stavropol' Pth will assume the functions of a regulator for

the Strapolskiy (without users in the southeastern part) and partially the
Krasnodarskiy Krays.

The nonuniformity of the gas consumption of the other parts of the Northern
Cnucasus-the Chechens-lngushskaya. Severe-cactinskaya. Kabardino-Balkar-
skaya and the Dagestsnskaya ASSRs autonomous republics and the southeastern
part or the Stavropolskiy Kray—-will remain unregulated in the future. In
order to discover the possibility of regulating the nonuniformity of the gas
consumption of these regions a calculation was made of the nonuniformity

of the gas consumption of the indicated regions and the republic of the
Transcsucnsus planned for the future.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1n the investigated version of the calculation for the southeastern part of
the Strapolskiy Kray in the future a consumption volume will be adopted in
the aaount of 25 percent of the total gas consumption of the Stavropolakiy
Kray beginning with the actual data on gas consuaptitn in the preceding
years.

The initial base for caltulating the nonuniforsity of the gas consumption for
the future was the data of the VNIIEgaspro. Institute with respect to volume
and structure of the gas consumption for the future and the actual coef-
ficients of nonuniforsity of the gas consulption by each category of users

in the regions of Northern Caucasus and the Transcaucasus. The actual non-
uniforaity coefficients of the gas consumtion were discovered in the process
of analyzing the gen consusption data with respect to the indicated regions
in 1971-1975.

The study of the structure of the gas consuption of the analyzed regions
desonstrated that in the overall gas consumtion significant weight goes to
the buffer users operating as regulators. To a defined degree they "moth”
the actual nonunifornity in the gas consusption.

Therefore when detersining the voluaes of the nonuniforaity in order to
obtain reliable data on the fluctuations of the gas consuuption, the effect
of the forced gas conauaption graph for the buffer users on the total indexes
of the intensity of fluctuations of gas consusption for which redistribution
of their gas consuqation by nonth in accordance with the fuel consuwtion
regi-en of the buffer users, was excluded.

As a result of the calculation. the gas consusption nonuniforsity coefficients
were discovered (see Table l).

Hhen going free the nonuniforaity voluse to the planned vol'me of underground
gas storage the factors of the temperature deviation in the coldest winters
and the occurrence of energency situations on the gas line were taken into
account which give rise to the necessity for creating a reserve. For the
first case. this reserve is taken in the anount of 20 percent. and the latter
case. 10 percent of the discovered volume of the nonuniforsity (Table 2).

Pros Table 2 it ia3obvious that in the future the seasonal gas shortage will
be 6,700 million In .

Under the conditions of continuous intensive growth of the gas consuaption
one Kalsass PKhG will not be able to elisinate the seasonal gas shortage in
the future, in connection with which the problem of creating a large base
Pth in the investigated region will becose highly urgent.

22
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
l

l .19
1.10
L3!
1.3
19&
1.31
I.“

1.16

l .3!

[I

1.22
1.25
1.29
1.35
1.81
1.3
I.“

O

I.”

III

1.2!
1.19
1.17
1.20
l."
1.28
1.3

1.15

IV

0.99
0.90
0.5
00%
0.9)
0.93
0.89

0.99

V

0.85
0.85
0.9K
0.77
0.81
09%
0.6!

 

1.8 1.20 0.90 0.81 ‘0.‘
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030025-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

.o.u¢ mmp~ oao~ me» can” emu“ comma can.“
9.8 o8 8 8 8n 8~ 88. mo:
nun mou as an on« on new". . on..
an“ on“ . an .oa one oou oonu on.

on» on» on" .9. on» o.“ coma oonu
own an on an om o» our can

8... 8» ca 8» oz. 8. 88 85
av. on. a." max cam can coo» co.»
8: on: 3» on 8: 8.. 83 88

      

I56 .253
on»! u..— .o...» 3

.uISAOD unauOum.

 

aquoh

xuuv muxnu030u>num
uo uu-m :uosuaom

mmm< ca-xnu-xucncocuvu-p-s
umm< cacxuauuo-0u0u0>~m

umm< quixoguancnuoconuosu
amm< cans-ctuoouna

‘mm BCd—u!‘

«3 83.38
«mm 5:322.

cow-ad

me no cabana»: .co«uox candoado-cuuhooaoqoscu
on» o» uuoaooa no“: enchanm .09 van sud-heuucscoz .oa5Ho> coauclsqcoo no noxdvau .N o~a¢u

2h

'0! OIPICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00860R000100030026-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the Transceucaaus and in the Northern Cauceeue projects have been

ongoing for a number of years to find sites for the creation of underground
gas storage in the depleted beds and aquifers. In Krasnodarakiy Krny. 210
eitee have been investigated. and the Lower Cretaceous deposits of the
Kuehchevbkiy Field have been reco-ended for underground gas storage; in the
Stavropol' Krny, l70 sites have been investigated. and the depoeite of the
Green Suite of the Northern Stavropol' Field have been recommended: in

Checheno-ingushetia. 100 beds of the Karaganehokrakskiy Couplex were inves-
tigated. and none were recon-ended.

in the territory of the Georgian SSR. the Soyueburges Trust has worked on

finding local water-bearing structures end collector beds for underground
gas storage.

in order to create underground gas storage in water-bearing structures.
there are geological prerequisites. and a final solution of this probles
will require a nuabar of exploratory operations.

The selection of the sites for underground gas storage in the water-bearing
structures of the Arsenian SSR has low prospects.

in apite of a large number of investigated depleted beds (about 600) in the
Azerbaijan SSR no favorable site was found except the beds of the V11
horizons oi the Keradagskiy Field.

The site for underground gas storage is the depleted beds of the V11 horizons
coordinated with the lower linb of a brachyanticlinal 15 RI long and 6 to 8

kn wide. The structure is divided into two blocks 1 (large) end II (snail)
by two dislocations.

The Vii horizons differ free the other horizons by significantly nore effec-
tive thickness of the send and aleurite beds.

Above the VI! horizon suite is an ergillaceous section Vl-VII 250-300 eaters
thick. which is a reliable confining bed.

In addition to the favorable geological characteristic. the additional
prerequisites for creating underground gas storage in the V11 horizons are
the possibility of extracting the condensate deposited in the bed. the
effect on the oil sargin underdevelopnent. the use of the existing wells.
field structures and lines for underground gas storage.

The ll (snail) block is reco-eaded as the primary block [3].

25
ton omcua. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nunbsr of operating wells 14
Capital investments. eillions of rubles 15.2
Operating expenses, trillions of rubles 1.65
Reduced expenses. Iillions of rubles 3.21
Specific capital investments. rubles/thousand

of e3 15.2

The cost benefit iron creating the first phase of the Karadagskiy underground
gas storage will be 6.7 trillion rubles per year.

The next phase of the underground gas storage is to be created in block I
(the large one) with subsequent buildup of it.

The joint use of the two underground gas storages (Kalnesskiy and Keraduskiy)
requires investigation of the problem of the distribution of the pulping

lava and the selection of gas between then. In this case it appears ex-
pedient to use the Karadagskiy underground gas storage as the base. and
Kaleasskiy. as the peak.

Thus. the creation of a large base underground gas storage in the depleted
bed of the V11 horizons of the Karadsg Field will cake it possible to regu-
late the nonuniforllity of the gas consumption in the Trenscaucasus and
individual areas of the Northern Caucasus. to create a reserve and iaprove
the operating reliability of the cross-connected main gas line systems.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Derezhov. S. R. SOTRUDNICRESTVO SOVETSKOGO SOYUZA S Imon V OBLAS'I'I
CAZOVOY PRONYSIILENNOSTI (Cooperation of the Soviet Union with Iran in
the Field of the Gas Industry). VNllEgazproo. abstract collection.

EKONOHIKA GAZOVOY PROHYSIILBNNOSTI (Economics of the Gas Industry). he 1.
1978.

2. Korshunov. Ye. S. "Extra-Eeonosic Cooseratmn of the Soviet Union in
the Field of the Develop-eat or the has lnoustry." Nedre. GAZOVAYA
nomsuumosf (Gas Industry). No 5. 1976.

3. Dursish'yan. G. A.; Kiyasbeyli. 1'. N.; and Orudzheva. Yu. S. ”Optilal
Solution of the Problem of Underground Gas Storage in Aurbaydxhan."
Nedl’e. GAZOVAYA PROMISIILMOST'. No lo. 1974.

comment: Vsesoyuznyy nauchno-issledovatel'skiy institut ekono-ilti.
organiutsii proizvodstva i tekhniko-ekonoeicheskoy iaforeetsii
v gaxovoy pro-yshlennosti (VNllBguprOI). 1979

1084.5
(:50: 1822

26
m orncm. use 0qu
Nk (WNICIAI. USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

UDc 553.98:622.276.057(57£.I)
DISTRIBUTION or PETROLEUM RESERVES AND OIL RECOVERY FROM THE UZEN' FIELD
Moscow GBOLOCIYA NBPTI I GAZA In RueeIen No 8,Aug 78 pp 1-5

(Artlclc by H. L. Surguchev. A. V. ChernItekIy. h. K. SIzove. VNII InetI-
tutej

[Text] More than 1800 velle have been drIIIed In the Uzen' formetIon. The
geophysical date for more than half of then have been Interpreted hy the
known procedure of [2].

More than 50 eeparate productive hede have been Ieoleted In the XIII-XVIII
horIzon eectIon. A large amount of InItIeI dete IncludIng tene of thoueends
of IndIvIduaI detereInetIone and cherecterIetIce have been accumulated for
these bode. They offer the poeerIIIty of etudyIng the etructure of the
formetIone choeen for deveIopeent vIth e hIgh degree of deteII and accuracy.
An lnformetIon retrIeveI eyetee (the Ueen' IPS) hee been deveIoped and act
up for complete uee of thIe brood meterIeI. It permIte operetIve. muItIpIe
aortIng end proceeeIng of the dete perteInIng to the Index or object under
study.

The Uzen' InformetIon retrIevaI eyetem Ie e eet of progrene for eutoeetIc
recordIng. cleaeIfIcetIon, etorege end proceeeIng of geologIcaI and geophyeI-
cal date on preductIve bode executed on the BZSN-o computer to]. In eddItIon
to the dete on the effectIve thIckneee end permeabIIIty of the bed. the
Informetlon retrIeveI eyetem catalogue conteIne dete on the coordInetee of
drIIIed veIIa. the poeItIon of the InItIeI oII-beerIng contoure for each
productlvc eenber. tectonIc dIeturbeecee. end eo on. The eyetem pereIte
grnphIceI conetructIone and ceIcuIetIona to be eade connected uIth the
spatial propagetIon of the eII-heerIng trepe In the body of the formatIon.

A epecIeI program wee ueed to deter-Inc the oII-beerIng vqumee uIthIn the
IlmIte of a gIven bed. bend or horIeon, a block or the entIre formetIoe.

An Ieportnnt characterIetIc of the eyetem Ie the poeerIIIty of IImItIng
the eclectIon of InformatIon to en erhItrery range of veluea of the perme-
anIIty. In pertIcuIer. eeIectIver ceIcuIetIng the productIve vqueee only
(or thoae bode. the permeebIIIty cherecterIetIc of uhIch correeponde to the
prevIouer gIven range of valuee.

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0"-
FOR (WPICIM. USE ONLY

Dy uaing the infer-etion retrieval ayateI it haa hecole poaaible to carry
out detailed differentiation and evaluation of the initial balance reaervee
of the oil in the XIII-XVIII horizona of the Uaen‘ foraation for 961 wells.
The priaary goal of thie evaluation waa not a review of the total oil
reaervea but only a atudy of their structure that is. the nature of the
diatribution with reepect to area. eection. and beds with different percola-
tion propertiea. For aeparate calculation of the reaervea with reapcct to
heda with different percolation characteriatic. various oil eaturation
coofficiente were uaed for the rock. The preaence of a atahle correlation
between the per-eahility and the oil eaturation [3] node it poeaihle to uae
different valuee of the latter coefficient for low. Iediun and highly per-e-
able trapa. The firat category included the heda with a per-eahility of
lcea than 50. the aecond category. bede with a perueahility of 50 to 150.
and the third. lSO ID or once. The category of low-peraeahle trapa wee
divided into two euhcategoriea. The first includea the bode with a porno-
ehility fro. 10 (the extreIe value of the paraIeter adopted when calculating
the reeervea. approved by the State CoIIieaion on Mineral Rcaourcea of the
USSR) to 20-30 ID (the lower liait under the cold water pquing conditiona
Ill); the eecond includea the productive depoeita with a perueability froI
25-30 to 50 ID. In accordance with the cleaaification of the Uzen' trapa
[3) the third category in divided into euhcategoriea correeponding to the
beda with perIeability from 150 to 600 ID or Iore.

Table l

  
    
  

Total with
reepect to XIII-
XVIII horizone

Peraeahility range
for oil-eaturated
trapa. ID

Note. Proportion of reaervea. percent: proportion fron total horizon in
the nueerator; iron the total range in the denoainator.

The reaervee were evaluated by the following acheIe. The addreea for each
analyzed eection of the for-etion waa calculated, by which the volunee of
the productive bade. haade and horizoea aa a whole were calculated on the
coaputer. Then theee voluIea were lultiplied by the lean valuee for the

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

given horizon of the porosity coefficient. the oil density and the conversion
factor and also by the oil saturation factor corresponding to the given
penseability range.

As a result. a detailed estinate was nade of the initial balance reserves
of the oil with respect to the horizons. beds. bends. and sections of the
blocks in each of the five given permeability ranges. The balance reserves
with respect to the fornation have turned out in practice to be equal to
those approved. The distribution of the initial balance reserves with

respect to permeability ranges and generalized results tron estinating are
presented in Table 1.

Host of the reserves turn out to be associated with traps with perneebilities
free 50 to 150 nD-onore than 30 percent of all of the balance reserves of

the XIII-XVIII horizons. The traps with perneability with less than 50 an
contain on the whole nore than 20 percent of the reserves of the XIII-XVIII
horizons. and sons of then. even more (in XIII 29.6. XVIII 36.8 percent).

A noticeable proportion (8.7 percent) is associated with the beds with the
permeability of less than 20 ID.

The oil reserves associated with the highly per-sable traps (150 an or more)
anount to a total of 47.7 percent of the overall initial balance reserves of
the (creation. Half of them are concentrated in the XIV horizon. Along the
highly permeable traps. as has been noted. a category has been established
with perneebility of sore than #00 so containing sore than 1/5 of the total
reserves.

The presented values of the volumes of the reserves in a formation with
different perneability indicate how wide the range of variability of the
bed properties is. how nonuniform the collectors are with respect to their
percolation characteristics and how large the proportion of the reserves in
the low-permeable beds.

This can be presented lore clearly by depicting (see Pigurs l) the oil re-
serve distribution with respect to psrneability in the form of the ((X) and
F(K) curves.

 

. ‘08- - a

Figure 1. Distribution of the balance oil reserves of the Uzen' formation
with respect to permeability. Distribution curves for the
balance reserves: l-DitfersntisI-i(K). 2-Integral--P(K).

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The weighted mean value of the permeability as a whole with respect to the
formation is 235 m0. . More than 70 percent of the oil reserves are as-
sociated with the beds and interstitial beds with permeability below this
figure. and the minimum permeability of the beds. the reserves of which
are considered industrial. is 23 times less than the weighted means.

The reserves connected with beds having permeability above 235 no amount

to less than 30 percent of the formation. and the ratio of the maximu-
perneability to the mean in this group reaches 7-10. The dispersion of the
seen value of the permeability is 1.16. which is appreciably more than for
the Ursl-Povolsh'ye fields.

The investigation of the structure of the initial balance reserves. their
distribution with respect to traps with different percolation characteristics
are of great interest when analyzing the flooding conditions of the produc-
tive formations.

in recent years. a relatively fast rise in flooding of the production
forsations has been observed in the Usen' field. It is known that the ef-
fectiveness of the flooding process is determined by aany factors. among
which the puping system, the viscosity of the oil. the discontinuity of

the oil-bearing strata, the condition of the bottosrhole pumping and operating
wells. and so on play an important role. The nonuniformity of the flooded
formations with respect to permeability also has very great significance.

in order to estimate the role of the natural nonuniforuity of the beds of
the XIII-XVIII horizons with respect to permeability and ratio of the
viscosity of oil and water in the flooding characteristic, a study wms made
of the following approximate calculation (idealized) scheme. All of the
operating sites in the formation are represented as a single multilayer
nonuniform bed. the reserves in which are distributed in scattered layers
with different average permeability corresponding to the above defined
perseability ranges. The thickness of the layers is proportional to the
fraction of the balance reserves characterized by one permeability rating
or another (see Figure 2). This schemetized bed is drained by using the
working and pulping galleries under constant conditions. Under the flooded
and oil-bearing tones. the percolation resistances remain equal. that is.
the reductions in phase permeability and viscosity of the liquid in the
flooded zone are the same. The layers will be worked in this case propor-
tionally to the seen values of their permeability. and the water will

break through into the working gallery free the sore permeable layers through
the less permeable ones.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2. ldeelieed ache-atic of flooding process. Curves l-6--Position of
the puping front at the tine of flooding the corresponding
layer.

Key: *--Pernsability

when a layer (aee_Pigure 2) with the highest per-eebility (in the range of
800 to 1.200 ab. hp. - 1059 no) is coepletely flooded, the pooition of the
water front in the other layers (indicated by a single vertical line) turne
out to be proportional to their nean perneabilitios; the pulping front line
will be described in curve 1. At the next point in tine--eonplete flooding
of the layer with an average perneability of 600 an (the range 600-800 ID)
--tho position of the water front is shifted (indicated by the double
vertical line) and the pulping front line will be described by curve 2. end
so on.

Considering the sinplifications of the percolation process discussed above.
the flooding of the production fornation at each investigated tine is defined

by the fornula
:1“
“' “mum. "°°"

where R; end h; are the nein velugs of the perneebility end the effective
thickness of the flooded layers. Kn end h“ are the lean values of the per-e-
ability end the effective thickness of the layers not yet flooded.

The coefficient of displace-ant of oil by water in the flooded foreation
is assumed to be equal for ell beds (0.62). here, however, it is considered
that the collectors with different naan perneability are encoapassed to a
different degree by the drainage. which is caused by their discontinuity.
The factor indicating the degree to which the beds are encoapassed by the
drainage in essuned to be equal to the following values for the given
perneabilities: for 10-20 n0. 0.5; 20-50 “0.6: 50-150 an. 0.7 and above
150 In. 0.9. This corresponds to the actual state of nonuniforlity of the
horizons in the (creation and encolpaasing of then by the drainage. fhe
low-perneability beds are characterized by greater discontinuity and are
less encoepassed with respect to thicknees in the walls not exceeding
0.5.

beginning with these conditions. the following relations were obtained between

the flooding and the current relative oil extraction calculated in percentages
of the final planned extraction (see Table 2).

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. "SE ONLY

The ratio between the indexes of the different stages of develop-ent indicates
that in the Usen' field very high nonunifornity with respect to psrneabiiity
of the initial balance oil reserves in the vorhing sites of the XIII-XVIII
horizons predeternines the relatively high flooding rate of the production
fornation. The characteristics obtained under the conditions of the idealited
aodei are close to the actual characteristics.

 

 

Table 2

Relative oil extraction. 1 Production flooding. 1

38.3

31? m

00.! 06.9

70.0 9| .8

”J 97.6

IN 91.4

 

in addition. the actual conditions of the working of the fornation are
characterized by the presence of n nuaber of factora having a negative in-
fluence on the flooding effectiveness. increasing the nonuniforlity of the
section and leading to an increased rate of flooding of the extracted pro-
duction.

One such factor obviously is the precipitation of paraffin (at least in the
botton-hole zones of the beds) when the thernodyneaic conditions change.
This has a negative effect on the percolation firat of all in the low-
perneable sections of the beds and. as a consequence. partial or conplote
exclusion of then fron the drainage procesa.

if ve assume that the layers representing the productive beds vith a per-u-
ebility to 50 ID are conpletely isolated fron the drainage. then the dynamics
of the calculated indexes of flooding of the extracted production and re-
lative oil extraction will be characterized as follovs (see Table 3).

A conparison of these indexes of the flooding process with analogous ones
under ideal conditions without considering the precipitation of paraffin
indicates that the latter leads to plugging of the pores in the lov-perneable
traps and. as a result. to reduced oil extraction with greater flooding of
the production.

 

Table 3
Relative oil extraction. 1 Flooding of the production. 1
393
61.2
9|.l
90.0
IN

 

 

32
'0‘ O'IICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the first stages of developeent. this difference has little effect. for
the lowbpereenble beds are worked at a slow rate. and the proportion of
their exploitation in the extracted production is insignificant. Later.
the divergence becoaee significant and leads to a much lower final oil
extraction.

if all of the traps with a permeability of leee than 50 on ere exludcd from
the drained part of the formations as a result of complications of the
dcvelopaent conditions (which is entirely possible). it is difficult to
achieve the planned final oil extraction free the beds with ordinary flooding.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Ryobinina. 2. K.; Voinov. V. V.: Safronov. s. V.. et al. "Effect of the
Geological Characteristics of a Stratal Section and the Low Permeability
Liait on the Variations of the Factor Indicating the Degree to which
the Deposits Are Encoupaaaed by the Displacement Process." 88. NAUch.
TRDDOV VNII. SBR. ISSLSDOVANIYA V ODL. NEPTEPROHYSL. GBOL. (Collection
of Scientific workers of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute.
Research Series in the Area of Oil Field Geology). No 50. 1976. pp l29~
l37.

2. Dolina. L. P. and Ivanchuk. L. P. "Problea of Studying the Permeability
of the XIII-XVIII Productive horizons of the Uzen' Poraation According
to the Field Geophysical Data." NEPTEBAZ. GEOL. l GBOPIZ. (Oil and Gas
Geology and Geophysics). no 1969. pp 37-41.

3. "Characteristics of the Geological Structure of the Uten' Oil Field."
TEDDY VNII (Horus of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute).
Moscow. No 63. 1977.

a. Vedenyepin, Ye. 8.; Polyanskiy. A. K.; Cherevychkin. Yu. K.; and
Chernitakiy. A. V. ”Application of Information Retrieval Systels to
Study the Productive Dads of the Uzen' Formation." NEFTEGAZ. GEOL. l
GEOPlz.. No l. 1978. pp 61-65.

COPYRlGuT: ledatel'stvo "Nedra". "Geologiya nefti i gaze". 1978

10845
680:1822 END

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY