FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10036
7 October 1931

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(FOUO 12/81)

Selections on CSSR Nuclear Power Construction. Equipment

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language

sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPIRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10036

7 October 1981

HORLDHIDE REPORT
NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(P000 12/81)

SELECTIONS ON CSSR NUCLEAR POWER CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT

CONTENTS

Significance of V-l Nuclear Power Station Described
(Lﬂdislav Blank; JAmm ENERGIE, Apr 81).sooooooooooooooooooooaooone:

V-l Power Station Planning Design Process macribed
(Jiri “Club; JADERNA mzmlz' Apr 81).IIOI0..OCOCOOOOOIOQ'OOOOOOIDOOODU

Construction work on V—l Power Station Described
(Jan Make; JADEMA ENERGIE, Apt 81)...coo-coo.sou-oooooooooonoooooaoo-

Installation of Equipment at V-l Power Plant Described
(Jiri Prochazka, et al.; JADERNA ENERG'IE, Apr 81)......................

Work of Investor Organization on V—l Station Inscribed
(Stanislav Smetlak, Martin Svirko; JADERNA ENERGIB, Apr 81)............

Final Stage of (bustruction Work on V-l Power Station Described
(Jozef Keher; JADERNA BNERGIE, Apr 81).................................

Quality Control Procedures for V-l Equipment Described
(Miroslav Herman; JADERNA ENERGIB, Apr 81).............................

Startup of V-] Power Station Described
(Viliam 21m. et a1.; JADERNA WERGIB, Apr 81)........................

Results of Physical, Power Production Startup of V-l lhits l md 2
Described
(Stefan Kamary, et a1.; JADERNA ENERGIB, Apr 81)......................

V-l Operating Results Described
("113“ K0261, et 81.; JADRmA ENERGIE' Apr 81).ooaooooooooooooooooooon.

- a - [III - WW - 141 F000]

22

32

(02

50

57

71

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Activities of State Nuclear Safety Overs 13h: office Inscribed
(Jlri Betanek; JAIEIINA ENERGIE, AD: 81)....cenoona000c.coo-eeccooooo

Work of Slovak Labor Safety Office in V-1 Project Described
(Augmtln Simoncic; JAlERNA BIBRGIB, Apr 81)........................

Sigma Modrmy Engages in Nuclear Power Plant Bquipmnt Mufacture
(“mponmu NOW, 12 J“! 81)....OOOOOOODOIIOO00.00.0000...0......

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIGNIFICANCE 01’ V-1 NUCLEAR POWER STATION DESCRIBED
Prague JADERNA ENERCIE in Czech No 4, Apr 81 p 121

[Article by Ladislav Blazek, CSSR Deputy Ministry of Fuels and Power: "The V-l
Nuclear Power Station: The First Component of the Nuclear Power Complex")

[Text] The program for providing fuels and energy is of fundamental importance for
the Czechoslovak national economy and for raising the standard of living in the
CSSR. Thanks to the concern of the Czechoslovak Comunist Party and to guidance
by the state, in the past 30 years the output of black coal has increased by 70
percent and that of brown coal by lo times, production of electrical energy has in-
creased by 9 times and the use of lighting gas has increased from less than 0.1.
billion cubic meters a year in 191.8 to a current figure of 3.9 billion cubic meters
a year, in addition to 9.1 billion cubic meters of natural gas.

Nonetheless, Czechloslovakia too must over come the consequences of the world energy
crisis. This primarily involves slowing the inflation of oil prices and faster re-
placement of liquid fuels, even though Czechoslovakia has not changed over to liquid
fuel on so large a scale as in the majority of industrially developed countries. In
1980, liquid fuels accounted for 25.4 percent and solid fuels for 61 percent of can-
sumption.

But the gap between increasing fuel and energy consumption and the possibilities for
obtaining resources has widened so much that we are being forced to take systematic
measures to redress the balance, not only in energy production and the extraction
and import of fuels, but in consumption as well.

As regards resources, i.e. development of the fuel and energy base, the program is
based on close coordination, economic cooperation and integration with the Soviet
Union and on utilization of the CEHA countries' energy resources. but with concurrent
maximum possible development of our own resources. Immense projects for through
pipelines to carry natural gas from the remote Siberian regions of the USSR are
being carried out and in addition a large-scale program for construction of a
nuclear power complex in Czechoslovakia is being implemented.

The nuclear power complex in Czechoslovakia is based on scientific plans, physical
designs, production technology designs and experience obtained in the Soviet Union.
The agreement signed on 30 April 1970 between the Soviet Union and Czechoslovak

governments regarding cooperation in the construction of two nuclear power stations

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'Sli ONLY

using pressurized water-cooled reactors of the VVER-ého type enabled Czechoslovakia

to rapidly construct nuclear plants which were reliable and had been tested in
operation.

The agreement was also based Jn the supply capabilities of the Czechoslovak power
equipment industry: other than the reactor and the directly associated reactor
control system, Czechoslovak equipment was to be used. The technical design for the

power station was worked out jointly by Soviet and Czechoslovak designers to combine
Soviet and Czechoslovak equipment.

Construction began in 1974 and the first unit was started up on 17 December 1978
following extensive physical trials and tests. Test operation was begun on 31 March
1979. The second unit was phased in for the first time on 26 March 1980 and put
into trial operation on 26 Hay 1980.

Trial operation of the power station demonstrated that the reactor, from the Izhorskiy
Zavod enterprise in Leningrad, and the Skoda turbogenerators, worked reliably, safely
and effectively.

During 1979 and 1980 the power plant's performance was gradually improved and the
design characteristics were gradually achieved and surpassed. The limiting factor
in this process was problems with the coolant water circuit and its quality.

The V-l nuclear power station has had an important effect on the electrical energy
balance. Its reliable, constant output and small amount of downtime have made it
a first-rate, basic energy source. In 1980 it produced 4.523 billion kilowatt-
hours of electrical energy.

This confirms the validity of the conclusion that nuclear power stations should pro-
vide for all increases in energy consumption starting in 1983, since there is no
possibility for increasing the output of coal-fired stations before 1988. Even
though in the past it was always risky to base the expansion of the power industry
on a single type of power production. the preconditions for focusing on nuclear
power plants of the Voronezh type are so positive that the idea can be considered
not only progressive but reliable as well.

By 1986 a total of six additional units are to be built at Jaslovske Bohunice and
Dukovany, and according to estimates from many quarters, by 1990 nuclear power
stations will reach a total output of 7,280 MW. This would mean that nuclear power
stations were supplying a third of electrical power consumption.

However, the program for construction of a nuclear power complex is not only of
fundamental importance for energy, but in addition is a stimulus for a number of
production sectors, for technical development and for management of the economy.

By its nature, its necessitates mastery of new production processes and new quality
control and testing procedures. The considerable demand for concentration of capa-
cities will pose new tasks in power plant construction.

All of these factors will also require higher quality personnel with not only
thorough knowledge of their specialties, but with a real sense for the utilization
of new findings from a wide range of sciences. In addition they must be people with
a refined humanity and a lofty consciousness, who are devoted to socialism.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONU

Thus the program for construction of a nuclear power complex has not only an
immense economic significance, but social and political significance as well.

As indicated by the experience with construction of the V-l nuclear power station,
and now with additional nuclear power stations, the Czechoslovak industrial base
has created the material, production, technical, organizational and manpower con-
ditions for successful accomplishment of the program, even while many rough spots
must be traversed.

Experience indicates that mastery of the program will depend primarily on utilization
of the principles of design management. characterized by the use of network analysis
and the simulation and modeling approaches, will make it possible to plan the activity
of all program participants in advance in such a way that the individual stages in
the activity will follow one another smoothly or will interlock with each other.
Management of this type is the best expression of a systematically organized pro-
grammatic design.

It is self-evident that both the set of economic instruments and the methods of
direct management must be correspondingly improved as they apply to the collectives.

This entails considerably strengthening the skills, authority and responsibility of
the direct participants in the construction work and also equipping them in such a
way that management is made considerably more flexible. This means that a strong
"construction project leadership" must be created for every construction project and
provided with extensive sources of information not only on the course of construc-
tion itself but also on the status of production in the subcontractor production
enterprises, so that they can make a timely choice of optimal day-to-day approaches.
Coordination of all participants in the construction work must be developed at a
high level. Accordingly. "operational management groups" must be organized within
the "construction project leadership" and "coordination groups" must be created at
critical facilities. This will insure interdisciplinary accomplishment of the
critical tasks in the construction work.

Experience with the construction of the V-l power plant has demonstrated the critical
importance of Soviet specialists' work in the construction of Czechoslovak nuclear
power stations. Their assistance and their technical and organizational experience
are major facotrs in solving complex problems. Their inclusion in international
brigades creates the conditions for mastering especially complex tasks in record
time.

Thus. for all construction participants from the designer to the operator, from the
smallest worker collectives to the top management. the V-l power station has become
a school of advanced experience which will be used in the further construction and
operation of nuclear power plants.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL n. p., 1981

8680
cso: 5100/3019

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V-l POWER STATION PLANNING DESIGN PROCESS DESCRIBED
Prague JADERNA ENERGIE in Czech No 6, Apr 81 pp 122-126

[Article by Jiri Holub, Energoprojekt Praha: "The Planning and Technical Design of
the V-l Power Station"!

[Text] This article provides information on the main questions
associated with provision of planning documentation for the V-l
nuclear power station in Jaslovske Bohunice, which was built
in Czechoslovakia with the cooperation with Soviet specialists.
It also describes the technical design of this power station.

Work associated with a reevaluation of the program for construction of nuclear

power stations was concluded in Czechoslovakia at the end of 1969. It was decided
that in the upcoming period nuclear power stations based on the VVER type of reactor
with individual reactor capacities of 440 Hue, which had been developed and built

in the Soviet Union and thereafter successfully put into operation as Units 3 and

6 of the Novovoronezh Nuclear Power Station, would be built in Czechoslovakia.

Preparations for construction of nuclear power stations of this type were begun in
Czechoslovakia in 1969 on the basis of technical documentation provided to the
Czechoslovak side following preliminary agreements. Talks with the Soviet Union
on forms of cooperation in working out the planning documentation, deliveries of
process equipment, and other activities by the Soviet organizations which were
necessary for the construction and startup of these nuclear power stations, were
under way concurrently. Basic discussions between the planning organizations of
both sides concerning Czechoslovak provision of part of the process equipment were
also held in 1969. In these discussions, the Czechoslovak side undertook to pro—
vide a substantial share of the deliveries. particularly for the secondary section
of the power station.

The principles of cooperation in the construction of the first two nuclear power
stations of this type in Czechoslovakia were laid down in an agreement between the
CSSR and USSR Governments, which was signed in April 1970. Subsequently, CSSR

State Decree No 195 was issued on 27 August 1970, specifying the basic conditions
for the construction of the first of these nuclear power stations. In particular

it designed the investor organization. the functions of Energoprojekt [power station
planning organization]. the supplier system including two general contractors, and
the deadlines for commissioning of the individual units.

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These documents made it possible to proceed to design preparation for the first
commercial Czechoslovak nuclear power station, which was to have a total capacity
of 880 MNe (two units. each with one V-230 reactor), and which received the name
of "V-l Nuclear Power Station, Jaslovske Bohunice," henceforth abbreviated JE V-l.

The preplanning documentation was developed before issuance of the documents men-
tioned above, and a construction site was chosen in cooperation with Soviet special-
ists. Finalization of the preplanning documentation and of the work associated with
provision of the design documentation began after issuance of State Decree No 195/70;
work in these areas had begun before the approval of the Planning Assignment. In
addition, we should note that the enactment of this state decree was not based on
the usual norms for capital construction; accordingly it signaled the adoption of a
number of extraordinary approaches, which had to be agreed upon among the construc-
tion participants throughout the construction process.

In giving an overall evaluation of the planning work for the JE V-l, we must stress
the decisive role of the Soviet Union and its specialists. The Soviet Union is the
originator of the technical concept for this nuclear power station, which includes
all the results of demanding, prolonged scientific, research, design, production
and planning work and the practical experience obtained by Soviet specialists in
the construction of their own nuclear devices and nuclear power equipment.

In working out the planning documentation, Energoprojekt cooperated closely with

the Soviet design organization Teploelektroprojekt, and particularly with LOTEP, its
division in Leningrad. As part of this cooperation, the preplanning documentation,
including selection of a construction site. was worked out, as was the planning
documentation itself; for the latter, LOTEP provided the technical plan and the
construction and equipment installation performance plans for the critical power
station facilities. In addition, Soviet specialists provided the Czechoslovak
designers with running technical consultations during the development of the plan
and the performance of the construction.

Provision of the planning documentation, the provision of consultations and other
activities associated with the planning work were contracted from the Soviet side
by Energoprojekt through the Foreign Trade Organization Skodaexport Praha (SEX).

The technical and economic part of the planning assignment for the JB V-l was
developed by Energoprojekt and handed over in October 1970 to the investor organ-
ization, which then assigned all of the planning work. The assignment of planning
work developed in this manner was approved by FMPE [Federal Ministry of Fuels and
Energy] on 3 December 1971 after discussions with the Soviet side.

Planning Documentation for the First Stage

This documentation was developed in cooperation with the Soviet side on the basis
of the technical plan provided by the Soviet Union, which also included the
assignments for the work to be carried out by the Czechoslovak side, the agreed-
upon site layout, and coordination of all installations and equipment in the
enclosed part of the power station site.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Encrgoprojekt issued the "Overall Plan" (SPR), which was worked out in accordance
with FMTIR [Federal Ministry for Technical and Investment Development] Notice No
107/66Sh. except for the technical sections, which were directly documented by the
Soviet side in its technical plan and which had been included in this Overall Plan
as part of the Soviet technical plan.

With certain excepticns, the technical plan supplied by the Soviet Union was develop-
ed in accordance with Soviet regulations and technical standards and on the basis of
technical data provided by Czechoslovakia for the secondary section. This technical
plan was handed over to Czechoslovakia in March-May 1972 and approved by a joint
Czechoslovak-Soviet evaluation board in June 1972.

The plan for.the first stage of the project, which was included in the Overall Plan

(contents as described above), was given to the investor organization in September
1972.

As a result of the new division of power plant equipment supply between the Soviet
and Czechoslovak side and certain changes in the data for the Czechoslovak equip-
ment, part of this SPR documentation was revised in September 1973. In addition,

in 1973 the construction organization plan (Pov) was reworked, the Overall Plan was
refined, and certain parts of the Soviet technical plan were revised in accordance
with a Czechoslovak-Soviet evaluation of the technical plan and a statement of
additional requirements by the investor organization. The SPR documentation with
these changes was approved as a whole by the investor organization in February 1974.
An annex to this duly approved SPR, detailing the division of the process equipment
into operating sets, and including an annex to the POV, was developed in May 1974.

The construction organization plan to be included in the SPR was the subject of
continuous discussions which began in 1972; final negotiations, including those on
the network chart, took place in July 1974.

Performance Plans

Energoprojekt developed a full range of construction performance plans, and also
performance plans for the equipping of the primary section of the power station, on
the basis of agreed-upon supplier-purchaser relationships.

The construction performance plans were developed by Energoprojekt itself pursuant
to a January 1976 agreement between its management and FMPE which mapped out an
extraordinary approach to the provision of planning documentation for the turbine
room and "racks" l? of electrical equipment]. The construction performance plan
for the primary section was supplied for Energoprojekt by LOTBP, and the general
designer added to them the final details needed by the Czechoslovak general con-
tractor for construction work (603). The construction performance plans for the
other facilities were developed by Energoprojekt in the usual way.

The equipment installation performance plans for the secondary section were worked
out by the general contractor for equipment (DGt) and his final suppliers, while
the performance plans for the equipping of the primary section were provided by

the general designer. Staff members of Electroprojekt and the Czechoslovak process
equipment suppliers took part in the development of the performance plans for the
primary section throughout their development in the Soviet Union.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Since the Soviet planning documentation was based on Soviet technical standards,
it was necessary to secure the necessary exceptions to the Czechoslovak state
standards. This work was carried out for the investor by Energoprojekt and the
general contractor for equipment.

Designer Oversight

The general designer performed designer oversight through the entire construction
period through a standing group located on the site of the V-l station, as well as
exercising expanded designer oversight through a separate organization which
Energoprojekt established for this purpose in Trnava in 1974. As part of contin—
uous designer oversight, Soviet specialists from LOTEP conducted designer oversight
for the general designer starting in 1915. The number of specialists was deter—
mined according to the scale of work at the site and reached its maximum in the
last year of construction, when about 25 persons were engaged.

Technical Design

The V-l nuclear power station is located in an area which was intended for con-
tinued construction of facilities of the A-l type. for which the site was largely
prepared in advance. This choice of site was of great importance, making it
possible to start work quickly, since the necessary surveys were available, all of
the site's connections to the external mains could be used, and a tested construc-
tion organization and investor collective which had built the A-l nuclear power
station were present on the site. In deciding on the layout it was necessary to
work from the existing condition of the site, and accordingly it was not possible
to meet optimal requirements. The determination of the layout for this location
envisioned the construction of the V-l station as the final project on the site,
and no further construction of new power stations on the site was provided for at
the time.

The conceptual design of the V-l follows the fundamental principles of design of
nuclear power stations with twin VVER-AAO units.

The main power production unit, containing two reactor units, each with an in-
stalled power of 440 Mwe, is a functionally and physically closed entity in terms
of the process of electrical energy production and the handling of fresh and spent
fuel, nuclear and fire safety, handling of radioactive wastes, entry into, exit
from and passage through controlled zones, and control room design. The design
of the operations building and its sewage loop, the installations for auxiliary
radioactive operations, the diesel generation station, the compressor and refriger-
ation station. the facilities for chemical treatment of water and for circulation
cooling, the central pumpings station, the equipment for circulation and technical
cooling of water, the cooling tower, and the central workshop, warehouses and the
like, are all related to the design of the main power production unit.

Process Layout

The process layout is a two-circuit design. The primary circuit produces heat
energy and transports it to the steam generators. The chain reaction in the nuclear
fuel (slightly enriched uranium oxide) liberates heat energy in the reactor core
(heterogeneous, using thermal neutrons). This energy is carried away from the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SF. ONLY

reactor by the coolant (chemically treated water), which is at a pressure of 12.25
M?: and a temperature of 269° C at entry into the reactor, and which also serves
as a moderator. The the“'al energy is removed from the reactor by six circulation
loops consisting of JsSOO circulation piping with gate valves at the entrances and
exits to the raactor, the main circulating pump and the steam generator.

The secondary circuit produces electrical energy, using steam generated from the
coolant circulating in the steam generators. Saturated steam from the steam gener-
ators is fed at a temperature of 258° C and a pressure of 4.6 MPa to the steam
turbines (2 x 220 MHe per unit), which are provided with a moisture separator and
steam reheater at the 0.49 MPa pressure divider (before entry to the lowbpressure
parts of the turbine). The turbine condensers are transverse two-pressure models
and are cooled by circulation through natural-draft cooling towers. The condensate
is returned to the coolant reservoir by a three-stage low-pressure regeneration
system and a deaerator. The feedwater station feeds the steam generators through

a two—stage high-pressure regeneration system.

The design of both circuits assures tightness so that the working medium in the
seconda., circuit remains nonradioactive.

Electrical Design

The basic circuitry of the V-l power station is entirely modular. The electrical
output of two 220-MH alternators in each reactor unit is fed from the unit's trans—
formers via a common 220-ky cable to the higher-level substation at Krizovany.

The main alternators are of ordinary design with combined water-hydrogen cooling,
but with special requirements regarding voltage regulation during combined steam
and electromechanical runout. To assure greater reliability of the power supply
to the main circulating pumps during various electrical disruptions in the station
and the grid. generator circuit breakers were eliminated from the design of the
basic electrical system.

The circuit for in-station power supply was designed to meet heightened require-
ments for reliability of the power supplies for in-plant propulsion in nuclear
power stations; these power supplies are divided into three groups in terms of
their importance for safety of the unit.

The first group consists of equipment which can suffer only brief interruptions of
power (about 1 second). This includes in particular the primary circuit main cir-
culating pumps, the reactor control and protective system. the instruments used to
measure reactor parameters, the drive motors for the turbogenerator oil pumps and
the like.

To assure sufficient heat removal from the reactor core, the main circulating pumps
must assure the necessary coolant circulation in the primary circuit, even in case
of an emergency shutdown of the reactor. for at least 100 seconds until gravity
circulation begins. Because of the low inertia of the main circulating pump which
results from its glandless design, electric power to the pump must be assured for
the time period mentioned even in case of a shutdown of the reactor accompanied

by complete degradation of the power system.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition, in order to assure reliable and stable operation of the unit, the
simultaneous breakdown of more than two of the main circulating pumps must be
ruled out in any breakdown of the station or the power system.

ﬂue second group consists of loads allowing power interruptions for a maximum of
3 minutes.

The third group consists of loads without particular requirements for power supply
reliability.

In accordance with this categorization, the s0urces and power supply systems for
in-plant power consumption are chosen as follows.

The working sources for in-plant power consumption are 25-MVA triple-wound regulat-
ing transformers fed from the output of the main alternators.

In view of the specific requirements for power supply to the main circulating
pumps, 6-H" auxiliary alternators for in-plant consumption are mounted on the shaft
of each 220—MU alternator as additional working power sources.

The reserve power supply for in-house consumption, which also provides the energy
required for warming up the power station, consists of llO-kV and 220-kV systems
with two bO-MVA three-phase triple-wound regulating transformers.

In case of an emergency cooldown of the reactor, the plant's emergency power supply
uses the kinetic energy of the turbine system as it runs down and in addition uses
six diesel generators with a capacity of 1,600 h“ each. Small.AC and DC loads in
group 1 are fed by bidirectional motor generators or storage batteries.

The added care occasioned by nuclear safety concerns also extends to the cable runs;
particular care has been taken to design them so as to minimize the consequences of

fire.

The construction of the cable ways and the selection of cable routes assures that

the equipment and systems which are most critical for operation will remain oper-

ational even if a fire occurs in the cable ways. A fire protection system for the
cable runs allows extremely rapid extinguishing of fires.

Structural Design Principles

The installations of the V-l power station which contain the process equipment and
the systems of the primary section are of special design. These installations differ
fundamentally in layout and design from those in power construction projects built

previously.

The strucrures housing the primary section must be considered an inseparable com—
ponent of the production equipment, subordinated to the aims of the power production
precess, which must proceed in accordance with nuclear safety requirements. The
layout and design of these installations is principally governed by the requirement
to protect the station's operators and surroundings from the harmful effects of its
operation. This requirement resulted in the division of these installations into a

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.\

number of independent compartments or "boxes," which are separated from one another
by structural elements, walls and ceilings. The mass of the structural members gives
protection from radiation effects, and they are provided with surfacing which assures
that they are watertight and resistant to decontamination solutions and that the
areas which they enclose are tightly sealed.

TheSe components are made of special monolithic reinforced concrete and their sur-
faces are covered with sheet steel (painted carbon steel or stainless steel) or with
special paint systems.

The accesses to these compartments (boxes) consist of cast iron doors for the operat-
ing personnel and built-in ports for piping and cables. This equipment may not
deviate from the technical specifications applicable to compartments of this type.

Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection Principles

The design for the V-l power plant was developed in accordance with the health
regulations for the planning of nuclear power plants. The equipment which could be
a source of radioactive contamination is designed in accordance with the relevant
standards regarding its design. production and quality control. Extraordinary
emergency conditions arising from the worst possible failure situations must not
subject employees or the public to radiation doses exceeding the permissible emer-
gency levels.

The safety of the V—l's power plant systems is based on the assumption that there
can be no failure of the JsSOO piping, and accordingly the plans assume that the
entire piping loop will be subjected to extremely strict quality control, regarding
both materials and work, during its production and installation. All other smaller-
diameter piping in this loop is connected to the main piping by means of nozzles
which limit the outflow of coolant from the primary circuit, with an equivalent
diameter of JleO. In these emergency situations the reactor is cooled by a boric
acid solution which is added to the system by low—pressure pumps from an BOO-cubic—
meter tank. The primary circuit compartments are cooled in such cases by a spray
system which is also supplied from this tank. The equipment and systems used to
produce energy from the nuclear fuel are located in separate compartments ("boxes"),
which are sealed off and are inaccessible to operating personnel during operation.
During normal operation, a slight underpressure (15 to 20 mm of water) relative to
the other areas is maintained in these compartments to assure that any radioactive
leaks will not enter personnel areas or areas to which operating personnel have
access during operation.

Radioactive leaks are exhausted from the sealed compartments by independent ven-
tilating systems, pass through aerosol and iodine filters and are discharged into
the ventilation stack. In case of an emergency associated with some other piping
failure, the temperature and pressure in the sealed compartments will begin to rise.
if the pressure reaches 30 mm H20, fast—acting valves close off the Ventilation
system and the compartments are completely sealed off from the surroundings. If
the pressure rises to 0.11 HPa, the sprinkler system is automatically turned on.
The sealed compartments are protected against unacceptable rises in pressure by
large-diameter valves which release an air-steam mixture into the atmosphere.

The main technical characteristics and parameters of the JE V—l power station
(according to the planning design) are as follows:

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Reactor--hcterogcneous, moderated and cooled by treated water. enriched uranium
fuel (WER 1.100 type 230)

Number of reactors in power station 2

Thermal output of reactor 1,375 HHt

Installed electrical capacity of unit 460 NH (2 x 220 Hue)
Uranium charge in reactor ‘2 tons

Cladding material zirconium alloy
Number of fuel assemblies in core 359

Number of control assemblies 37

Average uranium enrichment in

stationary mode of operation 3.5 percent 0-235
Expected burnup 28,500 HH-days per ton
Coolant temperature at reactor inlet
and outlet 269°I300° C
Coolant circulation through reactor 39,000 m3/hr
Coolant pressure 12.25 HPa (at reactor inlet)

2. Circulating pump-vertic1a, glandless. centrifugal
Number of pumps per unit 6
Capacity 6,500 m3/hr

3. Steam generators--single-body, horizontal. cylindrical

Number of steam generators per unit 6

Steam generator output 12k.7 ks/sec (550 tons/hr)
Steam temperature 258.9° C

Steam pressure b.60 MPa (49 kg/cmz)

a. Turbogcnerators--220 NH steam condensation turbines using saturated steam at
1.1. kg/cm2 and 256° c, triple-bodied

Number of turbogenerators per unit 2

Installed electrical capacity 220 MW

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Power factor 0.85 0.85
Nominal voltage 15.75 kV
Alternator for in-plant power supply 6 H"; 6.3 kV (on cannon shaft)

Electrical capacity of power station
at generator terminals 835.6 M" (2 x 209.0; 2 x 208.7)

In-plant power consumption at rated
power station output 64 M" (07.66 percent)

Net efficiency of power station at
rated output 28.05 percent

Annual production of electricity
at turbogenerator terminals (gross
assuming 6,500 hours/year use of '
thermal output of the reactor 5.430 Tub/year

Annual consumption of additional
nuclear fuel 28.2 tons uranium per year

Production cost per unit of delivered
electrical energy over entire year Kcs 158.2 per Huh

Total number of employees 864

Heat given off to surroundings at

rated capacity 1,978.6 HR
Quantity of heat given off to surroundings

per year 46,372 TJ/year
Built-up area of enclosed site 48 ha

The construction of the V-l power station was extremely demanding and involved a
number of difficulties. These resulted primarily from the large scale and com-
plexity of the undertaking. but were complicated, both during development of the
planning documentation and during the construction itself, by the stepped-up

nuclear safety requirements. A negative role was also played by other circumstances.
particularly by uncertainty in purchaser-supplier relationships between the partici-
pants in the construction work.

These circumstances affected the quality and coordination of the planning documen-
tation, its completeness and the times at which it was provided. and consequently

resulted in a large number of additions to the construction and equipment parts of
the planning documentation which were issued throughout the period of construction.

The difficulties occasioned by this situation had to be solved by increased flexi-
bility and by the use of a number of extraordinary measures.

12
W'
FOR OFHCIAL usr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 1. Diagram of unit

    

”7/?
3%» n

   
  

 

 

HIIHIH

     

Key:

1. Reactor 12. Main generator

2. Steam generator 13. Condenser

3. Main circulating pump 14. Low pressure regenerative heater

4. Primary circuit steam compensator 15. Condensate coolers for low temperature
5. Regenerative heat exchanger regenerative heaters

6. Final cooler 16. VTO (high pressure heaters)

7. Filter 17. Makeup water supply with deaerator

8. Steam turbine high pressure section 18. Feedwater pump
9. Steam turbine low pressure section 19. Condensate pump

10. Moisture separator and steam heater 20. Steam generator drainage expander
11. Moisture separator

To insure the performance of this work and to solve problems arising on the project
as a result of running revisions of construction and installation work plans, a

group of designers was set up at the construction site, led by the general designer's
chief design engineer.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Represented on the group were all the main participants who were working out the
planning documentation: Energoprnjekt, Skoda, Elektromontazny zavody [Electrical
installation Plants], Zavody prumyslove automatizace [Industrial Automation Plants],
Sigma. Kralovopolska strojirna [Kralove Pole Machine Works], Termostav. Potrubi,
Janka. Hydrostav and others. The composition varied with the needs of the prnjurt.
The investor and operator organizations took part in the work of the group, and its
activities were monitored by the Management and Startup Group, the Operations Staff,
and ultimately by the Interdepartmental Startup Committee.

Particularly stringent demands were imposed on coordination between the Soviet and
Czechoslovak planners, and for this purpose the Soviet side provided about 100
consultations.

In conclusion we may state that the V-1 nuclear power station was succassfully
started up in l978-1980 and that its subsequent operation has given the best pos-
sible results, owing particularly to cooperation with the Soviet specialists during
construction and into the first stage of its operation.

Statf members of the general designer organization and all other participants in
the construction project gained priceless experience during this cooperation in the
building of the V-l power station, which will be used in the construction of sub-
sequent power stations of the same type.

   

will.

‘mmmwm
-.-—=l

Fig. 2. Layout of Site at Jaslovske Bohunice
COPYRIGHT: SNTL n. p., 1981

8480
C50: 5100/3019

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSTRUCTION "ORR 0N V-l POWER STATION DESCRIBED
Prague JADERNA BNERGIE in Slovak No 4, Apr 81 pp 126-129

[Article by Jan Lasko, Hydrostav National Enterprise, Bratislava: "Performance of
the Construction Work for the V-l Power Station"]

[Text] The orientation of the Czechoslovak power industry toward nuclear power
stations, which under our conditions are the only promising source of electrical
energy, means a major change in the production program for the construction indus-
try.

The construction of nuclear power stations represents a major divergence from
traditional industrial construction, especially in the installations whose operation
involves radioactivity, where the nature of certain materials and construction
members is more reminiscent of the machine-building sector as regards both require-
ments for precision fabrication and problems of installation.

These important changeovers to materials and structural members (and the require-
ments to which they are subject) which are unfamiliar in the construction industry,
involve certain complexities and give rise to a number of problems in mastering pro-
duction processes. The main units of unconventional design are modules made of
steel, preassembled beam packages, metal facings for walls, ceilings and floors,
passages through walls, and various built-in components which must be installed with
high precision. They also include large quantities and a wide variety of metal
materials, carbon steel and austenitic steel sheet, and special heavy concretes and
fillers.

Large numbers of passages and anchoring components built into the walls are subject
to installation precision requirements which sometimes surpass the production
tolerances of the metals from which they are made, so that they must be machined.

The investment and planning preparation had a major effect on the process of con-
structing the V-l power plant. The participation of two design organizations,
LOTEP in Leningrad and Energoprojekt in Prague, using different forms and different
practices regarding the level of detail in technical development of the planning
documentation, and using different standards and regulations, not only led to
revision of the planning documentation for Czechoslovak practice, but also slowed
down delivery of performance plans.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Performance of the construction work was also negatively affected by the breaking
down of performance plans for facilities in the main power production unit and the
underground piping system into an excessive number of steps, and by additions,
changes and conflicts in the planning documentation. These circumstances caused
the construction contractor additional toil in both production preparation and the
work itself, and during construction it led to increased labor and financial expen-
ditures for the provision of capacities which in any case were insufficient.

The investment and planning preparation involved a large number of exceptions from
regulations and notices. which on the one hand enabled the investor to speed up
preparation. but on the other caused the supplier organizations special difficulties
stemming from extremely short lead times in the production preparation stage. These
circumstances forced the construction contractor to engage in improvisations and had
a negative effect on organizational economics. Based on specific economic results,
the construction of the V-l power plant with top social priority proves to have been
disadvantageous to the enterprise.

Construction of the V-l power station began with the excavation of the main power
production unit on 25 April 1973 in a location where basic capacities were already
available and which already had certain basic facilities in place from during pre-
vious construction work. Construction began simultaneously on the other capital
installations and on the construction site facilities.

By the end of 1980, the Kcs 974.1 million which had been budgeted for construction
work on the V-l power station had increased by 57.6 percent to Kcs 1,535.1 million.

This increase in budgeted expenditures was caused primarily by requests for addi—
tional work and deliveries for both the permanent facilities and the construction
site facilities.

About 140 capital installations and about 600 construction site facilities and

HCZS [expansion unknown] were built on the construction site

of the V-l power station. In view of the unique nature of the construction, the
extraordinary scope and demandingness of the design and the unusual precision re-
quired in construction, the construction site facilities were built by the indepen-
dent accounting method.

Because of the scope, technical demands and the necessity for carrying out assoc-
iated construction and installation work concurrently, the construction of nuclear
power stations requires a high concentration of construction capacities and also
demands a new approach and attitude on the part of all supplier organizations taking
part in the construction work.

Owing primarily to a shortage of capacities, construction work was carried out on

a single-shift basis, using extended shifts during favorable conditions in the
summer months. At certain times, when the equipping of the station demanded it,

or when it was necessary to meet certain construction completion deadlines, work
went on continuously, and even on days off when necessary. The maximum complement
of 2,675 workers was attained in June. 1977. This figure included employees of HDS
[expansion unknown] subcontractors, foreign workers, and employees

of Hydrostav National Enterprise who were providing services involving primarily
provisioning, housing, and maintenance of construction site facilities. The number

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of workers performing these services was far from insignificant amounting to
about 250 persons.

Between June 1975 and December 1978, about 114 workers from Yugoslavia worked on
the site, a while about 71 workers from Poland worked on the site from June 1977
to December 1978.

Table 1 shows the average numbers of workers called for the construction organization
plan [POV] and the actual average complements:

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

Number of workers
according to POV 210 1000 1600 2200 2400 2000 2150 450 170

Actual number 140 650 1360 1770 1915 2411 1598 619 212

In 1976 and 1977, the most complex years of the construction project, when deadlines
for construction completion had not been met. the construction contractor came under
pressure to constantly increase his work capacities. Hydrostav National Enterpirse
increased its construction capacities by 660 workers between the beginning of 1977
and June 1977, thus creating the conditions for movement toward plan fulfillment.
The shortage of construction workers manifested itself primarily in the specialized
trades (carpenters. ironworkers, welders).

If we compare the V-l construction manpower with that used on similar projects in
other countries (Nord Lubnin in East Germany and Kozloduj in Bulgaria, among others),
we find that the average construction manpower employed from the beginning of con—
struction to the end of the phasing-in of Unit 1 into the power system was relative-
ly small.

The state plan called for construction work worth Kcs 575 million to be done on

the V-1 station during the Fifth Five-Year Plan. The actual amount of construction
work done during this period was slightly more than Res 600 million. with the re-
sult that the construction work volume assignments for the short-term'plans were
overfulfilled every year during the Fifth Five-Year Plan. Hydrostav National Enter-
prise also successfully fulfilled the state plan during the Sixth Five-Year Plan,
when the planned volume of construction work. Kcs 684.4 million, was exceeded or
matched by a total construction work volume of Kcs 934.9 million. This means that
from the beginning of construction to the end of 1980, construction work worth
1,535.1 million korunas was done on the V-l station.

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

State plan

(million Kcs) 22.0 79.3 193.8 262.2 282.2 210.3 116.3 41.0 35.9

Actual volume

(million Kcs) 26.4 106.9 197.9 266.0 327.2 305.3 178.0 80.9 43.5
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As can be seen from this survey of finance figures, Hydrostav National Enterprise
had favorable annual fulfillment figures for construction work throughOut the
construction period. thanks to the use of many forms of worker initiative and to
Systematic introduction of advanced construction procedures aimed at decreasing
labor inputs and replacing trades that were in short supply. There were shortfalls
in fulfillment of the material figures for construction readiness in the critical
years of 1976 and 1977 on individual facilities according to the network chart, and
an average of 24 construction readiness deadlines went unmet each month. By the
second half of 1977, following a substantial increase in construction capacities,
there was a turn for the better and shortfalls in construction completion were made

up.

From the beginning of construction of the V-l to the end of 1980 the following
material performance figures were posted:

Excavation 1,537,000 m3
Simple concrete 121,924 In3
Reinforced concrete 203,950 m3
heavy concrete 2,230 m3
Cement surfacing 313,965 In3
Paneling 460,093 In3
Reinforcement 121,611 quintals
Bricklaying 27,190 m3
Masonry walls 64,063 m2
Cast iron facings 23,326 m2
Austenitic steel facings 13,840 m2
Exterior facing, Bolet. panels 5,708 m2
Syporex panels 7,395 m2
Special Beloplast flooring 17,600 In2
Special Fortit flooring 2.700 m2
Steel structural members delivered 8,772 tons

The performance of this demanding construction work from the beginning of excava-
tion for the main power production unit to the phasing into the power system of
Unit 1 on 17 December 1978 lasted 5 years, 8 months.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'Sl-Z ONLY

The performance of the construction work required the use of new, progressive pro-
cedures and efficiency-improvement measures. Practically all branch plants of
Hydrostav National Enterprise took part in construction. We should take the oppor-
tunity to give a high evaluation to the participation and good cooperation of
Hydrostav's subcontractors in this important project (for example, Armabeton Praha
(Cooling Tower Plant and Plant No 10), Hutny Hontaze [Metal Installation] Ostrava,
Termostav Bratislava, Janka Radotin National Enterprise, Transports Praha, Stavo-
industria Bratislava, Geoindustria Brno and so on).

A wide range of workers from Hydrostav National Enterprise and staff members of its
own research and development base took part in designing many complex construction
procedures. During preparations and during construction itself, Hydrostav made
effective use of the assistance and cooperation of scientific and specialized in-
stitutions in Czechoslovakia, such as the Welding Research Institute in Bratislava,
the Slovak Academy of Sciences, the Slovak Advanced Technical School, the Research
Institute of Construction Engineering and so on.

Many advanced procedures were used during the preparation and construction of the
V—l power station.

For example, an unconventional method was used to install the facilities for the
main power production unit and to protect the excavation pit for the boron facili-
ties of Units 1 and 2.

Packing of the foundation soil below the reactor room, consisting of light loess
alternating with clay strata, which in addition to their compressibility have an
undesirable tendency to shift, particularly when wet, was carried out by tamping,
i.e. by pounding the soil with a 7 ton weight falling from a height of 8 meters.
Under the base plate of the reactor room, a so-cslled consolidation zone of 3-60
concrete 2 meters thick was installed. The turbine room was set on enclosing
foundation ditches and the wall of Turbine Room B next to the reactor installation
was laid on Franki system piles. In locations where compression of the foundation
soil could sometimes be done in the winter, if there was a danger of freezing or
waterlogging of the foundation, the foundation layer was reinforced by using cast-
in-place sand-andigravel piles. -

Some 67 to 70 percent of all paneling work was done with IS—NOE system paneling
(Universal, Combi 20, Combi 70), produced under license at the Hydrostav branch in
Trencianske Bohuslavice. The high maneuverability of this paneling system gave a
saving of 20 percent on production expenditures compared with traditional paneling,
and a saving of 35 percent on labor inputs. When paneling the turbogenerator roof
beams and heavy ceilings, Hunnebeck system support members were used successfully.

As part of its own research, Hydrostav national enterprise developed a process for
producing heavy concrete using domestically available ingredients. The production
of heavy concrete met the requirements of Czechoslovak State Standard 732600 for
Class a concrete with a density of 3650 kg [per cubic meter].

The production of concrete mixtures was carried out in the remodeled BT 4&0 con-
crete plant which HDS had previously used in the construction of the A-l power
plant. In this concrete plant are installed two Vinget type mixers, each with a

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

capacity of 1,500 liters. By using this arrangement Hydrostav saved considerable
foreign exchange. The heavy concretes were produced in a separate ELBA 25 concrete
production unit. A sand-gravel quarry was built on the right bank of the Vah River
at Leopoldov, about 18 km from the construction site. A Swedala-Arbra classifier
was built in this location.

Horizontal transport of the concrete was generally carried out by cement mixer
trucks, and vertical transport by concrete pumps. Horizontal transport of heavy
concrete from the production unit used horizontal “tub" containers installed on
trucks, and vertical transport was done with tower cranes.

A high level of mechanization of cutting and fitting work in the stamping shop,
using Pedinghaus equipment with a capacity of 7,000 tons a year, made possible
increased efficiency through prefabrication of ceiling and wall members.

The workers of Hydrostav National Enterpirse managed in a relatively short time to
master the complex process of welding and installing large-area wall, floor and
ceiling facings using both carbon steel and austenitic steel.

 

Fig. 1. Construction of the reactor room.

Among other successful solutions we should mention the advanced system for facing
the HVB [main power production unit] facilities and the other auxiliary facilities
of the V-l power plant by means of connected large-area foamed concrete panels. He
should also note here the beneficial use of advanced Promonta preassembled partition
walls with a nonplastered surface which, when there were many partition walls to be
built, saved labor and scarce capacities. The workers of Hydrostav National Enter-
prise, together with the Slovak Academy of Sciences and the Research Institute of
Construction Engineering, managed to develop a surface protection for concrete in
the strict regime areas of the power station using epoxy systems. The paint systems
used, consisting of epoxy varnishes and enamels, were domestically produced.

The findings and experience obtained in the process of constructing the Unit 1 of
the V-l power station have manifested themselves in a considerably greater smooth-
ness of construction work on the Unit 2, and have extensive application in the
current construction of the V-2 power station. In this project, with three times
the area of carbon steel and austenitic facings as in the V-l, semiautomated pro-
duction of the large-dimension facing panels has been introduced and has led to

time savings and a reduced requirement for scarce trades, with a consistently higher

quality. Only the installation welds on site, or in spaces where the established
20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

procedure makes it impossible to industrially prefabricate large-size facing panels,
are done manually.

In the construction of the V-2 power station, the concept of using prefabrication
in the sealed and nonsealed zones is used to the maximum extent. In the V-l power
station, only a ceiling at a height of +10.S meters was prefabricated in the re-
actor room facility. In this connection it was necessary to use tower cranes of
considerably greater capacity.

In developing the design for the roof facing a changeover was made from wet appli-
cation processes to the installation of insulating panels on a support base, using
asbestos cement BDP panels with a Vistomat liner on a support base fastener to
steel U shapes, which was the most proven approach.

This briefly described trend toward the use of efficiency-improving measures and
the intorduction of progressive procedures is being implemented at the V-Z power
station and will be developed more extensively and successfully in the implementa-
tion of this important program in the future.

The extensive collective of the Hydrostav National Enterprise has won a high social
evaluation for the results of its work in the construction of the V-l power station.

He may state on behalf of Hydrostav's employees that they will be ready in the
future to do everything possible to carry out the demanding program for developing
nuclear power production in Czechoslovakia.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL n. p., 1981

8480
080: 5100/3019

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT AT V-l POWER PLANT DESCRIBED

Prague JADBRNA ENERGIE in Czech No 4, Apr 81 pp 129-133

[Article by Jiri Prochazka. Stanislav Stepanek and Josef Drahy, Skoda Regional
Enterprise, Plzen: "Experience in Construction and Installation of the V-l Power

Station"]

[Text] This article gives information on the construction approach
with reference to the delivery and installation of equipment. The
installation of the primary circuit and test assembly of the reactor
components is analyzed. The article also describes the 220-MH
saturated-steam turbine, which was put into operation for the first

time at the V-l power station.

with the construction of the V—l nuclear power station in Jaslovske Bohunics,
Czechoslovakia entered the era of commercial production of nuclear power, and it
must be stressed that this conspicuous success was attainable only with the ex-
tensive help of Soviet specialists. This help involved a number of sectors. From
the point of view of the general contractor for the equipping of the V-l station.
we should cite particularly the areas of deliveries, installation coordination, and
special installation. In the construction of the V—l power station (i.e. a power
station with two reactors, each with a capacity of 640 NW, of type V-230), Skoda
Regional Enterprise functioned as the senior equipment contractor on the full scale
only for the secondary section, while for the primary section it chiefly provided
Soviet deliveries and Soviet installation coordination and special installation
services, in addition to performing installation of the primary section according
to Soviet performance plans. The startup of the entire power station was organized
by the investor through the operators of Bohunice Power Stations [£30] and Soviet
startup specialists. This complex and demanding construction approach was chosen
because when planning work was begun in 1970 Czechoslovak industry was not yet
ready to produce the main control components of the primary section. Soviet de-
liveries amounted to about 50 percent of the power production equipment. In develop-
ing this construction approach, it was also necessary to take account of the fact
that there is a difference in conception between the Soviet and Czechoslovak systems
for preparing and carrying out the construction of nuclear power stations, which

can be summarized as follows.

In the Soviet Union, not only the necessary planning-engineering and construction-
installation capacities, but also the production of a number of types of operating
equipment, are included in the power ministry. Accordingly there is day-to-day

22

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contact between these elements. The Soviet systal does not anploy the senior con-
tractor function. and the equipment aspect of a paler station is broken down into
functional systems and circuits without regard to the future composition of the
supplier mechanism. The second stage of planning (performance planning for func-
tional systems and circuits), including the coordination arrangements, is worked
out by the planning organization which develops the first stage plans, using data
from manufacturers involved with orders for individual peices of equipment and
piping systems, supported by specifications from the performance plan. All coordin-
ation and set assembly activities during preparation for and performance of con—
struction are carried out by organizations in the purchasing ministry, including
preparation for and performance of startup.

Czechoslovakia uses a systan in which the general contractors for equipment and

for construction and the general designer are partners of the investor organization.
In this case the planning documentation for the power station is divided up into
construction and equipment sections. The equipment section is broken down into
operating sets and partial operating sets in accordance with the way in which they
are to be supplied by the contractors. The operating set and partial operating set
are the province of the senior final supplier. The preliminary plan, which as re-
gards detail and structure is the first stage of the plan worked out by the general
designer, is intended to be a complete basis for the working-out of performance
plans by the final suppliers. Accordingly a way must be found to include in it
directions regarding procedural, planning and engineering matters and the closely
associated details of contractor and supplier performance. The equipment perfor-
mance plans developed in the Soviet Union were revised for Czechoslovak practice,
including division into operating sets and partial operating sets; problens arising
on site, including those of heightened nuclear safety requirements, were solved by
consistent coordination of supply and by changes and additions to the equipment
performance plan.

Work involving differences between Czechoslovak and Soviet standards was also
extermely demanding; this made itself felt not only in the plans, but particularly
in deliveries of electrical equipment and monitoring and control systems produced
in the Soviet Union. In the technical preparation for installation, the complexity
of the conditions resulted from the fact that the production documentation arrived
from the plant with the last shipment, and accordingly it was not possible to
organize installation procedures and the associated production of fixtures, provide
the tools and the like, sufficiently in advance. However, at the construction site
there was complete cooperation between the Czechoslovak and Soviet workers, foremen
and engineers, who were organized into international brigades and through whose
initiative the tasks were accomplished. Their comninments made it possible to
overcome even the most complex problems. and to meet deadlines comparable to inter—
national standards in installation work. For example, in Unit 2 of the V-l station
the welding of the JsSOO piping of the main circulating loop, once it was in place,
was accomplished in 30 days, and the installation of the six main circulating pumps
on the JsSOO piping took only 20 days. However, the main finding ranains that only
well-prepared installation work based on a knowledge of the blueprints, their
development into installation procedures, and the provision of all necessary fix-
tures, including timely deliveries, will create the optimal conditions for carrying
out the construc:ion work. Another entirely indispensable factor is continuing
contact with the producing plant and its workers and engineers, which not only makes

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possible resolution of the most complex situations as they arise, but also creates
feedback between the installation site and the equipment production facility. In
addition, coordinated installation is essential in the construction of nuclear power
stations, and it requires close contact between the designer, the project engineer
and the builder, both in working out a coordinated procedure and in resolving
possible conflicts. Accordingly it is impossible to dispense with any of the
technical specifications which require that installation proper be performed in
coordination with the producing plants, when degree the surface and interior clean-
liness of the nuclear equipment is specified.

The installation of the primary circuit, consisting of the main control components
of the primary section, i.e. the reactor system, six steam generators, the volume
compensator, six main circulating pumps, 500 mm stainless steel piping, the main
gate valves and the like, was made particularly difficult by the fact that it in-
volved unconventional. outsize, extremely heavy equipment with exacting technical
specifications, and by the fact that it was impossible to acquaint oneself with the
production documentation and technical specifications sufficiently in advance. It
should also be realized that the installation of these components had to be almost
error-free as regards function and quality, because this equipment must operate for
its entire lifetime without major defects. Under the prescribed procedures, most
repairs are extremely difficult, since they involve work in a radioactive environ-
ment. The technical demands made by this installation work are best seen from the
following characteristics:

Pressure vessel

height 11.800 mm
maximum diameter 6,270 mm
weight 201 tons
maximum wall thickness 205 an

Upper unit [reactor control and protective mechanisms]

height 11,700 mm
maximum diameter 3,836 mm
weight 114 tons

Reactor barrel [sachta]

height 8,122 mm

maximum diameter 3,366 mm

wall thickness 60 mm

weight 37.6 tons
26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Base

Core

Bank

of reactor barrel
height

maximum diameter
weight

basket

height

maximum diameter
weight

of guard tubes
height

maximum diameter

weight

Steam generators

number per unit

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4,185 mm
3,005 m

30 tons

3,930 mm
3,080 mm

22 tons

6,685 mm
3,190 mm

35.2 tons

6 steam generators

24 suspensions

length of shell 11,570 mm
internal diameter of shell 3,210 m
wall thickness 75-142 an
weight 145 tons

0n the basis of transport considerations, the reactor pressure vessel was delivered
to the site with 10 connections attached, while the other two had to be welded on

in the inspection manhole.

The pressure vessel was installed in the concrete pit

using a 250 ton crane at the minimum possible speed (microdisplacement). In setting
the pressure vessel on the support ring, the following specifications had to be
observed:

--coincidence of axes 1—111 and II-IV of the support ring with those of the pressure
vessel;

--maximum permissible deviation of seating surface below the upper unit at 3,480 mm

diameter equal to 0.5 mm.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After the pressure vessel was adjusted, the interior components of the reactor were
test installed and the individual internal components were fitted to each other and
to the pressure vessel. During installation, the following precision requirements
were observed:

-—main axes 1-111 and II-IV of the barrel. the barrel base and the upper unit had
to correspond to the principal axes of the pressure vessel; the maximum permissible
deviation of the axes was 1 mm at 4.270 mm diameter;

-—the maximum deviation of the vertical axis of the ARK [emergency control assembly]

drive housing in the upper unit relative to the tubes in the barrel base at a dis-
tance of 19.5 m was lo an;

--the maximum error of fit between the barrel base and the core basket measured at
any point could not exceed 0.4 mm;

--when the barrel was installed in the pressure vessel, the seating surface of the

barrel base had to be maintained within 0.5 mm of the horizontal plane at a diameter
of 3,065 mm.

The most important operations in installation of the steam generators were: welding
on the collectors and steam generator supports, creation of a prepressure in the
JsSOO primary loops by filling the steam generators, removing the protective coat-
ings from the inner surfaces of the steam generators on the primary and secondary
sides, and a pressure test of the steam generator shell on the secondary side.
Particular attention was devoted to removing the protective coating from the steam
generators, since they came from the production plant with a coating of oil which
was extrenely difficult to rauove.

A consistent finding from the installation of this operating set is that it is
possible to achieve very good coordination of production capabilities and the shipping
of the main reactor system control assemblies from the plant with the needs of the
construction project regarding maintenance of a continual installation process and
coordination with the programs for startup and adjustment work. This involves use
of the plant's technical capabiliites for test assembly and step-by-step shipment,
i.e. first the reactor barrel, which is essential for circulation flushing of the
primary loop, and then the other internal components and the upper unit. In this
approach to installation there is no increase in risk resulting from the plant's
not carrying out complete test assembly before all of the interior components and
the upper unit are sent to the construction site. However. close ties between the
plant's personnel and the installation personnel must be maintained.

The technical specifications specify precisely the operations which are carried out
at the plant (any defects are instantly corrected by specialists) and the testing
work which by its nature is suited to the installation site (discovery of problems
occurring during transport and the like). To give a more detailed explanation, let
us refer to experience regarding the step-by-step test assembly of the VVER-AAO type
213 reactors produced by the Skoda Regional Enterprise. The pressure vessel of a
nuclear reactor is the main barrier which contains the high-temperature, high-
pressure primary coolant and prevents the escape of radioactive substances. The
interior parts of the reactor serve to contain the core, to limit coolant flow paths
and to guide the control rods and the leads of the measuring devices inside the
reactor. Correct positioning of the individual components inside the reactor re-
lative to each other and to the pressure vessel, and particularly relative to the
upper unit, is extremely important for safe reactor operation as regards both

reliable core cooling and reliable operation of the control rods, which are the
26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only movable parts in the reactor and which pass through the entire reactor and all
its interior parts with relatively small clearances.

Because of the large dimensions involved, the production of nuclear equipment is a
relatively precise activity, but nonetheless individual tolerances may not be com-
patible with each other. This may lead to difficulties in installation or poor
control rod movement through the channels during operation. Accordingly, test
assembly is required in the production of nuclear reactors; in it, the correctness
and precision of fabrication of the individual reactor components are checked, their
installation compatibility tested, their optimal mutual adjustments selected and
noted, and possible alteration and fitting of parts carried out in order to assure
smooth installation and dasounting of the reactor at the nuclear power station.

Ideally there should be a complete test assembly of the entire reactor at the pro-

ducing plant. In this case, test assembly would cover the following main reactor
assemblies:

a. pressure vessel

b. upper unit

c. barrel

d. barrel base

e. core basket

f. guard tube bank

3. inserted rod

h. control rod drive

i. electrical equipment and measuring devices
j. servicing platforms and equipment

It is obvious that for many reasons, primarily involving time and economics, it is
simply infeasible to carry out full-scale test assembly. In production this would
mean holding large-size completed components at the plant, with all the attendant
consequences, and with the imposition of a considerable strain on transport facili-
ties when all components were shipped together; for the power station, this would be
entirely unacceptable in terms of the progress of construction work. It is partic-
ularly unrealistic to hold back the pressure vessel for test assembly, since it
must be at the construction site early. The pressure vessel, which is a component
of relatively simple shape, or its inner surface, which alone is involved in test
assembly, can be replaced without difficulty by a mockup on which the main actual
measurements of the finished pressure vessel are shown precisely. This basic test
assembly approach includes all of the cmponents mentioned above except the pressure
vessel. Further analysis of the design, operating function, and purposes of the
individual components in the test assembly with reference to the production and
time demands applying to some components such as the upper unit, and with consider-
ation for optimal progress of work at the construction site and for the transport
and storage facilities, indicates that a simpler test assembly approach is more
suitable. The simplification is based on two main circumstances:

--the reactor barrel is not involved in guidance of the control rods, and accord-
ingly during test assembly it is necessary only to measure its relationship to the
pressure vessel (or the mockup) and its installation compatibility with the barrel
base; in the other test assasbly operations it is possible to replace it entirely
with a substitute barrel, e.g. the barrel of another reactor that is in production;

27 ‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--in testing the coincidence of the axes of the remaining components (the upper
unit, the barrel base, the core basket and the guard tube unit), the upper unit
may be replaced by a complete cover, while the positions of the remaining parts
of the upper unit can be shown individually.

There exist other less fundamental variations, such as transferring the test
assembly of the electrical cables to the construction site and associating it with
final installation, and the like. The approach to test assembly which has been
described can be considered fully equivalent to complete test assembly of the
reactor using all of its components. It gives the producer and the operator
sufficient information to assure smooth installation on site and is also favorable
as regards the progress of work on the station, since it makes it possible to supply
the pressure vessel well in advance (as much as a year) and to deliver the barrel
almost 3 months in advance of the other components.

in the secondary section, among the most importants are those of the 220 MW turbo-
sets. In particular, the turbine itself, which uses saturated steam, is a new
design, the conception for which took account of the following circumstances:

a. The pressure of the input steam of a saturated-steam turbine is comparable to
the pressure of the heated steam before the medium-pressure sections of steam
turbines in conventional power stations, while the input temperature of saturated—
steam turbines is considerably lower.

b. The isoentropic enthalpy drop of saturated-steam turbines is half that of large
turbines in conventional power stations, which for comparable power output means
that turbines in nuclear power stations have approximately twice the mass of input
steam.

c. The steam parameters before entry into the low-pressure section of saturated-
steam turbines and turbines in conventional power stations are squireleut.

Since the decision had been made in 1972 to use a "full" speed of 3,000 rpm (rather
than the “half" speed of 1,500 rpm as was the case in most saturated-steam turbines
abroad) for saturated-steam turbines with capacities up to 1,000 M", the conditions
described above led to the following concept of the 220 MW saturated-steam turbines:

—-the high-pressure section of the turbine would be derived from the medium-pressure
section of a 500 MW turbine for conventional power stations and would have a double-
flow design (in the entire contemplated power range up to 1,000 aw); in view of the
flow of high-pressure wet steam in the high-pressure part of the turbine, a material
with high resistance to corrosion and erosion would have to be selected for the
stator and rotor components;

--the two lowbpresSure sections of the 220 NH turbine would be completely derived
from the two low-pressure sections of a 500 MR turbine for a conventional power
station, and the blades of the final low-pressure stage would be used similarly
in both types of turbines.

Not only the 220-HH steam turbines, but practically the entire secondary cycle of
the nuclear power station with the VVER-éé" reactor, was developed in Czechoslovakia,

with the exception of the separator-superheaters, which are of Soviet design. The

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

200 MW steam turbine is designed for input saturated steam at a pressure of 0.32
HPa (temperature 256° C), with an absorption capacity of 377 kg/sec and a nominal
cooling water temperature of 20° C. Fig. 1 shows a longitudinal section of the
turbine, consisting of a high-pressure section and two double-flow low-pressure

The steam exits from the high—pressure section to the separator, where
down to a value of about 0.5 percent, after

which it is fed into a two-stage heater, where bled steam and live steam are used

to heat the steam to a state of 0.46 MPa and 216° C before it enters the low—pressure
section of the turbine. The condensate is heated in 7 regenerative heating stages,
including five low-pressure and two high-pressure heaters, to a final temperature

of 222° C. The two condensers are connected in series in a "two-pressure" arrange-
ment; with a coolant water temperature of 20° c, the pressure in the first condenser
is 5.35‘kPa and that in the second 6.84 kPa. The turbine is equipped with an elec-
tronic73ydraulic regulating system, and throttle-type turbine regulation is used.

Modules consisting of one fast-closing and two regulating valves are symme
located on both sides of the high-pressure turbine section. Before each low-pressure

turbine section is a pair of fast-closing valves to protect the machine against
overrunning in case of an abrupt drop in load.

sections.
the moisture is separated from the steam

\

'—'~4?-‘*——- s“1:2
' - ——L'-?—'I— . "— a...

..-- _...- -...__.__.—. ._-_—- .

I
g c o‘.“‘ ' ““."..‘\
h w""‘ ‘ “fruit“ ‘V' WI ‘iA‘ll"-4II“AA .r
. n a III :lllﬂ lllll! I" 2. : u“ “'53? 9.9-.

"—n 'JT.’.'."'—"'~'.'. —"< '-‘V.7,."',."' _ . ‘
L

 
  
      
 
  
  
    
    
   
   
 
  

  
 
  

 

  

 
 

‘ . ‘

[1 We? _'!2:‘.‘@iﬁ!‘§‘§ﬁ¥i'WW“!9 5

_—-'———l———

9'13 I' .1!!!)

 

   
  

   

Obr. I. Padang] fez turbinou

Fig. 1. Longitudinal section of the turbine

Typical design features are as follows:

--the double-flow high-pressure section, with six stages in each flow, is more

suitable than the single-flow design in terms of symmetrical removal of steam from
the high-pressure section to the moisture separator and of a unified conception of-

the entire series of saturated—steam turbines with capacities up to 1,000 H";
-—a bridge-type design is used for the two-layer housings of both low-pressure
sections, with a combination of welded-together die stampings and steel castings

for the inner shell and a completley-welded outer shell; the transverse ”bridges"
about 10 m long and 3.7 m high hold the turbines's radial bearings;

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘OR OFFICIAL USE OVIJ

--ihu limited size compound low-pressure rotors all consist of a shaft and hot-
pressed disk with four stages in each flow; the weight of a single low-pressure
rotor is ‘5 tons. Fig. 2 is a photograph of a low-pressure rotor;

--the blades of the final low-pressure stage are 860 um long and are fastened to

the disk by direct rooting; these blades have been tested in operation in 24 turbines
of 200 MW capacity in conventional power stations in Czechoslovakia and abroad; the
blades are proteCted against excessive vibration by two rows of crossing damping
wires, while protection from erosion by droplets in wet steam is provided by electric
spark~applied hard metal on the leading edges and the upper parts of the back edges
of the blades; to allow prolonged operation of the turboset either at idle or with

small load, the output parts of the low-pressure sections are provided with cooling
by sprayed-in condensate.

 

Fig. 2. Low-pressure rotor of the turbine

The Jaslovske Bohunice power station, whose turbine room is shown in Fig. 3,
currently has four 220 MW turbosets in operation. The operating results have been
positive; following the elimination of certain "infantile disorders" in the first
phase of operation they have been working extremely reliably, and the assigned
targets as regards both regulation during an abrupt drop from the nominal turboset
power and moderate heat consumption, have been met.

One oi the "infantile disorders" which showed up during trial operation and had to
be set right involved the problem of a signal link between the primary and secondary
circuits (involving both analog and digital signals) to increase reliability and
operating safety. This involved, for example, a direct signal link between the
reactor regulator and the turbine regulator aimed at preventing the operators from
imposing an unsuitable regulation structure on the unit. Also involved was a signal
link between the circuits for evaluating the operation of the main circulating

pumps and the turbine regulator, which solves the problem of maintaining the
pressure in the main steam collector when one or two of the main circulating pumps
break down. There were no complications in installation.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIA

Fig. 3. Turbine room of the V—l power station

In conclusion, lot us thank all 18 final suppliers for their high—quality products
and their good work on the V-l power plant in Jaslovske Bohunice. The production
of nc.t than 4.2 million Mun of electricity in 1980. representing a 37 percent
oVerfulfillment of plan, is the best demonstration of its successful and relaible
operation at the planned parameters, and thus is an evaluation of everyone's work

on this power station.
COPYRIGHT: SN'I‘L n. p., 1981

8480
CSO: 5100/3019

 

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WORK OF INVESTOR ORGANIZATION ON V-l STATION DESCRIBED

Prague JADERNA ENERGIE in Slovak No 4, Apr 81 pp 133-137

[Article by Stanislav Smatlak, IVES [Slovak Investment Company for Power Construction]
Bratislava, and Martin Svirko, IVES Jaslovske Bohunice: "Preparation For and Perfor-
mance of Construction of the V—l Nuclear Power Station"]

[Text] The construction of nuclear power stations in Czechoslovakia
must be considered a new, special problem for the investment process,
which in addition to the basic, characteristic traits associated
with the construction of large capital projects also has a number of
specific, distinctive features, such as concentration of a large in-
vestment volume in a relatively small geographical area, the close
interconnection between the construction and equipment aspects of
nuclear installations, involving the use of uncommon structural
components and pieces of equipment and treating radiation safety

as a functional element which affects design, manufacture and
construction. and the entire startup process. The preparations

and the entire process of constructing the V-l power station in
Jaslovske Bohunice, the first of a series of power stations in

Czechoslovakia with VVER 440 reactors, were carried out in this
context.

Preparation for the construction of the V-l nuclear power station was based on the
principles established by the Intergovernmental Agreement of April 1970 between
Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union. which laid down the basic principles for par-
ticipation and reciprocal relations in the construction of two nuclear power stations
in Czechoslovakia, each with two VVER 440 units. Among other things, the agreement

stated that deliveries from the Soviet Union (of plans and equipment) would be made
in accordance with Soviet standards and practices.

In May 1971 the foreign enterprises Tekhnopromeksport in Moscow and Skodaexport
Praha signed a general contract for deliveries, work and technical assistance to
be provided by the Soviet side for the construction of the V-l power station.

In accordance with these fundamental documents, Czechoslovak and Soviet organizations

carried out all of the preparation, construction and startup of the V-l power
stations.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Preparation for Construction and Supplier-Purchaser Relations

The basic assignment of responsibility for deliveries for the V-l power station was
planned and the division of planning labor agreed upon in accordance with the prin-
ciples stated in the Intergovernmental Agreement and the general contract. The
Soviet planning organization LOTEP [Leningrad Branch of Teploenergoproyekt] develop-
ed the technical plan for the power station with the participation of the Czechoslovak
general designer, Energoprojekt Praha, and then developed the performance plans for
the facilities in the primary section. Energoprojekt Praha worked out the first
stage of the plan in the form in which it was included in the Overall Planning De-
sign in accordance with FHTIR [Federal Ministry of Technical and Investment Develop-
ment] Directive No 3/71 (DOV [POV]*, budgetary and economic sections) and the con-
struction performance plans for the facilities. This participation by planning
organizations using different organizational forms and different degrees of detail
in their documentation led to complex situations in the suppliers' preparations and -
in performance of the work, owing to differences in the technical content and scope
of the plans, different planning practices, and different sets of standards and
regulations.

These difficulties had practical consequences in the initial stages of construction
of the facilities in the primary section of the power station, when the construction
contractor used not only a translation. but a considerable number of revisions of
the Soviet plans to bring them into accord with Czechoslovak practice. Ultimately
it was possible to minimize these requirements only in areas covered by mutual
agreement. A new assignment of equipment deliveries at the end of 1973 made it
necessary to revise the agreed—upon overall planning design, and this made it
necessary to postpone the deadlines initially established for presentation of the
planning documentation. To assure that construction work could proceed, the plan-
ning documentation was divided into stages, which allowed smooth construction work,
but created great difficulties in preparation and coordination for all construction

participants.

In developing the planning documentation, considerable use was made of the newest
tested findings and experience from the operation of similar VVER power units. The
plans for the power station also made use of several distinctive, progressive
approaches which took account of the circumstances, for example location of the
boron facilities in the lower parts of the main power production unit, revised
layouts of some auxiliary circuits, and some other variations in the equipment
which increased nuclear safety and operating reliability.

The development of the site layout plan for the V-l power station in Jaslovske
Bohunice made allowance for its relationship to the A-l power station, which was
completed during the period of preparations for the V-l station.

The siting of the V-l power station close to the A-l station had a favorable effect
during preparation and initial construction work, but also led to certain problems
involving interconnections and conflicts in the underground and above-ground road-
ways and mains. The development of the site plan for the V-l focused on optimal
layout for the already-existing A-l station.

*[POV: construction organization plan]

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among the main positive factors involved in the construction of the V-l power
station in Jaslovske Bohunice were the following:

--during construction it was possible to use some of the construction site facili-
ties and permanent facilities of the A-l power station, particularly during the
first stage of construction;

--some use was made of the results of geological surveys;

--there was no change in the health protection zone and it was not necessary to
remove any structures or resettle people, which also speeded up the process of
securing approval from the social and legal bodies;

--th: supplier organizations, particularly for the construction work, changed over
without a break to work assignments on the V-l, which decreased the time required
for the commencement of construction on the main power production unit;

—-the experience of the investor and operator collectives could be used in the
preparation, construction and startup of the power station.

Even though the Czechoslovak organizations that took part in the construction had
acquired a certain amount of experience during construction of the A-l power station,
the construction of the V-l station required that they master new construction pro-
cedures and construction organization. For this reason, difficulties were encoun-
tered in securing approval of the organization plan and construction schedules.

The initial construction schedule was worked out by the general designer with the
participation of the contractors and the investor and took account of findings and
experience regarding the construction process and arrangement of scheduling mile-
stones obtained in the construction of nuclear power stations in the Soviet Union,
Bulgaria and East Germany.

it must. however, be stressed that the conditions under which nuclear power stations
have been built in these countries are not met in the construction of the V-l

power station, i.e. number of workers, work in shifts, availability machinery, con-
ditional and compulsory investment and the like.

Disagreements in supplier-purchaser relationships and in making arrangements for
the provision of certain special products and work were among the reasons that the
construction organization plan was approved only in 1974 and that compulsory ad-
herence to the revised network chart was instituted in 1975 during full-scale con-
struction. The use of the network chart in the management process by contractors
was not. however. fully carried through because of insufficient technical and
personnel preparation and because of a shortage of initial technical and scheduling
information throughout the period of construction.

Accordingly, in the concluding stages of construction partial time schedules and
deadlines for certain installations were worked out for the day-to-day management
system, but these were based on the approved network chart.

Supplier-purchaser relations for the construction of the V-l power station were
designated by the CSSR Government Decree No 195/70 and revised by CSSR Government
Decree No 169/73.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--The general leadership of Slovenske energeticke podniky [Slovak Power Production
Enterprises] in Bratislava, and later Investicna vystavba energetiki Slovenska
[Slovak Investment Company of Power Industry Construction] k.n.o. in Bratislava,
were designated as the direct investor organization;

--The general designer was Energoprojekt Praha.

-The general construction contractor was the Hydrostav national enterprise in
Bratislava, with its suppliers Armabeton Praha. Termostav Bratislava. Hutne Montaze
[Metal Installation] Ostrava and Pozemne stavy [Surface Construction] Trnava.

--The general equipment contractor for the secondary section and for installation

of the equipment in the primary section was the Skoda regional enterprise in Plzen,
with its final suppliers E2 [Electrical Machinery Assembly Plant] Praha, Potrubi
[Piping] Praha, ZPA [Machinery and Automation Plants] Bratislava, Sigma Modranske
utrojirny [Modra Machinery Works], Sigma Branice, Chemont Brno, Janka Radotin, CKD
[Ceskomoravska-Kolben-Danek] Praha, Termostav Bratislava, CKD Dukla Praha and others.

-The contractor for equipment from the Soviet Union and for the services of Soviet
organizations was PZO [Foreign Trade Enterprise] Skodaexport Praha.

-—Atomove elektrarne [Nuclear Power Stations] Bohunice was the contractor for
startup of the power station and its operator.

The relations between the individual contractors and the investors were specified
in economic agreements, and their work was carried out in accordance with the basic
construction documents in accordance with Notice No 157/1976 of FMTIR concerning
conditions governing the performance of work on the project.

The Construction Process

The construction of the power plant began while the main construction documents

were being developed, following the working out and approval of the necessary per-
formance documentation. After the essential minimum of preparation work was
completed in 1972 (laying of the mains for the A-l power plant, laying of the drain-
age system and the like), excavations for the main power production unit began in
April 1973, in addition to which construction work was begun on the other facilities
of the power station and on construction site facilities. The initial progress of
construction was considerably influenced by the design of the faundations for the
main power production unit )boron equipment, reactor pit) by the lateness and quan-
tity of documentation presented and by the production of prefabricated construction
and equipment components for the lower parts of the construction. The construction
process was carried out in terms of the principal nodes on the time schedule; dur—
ing construction there were refinements and changes were made, primarily because of
changes in construction procedures and equipment delivery contingencies. In 1975,
when construction was already under way on a large scale, the subsequent progress

of construction work in the reactor facility was worked out in coordination with
Soviet specialists, with reference to the operating conditions for the 250~metric~
ton crane, which was used to install heavy process equipment; the network chart was
updated to take account of this change.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Main Stages in Construction of the V-l Power Station

Unit 1 Unit 2
Beginning of preparatory work 25 April 1972
Beginning of excavations for main
power production unit 26 April 1973
Structures ready for installation of
steel structural members of main
power production unit October 1974
250-ton crane put into operation June 1976
Large-dimension equipment installed
in planned locations
Steam generators August 1976 November 1977
Reactor vessel July 1977 June 1979
Stages of Testing
Unit 1 Unit 2
Pressure and tightness tests 26 Hay 1978 28 August 1979
Hot tests 12 September 1978 28 December 1979
Beginning of physical startup 6 November 1978 21 February 1980
Phasing into power system 17 December 1978 26 March 1980
Comprehensive testing 27-30 March 1979 23-26 May 1980

Because of their large scope and complexity and the increased quality and precision
requirements, the construction work on the installations of the main power production
unit and the building housing the auxiliary facilities required the use of new,
advanced procedures. The construction contractor, Hydrostav Bratislava, used cer-
tain progressive methods, processes and procedures in the construction of the power
plant, which both increased labor quality and productivity and made it possible to
avoid the shortages of certain specialized trades and to shorten the duration of
construction work. These involved, in particular, the use of systems of steel and
large-area paneling, support members, and shaped sheet metal as replacements for
paneling, prefabricated partition walls which did not require plastering, wall
facings made of foam concrete panels, the production of carbon steel and stainless
steel facings using semiautomatic and automatic welding units, and so on.

Some parts of the construction, in which the quality and precision requirements
exceeded construction norms currently in force and which constituted specialized

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction work (the ponds and the reactor pit) involved considerable technical
and construction difficulties.

To master the high technical requiranents in accordance with plan, it was necessary
to use specially chosen materials, and special methods of installation and welding
in cooperation with the Welding Research Institute and specialized organizations,
which led to great organizational, time and financial demands. The specifications
for the physical and power-production startups required that the construction and
installation work in the primary section of the power station be entirely completed.
Accordingly, at the conrlusion of construction work. during the startup state, it
became necessary to carry out extensive construction finishing work (painting,
floors, low-voltage wiring, detail work and the like) in an unusually short time,
concurrently with installation work and startup work.

In spite of technical and organizational problems and insufficient capacities during
construction, the structural part of work on the V-l power station was successfully
carried out, as regards both level of work and schedules.

The installation work on the V—l power plant can be divided into three sections:

--installation of machinery and process equipment for the primary circuit and
auxiliary systems,

--installation of electrical, measuring and control facilities,
"installation of the turbine room and auxiliary facilities.

The installation work on the primary circuit was carried out by Czechoslovak organ-
izations under the general coordination of Soviet specialists. This equipment was
installed in a relatively short time. The progress of installation of electrical
equipment and SKR [reactor control systems] was affected by behind-schedule readying
of the machinery and by modification of the equipment delivered from abroad in
accordance with Czechoslovak state standards, which meant that a large amount of
work piled up in a relatively short time span. Accordingly it was necessary to

use a system of coordinated installation by multiple trades. The installation of
the turbine room and auxiliary facilities was carried out by the classical con-
tractor method.

A special effort was made during construction. installation and commissioning of
the power station to bring products delivered from abroad into agreement with
Czechoslovak standards and regulations.

Discrepancies had to be resolved by securing individual exceptions for the Office
of Standards and Measurement, or by modifying the equipment, including development
of the necessary docurnentation. But this involved considerable work and in the
last of the stages of construction listed above it entailed further demands on
specialized technical supplier capacities. Considerable work and assistance in
these activities was provided by the operator, the Elektrarne Bohunice [Bohunice
Power Stations] concern.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE DVD

On the basis of the requirements for nuclear safety and operating reliability,
selycte'! equipment from the primary section was subjected to incoming tests during
ihc'umrse of Construction. For this purpose. a plan was worked out frr the test—
ing of equipment for the power station, including incoming, pre-operat. '1 and in-
operation testing to determine its condition; this plan was approved by the relevant
Czechoslovak and Soviet organizations. Incoming tests were performed out jointly
by the investor and specialized teams from the Nuclear Power Station Research In-
stitute [VUJE] in .lnslovske Bohunice and Skoda Plzen. Results and experience ob-
tained confirm the necessity and justifiability of this testing, but in the future
it will be necessary to create the necessary material and technical base and to
allocate a specific time span on the work schedule for the performance of these
activities.

A factor that affected the progress of construction and installation work was the
making of changes and additions to plans throughout the construction process. These
changes and additions resulted from development of performance plans for process
equipment and from attempts to use the most recent findings, particularly with
regard to increased operating reliability.

To support installation work and the startup stage for unit 2, for which a rela-
tively short time span was available. maximum use was made of experience and find-
ings obtained in Unit 1, measures to increase coordination of work were developed,
worker initiatives were offered, a continuous work cycle was introduced, the
number of plan oversight personnel and review and test engineers was increased,

and representatives of state oversight organizations were constantly at work on the
site. In many installation operations and testing stages on Unit 2. the time re-
quired was considerably shortened while maintaining the required quality and com-
pleteness of installation. Performance of these measures also made it possible to
decrease the time required for the program of physical and power—production startup
and for preparations for the comprehensive testing of Unit 2.

 

Fig. 1. General view of the V-l power station

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Management of Construction and Startup Work

The general document governing construction was the network chart. whose mile-
stones and target dates for the different units were in agreement with government

decrees. The network chart was updated annually and was used as the starting
point in working out annual schedules and investment plans which specified the
material and financial figures for construction and the performance contingencies

and schedules.

For day-to-day management and coordination of the construction process, a "Con-
struction Project Leadership" was created; this working body consisting of repre-
sentatives of the main organizations involved in construction. For further day-
to-day coordination of the progress of construction of the critical facilities.
coordinating groups were created; these, under the guidance of the investor and
with the cooperation of the parties involved, coordinated the progress of con-
struction in terms of the basic and short-term network charts.

For the startup stage. the Interdepartmental Startup Committee (HSK) was organized;
its executive bodies were the startup management group for Unit 1 and the operation-
al staff and operational group for Unit 2. In the startup stage, the basic mission
was to provide all management levels with the necessary support, with priority and
on an extraordinary basis. for smooth performance of the concluding stage of pro-
duction. This mission was supported and asserted by the operational staff and the
MSK, which monitored. evaluated and approved all stages of startup work, especially
in terms of the maintenance of maximum quality and operating reliability. The
operational staff and operational group directly managed the progress of individual
types of work in the concluding stage, and developed and approved readiness certi-
fication for sub—steps and stages of work; the activities of the other management

and coordination organs were subordinated to this activity.

 

Fig. 2. 1he Unit Control Room

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Czechoslovak-Soviet Cooperation in the Construction work

Cooperation between Soviet and Czechoslovak organizations in accordance with the
intergovernmental agreement began during preparation for the construction of the
V—l power station and increased throughout the construction work and startup. The
participation and cooperation of Soviet organizations was focused on the following
areas:

--preplanning and planning preparation,

--deliveries of process equipment for the primary section (reactor, steam generators,
circulating pumps, primary circuit piping, volume compensator, diesel generator
station equipment, protective systems, control and measurement equipment and the
like) 9

--technical guidance of installation, installation coordination work, special
installation and consultations,

--startup of the power station and training of the operating personnel,
—-de1ivery of the nuclear fuel for operation of the power station.

The basic economic relationships were established in contracts between P20
Skodaexport in Prague and Atomenergoeksport in Moscow.

To support the production process, the structure and scope of Soviet specialists'
participation in the technical guidance of installation work, installation coordin—
ation and special installation for equipment in the primary section of the power
station and for the startup of the station were agreed upon by the Soviet side.
Individual groups of Soviet specialists, the number of whom reached 150 at the peak,
worked on a subcontract basis for the main construction participants: the investor,
Energoprojekt, Skoda Plzen, and Atomove elektrarny [Nuclear Power Stations]
Bohunice.

It should be stressed that this close cooperation between Czechoslovak and Soviet
specialists was the basic factor in achieving successful results both in con—
struction work and in the startup and initial operation of the power station.

Conclusion

In this article we have presented the investor's viewpoint on certain findings and
problems associated with the construction of the V-l power station in Jaslovske
Bohunice. In making an overall evaluation of the construction process we may
stress certain other aspects that had a positive effect on it:

--the priority assigned to the project in the state plan and its observance at the
individual management levels in construction work, production and installation;

-—specia1—capability collectives from organizations participating in construction,
and good labor organization using new forms of coordination (working and coordin—
ating groups):

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--extensive use of advanced components and procedures in construction;

--a high degree of organization of startup work. with the operator organization
taking a considerable part in the startup stage;

--close cooperation and participation by Soviet specialists throughout the building
of the power station;

-—cffective use of mass political work, socialist competition and other forms of
worker initiative in the construction process (international brigades);

--progressive creation of suitable labor and social conditions and services for
construction workers;

-constant support from party organs and bodies of the state construction problems
office.

The utilization of findings and experience from this construction work in combin-
ation with experience obtained at other power stations which have been built in
the CEHA menber countries will make a major contribution to further increasing the
efficiency and decreasing the duration of construction work and to supporting the
program for developing nuclear power in Czechoslovakia which is being carried out
in close cooperation with the Soviet Union.

The experience obtained in the process of building the V-l power station has already
been used in the preparation and construction of the v-z power station at Jaslovske
Bohunice. whose conception and technical design, based on a higher level of nuclear
safety. involve greater demands than the preparation and building of the V-l power
station as regards both construction and equipment, and have been used as the

basis for the technical design and preparation for the construction of the Mochovce
power station.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL n. p.. 1981

8480
080: 5100/3019

41-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FINAL STAGE OF CONSTRUCTION WORK ON v-1 POWER STATION DESCRIBED
Prague JADBRNA ENERGIE in Czech No 4, Apr 81 pp 137-140

[Article by Jozef Keher, CSSR Deputy Minister for Technical and Investment Develop-
ment: "Conmissioning of the V-l and Management of Final Construction Nork"]

[Text] The construction of nuclear power stations is a complex,
technically demanding undertaking in all aspects, which makes
great demands on investment funds and capacities, while the con-
struction work involves a special responsibility toward society.
In the 1970's, Czechoslovakia began the construction of com-
mercially tested nuclear power stations of the VVER 440 type.

The Soviet Union functioned as supplier of the technical plans,
including deliveries of the equipment making up the primary
circuit, Czechoslovakia provided the plans and deliveries for

the secondary circuit and the auxiliary facilities. This article
gives a brief analysis of the problems of material and scheduling
support of construction-installation and startup work in the con-
cluding stage of construction. The method of managing this pro-
cess in the case of the V-l power station and its efficiency,
which made it possible to put the first unit into operation
within 68 months of the beginning of excavations for the main
power production unit, are analyzed.

Industrial construction of nuclear power equipment takes different routes different
countries. A number of factors specific to each country determine the main outlines
of national technical policy on nuclear power, and especially the types of nuclear
reactors used in power stations.

We developed the first heavy water reactor in the 1960's and put it into operation
in 1972. The 1970's saw a change in the concept of development of Czechoslovak
nuclear power production, because we began the construction of series-produced
vvsa-aao reactors, which had been proven in operation.

The construction of the first nuclear power plants of this type is covered by the
intergovernmental agreement of 30 April 1970 between the Soviet Union and Czechoslo-
vakia. This construction work is a component of an extensive problem* which is re-
lated to nuclear power's indispensable role in the further development of the
national economy and to the development of the Czechoslovak production-technical

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

base, particularly the power production machinery sector, which manufactures power
production equipment of extraordinary size. A further problem is the need to con-
centrate capital construction resources and manpower on critical programs and to see
that Czechoslovakia is suitably represented in bilateral and multilateral inter-
governmental agreements on cooperation and specialization in equipment production,
mutual provision of nuclear power equipment and scientific and technical cooperation.

The construction of the V-l power station in Jaslovske Bohunice was begun and is
proceeding in the context of this problem, but subject to material and time limi-
tations. If we wish to analyze the problems of commissioning the V-l, i.e. of the
concluding stage, which make use of the preceding critical stage, i.e. performance
of the capital construction itself (beginning with planning work, and continuing
with production of the equipment and performance of the installation and construction
work), we must give a partial summary of it.

In March 1970 the Presidium of the CSSR Government agreed to the construction of a
nuclear power station with a capacity of 880 MW consisting of two VVER-AAO model
v-zao units. Subsequent decrees designated the main measures to be taken in support
of construction and established the schedules for commissioning the units.

In the course of the preplanning and planning preparation, when the supplier system
was being created, there were considerable shortfalls as a result of incompletely
worked out supplier—purchaser relations--that frequent oblique expression which
negatively characterizes Czechoslovak capital construction. There occurred changes
in the assignment of deliveries and technical designs and many changes in the con-
struction performance plans (particularly the location of the boron facilities under
the reactor room and changes in the "racks" [? for electrical equipment]). By 1
OCtober 1974, only 7.6 percent of budgeted funds had been spent, and 30 percent of
planning work, 32 percent of construction work and 25 percent of delivery and in-
stallation of process equipment had been completed.

These circumstances created the danger of a shortfall in meeting final deadlines
estimated at about 24 months. Efforts to bring about a turn for the better resulted
in a confirmation of the construction network chart by all participants at the VHJ
and ministry levels in May 1975.

In the subsequent course of construction, in spite of gradual improvement, the re-
sults of insufficient provision of construetion-installation and equipment production
capacities, the postponement of deliveries of foreign equipment, and changes in
technical design made themselves felt, necessitating further updating of the network
chart and changes in the construction milestones, but nonetheless we must consider
the May 1975 network chart as a change to a more efficient and effective solution of
the problem. During construction of the V-l power station, which was built using
extremely complex purchaser-supplier relationships, but also with a certain amount
of good experience from the construction of a complex nuclear power project, the A—l
power station, nonetheless there was a repetition of errors and problems. which
manifested themselves primarily as critical time losses in the period of investor
preparation and especially planning preparation and as a failure to settle supplier-
purchase relationships. The undeniable newness and complexity of this type of con-
struction were objective causes. In addition, changes resulting from stepped-up of
nuclear safety weakened our capability to use experience from previous projects.

43

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Difficulties were also created by differing methods of planning. by the use of
Czechoslovak state standards. and by their relationships to the standards and tech-
nical specifications according to which equipment is produced and delivered by the
Soviet Union. These problems can be solved in a positive manner only by a rational
approach on the part of all construction participants, i.e. by teamwork under the
leadership of the investor and systematic. skilled cooperation between the general
designer and the contractors for construction, installation and startup work.

To achieve maximum coordination between the organizations taking part in the con-
struction of a nuclear power station and to assure fulfillment of assignments as

they arise at all management levels, the Federal Ministry of Fuels and Power appoint-
ed the Interdepartmental Startup Commission for the V-l power station (MSK) by agree-
ment with the relevant ministers.

The MSK functioned as a collective body composed of deputy ministers, representatives
of the state oversight organs and responsible representatives of enterprises, led

by the Deputy Minister for Investment, Ministry of Fuels and Power. Leading Soviet
specialists also took part in its work.

The main tasks of the MSK were:

--to approve the most important startup programs,

--to grant permission for commencement of the key stages of startup on the basis of
documents attesting that the equipment and operating personnel were ready and with
the agreement of the oversight bodies.

--to solve major technical and organizational problems,

—-to designate measures aimed at assuring adherence to schedules.

To see that tasks were carried out at the construction site and to exercise day-to-
day leadership, the Startup Management Group was created and designated the repre-
sentative of the MSK. The Startup Management Group (SR8) consisted of leading staff
members of the investor, operator and contractor organizations. Soviet specialists
also took part in its work.

The main tasks of the SRS were:

-—to specify approaches and approve specific procedures,

--to settle technical questions arising from the startup plan,

--to validate documents certifying that equipment and operating sets were ready for
each of the startup stages.

--to discuss and approve the results of tests,
--on the basis of testing results from the preceding stages and approved certifica-

tions of the readiness of equipment and personnel, to submit recommendations that
the Interdepartmental Startup Commission agree to the commencement of subsequent

stages.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The SRS performed its functions by means of working groups created for the most
important systems in the power station (scientific leadership, primary circuit,
secondary circuit, electrical, measuring and regulating equipment, dosimetry and
air engineering, special purification and the like). The working groups were com-
posed of staff members from the operator, contractor and investment organizations.

The main tasks of the working groups were:

--to make sure that the systems and equipment were complete and ready for tests,
--to produce reports on the readiness of systems and equipment,

-—to develop programs of work,

-—to conduct tests,

--to formulate conclusions based on evaluation of the tests,

--to rest operating personnel.

The progress of startup work was carefully monitored by the Czechoslovak Atomic
Energy Commission, the Slovak Office of Labor Safety, the SSR Chief Public Health
Officer and the Kraj Public Health Station in Bratislava. Their designation as
oversight bodies and their tasks in the testing process stemmed from the relevant
Czechoslovak laws and nocices and from their own by-laws.

Even though in management terms this situation at the construction site was intoler-
able and uncontrollable at all levels from the management group down to the working
group, it did prove possible to master the situation by means of rational approaches
on the part of the construction participants, the help given by the ministries,

the active assistance of Soviet specialists, and particularly their guidance. A
particularly useful and helpful role in these complex relationships was played by
the investor organization, which successfully mastered a situation stemming from
recent changes: a technical design was accepted which in many cases had to be
carried out in a short time span, even though it was frequently not possible to work
out the technical documentation supporting it and no one knew how deliveries were to
be assured.

This indicates that much can be accomplished by an extraordinary approach and
especially by commitment, but this requires extraordinary efforts and an extreme
degree of coordination and leads to increased expenditures; ultimately, however, it
shortens the deadlines for the performance of finishing work in the period when the
project becomes the most complex and encounters the highest demands for work quality.
This must be backed up by the results of tests in the individual stages, such as in-
coming tests of selected process equipment, circulation flushing, pressure tests of
the primary and secondary circuits, initial tests of the electrical, measuring and
regulation equipment, hot tests, the physical and power production startups and

their associated experiments, final comprehensive operation and test operation.

Each of these phases involves a number of new, but also recurring, problems, which
very often resulted from insufficient coordination of the planning documentation;

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this manifested itself to a critical degree in incorrect relationships between the
primary circuit (Soviet perf0rmance plan) and the secondary section (Czechoslovak
deliveries and performance plan).

An especially important item in the first half of 1978 was the problem of use of

the Czechoslovak state standards and their reconciliation with equipment delivered
from abroad, where the knowledge of the material problems and a correct design
approach on the part of engineers and staff members of the state oversight bodies

and the state Office of Standards and Measurements made it possible to find a way

of solving the problem with surprising ease. In some cases additional modifications
were made on equipment that had been delivered, and in some instances exceptions
were adopted, but with adherence to and maintenance of the main conditions for equip-
ment operating safety and personnel safety.

The critical tests before agreement to begin physical startup of the first block
could be secured were the hot tests, which are tests of the process equipment as a
complex under nonradioactive conditions. These tests had to be interrupted because
of defects in coordination between the functions of the primary and secondary
sections. It took almost 2 weeks of continuous work to revise the performance plans
for the electrical and automation equipment on-site and necessitated the direct
cooperation of designers, installers and startup workers.

In the first stage of the power production startup, during the experiments and
during operation, the following main problems and shortcomings emerged:

--The performance plan for the electrical. measuring and regulating equipment was
not adequately coordinated, which resulted in many problems in the concluding stage
of the tests. These problems were solved through extraordinary measures by a multi-
disciplinary group composed of designers, installers and test engineers on-site.

--'1'he general contractor for equipment and the final suppliers failed to coordinate
the overall startup proceSs for the secondary section at a level adequate for startup.
A particularly noticeable shortcoming emerged in providing process interconnections
and relations between operating conditions in the individual operating sets, which
unnecessarily complicated testing and prolonged the work. In the secondary circuit
of a nuclear power station, it is insufficient to use an approach similar to that
used for conventional thermal power stations. The general contractor for equipment
did not create the conditions for overall coordination in preparation for compre-
hensive testing in continuous operation. This coordination was achieved only with
reference to the particular operating set being tested. There was no comprehensive
management element (which might consist of the shift engineer and other necessary
workers on the shift) with a comprehensive knowledge of operating problems in the
secondary section and their relationship to the primary circuit. These functions
had to be provided collectively by a startup group from Atomove elektrarre and
Soviet specialists.

--The first trail run of the secondary section revealed certain shortcomings of
design concept:

a. The condensers were filled with demineralized water through only one pipe other
than the sprayer. which made it impossible to make up losses during operation or
other condensate losses (resolved for the moment by a temporary hookup).

66

FOR OFr'ClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b. The coolant flow for the feedwater pump gland is connected to the demineralized
water makup line, and there was a water pressure drop in the pump shutoff unit: a
brief pulse—type pressure drop was sufficient to shut off the feedwater pumps. Hith
this design, the operation of the feedwater pumps was unreliable.

c. The shutoff mechanisms monitoring water levels in the steam generators require
sensitive regulation in about a 7-cm range. A brief dynamic change in the water
level is sufficient to shut off the turhogenerators.

d. The system of shutoff devices protecting the individual machines and equipment
was overdimensioned and did not allow for the higher priority given to operating con-
dition requirements for the reactor and the primary circuit.

c. A basis for reliable diagnosis of emergency conditions by multiple sensors and
subsequent actuation of the shutoff devices by selection of, say, 2 out of 3 sensors.
was not always observed for the shutoff and protective devices.

f. Components of high reliability and quality were not always chosen in Czechoslo-
vak—supplied monitoring, regulating and electrical equipment (even for auxiliary
equipment).

--The automatic regulating systems could not be adjusted by the date set for trial
of the turbines. It was necessary to put these systems into operation during the
first running-up to the various power output levels. It is impossible to run both
turibnes without automatic regulation.

Major problems arose in the adjustment of the automatic regulating system for the
following reasons:

a. the regulators were prototypes and proved to have problems,
b. the supplier did not have a sufficient number of spare parts.
c. full laboratory testing and adjustment were not performed before installation.

Accordingly it was necessary to repeat the laboratory testing while the turbines were
being run by the operator, to take extraordinary steps to provide the spare parts,
and to arrange servicing by the producers. The defects were frequently found only

by the operator, and the supplier organizations were unable to eliminate them
expeditiously and assure continuous availability of their specialists during adjust-
ments, which prolonged the process of power production startup at the 35 percent
power level and made it impossible to proceed to a higher output level.

--The electrical equipment supplied proved to be unreliable in operation in some
cases, and it became necessary to replace components or make additional modifications
during tests. The scope of these was small, and accordingly it was possible to
eliminate these problems more expeditiously than in the case of the measuring and
regulating equipment.

with the exception of these problems, all participants in the construction work
managed to cut their performance time, particularly in the concluding stages of con-

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

struction, installation and startup work; the first unit was connected into the
electrification system at the end of 1978 and its power startup was continued under
conditions which led steadily to stabilization of its operation. The first unit
was put into operation 68 months after the beginning of excavations for the main
power production unit. .

It was possible to eliminate fundamental problems which decreased operating re-
liability, and in the second half of 1979 the unit operated in the power system with
quite different, more favorable results.

My survey and analysis of the problems might perhaps seem to be too critical and to
fail to give due recognition to the quantity and quality of work done by the construc-
tion participants; but the high demands regarding the quality of nuclear power equip-
ment and its reliability and safety cannot be measured only by the size of the ex-
penditures, the intensity of the work and the devotion of the workers: the critical
result is reliable and safe operation with optimum economy.

Construction of the second unit proceeded simultaneously with work on the first.
The participants in the construction work made excellent use of the lessons learned
on the first unit and dealt with their assignment well; the necessary changes in
the documentation for the second unit were quickly made and higher—quality prepara-
tions were made, even though problems with deliveries were repeated in the case of
the second unit. The devoted and, above all, the skillful work of construction
participants, workers and engineers were a positive factor in the key stages of
work on the primary circuit and the electrical, measuring and regulating equipment,
and in the construction finishing work, with the result that in some cases the time
requirements were decreased to as little as half that needed on the first unit, in—
cluding startup and adjustment work, while the quality of all work was considerably
higher. The result was a successful power-production startup and trial operation,
and current fulfillment of the production plan with minimal stoppages due to mal-
functions. The reactor pressure vessel in the second unit was set in the reactor
pit in June 1979, and the power production startup of the block and the beginning of
power production came in March 1980.

Conclusion

The construction of nuclear power stations on the planned scale and on schedule is
a complex and demanding task in all respects. It can be accomplished through a
fundamental improvement of investor, planning and construction preparation and by
better management of all aspects of the work. Special account must be taken of the
following circumstances:

--The rapid development of technical designs subsequently leads to running changes
in the planning documentation not only in repeated construction of vvrn-aao units,
but especially in the construction of the first VVER-lOOO units.

«The development of the production and technical base for nuclear power equipment
and the construction of nuclear power stations constitutes the main structural
transformation of the Czechoslovak power machinery industry as regards quality
(industrial utilization of nuclear technology) and the extent of capacities, re-
sources and manpower taking part in these changes.

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--The material and social complexity of this process is intensified by the coexist-
ing demanding situation in the national economy, particularly in capital construction,
as a result of which the priority of nuclear power plant construction must be con-
tinually asserted in planning, construction and installation work and the production
of equipment, which leads to increased demands on capacities.

This circumstance shows itself particularly in the difficulty experienced in meeting
established deadlines for commissioning of individual units and in the need to take
constant action, even in the central economic and political leadership. to assure
that the nuclear power stations are built. The further expansion of nuclear power
plant construction requires:

--Discussion by central organizations of the current organizational arrangements and
the management level that has been achieved as they relate to the scale of nuclear
power station construction through 1990, including the necessary amount of work in
progress. and to existing regulations on capital construction, so as to achieve
greater centralization of management, greater integration of the activities of the
various trades. unambiguous and inescapable designation of the production participants‘
responsibilities. and a considerable simplification of supplier-purchaser relations.
The measures which emerge from this discussion should be implemented, even by the
economic organizations. Finally, the process of managing preparation and performance
should be developed to the point of optimal integration and centralization of nuclear
power plant capital construction.

COPYRIGHT: SN’I‘L n. p.. 1981

8480
CSO: 5100/3019

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

QUALITY CONTROL PROCEDURES FOR V-l EQUIPMENT DESCRIBED
Prague JADERNA ENERGIE in Slovak No 6, Apr 81 pp 160-143

[Article by Hiroslav Herman, VUJE [Research Institute of Nuclear Power), Jaslovske
Bohunice: "Incoming and Pre-Operation Tests of Materials in Selected Equipment for
the V-l Power Station"]

[Text] This article describes the system for assuring the quality
of materials used in selected equipment for Units 1 and 2 of the
V-l power station in Bohunice during incoming and pro-operation
tests. It covers the main findings emerging from this process,
including a description of organization for the testing work and a
description of the methods and test procedures used.

1. Introduction

An important factor in assuring nuclear safety is assurance of the integrity of
materials in selected equipment in the primary circuits of nuclear power units.

Tr meet these requirements. during construction of the V-l power station in Bohunice
a set of nondestructive flaw detection tests of the basic materials and the weld
materials and weld overlays in the most important equipment of the primary circuits
of Units 1 and 2 were carried out. Below we describe the approaches to testing, the
procedures themselves. and the ways of evaluating the results.

2. The Testing System

Work related to the testing of selected equipment for the V-l power station began

on the basis of an FHPE [Federal Ministry of Fuels and Power] Decree of 29 July 1975.
The scientific research base of Atomove elektrarne [Nuclear Power Stations] Bohunice
developed a draft program for testing activity which was issued under the title
"Testing Plan for Selected Equipment of the V-l Power Station." After extensive
comment, the draft was adopted in August 1976 as a document specifying:

--the choice of nuclear power equipment to be included in the category of ”selected”
equipment,

--organizational support of preparatory and testing work,
--requirements regarding the testing methods themselves,

--the locations, extent, schedules and methods of testing the materials,

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-criteria for evaluating the quality of the materials.

1 terms of time. the tests were distributed among the installation stage (incoming
eats), the startup stage (pre-operation tests) and the permanent operation stage
>perating tests) for each unit.

.1 The Purposes of Incoming and Operating Tests of Selected Equipment

1e purpose of incoming tests of the selected equipment was to check the quality

E the material and the welded joints of the equipment when it was delivered by the
roducer. This assured that all unacceptable defects were eliminated at the test
aints before installation. The group of selected equipment for Units 1 and 2 of
ne V-2 power station included the functionally most important elements of the
rimary circuits. These were: the reactor set, the JsSOO main circulation piping
nd Volume compensator piping, the main gate valves for the JsSOO piping, the hy-
raulic sections of the main circulating pumps, the steam generators and volume
ompensator, the special water purification fitters and the bubbler tank of the
olume compensator.

re-operation tests of the condition of the material were carried out on the same
quipment as was subjected to incoming tests. Their purposes were:

-to check the quality of installation of the equipment in assemblies which were
ritical to the integrity of the primary circuit,

-to determine the initial, zero-point condition of the material in the equipment
or the purpose of periodic operating tests.

3 the foregoing indicates, incoming and pre-operation tests; and especially their
esults, constitute a precondition for the decision to begin the physical startup
f a unit.

he bulk of the testing in these stages was carried out at the V-l power station by
he Federal Ministry of Fuels and Power's testing laboratory in the Research In—
titute of Nuclear Power [VUJE], Bohunice. The organization responsible for state
versight over nuclear safety and stage specialized oversight over labor safety was
he investor, represented by plant No 01 of the k.u.o. Investicna vystavba energetiky
lovenska [Slovak Investment Company for Power Construction] in the case of incoming
ests, and the operator of the V-l power station, Atomove elektrarne Bohunice, in

he case of pro-operation tests.

t peak intensity, 35 members of the ministry‘s testing laboratory in VUJE and 15
embers or cooperating organizations were taking part in the testing.

Organization of the Testing

esponsible persons from the investor organization and the research laboratory in
UJE were entrusted with organizational support for incoming testing. Their tasks

ere: \

-preparation of the equipment for tests,

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--perfornance and evaluation of the tests. and where necessary the making of repairs
and repetition of the tests.

VUJE worked out more detailed programs for incoming tests, since it was the principal
counterpart of the supplier in securing approval of the tests.

The tests themselves were carried out in accordance with deadlines in the time
schedule for complete construction of Units 1 and 2 with the required quality. Be-
cause pre-operation tests were carried out during the first and second reviews of the
equipment in the units during the startup period, the preparation for these tests
was much more demanding than that for incoming tests. Accordingly, detailed work
schedules were developed, and the occasion was taken to solve the problem of per-
forming construction and installation finishing work, preparation of equipment for
functional and material tests, performance of the reviews, and preparation of the
equipment for the next stage of startup.

During the first and second reviews of the units, two working groups consisting of
representatives of the operator, its maintenance and quality control subdivisions,
the investor organization, the equipment supplier and the materials testing organ—
ization were created; in accordance with the relevant schedules for startup work,

these organizations coordinated:

--preparation of the equipment for testing and review,

--testing, evaluation of the tests, and elimination of defects where necessary,
--preparation of the equipment for the next stage of startup work,
--pcrformance of final installation, construction and insulation work.

Responsible representatives of the Soviet supplier and members of the Soviet startup
group took part in both working groups.

It speaks well of the work of these groups that the deadlines established for the
performance of the tests were completely met. This confirms that they were correct-
ly chosen and that the experience obtained in performing them could be applied in
the construction of subsequent units.

4. Incoming Tests of Materials and Welds in Selected Equipment

we should note by way of introduction that the incoming tests of the material of
selected equipment for Unit 1 of the V-l power station were the first action in the
process of assuring the quality of nuclear power equipment for use in corlwrcial
nuclear power stations in Czechoslovakia. It follows from this that support work
and the testing itself involved extensive preparatory discussions and demanding
organizational work.

4.1 Scope and Methods of Testing and Evaluation
The scope of the incoming tests. involving designation of test locations and per—

centage of items to be tested was so chosen for each procedure that tests would be
made of the quality of:

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--the majority of production welds in the equipment,
--se1ected surfaces of the material used in manufacture,
--most of the surfaces of corrosion-resistant overlays,
--surfacc on which installation welds would be made,
--connection pieces on the equipment,

-characteristic dimensions of certain pieces of equipment.

During the performance of the incoming tests, their initial scope was changed as a
result of the test results. For example, selective ultrasonic testing of the
material of the JsSOO main circulation piping and volume compensator piping was
replaced by loo-percent testing, and selective testing of certain welds on the
main circulating pumps by overheating was also replaced by loo-percent testing;
the testing of the main gate valves for the JsSOO tubing was expanded to include
overheating of the material in the central casting, and so on.

Direct visual inspection accounted for the largest percentage of the test methods,
while ultrasonic and overheating methods accounted for about equal proportions of
the volume methods, and of the surface methods the capillary method was applied
only to austenitic materials, while only the magnetic powder method was used for
other materials. If defects were found, all possible methods were used to identify
them precisely.

For testing of dimensions we used measuring devices capable of giving the required
degree of precision. The Rockwell method was used to measure hardness. The extent
of the ferromagnetic phase in austenitic materials was determined by the eddy
current method.

Structural analyzes of the materials at selected locations were carried out by non-
destructive metallography using the impression method. Mechanical tests which
would have given a complete picture of the quality the materials were lacking; they
could not be performed because test samples of the material were not provided with
the equipment.

The tests were carried out using instruments and materials which were good by inter-
national standards: equipment of proven quality recommended by the Czechoslovak
Flaw Detection Center was used. VUJE developed its own equipment for identifying
the positions of austenitic welds and preparing the surfaces of materials for the
taking of impressions.

For visual inspection of the inner surfaces of reactor control system tubing and
other inaccessible surfaces of the equipment inside the reactor, Skoda Plzen develop-
ed a manipulator which c0u1d maneuver a television camera by remote control.

The results of nondestructive testing of welds and overlays were evaluated in
accordance with the "Regulations for Testing Welds and Overlays in Assemblies and

Structural Members of Nuclear Power Stations, Experimental and Research Nuclear
Reactors, and Sets," PK 1515-72.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he quality of the material used was evaluated in terms of the producer's technical
specifications for each type of equipment selected. Instances in which defects ex-
ceeded acceptable standards were resolved by a special approach. As part of this
approach the Czechoslovak side always developed an expert judgment, in the production
of which research organizations in the materials, welding and nondestructive testing
fields participated. Minor defects were dealt with as they occurred by the simpler
approach of repair in situ.

The other characteristics tested (e.g. hardness, characteristic dimensions) were
compared with the figures in the technical documentation sent with the equipment.

5. Pre—Operation Tests of the Condition of Materials and Welds of Selected Equipment

The program of pre~operation testing in Unit 1 of the V-l power station was demanding
because of the concurrent performance of final installation work in the areas where
the tests were being made. The situation was much more favorable on Unit 2 owing

to the status of finishing work.

5.1 Scope and Methods of Testing and Evaluation

The scope and methods of pre-operation testing were worked out in the "Plan for
Testing of Selected Equipment for the V—l Power Station" mentioned above.

The scope of pre-operation testing was so chosen that the results and findings
would provide complete starting data for periodic operating tests. In addition,
the quality of installation work was monitored in assemblies which were important
in assuring the integrity of the primary circuit.

The test methods were chosen so that they could be repeated during in-operation
tests. Among volume testing methods, the amount of testing by overheating was
minimized and the amount of testing of the material of the reactor pressure vessel
was adapted to the capabilities of the manipulator used or the concrete container.

During the test work, several manipulators developed by VUJB and Skoda for operating
tests were themselves tested. They included the TELEKAR manipulator for carrying a
television camera during inspection of the interior surfaces of the main circulating
piping and a modernized manipulator for remote visual inspection of the interior
surfaces of SOR [? protective system] piping by television.

One shortcoming was the fact that there were no tests of a manipulator which would
allow remote visual and ultrasonic testing of the reactor pressure vessel, a .
manipulator for remote visual inspection of the inner surfaces of the primary steam
generator collectors and one for inspecting the inner.surfaces of the volume compen-
sator pressure vessel, all of which were already available at the time of the first
and second operating tests on the equipment. During pre—operation testing of the
reactor pressure vessel, however, an equipment set and procedure for ultrasonic
testing corresponding to the equipment set of the Swedish TRC company's inserted
manipulator were applied.

In pre—operation testing, the problem of separating test operations from various
stages of startup work arose to a greater extent than in incoming tests.

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As part of pre-operating testing of Unit 1, during the first and second reviews the
whole range of test operations prescribed by the testing plan was repeated.

After comparison of results from the two sets of tests performed on Unit 1 and con-
sideration of breakdown mechanisms, the following set of test operations was drafted
and used on Unit 2:

a. The first stage of pre—operation tests was carried out after the pressure test
of the secondary side of the steam generators and consisted of testing of:

—-the pressure vessel of the steam generator. from outside,

--the steam collector of the steam generator.

b. The second stage of pre-operation tests was carried out after the first and

second hydraulic tests of the equipment as part of the first review and included
testing of:

—-the installation welds of reactor connections to the main circulation piping,

--the inner weld overlays of the reactor pressure vessel,

--the installation welds on the main circulation piping and the volume compensator
piping.

--the nuts and bolts in the primary collectors of the steam generators,

--the outside of the volume compensator.

c. The third stage of pre-operation tests was carried out after the third hydraulic
test of the equipment as part of the second review and included tests of:

-—the interior surfaces of the steam generator pressure vessels. including the nuts
and bolts of themanholes,

--the steam generator primary circuit collectors, including tightness tests of the
tube plates,

--the interior of the volume compensator pressure vessel and other selected equip-
ment to the full extent prescribed in the testing plan.

This division of pre—operation testing into three stages helped decrease the time
required for testing during the first and second reviews and helped make possible
smooth performance of insulation work on the selected equipment.

The results of nondestructive testing were evaluated in terms of the same principles
as were used in incoming testing.

6. The System for Preparing Documentation, Document Storage, and Machine Processing

The evaluation of test results were worked up into partial records which contained
all data required for subsequent tests, and also reported the test evaluations.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annexes to the documents gave Identification data on the position and nature of
acceptable defects which were found and data on the number, nature, position and

means of elimination of unacceptable defects.

The results of the individual tests reported in the partial records were aggregated
into final records for each piece of equipment. These forms also contained sugges-
tions for subsequent installation or startup work.

All of the documents are stored by the investor's or operator's relevant subdivision
and by the ministry's testing laboratory in VUJB.

To make efficient use of this documentation, VUJE developed and tested a system for
machine processing of the quality documentation.

7. Conclusion

Now that the units of the V—l power station have been successfully put into operation,
we may state that the aims established for assuring the quality of materials in
selected equipment have been met. We should, however, note again that this was the
first performance of a demanding program in this field, which required effort not
only directly in the testing process, but also in the preparations for these opera-
tions, in working out the test programs and the like. The fact that all of the
planned measures were carried out was also the result of a considerable amount of
active cooperation by the investor, the operator and the research organizations
which were involved. Thus Czechoslovakia has created a base for the performance of
demanding tasks to assure the quality of other nuclear power stations with VVER 440
units which will be built.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL n. p., 1981

8480
cso: 5100/3019

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

swamp or v-1 rowan STATION otscnnnm
Prague JADERNA tumors in Czech No 4, Apr 81 pp 143-148

(Article by Viliam Ziman, Dominik Carnecki, Vladimir Twaroska and Vincent Capicik,

Atomove elektrarne [Nuclear Power Stations) Jaslovske Bohunice: "The Startup of
the V-l Power Station"]

[Text] This article describes the temporal and material aspects of
startup work on Units 1 and 2 of the v-1 nuclear power station, with
particular reference to work on the primary circuit from the flushing

and pressure tests on the equipment to the power production startup
and 72-hour comprehensive testing of the power station.

1. Introduction

Startup work on a nuclear power station is the concluding stage of its construction
in which the equipment is put in order (broken in) and the individual machines and
functional systems are tested. A large amount of startup work (breaking-in and
testing) was performed concurrently with installation. The testing of the individual
elements or functional systems is carried out together with that of the relevant
e1ecrrica1 equipment and measuring and regulating equipment (MaR). The nuclear
safety work which is done during the startup stage as a specific requirement for

the startup and operation of a nuclear power station may be divided into (1) the
work leading up to introduction of the nuclear fuel, i.e. the nonradioactive tests,

and (2) the period following introduction of the fuel into the reactor, i.e. the
radioactive tests.

The following procedure was used in startup and breaking-in work:

--Nonradioactive tests:

1. Plush, pressure resistance and tightness tests of process systems (including
the first hydraulic test.

2. Pressure tests and circulation flushing of prﬂnary circuit (second hydraulic
test),

3. First review.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

4. Hot tests (third hydraulic test)

5. Second review.

-Radioactive tests:

1. Physical startup,

2, Power production startup

3. 72-hour comprehensive trial.

The main purposes of the nonradioactive tests are:

--achieving the required cleanliness of the inner surfaces of piping and equipment,
--checking the strength and tightness of the installed piping and equipment,
--testing the quality and completeness of installation of this equipment,

--testing the operability of the systems and equipment in conditions similar to
those of actual operation,

--measuring the real parameters and characteristics and testing the operating modes
and interactions of the equipment and systems, and comparing them with the design
figures. -

--acquisition of skills and experience by operating personnel,

--checking overall readiness for introduction of fuel.

The aims of the radioactive tests are:

--cxperimental determination of the operating physical characteristics inside the
core,

--testing the operation of the power station in normal, transition and emergency
conditions,

--bringing the power station to the rated output.

In the preparatory phase it was necessary to work up and evaluate the startup docu—
mentation. we evaluated a one-stage working draft, on the basis of which we develop-
ed standard programs of startup work on the individual process units and for the
main stages of startup. 0n the basis of these programs we worked out the operational
programs which took account of the specific status of installation and startup work.
A total of 178 operational programs were developed for the nonradioactive tests in
the two units.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Organizing Final Installation Work and Commissioning of the Unit

Startup work on the primary circuit with its auxiliary systems and equipment was
performed by staff members of EEO [Bohunice Electric Power Stations] with extensive
participation by Soviet startup personnel. Startup work on the systems and equip-
ment designed by the Czechoslovak side was performed by the Skoda regional enter-
prise through its suppliers.

Each of the main stages in the startup work requires a certain degree of readiness

of the process equipment and structures, so that final construction and installation
work proceeded in parallel with the startup work. when Unit 2 was put into operation.
there also arose the requirement of maintaining safe operation of Unit 1. which was
already functioning.

The complexity of the task required close coordination of startup and breaking-in
work. Accordingly we adopted the following startup management organization (we give
the organization used for Unit 2). The operations staff supported and was respon-
sible for technical management of all final construction and installation work and
for atartup in accordance with the startup schedule.

The construction project leadership created the conditions for material and time
fulfillment of the startup schedule for Unit 2 and arranged and supported economic
activity during final construction and installation work and startup, and decided

on and carried out economic activities.

The Operations group represented the executive and-—through its working groups--the
performance arm for the decisions and orders of the operations staff. It represented
the technical, process and coordination leadership of the working groups.

The working groups developed operational programs and schedules for performance and
completion of the specific tasks within the schedules established by decisions of
the operations staff and operations group. They saw to the performance of con-
struction-installation, startup and break—in work by all trades.

Working groups made up of representatives of participating organizations, i.e.

IVES [Slovak Investment Company for Power Construction], Soviet Specialists, ESP
[Energoprijekt], the Skoda regional enterprise, Hydrostav and 330 were created for:
~-the process water system,

--the llO-kV switchgear for in-plant power supply.

--in—plant power consumption and "racks" [? for electrical equipment],

--the control room for the unit, the relay panels, the measuring and regulating
equipment, and the secondary section,

--primary circuit auxiliary systems,

--the primary circuit itself,

59

FOR OFT-10“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

--the turbine room and central pumping station,
--the diesel generator station,
-—air engineering.

A scientific leadership group for startup, with representatives from E30, VUJB and
CSKAE [Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Commission] was created to manage the preparation
and performance of the physical and power production startup programs.

To limit unnecessary manipulations and to assure labor safety, starting with the
beginning of the circulation flushing it was necessary to institute a special labor
organization regime in the main power production unit. Conditions were created for
controlled access to the primary circuit areas, and operation in continuous shifts
was begun. All activities in the main power production unit were subordinated to
startup and break-in work.

3. Plush, Pressure and Tightness Tests of the Process Systems

The process systems were flushed out with demineralized water at a speed of 2 to 3
m/soc so as to remove installation dirt, welding overflows and extraneous objects
from the inner surfaces. Demineralized water in the required quantities and of the
required quality was provided by the chemical water treatment facilities of the V-l
or A-l plant. The piping in the process water system was flushed with process water
ted by vo-aoo pumps in the central pumping station. Systems with a gaseous working
medium were blown out with compressed air. Systems with temporary loops were rinsed
in two ways: first with the temporary diverters installed, followed by a second
circulation rinsing of the loops in their planned final configuration. Changes of
water were also made at the same time, as needed. After the flush, the water was
drained to the outside water drainage system, since it contained no chemical reagents.

1hc flushing process was monitored in terms of the quality of the flush water. When
95 percent transmittance was reached, the flushing was terminated.

After the flushing was complete, the unnecessary temporary diverters were removed
and the process units which were already in their planned configurations were sub-
Jected to pressure and tightness tests. One of the most important pressure tests

is that carried out on the various loops of the primary circuit. Successful perfor-
mance of this test makes it possible to begin partial emplacement of the insulation
and also decreases the likelihood that the pressure tests of the primary circuit
before circulation flushing will last excessively long. In the first unit, the
loops were put under pressure one by one with the normal makeup pumps. The greatest
degree of leakage was shown by the flange joints of the self-contained circuits

in the main circulating pumps. All cases of leakage found were immediately
corrected. During strength tests of the loops in Unit 2 considerably less leakage
was found, and this fact, in combination with the performance of simultaneous
pressure tests of all the loops, considerably decreased the time consumed in the
tests.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Circulation Flushing of the Primary Circuit

The flushing of the inner surfaces of the primary circuit was carried out with
circulating water heated to 160°. The heating and circulation of the water were
carried out by the main circulating pumps. it is extremely important for the per-
formance of this testing stage that certain systems in the secondary section be in
good operating condition:

--the water heating system,

--the feed water equipment,

--the primary circuit cooling system.

The main objectives in this stage are:

--to test the tightness of the primary circuit,

--to finish testing the welds for compliance with the standards for putting the
primary circuit into operation,

--testing several operating regimes.
--first startup of the main circulating pumps,

--removal of installation dirt from the primary circuit and attainment of a water
purity in the primary circuit which meets the standards,

—-testing the combined operation of systems and equipment.

The circulation flushing of the primary circuit can be divided into several substages:
--filling the primary circuit with water of the requisite quality,

—-pressure tests at 3.5 MPa,

--creation of a nitrogen cushion and heating of the primary circuit to 120° C,
--strength tests of the primary circuit at 17.5 HPa,

--heating the primary circuit to 160° C,

--circulation flushing at 160° and 4 HPa. and water change,

--cooling the primary circuit to ao°-so° C and draining it.

In addition to monitoring the operation of the main auxiliary equipment and systems,
the following work was also done during the circulation flushing:

--monitoring and measuring the heat expansion and displacement of primary circuit
equipment,

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--the secondary stage of removal of protective coatings and passivation of the
secondary side of the steam generator,

--tensometric measurements in Unit 1, used to test the computation procedure used
in the design of the compensation system.

In Unit 1, the hydraulic resistance of the core was simulated by partially covering
the openings in the reactor support housing. A baffle was installed in the separat-
ing ring of the reactor pressure vessel, thus separating the hot and cold legs of
the loops. A "long loop," allowing circulation of the primary circuit water and
replacing the hydraulic resistance of the core, was created by disassembling the
hydraulic section, of the main circulating pumps on loops 4 and 5.

The primary circuit was heated by operating the second and third main circulating
pumps; the temperature rise was 6°-6° per hour. The heating was speeded up by
heating the steam generator with feed water. Later the water change line was sub-
jected to circulation flushing simultaneously with removal of the protective coating
from the steam generator. In both units of the V-l, the required water quality in
the primary circuit was attained as soon as the protective coating had been removed

from the steam generators. After satisfactory results had been obtained for the
steam generators, the circulation flushing was terminated and cooling was begun.

5. First Review of the Equipment
The content of the first review of the equipment was:

--eva1uation of the state of the equipment after hydraulic tests and circulation
flushing,

--evaluation of the reliability of the main and auxiliary equipment of the primary
circuit,

--elimination of all defects and malfunctions found during the circulation flushing,
—-introduction of dummy fuel elements into the core,
--installation and sealing of the reactor.

After cooling the primary circuit to 50° C and draining it, it was possible to pro-
ceed with:

--checking the condition of the equipment in the primary circuit (use of nondes-
tructive methods to test the quality of the metal in equipment and piping, evaluation
of the condition of seating and sealing surfaces as well as other interior surfaces),

--evaluating the quality of the rinsing done on the interior surfaces of the primary
circuit piping and equipment,

--preparing the equipment for the hot tests (introducing the simulator, fitting out
and closing the reactor for the hot tests),

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--elimination of problems and shortcomings in the equipment found during circulation
flushing.

The main document specifying the scope and performance of nondestructive tests is
the "Instructions for Pre-Operation Testing of Selected Equipment in the Bohunice
V-l Nuclear Power Station." The sequence and scope of work in the first review of
the reactor are specified by EBO's working programs. In view of the fact that the
support housing (barrel) and two main circulating pumps were not included in the
circulation flushing of Unit 2, the work done differed from that done on Unit 1.

All surface defects such as scoring. grooves, scratches, rough spots, scoria and

metal spatter which were found at the test points by nondestructive flaw detection
methods were eliminated by grinding.

Final installation and construction work proceeded concurrently with this first
inspection.

6. The Hot Tests

The most important stage of nonradioactive testing of the primary section of a
nuclear power station is the hot tests. These include comprehensive tests of
practically all systems in the reactor and turbine rooms, the operation of all
electrical equipment and the measuring and regulating systems, and tests of their
combined operation in conditions similar to the normal operating regime. Thus it
is the last comprehensive test of the equipment before introduction of the fuel.
The elimination of malfunctions and defects in the equipment does not yet involve
problems of maintaining radiation safety or handling nuclear fuel.

 

Fig. 1. The first container of fresh fuel before its introduction into the reactor
of Unit 1 at the V-l station: a glorious moment for the joint Czechoslovak-Soviet
brigade.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The hot tests themselves can be divided into five substages:

l. filling of the primary circuit, and pressure tests at 3.5 MPa,

2. heating the primary circuit to 120' c and strength testing at 17.5 HPa,
3. heating of the primary circuit to 260° C,

4. functional tests at a primary circuit temperature of 260° C,

5. cooling of the primary circuit.

The main tasks carried out during the hot tests were:

--checking the strength of the upper unit of the reactor, since the process cover
was used during circulation flushing,

--dctermining the hydraulic characteristics of parts inside the reactor and the
primary circuit,

--mcasuring the heat balance of the primary circuit,

—-measuring the thermal expansion and displacement of the equipment,
--comprehensive tests of the reactor protection and regulation system,

--testing of the operation of the equipment in the primary circuit: the volume
compensator system and its safety valves, the bubbler, the main circulating pump.
the main shutoff valves, and the steam generators with their safety valves,
--individual functional tests of auxiliary systems along with the primary circuit,

-—tests of turbogenerator runout,

--sinulation of losses from in-plant consumption, and tests of the automatic equip-
ment for stepwide startup,

--cooling of the primary circuit,
--acquisition of skills and experience by the operating personnel.

To stabilize the primary Circuit's characteristics, the running-up of the equipment
and the planned tests were begun at a primary circuit temperature of 260° C, in
the following sequence:

a. The safety valves of the volume compensator were adjusted by means of auxiliary
equipment produced by Simpellat a primary circuit pressure of 8 "Pa. The functional

tests of the bubbler and volume compensator were carried out at the end of the hot
tests, with satisfactory results.

b. in adjusting the safety valves of the steam generators it was necessary to
make alterations in the pressure system of the surge valves.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c. A test of the separating equipment at t a 260° C =12.5 HPa confirmed

. FPO
that it was operating properly.

P0

d. A comprehensive test of the reactor regulation and protective system was made.

The purpose of this test was comprehensive adjustment and testing of the following
reactor regulation and protective systems:

--the system of emergency protective devices.

--the AC and DC power supply system for the reactor regulation and protective system,
--the control system for the emergency control assaubly dirves,

--the emergency control assembly drives and the ionization chamber.

The tests were made with the reactor filled but not under pressure, at a primary
circuit pressure of 4 MPa, and thereafter at the rated values. Tests confirmed that
all systems were operating properly.

e. The hydraulic characteristics of the primary circuit were measured.

The purpose of these measurenents was to test the expected hydraulic characteristics
of the system and the primary circuit equipment under operating conditions (i.e.
temperature, pressure, coolant flow rate) in stationary and transitional modes. The
measurements consisted of the following subtasks:

—-establishing the relationship between the coolant flow rate and pressure losses
in the core in stationary primary circuit operating modes,

«determination of the hydraulic resistance coefficients of the individual parts of
the primary circuit in stationary modes with different nunbers of main circulating

pumps, and determination of the overall hydraulic characteristics of the primary
circuit,

--determination of coolant back flow in the main circulating loop with the main
circulating pump stopped and the main shutoff valve opened and partly opened,
and determination of the relationship between the flow rate and the degree of
opening of the main shutoff valve,

«measurement of the primary circuit transition characteristics with me main cir-
culating pumps out of operation and being brought up to speed, and determination
of the time dependency of coolant losses and flow in the core and the circulating
loops with the main circulating pumps operating and stopped,

--testing of the coolant flow through the main circulating pump by measurement of
the heat balance in steam generator No l.

[. Measurements of heat losses to the surroundings and the heat capacity of the
primary circuit were made by heating the primary circuit. with circulation being
provided by different numbers of main circulating pumps. Both of these figures are

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

essential for calculating the heat output of the reactor below 5 percent of nominal
output. A knowledge of the heat capacity of the primary circuit is needed for cal-
culations on nonstat ionary modes.

g. Testing and monitoring of gross temperature measurement of the coolant exiting
from the fuel assemblies.

h. The measuring systems in the primary circuit were adjusted and tested.

1. Tests were made of volume compensator operation in regimes using a steam and a
nitrogen cushion, of heating by the electrical heaters. of replacanent of the nitro-
gen cushion by a steam cushion and vice versa, of the makup regime. and of piping
vibration.

j. The expansion of the primary circuit was measured'.

k. Functional tests were performed on the following primary circuit auxiliary systems:

--intermediate circuits of the reactor regulation and protection systal and main
circulating pumps,

--normal makeup,
--steam generator drainage.

1. Turbogenerator runout was tested: these tests for defects in the electrical and
mechanical sections were completed in both units during the physical startup stage.

After all tests included in the hot test stage were completed, we cooled the primary
circuit, checking the operation of the cooling systal in all regimes.

7. The Second Review of the Equipmemt

The content and purpose of this stage were:

—-evaluation of the condition of the equipment after the hot tests and elimination
of any malfunctions or defects,

--final adjustment and testing of the technical transport equipment and elimination
of malfunctions and defects.

—-comparison of the results of the second review with results obtained during
operation.

The review covered the following equipment:
--the reactor vessel,
"parts inside the reactor,

--thc upper unit of the reattor,

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--the outlets of the control, emergency and shim assemblies.
--the interiors of the steam generators,

--the main shutoff valves.

--the interior surfaces of the JsSOO piping,

--thc main circulating pumps,

--the volume compensator and electrical heaters,

-the bubbler.

Defects found during the second review were corrected.

8. Physical Startup

The content and scope of the physical startup experiments included in the program
were chosen to cover all operating requirements regarding the reactor's physical
characteristics. The final results of the experiments on the reactor is an ability
to predict accurately its behavior in various operating modes and thus to assure
safe and economical operation of the power station.

In preparation for physical startup, a step-by-step physical startup program was
worked out for each unit; it covered all the work from preparation of the reactor
and the other equipment for the introduction of the fuel, through the actual loading
of the core and preparation of the reactor for operation, to attainment of the
minimum measurable power. The time interrelations and sequence of performance of
the individual experiments were worked out on a physical startup scheduling chart.
The scope of tests and measurements was spezified by the physical startup work

programs.
To support the startup work by designating areas of activity, responsibility, author-

ity and organizational subordination of supervisors, a set of regulations for work
organization during physical startup and directives on methods of work with an open

primary circuit were drafted.
The physical startup process can be divided into two parts:

1. introduction of fuel,

2. achievement of criticality and performance of the physical startup experiments
themselves.

These two parts are separated by installation work connected with the sealing of
the reactor.

The introduction of the fuel can be divided into faur successive steps:

First stage: introduction of 37 control parts of the HRK [main control assemblies]*,

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Second stage: introduction of 162 fuel elements,

Third stage: introduction of f’ absorbers into the main control assemblies, and
filling of the reactor with boric acid to a level 200 cm from the bottom of the core
basket, i.e. 60 cm below the heads of the fuel elements,

Fourth stage: introduction of the remaining 150 working assemblies at intervals
of 25, 50 and 250 cm, with time delay.

The initial critical stage is attained by decreasing the boric acid concentration
with all working assemblies of the main control assemblies withdrawn. The concen-
tration is decreased by changing water and by saturating the special water purifi-
cation filters No 1.

Note: the results of the physical startup are described in detail in the article
by staff members of VUJE (pp 148-154 of original].

9. The Power-Production Startup

The power-production startup is the concluidng part of startup work on a nuclear
power station, which follows successful completion of the physical startup of the
reactor. The power-production startup consists of gradually bringing the station
up to power. During the power-production startup the functioning of the power
station equipment is checked, normal operating, transitional and emergency modes
are investigated, the self-regulation system is checked, the neutron-physical and
heat engineering characteristics of the core are monitored and the radiation system
is checked at various power levels up to 100 percent.

Experimental work in the power-production startup began with testing of the ioniza-
tion chambers at a power of 5 percent of the nominal figure. At this power the
szation's emissions into the atmosphere are adjusted and the natural circulation is
checked with various numbers of loops connected.

Then the reactor power was gradually increased to 20 percent, 35 percent, 55 percent,
75 percent, 90 percent and 100 percent of the rated figure.

The results of the power production startup in the two units fully confirmed the
design figures and characteristics for the V-l power station, the calculated values

for conditions in the core, and the maintenance of radiation and nuclear safety.
Above all, the tests demonstrated the reliability of the systems that assure nuclear

safety of the unit:
--turbogenerator and main circulator runout,
--automatic diesel generator startup,

-—functioning of the automatic equipment for stage—by-stage startup of important
drive mechanisms,

--reactor shutdown and maintenance of pressure in the primary circuit.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Note: The results of the power-production startup are given in the article by the
VUJE staff members [pp 148-154 in original].

10. Comprehensive 72-Hour Operating Trial

After successful completion of the power-production startup program, we completed
this stage with the 72-hour comprehensive operating trials, which were successful
for both units.

A comparison of the startup work for the two blocks of the V-l power station shows
that in the case of Unit 2 there was a considerable shift of available time to the
stages of preparation of the equipment for the main of work (Fig. 3). The duration
of the main stages was considerably shortened; for example, the circulation flushing
of Unit 2 lasted 13 days, while for Unit 1 it lasted 28 days; the hot test lasted 35
days for Unit 1 and only 13 days for Unit 2. The lengthening of the first and
second reviews, sometimes as a result of delivery problems. provided a sufficient
tune span for high-quality preparation and testing of the process equipment systems.
Unit 2 experienced a minimum number of stoppages resulting from breakdowns of equip-
ment and incorrect operations by the operating personnel.

Conclusion

In comparison with the startup of Unit 1, the time required to bring Unit 2 to
loo-percent power and perform the 72-hour comprehensive operating trials was
decreased by 40 days.

The results achieved in the physical and power—production startup confirmed that
the main characteristics of the primary and secondary circuits were in agreement
with the design figures. Measurement of the self-regulation capability confirmed
that the temperature and power had a negative feedback effect on reactivity.

Measurements confirmed that withdrawal of heat from the core by natural circulation
was sufficient to cool down the reactor in case of an emergency shutdown. Dynamic
tests of the unit, during which the regulators were adjusted, were used to check
correct behavior of the unit in transitional modes.

In the preparation and performance of startup work on Units 1 and 2 of the V-l
power station we obtained a good deal of valuable practical experience. Its use
in the startup of subsequent units with VVER reactors is an indispensable pre-
condition for the development of nuclear power.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. £30. Technicka sprava o spustani l. bloku JE V-l [Technical Report on the
Startup of Unit 1 of the V-l Power Station] (Part 1).

2. E80. Technicka aprava o spustani 2. bloku JE V—l [Technical Report on the
Startup of Unit 2 of the V—l Power Station].

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STARTUP HORK ON UNIT I

- z'ﬁrujigiﬁ’u-mamn .

 

pmm,— 000000 2'11-

2]

ln stages of startup

ll operation

3 percent of rated power
Inned stoppage

percent of rated power
using-1n

{er-production startup
tainment of minimum measurable power
ading of fuel

ysical startup

:ond review

t tests, 3d hydraulic test
rst review

rculatlon flushing

rst hydraulic test

ushing, functional tests

SHT: SNTL n. p., 1981

5100 3019
I 70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RESULTS OF PHYSICAL, POUER PRODUCTION START"? OF V-l UNITS 1 AND 2 DESCRIBED
Prague JADERNA ENERGIE in Czech No 6, Apr 81 pp 148-154

[Article by Stefan Kacmary, Stefan Rohar. Jozef Ricany and Ivan Sarvaic. VUJE
Jaslovske Bohunice: "Results of Physical and Power Production Startup of Units 1
and 2 of the V-l Power Station")

[Text] This article describes the concept and performance
of work during physical and power-production startup of
Units 1 and 2 of the V-l power station in Jaslovske Bohunice.
It presents evaluations of the results of the most important
tests performed on the units. The approach to startup work
is evaluated and suggestions for startup of future VVER-typa
units are given.

1. Introduction

The commissioning of a nuclear power station is the last phase of its construction.
After all construction and installation work has been completed and individual
tests on the various pieces of equipment or partial tests of the various systems
have been performed, one of the most-awaited stages of construction. namely attain-
ment of criticality in the reactor followed by breaking-in the power station equip-
ment, is begun. Following measurements at zero power, the output of the unit is
gradually increased to the rated value. while an extensive program of tests and
measurements is carried out at various power levels. The main purposes of this
program can be summarized as follows:

--testing of the main neutron-physical parameters of the core;

--testing to assure that the nuclear fuel and regulating components have been
correctly introduced;

--determination of the hydraulic, heat engineering and electrical characteristics
of individual pieces of equipment and of the unit as a whole;

--testing of the functions of the control system. automation equipment, and shutoff
and protective elements. and their adjustment;

--testing of the coordination between individual systems;

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

--testing of the operability of the unit in the planned range of nonstationary
transition conditions (operating and emergency conditions);

--mastery of operation of the unit by operating personnel with the assistance of
experienced operators.

The concept and content of the various stages of startup of the V-l were based pri—
marily on experience with VVER-type reactors in the Soviet Union, East Germany and

Bulgaria and on advanced experience of other producers of pressurized-water power
reactors.

0n the basis of standard Soviet programs [1, 2] for the startup of VVER-type nuclear
power stations. we developed detailed work programs for the physical and power pro-
duction startup stages, which following approval became compulsory for performance
of the various tests. Particular attention was devoted to development and mainten-
ance of nuclear and process safety procedures.

During startup of the second unit of the V-l power station, use was made of experience
acquired with Unit 1, as is most strikingly indicated by a comparison of the time
elapsing between introduction of the first fuel cell into the core and achievement

of the planned power: this was 142 days for Unit 1 and only 93 days for Unit 2.

2. Physical Startup

The purpose of the tests included in the physical startup stage was to check the
most important neutron-physical properties of the core. This stage included the
following tests:

——attainment of criticality,

--monitoring control assembly function and the symmetry of loading of the core,
--checking the functioning of emergency protective devices of types I through 111
and determination of the efficiency of the control assemblies by means of withdrawal
at temperatures of 120° and 260°.

--measuring the effectiveness of the boric acid solution and the integral and differ-
ential characteristics of the groups of control assemblies at a coolant temperature
of 120° c,

--measurement of the temperature and pressure coefficients of reactivity.
--measurement of the effectiveness of the boric acid solution, the integral and
differential characteristics of the control assembly groups and the temperature
coefficient of reactivity at 260° C,

--calibration of the neutron flux instruments,

--measurement of the power coefficient of reactivity below 1 percent of nominal
output.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During power-production startup, additional data on the temperature and power co-
efficients of reactivity were obtained (under renctor operating conditions): these
are givon below, together with the results measured in the physical startup stage.

An important part of the preparations for operation of the VVER-type nuclear reactors
in Czechoslovakia was the preparation of the basic software to be used in calculating
the physical parameters of the core. This consisted of adapting Soviet computer pro-
grams [3] which were further expanded, particularly in regard to microscopic para-
meters of cells in the assembly structure and extensive core calculations for all
expected states [4]. This work was performed in cooperation with UJV [Nuclear
Research Institute, CSAV] Rez, and VUJE [Research Institute of Nuclear Power Stations].

Physical tests during the breaking-in of the reactor (i.e. between the beginning of
the lowering of the boric acid concentration and the attainment of a reactor heat

output corresponding to about 1 percent of the planned output) were performed in

which differed primarily by the temperature of the coolant in the reactor. For the
"cold reactor" the characteristic coolant temperature was about 120° C, while for

the "hot reactor" it was about 260° C; this was the case for both reactors in the V-l
power station.

  
   
 
 
 

w it!-
aisle-ud-
ddhinuiiz-
enrichment

‘. <3 (3 >

Key:
A~working assemblies

B-control assemblies

Fig. l. DiSposition of fuel the core of the V-l power station.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
:5.»
:3: N

 

No .
.733:an A15: «m GVDC; 2:1. .v.

.l'. \

 

a.» in 59.2. 025on .333:
\ Show swarm—65.
5o 3.x
'
a I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 6. Isothermal temperature
coefficient of reactivity as a
function of coolant temperature

 

     

—~
9
g i i I
"h§ 1 audglh ' ' ' ' -
. _ L n! _ ' '-.n _J
0' trams. 4. _
’L':€"%/?N,::' :‘
-MLJ-M‘fum '_..-.._.1_. .-

05d.- “’52:“-

Tablc 1. Critical concentrations of boric acid for selected regimes.

Tobdh I
Krimu lonmlucn kyuliny borito) pro vybram‘ rolimy

 

  
  

  

Position 5" 7b ’10 ' c=o mess. lcaic.
lcnl POI [Iii] I '

        
 
 

    
   
 

3125» "7’"

   
  
  

___~ __ 355-. (M) 0.00 10.05
315$ (192.5) _ 1.04 i one

  

I‘ll—o (40.5) o.” t 0."

huh. (309)

has; (‘5)
I‘IK-o (2‘) __

_I'_I_I-c (0)

III;_ '. (200-— ”150)

hill _. (200—2250).

 
 
     
 
 
    

 

75-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Integral efficiency of groups of control assemblies as a function of
H3802 concentration, measured on Unit 2 of the V-l.

1'th 2

lntegrdlna «huh noel okupin Inuiot. Mm! no 2. bloku V l :monou honoonu-tcio 3.80.

"8| lPosit ion .“ i c...“

It”!

huh. (I87 --0) +
hnx-. (800 — 250)

ham. (181 —0) +
h. .‘_ . +
ML. (60— 200)

hug (0 - 222) +

“II—a (200 — 25°)

hng_. (0 — 332) +
har-.

m

hlg,‘ (O — 232) +

ham + Mu +
h.‘_. (200—- 250)

 

Table 3. Comparison of the effectiveness of the sixth group of control assemblies
(0-250° C), measured with changing H3303 concentration.

 

 

1'.qu
Porovnanio déinnooti VI. okupiny roguladnyoh lucid (0—860 cm) nammoj ammo» koncanzrlcio 11.30.
Unit v-1 unit 1 v-1 unit 2 Kozloduj *1] NORD 2
1.090 0.0: 1.12. 1.14 * om MO '1 0.0:
Cold Fificiency (z) Imma— * _T__—
rcact __L°'_._—'-_;_ "
. or Temperature ('C) no no "7 100
Hot ., measured L1" L1" [.8 :t 0.03 1.8! :t 0.03
react Efficiency (") calc. I.” I.” — —
0‘ Temnerature °C .2- m ”5 ”0

° lladnoly propoelunl no plnd munutio

*Converted to values for fully-removed rods.

Fig. 5. Mean isothermal temperature
coefficient of reactivity (250-260° C)
and temperature coefficient of re-
activity as a function of boric acid
concentration in primary circuit
coolant.

 

—- 3‘c:,.'.,t.q/I;J

76- '

FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 6. Tenpersture coefficient of

reactivity of the moderator in various “.OT
reactor output states for Units 1 and 2
of the V-l. o
"Rt'.
Key: FS—-physical startup; *i:
ES--pouer-production startup ‘~~:

 

Table 4. Overall effectiveness of control devices of the reactors in Units 1 and 2
of the V-l power station. measured during physical startup.

Colkov‘ ofektﬁmoot wlahy’ch orﬂnov reskunov I. s 2. bloku JB V-I new pri fyﬁkﬂnomropulzxi

unit 2 alculated :‘a tor rﬂ-IV-l Safety
Unit/datum . BIPR—S e2§48218n [report

0 - reactor:
9.5 0. [6 I l.41 0.2
total reactivity (Z) t *

Hot reactor: _' '
total reactivity (1) l2.“ i 0.3 [3.] :i: 0.3

 

Table 5. Effectiveness of boric acid, measured during physical startup of Unit 2 of
the V-l power station.

Tab-alto 5
Efoktlvnoat kyooliny boritoj. nuns-n6 pri P8 2. bloku JE V-l

Position ‘3:

to!“
ix .3 “no" "s”OoI
[all __—_
measured

huh. (200-. 0) "2.14 i «.15

hum. (200)-hn-. (60) 4.20 + 0.”

h.g_. (200—. 0) t .
ML. (200)-‘haxu (50) t .

 

77- .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The measured values were evaluated in the final reports [5. 6]; below we give the
most important of them in comparison with the results measured in the reactors of
Kozloduj Unit 1 and NORD Unit 2 [7]. The cores in these units had the same charges
of nuclear fuel (Fig. l). The calculated values were obtained by use of the BIPR-S
and BIPR-K computer programs.

The critical concentrations of boric acid measured in the cold and hot reactors

are shown in Table 1. Small deviations from the figures measured at Kozloduj Unit 1
and NORD Unit 2 are related to tolerances in uranium enrichment and in the weight of
the fuel cells. and to systematic errors in measurement of the boric acid concentra-
tion.

Measurements on V—l Units 1 and 2 (Fig. 2) gave higher power nonuniformity values

that are usual in VVER-type reactors [7]. A computational analysis showed that inter-
change of fuel cells with different degrees of enrichment would give substantially
higher nonuniformities than were measured in V-l Units 1 and 2, so that the higher
nonuniformity of volume power distribution could be ascribed to experimental error.

To decrease the nonuniformity of the volume distribution of power, when charging

Unit 2 the approach of allowing for production deviations in weight and degree of
enrichment of the uranium in the delivered fuel cells [8] was adopted.

The integral and differential characteristics of the control assemblies were
measured by varying the boric acid concentration. The time characteristic of re-
activity found by using a computer to solve the kinetic equations was processed by
the KINETIK program in such a way that a linear regression line was entered on the
reactivity chart between two movements of the control rods. This method eliminates
reactivity fluctuations resulting from random fluctuations of the neutron flux and
also to some extent from spatial effects. The measured integral effectiveness values
for V-l Unit 2 are given in Table 2. Table 3 compares the effectiveness of the sixth
control assembly group for different blocks. The integral characteristics of the
sixth group for the hot reactor is also given in Fig. 3.

The overall effectiveness of the entire system of control assemblies in terms of
neutron flux resulting from withdrawal of the control rods differs by approximately
7 to 10 percent from the computed values (see Table 6). The effectiveness of the
boric acid, expressed as the boric acid reactivity coefficient (AP/4 C )

is given in Table 5 as a function of the position of the control assemblies.

The isothermal temperature coefficient obtained during heating of the reactor is
shown in Table 4 and the isothermal temperature coefficient measured as the boric
acid concentration in the coolant was lowered (with the control assemblies withdrawn)
is given in Fig. 5).

The temperature coefficient of reactivity of the moderator. obtained through kinetic
measurements in various power production states of the reactor [5} with the control
assemblies in operating position, is one of the most important reactor characteris-
tics. Fig. 6 gives the measurement results obtained during gradual increase of
reactor power; for full reactor power. the figure also shows the calculated curve
for this coefficient during the course of the run.

The power feedback coefficient, also measured by the kinetic method [9], is shown in

Fig. 7. The results measured in both units of the V-1 power station are in agreement
with each other and in good agreement with the results obtained for NORD Unit 2.

.73.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060013-7

I FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 7. Power coefficient of re- p
activity as a function of reactor I
power with constant coolant exit -?
temperature. a
sis
. w
Obr. 7. MW vy'hua
vjbouenahompn'bonﬂ
‘5 '- F— 5‘5
."NII‘I 0"!
Q.
l
q .
d... Fig. 8. H311

    
 

Q
5 out of act
31,- \(~"---------4" Unit 1.
m... . ~~~——__,:«
\i k -—--,-
— u}
, Obr8 VypadohﬂCOZaJ N.—100%.1Nok

Fig. 9. Main circulating pump 1 out of
action, self regulation. NR = 55 per-
cent, Unit 1.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060013-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Power-Production Startup

After successful conclusion of the physical startup tests and preliminary evaluation,
the power-production startup stage began, and the reactor output was gradually in-
creased to 5, 20, 35, 55, 75, 90 and 100 percent of the nominal power. At each of
these power levels, combinations of the following measurements or tests were per—
formed on both units in accordance with the startup schedule:

--measuranent of the hydraulic characteristics of the primary circuit,

"measurement of the heat balance and calibration of the power measuring instruments,
--tests of self-regulation of the reactor and the unit,

--calibration of the temperature measuring sensors in the primary circuit,
--monitoring of the heat production field in the core,

--testing of reactor cooling in the natural circulation mode,

--tests of mechanical runout of the turbogenerators,

--tests of the system for automatic regulation of stations for release of stea‘ to
the condenser and the atmosphere, ‘-

-—tests and adjustment of turbine and reactor power regulators,

--tests of the Operation of emergency protective signals of types III and IV as a
function of operating parameters,

--tests of in-house power supply systems,

--tcsts of coordination between the main regulators in the unit (dynamic tests),
--tests of the tightness of sealing of the fuel elements,

--mcasurement of the radiation situation during power production startup.

The results of these meaSurements and tests are too extensive to be presented in

this article. They are evaluated in detail in references 10 and 11. For purposes
of illustration we give the results of the main tests during operation of the unit.
In addition, we include results froa tests of the behavior of the unit in transition-
31 processes resulting from cessation of operation of the main process equipment;

for safety of operation these must be passed without the unit's dropping out of
operation or emergency shutdown of the reactor. The importance of these tests is
underlined by the fact that they are used to investigate situations which might
arise at any moment during operation. The purposes of these tests are:

--overa11 testing of the reactor and turbine regulators,

--acquisition of data for correction of the main regulators in the unit,

vU
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--detcrminationa of limits and conditions for operation of reactor equipment at
various power levels,

--testing of the design dynamic characteristics during emergency disconnection of
the main equipment in the unit.

A graphic overview of the behavior of the most important parameters during certain
selected tests is given in Figs. 8-12.

The curves for the main unit parameters indicate that the main protective regulators
and automation equipment regulators successfully deal with transition processes
after adjustment, even in case of dropout of all important equipment in the unit,
while maintaining unit safety.

Performance of the tests and measurements on V-l Units 1 and 2 provided a good deal
of practical experience which must be used fully when commissioning future nuclear
power stations. Here we cite only the most important:

a. In terms of the number of VVER-type nuclear reactors that have been operated,
the program of tests may be considered standard. It is part of the comprehensive
testing of the functional operability of the unit before it is put into test oper-
ation, with simultaneous determination of the characteristics which are essential
for further Operation. A number of these characteristics cannot be determined
during regular operation using the standard set of equipment.

b. The established program of tests and the conditions for their performance must
be unconditionally adhered to. An attempt to shorten the program of tests may lead
to the loss of certain characteristics, and it is not possible to rely entirely on
characteristics measured on other units because of the differences between the
characteristics of individual pieces of equipment. Similarly, it is impossible to
recommend shortening the program of tests and measurements by not adhering to the
conditions for the tests themselves.

c. In carrying out the tests it is necessary to observe unconditionally the full
range of parameter changes called for by the plan. Experience shows that during
startup there is a tendency to decrease the number of parameter changes so as to
decrease the number of equipment shutdowns in the unit. The range of parameter
changes is chosen so that one of the most important aims will be met, namely iden-
tification and elimination of defects.

d. To assure smooth performance of the tests which are part of physical and power-
production startup, it is necessary to assure high quality of the measuring equip-
ment. in both units of the V-l power station, an RPP-16 5 computer was used to
collect and preprocess the results. It may be stated that the use of computers
considerably improved the quality of the information on processes that flows to
operating and testing personnel, considerably decreased the number of experiments
required and speeded up evaluation of the tests on which transition to a higher
output level depended.

e. From the point of View of startup of future power station units, it will be
necessary to devote more attention to the period of preparation for comprehensive
testing and to individual and partial tests of the equipment and systems, so that

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the systems will operate reliably during physical and power production startup, which
ultimately will yield greater success by shortening the time required to bring the
power station to its rated power.

4. Conclusion

A comparison of the test results and the characteristic curves produced from them
during physical and power production startup of Units 1 and 2 of the V-l power
station with the planned and calculated values for these units shows good agreement.
Similarly. we may state that there is good agreement with the results of startup
work in similar units with VVER reactors. Discrepancies between calculated and
measured values were noted during measurements on the control rods in the hot re-
actor. Since similar discrepancies were noted for both blocks of the V-l it is
probable that it resulted from insufficient correlation of the input constants for
the [PR computation program. The discrepancies between the calculated and measured
power coefficients of reactivity were judged acceptable in Czechoslovakia and East
Germany. and additional correlation of the BIPR computer program was performed on
the basis of these results.

Valuable practical experience was obtained during preparation for and performance
of the physical and power-production startups. Its use in subsequent units will
lead to further imporvement of the quality of collection and evaluation of measure-
ment data and thus to further refinement of the computer program. This fact will
also help to establish more precisely the limits and conditions governing operation,
which ultimately will yield improved operating safety while allowing an upgrading
of the technical ari economic parameters of the units.

in addition, during physical and power-production startup, the reliability of the
protective. safety and regulating systems was demonstrated, making possible reliable
operation of the first Czechoslovak commercial nuclear reactor as part of the power
sysrem. These conclusions have been fully borne out by subsequent power-production
operation of both blocks.

List of Abbreviations

CH3303 Boric acid concentration

CDPO Quantity added

hRK Position of control assemblies

“PC Water level in steam generator

hPS Degree of opening of exhaust stations

Nt Heat output of reactor

NIK Heat output of reactor according to ionization chambers
82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

A ll. of
1131.12!) ”WEN
. I ;

i”.Mi lk
. : 1. ‘4 \-“__-- ‘ N",

 

Obr. 100, b. VWE HOG 5. N. = 100 %, 2. blob

Fig. 103. b. Main circulating pump No 5 out of operation, NR - 100 percent, Unit 2.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. lla, b, c. Stopping of turbogenerator No 22 by closing RZV valve. NR . 1005,

Unit 2.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

P
k
\\-"~—- J ~‘aA4

  
  

.’.’-~ 5
a I
Ov’. ‘7‘
mnu
mar)
I“=1: I
L.! h
:57 me" (‘3 :2?)
I ' t, i I"\
b

 

it!)

Obr. 12a. b. quulovam’e T0 21 a T0 22 na vladmi
W. N, 100 %, 2. No]:

Fig. 12a, 1:. Regulation of turbogenerators 21 and 22 for .tn-house power supply.
NR = 100 percent, Unit 2.

List of Abbrev1ations (continued)

Nc Turbogenerstor output
PKO Pressure in compensator
PHPK Pressure in main steam collector
I"!0 Pressure in primary c1rcu1L*
APR Temperature drop in reactor*

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Qi Flow in 1-th loop
t“v Temperature in hot leg
tsv Temperature in cold leg
tPKO Steam temperature in volume compensator
:10 Average coolant temperature in primary circuit
Atk Average coolant temperature in reactor
Tef Reactor operating time in effective days
APi Pressure drop in i-th loop
P 431.10 Taperature coefficient of reactivity
3/6, 8:0 Pressure coefficient of reactivity

Operating regimes of reactor power regulator:

R:

SRN:

SR5:

l.

2.

3.

regulation node from pressure in emergency control assembly
sentry regulating mode

unit output stabilization regulating mode.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Programma fizicheskogo puska AEV V-l "Bohunice" [Physical Startup Program for
V-l Nuclear Power Station in Bohunice]. Contract No 39 046 of 14 Hay 1976.
Annex No 2, b, 2.1.7 [in Russian).

Programna energetichesogo puska I. bloka V-l Buhinice [Power Production Startup
Program for Unit 1 of Bohunice V-l Power Station]. Congract No 39 046 of
16 Hay 1976. Annex No 2, b, 2.1.9 [in Rusaian].

Mjasnikov, A., and Spalek, J. BIPR-EC--Verze programu BIPR-S pro pocitac
50-1040 [The BIPR-Ec Version of the BIPR-S Program, for the EC-lObO Computer].
UJV Rez, 1978.

Ferencei, K; Kruzik, P.; Hjasnikov, A.; and Spalek, J. Vysledky neutronova-
fizikalnych vypoctov pre fizilakny spustanie AB V-l [Results of Neutron-Physical

Calculations for Physical Startup of the V-l Power Station]. VUJE, Jaslovake
Bohunice, 1978.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8.

10.

11.

COPY

8480
C80:

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0ND

Rohar, 8.; Sarvnic. I; Liptak, P.; and Petenyi, V. Vysledky vyhodnotenia
experimentov programu fizikalneho spustania 1. bloku elektrarne V-l [Results
of Evaluation of Experiments in the Physical Startup Program for Unit 1 of the
V-l Power Station]. VUJE Report No 8/79, 1979.

Rohar, S.; Sarvaic, I.; Liptak, P.; and Petenyi, V. Vysledky vyhodnotenia
experimentov programu fizikalneho spustania 2. bloku elektrarne V-l [Results
of Evaluation of the Experiments in the Physical Startup Program for Unit 2
of the V-l Power Station]. VUJE Report No 2/180. 1980.

Adryanov, G. et a1. Obzor rezul'tatov fizicheskikh issledovaniy aktivnykh zon
reaktorov VVER-bbo na perio' fizicheskogo puska [A Survey of the Results of
Physical Tests on the Cores of VVER-ébO Reactors in the Physical Startup

Period]. Moscow, IAE [Institute of Atomic Energy] imeni Kurchatov, 1976 [in
Russian].

Bardos, J. Vyuziti rozpytlu hmotnosti izotopickeho obohaceni jaderneho paliva k
optimalizace provuzu VVER--popis progranu FLOP [Use of the Mass Dispersion of
Isotopic Enrichment of Nuclear Fuel to Otimize the Operation of VVER Reactors-
A Description of the PLOP Program]. UJV Rez, 1980.

Pctcnyi. V. Heranie vykonoveho koeficienta reaktivity na roznykh vykonovykh
hladinakh [Measurement of the Power Coefficient of Reactivity at Various
Power Levels]. VUJE Report No 11/79, 1979.

Ricany. J. et a1. Vyhodnotenie experimentov energetickehe spustania 1. bloku
AB V-l [Evaluation of the Power Production Startup Experiemnts on Unit 1 of
the V-l Power Station]. VUJE Report No 23/79. 1979.

Ricany. J. et a1. Vyhodnotenie experimentov energetickeho spustania 2. bloku
AE V-l [Evaluation of the Power Production Startup Experiments on Unit 2 of
the V-l Nuclear Power Station]. VUJE Report No 90/80, 1980.

RIGHT: sm n. p., 1981.

5100/3019

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V-l OPERATING RESULTS DESCRIBED
Prague JADRENA ENERGIE in Slovak No 4, Apr 81 pp 154-157

[Article by Milan Kozak, Viliam Ziman, Juraj Kmosena and Oto Kopal, Atomove
elektrarny [Nuclear Power Stations] Bohunice, and Zdeno Hudec, Slovenske energeticke
podniky [Slovak Power Production Plants], Bratislava: "Results and Experience From
Operation of the V-l Power Station")

[Text] The beginning of test operation of Units 1 and 2 of

the V-l power station in Jaslovske Bohunice produced consider-
able benefits for the Czechoslovak power system. The two units
had produced a total of 6,686,000 Huh as of 31 December 1980,
while Unit 1 had produced 2,476,000 Nwh in the previous year.
The utilization coefficient of the output of this unit was 0.7,
which is in agreement with experience with power stations.

1. Main Data on Operation

1.1 The first unit of the V-l power station was put into test operation on 31 March
1979 after successful physical and power-production startup and 72-hour trial oper-
ation at the nominal parameters. The first run amounted to 349.6 effective days
(without use of the power effect), compared with the calculated figure of 320 effec—

tive days.

During the first run. the electrical energy output was 3,272,589 Hub and the amount
of energy delivered to the power system was 2,972,473 Huh. The maximum half-hour
output at the generator terminals was 426 Hue. The operating results during the
first run are comparable to results achieved in equivalent units of nuclear power

stations abroad.

On 10 Hay 1980 the first unit was stopped for refueling and performance of guarantee
reviews and repairs. Operation was resumed in July 1980; after a number of repairs,
primarily on the Secondary section, it operated with considerably higher power pro-
duction economy.

1.2 On 26 Hay 1930 the second unit of the V-l power station went into operation.

A feature of this block was that its startup and trial operation involved consider-
ably better organization and higher-quality operation. These resulted primarily
from the following circumstances:

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--the shortcomings which occurred in Unit 1 during startup and test operation were
eliminated in Unit 2 before these steps were carried out;

--the operation personnel had acquired valuable experience on Unit 1 and made thorough
use of it.

The improvement in operation on Unit 2 compared with Unit 1 is shown by comparison
of the following indicators for the first 5 months of operation:

Indicator Unit 1 Unit 2 Difference between
Units 1 and 2

1. Output of electrical energy (HHh) 868,074 1,117,091 +249,017
2. Electrical energy delivered (Huh) 765,920 1,015,888 +249,968
3. ln—house consumption of electrical

energy for power production (2)
4. Readiness factor of unit 0.842 0.874 0.032
5. Cross efficiency of unit (I) 27.61 29.16 1.55

Operating Experience in Electrical Energy Production
2.1. Economic Results of Operation

The 6,686,000 MHh of electricity produced by the V-l as of 31 December 1980 would
have required about 8 million tons of brown coal in a conventional power station.

Among the basic data on operating economics are the following:

--thc gross efficiency of the units was 29 percent and the net efficiency 26.5 per-
cent;

--the readiness factor was 0.77 for Unit 1 and 0.88 for Unit 2;

-—the specific nuclear fuel consumption for electrical energy production was 12.6
CJ/Hwh in Unit 1 (compared with a 1980 plan figure of 12.89) and 12.35 GJ/HHh in
Unit 2 (compared with a 1980 plan figure of 13.9).

These data too may be considered successful in comparison with equivalent data for
other units.

2.2. Factors Influencing Operating Economics
The main task of the operating perSonnel was and is to assure reliable, safe,
economical operation of the units. The main problems in operating economics resulted

from the following factors:

a. Insufficient cooling in the cooling towers decreased these units' output by
about 5 MW (the cooling towers fall about 2° short of the planned figures).

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI-‘HUAI, USE ONLY

b. Failure to achieve nominal reactor power with an electrical system frequency
lower than 50 Hz (a l~percent decrease in frequency means a decrease of about 4
MNe in the power at the generator terminals).

c. Scale buildup on heat exchange surfaces on the coolant-water sides of the
turbine condensers was a considerable factor lowering the electrical output of the
units (see Fig. 1).

In 1979 and 1980, between cleanings of the turbine condensers, the following average
rates of decrease of the electrical output of the Unit 1 as a result of scale build-
up on the condensers were recorded:

March-June 1979 0.40 MH/day
July-August 1979 0.43 MW/day
September-December 1979 0.58 MW/day

Average values:

March—December 1979 0.68 HH/day
January-May 1980 0.38 HU/day
August-September 1980 0.13 HH/day

It can be seen from these figures that between January and May 1980 (before the be-
ginning of guarantee reviews of Unit 1) it was possible to decrease the negative
effect of scale accumulation on the condensers by a factor of 1.2b compared with
1979, while in August—September 1980 (after the guarantee review) the improvement
over 1979 was a factor of 3.52. This led to a considerable increase in operating
economy for unit 2.

Now, when equipment for continuous cleaning of the turbine condensers has been in—
stalled on all turbines. we can gain an idea of the contribution this factor makes
to operating economy from the following data:

—-on 27 October 1980, after running-up of turbogenerator 11 with the equipment in-
stalled but not yet put into operation. the "end temperature difference in the con—
denser" (i.e. the difference between the temperature of the condensate leaving the
condenser and the temperature of the cooling water coming from the condenser) A: t
was 11°C;

--on 28 October 1980, A t was 7.3° C after about 1 hour of operation of the equip-
ment;

--on 29 October 1980, ‘5 t was 5.9° C after about 3 hours of operation of the equip-
ment. This difference has steadily decreased in subsequent operation.

--on 9 December 1980. ‘5 t was 4.8° C for turbogenerator 11. In December 1980 it
varied between 6.1° and 5° C for all turbogenerators.

Another factor leading to power losses was leakage in the turbine vacuum system.
The shortcomings found were steadily corrected.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among other improvements we may cite additional installation of siphons in the lines
carrying the steam-air mixture from the condensers to the vacuum pumps, and adjust-

ment of the turbine cleaning system. These modifications made it possible to cut
the vacuum drop in the turbines in half.

2.3. Measurements for Increased Operating Economy

During test operation of the units, many test. reference and guarantee measurements
were made after April 1979. The aim of these measurements was to check the planned
equipment parameters at the beginning of permanent operation (static characteristics
of turbogenerator regulation, primary circuit measurements, noise measurements, in-
sulation surface temperature measurements and the like).

Below we give a more detailed description of the guarantee measurements on process
equipment critical to operating economics.

2.3.1. Guarantee Measurements on the Turboseta of Units 1 and 2

The supplier guarantees the following:

3. Turbine set output of 215 + 6 HR according to the technical report of the
performance plan, main generator output of 214 ﬁne, auxiliary generator output of
6 MUe, combined generator output of 220 HHe, under the following conditions:
-—purely condensation operation, with heating of its own condensate,

--ruta1 coolant flow through the condenser equal to 35,000 m3/hr.

--coolant water temperature 20° C,

—-cos (P for main generator equal to 0.85;

--cos 19 for in-house power supply generator equal to 0.8.

b. Specific heat consumption equal to 11,388 CJ/Mwh in accordance with technical
report of performance plan. This consumption level allows for a tolerance of 1.5
percent in addition to measurement tolerances specified in Czechoslovak State Stan—
dard 08 0070, under nominal steam conditions before the high-pressure RZV
[expansion unknown].

Before guarantee measurements were made on turbogenerators 11 and 12 it was necessary
to make use of the stoppage of the turbosets to inspect the equipment and clean the
condensers as specified in the documentation received. The measuring instruments
and measuring diaphragms used for guarantee measurements were installed, and measure-
ments were made according to specifications. The voltages across the voltage and
current transformers were measured and the specialist added certifications of the

transformers used for the guarantee measurements.

During guarantee measurements on the turbogenerators of Unit 1. the condition of the
two turbosets was as follows:

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--The turbosystems had already been in operation for 15 months after introduction of
the first steam into the turbines.

--lhe water-side heat exchange surfaces of the condenser had considerable scale
accumulations.

--The vacuum system was not tight (the vacuum drop for turbogenerator 11 was 1707
Pa/min and that for turbogenerator 12 was 1853 Pa/min).

--The pressure system in the secondary circuit was not tight. The irreversible
mass leakage was 12.76 tons/hour.

Since the guarantee measurements on turbogenerators 11 and 12 and on turbogenerators
21 and 22 were performed under conditions which deviated from those agreed upon. the
results were corrected to the agreed-upon conditions for validity of the guarantee.
The main results obtained were as follows:

Guarantee measurements on turbogenerators 11 and 12, performed 23 November 1979:
--The corrected measurement of specific heat consumption was 11.507 GJ/Hwh, 1.05
percent over the guaranteed value (11.388 GJ/Hﬂh). However, this value was within
the 11.95 percent tolerance for measured consumption.

Guarantee measurements on turbogenerators 21 and 22, performed 30 Hay 1980:
--Corrected measured specific heat consumption equal to 11.282 GJ/Mwh, 0.934

percent below the guaranteed figure (11.388 GJIMWh). This is within the i'1.25
percent measurement tolerance.

--Corrected measured power during phasing-in of turbogenerator 21 equal to 235.22
MHc. 1.92 percent higher than the value called for in Czechoslovak State Standard
08 0030, with a measurement tolerance of 10.75 percent.

v-The net thermal efficiency of turbogenerators 21 and 22 was 29.65 percent (31.6
MWe for in-plant consumption according to Landis meter).

it should be noted that the effect of warmer cooling water (the intake temperature
of the cooling water was 26.67° C for turbogenerator 21 and 26.37° C for turbo-
generator 22 and the outlet cooling water temperatures were 38.l7° and 38.73° C
respectively) had a negative effect on the measured output amounting to 13.552 Hue
compared with the output at a nominal cooling water temperature of 20° C.

2.3.2. Gurantee Measurements on Cooling Tower No 2

The guaranteed cooling tower design parameters are:

--quality of heat removed 0 - 1626 GJ/hr,

—-cooling water mass flow 0 - 36.250 tons/hr,

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

turbugenerator cleaning operations

plhus

refueling

I!
t?-

 
  

cleaning

    

      
   

ﬁhunn

 

N
i h
~ :3
U
“I u-a
o: 5"
cm
a 5.,
m
z" 05
o
nu
l 2=
. :2
«I‘—
U“
:2
Oc‘
on»
M.

Fig. 1. Drop in electrical output of Unit 1 of the V-l power station. corrected
to cooling water temperature of 20° C, showing the effect of fouling of the tubes
in the main condensers during the period from March 1979 to December 1980.

-—temperature of heated water t1 - 32.7° C,

--tempcrature drop t - 10.7° C.

-—temperature of cooled water t2- 22° C,

--base conditions for ambient air, t31 - 15° C. 6 = 70 percent,
--wind speed v - 2 m/sec.

Different hydraulic and thermal load conditions are allowed for by a set by
correction curves.

The flow volume of coolant water was measured in the outflow channel from tower No
2 using carriers equipped with flow meters. which were vertically displaced along
the measured vertical speed profile at a rate of 2 cm/sec.

The guarantee measurements indicate that the towers are falling short of the initial
planned parameters given above by 2.1° to 1.8° C depending on the nominal coolant
flow volume selected.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When the cooling effect was evaluated following additional corrections it was found,
for example, that for a cooling water base temperature t - 24. 5° C the tower

would meet the guarantee figures, since (again depending on the coolant water flow
volume chosen) the cooling values were 0. 2° to 0. 5° C better than the guarantee
figures.

The following conclusions follow from the guarantee measurements on the cooling
towers:

1. The inadequately dimensioned cooling system is failing to maintain the guaranteed
cooling water temperatures.

2. The cooling effect is highly sensitive to wind action, and cooling water is
removed through the high intake openings by the wind.

3. Equipment Malfunctions.
During operation of the units, failures which by and large were typical of power
station equipment in the initial stage of operation occurred. Some of these fail-

ures decreased the power output of the unit.

The individual circuits of the power station typically showed the following mal-
functions:

Primary circuit

--failures in main circulating pump power supply cable connections;
Secondary circuit;

--1eakage in steam piping,

--leakage in high pressure heaters in the regeneration system,
-—incorrect operation pump shutoff devices in the regeneration system;
Other:

-conflict between the ARM reactor power regulator and the IVER turbine output
regulator,

--nonselective switching-out of electrical switchgear for in-plant power supply,
--actuation of protective devices during starting of 6 kV electric motors.

Other malfunctions included the effect of limited operating personnel experience.
All of the malfunctions and defects were immediately analyzed and the measures in-
dicated were taken without delay. The decrease in the number of personnel-caused

malfunctions indicates that the operating personnel were acquiring good operating
experience.

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Refueling of Unit 1

The first refueling of Unit 1 was carried out between 10 May and 23 July 1980 in
combination with guarantee reviews and prescribed tests. The work proceeded in
accordance with documentation developed for the purpose. A total of 36 work pro-
grams, 25 time schedules and 9 organizational measures were drafted. In addition
to this general documentation, the maintenance division drew up a separate document
for each action, incluuing a work order, performance documentation, testing docu-
mentation and the requisite supporting documentation.

The purpose of the work done during the first refueling, other than the standard
refueling and equipment review program, also included included the performance
of work indicated by operating experience with Unit 1.

The progress of the work was considerably affected by the demanding process of
eliminating leakage in the refueling and storage pond. For this reason, disassembly
of the reactor began 21 days later than planned.

Availability of spare parts was good.

The work involved in refueling, guarantee repairs and review and testing of mater-
ials was carried out to the planned extent. The slippages which occurred in the
initial period were partially made up by intensified initiative, good labor organ-
ization and increased overtime. The experience obtained will be reflected in the
refueling documentation for 1980 and in subsequent refueling operations.

In addition to the specifications which are customary in every refueling of this
type of nuclear power station, there arose a requirement to empty the emergency
boron tank. Procedures were worked out and a backup method of making up losses
and of assuring cooling during coolant loss in the core was developed and carried
out. The refueling was carried out without breaches of nuclear safety.

As regards observance of nuclear safety, the first refueling of Unit 1 involved
special requirements.

To maintain general safety during the system of maintenance work, a system of so-
called "5" orders was introduced and proved effective. This system unambiguously

defines the method of removing equipment for repair, the work procedures for repair
and maintenance, the personnel requirements, and responsibility.

The work carried out during the first refueling of Unit 1 did a great deal toward
attainment of the planned characteristics.

5. Conclusion

To date, operation of the two units of the V-l power station has successfully met
plan assignments for electrical energy production.

The most important results are considered to be the number of kilowatt-hours pro-
duced for the national economy and the valuable operating experience obtained,
which will be fully utilized in subsequent operation.

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY

However, it is clear that operating results cannot be evaluated solely in terms of
the number of kilowatt—hours produced. A comparison of the characteristic statisti—
cal data for Units 1 and 2 indicates where there is unused potential, where there
are failings and where further effort should be directed in order to increase oper-

ating reliability and quality. The following are considered to be essential tasks
for the next period of operation:

a. Further improvement of the system for increasing the qualifications of operat-
ing and technical personnel, i.e. further improvement of the special, theoretical

and practical proficiency and readiness of the personnel in direct connection with
the level of discipline.

b. From the social point of View, it is clear that an effort must be made to de—
crease specific fuel consumption.

c. Findings already obtained from the operation of the two units have provided

new. more precise data for updating the operating and safety documentation. In
the next stage it will be necessary to develop standardized documentation for
equipment maintenance.

d. it will be necessary for the operator, designer and performing organizations
and subdivisions to make joint efforts to eliminate causes of the main malfunctions
and their negative effects on operating reliability and economy.

 

Fig. 2. Installation and test work on rotor parts of 220 MW turbine.
COPYRIGHT: SNTL n. p.. 1981

8480
CSO: 5100/3019

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prague JADERNA ENERGIB in Czech No 6, Apr 81 pp 158-160

[Article by Jiri Beranek et al., CSKAB [Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Commission]
Prague: "Activities of the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office, SCKAE, in the
Construction and Operation of the V-l Nuclear Power Station")

[Text] This article presents information on legislative
provisions for the activity of the State Nuclear Safety
Oversight Office, CSKAE, and gives a rather detailed
description of the approval process for the physical and
power production startup of the V-l power station.

safety as a socially necessary preventive activity to assure that nuclear power
installations could be designed and built without undesirable radiation rist to

the operating personnel, the public and the environment. In view of the importance
of nuclear safety and the social importance of this problem, the legal basis for
state oversight of nuclear safety has now been developed on the basis of decisions
by the CSSR Government Presidium; their purpose is to lay out in comprehensive
form the tasks, standing and competence of the state oversight office. including
the necessary authorization for the performance of its oversight activities. Pre-
viously, in the absence of this basic legal provision, the function of the State
Nuclear Safety Oversight Office, CSKAB, was legislatively mandated and developed
step by step over a number of years in keeping with the development and require-
ments of the Czechoslovak program. The activities generally have been legislatively
mandated during the drafting or updating of basic legal instruments, for example in
the updating of construction law No 50 in 1976. Some further state oversight
functions were legally mandated in the form of government decrees (Government Pre-
sidium Decrees Nos 195/77 and 156/79).

The construction, commissioning and first successful period of operation of Units

1 and 2 of the V-l nuclear power station mark a significant milestone in the imple-
mentation of an extensive Czechoslovak nuclear power program. It is an especially
significant milestone in view of the successful beginning of construction in this
program, since this work has all the characteristics of industrial construction.
The industrial nature of the construction and the use of the flow-through con-
struction method are the decisive elements for the organization of construction
and of the relationships between all its participants, including all oversight

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bodies. which, as indispensable participants in construction and operation must
also adapt to these quantitatively and qualitatively new conditions.

The industrial nature of this construction is governed by the following main
factors:

--nuc1ear power stations are undertaken in the form of standard plans for proven
units. and include nuclear safety concepts;

--the individual production stages of the series with 660 NH unit power all stem
from the same basic design;

--the series of VVER 640 nuclear power stations in the Czechoslovak program is so
extensive that there is a direct need to develop an optimal (standard) approach
both in organizing construction and in preparing for operation. as well as in
state oversight activity.

On the basis of an analysis of these circumstances. the State Nuclear Safety Over-
sight Office orients its activity in the following directions:

--as regards the nuclear safety design concepts embodied in the plans, it monitors
the completeness of information required for preparation of the Czechoslovak program,
and sees to it that the plan can be implemented effectively and that no basic
changes are allowed without the agreement of the designers,

-for the activities carried out on Czechoslovak territory (selection of a construc-
tion site, construction. commissioning and operation), it must provide the legis-
lative base, a viable approval and inspection body, and an effective feedback
mechanism.

As empowered by the laws specifying its jurisdiction, it has prepared and issued
universaliy binding legal documents on the basic requirements for nuclear safety
in the various stages of construction of nuclear installations. These are:

--CSKAB Order No 2 on assuring nuclear safety in the design, licensing and con-
struction of projects involving nuclear power installations (1978);

--CSKAE Order No 4 on general criteria for assurance of nuclear safety in the
siting of projects involving nuclear power installations (1979);

--CSKAE Order No 5 on assuring nuclear safety-related quality of selected equipment
in the nuclear power industry (1979);

--CSKAB Order No 6 on assuring nuclear safety in the startup and operation of
nuclear power installations (1980).

The preparation of these regulations was based in particular on Soviet regulations
and on Czechoslovak experience in the construction and operation of nuclear power

facilities, especially the V-l, which naturally preceded these regulations and was
a stimulus for their preparation.

98

F0l.0FﬁKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This basic series of universally binding legal instruments for assurance of nuclear
safety designates relations between the state oversight office and the other par-
ticipants in the Czechoslovak nuclear program as well as technical requirements and
procedures, and has had a particularly favorable effect in the case of Unit 2 of
the V-l station. Experience and needs to date indicate that certain requirements
established by the scate oversight office will need to be worked out in more detail
in the form of directives or instructions. Some of these directives are now being
prepared (more detailed instructions on the drafting and content of safety reports,
limits and specifications, the scope of ecological studies, specifications for
various quality assurance programs).

The State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office's authorization to issue approval for

the various stages of construction and operation of nuclear power facilities is
contained in construction law No 50 of 1976 and its implementation notices Nos 83
and 85. The following basic stages are established: site decisions or decisions
on the safety zone, and construction licensing and warranty inspection decisions
(i.e. permanent operation). These approvals are issued after presentation of appli-
cations supported by a safety report (acceptance, preliminary, pre—operation), and
may be made contingent on fulfillment of conditions with set deadlines.

On the basis of regulations in force, the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office
gives its authorization after presentation of an application and the required docu-
mentation. Requirements regarding the drafting and content of safety reports are
laid down by specific CSKAE directives.

In addition, the oversight office also gives partial authorizations on the basis

of authority granted by Government Presidium Decree No 156 of 1979 for the physical
and power-production startup programs, for loading of the nuclear fuel into the
core, for the beginning of the various stages of physical and power-production
startup, for trail and permanent operation, for changes in documentation affecting
nuclear safety, and for methods of transportation and storage of fresh and spent
fuel.

Thus far the V-l pater station is the most complete facility to which all of the
oversight office's activities have applied.

In terms of nuclear safety. the commissioning of a nuclear power station is among
the most important stages in its entire existence. This involves a relatively
short time span of several months, during which it is, however, necessary to check
all neutron-physical, thermal, hydraulic, regulating and other characteristics of
the completed project and to demonstrate the fulfillment of all requirements and
conditions contained in the plan and in the pre-operstion safety reports and other
documentation. An extremely important requirement in this stage is painstaking
planning of experiments and adherence to all safety requirements during their per-
formance. The main risk during startup results from the fact that in the initial
stage the reactor has the largest reserve of reactivity, the highest incidence

of malfunctions and failures is expected in most equipment, and during this period
the operating personnel are first acquainting themselves with the new equipment

in operation. Accordingly, the startup period requires the most intensive activity
on the part of the oversight office.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main requirement for issuance of an authorization for operation of a nuclear
facility is the presentation of complete. substantive documentation in the pre-
operation safety report. In the case of the V-l power station. this report was
presented to the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office, CSKAE, in July 1978 and
underwent a number of expert evaluations. The conclusions were discussed by the
Nuclear Safety Council of CSKAE and by a full CSKAE session. The individual stages
requiring authorization during the commissioning process were established as follows:
1. physical startup (including loading of fuel),

2. power production startup,

3. trial operation,

1., permanent operation.

An essential requirement for advance to the next stage was evaluation of readiness
for it, an assessment of the preceding stage. and presentation of the requisite
"Limits and Specifications."

Physical startup of Unit 1 of the V-l power station was begun after performance of

the required prepatory startup work (functional teats, pressure test, first review,
hot tests, second review).

The state oversight office established specific requirements for this stage and
made issuance of its approval for introduction of the fuel and for physical

startup contingent upon their fulfillment. The required documentation consisted

of the following:

1. Reports on system readiness tests during the second review (reactor, protection
and regulating system, reactor monitoring and measuring equipment, startup equipment.
equipment for introduction and storage of fuel, radiation protection and monitoring
systems, boric acid preparation system, ventilation systems, electrical power supply
systems, communications systems).

2. Procedure and time schedule for loading the fuel.

3. Instructions for assuring nuclear safety during loading of fuel.

4. Instructions for assuring nuclear safety during storage of fuel.

5. The physical startup program (attainment of criticality. list of physical ex-
periments and their sequence and procedures, and evaluation of the experiments).

6. Instructions for assuring nuclear safety during physical startup.
7. Readiness of operating personnel and interface with physical startup group.
8. Operating regulations needed for physical startup.

9. Set of documentation on loading of fuel and physical startup.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Program for monitoring of dosimetric measurements during physical startup.
11. Emergency plan for power station employees.

After these requirements were met. authorization was issued for loading of the core,
which was completed on 13 November 1978 in the presence of a CSKAB inspector. After
detailed testing of equipment readiness, a special working group led by CSKAE gave
CSKAE's approval for physical startup on 23 November 1978, contingent on the meeting
of further conditions. The physical startup-program for Unit 1 of the V-l power
station was concluded on 7 December 1978.

After fulfillment and evaluation of the planned experiments included in the physical
startup, preparations began for power-production startup. The documentation required
by CSKAE for authorization to begin power production startup included:

1. Evaluation of stage I (introduction of fuel and physical startup) and conclusions
drawn for the purpose of power-production startup.

2. The power production-startup program (performance procedures, expected numerical
values, organization).

3. Limits and specifications for power-production startup (or substitute documenta-
tion).

4. Reports on readiness and acceptance for power production operations of all stan-
dard systems, equipment and facilities of the power station.

5. Operating regulations for the equipment of the V-l station.
6. Equipment maintenance regulations.
7. Worker readiness for power production startup, and interface with startup group.

8. Readiness of emergency plan for the public.

After evaluating the current state of affairs on the basis of inspections, on 13
December 1978 the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office, CSKAB, gave its authoriza-
tion for the commencement of power-production startup with a number of additional
conditions whose fulfillment it required by specified dates, or before attainment

of specific power levels, depending on the importance or technical performability of
the conditions. This authorization also included requirements for evaluation of the
results of power-production startup after 35 percent of rated power was achieved.
CSKAE made the issuance of its approval to proceed to higher power levels contingent
on approval of the evaluations for this stage. By this approach the office not only
kept constructively informed of the requirements for smooth performance of the power
production startup, but also set deadlines for the meeting of requirements which
were important for nuclear safety before higher power levels could be reached.

The office devoted particular attention to and laid particular stress on measurement
and regulation systems and protective and shutoff mechanisms, which were affected
by a considerable number of conditions and requirements, including the keeping of

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

records on defects in these systems. and ultimately the performance of several
specialized inspections including experts in this field. The subsequent course of
the startup process showed that the stress laid on this area was fully Justified.

The state oversight office used a similar approach to authorization at the 55, 75,
and 100 percent power levels.

On 26 April 1979 the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office, CSKAE, gave its author-
ization for the beginning of trial operation of Unit 1 of the V-l power station.

In 1979, V-l Unit 2 was undergoing final installation work and gradual preparation
for startup. Even in these stages it was evident that the positive experience which

activity of the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office was concentrated on the ful-
filiment of the improved programs for incoming tests of selected equipment. testing
of equipment and systems readiness, and performance of the programs of tests in the
individual stages of startup of the unit, and subsequently on running evaluation of
the results obtained in physical and power production startup, comment on and
approval of the relevant documentation, designation of specific steps to be taken
to eliminate malfunctions connected with nuclear safety, evaluation of technical
designs involving various changes and modifications in the plans for individual
systems and equipment (about 250 were developed for the V-l power station) and
checking the readiness of operation personnel. In view of the requirement for
precise evaluation of the results obtained in the various experiments, the State
Nuclear Safety Oversight Office required the development of success criteria for
the individual experiments. This made possible an objective and expeditious
evaluation of results in all startup stages.

For example, there was time for tests of the tightness of the primary circuit com-
partments. Similar tests were made on Unit 1 even during the stoppage for refueling

Experience fully justified CSKAE's requirement that all equipment be ready as early
as the physical startup stage, and as a result the physical and power-production
startup processes took less time than for Unit 1 because of the higher degree of
equipment readiness.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After evaluation of the documentation presented for Unit 2 of the V-l station. and
of the readiness of equipment and personnel and evaluation of the preceding stages,
CSKAE issued the following authorizations:

a. Authorization for the program of loading of fuel into the core of Unit 2 of
the V-l and for the physical startup program, on 22 January 1980.

b. Authorization for actual loading nuclear fuel into the core of Unit 2, on 21
February 1980.

c. Approval for the power-production startup program for Unit 2, on 7 March 1980.
d. Approval for commencement of physical startup of Unit 2, on 7 March 1980.

e. Approval for commencement of power-production startup of Unit 2, on 25 March
1980.

f. Approval for commencement of trial operation of Unit 2, on 9 May 1980.

As in the case of Unit 1, most of the authorizations included supplementary con-
ditions on whose fulfillment the validity of the state oversight office's authori-
zation was contingent.

The approval process for a nuclear power installation is a demanding, continual
process which begins with the selection of a site and ends with the final removal
of the facility from operation, and which involves a weighing of the requirements
and interests of the individual partners involved in it. Rapid and effective
performance requires mutual trust and respect, particularly on the part of the two
partners, i.e. the monitoring body (the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office) and
the applicants (before the beginning of permanent operation, the builder and inves-
tor, and subsequently the operator). One of the main conditions is good, contin-
uous exchange of information.

As the Czechoslovak nuclear program has developed, the requirements regarding the
activity of the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office have been steadily expanded
and deepened. The quality of its activity has been improved, particularly since
the creation of the post of permanent inspector cn—site in Jaslovske Bohunice; this
officer's activity began in July 1979. The use of a permanent inspector has justi-
fied itself especially well, both for the state oversight office and for its
partners, thanks to increased expeditiousness in inspection and running provision
of information.

There has been a fundamental imporvement in the quality of monitoring activity,
which has been economically beneficial.

The experience with the commissioning of the V—l power station indicates that the
basic contingent of experienced workers has been created and that with Soviet
assistance they have mastered the complex and demanding task of building the V-l

power station and putting it into reliable and safe operation. In this complex
process, the State Nuclear Safety Oversight Office, CSKAE, was an effective and in-
volved participant in construction, and its positive contribution has been recognized.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL n. p., 1981

81.80 103
cso: 5100/3019

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WORK OF SLOVAK LABOR SAFETY OFFICE IN V-l PROJECT DESCRIBED
Prague JADERNA ENERCIE in Slovak No 4, Apr 81 pp 161-162

[Article by Augustin Simoncic. SUBP [Slovak Labor Safety Office], Bratislava: "Par-
ticipation of the Slovak Labor Safety Office in the Construction and Operation of
the V-l Power Station"]

[Text] The oversight activity of the Slovak Labor Safety Office
in the construction and operation of the V-l nuclear power
station and the prospects for more intensive oversight over the
safety of nuclear power equipment in the construction of future
nuclear power station in Czechoslovakia are described.

The Slovak Labor Safety Office (SUBP) performs state specialized oversight (SOD)
over labor safety, technical equipment safety and observance of the power industry
working conditions established in accordance with Law No 176/1968 (Code) and the
associated implementation regulations.

in view of the importance of the new technical and social problems and the potential
risk involved in nuclear power, the highest state and political bodies in Czechos-
lovakia are devoting particular attention on it. In its 1977 session, the SSR
Government Presidium adopted Decree No 319 (pursuant to CSSR Government Presidium
Decree No 195 (1977) on state specialized oversight in the nuclear power field.

This SSR government decree instructed the head of SUBP to:
--issue compulsory rulings based on the results of its oversight,

--crcate a special group of experts for oversight purposes,

--issue regulations for assurance of technical safety, particularly of pressure
components.

By its order of 8 August 1980 (pursuant to paragraph 5, section 1, article h of
Law No 174/1968 (Code)) assigning the performance of state specialized oversight
over nuclear power facilities. SUBP took on the performance of state specialized
oversight tasks in the planning. production, installation, constructioa and oper-
ation of nuclear power facilities, as specified in paragraph 6 of Law No 176/1968
(Code) and in accordance with SSR Government Decree No 319/1977 on state technical
oversight in the nuclear power field.

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAI. lESl-I ONI."

In accordance with this law on state specialized oversight of labor safety, tech-
nical equipment and prescribed working conditions, and particularly in accordance
with the SSR government decree mentioned, SUBP's component elements greatly inten-
sified state specialized oversight over the production, installation and operation
of components and operating sets of nuclear power equipment of the first Czechos—
lovak VVER-type nuclear power station. The main principle of this special inten-
sification of state specialized oversight over nuclear power equipment was the
performance of industrial functions in which it monitored the entire process from
the invesrment concept to the decommissioning of nuclear power equipment to see
that the design, performing and operating organizations observed the conditions
stemming from extremely demanding qualitative requirements regarding safety and
operating reliability of nuclear power equipment.

During this period consultations by construction participants with state specialized
oversight personnel, even during development of the preparatory and performance docu-
mentation (in the early 1970's), as well as evaluation of technical documentation
developed at the overall planning design level, preceded direct oversight over the
construction and installation of entire units of nuclear power production equipment.

As time passed, the requirements for work by state specialized oversight bodies
grew continually as both the amount of oversight work and the demands on the special
capabilities of oversight workers increased. It became necessary to arrange their
work so that during installation they were included in the working groups which

are charged with solving problems arising in particular from discrepancies or
differences between the safety requirements of existing Czechoslovak standards and
regulations and the ready-manufactured imported equipment produced according to
regulations in force in the producing country. SUBP's oversight activity was based
on:

—-intergovernmental agreements on cooperation in the construction of nuclear power
stations in Czechoslovakia which had been concluded between the CSSR and USSR
governments,

--delivery contracts concluded between the Czechoslovak purchaser and the foreign
supplier in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement,

--USSR regulations concerning pressure components of the primary circuit and other
selected pressure components.

--Czcchoslovak standards and regulations in force.

Starting in the middle of 1978 the question of safety and operating-reliability of
imported technical equipment used (i.e. hoisting equipment) or installed during

the construction of the first unit of the V-i power station required permanent
presence on-site of state specialized oversight representatives. In the various
working groups, these staff members took a direct and active part in solving the
technical problems associated with this equipment, proposing alternative methods

of solving problems which enabled the builder or supplier organization to chose

the method which was most suitable in terms of installation capacities, expenditures
and adherence to the construction schedule, while simultaneously meeting the safely
and operating reliability requirements for the equipment.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A part of the intensified State specialized oversight was the oversight bodies'

work to assure that regulations and additional technical conditions for construc-
tion and installation of the Vt ious types of technical equipment and other selected
process equipment and facilities were observed. The state specialized oversight
bodies also participated in evaluating applications for exceptions from Czechoslovak
state standards and in evaluating proposals for design modifications on imported
equipment which did not fully meet the safety requirements of Czechoslovak regula-
tions and for which exceptions could not be granted.

Based on the situation in the production and installation of technical equipment

and in the construction of installations for the V-l power stations, the state
specialized oversigh: bodies issued compulsory rulings on the readiness of operating
sets. process units and facilities in keeping With the relevant legal provisions for
the purpose of safety of both designated and other process equipment. This docu-
mentation provided the essential data for overall state specialized oversight rul-
ings for individual stages in the startup of Unit 1 of the V—l power station.

SUB? issued rulings on the readiness of technical equipment in Unit 1 during the
following stages:

--loading the reactor with nuclear fuel and physical tests of the reactor,
--power production startup of the unit,

--test operation,

-—permanent operation.

During 1975, concurrently with the performance of oversight activity on Unit 1 of
the V-l power station, SUBP staff members also carried out oversight over con-
struction and installation of Operating sets, process units and installations of
Unit 2. The procedure was simpler in some respects than that for Unit 1. Many
problems were solved in a similar manner to that used in Unit 1, but the oversight
activity was partially expanded to include oversight of labor safety and technical
equipment safety in the test operation of Unit 1.

As part of their intensified oversight of technical equipment safety in the instal-
lation of process units and operating sets for Unit 2, state specialized oversight
personnel focused especially on the quality of installation of all types of equip—
ment as it affected safety. This oversight was performed pursuant to the require-
ments which SUBP had established for the general management of Slovenske energeticke
podniky [Slovak Power Production Enterprises] Bratislava regarding the scope of
documentation for authorization to commission Unit 2.

As in the case of Unit 1, SUB? also issued rulings on the readiness of process
equipment for all stages of the startup of Unit 2.

lhe complexity of state specialized oversight over labor safety and technical
equipment during the planning. construction and operation of nuclear power facilities

was multiplied by the shortage of legal regulations and standards in Czechoslovakia
regarding the safety of nuclear power installations. This state of affairs required

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()Nl.\

intensified efforts and made greater demands on the theoretical knowledge and prac-
tical experience of state specialized oversight personnel. especially those over-
seeing the safety of designated technical equipment. Accordingly a considerable
number of consultations were held to make it possible to apply experience and find-
ings acquired during oversight of other important, technically demanding production
units.

One of the main preconditions for this system of intensified state specialized
oversight in the nuclear power field was development of the necessary legislative
base. Accordingly, SUBP, in close cooperation with CUBP [Czech Labor Safety Office]
performed a detailed analysis of the current state of legislation on technical

safety of nuclear power facilities and other important technical equipment which
assures the safety and operating reliability of the most important components of
nuclear power stations units. On the basis of this analysis, the offices are cur-
rently developing the technical basis for a new legal standard which will expand

the range of technical equipment covered. Under its aegis, state specialized over-
sight will be intensified in accordance with SSR Government Decree No 319/1977.

1his applies to designated technical equipment which is covered by $08? and SB"
[expansion unknown] Notices Nos 23-26/1979 (code) and SUB? Nocicc

No 7/1979 (code), and other equipment whose safety and operating reliability directly
affects the safety of the most important components of the primary circuit and of

the nuclear power station as a whole. The Notice on State Specialized Oversight

of Nuclear Power Station Facilities, the executive notice for Law No 174/1968 (Code),
would be the new legal norm.

By 1 April 1980, SUBP had organized a department for oversight of nuclear power
facilities. After it is fully staffed, its mission will be direct performance of
state specialized oversight in the nuclear power field in Slovakia as part of
implementation of the Czechoslovak nuclear program. It will be charged with per-
forming intensified state specialized oversight over the pressure components of the
primary circuits and certain other equipment in accordance with the Notice on State
Specialized Oversight in the Nuclear Power Industry which is being prepared, and
oversight of labor safety, technical equipment and the observance of established
working conditions in accordance with Law No 174/1968 (Code).

0n the basis of experience acquired in the construction of the V-l power station,
SUBP is now doing everything possible to intensify and improve its activities so
that it will be capable of implementing fully the intensified state specialized
oversight regime.

To exercise this function and to fulfill consistently SSR Government Decree No
319/1977. on the basis of its experience in the construction of the V-l power

station SUBP has organized field offices with working teams of inspectors directly

on the construction sites of nuclear power stations (Jaslovske Bohunice and Hochovce).

After the nuclear power equipment oversight department is fully staffed, SUBP will
exercise permanent oversight over the quality of planning documentation, production,
construction, and the adherence to technical specifications for equipment during its
operation, as these matters affect safety. Thus state specialized oversight activ-
ity in the construction and operation of nuclear power facilities will become a
permanent component of the implementation of the Czechoslovak nuclear program in
Slovakia.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL n. p., 1981
8480 107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIGMA MODRANY ENCACES 1N NUCLEAR POWER PLANT EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURE

Prague HOSPODARSKE NOVIN'Y in Czech No 2’4, 12 Jun 81 p 3

Text] One of the enterprise taking part in the design. production and installation

of equipment for nuclear power stations is Sigma Hodrany. Because of the increased
demands imposed on the production of this equipment, Sigma has reconstructed old
facilities, and during 1980 it provided new capacities for the production of

nuclear power station fittings. The photograph shows the machining of a valve for
the JsSOO piping for a nuclear power station.

 

8480
C80: 5100/3019 END

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY