FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10099
5 November 1981

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(FOUO 13/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED BEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/

5 Raven

WORLDWIDE REPORT

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(POUO 13/81)

CONTENTS

EAST EUROPE

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Health Hazards at Nuclear Power Plant V-l Assessed
(Jozef Carach, et. a1.; BRAIISIANBKE LEKARSKE LISTY,
Aug 81) .......... 0000.00.00..sllllOOOllOnssdololooolclooo

SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA

NIGER

Authorizations for Uranium Exports During First Half 1981
(HARCBES TROPICAUX ET HEDI‘HRRANEENS, ’0 Sep 81) . . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Uranium Sales Policy
Japanese Uranium Exploration Agreement
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECMSLOVAKIA

HEALTH HAZARDS AT NUCLEAR POHBR PLANT V-l ASSESSED
Bratislava BRATISLAVSKB LBKARSKE LIST! in Slovak No 2, Aug 81 pp 231-240

(Article by Jozef Carach, Maria Petrasova, Tones Trnovec and Dusan Ondris: "Hed-
ical Care Aspects of Nuclear Power Engineering in the SSR.” Regional Hygiene
Center in Bratislava, Director Docent F. Schulz, 11.0.; the Center of Physiologv
ical Sciences of the Slovak Academy of Sciences; the Institute of Experimental
Pharmacology in Bratislava, Director Docent L. Benes, R.N.D., Candidate of Sci-
ences; and the 1330 Factory Health Care Center in Jaslovske Bohunice, Head Physi-
cian M. honola, ILD.)

[Text] As a developed socialist country, Czechoslovakia decided to cover further
power demands by building nuclear power plants. According to the plan's expecta-
tions, nuclear power plants with a total power output of 8,000 If! will be put in
operation before 1990. The first Czechoslovak nuclear power plant had an experi-
nental character; it was operated fron 1972 to 1977 and fulfilled its progran.

The second Czechoslovak nuclear power plant, V-l, is of a different type, based
on a different conception with many unique technological elements. Before the
end of the century, only this type of nuclear power plant will be built in our
country, and our first experience from the hygiene inspection in this facility
can significantly influence the hygiene approach to further stages in nuclear
power plant construction development.

General Principles and Provisions for Staff's Bealth Protection in the V—l Power
Plant

1. Division of Space According to the Extent of Ionizing Radiation Hazard

A11 technological systens and equipment containing radioactive media are enclosed
in hermetically sealed and screened spaces, equipped with an independent ventila-
tion system. A so—called monitored zone has been established, where only a cer-
tain number of employees is allowed to enter under precisely specified conditions.
The monitored zone areas are divided into unattended, seniattended and attended
areas. The unattended areas include hermetically sealed boxes (steal-generator
boxes, the volume compensator box, the radioactive media treatment station boxes,
the-reactor shaft, the rooms with the filtering apparatus for the ventilation
systems, etc.). These spaces are characterized by high levels of external gamma
radiation and the presence of radioactive substances. The staff enters the

' 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

semiattended areas only with special permission for a certain period of time and
is monitored by the members of the dosimetric service (the reactor hall, the main

circulation pumps and main closing fittings control rooms, the measurement and
regulation rooms, etc.).

In the attended areas. the radiation hazard is very low during regular operation
and the staff's movements within this zone are not limited by time (the reactor
hall control room, attendance corridors, communication corridors. etc.).

2. Dosimetric Monitoring Systems

Hith respect to the importance of the harmful effects of ionizing radiation in the
working environment, an extensive dosimetric system is regularly installed in
nuclear power plant facilities. The system has been designed to measure the radi-
ation characteristics of the working environment and technological media (air,
water).

a) Biologic Dosimetry

Biologic dosimetry concerns the radiation factors in both the working and living
environment, to which the staff and the nearby population are immediately exposed.
on the other hand, technological dosimetry utilizes the monitoring of radiation
factors for the control of the conditions of technological equipment.

The stationary part of the biologic dosimetric system processes information ob-
tained through individual detectors placed in various spaces of the nuclear power
plant monitored zone. The information is signalled by sound or light whenever
the adjusted levels have been exceeded in the detector's vicinity and in the
radiation control block monitoring room, where the information is recorded at the
same time. The volume activities of gases and aerosols are measured in the work-
ing site atmosphere, along with the levels of the exposure gamma-radiation input.
Dosimetric instruments serve for periodical operational control of the situation
in radiation.

b) Technologic Dosimetry

0f the wide spectrum of various measurements, performed to obtain information con-
cerning the present conditions of the reactor's technological quipment13 and pri-
mary circuit through monitoring the active products. measuring 2I and1 3"12 ac-
tivities continuously is most important; next comes exposure gamma-radiation input
to the primary circuit piping, in active-water treatment stations and the like.
The penetration of radioactivity into the secondary circuit is monitored by mea-
suring the exposure input on the live-steam piping and the total beta activity

of the steanrair mixture taken from the turbine nozzles.

Samples of the media from the primary circuit and other technological circuits
are taken to determine the total beta activity in laboratories. the tritium ac-
tivity, as well as the activity of individual fissile and corrosive products.
Gamma spectrometry and liquid scintillation spectrometry are used methodically.

Timely discovery of failures in technological equipment through monitoring the
radioactivity of the media is also important from the point of view of radiation

safety.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Radioactive Haste Monitoring

The radioactivity of waste products being let out through the ventilation chimney-
is measured with equipment which permits degermining the total beta activity of
rare gases, long-term aerosols and steals 1 11 The data obtained are transferred
to the radiation control monitoring room. Tritium in waste products is measured
in samples continuously taken through capturing air humidity on silica gel.

4. Personal Dosimetry

The staff dose exposure to external beta radiation and gamma radiation is measured
with the method of film dosimetry. complemented by measurements using ionizing
chambers and thermoluminescence method. The dose exposure to fast neutrons is
measured with a trace dosimeter. Every member of the staff is equipped with a set
of personal dosimeters corresponding to the radiation characteristics of the en-
vironment in which he works.

5. Monitoring the Surface Contamination of the Staff Members

Stationary dosimetric instruments have been installed at the exit from the moni-
tored zone for measuring the surface contamination of the staff members' clothes
and bodies. Portable dosimetric instruments serve in operative monitoring of the
surface contamination of staff members as well as areas.

6. Monitoring Internal Contamination of the Staff Members

The Plant Health Center monitors internal contamination in the staff members.
The staff members are examined according to their position and the type of work
they perform. Selected professionals, such as shift dosimetrists, maintenance
staff members, operators of the reactor's auxiliary systems, chemists manipulat-
ing with radioactive samples and the like, are examined routinely at 1 month
periods.

Further. the staff members participating in work assignments involving increased
hazard of internal contamination or those having been surface contaminated to a
certain significant extent are examined regularly. In both cases. the basic
examination consists of measuring the radioactivity with an entire-body computer.
determination of the radioactivity of the thyroid gland. checking the internal
contamination by tritium. and determining the total radioactivity from the beta-
spectrometric and gamma-spectrometric examination of biological material.

Preventive medical examinations also include monitoring internal contamination.
In this way, internal contamination is examined in every member of the staff sub-
ject to some exposure for at least 1 year. The extent of this examination de-
pends on the frequency and type of work performed in the environment with ioniz-
ing radiation.

The dose exposure of the V-l power plant staff members due to internal contamina-
tion ranges within very low levels. In several tens of cases, increased total
beta activity, the presence of 1340s, 13763 and tritium have been found. Not
even a single case of the occurrence of radioactive iodine has been discovered.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dose exposure froa internal contamination has never exceeded the value of
l mSv.

Up-To-Date Hygiene Experience From the Operation

All physical parts of the nuclear power plant were put into operation according

to a scientific program and instructions prepared in advance. The reactor reached
the critical state on 27 November 1978. The process of activating the reactor for
power generation at various output levels up to the nominal output was completed
on 30 March 1979. Since then, the V-l power plant has been in trial operation,
during which the provisions for radiation protection incorporated in the design
are being tested thoroughly. together with other characteristics.

1. Contamination of Technological Circuits

The radiation hazard in a nuclear power plant is related directly to the conditions
of the reactor and its primary circuit, primarily to the inventory of fissile and
corrosive products. Apart from nuclides with short half-life period of disinte-
gration, such as 15H, 2K, 2“Na, whose specific radioactivity under the conditions
of the reactor's nominal output ranges within the level of 106Bq.kg‘1, 1311, 13‘I,
91Sr, 13‘Ba and 14‘Ce nuclides were also found in the cooling wazer of the primary
circuit. their specific activity levels rs ing between 102 - 10 Bq.kg’1. Prom
corrosive products, the presence of 56Mn, 23Co and 187W has been ascertained.
Their radioactivity does not exceed 1.85-1053§.kg'1. The volume activity level of
3H in the primary circuit is maintained at 10 Bq.l’1, which is by one order less
than the value prescribed in the design.

No significant leakage has been found in the technological equipment of the pri-
mary circuit and its auxiliary circuits, which might lead to significant contami-
nation of the working areas of the power plant. No defects in the hermetic seal-
ing of the fuel rod casing have been found. either.

2. External Radiation Hazard in the Power Plant Areas

The gamma-radiaiion dose input level in the attended areas (Table l) keeps at
tenths of Gy.h' , which is almost the level of a natural background. Exception-
ally, increased values have been measured in the fittings attendance room where
the box for the water intake from the primary circuit is situated.

In semiattended areas, higher levels of same radiation have been found, ranging
between the levels of ones to tens Gy.h' . The inputs in the unattended areas
are related to the types of technological equipment and the magnitude of the
radioactivity present in this equipment. All these areas are closed to staff
members during the reactor's operation.

3. Surface Contamination and Radioactive Aerosols in the Power Plant Areas

It follows from the measurements (Table 2) that surface contamination has been
ascertained only exceptionally, namely in the areas of the water-treatment sta-
tion of the primary circuit in the steam-generator and main circulation pumps

1.
FOR‘OFFKJAL USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

measuring rooms and in the area where the radiation of the water from the primary
circuit is monitored. The contamination had been caused by leakage through vents
and seals, and having been discovered, it was stopped immediately.

The volume radioactivity of aerosols in both attended and unattended areas ranges
about the level of ones to tens mBq.l‘1. Higher values have been found in the
radiation monitoring roOm of the primary circuit water and in the rooms with steam-

generator and main circulation pumps measuring instruments, as a result of surface
contamination.

The volume of beta activity of rare radioactive gases ranges between ones and tens
Bg.l‘ .

4. Radiation Exposure of Staff Members

The high technological standard of the primary circuit equipment is reflected in
low dose exposure of personnel. Not even for a single month did a collective
dose of external gamma radiation exceed 0.02 Sv; nearly 800 workers were examined
(Table 3). No significant differences were found between the evaluations per-
formed during the gradual process of activating the plant and those performed dur-
ing trial operation with the nominal output. Analyzing the distribution of the
collective doses to various groups of professionals we found out that beside the
equipment attendance staff, also chemists, dosimetrists and leading technical
personnel were exposed to doses during the process of physical and energetical
activation of the plant, whereas the attendance and maintenance personnel almost
exclusively participate in the dose exposure during trial operation.

5. Radioactive Wastes

The results of monitoring the radioactive wastes in the ventilation chimney
(Table 4) testify of a good radiation situation during the operation of the first
block of the V-l power plant. The radioactivity of rare gases (radioisotopes of
xenon and crypton) amounts to several ercent, aerosol beta activity reaches only
several hundredths of a percent and 13 I only several tenths of a percent of the

permissible limits.
6. Liquid Radioactive Wastes

All waste water leaving the V-l power plant is monitored dosimetrically. Year
limits have been determined for the discharge of radioactive substances into the
living environment, further specified for fissile and active corrosive products
and tritium. The up-to-date monitor records show that the amount actually dis-
charged reaches the permissible limits only partially. The average value of the
total beta activity of the waste water discharged from the power Blant in the
first half of 1979 is 2.31. Bq.1"1. The share of the content of 9 Sr and 137cs
in the total beta activity is 70 percent. The radioactive substances discharged
into the living environment cause to the population living in the plant's vicin-
ity negligible dose exposure, if compared with the exposure to natural radio-

active background.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ccnnrntor 30:, Water Trent-ant S
13. Ron-

I‘CIO Ron-

3 Roan

:ion Monitoring Roan

k Hater Treatment Station
:irculntion Pups Platter.
hr Hall

pr Hall Conttol Roo-
.ntion Synten Attendnncn Cortidor
s3. Attendance Roo-

7 Circuit Hunt Box
lanc- Corridor.
Stan-Gonorntor Box, Voter Tron:
Fitting: Root-

Bxchongero Ron

Filters Roo-

Rodiation Monitoring Roo-

o! tho Water trout-on: Station
Main Circulation Pup. Platform
Ructor lull

Reactor "all Control Roo-
Ventilation Synta- Attondonco c
ﬁtting. Attondonco Roo-
Attcndnncc Corridor.

Special Oporotion Building lull
n unsure of the Staff in tho Period fro- the Ruccor'l thsicnl Stu

Collective Done

who: of
Foxﬁre Ext-med

770
791

791
800
757
752
762
782
787
81 1
816
838
886

3.9
18.2

6.3
6.8
6.2
2.6
1.0
0.5
0.6
3.7
7.6
2.2

6.5

ISV

0650

0.3

0.7

2.7

1.9
6.8
2.8

2.2
0.7

Maxim. Ind 1v“

Done

0.7
2.2
1.9
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.2
0.6
0.2
0.6
1.3
0.6
1.0

'I5

003

0.9

1.1

3.2

0900

0.3

0.7
1.7

0.7
1.6
0.9

1.1
0.7

m
Assn

of I
up to

760

768

778
787
769
765
756
780
785
801
802
829
873
ZONLY

FOR¢OHHC1ALI

00.0
0~.0
«0.0
00.0
00.0
«0.0
«N.0
0~.0
«0.—
0n.0
nn.0
no.0

 

gunman Iowa
uncouoh

00¢.n
on0.0~
nu.n
0-.n
00—.0
«noon
'0'.“—
00n.n~
0n0.00
050.0u
0cm.0n
«00.0n
Immm

~_n~

 

~—0.0
N~0.0
n~0.0
0—0.0
0~0.0
Nu0.0
n—0.0
0~0.0
~N0.0
Oucoc
n~0.0
e~0.0

 

uumnuu loam
undone;

-o.o~
0ne.n_
«un.n~
000.0N
c—a.-
n00.5—
a—noo—
o~0.nn
000.0"
¢n0ooc
ouo.0«
000.0—

...mmmm..
cacaouo<

0.”
n.—
a."
n.n
«.n
0.0
c.m
0.0
«.0
Nov
”.0
~.n

 

cannuu noun
unduuom

000.m

~N5.n

m—0.n

0N0.n~
00¢..N
0o~.0~
¢0~.~«
000.5—
006.0—
«00.0—
00—.0—
00<.«~

nhhbl
con-0

non-soon
nonalboz
uoaOuoo
ucnliualm
unaua<
hush
cash

5.:
uuua<

Bond!

hu-auaou

 

snag:

 

aka. an u¢-m uoaoa ~u> an as» noun so»u.gu..g .uoavo~. o...: no u»«>«»o.o«vn¢

a

O A A I H

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Discussion

Compared to other technologies, the pressure-water nuclear reactor technology is
most widely used and evaluated as a whole from various aspects, including radia-
tion exposure, it reaches the best parameters. The V—l power plant is equipment
manufactured in series. The favorable experience with the radiation situation in
both working and living environment of a power plant of this type has been dis-
cussed in literature many times (Golubev and team, 1976; Martin, 1977; Murphy and
team, 1977; Vohra, 1978; Voznesenskij, 1978).

Our present experience with the operation of the V-l has been equally favorable.
An overwhelming majority of nuclear power plants operating throughout the world
at present are essentially of an analogous conception. We know from both our own
and foreign experience that fro- the point of view of radiology, it is necessary
to keep in mind two important factors.

1. The so-called human factor is accentuated as always more important. Despite
advanced technological and engineering safety of the facility, mistakes in judg-
ment, inadequate observation of operational regulations and duties can lead to
serious failure with subsequent leakage of a significant amount of radioactive
substances into the environment. Therefore, high professional standards, sys-
tematic supplementary training and testing the operational staff is emhasized.
Technical tests aim at testing the knowledge of the physics of the reactor, tech-
nology and nuclear and radiation safety.

2. During operatiOn some parts of the technological equipment wear out gradually,
leakage occurs as a result of the damage of the compactness of the structural ele-
ments due to corrosion and the like. The ever-growing demands for maintenance
and repair of the radioactive equipment result in the increase of individual ex-
posures as well as the increase of the leakage of radioactive substances into the
living environment.

At present, the need to obtain electric power, on the one hand, and the biologic

' aard resulting from this activity, on the other hand, are often discussed and
considered. In our country, this question has been discussed in detail by
Paulicka and Trnovec (1976); they pointed out that even in the case of optimal
coverage of all of the Czechoslovak area with nuclear power plants, no inadequate
biologic hazards threaten as a result of leakage from these facilities which might
be reflected in the increase of lethal diseases or perhaps undesirable genetic
consequences .

Summary
Factors of radiation hygiene in the operation of a nuclear power plant of a pros-
pective type with a water-pressure reactor are surveyed. Both home and foreign

experience shows that generating electric power using this type of nuclear tech-
nology is compatible with low biological hazard.

COPYRIGHT: VEDA, Vydavatelstvo Slovenskej Literatury, Bratislava, 1981

9814
C80: 5100/3001

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

AUTHORIZA‘IIONS FOR URANIUM EXPORTS DURING FIRST HALF 1981

Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRMNN‘BENS in French No. 1869 6 Sep 81 p 2278

[Text] According to uranium export authorizations issued by decree published in
the Official Gazette of the Niger Republic, the Niger government authorized exports

of 4,846.9 tons of uranium during the first half of the year, to be delivered during
1981 to six countries: France, Libya, Japan, Spain, Federal Republic of Germany and

Iraq .

France will be Niger's major custoner, with authorized imports (decreed on 3 and 7
March) of 2,293.3 tons, as compared with 1,344.3 tons in 1980 and 100 tons in 1979.
It is followed by Libya (1,212 tons in 1981, against only 380 tons in 1980), Japan
(816 tons), Spain (300 tons), Federal Republic of Germany (with 125 tons of uranium
for 1981, in comparison with 250 tons in 1980) and finally, for the first time,
Iraq with 100 tons.

Out of these six customers, four, through subsidiaries. are shareholders in the
capital of the two Niger uranium mining firms, sauna (Air Mining Corpsny) and
COMINAK (Akouta Mining Company). Thus they have uranium export rights allocated
on the basis of their share in the capital of the mining conpanies.

Niger, for its part, holds 33 percent of SOMAIR's capital and 31 percent of COMINAK's
capital, through ONAREM (National Mineral Resources Board).

In SOMAIR, Niger's partners are France (General Nuclear Materials Cowany with 26.96
percent, French Uranium Company with 11.79 percent, Minatome with 7.58 percent and
Mokta Mining Company with 7.58 percent). PKG (Urangesellschaft with 6.58 percent)
and Italy (Agip Nucleare with 6.53 percent).

In COMINAK, ONAREM is joined by France (COGEMA with 310 percent), Japan (Overseas
Uranium Resources Development with 25 percent) and Spain (Empress Nacional de Uranio
with 10 percent).

Consequently only two countries, Libya and Iraq, which have no shares in the capital
stock of the two Nigerien uranium conanies, were importers of Migerien uranium in
1981, purchasing it from own.

In examining the data in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Niger, it is found
that although it is the first time that Iraq has bought uraniul from Niger (decree
of 28 January 1981), 1979 (150 tons) and 1980 (180 tons, then 200 tons). Bcononic
observers note, however, that it is the first time that this country, which has no

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processing plant, has purchased such a large amount of uranium (1,212 tons). (For
possible uses of this uraniul by Libya, see under "Libya".)

French imports (2,293.3 tons) also register a clear increase over 1979 (100 tons)
and 1980 (1,36&.3 tons). Out of these 2,293 tons, 600 will go to the Atomic
Energy Commission, as a special purchase outside the quota.

Japanese and Spanish inports have remained at about the same level as in previous

years, while the ERG has reduced its deland by half from 1980 (250 tons) to 1981
(125 tons).

According to the Official Gazette, exports authorised during the first 6 Ionths of
the year will be made "in the course of 1981." It is rather unlikely, observers
note, that further export authorizations will be issued for this year, since the

total tonnage already authorized during the first half of 1981 exceeds the dolestic
production capacity by about 500 tons.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9805
080: 5100/6965

12

FOR OFFNJAI.USE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

URANIUM SALES POLICY-~8y publishing in the JOURNAL OFFICIEL of 27 August a list of
all sales of uranium decided on during the first 6 months of 1981, the authorities
confirmed their resolution to make commonplace trade in a highly strategic product.
Deliveries to Libya increased six times (1,212 tons as compared with 200 in 1980)
and an initial purchase by Iraq (100 tons) was recorded. whereas these two countries
have been blacklisted in particular by the United States which, invoking nonprolif-
eration, would like to prohibit the third world states from access to nuclear energy,
even to the atom bomb. The position of President Seyni Rountche is clear: "We are
selling to any customer who, while accepting our prices, satisfies the purchase
conditions set by the international commission in Vienna." The loading of blue
barrels full of ore is carried cut in broad daylight at the airports of Niamey and
Agadez or in the port of Cotonou (Benin). Moreover, the quantities which will be
sold to each of the customers is known in advance, by decree. Thus for exports
which will be delivered this year: France will purchase 2,293 tons (as compared
with 1.344 in 1980 or 47 percent of total sales); yibya, 1,212 tons (25 percent);
Japan, 816 tons (17 percent); Spain, 300 tons (6 percent); the PRC, 125 tons

(3 percent) and Iraq 100 tons (2 percent). In total: 5,866 tons for 1980. In

fact, to boycott some purchaser or other according to the whims of western diplomacy
would be tantamount for the Nigerien Government to losing control of the receipts

of foreign exchange vital for the pursuit of economic development [Text] [Paris

JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1080. 16 Sep 81 v 31] [COPYRIGMT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA
1981]

JAPANESE URANIUM EXPLORATION AGREEMENT-A Japanese company, the Power Reactor and
Nuclear Fuel DevelOpment Corporation [PNC], signed on 9 September in Niamey a draft
agreement with the Nigerien Office of Mineral Resources [ONAREM] for the exploration
and exploitation of a new uranium deposit. The ONAREM—PNC association is to start
soon its exploration in Agadez Department (northern Sahara), on the In Adrar site.
The draft agreement was signed for the Nigerian side by the minister of mines,

Annou Mahamane, the director of ONAREM, Ssni Knutoumbi, and by the director of the
PNC, Mikio Iaetani. It stipulates that the Japanese company will finance the
exploration and installations at the rate of 600 million CPA francs for the next

2 years and an additional 600 million CPA francs for the fourth year. Japan is
already active in Niger in the exploration and exploitation of uranium in particular
through the Overseas Uranium Resources Development [OURD]. which holds 25 percent

of the capital of the Akouta Mining Company [COMINAK], one of the two large Nigerian
uranium exploitation enterprises, with the Air Region Mining Company [SOMAIR].

Japan has purchased in Niger 816.6 tone of uranium since the beginning of the year.
[Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1871, 18 Sep 81

p 2383] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreuu et Cie Paris 1981]

cso: 4719/29 END
13