FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10461

15 April 1982

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in tho first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(r000 4/821
Couteurs

EAST EUROPE

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Development of cm Nuclear Power System Viewed
(Ye eniy P. Vlasov, at 31.; “MA ENERGIE, No 12,

1981 coco...o000.09.000.0000000000000coonncconoooooooa

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Reactor Simulation Program Results amused
(Ivan Kinka, at a1.3 JAIERM mm, No 12, 1981)..

-a- [III-WW-141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEVELOPMENT 01’ cm NUCLEAR POUER svsm VIEWED

Prague JADERNA ENERGIE in Russian No 12. 1981 pp 439-643

[Article by Yevgeniy P. Vlnsov. International Scientific Research Institute of Con-
trol Problems. Moscow; "1105 Dragny. Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Commission. Prague;
and Yuriy A. Iyurin. Department of Scientific and Technical Cooperation of the cm
Secretariat. Hoscow: "A Study of Methodological Problems in the Forecasting and
Optimal Development of a Nuclear Power System for CEHA hatter-Nations”

[Text] One of the important directions in solving the fuel-
and-power problem of cm member nations is the accelerated devel-
opment of the nuclear power industry. The present stage of the
cooperation among these countries in this area is characterized
by the large-scale and comprehensive implementation of measures.
the considerable influence of scientific and technical progress
on production efficiency and the great contribution of these
countries to the overall issue of realizing the nuclear power-

production portion of the long-term specific program of coopera-
tion (D‘rsPs) to provide for the economically founded requirements
of the cam member-nations for the basic types of power. fuel
and raw materials to the year 2000. The indicated conditions

for the development of the nuclear power industry are dictated
by the necessity of improving methods of. controlling and planning
the development of the entire nuclear power couple): (Yam) of

the socialist countries [1.2].

Figure 1 presents the interindustry structure of the nuclear power~production com-
plex. It includes the fuel-cycle industries (extraction, processing and enriclnent
of fuels, the manufacture of fuel elements. chemical processing of spent nuclear
fuel and processing and storage of radioactive wastes). nuclear stations and in-
stallations for the generation of electric and thermal power (nuclear electric-
power stations. nuclear heat-and-power stations and nuclear power-production instal-
lations) and all capital-generating sectors of the nuclear power complex (metallurgy,
heavy. chemical and power-engineering industries. the electrical equipment industry.
instrument engineering. power industry construction and the construction industries).

Of course. the nuclear power complex of a given country can and must be considered
a subsystem of the integrated nuclear power complex of the cm mower-nations.

It is possible to rational 1y solve problems which within the framework of a single
country cannot be solved at all or, at least. cannot be solved efficiently. This

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f0" UI'I'ILIAI. UBE. UNI-I

can be accomplist through international cooperation. diVision of labor. special-
ization of production and construction through contined effort or cooperation with-
in the scope of capital investment in construction.

The industries in the nuclear power complex are elbraced by complex interrelation-
ships. including reciprocal relationships (for example. the chemical processing of
spent fuel). The formation of this aggregate of industries into a unified nuclear
power complex is dictated by the degree of specialization. the influence they exert
on one another as well as by the overall production cycle.

The characteristic integrity of the nuclear power complex which we have pointed out
determines the necessity for applying a systematic approach to examining the pros-
pects for its development and the introduction of methods for multisector planning
and control.

The overall organizational structure for planning the long-term development of the
nuclear power complex can be presented in the following manner (fig. 2). This dia-
gram displays the operational makeup and the interrelationships of these operations
in the forecasting and formation of nuclear power programs and a comprehensive long-
range plan of development for those industries included in the nuclear power complex.
The close interrelationship between the planning of scientific research and industry
is shown by a block for the determination of the needs of industry in the develop-
ment of equipment and technology and effective directions for the utilization of

the new results from scientific research and experimental design work. A positive
feature of this long-term planning program is the emisination of the processes for
forecasting and forming programs and plans for the development of the nuclear power
complex into a unified cycle of interrelated operations. The results from forecast-
ing programs and the coordinating of these programs with specialized plans should
insure the best continuity.

At the present time. we have good reason to believe that the cm member-nations
will insure the realization of a comprehensive and specific approach to managing
the development of the nuclear power industry up to the year 1990. Within the scope
of the previously mentioned long-term specific program of cooperation, we have con-
cluded the Agreement on Multilateral International Specialization and Cooperation
in the Production and Mutual Supply of ABS Equipment for the Period 1981-1990. we
are creating the necessary organizational prerequisites and are solving three of
the most important problems in scientific and technical cooperation within the nu-
clear power industry: the mastery of water-cooled water-modulated reactors with
outputs on the order of 1.000 W; the development of high-output fast reactors;

and the development of nuclear heat and power stations and nuclear heat plants.

However, features of the process for the integrated devllopment of a nuclear power
complex--a considerable rate of growth. a broad spectrum of scientific research
and feasible structural transformations. the time lag and the capital-intensive
nature of the problen--dictate that technical and economic studies of the prospects
for a CEMA mater-nation nuclear power complex be conducted for the years beyond
1990 and that corresponding long-term cycles for managing its development and pro-
gress be organized.

2
FOR OFI'KJAI. USE ONLY
Control over the development and progress of the nuclear power complex and the real-
ization of the corresponding industrial-economic and scientific-technical activities
are contained in the field of activity of a nutter of agencies and organisations.
primary among which are:

a) at the national level:

- the highest organs (government and joint agencies for planning. finance. teclmical
development, foreign trade, etc.)

- special ministries (ministries of power. metallurgy. machine construction, instru-
ment engineering. construction and the construction industry. etc.)

- the organisation of a scientific-research and experimental-design base;
h) at the CBHA level:
- supreme organs (Supreme Soviet, Executive Comittee).

-connittees for cooperation in the area of planned activity and for scientific and
technical cooperation. as well as their working agencies (namely. the working Group
for the Fuel and Power Balance and the Council for Scientific and Technical Coopera-
tion in the Area of Fuel and Power Problems--the 11:? Council), '

- special Permanent Committees (namely, those for the utilization of nuclear power
for peaceful purposes, for electric power, for machine building and for construction)
and their working agencies,

- international economic organizations (namely. international economic organiza.-
tions of Interatonenergo and lnteratominstrument),

- international organisations of the scientific research baae (namely. HNIIPUu
the International Scientific Research Institute for Control Problems).

Within the organizational plan. integrated programtic-specific planning and man-
agement of the cm nether-nation nuclear power complex according to diagram 2 should
be constructed on one interrelated plan of harmonious work coordinated by the above-
nentioned agencies and organizations at the national and international levels.

Let us now dwell upon the status of the work being done in the area of forecasting

the long-range development of the nuclear power industry in socialist countries.

he refer here to' the work being carried out within the scope of activity of the
Comittee of the Scientific and Techical Council which. on behalf of the 26th meeting
of the CEHA Session, organizes the development of a scientific and technical forecast
for the solution to fuel and power problems in the period to the year 2000 and for

the long term. This work. being carried out from 1980 to 1984. is based upon data
from interested cam member-nations regarding the planned development of national

fuel and power complexes.

The first meeting of the Provisional Collective of Scientists and Specialists (VKUS).
created by the m Co'mcil to develop a forecast for the development of the nuclear
power industry. took place from 27 to 30 January 1981 in the city of Oatravs in

FOR OFFICIEL USE ONLY
ments were submitted for approval:

1. a program of development and

The sixth session of the TEP Council which took place in Berlin, Bast Gernany from
16 through 19 June 1981 approved both documents and noted that the Soviet Union had

and initial basis for forecasting. Two major stages have been proposed: the develop~
nent of a forecast plan and. naturally. the forecast itself. During the first stage,
alternative strategies for the development of the power industry itself are examined
and evaluated. During the second stage, these strategies are refined and adjusted.
In addition, suggestions are developed regarding integrating measures and the con-
tribution of each country toward their realization.
At the same time. on the international level. alternatives are worked out for the
realization of integrating measures for can member-nations as well as mutually ad-
vantageous alternatives for scientific-technical and industrial-economic cooperation.

At the concluding stage. of forecast development. the specific structure is submitted
for approval and a plan of the decisions is prepared for examination by the corres-

ponding CEMA agencies with regard to integrating measures which insure the long-term
growth of the CEHA member~nation nuclear power complex.

of the national nuclear power industry. The development of a forecast begins with
the determination of the scope of the national nuclear power industry for the years
l990~2000-2010 and the selection of types. unit outputs and the stages of utiliza-
tion of nuclear reactors. Then studies are developed for determining the basic
tasks of scientific research. alternatives for the development of an industrial
and construction base and the demand for scarce materials and the basic types of
equipment. Simultaneously, as a result of the determination of the structure of
AES's. ATETs's and AST's planned for construction in the period to 2010 and the
evaluation of the prospects for the utilization of nuclear power installations in
metallurgy. chemistry, agriculture. transportation and in other sectors of the
economy. we are conducting:

- an analysis of ecological factors and the identification of the corresponding
limitations on and requirements for the construction of nuclear power installations;

- the development of alternative methods for maintaining, storing and transporting
spent fuel and for processing and burying radioactive wastes;

- the development of alternative methods for decomissioning nuclear power installa-
tions.

Naturally, these problems in the development of the nuclear power industry give
rise to their own scientific-technical and industrial-economic questions. A study
of the alternative methods for developing production and scientific research in
individual sectors of the nuclear power complex concludes with a system for evaluat-
ing alternative methods for the development of the power industry. If it becomes
necessary. the previously selected structure and alternative methods for the utili-
zat ion of nuclear reactors can be adjusted according to the results of this evalua-
tion in order to improve the effectiveness of the solutions obtained. After satis-
factory results are obtained, a selection is made of the major directions for the
scientific and industrial work being done to insure the development of the national
nuclear power industry. The country then draws up proposals for international coop-
eration in the given area. ‘

It must be noted that the initial selection of the structure and alternative methods
of utilization of nuclear reactors is a most critical stage in the development of

a national forecast. This selection essentially determines future scientific and
industrial activity both within the scope of the national nuclear power program

as well as international programs for the integrated development of the nuclear
power complex. Thus. we must develop this stage with particular care, enlisting

the aid of leading scientists from various sectors of the nuclear power industry.

FOR OFFICfAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. [SE ONLY

In order to carry out systematic research and optimize strategies for the long-term
development of the cm member-nations' nuclear power complex. UNIIPU together with
the interested national organizations is formulating a system of mathematical eco-
nomic models. This system includes models for the development of fuel-cycle sectors.
a model for the development of the power-production base, a model for the develop-
ment of the machine-construction base and the related nuclear-power production in-
dustries as well as a model of the interrelations among sectors of the nuclear power
industry. This system of models reflects the multistage process of production (for
example. the extraction, enrichmnt, processing. etc. of ores) and considers the
basic production parameters which determine its technological feasibility and its
technical and economic efficiency. Horeover, the models directly reflect the re-
sults of the development of new equipment and techniques and their introduction into
industry.

The realization of tasks regarding research and the optimization of long-term strat-
egies for the development of a nuclear power complex utilising the indicated models
is accomplished on the basis of the SOPOT [expansion not provided] man-machine sys-
tem developed at the International Scientific Research Institute for Control Prob-
lems. This system is problem-oriented toward the solution of tasks involving simu-
lation and the optimization of intersector industrial complexes [3]. The SOPOT
system consists of: a data bank; a generator of model programs; a numerical-method
library; a model-research and problem-solving block; and an interactive-procedure
block. '

The features of the SOPOT system provide:

- the capacity for system correlation and problem decomposition in multilevel
organizational systems;

- facility in adjusting mathematical economic models and problem conditions;

- the solution to complex data problems. including the answers to nonoperational
queries.

At the present time. HNIIPU is organizing the exchange of SOPOT system software
with interested national organizations. The planned exchange will enable the coun-
tries to reduce considerably the time and resources spent on creating a system for
simulating the growth of national fuel-and-power complexes, as well as to prepare
a basis for contining national systems of power-industry models in order to conduct
joint investigations of alternative strategies for integrated development of fuel-
and-power complexes.

In conclusion. we must emphasize:

l. the importance of date formulated at the national level and. thus. the complex-
ity of the makeup of national working groups. It is desirable that all interested
agencies and organizations in the scientific-technical and economic spheres of each
country participate within the scope of these working groups. The participation of
administrative and economic agencies (the State Planning Comittee. the ministries,
etc.) is necessary in view of the fact that these agencies are the ones which will
subsequently utilize the results of the forecast and can from the very outset intro-

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
J12 ___________ _ ______ _.

______ .—..-._——_._1

:’ manicure-It anew «um-swearmmm armatu- l
foam "19¢ saw-am “Wm. 1mm“ W‘m ~-:o.-:e.-.-’ne-'ue -'-"’"3‘"" mm "'- .J

  

Key :

L—u—p ————— — —————— ——’—— v—_— -——— ——— -—
52) : g3) ! m | (521' 562‘— 5 3" $82 I (931
2:":me . .‘g‘l'flltl I ’3’.ch4'5." . Meter.“ 5 3:1. wag-.9 . -_j-'.'_'.e_.-li':4 _m-M

WM

.y‘waw-
"no-nu

    
 

! emu-w I Ifaoemue I Immune i lzﬂﬁxu-u ‘ iMrueil
‘ ' ' ' . . 1..."! _n

O 1 l

     
  

 

   

Figure 1. Diagram of Interinduatry Structure
of the Nuclear Power Complex

Radioactive discharges and waste

Revenue-generating sectors of the nuclear power complex: metallurgy. heavy,
power, chemical and electrical machine construction. instrument engineering,
the construction industry, etc.

Equipment for extracting and preparing ore

Reactor units

Thermonuclear equipment

Chemical equipment

Electrical equipment

Instrumentation and computers

Hoisting and transporting equipment 0

Construction and prefabricated materials

Natural reserves of uranium

Natural reserves of thorium

Extraction and preparation of uranim ore

Extraction and preparation of thorium ore

Uranium enrichment

Enriched uranium

Depleted uranium
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 1. Key (con'd.)
17. Natural uranium
18. Production of fuel elements
19. Burial of radioactive wastes
20. Processing of spent fuel elenents
21. Fresh fuel elements
22. Spent fuel elements
23. Radioactive wastes
26. ABS's, ATEIs's and AS‘r's with thaml reactors
25. ass'a. A‘rB‘rs's and nuclear power installations with fast reactors
26. Nuclear power installations with high-temperature reactors
27. Electric power
28. High-potential heat
29. Low-potential heat
30. Thermal wastes
31. Non-power aaterials

duce the necessary corrections in the studies being conducted and orient these stu-
dies in accordance with their own requirenents. The immediate users will be the
organisations in the scientific-technical sphere which will introduce the desired
scientific approach and methodological apparatus into forecast studies;

2. the important role of meetings of the Provisional Collective of Scientists and
Specialists which will observe and evaluate the progress of the work, insure the
exchange of information and experience as well as consolidate individual points

of view and discuss all data presented by the meaber-nations and the coordinator;

3. the extraordinarily vital and couple: role of the coordinator. In contrast to
the Provisional Collective of Scientists and Specialists, which can operate only
periodically during the course of its neetings and will be linited to the discussion
of the asterials presented. the coordinator will continuously carry out the follow-
ing activities on an international scale:

- prepare proposals for refining methodological instructions and working programs,

- develop a conceptual plan for an integrated nuclear power complex (at the first
stage of development),

- evaluate eaterials presented by the countries regarding national nuclear power
complexes and develop plans of the corresponding reconnendations,

- evaluate the countries' considerations regarding an integrated nuclear power com--
plex. sumarize then and. finally, '

- complete editing of the forecast plan and the final forecast for the integrated
nuclear power complex.

Naturally, in order to successfully implement such broad and aultilateral activity,

the coordinator must make extensive use of its own scientific-technical potential
and accumulated expertise in the area of organisation of forecast work.

8
FOIOI'IICIALUSEONLY
iﬁst":r
.4 1 ,. '
:l' “Inner . - in?! can! .

 
 

r———______
- Parasite-IJIue-nssas I

 

. {games-cu 3.1mm ' k '0
-.,§§§5§;ezmrr?~;§§§§="g
- a (19) i i (20) '
: . . : \W l ,
- \J :.
N “spelt-mu spam- ; :
(u) ﬁmgfﬁ" L...‘ (21) N Wham-‘-
' (22)
(12) weﬁgéﬁgiﬁ-ﬁiﬁ’NaR Wm N” 3:33:11 war—“m- """"
(23) (26)
Figure 2. Overall Structure of a System for the Long-Range
Developmental Planning of a Nuclear Power Couple:
Key:
1. Joint program of scientific and technical progress
2. Goals of the country's social and economic development
3. Basic directions for the country's economic and social development
Io. Limitations on resources
5. Program adjustment
6. Pomlation, balancing and optimization of alternative long-range plans
for the development of industrial production within the one ear power
complex
7. Forecast of economic requirements for the output'of the nuclear power
complex
8. Forecast for the development of the raw materials bees
9. Forecast for the development of scientific and teclmical progress in the
creation of new nuclear power equipment and technology
10. Forecast for the development and situation of the nuclear power complex's
production base
ll.‘ Analysis of foreign trends in the development of the nuclear power c lex
12. Formulation of forecasts sud goals in the long-range developaent of the
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2. Key (con'd.)

13.

11a.

15.

[6.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

210.

Integrated forecast for the development of the nuclear power industry

and its raw-material. scientific-technical and industrial base
Determination of goals according to the basic directions for the develop-
ment of the nuclear power complex (the creation of ABS'_s. development of
the fuel and raw-material base, nuclear equipment construction, etc.)
Formation of long-term scientific-technical and industrial programs for
the development of the nuclear power complex

Industry requirements for the development of equipment-and technology
Proposals for the utilization of new equipment and technology

Formulation of an integrated long-range plan for development of industries
within the nuclear power complex

Formulation, balancing and optimization of alternative plans for scien-
tif ic-technical activity in industries within the nuclear power complex
Formulation of f ive-year plans for industry

Program adjustment

Limitations on resources .

Formulation of long-term programs for the development of the nuclear power

complex
Formulation of long-range plans for the development of industries within

the nuclear power complex

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Dragny. H., and Svetlik. Ya., "The Nuclear Power Complex and the Main Directions
of Scientific and Technical Progress," ATOHNAYA ENERGIYA. Vol 49, 1980.

2. Dragny. M., "The Integrated Nuclear Power Complex of the cm “ember-Nations."
JADERNA ENERGIE, No 26, 1980.

3. Vlaaov, Ye. P., 'ryurin. Yu. A., ”The Study of Methodological Questions and the
SOPOI' Han-Machine System for the Forecasting and Optimal Planning of the Devel-
opment of the cm Member-Nation Fuel and Power Complex (Based on the Example
of the Nuclear Power Complex)." International Scientific Coordinating Conference
on the Problem of Improving the Control System for the Development of the CEHA
Hester-Nation Fuel and Power Complex, Moscow, 1-3 Decenber 1980.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL, mp. 1981

9512
050:

5100/3012

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECIIOSLOVAKIA

REACTOR SIMULATIW PROGRAM RESULTS SUMMARIZED

Prague JADERNA ENERGIB in Slovak No 12, 1981 pp 628-633

[Article by Ivan Kinks, Energoprojekt, Prague; Rostislav Pernica, Institute
of Nuclear Research. Res; Jozef Hisak, Research Imtitute of Nuclear Power
Stations, Jaslovske Bohunice; end Bedrich Bermansky, Faculty of Nuclear
Science and Physical Engineering, Prague: "Evaluation of Results of Test
Runs of the RRPAlD, WER—D, SICHTA and M79 Progress: Part II. Summary of

Results"]

[Text] The first part of this article gave a concise
description of the progress tested (REPAID, WER-D,
SICHTA and DYN79) and discussed the fornulation of the
simulation problem and the input data. This second
part is devoted to the conputation results and evalua-
tion of the individual programs. The nost important

parameters that were nonitored are presented in figures
and tables.

5. Results of Individual Simulation Runs

In addition to the results presented in this article, a considerably greater
amount of information can be obtained from references 5711, which report the
capabilities of the individual programs on the basis of practical results.

The relative deviations given in the tables are always calculated relative
to the lowest value obtained.

5.1. Uncontrolled Removal of Control Rod Groups at Zero Reactor Power

The course of the process as determined by the individual programs is eun-

narized by the selected parameters given in Figs. la-lc. Be¢auae the results
were obtained taking the prograns in pairs, i.e., mm with VVER-D and

SICBTA with M79, it was quite apparent that the reason for the considerable
differences in the results for these two pairs was the fuel-reactivity

coefficients, which were temperature-dependent in the first pair and constant
in the second. In spite of this evident fact, we conducted an extra control

computation with the REPAlD progru using a constant fuel-reactivity coeffi-
cient of -2.17 - 10's deg'l, which in absolute terms is somewhat lower than
that used in the SIGHTA and M79 programs. The curve of power as a function

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of time for this caae, shown in Pig. 1, alao indicates the effect of reac-
tivity coefficients on the proceaa.

Key: a. Control conputation with
mm with temperature
coefficient of reactivity
equal to -2. 17 10-5 deg-1

II 7I
IIIII

 

Fig. la. Uncontrolled removal of control rod group, zero reactor power:
reactivity and relativa power as functions of tine (Pm-nominal
power).

   
  

, ral channel

  
   

s:IIIIIII
IIﬂIIII

Fig. 1b. Uncontrolled removal of control rod group, zero reactor purer:

maximum fuel tenperature in central and hot channels as function
of tine.

FOR OMZL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USEZONLY

I ,,za|
Will
Inﬁll-I
IIHIIII

’—_———-l
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII-"'
”L

I l%:
I===%II

IIIWIII

lulu-II

mum-III

llullll

llﬂlIIl
U

   
 

central
channel

   
    
 

  
    
       
       

Fig. lc. Uncontrolled removal of control rod group, zero reactor power:
maximum temperature of inner surface of cladding for hot and
central channels as a function of time.

It is worth noting again that the interpretation of "power" is slightly
different in the SICHTA program than in the others: in the SICHTA program
the "thermal power" figure takes account of the quantity of heat liberated
by fission products, while the neutron-flux density obtained from this pro-
gram is approximately in agreement with the interpretation of "power" in the

other programs.

Table l surveys the extreme parameters obtained with all four programs. For
completeness we also give the largest absolute differences obtained in our
results, including the case in which the reactivity coefficient was altered
[RBPAlD program]:

--relative power, 0.185;
--maximum total reactivity, 0.0061;
-—maximum fuel temperature, 396°C;

--maximum temperature of inner surface of cladding, 14.7'C;
--outlet temperature of coolant, 12°c.

13
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l. Colmarison of extreme values obtained for uncontrolled removal of
control rod group at aero initial reactor power. sr—central
channel; lion—hot channel. Meaning of numerical values: paraneter
value, time at which attained (sec), relative deviation (1).

1.06 1.0
I” 140
0
0.013
40.1
0
M0

0
0.011
40.0
183

lots vgucmo
we u po -
{’51 2'. ['01

maximum ‘;3‘ :
Ha
hang-‘30] ’

 

Kc :
y a. Parameter e. Maxim. fuel temperature Tf (’C)
b. Channel f. Maximum temperature 'l'c of inner
c. Reactor power 1’].an (relative surface of cladding (’0)
to nominal power) g. lIaximua exit temperature of
d. Maximum total reactivity A9 (I) coolant ('C)

5.2. Ejection of Control Rod at Nominal Reactor Power

The graph of the parameters in question over time is presented in Figs. 2a-2d,
and the extreme values obtained are given in Table 2. At the power peak,

which in this case is produced almost exclusively by the kinetic equations,
there are only extremly small discrepancies: the lower value from the

SICHTA program results from the interpretation of "thermal power" already
described. I! we take the neutron-flux density in the SICEl'A program as the

power. we obtain a peak value of 2.07. The greatest discrepancies are in
temperature, particularly on the inner surface of the cladding, where the

heat-transfer equations and the thermophysical parameters of the cladding
which were used may have been responsible.

FOR Oil-1C“ USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050037-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

,Iglllll
ﬁll§§lll
"unease:
,ppllll

I l l I 7

.’¢[n)

    

Fig. 2a. Ejection of control rod at
nominal reactor power: reactivity
and relative power as functions of

tine .

 
 
 
     

central
Echannel

 
    

"E‘sgn-I- channel

'-------
‘

will!!!

:12:

  

a
c It)

Fig. 2c. Ejection of control rod at
nominal reactor power: maxim
tewerature on inner surface of
cladding of central and hot channels
as a function of tine.

15

l awo-
%
l
’18. 2b. 831
at nominal r¢

fuel tempera
channels as

0N

‘-
.gt‘atgc'ki
~Wi~ﬂ

Fig. 2d. 33
at nominal r
tenerature

as function .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050037-1
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Colpariaon of excrete values achieved in ejection of control red at
rated initial reactor power. st-central channel; mk—hot chan-
nel. waning of numerical values: parameter value, tine at which
attained (sec). relative deviation (1).

ICII \I D
\‘VKII-D
SILII'I'A

n‘kon nnkwta. Cl

. I., .

'P- 2.qu 2.092 thlg -.0.

(Gummy I 0.2 0.13 | «.1: 0.1:)
k nominalncuuﬂ - “.0 ‘ 0.! - u .

mnximﬂnslwl- - . .-
nota celkowj 0.37 0.81 0.306

rceklivily J9 0.1 0.1 0.!
['6]

maxI mans.

top on p m

T! ['0]

maximdlua u- )-
lum \‘m‘u-mu" u. ST “.70 0.04

luwrchu 'u-kry- _u.:$ 2.4

Inn 1'. : *‘l - "'5'" "B; .
I mm «.15 mm
2.7 5.0

I nximum \'}‘~ 1 IT" :III III 309
a'tInpnej u- loty 81‘ 3.0 4.46 0 :1,
chlaclwel C] ",3 0.0 u.d_

520.: no.3 320.5 320.:

HO". 0.“ 0.8! 0.9 I
0 0 0 0

R‘Jiﬁ'tﬂ32m‘ Lu 1.31 1.313 2.43
tolwlnéhu pom.» H010. 0.4: ".28 NM;
ru h, | 17.0 0 5.2 80.3

 

a . Parameter
b . Glannel

c. Reactor power P/Pm (relative to nominal power)

d. Maxi-an total reactivity A0 (2)

e. Maxim fuel tenpereture 'l'f ('C)

f. Mariana telperature Tc of inner surface of cladding ('0)
3. Maxim exit temperature of coolant ('C)

h. Mini-us critical te-perature ratio kg,

In the case of the critical temerature ratio no benefit is gained from con-

paring WW9 with the other prograne, because the equations used differ
considerably (Bezrukov equations vs Oanachkin equations). In addition, in

this situation the WEB-D progren'e more precise description of the hydro-
dynamic ratios in the channela hae a pronounced effect on the results.

16
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In this case. we obtained the following largest absolute differences in the
values of the parameters monitored:

-re1ative power, 0.131 (owing to interpretation of power in SICRIA progral);

«maximum total reactivity. 0.0051;

"maxim fuel temperature. 120°C;

«maximum teuperature of inner surface of cladding. 21.5'C;

"exit temperature of coolant. Z’C (apparently as a result of boiling in the
hot channel);

--critical tewerature ratio. 0.23 (Osnachkin equations only).

5.3. Leakage of Cold Hater Into Core

The qualitative difference between this process and those described above is
that the output temperature of the coolant and the uses flow change over tine

and the change in reactivity is produced by the reactivity coefficient of the
coolant.

The dispersion of the results obtained, particularly between SICBTA and the
mum and WER-D pair, is partly explained by the fuel-reactivity coeffi-
cients and partly by the heat-transfer coefficient of the crack. The most
notable differences between the DYN79 program and the others—since they show
up even at tine t - Ouare apparently produced by the heat-transfer coeffi-
cient of the crack. The power peak in the SICHTA program, with a neutron-

flux density of 1.375. is considerably lower than that obtained fro. the
VVER-D and REPAlD programs.

IE7]
[1,74-
5'4.-

   
 

channel

  

2, names:

IWZIII§

gall-ll

~ Full.
'0)

 
    

Fig. 3a. Leakage of cold water into Fig. 3b. leakage of cold water into
core: reactivity and relative power core: maxim fuel teqerature in
as Emotions of tine. central and hot channels as function
of tine.
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hot
channel

   

Fig. 3c. Leakage of cold water into Fig. 3d. Leakage of cold water into
core: naxinun tewerature on inner core: critical temperature ratio
surface of cladding of central and in hot channel as function of tine.

hot channels ea function of tine.

Table 3. Cowarisona of extreme valuee obtained for leakage of cold water
into core at 5/6 of nominal power at beginning of process: 8T”
central channel; non-41o: channel. Meaning of numerical values:
parameter value, tine at which attained (sec), relative deviation (1)

a. Parameter

b. Channel

c. Reactor power P/PNOH (rela-
tive to nominal power)

d. Maxinun total reactivity

RIPAI D

. A9 (1)
MW“ 4:156 e. ﬁxing fuel temperature

Ww.y:£p f. lhxinun tenperature Tc of

['0] e __ inner surface of cladding
(‘0)

g. Maximu- exit tenperature
of coolant (°C)

h. Minimum critical tempera-
ture ratio kn

naximumvy
«upne j to oty
ohladivat

an an
3 Hon 33.: no.0

minimum holl-
muu krmckulw
Irpolnﬂm p“.
mom I...

 

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The change of parameters over time is shown in Figs. 3a—3d, and the extreme
values obtained are presented in Table 3. 0n the basis of the results

obtained. in this type of situation we may expect the following dispersion

of the extreme values of the parameters monitored for the different programs
(including the effect of the input data, namely the coefficient of reactivity
and heat-transfer coefficient of the crack):

--rclative power, 0.27;

-maximum total reactivity, 0.0141;

-maximum fuel temperature. 360°C;

--maximum temperature of inner surface of cladding, 22.5.6;
--exit temperature of coolant, 7°C.

5.4. Uncontrolled Removal of Group of Control Rods at Nominal Reactor Power

The last of the test runs is the classical emergency situation, in which

limiting values may be approached (or exceeded), even in the central channel.
Accordingly, it is in this case that physical models of the individual pro-

grams have the most evident effect. This case is, moreover, the most suitable
one for comparing the REPAlD, VVER-D and SICHTA programs, because a
temperature-dependent fuel-reactivity coefficient was also used here for the
SICHTA program. The results are most readily apparent from the power curves

of Fig. 4, which are virtually identical for almost the entire simulation
period of the programs. The constant fuel-reactivity coefficient value again
had an evident effect in the DYN79 program. The abrupt increase in the
temperature of the inner surface of the cladding of the hot channel given by

the REPAlD program results from the transition to film boiling, while the
VVER-D program uses equations for nucleate boiling even after the critical
neutron-flux density is exceeded. The temperature discrepancies are small on
the whole and mostly reflect differences in the thermophysical parameters and
heat transfer modes used. It is noteworthy that the SICHTA program gives a
relative power figure (represented by the neutron-flux density) of 2.38 at
time 1 - 60 seconds.

The variation of the values monitored over time is given in Figs. 4a-4d; the
extremes at time 1 - 60 are given in Table 4. The time 1 - 60 see is merely

an arbitrary reference point, since some of the programs followed the process
farther.

0n the basis of our results, in this type of situation we may expect about the

following dispersion in extreme values (including inconsistency of input
parameters):

--relative power, 0.49;

--maximum total reactivity, 0.0341;
-maximum fuel temperature, 184°C;

--maximum temperature of inner surface of cladding, l46'c;
-exit dryness of coolant (hot channel). 30.72;

--minimum critical temperature ratio, 0.27 (excluding DYN79 and hot channel).

19
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
central
channel

 

IEEIIVEMc

III-”7,. channel
Illlall
Illﬂlll
IIHIIII
.I-II.

 
    
   
     

Fig. lob. Uncontrolled removal of
control rod group at nominal reactor

power: maxim fuel temperature in
central and hot channels as func-

tion of time .

 

"Inuluzamt
v .I“..“. channel
“IINRIII
"II-NIIE
‘Illﬂﬁll

 
     
 

 
 

Fig. 6d. Uncontrolled removal of
control rod group at nominal reactor
power: critical temperature ratio
for central and hot channels as
function of tin.
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Table 6. Comparison of extren values achieved for uncontrolled removal of

control rod group at nominal initial reactor power. S‘r—central
channel; Inn—hot channel. hating of nuaerical values: parameter

value, relative deviation (2). Reference tias is 1' - 60 sec for all
cases except for reactivity and exit teqeratum of coolant, where

the tine of attainment is shown in parentheses.

llEPAlD

mainline up
lots peliva T,

('0)

maxilnelne le )-
tole vnutom‘

hu
5:? rd?”

maximum v9- 320. 3 320.3 380. J 320.3

a t (_7_3)
3.1533313 ’

M su-
[%u:chdive

 

a. Parameter
b. Channel

c. Reactor P/Puo“ (relative to nominal power)

d. Maxim total reactivity 60 (X)

e. Maxi-u fuel temperature If (‘0)

f. Maxim teqerature we of inner surface of cladding (‘0)
g. maxim exit temperature of coolant ('c)

h. Exit dryness of coolant (X)

i. Hininun critical temperature ratio Iqu-

6 . Conclusions

0n the basis of the results iron our test runs. we may state that all of the
program produce equivalent results in the solution of the basic sets of

equations, and that the discrepancies result by and large iron the capabilities

21
MOMMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the programs (salectability of input parameters) and from physical charac-
teristics built into them. Other than the reactivity values used. the deci-
sive figures affecting the process over time are the fuel—reactivity coeffi-
cients, for which the temperature dependency of the Doppler effect generally
cannot be ignored. The maximua fuel temperatures are affected not only by
the development of power over time, but also to a substantial degree by the
heat-transfer coefficient of the crack. The equations for heat transfer to
the coolant have a quite prominent effect in the region of heat transfer to
cooled liquid, while certain discrepancies appear in the equations after the

beginning of boiling. The critical heat-flux density is highly dependent on
the equations used. with the Osmachkin equations giving considerably lower
values. The results for crisis heat-transfer conditions are greatly affected
by the precision with which the pressure and flow ratios in the core are
described. In spite of these differences, which increase in such a way that
they could be eliminated (or reduced) without great difficulty, each of the
programs tested may be considered capable of performing comutstions for
safety documentation, since we are dealing with a point model of the reactor
and since the redistribution of coolant flow between channels under different
temperature loads can be ignored.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

S. Tinka, I. "Description Procedure and Parametric Study of the VVER-MO
Reactor Eurgencies with Disruption of Reactivity," Energoprojekt Techni-
cal Report 11-6-19420, Prague, 1979.

6. Pernica. R. "Methodology of WBR-S and VVER-D Couputation Programs,"
UJV [Institute of Nuclear Research] Report 50810-1‘, Res, 1979.

7. Pernica, R. "Studies of Selected Emergency States of wen-440 Wpe 213
Nuclear Power Stations," UJV Report 4553-1‘, Res, 1978.

8. Hisak, J. "The SICHTA Computer Program for Analyzing the Temperature
History of a WER Reactor Core," Sbornik seminare RVHP TP-78 [Documents

from cm Seminar ZIP-78], Budapest. 1978.

9. Hisak. J. "Analysis of Selected Emergency lbdes of the V2 Power Station,"
VUJB [Research Institute of Nuclear Power Stations] Report No 118/79.

10. Hermnsky, B. "The DYN79 Computer Program and Performance of Simulations

for the Wall-660," Vyzk. sprava ve spoluprsci lUl'I-WJB"r [FJPI-VIIJE
Cooperative Research Office]. 1979.

ll. Hermansky, B. "The W880 Program and Simulations of Uncontrolled Ejection
of Control Rods," FJFI-VUJB Cooperative Research Office, 1980.

*FJl-‘I: Faculty of Nuclear Science and Physical Engineering
COPYRIGHT: sm, n.p. 1981

8480
080: 5100/ 3011 HD

22
FOR OMGAL USE ONLY