FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10031
6 October 1981

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(FOUO11/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT
NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION

(P000 11/81)

CONTENTS

LATIN AMERICA
BRAZIL

U.S. Break of Nuclear Fuel Contract Feared
(LATIN AMERICA DAILY POST. 29 Aug 81)..

CUBA

Nuclear Technology Developments Discussed
(WWIA, 31 Jul 81)-O.soooooooltoooooooooooooc00.00000000000004

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
LIBYA

'Unusually Iarge' Uranium Purchases Noted
(m: mass, 29 Aug 81)

OII...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOUOOOODOIIIIOOOOOI

WEST EUROPE

FRANCE

Nuclear Program Seen Continuing in Spite of Opposition
(Jacques Homand; LB NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR. 8 Aug 81)..............
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRAZIL

U.S. BREAK OF NUCLEAR FUEL CONTRACT FEAR“!
PY310045 Rio de Janeiro LAIIN AMERICA DAILY POST in English 29 Aug 81 p 1

[Text] Brasilia (DAILY POST)—-The United States may break a contract to supply
enriched uranium fuel for Brazil's first atomic power station if Brazil refuses
to permit international inspection of nuclear installations, a diplomatic source
said.

Commenting on news reports that Washington has "threatened" to cut supplies, the
source said, "You can say that there have been contacts between the two govern-
ments, and that the subject is under discussion."

Other sources close to the Brazilian nuclear power program told the BSTADO DB 8A0
PAULO newspaper that Brazil, foreseeing possible difficulty in supplies fron the
United States, had already negotiated fall-back uranium supplies from the British-
Dutch-German URENCO consortium.

Brazil's first nuclear reactor, built by the North American Hestinghouse Company,
is due to start operational testing sometime in the next 2 months using 50 tons
of enriched uranium already supplied by the United States.

Arguments now are about fuel to restock the reactor when its first charge is
burned out in 3 years, the diplomatic source s‘id.

0 ESTADO DB SAO PAULO said U.S. officials had raised the subject with Brazil last
week but gave no details of who made the contact. According to the paper the
differences are "legalistic but serious" and could lead to a wider breach in
relations.

Washington is insisting that a 1972 treaty with Brazil, which includes the Inter-
national Atomic Energy Agency, should apply to all Brazilian nuclear facilities
while Brazil says the treaty covers only equipment and naterial received directly
from the United States, the newspaper said.

In addition to its first Uestinghouse reactor, Brazil is new building up to eight

more nuclear power stations and a fuel reprocessor as part of a multi-billion
dollar deal with West Germany.

FOR:0FF“JAI.USEZONLJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON”

Brazil is not a member of the IAEA and does not accept agency control over its
nuclear program. An acceptance of this control or its equivalent, the paper

said, would include submitting reports on the approximately 100 tons of non-
enriched uranium Brazil has stockpiled.

The Brazilian Government recently denied news reports that it had secretly shipped
eight tons of. enriched uranium. produced from this stock, to Iraq for use in
the reactor which was later bombed by Israel.

C50: 5100/2319

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CUBA

NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENTS DISCUSSED
Havana BOHEMIA in Spanish 31 Jul 81 pp 8-13

[Text] At the Novovoronezh nuclear gowerplant built 17 years ago in the central
Soviet Union, a poster mounted over the entrance to the turbine room announces,

in bold letters: "Let the atom be a worker and not a soldier!"

The phrase engraved there bears witness to the fact that just as at other power-
plants in the great country of Lenin, the Soviets work here with feverish enthusiasm
on the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

The scientists in the USSR are convinced - and the highest leaders of the party

and the government so proclaim -- that if not all, at least a large share of mankind
will disappear from the face of the earth if the blind, brutal forces of the capi-

talist reactionaries and imperialism dare, with irresponsible determination, to set
off atomic bombs.

The peaceful policy aimed at eliminating or substantially limiting atomic weapons,
if we want life to continue on our planet. has been ignored by the capitalist
powers. mainly the United States, contrary to the appeals for peace made by the
Soviet Union and repeated warnings from the chairman of the Supreme Soviet. Leonid
Brezhnev, that the atom should be used for the good of, not to the detriment of,
mankind.

Ouba Before and After 1959

In "La Historia Me Absolvera" [History Hill Absolve He], Fidel reminded us that
"everyone agrees that the need for industrialization of the country is urgent. that
we need metallurgical industries, chemical industries, paper industries, "but the
government stands idly by and industrialization never comes."

After the Revolution overthrew the old political-ecbnomic-social structure, Cuba
began a new life and embarked upon the path of progressive alternatives, which

could not fail to include agrarian reform. nationalization of the monopolies that
exploited workers and farmers. and industrialization.

Before 1959, did we even have enough thermoelectric potential to embark upon that
urgent and far-reaching undertaking?

Absolutely, positively not!

3
FOR OFFIClA1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As part of its broad range of constructive plans, the Revolution undertook national
electrification and took electric power to the most remote rural regions of the
country, where previously, the people had only known the traditional kerosene lamp
or the typical native chismosita.

At the same time this extremely important source of energy was being developed,
large industrial complexes were cropping up in all regions of Cuba, complexes that
necessarily operate with electricity, and the raw material that moves this powerful
machinery day and night is expensive and has to be imported.

Cuba does not have its own fossil fuels such as oil or coal, nor does it have large,
powerful rivers that would provide it with water power to meet its future energy
needs. Our country has no other alternative than to develop nuclear energy, which
will meet the growing demand and which today, with the price of oil, is more econo-
mical than traditional sources.

In his address summarizing the events commemorating the seventh anniversary of
the defeat of Yankee imperialism at the Ray of Pigs, Fidel said, in April 1968:

“when man discovered the energy contained in the atom, he discovered a source of
energy capable of supplying the unlimited future needs of mankind. Atomic power,
which mankind first came to know as an instrument of war and destruction, is at
the same time the only solution of mankind in the future.

"Consequently, any country that has any foresight and that looks to the future
has to think about the generation of electric power using nuclear energy. Our
country cannot continue to build more and more electric powerplants based on oil.

Once we have completed the current program to set up thermoelectric powerplants,
we shall have to think about facilities that use atomic energy.

"That is why," Fidel said, "our Revolution is already recruiting outstanding stu-

dents to study nuclear physics and become the engineers who will operate this
type of plant. This is one of the issues of most interest to the world today."

Nuclear Science and Technology

Not only at the nuclear powerplants are the nuclear science and technology for
peaceful purposes applied. They are also utilized for the production of radio
isotopes and in many branches of the economy. In medicine, agriculture and
industry, as well as in physics, chemistry and biomedical research, we find
various uses.

Specific examples of its applications include the following: determination of
soil moisture, the volume of rivers, the calcium and potassium content of grass
and milk, densities and levels of industrial processes, mineral composition, the
conservation of food by irradiation, and geological prospecting (exploration).
In medicine, nuclear techniques are used for the treatment and diagnosis of dif-
ferent diseases, the sterilization of surgical equipment, and the creation of

ideal conditions in which microorganisms that produce antibiotics must live, so
as to improve productivity, and so on.
Institute of Nuclear Physics (ININ)

This Institute, since 197A known as the Nuclear Research Institute, was established
with the fraternal, valuable help-of the Soviet Union and as the culmination of

the work done by the Nuclear Energy Group of the Cuban Academy of Science. It
opened in January 1969.

Beginning on that date, with the advice of Soviet specialists, Cuba embarked upon
the task of putting nuclear sciences on a scientific footing in our country. We
would also have university graduates in radiochemistry. dosimetry. nuclear reactors
and radiological protection, trained at the Moscow State University.

At the same time and without interruption, the training of Cuban technical and
scientific cadres continued at various centers and institutions in the Soviet
Union.

Along with the incorporation of the first graduates in the USSR, Cuba intensified
activities to give advanced training to the personnel that would fundamentally be
responsible for work and research. In 1971, the number of workers at the Institute

increased significantly with the entry of a group of physics and chemistry graduates
who had completed their education at the University of Havana.

At the same time we planned for new work, we strengthened cooperation between the
National Nuclear Research Institute and the State Committee for the Use of Atomic
Energy from the USSR, including the signing of new agreements on advice and the
visits of Cubans to Soviet nuclear centers. Regarding international relations,
they were established - and have been maintained - since the founding of the
Institute, especially with the International Atomic Energy Organization under the
United Nations, with headquarters in Vienna, the Cuba-USSR Unified Nuclear Research

Institute, the Sossendorf Central Institute in the German Democratic Republic,
and the CEMA Permanent Committee for the Peaceful Use of Atomic Energy.

Cienfuegos Powerplant

Fulfilling the energetic plans of the Cuban Government and as a result of the enthu-

siastic cooperation of our Soviet brothers, the agreements for the construction in
Cuba of the first nuclear powerplant were signed.

Talks began in Moscow in 1974. At that time, the agency involved was the Ministry

of the Electrical Industry and later, the Academy of Sciences, the ministries of
Public Health, Mining and Interior and other government organizations came to parti-

cipate. Two years later, research began for the location of the site in the central
area of the island.

“Why in the central region?" we asked engineer Alfonso Afont Pifat, deputy director

of the First Nuclear Powerplant Budgeted Investment Unit of the Ministry of Basic
Industry.

"The reason is the requirements of our national electric power system," Afont

explained. "There is obvious industrial development in the central region of Cuba.
The area chosen meets the hydrological, geological and other needs."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"what is the main difference between a thermonuclear powerplant and the plants
in use today?" we asked.

"A thermonuclear powerplant is a plant that generates electric power, like those
at Mariel, Rente and Cienfuegos. The difference lies in the fact that its main

source of energy is the process of nuclear fission, which replaces the burning of
oil."

"what is fission?"

"It is a type of reaction in which the neutron from a source emitting neutrons or
from a previous fission strikes a uranium nucleus, which divides (splits) into two
light nuclei. In this reaction, a large quantity of energy is given off.

"Uranium (nuclear fuel) is a cheaper and safer source. Our solution lies in build-
ing plants that generate electric power by using this radioactive element, but for
this, we need a substantial number of highly skilled specialists. A plant of this
type requires the services of many high- and intermediate-level technicians. At
both levels, most personnel will need complete nuclear training.”

High-level personnel now receive training at the School of Nuclear Science and
Technology of the University of Havana and at specialized institutes in the USSR.
The rest of the personnel for the powerplant includes graduates of the country's
university centers, where additional training is received.

Intermediate-level personnel will be trained at the Cienfuegos Nuclear Polytechnical
School, which will be set up in September of this year, with the beginning of the
1981-1982 school year, where skilled workers will also be trained.

The polytechnical school is being built near the site where the thermonuclear
powerplant will be and at the present time, final touches are being put on the large,

modern building by workers from the Industrial Projects Construction Enterprise
No 6, which will also build the powerplant.

With the beginning of this school year in the new facilities of the polytechnical
school, the students will study intermediate-level nuclear technology and interme-
diate-level automatic control. Graduates of this center will first go to the Jura-
gua powerplant. This includes technicians as well as skilled workers. All working
personnel will receive the indispensable training in thermonuclear technology. In
addition, every worker must study and pass the standards of radiological protection
and work safety for this type of plant.

The polytechnical school has seven laboratories: physics, nuclear physics, auto-
matic control, metals, chemistry and biology, chemical analysis, electronics and
electrical engineering. It has six shops: assembly, operation and steam generator
and reactor repair, dosimetry, electronuclear powerplants, central assistance and
reagent protection, languages. There will be five senior teaching posts.

Like all centers of study that the Revolution has built and continues to build for
intermediate-level education, this school has its administration, teaching admin-
istration, meeting room, files, administration of nuclear activities, foreign
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical assistance office, theater, student dormitories, faculty dormitories,

recreation and living rooms, clinic. barbershop and beauty salon, kitchen, dining
room, green space and playing fields.

Anatoli Cherbakov, Soviet electromechanical engineer who has been responsible for
the setting up of the laboratories, offices and workshops of this plant as well
as of the Armando Garcia Aspuru Energy Polytechnical School in Santiago de Cuba,
told us:

"I have been in Cuba for 3 years. I like this country very much; the Cubans are
very friendly and brotherly. It is a pleasure to work with them, whether they

be construction workers or professors. They are all happy, enthusiastic, hard-
working and content. The students are magnificent. They are already reaping the
fruits from the Santiago polytechnical school. These young people are very good
technicians and they will be very useful in the field of electric power."

Comrade Cherbakov talked to us in Spanish about our customs, the fun-loving nature
of the Cubans, and he expressed his regret over leaving Cuba so soon even though
his work contract has been completed.

"I have been very happy in Cuba. I am grateful for all the attention I have re-
ceived, but I want to say that with the same willingness that I have come to this
beautiful country, the first free territory in America, I would go to Ethiopia,
Angola, Nicaragua or wherever my cooperation is needed. We communists practice
proletarian internationalism with true pleasure because this is part of our
Marxist-Leninist education."

5 de Septiembre Polytechnical School

We visited the S de Septiembre Polytechnical School in Cienfuegos, where we were
welcomed by Director Francisco Mendez and other members of the board of directors.

We were informed about the progress of students beginning their studies in nuclear
technology. They and a group enrolled at another polytechnical school will make up

the class of the new polytechnical school that will open in September.

"There is no lack of difficulties," the director told us, "but they are being
resolved. These young people are very promising."

We were able to talk at length with several students, all of whom expressed the
importance of the career'they have chosen. Orestes Morales, one of the most enthu-
siastic, said he was convinced that "energy is a fundamental branch for our coun-
try's economy. Cuba needs to develop its industries," he said, "and to create

many more. For this purpose, we need large amounts of electric power, which can
only be obtained from nuclear powerplants."

"What does this career mean to you?" we asked him.
"For me, it means a great deal. I like the field of energy. I visited the Carlos

Manuel de CespedesThermoelectricPowerplant to see its operation because nearly
all of its machinery is like that of a thermonuclear plant. The difference is the

reactors."

FOI’OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

University of Havana

It is not widely known that at the University of Havana, the School of Nuclear
Science and Technology trains high-level specialists in nuclear energy.

Dean Jose Roig told us that the graduates will work at the Juragua Powerplant
and will teach at the school or do research for the INIH.

He continued:

"Although our school will begin its operations this year, nuclear energy was al-
ready being taught at the Jose Antonio Echeverria Advanced Polytechnical School.
That is why we have students at all levels in the field. In July, we shall have a
new class of engineers graduating in nuclear energy. The school has connections

with the Research Institute and with the Ministry of Basic Industry in the area of
teaching and in research. Students practice or do research for the national enter-

prises, as do the professors.“
Personnel

To use a phrase in vogue, Cuba already has a number of duly qualified technicians,
some working for the thermonuclear powerplant. The first group of Cuban engineers
went to the Soviet Union in 1971 to receive postgraduate training iﬂ.Moscow. They
worked at the Novovoronezh Powerplant. In 1973, another group of university grad-
uates studied at the same centers. They all had some background in nuclear energy
that they obtained in Cuba. In 1975, more graduates went.

Those specializing in the USSR are working for the Projects Enterprise of the Minis-
try of Basic Industry, in the central offices of that ministry, in the Juragua
Budgeted Investment Unit and at the University of Havana.

"There is a fourth group," Daniel Calcagno, a thermonuclear technician, told us,
"made up of comrades who in February completed their special training at the Moscow
Energy Institute. They completed thermophysics for 5 years. Previously, they had
had preparatory studies and Russian in Cuba for 1 year. In May, several members

of the group joined the Juragua Budgeted Unit."

There we had the opportunity to meet with engineers Miguel A. Perez Jardines and
Luis Angel Medina Ramos. Both decided to give us a single response to our questions.
They told us:

"Our group was made up of comrades who had belonged to the Nuclear Physics Interest
Club of the Lenin Vocational School. We met because of our interest in the field
and were lucky enough to have the help of a highly trained professor who had studied
in the USSR. His classes prepared us for the activity to which we would finally
devote ourselves. There were plans coordinated between Iconsomol and the UJC

[Union of Young Communists]. Upon our return, we went into production. We are
anxious to serve science, technology and the Revolution wherever we would be most
useful, but we believe that it is here. in Juragua, where we must begin our work."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Training

The training of Cuban specialists in this field of unlinited possibilities moves
steadily forward. Through the signing of an agreement with a Study and Training
Center at the Novovoronezh Powerplant, personnel will be trained for operations,
laboratory work and maintenance. The first group will begin its training at the
end of this year. Others will leave for Novovoronezh in 1982.

Electrical engineers from the Carlos Manuel de Cespedes Thermoelectric Powerplant
with some background in nuclear energy have been chosen to take a course in theory
and practice in the Soviet Union lasting 1 year. We talked with a number of them
and they all agreed that the trip will complete their professional training. The
knowledge they acquire will be very beneficial when, on their return, they go to
work for the first nuclear powerplant in Cuba.

COPYRIGHT: BOHEMIA 1981

11,464
CSO: 5100/2322

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYA

'UNUSUALLY LARGE' URANIUM PURCHASES NOTED
P11311442 London THE TIMES in English 29 Aug 81 p lo
[Dispatch "from our correspondent": "Libya Buys Uraniun Secretly")

[Text] Paris, 28 Aug--Libya has bought unusually large amounts of uranium in the
first half of this year from Niger, the West African producer, leading to specula-
tion that it is acting for other Arab countries with more advanced nuclear
capacit res.

In the first half of 1981, Libya has bought 1,212 tons of uranium from Niger, three
times as much as in the whole of 1980, according to official figures published
yesterday in the Niger capital, Niamey.

Hhat need Tripoli can have of such quantities is obscure since Libya has only a
small, Soviet—supplied research reactor which uses small amounts.

Sources said it was possible that part of the total given by the Niger authorities
was accounted for by deliveries made last year and not recorded inediately. But
even the total announced for 1980-380 tons-was large for a country with Libya '6
limited requiralents.

Experts in Paris suggested that Libya might be selling the uranit- to other countries,
such as Iraq, which bought 100 tons of uranium from Niger in the first half of this
year. Pakistan and Syria were two other possible final destinations mentioned.

Niger's deliveries to Libya in the first half of the year were half as much as was
sold to France. But they made Libya Niger's second biggest customer ahead of Japan
which took 816 tons and Spain which received 300 tons.

Libyan purchases of uranium from Niger stood at 150 tons in 1979, rose to 380 tons
last year, and then bounded ahead this year.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1981

C50: 5100/2329

10

FOR OFF-THAI “CF (IN! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

NUCLEAR PROGRAM SEEN CONTINUING IN SPITE OF OPPOSITION
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 8 Aug 81 p 30

[Article by Jacques Mornand]

[Text] The freeze on the construction of five nuclear power plants,
decided on at the last council of ministers session on 30 July, has
been very badly received. It was too much, in the opinion of some
people, and too little, according to others.

The environmentalists consider these measures inadequate. They even
use the word "treason," since the construction of the Nogent-sur-
Seine (Aube department) and Penly (Seine-Maritime) power plants, the
enlargement of the waste reprocessing center at La Hague, and the
start of construction at the Creys-Malville breeder reactor will
continue. The CFDT [French Democratic Confederation of Labor] uses
approximately the same terms.

On the other side, the other unions, the CGT [General Confederation
of Labor], the PO [workers Force], and the CPTC [French Confederation
of Christian Workers], along with the Communist Party, have unequi-
vocally denounced this "abandoning of the policy of national energy
independence." They fear that the decreased activity in the nuclear
sector will further worsen unemployment. At the sites where work
has been halted, the workers whose jobs are threatened continue to
demonstrate noisily. Fears are sharpest in Lorraine. At Cattenom
(Moselle department), during the weekend which marked the start of
the traditional August vacation period, angry workers blocked the
highway leading into Belgium, causing a monstrous traffic jam 30
kilometers long.

These reactions show that the national debate about our entire
nuclear policy, scheduled for the fall in compliance with Francois
Mitterrand's campaign premises, will be a heated one.

In reality, the steps taken by the government on 30 July are
symbolic and conservative in nature. The slowdown which was called
for might be of a very short duration. There is really nothing

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

irreversible about it. It indicates that the government does not
want to decide in advance the outcome of the debate that will be
held over the next several weeks in parliament and in regional and
departmental assemblies. There the parties, unions, environmental
groups, etc. will have to decide--quite rapidly, it seems-~before
the final decision which may or may not challenge the vast nuclear

program begun during the administration of Pierre Hessmer in 1974,
at the time of the first oil crisis.

Controlling the Gas Pipeline

In the debate which is about to start, the government of Pierre
Mauroy will not be neutral. It will introduce a bill that is now
being drafted. The criteria included are: the prospects of economic
growth and energy consumption, independence, and the decentralization
of programs. However, the final preparation of this bill is a sen-
sitive matter. First of all, because even inside the PS [Socialist
Party]: there are different groups; supporters and opponents of
nuclear development clash there just as they do all over the coun-
try. Purthermore, the room for maneuver of the minister of energy,
Edmond Herve, is limited. In fact, the situation of our country,
which lacks essential energy resources, will not let us do just
anything. Any cutback in our nuclear program will have to be bal-

anced by an increase in some supply source or by equivalent energy
savings.

Petroleum

Despite the slump in the world petroleum market right now and the
reduced prices offered by producers, the price per barrel is con-
tinuing to rise, because of the increase in the dollar, the reference

currency. So the price for super gasoline in early August just
went over 4 francs per liter.

Coal

Even though French coal is expensive, the government is thinking of
increasing its production. Production should reach about 30 million
tons in 1990, compared with about 20 tons in 1980. For the 1982 bud?
get, the Charbonnages de France (French Coal Mines) investments will
be increased by 42.70 percent in relation to 1981.

Gas

Investments for the French Gas Company are being increased 25.9
percent next year. But this will affect storage and distribution
facilities. It will not give us one cubic meter more of gas of
French origin. Production at the Lacq field has reached a plateau
and will decline significantly in the future. Then we will have
to import more and more gas from Algeria and from the Soviet Union.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A big contract with the USSR has been in the negotiation phase

for months now, jointly with some other countries, including
Germany. But there is a security problem involved here. In case
of a crisis, what would happen if Moscow decided to turn off the
tap of the pipeline? Washington is sending out warning after warn-
ing on this issue. But Francois Hitterrand seems to have come
around to the point of view of Helmmt Schmidt, who favors this
project.

Renewable Energy Resources

Solar, biomass, wind and tidal power should, according to Francois
Mitterrand, supply 10 percent of our energy needs between now and

the year 2000; this percentage is significantly higher than what
had been planned earlier.

Savings

Efforts in this area have to be increased. But it will be an
expensive process, because the savings that are easy have already
been done. So now we will have to invest more than before to ob-
tain comparable results. However, energy savings do offer one
major advantage: saving energy creates jobs (insulating buildings,
regulating heating, etc.).

Considering the variety of economic and political necessities

facing it, the Mauroy government will probably have to choose a
middle of the road course between the "all nuclear“ approach favored
by Giscard and EDP IPrench Electricity Company] and the "no“ to
nuclear power of the environmentalists. He might slow down the
long—term program, considering the expected decline in the rate

of growth of electricity usage. But he will probably decide to
continue work in progress wherever it is well underway already.
Whether we like it or not, we will probably have 45 nuclear power

plants operating in 1987. They could then supply 60 percent of
France's electric power.

Stopping this program cold would have incalculable financial
consequences and would cause tens of thousands of jobs to be elimi-
nated. In spite of everything that could be done to save energy
and house renewable energy resources, this would still mean an in-
crease in our petroleum exports. And at the price of oil today,
whowould dare suggest such a program to the French people?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Le Nouvel Observateur"

7679
C80: 5100/2306 END

13