APPROVED FOR RELEAOE: ROOT/0210.: CIA-ROP02-OOOCOROOO100030062-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 13/8339
16 March 1979

FRANCE: NUCEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPP‘ENTS
FOUO No. 1455

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times vithin items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no any represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.?. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMTNATION
OF THIS PUELICATIOK BE RESTRICTED POROFPICIAL USE ONLY.
FRANCE: NUCLEAR, "188113. AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS,
POUO NO. 455

. Palatine chaalaaﬂoa None all

Joint Pnblicatione Belearc'n Service
1000 North Glehe Road

Arlington, Virginia 22201
12. Soon-ale, Onealrulea Name ead More

Aa above

l8. Souk-army None

The aerial report contains information primarily fro- !ranch najor daily navapapere

and pertinent epe-zializad journale on French nuclear. aiuile, and space technology,
raaearch and deVelopnenc.

weapona
Aeronautics
Hiaailea

Nuclear Technology

"L Helmet-[Outline Tat-a

m. comm Field/Grove 160, 181, 19?, 223

v “humane-eat
For Official Use Only.
united Number of Copies Available Fran JPRS.

 

M ”VI.“ "0-”!

“0.0: 4.8)9’1 I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/!
16 Marc!

FRANCE: NUCLEAR; MISSILE; AND SPACE DEVELDPNENTS
éouo ":0. 455

. Cou'reurs

Phat-1985 ﬁxture or French Nuclear Force Diamond
(Paul-M16 de 18 001130318 MRO, 1h “b 79) aeaeaoaeaeeoe

mperinental Reactor To Study Past Reaction Safety
(mmn'mw’ wt 78) 00.'OIOOOOOOOOOO'IOOOOQODI

Tricaatin Uranium Enricbent Plant's Regional Impact Reviewed
(ummie; “mg, 2611“”) OOIIOCOOOCOOOOOOOOIOOODO

Briers
New Ballistic Missile
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POM-1985 mm 01‘ macs IIUCIBAR MGR DISCIBBBD
Paris LE FIOARO in French 1': Feb 79 p 5

[Krtlcle by Paul-Mirie de la Gorcg7

[Text] Several facts that beats apperent at the beginning of the year
suggest that the future of the French nuclear force is already under
discussion. Since January. the superstendards of the aircraft carriers.
Foch and Clo-enceau. little by little have been equipped vith etonic
weapons. Loans have been allotted for the preparation of a surveillance
satellite. It hes been decided to construct a nediuI-renge air-to-ground
missile, not to Iention. of course. the nest iaportent thing of all, the
construction of a sixth SIILB (nissile launching nuclear sub-nine). the
first of the second generation of French nuclear subuarines.

Basically. the problens that are posed are reduced to only one, free the
strategic point of view: the continuance after 1985 of France's potential
for deterrence. And in practice this breaks down into four Iain ques-
tions: those that have to do with the future of the three present con-
ponents of the strategic nuclear force and that of tactical etc-1c weapons.

No one questions the efficacy of the 8MB as the nejor instruent for deter-
rence. there is even a sort of general egreenent in this regard along the
public--e rather rare thing. by the way. Their present invulnerebility is
not debatable end the progress that the passage fron the first to the
second generation of French submarines will represent is considerable.
both with regard to destructive power-with the replacement of the HA ais-
siles by the mo's—and to security-beceuse they are lore silent—end
perfornence. But ve sust now realize that an effort must be asde even
beyond the refitting of the first five submarines. In fact, under present
circmstances. and with six ships . the deterrent capability of this navel
conponent for deterrence could be seriously reduced, either fron seegoing
risks-an Merican eubnerine ves lost in this nenner-or fron a sudden and
enonynous attack, which sailors call ”a stab in the dark." He met not
allow this risk—even a nininal one—to prevail. Us lust therefore agree
that the total nueber of 5mm nust n’ t be united to 6, but increased to
8. or s Inim- of 10.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mobile Missiles

This only makes very good sense. He will recall that the construction of
this type of submarine costs about three billion. to be extended over
several years, which constitutes an extremely small part of military
expenditures. And it is not a question of a sudden and great effort to be
made all at once. 0n the contrary. it must be a methodical enterprise
that would require the same amount of industrial and scientific means and
personnel, but that would be carried out without interruption or abatement.
For a very limited cost, the stake is outstanding: the Trench nuclear
submarine can in fact strike anywhere in the world. It is therefore the
only one that fits the indispensable concept of an "all-encompassing"
strategy.

we would therefore be wrong to deal a blow to the future of the 8838
(ground-to-ground strategic ballistics) the first generation of which is
on the Albion plateau. Doubtless the growing precision of hostile aissiles
will render it progressively vulnerable. But let us remember that its
destruction would require enormous means-some 300 missiles. according to
some estimates-and that the nuclear missiles used against French sites
could not be launched simultaneously without mutual neutralization.
Therefore there would be a delay before launching a counterattack. Once

a decision has been made to launch an 8888. one of its important advan-
tages is that it can be used immediately. The progress that has been made
furthermore shows that additional uses can be assigned to the 8838's:

the Albion missiles were improved with respect to destructive power and
especially range--on the order of 2.500 kiloseters--and it is probably
regrettable that their development in quantity has been stopped.

In any case. the future generation of the 8333's will necessarily be
different. It can be a question only of mobile missiles: their use
naturally presents special problems for a country with a relatively dense
population. as in the case of France, but the invulnerability that would
thus be acquired would be such a trump that the obstacles will have to be
surmounted. The essential thing is to make sure that a possible enemy can-
not attack French ssss‘: without engaging in a massive and marked
aggression. which would make it impossible for anyone to believe that the
enemy did not want to attack France, or make it impossible for it to
clothe itself in anonyeity-as in the case of the destruction of a
submarine-—because it would then bring a major counterattack upon itself.
This definitely shows that it is a most important deterrent.

The Mirage 6.000

Should there be a continuance of the air component of the strategic
force? Many reasons lead to an affirmative answer. Versatility of use.
the unpredictability of trajectories, a reasonable degree of invulnerability.
and above all the possibility of making "demonstrations" before coming to
the actual point of nuclear firing: a strategic air force has many
advantages-even decisive ones. There is also the fact that the United
2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

States and the Soviet Union are developing theirs. The solution for the
replacement of the hit-age lb is known: it is the Mirage 6.000. having

a target capability that is extended by a eediun-range eissile. adding up
to a total of 3,500 kilometers.

Thu future use of Pluton's as a tactical nuclear weapon is an integral

part of the natter of the strategic force-ofor the simple reason that. in
the French doctrine. which is perfectly coherent. it is not a question 0‘.
nuclear artillery "to enrich” an eVentusl conventions‘ conflict. but a
leans of replying to the beginning of an aggression-the last warning prior.
to the use of strategic eeens. Again this is the concept that nust guide '
the choice of a new weapons syszee. whether it is a question of a new
ground-to-ground missile or a eediuI-range missile launched by the Mirage
2,000's. it Inset be viewed as being enloyed not against concentrations

of arnorsd cars engaged in battle. but rather against the entire logistics
that make it possible to engage in it. behind the hostile srlies.

All things considered, everything points to the necessity of preserving
the present coaponents of the nuclear forces. which are conplenentsry and
assure the cohesion of the syatee. Everything also indicates that choices
should be nsde in accordance with rigorous respect for the French doctrine
concerning deterrence. which alone justifies the effort to be esde. but
we aust not infer from this that it is a question of an enoreous.
i-ediate. end ruinous effort-any more than we should believe that every-
thing can rennin as it is now and that the daterrencewill be forever
assured. Facts and statistics have long since proved that the require-
eents of nuclear forces involve only a lilited portion of eilitary spending.
whereas the forces are essential to the security of the country. but only
continuity and perseverance of effort guarantee its credibility. In this
doeain. the key word is "continuity."

630: 3100

3
ton orrxcm use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EXPERIMENTAL REACTOR TO STUDY FAST REACTOR SAFETY
Paris CEA NOTES D'INFORHATION in French Oct 78 pp 2-6

ﬁEext7 The experimental reactor, Cabri, located at the Cadarache
clear Research Center near Aix-en-Provence, was inaugurated
Jointly on 27 October 1978 by representatives of the German
Ministry of Research and Technology and by French Atomic Energy
Commission officials.

This inaugural ceremony was presided by Messrs Pierre Tanguy
director of the Atomic Energy Commission's Nuclear Safety an
Protection Institute, and by Hans Hennies, director of develop-
ment of reactor safety at the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center.

The goal of the experimental program associated with this reac-
tor whose features are unique in Europe, is to study the be-
havior of the fuel used in sodium-cooled fast reactors.

The Atomic Energy Commission and the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research
Center of the Federal Republic of Germany are each paying half
of the investment and development costs of the experimental
program. In addition to these two organizations Great Britain,
Japan, the u.s. Department of Energy and the U. . Nuclear
Regulatory Commission are participating in this project.

The reactor construction costs plus the costs of the associated
experimental pro ran which will continue until 1983, come to
approximately 2 million francs.

The Cabri program is a new illustration of the importance of the
studies being done in the field of nuclear reactor safety. It
is part of the general program which recently culminated when
the Phebus reactor at Cadarache went critical. This reactor is
used for safety studies of pressurized water reactors.

u
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A major research and construction program for fast neutron
sodium-cooled reactors began in France during the'1960s. Its
main phases were: ' ' '

a. The construction of Rapsodie, which went critical for the
first time on 28 January 1967.

b. The construction of Phenix which was connected to the
network on 13 December 1975.

c. The construction of Super Phenix, now in progress at
Greys-Melville.

Starting in 1967 the Atomic Energy Commission began a research
program, called écarabee, dealing with the analys.s and conse-
quences of failures in the fuel cooling system of this type of
reactor. This program whose detailed interpretation was done
Jointly with the United Kingdom's Atomic Energy Authority and
the Kernforschungzentrum Karlsruhe GmbH of the Federal Republic
of Germany, yielded some significant data.

Reactivity accidents occurring in a reactor during normal opera-
tions, or following a coolant failure not followed by a shutdown
gr reaction, are scum studied in a second program, called

abri.

The Cabri experimental program, conducted in pile, is essentially
of a general or overall nature, in that it includes a study of the
behavior of the fuel elements under the conditions most repre-
sentative of those likely to occur in a power reactor.

The experimental facility includes a test reactor, Cabri, and

a loci whose test cell is placed at the center of the core. The
cooling defects ar created in a second reactor, Scarabee ﬂ
Aiguil es [ﬁbedleg§, which is adjacent to Cabri.

Objectives and Programs

The evaluation of the safety of fast neutron sodium-cooled
reactors includes the study of possible core accidents.

Their study is made extremely complex by the multiplicity of
the possible initiating causes, but all possible foreseeable
accidental sequences do have some common features:

5
Fox onrcm. use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a. They always go through a more or less significant fuel
fusion phase.‘ ' '

b. They depend on physical phenomena taking place within
a fuel assembly.

c. They require a knowledge of the physical processes of

energy release and propagation between the fuel as-
semblies.

Cabri Program

The Cabri program is designed to simulate hypothetical accidents
in order to study the behavior of the fuel needles during abrupt
power surges, whether preceded or not by a coolant defect.

These power surges start from a power level (20 MWth) corres-
ponding to the nominal operating conditions of a reactor, and
go up to 1,000 times this power of 20 HWth in several
hundredths of a second.

Tb simulate a coolant defect before the power surges, the flow
of sodium around the test needle may be reduced to 1/20 of the
nominal flow.

During these experiments energy goin up to 2 kiloJoule per
gram may be released in the test need e. This energy is enough
to induce fusion, or even to vaporize the uranium oxide 002 and

its shield. A classical thermod namic interaction between this
fuel and the sodium may occur. is interaction is expressed
by the conversion of part of the thermal energy contained in
the needle into mechanical energy transmitted to the sodium
and to the surrounding structures.

The main phenomena and parameters that the Cabri program is
attempting to analyze and quantify are the following:

a. Factor of conversion of thermal energy into mechanical
energy. '

b. Rupture threshold of the fuel needle shield.

c. Moment of rupture of the shield in relation to the moment
of power peak.

d. Speed of vaporization and ejection of sodium coolant
surrounding the needle.

6
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e. Movements of the fuel in its shield.
f. Recondensation of the sodium.

3. Role of fission products in the preceding phenomena.

L£_;5L_jnl.JLJRn
(2 . (I). .1”. . I ham mam-I (3)

        

Cross Section of the Auxiliary Core
Key:

Cabri -- Median Plane of Core
Core envelope

Preliminary element

Graphite

Control rod

Power surge rod

North

Hodoscope channel

Fuel elements

Braces

oomomrw M-e

_A

The length of the fissile fuel in the test needle will be 750 mm;
its diameter will be 6.# mm.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The experiments will first be done with a series of non-irradi-
ated U0 needles then with a series or mixed uranium oxide

and plu onium oxide needles (U-Pu)02 pro-irradiated up to
60,000 megawatts/day per ton. ' "

In all about 30 tests will be done during the 5-year program
scheduled to begin in mid-1978. '

Equipment
The experimental unit consists of three parts.
The auxiliary or support reactor

This is a thermal reactor of the swimming pool type whose core
consists of rods of 002 enriched to apgroximately 6 percent
with U 5. It can provide levels of 2 MW thermal power cor-
responding to the test needle in linear power conditions (480
W/cm) for a lagge-size fast reactor and power surges whose
value may be 1 0 times greater for a short period of time.

It has six safety control rods and four "start-up" rods. These-
"start-up" rods are used to provide the required experimental
conditions obtained by the rapid depressurization of helium 3.

The core is divided into two parts by a vertical slot 50 mm

wide. This slot is used for observation of the test needle
during power surges by using a device called a hodoscope.

Based on the detection of the fast neutrons emitted by the needle,
this observation can show possible axial movements of the fuel.

The Loop
This consists of two parts.

a. One part outside the pile consisting of circuits, pump
and tanks designed to provide for the part in the pile
and in the test section suitable flows of'sodium and
also of the organic liquid for cooling the structures.

b. A part in the pile or cell, which is placed vertically
at the center of the auxiliary core. '

The cell stays housed in the reactor and a new test device
is placed in it for each experiment.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) Mind-ow ll
um

“3'“ ' LI“)

«1 II
Wadi-e I, 5)
can.

hhldl 6)
0‘!-

   
 
    

2) hmmlau

”Mud-l)
seam

      

Bluhuuwﬂ

9"! to 0 null
ﬁll-o 1401 o In
10}

In m

u m (”I-I)

Cell -- Median Plane of Core

Key.
1. Containment rod
2. Stainless Na enclosure
3. Vacuum Zy enclosure
. Organic liquid separation ring
5. External 2y enclosure
6. Nickel tube
7. Water
8. Fuel needle
9. Niobium tube

10. "Shoop" 1 mm thick
11. Vacuum
12. Instrumentation refitting tube

The Test Device

This holds the test needle and the instrumentation for measuring
flows, pressures, and temperatures. It must contain the
mechanical energy that will be released during the fuel-sodium
interaction and the 002 particles that will be formed.

This equipment is replaced for each experiment.

9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE CﬂLY

Data Recording

This is done by the equipment shared b the two.8carabee N
and Cabri-sodium cells (described above .

Scarabee Program

The major types of simulation scheduled during the program
are: .

a. Local plugging of a fuel assembly.

b. Complete blockage at the bottom of the fuel assembly with
maintenance of power.

c. Complete reduction of the flow of sodium simulating a
pump shutdown, with power reduction accompanying it for
a given reactor.

d. To a lesser degree, power variations.

Studying these situations will provide some answers for the
following objectives:

a. To clarify the dynamics and effects of destructions of the
fuel element under its main aspects (thresholds of rupture
of the shield, development of the secondary effects of
this rupture, behavior of the melted fuel and consequences
of its contact with the liquid sodium, possible propagation
of this process).

b. To identify and analyze the preliminary signals which may
at each phase make detection ossible (temperature, pres-
sures, fission products, etc. .

c. To develop one or more theoretical models to show these
phenomena. ‘ ‘

A large part of this program has already been done with the
non-irradiated 002 fuel needles of the Rapsodie 2% Hch type
with, in some cases, the simulation of internal pressure due to
the fission gases of the irradiated fuels.

Two series of experiments have been done: one with a one-needle
configuration, and the other with a seven-needle configuration.

10
'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This first test program was completed in July 197# and work is
now in pregress to do the followup of the program under the
name of Scarabee‘ﬂ Aiguilles. The same types.of experiments
will be done on pro-irradiated needles in the one and seven-
needle configurations then'on larger clusters goin up to 19
and 37 needles. 'Pre-irradiated needles will be use as fuel

in Rapsodie, and in order to Just do readjustments, pro-irradia-
ted 002 PU02 needles will be used for Phenix.

Later, experiments on the propagation of fusion from one
cluster of neednm to another may be done between central
clusters of 19 needles and six peripheral clusters of 10
needles (the number of needles is only given as an example).

The start of this new phase of the program is scheduled for the
endiog 1980, and the experiments are to be done over a 5-year
per 0 .

Test Equipment

The future Scarabee N Aiguilles equipment will be very close
to the old equipment in its general design. So we will only
give its essential features.

Reactor and Part Outside of the Pile

Both the old and new equipment include the test cell, located

in the center of the reactor on plates, and Scarabee and
Cabri share: .

a. The external sodium supply circuit with different auxiliary
circuitry (see figure following).

b. The neutron graphy system for examining the fuel needles
before any major handling after an experiment.

c. The system for measuring the distribution of the fuel in
the needle by 1 detection. '

Test Cell or Part Located In the Pile

This is located in the center of the reactor in two concentric
enclosures which separate it from the reactor's water. Organic
liquid circulates between these two enclosures to cool them.
The thermal insulation betweeen the sodium circuits and the
organic liquid circuit is provided by a vacuum enclosure. The

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cell consists of two parts: a fixed part which provides the
sodium circulation and a‘removable part'supporting the actual
experimental unit itself. ' ‘ ' '

 

SURA: General Design of Circuitry

Key:

1 Spectrometer
2 Air coolant
3. Shield rupture detection

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

h. Storage

5. Cere water

6. Siphon breaker
7. Sodium storage

8. Legend: Pressure; temperature; flow

The removable part is the more important part of the equipment.
It forms the support for the test channel inside which the fuel

needles and the instrumentation are placed. It includes, going
from bottom to top:

a. A pan to collect fuel debris in case of fusion.
b. The test channel and the fuel needle or needles.
c. Outlet connections.

d. A filter to stop oxide particles.

e. An outlet pressure valve.

Instrumentation and Recording

The cell has all the instrumentation (thermocouples and electro-
magnetic flowmeters) needed to follow closely the changes in
thermohydraulic conditions in the test channel during the experi-
ment, as well as the temperature in the fuel.

Pressure sensors will be used to measure the mechanical conse-
quences of a possible sodium-melted fuel interaction.

The loop also has a DRG [Shield Rupture Detection System? which
operates by detection of delayed neutrons and a spectrometer

(germanium-lithium) placed either directly on the sodium or

on argon, to measure the activity of the various fission products
emitted.

These measurements are recorded on:
a. A 60-channel digital device (one point every 5 milliseconds).
b. An analog device using magnetic tapes.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interpretation of Results
Thermohydraulic Phenomena

Qualitatively, a correspondence can be established between

these phenomena and the type of power variations being studied.
But in order to be able to extra olate the results, we must

have methods of calculation whic can be used for power reactors.

Two problems are considered:

a. To determine as a function of the type of accident the
domains of validity for the homogeneous and heterogeneous
models of sodium boiling.

b. To develop new models to account for special phenomena:
"chugging," melted fuel-sodium interaction.

Behavior of the Fuel-Shield Unit
The important points for safety are:

a. A study of the development and mode of failure of the
shield

h. The condition of the fuel at this moment, particularly
the amount of fuel melted _

c. The possibility of occurrence and the effects of the
melted fuel-sodium interaction.

Interpreting the experiments requires the development of highly
complex computer programs, for the physical phenomena involved
are numerous and complicated, especially during abrupt power
variations. Moreover, most of the available measurements re-
lated to the fuel are measurements concerning its condition
after the test (neutron graphy, gamma spectrometry metallo-
graphic cross sections), and there are only a few temperature
and pressure measurements which enable us to follow the kinetics
of the phenomenon.

Finally, the characteristics of the materials especially of
the materials used in the shield, must be tested in this
particular range of temperatures (900 and 1%OO°C) by tests
outside of the pile.

lb
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Transposition of Results to Reactors
Three phases may be distinguished in this transposition.

a. Generalization of purely qualitative results, such as
the absence of interaction in coolant accidents, the
lack of serious danger in the case of a local Jamming,
the absence of overheating. The conclusions are valid
only for the actual conditions of the experiment (at

present clusters of one and seven non-irradiated
needles .

b. The improvement of the assumptions to be used in
accident calculations: time of draining of the
channel, the quantity of melted fuel, for example.

c. The use for reactors of computer models validated by

experiments, in order to extrapolate the conclusions
obtained up to now.

 

Reactor-safety research area: Cabri-Scarabes (foreground)
for tests involving rapid neutron fuels; and Thebus (background)
for light-water type fuels.

15
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The two progr e Cabri end Seer bee, taken together, ere
called SURA est Reactor Seret . They ere part or the
broad experimental ro ram being conducted in liaison with other
units or the CBA ton c hergy Commission? in order to develop

fast neutron reactors.

7679
080: 3100

16
ron orncm. use on!
NR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

“1031‘!" UMNIW amtcmtm rum-'3 REGIONAL tunic-r mm
Perie 1.8 ms in l'rench 26 Jan 19 pp ll. 16
(Article by Bernard Blie]

l‘l’ext] Even while peeeing on Highway A7 in a hurry to reach the ehoree of
the Mediterranean notoriete cannot ignore the n clear oito at ‘i'riceetin.
Between Pierrelatto and Boliene the two swoon cooling towere. flanked
by the (our EDP [French Electric (Bower) Conpany] reactore. conetitute a
concrete fortraee to which the Donate canal at in foot ie what the
noata fornerly were to the etructure of the Middle Agar.

For a long tine the era. hae had the "freedo- of the city” in thie region.
But the installation of the cm (Atomic energy Co-iuion)-~ior nilitary
epplicationeuare hidden on the plain. The European isotope eeparction
plant for civil applicatione would be difficult to conceal: ite towere are
120 netere high and the aurfece coating plant where all the parte intended
(or roam" are niclml plated in big enough that two ehipe like the trance
could be contained within it.

Begun in 197‘, the uraniun enrich-eat plant and the electric power plant2
to provide it with the neceuary energy will indeed take part in the great
nuclear rendervoue of MOO-1985. By the end of 1979 the plant ahould be
operating at 25 percent of production capacity. The ll)! power plant hae
boon appreciably delayed iron the original planning. The firet of the (our
925-liagewett neg-onto will be on line only in Auguu 1979, which ie nine
nonthe behind echedula. "But thia delay will be fully nade up by the tin

the fourth neg-ant goee into operation at the end of 1980," ie the eeeur-
ance of lene Couayn. inetallationa chief.

At thie duplex conatruction eite--one oi the largeet in Europe-othe taper-
ing oti‘ phnee haa counced. The nunber of worhare will no longer anount
to the minu- 2chieved in the third quarter of 1978 when 7.738 were an-
ployod at the nits.3 for aeveral nonthe electriciana. nechanice, ae-
eenblere, and weldere have already been replacing carpantera and naeona.

A portion of thaee lac-Jr are being relocated in the north in order to take

17
M OFFICIAL IBS om
M OFFICIAL WE ONLY

port in construction of the Cruse-Naysse and Saint-Albens-Saint Heurica-l'Byliae
power plants. Others. foreim workere anong than. are reluctant; froe
Pierrelatte they are less than two hours by train for the old port of
liarseiile or the rue da la Republique in Lyon.... For these reasons unsa-
ploynent is beginning to appear in a region which up to now has blithely cane
through the crisis. [it Pierelatte. in a Sonacotra lodging house with 300
beds. there is already an unenpioynent rate of one-third. In lallene, the
nunicipal oificere elected in 1917 under the banner of the Union of the Left
are worried: the nunber seeking enploynsnt has gone free 250 to 500 in 10
nonths. After the euphoria uneasiness is beginning to take hold. Upon what
concrete will the region feed in two years.

The Depart-ant of Drone. and the quadril..tera1 for-ed by Pierelatte, Topulud.
Bolene. and Saint-Paui-Trois Clutesux in particular. however, is used to these
ups and downs in develop-ant. In the course of the last 30 years there were
successively the Donnere-Hondragon Canal work with construction of the hydro-
electric station (ms-1953). than the construction at Hercoule (1956-1953),
and last. of the ailitary nuclear plant at Pierrelattc (1960-1968). The de-
cision to construct runoolr was nada 27 hove-bar 1979 and the French govern-
nent's proposal of the Tricastin site for its construction cane at a tine when
the region was again depressed.

"The nission for territorial development of Tricastin has played an effective
role" is now the opinion of Dr Jean Houton, liayor of Piarrelatte (-jority
coalition). That opinion is shared by the nayor of Saint-Paul-Trois Chateaux.

Parcel Gony (najority coalition). who still speaks of the "anarchic disorder"
of the canal construction site.

The role of Jean-Pierre Roux, placed by the govern-ant In charge of coordin-
nting this gigantic construction was a priori not an say one. All the aore
so as to the usual difficulties in her-Ionizing relations anong DATAR [Dele-
gation for Territorial Develop-ant and Regional Action]. elected officials
and edllniotratlous, and in this case. two general contractors.--BUR<DIF and
the .Pnthere was added one of geographical nature. The 300 hectares of the
construction site (250 for mum and 50 for the In!) straddle three counrnes
(Pierrelatte. rollene, and Saint-Paul-Trois auteeux), two depart-ants (Drone
and Voucluse). and two adeinistrativc regions (Rhone-Alp“ and Provence-
Alpes-Cote d'Asur). "Do it in such unner that there is no talk of
Triscastin” was the instruction given to Rom. head of DATAR at the tin.

any one consider that the mmr construction site has caused little talk?

It would be difficult to onit nntion of two strikes which paralyzed civil en-
gineering work for six weeks each tine. witnessing the deep discontent of the
personnel. It is iepossible to forget the 11 xerlters who lost their lives
and the two others who were deriously injured. Nevertheless, certain in-
itiatives intended to avoid repeating the eistaltes of Poe have been taken.
Aeong thee, installation of a reception center-«the Tricastin houssnat the
entrance to the construction center which coebines all the services the

18
M OFFICIAL WE OIL!
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

workers my needuexcept, however, union representatives, which the unions
deplore. The steps which were the subjects of experissntstion here heve

ends it possible to drew up the reguletions governing "lerge construction
sites. since then also epplied elsewhere. As fer es Jenn-Pierre Roux is

concerned success depends upon seekint ”to bring the pertners together tether
then conducting e Kechnocrecy."

A City end Its Problene

To receive between 16,000 end 18,000 people within e redius of is kiloneters
(7.000 to 8,000 workers, helf of when heve wives snd children) s mini-u- of
concerted effort wee in feet necoesery. "All the neyors heve tehen pert
whetever their politicel lsbels," Roux eclniowledges. To avoid eny excessive
concentretion this populetion wee dispersed into 10 co-unes. Certeinly the
beginning wee to conduct e cereful census of existing eveileble lodgings-~
about 600. Then more were builtuneither too neny nor too few. More then
300 noderete rentel housing projects were built, some of which were perti-
tioned into rooee to serve for the ties being es bechelor qusrtsre. In sd-
dition, to seeure thet the "tenporsry" housing did not survive the construc-
tion site, recourse wes hed to eobile nodules coming, in pert, free too.
Lest, severel treiler psrhss were lsid out, ”sometimes with considereble
dcley,” observes the Deputy Heyor of Bollene (Con-mist Petty).

ln thet coereune e treiler pork with 166 plecee opened only in July 1978, or
(our yeere sfter the construction site wss opened, "so thet the treiler own-
—ers hed to nestle for months in the nunicipel treiler perk under grossly
insdequete hygienic conditions," thet elected officiel esserts. The 661'
[Genersl Confederetion of labor] representstives et Pierrelstte denounce the
"disco-torts oi the living querters" of which "one burned like e netchbox,"
end elso, ”the high rents deesnded by Sonscotrs et the seas tine es there wee
otten no hot weter.” 'lhe union representetives explein. “The CG! hed pro-
posed construction of leisure time villegss where the stsy of the workers
end their fenilies would heve been eore pleessnt. The necesssry equipnent
would then heve been pleced st the disposition of. the megs-ent-enployees
co-eittees. But they did not listen to us. It wss preferred to pen the
workers.“ 'l'here ere those who heve nostelgin for the workers' cities:
"those still deteched buildings with e bit of e gerden where one steyed (or
two, three or four yeers, were peredise sfter ell!" uninteins s cerpenter

who (or e long tins hes been used to working in the construction sites of the
Rhone valley.

In sddition to housing such e construction site bring about e whole series
of coal-unity instellstions; in totel, 300 nillion (rents heve been invested,
e third of which ere considered specific, thet is, releted to the presence
of the construction site end hence cenpletely cher ged to the governeent.
Suneti-es the con-nines heve done e "good business." For emple, Pierrelette
scquired 19 hecteres of ground for 650,000 frencs upon which the govern-set,
under the hesding of specific instellstions, hes constructed instslletions
(intent csre centers, schools, end gylnssiule) st e cost of l2 million irencs.

19
m OFFICIAL 08!: 0E!
M OFFICIAL USE MY

A Basket Spreading Over 'l'hree Departments

Saint-Paul-Trois Chateaux, with a secondary school, a swi-sing pool, two
gymnaiums, playing fields, and an cntartninnent center in no way need envy
Piotrelntte. But Mayor Gony has aore nixed feelings in his assessment of
the advantages that the commutes are deriving from those operations which
accompany the construction site: 'Vhen a ochool group estinted at the
start of 3.5 million francs in the and amounts to 5 million francs, the dif-
ference is at the comsune's expense. today, above all else, we are rich in
hope," he adds ironically. The limitation in the business tar-for which
the new rules of application have not been establisheduindeed make this tax
no longer a preferred revenue source. "rho difference between the amounts
expected and those which we shall actually receive would have sufficed, had
we known at the start, to make us anti-nuclear," states Gony. ‘l‘hen, angrily,
he adds, "If we are living as some say in the anteroom of the Apocalypse,
the tax revenues must be considered recompense for fear."

But the business tar-with a tap limit or not--the com-unity installations,
specific or simply enticipatedudo not constitute the principal fallouts
free a construction site such as this. The nost iaportent in the end cones
from the inpetus to economic activity with the portion of the payroll spent
in the region: between l0 end 15 million francs each month, 120 to 140 mil-
lion annually. The rapid increase in the prices at which businesses are
sold, the rate at which proprietors are enlarging or nodernizing their stores,
and the installation of large selling areas out in the brush attest to the
good health of local conserce. But above all it is the construction con-
tracts given to local and regional enterprisesudirectly or through sub-
contracting-which constitute veritable riches for the region. According
to statistics conpiled by the territorial developent mission almost 35
percent of the total market for construction work and small supplies for
tvamr are going to enterprises in Rhone-Apes (7/05 nillion francs) and
Provence-Cotes d'Azur (625 million francs). In the llhone-Alpes region
this basket has been mainly distributed in three departments: Drona ((066

million), Rhone (185 million), and Isere (75 million). The effort ends by
the USS! firm within the scope of the moon? construction work, however,

has been up against the "lack of competitiveness" of the regional enter-
prises.

'Ve were greatly disappointed when we learned that these enterprises never
had the desire to fight. For exanple, by combining within the scope of an
inter-trade group of enterprises they would have obtained the means for
winning more contracts," explains Hr Parmentier, in charge of installations
planning at Elma)”. Nevertheless the results are better than those ach-
ieved by the ml? in construction of its power station: only 10 percent of
the total invest-ant (4.1 billion l97lo constant francs), or 600 million,
went to regional enterprises. 'Ve would like to have done a little better,
but it is not easy: EDP awards total contracts in order to obtain the best
prices," says Ilene Cousyn, in charge of installations planning for the power
plant. Specifically to improve further its participation, Rhodanin, the

20
”OFFICIALUSBONIX
1'“! UI'ELUML WIS Wis!

association for promotion of smell and medium sized industries of the Rhone
valley has established, at another EDP construction sitenthat of the Cruse-
Haysse power plantua subcontracting exchange. "le want to have those who
place orders specify their requirements and to give consideration to regional
enterprises. We are also trying to place those who solicit orders, even if

by rapid professional training, at a level of discussion sufficient for ob-
taining contracts," explains Hr Desjardins, the engineer in the industrial
promotion department of the chamber of comnerce and industry at Valence.
'l‘hat association has 200 enterprises on file and can have recourse, if
needed, to the files of the chamber of comeerce. If this activity bears
fruit, it could enable Drome, and secondarily Ardiche, to attain new peaks
in a few years. but already in that department, Drone, which is very little
industrialized, people are wondering about the future: what will they do
tomorrow?

POM‘NUI'BS

1. 81111001? is a company privately organized but whose capital stock is
owned by Spain (11.1 percent), Belgium (11.1 percent), Italy 25 percent),
the French cactus firm, a subsidiary of the cm (27.8 percent), and
SOFIDIP (French-Iranian Diffusion ComPIDY)--60 percent of whose stock
is held by Iran and 60 percent by comm-(25 percent). France thus
holds 63 percent of EURt‘DlP‘s capitalisation. The latter controls three
companies: SOCATRI (Tricestin Auxiliaries Company), responsible for the
plant's construction; meow Production, responsible for operations;
and CORBDII' (Company for Construction of a New Diffusion Plant). The
general contractor for the plant at ‘i‘ricastin is the USS! (Isotope
Separation Flam) Company, which previously constructed the military
plant of Pierre...tte end has been assigned the preparation of the
CGlEDIF project. -

2. The four segaents of the power plant represent total installed capacity
of 3,700 megawatts, which is greater than required for 811an oper-
ation (3,100 megawatts). Because of restrictions inposed by maintenance
a portion of the energy required by the enrichment plant will have to be
obtained)from outside sources (about 600 megawatts for eight months of
the year .

3. In August 1978 the number of workers directly involved at the site was
5.5+l (57 percent, or 3,160 for the an? and 103 percent, or 2,381 for
BURN"), the other 2,000 being auxiliary employees.

6. Six of these fatal accidents occurred on the rumors construction site,
tour on the 30! site, and one outside of those two sites.

5. 0a 30 September 1978 there were 563 trailer spaces available in four
communes. The number of beds managed by SOMCOI'M on that date amounted

to 2.158, of which 1,031 (48 percent) were in modular housing and 1,127
(52 percent) in noderate rental housing.

21
M 01'?!an USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL LBS ONLY

6. In con-tent tunes the total amount of EURwIP investments amounted to
9.5 billion. At the end of September 1978 the amount of contract. go-
ing to regional or loci" enterprues either directly or through aub-
contractins reach 1.1. bxllion francs. '

11,706
(:80: 3100

22
. FOR OFFICIAL (BB ONLY
F‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

NEH EALLISTIC MISSILE-4n 1980, the Ballistics and Space Systems Division
of SNIAS will curry out the first sxperisentol firing of the new Wu
ballistic missile which is to replace the current H2 and H20 nissiles on
the navy's missile-launching nuclesr sub-nines. The W. missile will be
placed first on the "Inflexible." which is to be emission“ in 1985.
[Text] [Paris LB MITEUR DE L'AERONAUTIQUE in French Her 78 p 7]

C80: 3100 BID

1-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY