FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

JPRS L/10526

18 May 1982

Worldwide Report

NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROLIFERATION
(FOUO 5/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

momentum“
.ms publications contain infatuation pri-rily tron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also iron news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- Bnglish-lauguage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

leadlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPBS. Processing indicators such as [text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each ita, or bum-ting the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infatuation was
processed. there no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sI-arizad or extracted.

Unfamiliar na-es rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion art and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes vithin the body of an
iteu originate with the source. tines within its-s are as

given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Governent.

COPYRIGT HHS Al) REGULATIOB manna: m1? 0?
mmms ”PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE mu DISSEHDiATIOﬂ
OF nus PUILICATIOII 38 RESTRICTED r01 OFFICIAL (BB ONLY.
NORLIMIII [SPORT
NUCLEAR DevaLomeut AND Paousaunou

(r000 5/32)
Coursu'rs

mums AFFAIRS

Briefs
UK Supplies Uraniu- to Brazil

HEAR EAST All) I. AFRICA
AIBERIA

nuclear Energy Utilization Flamed
(Hm moncmx 31' mm, 5 Mar 82)

W AFRICA
NIGER

Briefs
Kuwaiti Interest in Uranium Cm

SOUTH AFRICA

West. studies Michael Uranium to South Africa
(Pascal Boniface; m AFRIQUB, 13 Jan 82) ............

-.- [III-W-Ill!

mmmouu
BRIEFS

ll SUPPLIES URN"!!! 1'0 BRAZIL—Britain in supplying enriched uraniu to
Brazil after the United States banned ship-ante because of Brazil's refusal
to acet Anerican non-proliferation require-ants. A Britiah nuclear fuel
spokesman confined last week that 'uraniu hexafluoride has been processed
at the Capenhurat enrichent plant for Brazil.’ Hashington bad nude it a
condition that 'international ato-ic energy safeguards be naintained on all
peaceful nuclear activities in Brazil.‘ Reports that Argentina my be
building a nuclear bomb have triggered speculation that Brazil night be
tempted to pursue avainilar course. The enriched uraniu- fron Britain is
to be supplied by the joint UK-Ueat Germ-Dutch mmany, moo, in which
British nuclear fuel: holds a one-third stake. It is only lightly enriched
(about 3 percent) and is not suitable for Idling boobs. [Excerpt] [Report
by Martin Bailey: "ll Bella Uraniu- to Braail'] [m‘1607 London TIE
OBSERVER in English 2 May 82 p 6] [(DPYRIGIT: The Observer Ltd 1982]

C80: 5100/2158

1
momcuuszmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

NUCLEAR ENERGY UTILIZATION PLANNED
Paris Hams 1'”le E'l' ”DIM in French llo 1895, 5 la! 82 p 673
[Art icle: ”Algeria Preparing for Use of nuclear Energy"]

[‘l'ext] Algeria is deternined to endow itself with a "national scientific and
technological base" in the nuclear field with a View of supplennting its oil
and gas resources with nuclear energy, Abdelwahab lemini, the director of the
Algerian Center for Nuclear Science and Technology, annomced in substance.

In an interview published on 22 February by the daily newspaper Bl. mammals,
Bennini enphasized that after ”reflection on the problem of nuclear energy,
the conclusion was reached that it is necessary to build a national scientific
and technological base capable of being the point of departure for a national.
nuclear progran, whatever the country's energy options in the natter."

Evaluating the Algerian Center for Nuclear Science and Technology, created

in 1976, Bennini stated that it consists of nine divisions whose job is
research, ”fro. ainerals and nuclear raw naterials to nanagenent of radio-
active wastes." The different laboratories of the center have often been set
up by Algerian researchers and engineers, sane 180, he indicated. Emles

of the results obtained up to now are “the construction of prototypes, the
production of purified nuclear products, the use of radioisotopes or radiation,
and high-level scientific publications."

According to Bennini, the center is ”at the stage where sone divisions are
already in a position to build their equip-eat, and acne are capable of
contributing to the construction of the lost sophisticated equipnnt."

In addition to its functions in the field of research and the training of
engineers and senior technicians, Bennini said, the center is working in
collaboration with the ninistries of health (radiological nonitoring of
personnel and the providing of radioisotopes), agriculture (the use of
radiation to irradiate food), defense, energy, hydraulics, and so forth.

The Algerian Govern-cat's recent decision to create a 00-ission for New
Energies, he added, ”illustrates the administration's desire to take responsi-
bility for proble-s of energy supplemntation and scientific and technological
develop-eat." .

It should be noted that this is not the first tine that the necessity of
providing for the inplenentation of a nuclear progr- has been perceived in
Algeria. Just 1 year ago, the sane daily newspaper Bl. momma indicated

“MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that Algeria intended to prepare itself technologically for the nuclear energy
era in order to overcone all constraints before launching a nuclear program
which will at best contribute to neeting 10 percent of its electrical energy
conSunption in sons 20 years.

Of these constraints, "mltifarious foreign dependence constitutes a mjor
preoccupation" for Algeria, EL MOUNARID esphasiaed at that tile, adding that,
in order to provide against it, or at least to ”linit it to acceptable levels,"
Algeria was endeavoring to begin "action far in advance at the level of train-
ing and research as well as at the level of the other sectors of the national
economy, particularly industry, with a view to arriving at optinal national
integration." The newspaper indicated in another connection that since the
lead tine is particularly long for nuclear energy, the current 1980-86 live-
Year Plan would be devoted principally to studies for bringing these plans to
fruition.

Algeria, it will be recalled, has uraniun reserves at Beggar, in the far south,
estimated at lore than 50,000 tons of Ietal. Moreover. in this regard, it

nay also be recalled that 5 years ago Algeria, being interested in nuclear
energy and having decided to snake a start in this field, entered into a series
of contracts with several groups of international enterprises (American,
Canadian, Belgian, English, and French). In early 1977 the French consortiu-
announced in a press release that it had been entrusted with the responsibility
of carrying out the first phase of the studies necessary to exploit the uraniu
deposits at lloggar. The consortiun consisted of the Sogeren and snc conpanies
of the Pechiney Ugine Kuhlnann Group, the Hinato-e Conpany of the m Group.
OPP. the Inter G engineering groups and the Sofrenine engineering coqany.

lts representative was STBC, otherwise affiliated with Inter 6 through the
Pro-ato- econonic interest group created by these two coqwanies in 1975.

Since then. the possibilities for cooperation in nuclear energy have usually
figured in the negotiations which the Algerians have been pursuing with their
different partners. Recently there was talk of it in the conversation held
with the 0888 (um 14 August 1981, p 2099, and Is Septeder 1981, p 2268).

Last January, Hichel kocard, the French minister of state for economic planning
and develop-ant, had talks in Algiers with his counterpart, Abdelhanid Brahini
(34111 29 January 1982, p 250).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux er. Cie Paris 1982

9380
050: 5100/5904

3
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
”HAITI mm Ill Milli cmm—A mu. m in acquiring a one third
interest in the capital of a large ligerien uraniu- ore lining may in process
of formation, the lining (Iowan, of faces I'Togbalgne [m]. The Izmir Foreign
Trading Contracting and Invest-ant Coupany [sax] has thus joined the sun's tvo
initial partners. the General llnclear laterals Ooupany [comm and the national
Office of ﬂineral Resources [exam]. The capital, divided up by thirds along
the three partners, has been increased on this occasion fro. 7 billion CPA francs
to 10.5 billion CPA francs. Niger.“ is recalled. exported sons 6,860 tons of
uraniu- in 1981 produced by the first two ligerien lining coupanien. the Air

legion lining Coupsny [smut] and the Minute lining m murmur]. [Text]
[Paris W nonmnx ET mm in French lo 1898, 26 Her 82 p 851]

050: 5100/ 56“

h
FOR OFFICIAL 088 cm
POIOFFICIALISEONLY

WWIBMMWNMAM“
ParisJBUIBAPIIQUEinPrencthsn 82p36

[Article by Pascal Boniface: "Rho Supplied the Ursniu? Pretoria has
Pinally Pound the Western Participation Needed to Continue a Unclear
Prograa “that worries Africa"]

[Test] The delivery to south Africa of enriched nrenhn. which will per-it
start-up of the Iceberg nuclear facility, has raised a s-ll journalistic
and diploeatic acorn the past few weeks.

The whole affair dates hack to a 1974 agree-ant between Pretoria and
washingtorn. The United States was supposed to enrich native South African
nranim,whichwouldthenheohippedto hance.where!rsnatone [franco-
Anericsn Atonic Construction Co-pany], which supplied the two Iceberg
reactors. would convert it into fuel elenents.

This plan was jeopardized in 1978 when Congress passed the Nuclear
Nonproliferation Act (lolPA). Under the provisions of this law, which

was intended to regulate Aaerican nuclear exports, the United States could
only deliver tissionahle natter (nraniu and others) or nuclear installations
to those countries which agreed to sch-it their entire nuclear pro“.

(and not just iaported equip-cut) to the terns of an International Atoaic

Energy Agency (am) guarantee agree-mt.

But if Southuricaisnorethanwillingtoanhniteventhelneherg
facility and the nraniu intended for it to the AIIA's inspections. it
would not at all like international inspectors sticking their noses into
the Valindaha pilot uraniu- suichnsnt plant, where gossip has it there
is nore interests in atonic hots than in nuclear energy.

Unfortunately. the Valindaha plant does not have sufficient production
capacity to assure the supply needed for a facility, and the mid
enricbent plant being constructed neat to it will not he operation].
before 1985-1986.

to suspend a project coating an esti-ted 1:. billion French francs for
several years was unacceptable. than, after his election in Invader 1980,
President Ronald leagmdeclared that the8onthA£ricanreginswas an
essential allyof thathitedStates. Attheeanstins,heexpressedhis
desire to nits the job oi Anticsn unclear exporters easier.

“Ml-INONLY
FOR OFHGAI. USE ONLY

The South Africans quickly turned up in the United States, and the
Aeericana took the plane to Pretoria. Nothing heppaed. No natter how
they looked at it, the uranium delivery would have been a flagrant
violation of the MA.

They were engaged in these sad reflections when they learned that the
airacle had occurred. The apartheid mine had found soee enriched

ureniu, which it had i-ediately sent to ire-atom. At once, the guessing
gene began. The $66,000 question: Who supplied the enriched uraniu- to
BSCCH [Electricity Supply Co-iasion], the South African electricity
coapany‘! "It was China!" tn-ptad the W P081. Not at all, replied
the Chinese, with their hands over their hearts. They stated that, even if
theyweretosoeeday export uraniu. theywouldnevereverdoaotoaid
either South Africa or Israel. Called on for help. the Anerican State
Department itself backed up Peking.

The rumors then switched continents and wound up in lance. “hat if
Eta-atone itself had supplied the ureniua. thus acceding the terns of
its contract? The Anglo-Saxon preea began to spotlight the nuclear tiee
binding France to South Africa. "hat a beautiful picture—socialist
France giving nucleer resources to the racist Send: African regi-s! This
picture is nevertheless closer to being a doctored photograph than a
real-life snapshot.

In truth, it was Kernkrafaerk Kaiseraugst, a consortia of Swiss and
Gerunn conpaniea, that furnished the enriched uranin to 286014 for $60
million (16.5 billion CPL francs). This consortia, which tried in vain
for several years to start the Swiss leiseraugst facility, possesses
surplus enriched ureniu aequired free the enrich-sot coapeny modif
[European Diffusion Agency]. Of course, the Svisa denied it all, even
claiming that they sold their surplus to another ooapany. In reality, said
conpeny served as a screen between 3800!! and Kernkraftwerk Kaiserengst.

In any case, the ureniu in question is only enriched to 3 percent, which
is sufficient to supply a nuclear facility but clearly inconsistent with
ailitary applications, since in order to seize a bed, one needs uraniu
enriched to 93 percent. In addition, the uraniu will he placed under
an controls. Certainly. while the Valindaha pilot plant is too small to
run the Koeharg facility, it could still supply highly enriched uraniu for
a boeb. That isn't the problea for South Africa, which hes a civilian
progran separate fro. its nilitary prom, and which, above all esle,
already has the hoab.

So what conalusions can be drawn fro- thia affair? First, South Africa has
finally found the Western participation needed to continue a nuclear progra-

that worries Africa. Further-ore, the prosecute accusations against France
were above all intended to create discord between Paris and the African

countries just when good prospects are appearing for i-proved relations.
COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrioue CRUPJIA 1901

9939
680: 5100/ 5629 END

6
FOIOl-‘FICIALUSEONLY