APPROVED FOR RELEAOE: 2007102100: CIA-RDP02-00050R000‘I00020033-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020033-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/8288

26 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR TRADE AND SERVICES
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020033-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. there no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was suuarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OP nus PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROPFICIAL USE ONLY.
.- znlormiu Ogaoiuuoa Ron.
0.
IO. Pinion/1’ oak/lull Unit No.

. Conner/Guam No.
u. T a I t P ‘u

9. Pale-ma. Onaointioo Name «4 Menu

Joint Publication Research Servica
[000 north Glebo Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

  
  

    

  
    
 
 

  

i2. Spa-awn. One-nation Name and m..-

  
   
 

Aa above

   

 

IS. Supplementary Nona

  
 

. Abanaua

  
  

 
 

This serial report contains information on international economic relations.

communications, consumer goods. domestic trade. transportation. manpower, and
industrial sociology.

 
   
 

- ore-m Aoalyua.

 
  
 

  

International Relations
Co-erce

Conan-er Goods

Domestic Trade
Economics

Manpower
Telecomnicationo
Transportation

 
       
     
    
 

I75- “coulicu IOpao-EMN Tom

 
      
  
  

m. COSATIFkU/Gco-p 5c, 51. 17B

30. Madahiuy Stale-rot

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of
Copies Available From JPRS

  
  

     
  

  
  
 

I9. "our, [all (Thia
Room)

2!. ‘0. ml Pun

ungowoc non-MI

    
       

pom. ~'Q.II’ mu. 3-"!

THE '0”! IMY DE REPRODUCED
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/szm
26 Pebrunra

TRANSLATICNS 0N USSR TRADE MD SERVICES

(P000 3/79)
Coureurs

MMIOML momc RMIOIB

Discussion on the Transferable Ruble
(Rainer Dob; osmnom wmrscam', lo 3, 1978)

mm: m, summon, mm

Settlemnt Policy Important for Urban, Burn]. Growth
(11. Stronginn; vomosr moan, lo 12, 1978)

WWI“

Fractional Economic Zoning of the intern 3M! Zone
(P. 1;. mm, et 31.; mm Am: max
883, m Gmmu’ HOV-“c 78) 0000000....
DISCUSSION on m TRANSFBRABLB 31181.!
Stuttgart OSRUROPA museum in Ger-an No 3, 1978 pp 203-216

[Article by Rainer Doh exanining whether the transferable ruble fulfills
the functions that would justify it as an international currency. etc]

Introduction

[Text] "Foreign trade between the socialistic planned economies of Eastern
Europe cannot readily depend upon the categories of the nrket. As in the
field of the national econaly. narhet categories such as price and noney
are instrusnts ("levers") of the doninant planning systea. Since the
countries unified in the Council for Mutual Econoaic Assistance (cm)

have no total overall plan. because national sovereignty (including plan-
ning power) is protected, a fact which, in the face of existing conflicts
of interest is neither strange nor always successful. the cam is left to
prices and noney; even in the CDIA nothing is free. If there is trade be-
tween the states. and if one does not wish to stay with direct barter, then
the various flows of goods lust be charged and paid for respectively. For
this purpose the can countries have created a special international cur-
rency, the transferable ruble (m1) and an institution which calculates
international trade in the can. the International Bank for Econoaic Coop-
eration (mac. founded in 1963). Both are the basis for nultilaterel ex-
change of paynents in the CDIA.

Hhile western literature in general is very critical and doubtful about
the nonetary properties of the transferable ruble. the canon international
currency of the reaber comtries of the Council for Hut 1 Boone-dc Assis-
tance--it doubts whether the m1 is real, genuine non Eastern litera-
ture (above all in the GM and the USSR) usually does not raise this ques-
tion. here it is considered obvious that the m1 is "real noney" and not
just a calculating unit. that the m1 "3y its nature can fulfill all the
functions of an international currency." and therefore does not have to
be afraid of a coaparison with other (that is. Hestern) international cur-
rencies. Difficulties in the use of the mm are not found to ste- fron
its ”nature" but fron in. fact that ”it does not yet fulfill its essential
functions coqletely." In agree-ant with this, another passage runs:

1
P0! OHICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”The transferable ruble fulfills in accordance with its nature all the
nain functions of an international socialistic‘currency: neasurenent of
values. leans of pay-ent and of accumulation."

But what lakes the ran into an international currency of aocialistic
nature-which nust be understood in the sense of a liaitationuis not that
it fulfills these functions. but how it fulfills then [mderscoring here
and later indicates italics].

 

National and International Honey in CHM

Unlike the situation in the Heat. national nonetary spheres in CBHA coun—
tries are isolated fron one another. Since nonetary flows are integrated
nationally into the systen of economic levers and function as paraneters
of national scone-1c planning. they are of necessity dependent upon the
area of their validity for their effectiveness; pay'nents, etc. cannot be
realised without an additional errangensnt in the plan. As a result. the
currency nonopoly. which is a necessary elenent in the systen for direct-
ing the scone-y. hinders international effectiveness of the national so-
cialiatic noney. Without currmcy monopoly the donestic circulation of
noney would be subject to unplanned external influences. Just as there is
no international price connection in the can (prices, too. are planning
parameters). there is also no "nonetary connection" in the sense that the
currency of a country can serve as a scans for settlenent of claim. The

national currencies of GEM countries are therefore purely donestic cur-
rencies.

The fact that noney of CB)“ comtries cannot be effective in foreign eco-
noaic relations shows a basic fault in this noney: none of the national
currencies serves as a general calculating unit and as a general neans of
pay-eat in the can standard.

This fault also appears in the postulates of Hardst theory upon which the
nonetary theory in can countries is based. when. here, soney is defined
as "gener l equivalent...for udiation between production and circulation
of goods" -in Marx as the "absolute” or ”general goods"-then noney

limit in foreign use is no longer really a ”general equivalent" for &
goods. Such noney, however. which according to Her: is "the ecessary
evidence of the inset neasure of value of goods. worktiae," and there-
fore would have to be independent of the linits of a national planning
area, would have to exist in can countries as a consequence of Hsrx' "Law
of Value," which is valid as a leading principle in socialist planned
econonies.

Marx hinself eqhasiaed in this connection that the "flight" of noney fron
the area of the donsstic econo-y and the fulfill-ant of a function as a
general scans of pay-eat independent of national borders and national state
peculiarities is s consequence of his concept of noney. "Horld aoney func-
tions as a general nsans of payment, and neans of buying and of social

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

evidence of wealth in general."8 But this "world noney" has a direct
connection to national noney. It is donestic aoney that divests itself
of its national torn and thereby becomes international loner-"world
honey." Donestic noney which cannot take such a step is therefore not
"world noney," and furthsmre~because this is a consequence of Harx'
concept of noney—it is only noney of linited use.

0n the other hand, with this limitation of the functional capability of
the noney to the area of the doneetic econony, an essential condition is9
lacking for the develop-eat of intra-CEHA trade on a nultilateral basis:
exchange relationships are accompanied on a bilateral basis without recog-
nition by a third country. The lack of a noney which could provide a con-
Ion denominator for outstanding debts. and which would note their nulti-
lateral paynent possible. nade the necessity of first having a bilateral
clearing which showed a considerable hindrance of the international dis-
tribution of labor in the cm. As a solution to these faults. however,
the reasons for lack of internationalisation of the noney were not re—
noved (that is. above all, the planning systems which are isolated fron
one another and which are directed toward national interests). but rather
alongside donestic currencies. an international currency was established-
the transferable ruble--on the basis of which Iultilateral foreign eco-
nomic relations were to develop.

The m1. then, is international nonay without being national noney, and

it is therefore, just as the national noney of the can countries, neither
an international currency in the western sense. nor "world noney" in the
Marxist sense. It cannot even live up to the often-used concept of ”world
Honey Representative," because the ‘l'llbl lacks essential qualities which
would enable it to represent “world money." The fact that the TRbl, as

it is clained in the Eastern literature, is "the first really collective
currency in the world."10 is the expression of a lack, since the ‘l'Rbl

is not siqu a real but rather only a collective currency! Therefore,

by neans of the central handling of all international payaents in a canon
currency in the International bank for Economic Cooperation (1330). the
desired multilateral nature of trade and pay-ant could not be accoaplished:
over 90 percent of intra-CDIA trade is developed and calculated on a bi-
lateral basis. although this payaent takes place fornally for all coun-
tries in nu.“ This is also adnitted in the East: "Bach country balances
its peynents not unconditionally"(!) "bilaterally;“ "for the planning
period as a whole, however, each country strives to balance out its pay-
nents with the other countries in their Sotality by leans of paynent of
the account balance with each country.“

“bls arise in the 1336 only on the basis of flow of goodsnthis is what
is neant by the "goods coverage" of the m1. "Transferable rubles arise
priaarily onlhfron the export of goods and services fro- one country

into others." Since the inports and exports are basically planned to
be balanced bilaterally. a balancing and a credit of m1. beyond the cur-
rent pay-ant (short-tern credit) can only occur outside the regular plan:

3
roe orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRbl reserves or credits presuppose. then. deviations fro: the plan or
arise because of periodic lack of synchronization of deliveries of two
partners (automatic credit). In the process. the previously planned
yearly balance of accounts is done away with.” However. these unplanned
m1 credits are. within the franeworh of intra can trade. which is de-
veloped on the basis of planning. not directly usable. These problem
are generally skipped over in the Eastern literature; thus it is said:

"The TRbl is freely transferable and can be transferred free the account
of a nedrer country of the 1330 to the account of another. This currency
can be used without exception in all can countries. This neans that each
country can use the proceeds fro. the export of its produc n in m1 freely
for the psynent of inorts fron gvery other country which .Jkes part in the
multilateral pay-eats service.“

However. this transfersbility transpires within the fraaework of the bi-
laterally (ex ante) adjusted balances and quotes. A country that has
‘l'Rhls "assures itself the possibilifx of buying goods for this currency
beyond the balanced deliveries...." But whether the nesibilitx of such
purchases also leads to actual purchases depends upon more than simly the
existence of a corresponding anount of mu credit:

"If the deliveries vary fro. the plans agreed upon among the countries...
the acctnsulated funds for the planning period are used for the payment of
free goods of the neuter countries of the CEHA which exceed the plan in
their nutual exchange."17

For this. however. it is first necessary that such reserve goods exist at
all in the necessary anounts. so that variations free the plan in one di-
rection are balanced by variations in the other. For this. reserve goods
would have to be built up (increasing prices to cover excess duand will
not work for planned export trade). whereby such a "collective reserve"
naturally would create resistance in the creditor countries. since this
reserve would not deusnd paynent discipline. Also. the roundabout way of
disposing of such a reserve on the world nsrket would create difficulties.
because 63M generally lacks goods suitable for the world asrhet. and
since for this very reason one would not want to put ther-if they are
available-into a reserve fund.18

The resolution of such unplanned-for ‘l‘Rbl credits. which are identical
with autos-tic credits. is therefore only possible by means of planned
deliveries of goods and services by the borrowers. for in the dousetic
ssrkat nothing can be bought with mlsuthe forﬁgn econo-ic aonopoly is
not touched by the general balancing operations. Therefore this "free
utilisation" of Table does not exist. But here authors. particularly
free the Soviet Union and the cm. are of a different opinion:

"It cannot be concluded from the planned arrangement of econoeic relation-
ships of can that there is no free purchase of goods in a given meter

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

country, and that the 'l‘Rbl therefore cannot becone conpletely effective
in its functions."20

To this objection it must be said that free purchase cannot at all belong
to the functions of the TRbl. that it can only exist, by nature of the
systen, as an exception, a fact which, to be sure, does not sean that the
'l'Rbl cannot conpletely fulfill it_a functions. The TRbl, which was created
and determined by the planned econonic systen. cannot have the function

of a freely usable currency in the nodel of a narket sconony-uthe 'l'Rbl can-
not fulfill functions not postulated in its foundation; thus the objection
of Berk/Seidel is neaningless.

The liaitation of the paynent function of the ‘1'an to be sure is noticed
only by countries capable of producing surpluses. This systea of pay-ants
is a disadvantage for the potential creditor countries because surpluses

lead to autoaatic credits, the criteriua of which is not their profitable-
neees

Credits which are autonatically produced, and which arise of necessity in
the paylent of bilateral accounts, contradict the principle that foreign
trade should asks a 'naxinu contribution to the national incone; if there
are no econonic calculations as a basis for the credit. but if it rather
lust be granted because the partner with the return delivery is late, then
the efficiency and profit of the foreign trade is hurt. The positive
balances in Table in the me are not used because the creditor country

is interested in a reserve, because he is counting on long-range use of
the balance or because he considers the interest to be profitable. but
rather because they were built up in an unplanned way and can be used only
in a planned way.

From the viewpoint of the debtor country this disadvantage becones an ad-
vantage. Deviations fron foreign trade plans which lead to unplanned
deficits in the balance of paynents do not result in the appearance of
unplanned demands fron abroad, and the iaport plans can still be realized.
Credit, which the creditor would as; provide if economic calculations
were the decisive factor, because an advantage to the debtor, since he
obtains the credit under relatively favorable conditions.

Accordingly, then, inprovenent of the present systen of payaents is an
area of mutual national interest. Here there are sons countries who

favor an efficient currency systenn with profitably functioning interest
rates and with at least a partially existing convertibility of TRbl credits
into gold and convertible currmcies (Poland, Hungary), and there are other
countries which are only interested in perfecting the existing systea of
pay-eats, because they understandably do not want to have to pay high
interest rater-even if the latter are economically justified-for their
generally negative account balances, but would rather look upon the credits
as functions for technical bridging and evening-out of psynents. The in-
terest policy of the IBBC therefore shows a continual search for compro-
nises in the opposing interests of creditor and debtor countries.

5
m onrcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this connection it should be noted. however, that the allocation of
resources and the mutual delivery of goods are not directly influenced

by interest policy, since the amount of interest in the trade relation-
ships of the can countries is not a direct tax rate-the accounts which
are to be abject to interest appear ex post as plan deviations.22 But
an indirect influence can still arise if foreign trade planning should.
for eunle, anticipate the advantages of a low interest rate policy, and.
say, in bilaterally balanced planned exchange, set exports unrealistically
high in order to take advantage in this way of the automatic payment
credits.

In spite of nany past technical inprovenents in the systen of payments,
the basic problem which was supposed to be solved by the m1 has had

to remain unsolved. Now as before, money-also as international money—
plays no independent role in the socialistic planned economy but is rather
subordinated in essential points as the means of planning. This problem
is one created by the system and characterized by it, and cannot be solved
by technical-organizational reforms or by the creation of new institutions.

The Value of the ‘l‘llbl

0n the basis of its foreign trade monopoly and its economic iwlications,
gold parities and exchanges rates in the CHM have a different position
than they have in urket economy countries. As with all other economic
categories, they are not independent in the planned economy system but
rather function as "economic levers" as means of planning.

The fact that in the agreement on the multilateral payment in TRbls a
fixed gold content was established for the m1 at 0.987.612 grams of fine
gold, but that at the same time the m1 is not exchangeable into gold, led
Hester-n author’s to say generally that this gold content of the TRblis
"fictional."2 But the maintenance of a gold standard not only for the
m1 but also for all domestic cu encies in the OSHA cannot be explained
simply by ideological motivation. The can countries. to be sure, de-
termine independently the gold content of their currencies and of the
m1. i.e., the gold price does not arise as a balance price on the un-
ket, but this fixed gold content still makes a formal comparison with
Western currencies possible. The important thing here is the acceptance
of world market prices for the cm price system. Here it is not neces-
sary that run credits actually be exchangeable for gold—the Eastern
literature speaks in this connection continually of gold content or gold
parity and not of gold coverage. Since there is an integration of the
'l'Rbl in the international currency markets, gold parity is the only pos-
sibility of creating a relationship to the dollar which is independent

of its revaluations and exchange movements—gold parity here takes over
the function of a conversion coefficient. 5

0n the other hand, independence from gold is found in planning which nakes
axariation of the monetary value from the gold value, and therefore the

6
Iron onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

autonomous determination of gold parity, possible. What the following
says for the gold standard of the domestic currencies is also valid for

the m1:

"Although the prices of goods are expressed in gold, their movement as
relatively independent of the changes in the value of gold itself ."2

Hith this it is also possible to maintain "false," i.e. economically un-
founded. relationships to gold and to the convertible currencies; the
"relative independence" of the m1 from gold means that only very large
variations have to be corrected free tine to time: "The inner economic
connection between the value of gold and the price level becomes particu-
larly evident when the variation continually increases."27

Thus a dileua arises: the gold content of the m1 is first set inde-
pendently of the market and made subject to planning (state gold monopoly);
nevertheless the planning trust somehow be related to the market value of
gold in order to be able to apply it at all. Only then is "gold in so-
cialism a leans of conscious fixing and changing of prices...." 8 For the
run this leans that it has only an economically founded relationship to
western currencies when it is related to the market value of gold. but
that it is then divested of its value for planning.

Since on the other hand the role of gold in the Western currency systen
is being reduced. above all in its significance as a reference figure
for currency parities and as a general calculating unit, gold seems to be
a doubtful vehicle in the long run to form a solid basis for the calcula-
tion of Table into western currencies.

0n the basis of the gold standard of the m1, it would have been expected
that in the past the inflationary developments of the western currencies
would have to have led to a continual upward valuation of the Eastern
donestic currencies and of the m1; in other words, to maintain the
stability of the currencies a "flezdble exchange policy" would have to
have taken place.29 In the opinion of the Polish economist Racskowski.
however, such exchange and price revisions should 33m place only when
the present overvaluation of the m1 is removed. The existence of a
"substantial" overnluation of the m1 is hereby not only recognized in
Hestern literature but is also expressed isplicitly in Eastern sources
when. for example, it is said with reserve that the nu rate must "become
realistic."32 Authors who expressly emphasise that the m1 rate is
realistic still throw some doubt on the matter themselves when they call
for a "confirmation of the reality of the exchange rate."33 0r. expressed

another way:

"At present the cm countries are working on the establishment of eco-
nomically based and mutually agreed-upon relastonships of their currencies
to each other and to the transferable ruble."

7
ton orncm. use any
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is a remarkable confession of what these relationships at present
are Let: econoaically founded and mutually agreed upon.

Even if the econo-ic justification of the exchange rate of the ”bi to,
say, the 0.8. dollar, is controversial and disputed, yet even if it is
doubtful whether on the basis of diverging planned price structures an
econoaically based exchange rate can exist at all-the projects mentioned
by Paddejew have been going on since 1966 and no end is in sight—neverthe-
less such a relationship, which is to a great extent administrative, is

in fact used for the calculation of world narket prices into TRbl prices.

Since the total intra-CEHA trade is caught up in world market prices. the
exchange calculation (independently of all Bast-Heat business) is of great
importance for the CEMA. If a deviation fro. the result is necessary for
planning reasons, this can also take place by way of modification and set-
tlenent of world market prices and must not take the form of a change in
the exchange rate.35 When one talks about a deviation of the world narket
prices free the contract prices in can. then taken literally this neana
that an unchanged exchange rate is imputed.

Since each one of the domestic currencies in the cam. has a gold parity,
Just as the m1 does, the so-called official exchange rates can be deter-
ained free it. The rates and coefficients used in comercial trade, how-
ever. do not correspond to these official rates, because direct conpari-
son of the currencies cannot be eccowlished by such centralized rates.

The relationship between domestic and foreign trade is accomplished ac-
cording to the preferences of state planning through the foreign trade
nonopoly, so that the exchange calculation of, say, the proceeds of a
Tllbl export into a domestic currency, is influenced "according to plan"
by the application of special rates and coefficients which are differen-
tiated according to countries and currency structures in question.

Exchange Rates and Coefficients

The official exchange rates do not reflect the relative buying power of
the currencies. The actual calculation cones by way of the differentiated
rates and coefficients that are said to be, say, between Poland and other
can countries, 2.7 to 5.7 times higher than the official rates.36

Coefficients and rates are different in that the latter are based on in-
ternational agreeaents and therefore always valid between the national
currencies and between them and the mm respectively, while the "currency
exchange coefficients“ are internal calculation figures.37 There is no
agreement in Eastern literature on how the exchange rates come about. Thus
according to Huber the rates are average prices which arise froa "thousands
of price coqiarisona."38 But Bhlert and Luchterhand cone to the opposite
conclusion: "...vith the lack of economically founded and autually agreed
upon rates between the Tllbl and the national currencies of the nenbar coun-
tries, (it is) hardly possible to lake precise cmarisons of costs and

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prices."39 Here. then. lack of rates hinders price coeparison which is
what Iluber says leads to the rate. From this we can see that the national
prices are not coepsreble; when there are diverging price structures, ‘0
there can. under these conditions. be no unified buying power parities.
The necessary administrative setting of rates therefore always includes
a certain anomt of arbitrariness which allows race for conflicts and for
the introduction of national interests. Pros this one can get the intes-
sion that it is a problen of lack of agree-ant snong partners. But this
is rather the consequence of lack of unified buying power parities in
GEM. Pros this, consequences arise for the utilization of these rates:

”At present the rates have extrenely conditional character; their practical
effectiveness is more or less united.“1

In prcctice. the exchange rates bacone effective only in connection with
the coefficients; only through then does the HM cone into connection
with the domestic currencies. The latter are changed by a coefficient sys-
tee in accordance with the way planning wants the foreign trade structured.
according to the structures for the goods and regions.

By seens of the differentiation between rates and coefficients. i.e. by
the double exchange calculation. there arise alongside the doneatic cur-

rencies so-called foreign currencies (exchange nsrk. etc). The exchange
eark. for exanple. is defined as follows:

"Calculating unit for the exchange calculation of world earket prices of
experts or imports expressed in foreign currencies. The V“ [Velutaeark
(exchange nark)l is above all a planning coefficient.... It has signifi-

cance for prise adjustment and for evaluation of the profitability of for-
eign trade."

The exchange ear): is therefore not an independent currency unit, but rather
a connection between donestic and foreign currencies. Donestically the
exchange nark is connected with the national currency by way of the dif-
ferentiated coefficients. In this way the relationship between donestic
and foreign currency (for eagle. beZween the exchange art: and the nrk
of the 608) is of variable greatness. 3 and depends upon the coefficient
structure at the tine. This relationship influences the structure of
foreign trade. but. conversely, the latter does not influence the rela-
tionship of doneatic and foreim currency, even if presented this way in
the final result and repercussions arise.

The significance of the foreign currency for price adjust-ant is that the
coefficients of foreign trade and its structure are regulated (along with
other instrulents) for the businesses engaged in foreign trade so that a
profitable state-desired foreign trade cones about on the basis of economic
calculations and econonic levers. although without application of these
coefficients it would not be profitable. This discrepancy lust be clini-
nated by leans of a price adjust-ant. The difference between doneetic and
foreign trade prices. and therewith also the coefficients. is financed by

9
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the national economy. If there are positive differencee they are paid
over to the governsant. In this way. by subsidies or ski-ing off of
excess profits. the profitability of foreign trade is influenced.

In the Soviet Union there is a peculiarity of this rate and coefficient
systen because the Soviet dosestic ruble and the m1 for-ally have the
seas gold content and can be calculated in the relationship of 121. In
spite of the for-e1 agreesent. the Tllbl is however an exclusively intre-
state currency and not usable in the Soviet Union. The difference for the
doaestic ruble cones fro- the use of the coefficients which aodify the
exchange rate fros 1:1. But the Soviet foreign currency sust not be calcu-
lated in ran through the nediation of a special exchange rate; m1 “er-
change rubles” are for-ally the ease but are differentiated by their eco-

nosic character.

Schenatically, the exchange calculation system of the cm countries can
be represented as follows:

cm Country. Soviet Union

I
Doaestic ‘ Exchange

 

Currency I Currency
1. _____
Coefficients Exchange
Rate

The adjustsent of undesired excl-age rates by leans of coefficients can,
to be sure. insure the control of foreign trade, but the notional scone-y
suffers. Since the exchange rates and coefficients have a "redistribu-
tion" function.‘ the exchange rate as an average figure does not bring
all partners the seas benefit. and here. too, conflicts of interest arise;
each country would like to ensure itself the greatest possible benefit in
the deter-ination of such average figures.

If in factnes prospects have variously been set forth-oby 1979 there are
uified exchange rates for all paysents. this will also require a change
in existing price structures.“ which will. however, hurt the national
interests of various CM countries; therefore the realization of such
plans in the face of the present situation in the can sust see. doubtful.
According to an older suggestion by Kuehne, the coqlete agree-eat of
donestic and foreign currencies should cons about in order to cllow inter-
national sonetary relationships to have full away in the dosestic econo-y.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The balance of paynents is supposed. in the process, among other things,
to be sssuzzd by neana of a "balance of paynents oriented donatic price
structure" which, in the long run, would lead to an npproxiaation of
the donestic price struc. ~res. This suggestion points to the dileena
which exists here: reaoval of the isolation of the nonetary donestic
circulation would inply an end to govern-sat price-setting—it could
only be maintained if it were adjusted to the situation, and if it did
this it would itself becone superfluous. In view of the priorities of
the CEHA countries, such suggestions are not in agreenent with the present
economic systea. since they point toward an end to sovereign econoaic
planning.

Under present conditions. rates and prices are not the Iain criteria of
Intra-CM trade. but rather the agreed-upon contingents along the states.
But in order to be able to balance and calculate the latter evenly. an
evaluation of both sides of the balances lust be possible. This evalua-
tion in 'l'Rbl prices. however, does not cone over an international Isrket
but rather in bilateral negotiations. the nechanisa of which can lead to
different prices for honogenoua goods as well as to special conditions

of the products (quality. technical standard. etc) not being expressed
properly. Therefore. within the framework of bilateral balancing. goods
are adjusted as "hard" and ”soft.” because it is not possible to express
in the price the existing differences such as quality. technical standards.
etc., for exam”. between groups of goods such as aschines and agricul-
tursl products. The appearance of the can contract prices and their
connection with planning prevent the m1 fron being the conon denominator
for :1; goods which could express all qualitative differences quantita-
tively with the result that the m1 could really be a "general equiva-
lent.” Thus the 1336 credit balance in m1 is dependent on the value

the goods being delivered at the tine which forms th. basis of their
existence. As a result of this. the lack of a balanced price syste-
forces the countries to bilateral behavior: an excess of Mls becoaes
less valuable when it is carried over to a third partner or when it has
been obtained fron "bard" goods and lust be used for "soft" goods; thue.
planning always strives for equal balances. "Under these circulstancee
the CDM countries would, in the case of a non-bilateral, nultilateral
trade adjust-cut. after a nutual adjmtnent of accomts. be unequally
rewarded or neglected.""3 Disadvantages would accrue to all countries
that exported "hard" goods with a relatively high degree of world nerltet-
ability. while on the other hand the countries that asme exported "soft"
goods in the can area would gain certain advantages. or they could reduce
their poorer coqetitive position in the CD“. In this respect bilateral
balancing. llldtl' the given circutances. better suits the interests of
the sore highly developed CW comtries—at least as long as it is not
possible properly to express the qualitative differences of the goods

in the price.

If ems earned in foreign trade are not coqarable because of the conver-
sion by leans of exchange rates. then a nonetary grasp of the efficiency

I

1.].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of foreign trade is practically imossibls. To be sure. by means of the
coefficient systen. foreign trade can be integrated into the systen of
econonic accounting. so that for the business fir- the profitability of
its foreign trade can be determined. but only after transforution of the
foreim trade proceeds into a donestic econowy figure with inclusion of
the adjust-ant through the national finance office. The concept of a
people's econonic foreign trade profitability as a "aonetary expression
of the directly beneficial effects of foreign trade in relation to the
expenditure" 9 is not clearly possible. because one and the sane "econonic
beneficial effect" can have a coapletely different "nonetary expression."
i.e.. a credit in TRbla as such does not allow any inference about the
profitability of the underlying transactions. The determination of for-
eigh trade profitabigbty is therefore bound to the linits of bilateral
trade relationships; It profit cmerism between several countries is
not possible. The basic subordination of nonetary categories to planning.
which is expressed in the obvious difficulties of the m1. sakes a sub-
ordination of the aonetery grasp of foreign trade efficiency under the
criteriun of plan fulfillaent necessary.

Convertibility of the mm

It has been shown in the above discussion that the m1 can neither be
converted into Hestern currencies nor into the national currencies of the
can countries. (In the following discussion. convertibility Irene the
latter.) The donestic character of the currencies. the doninence of the
planning categories. and the lack of international price correlation force-
fully hinder an ggtional transferability of the Tllbl independent of the
use or the origin of the anountwand this is what one nust understand by
the ter- convertibility. The Tllbl as an international currency independent
of the national currencies is the result of their inconvertibility (see
above). Since the donestic currencies could not be used for international
pay-ants and could not cone into direct correlation. there was the neces-
sity of creating an international currency which could only be used for
international pay-ants. But a convertibility of the Tllbl with the national
currencies of the can because under these circuutances a contradictio

in adjecto. If the lel could nansly be exchanged at will for each of the
national currencies. then the sane would be true for then with each other.
and there would be no reason not to use their own international currency
alongside the national currencies for international pay-ants. The con-
vertibility which is to be reached by refer-a of the price and currency
systen as well as by an approxination of the price structures cannot con-
cern the TRbl but only the national currencies. If this were successful.
the TRbl would becone superfluous.

It is therefore not strange that in creation of the convertigtlity of the
T8131. which was discussed in the "Co-ple): Program" for 1980. no essential
progress could be lads. Under these circunstances an external convertibil-
ity of the lel is also illusory. no natter how advantageous it nay sea
to be in the Best. A currency that is inconvertible in its own area and

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that in dependent upon national foreign trade planning for ite uaability.
and which ia juat m; "general equivalent.” cannot be freely exchangeable
into currenciee which. with all their weakneeeee. at leaet have the”
qualitiee.

The ran an a Calculation Unit
lf. up to now. it hae been established that the m1:

-exiete ee a collective currency eeparated from the domestic currencies.
-ie only applicable in connection with planning.

-ae a name of technical einlification of the accounting proceee cannot
make the proceee multilateral.

netande in no economically fully grounded relationahip to gold and to
Heatern currenciee.

"repreeente differing valuee in credits at the 1330.

-ie neither convertible into the national currenciee of the cm coun-
triea not into foreign bille of exchange.

then the doubta mentioned at the beginning about the monetary qualitiea
of the m1 aeea nore than juetified. But thie does not lean that the
m1 cannot fulfill any nonetary functione at all and that it ie no money
at all but only a calculating unit. There in no contradiction here. for
the ran in. ae a calculating unit. alao the bearer of monetary functione;
but it fulfilla theee functione only in the framework eetahliehed by plan-

ning. and not generally.

Since the m1 mderliee the (bilateral) eettlemente and thua functione

an e calculating wit, it ie the co-on denominator of the balanced etreane
of gooda to the extent that thie calculation functione. within thie frene-
worl: it can alao mediate pay-ante. Even if the realization of 'ﬂlbl credita
requirea planned equivalence. the ml in etill the co-on denominator of
credit and equivalent which it adjuate together. The fact that thie leade
to the difficultiee mentioned. becauee there in really no objective neaeure
for the value of the m1 doee not sun that thie calculation doee not take
place in a practical way within the fraacuork of ite naturally liaited
fora.

Thua the concept of the calculating unit preeuppoeee certain rudimentary
monetary functione. without which trade in the can countriea would not
he poaeihle.

13
POI! OHICIAL use ONLY
1.

2.

3.
lo.

5.

6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

12.

13.
1‘.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

Cf. A. Zuaee. “Konvertibiliteet in Rat-Rem?" [Convertihility in the
OSHA Areal]. in WWITIK 1970 pp 367 ff.

Paddejeu. "Der Rat fuer gageneeitise Hirtechaftehilfa [Council for
Mutual lcononic Aeeiatencel." Frankfurt 1975 p 279. However. critical
review of thin have appeared in hunger}, Poland and Czechoslovakia.

Ibid. p 280.

Carhuaov. "Die Vervollko-nuns der Heehrungenund Pinaneheriehungen
der Mtsliedalaander dee ECU” [The Perfection of the Currency and
Financial Relationahipo of the Huber Countriee of the COM] in
“Internationale oozialietieche ﬂeehruna der Hitslicdelaender den
W' [International Socialietic Currency of the Hater Countries of
CM). Derlin 1976 (Hoocov 1972).

"Autorenhollektiv. Hoerterbuch der OekononieuSozialianue” [Collected
authore, Dictionary of the BconouyuSocialian], Berlin 1969 p 302.

ct. K. Marx. "Dee Kapital." Vol 1 p 83.
Ibid. p 109.
Ibid. p 157.

Cf. A. Zvaaa. "Zur Prohlenetik der Haehrungaheriehmsen zviochen Oct
und ﬂeet” [Concerning the Prohlene of Currency Reletionehipa hetveen
Beat and ﬂeet], Vienna 1971..

Konatantinov. "Dichtms und Uahrheit ueher den tranaferablen luhel"
[Poetry and Truth Concerning the Traneferahle Ruble]. in "Interna-
tionale Socialiatiache Haehrmg” [International Socialist Currency]
op. cit.

Cf. Stelrl, "Die internationelen Benken dea ROB" [The International
Dante of can]. Huenchen 1973.

Schein, "Die hollektive Haehrung der Hitglicdalaender den m und die
Hose ihrer Varvollkomung" [The Collective Currency of the “or
Countriea of the cm. and Ira Path to Periectionl in "Internationale
oocialiatiache Uaehmng" [International Socialist Currency], op. cit.
p bl.

Paddejeu. op. cit. p 279.
Cf. A. Suaee. "Convertihility...." op. cit.

1';
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.

21‘
22.
23.

26 .
25 .
26.

27.

28.
29.

31.
32 .
33.

FOR OFl’ICIAI. USE ONLY

Konstantinou. op. cit. p 27.

Rotleider. "Der transferable Rubel-dia internationale socialistische
Vachrung der W—Laender" [The Transferable Ruble—International
Socialist Currency of the OSHA-Countries], in "International sozial-
istische Haehrunguu" [International Socialist Currency] op. cit.

p 21.

Schsin, op. cit. pp 39 ff.

ct. ibid. p «7.

Cf. A. Zvasa. op. cit. p 102.

Berk/Seidel, "I‘heoretiache Problem der Valuta—und Kreditbeaiehungen
in socialistischen Heltsysten" [Theoretical Problem of Currency and
Credit Relationa in the Socialist World Systea]. in HIRISCBAPTSWIS-
sausaurr 7/1976 p 1069.

Cf. A. Zuass, op. cit. p 103.

cf. Steffens, "Integrationsproble-e in W [Integration Problems in
the CEHA]. Badmrg 197‘ p 79.

cf. the equation of gold and money in Kent, op. cit. p 109.

Cf. A. Zvass. op. cit. p 383.

Autorenkollektiv. "Lehrbuch Politische Oehonmie—Sozislisnue"
[Collected authora. textbook for Political EconolyuSocielien], Prank-
furt/Hain 1972 (Hoscov 1970). p 275.

Autorenkollektiv. "Politiache Oekono-id’ [Collected authors. Political
Zconouy], Vol 3. Berlin 1973 p 327.

Autorenkollektiv. "Lehrbuch..." [Textbook...], op. cit. p 275.

Cf. Ii. Hachovslti, ”Packt die Inflation jetzt auch den Caren?" [Is
Inflation now Reaching the Baat‘ll, in mmaumms. 1976/15.

Ractlwvski. "International Money of the Socialist Countries." in
osomoomca row 1975/5. pp 325 ft.

Cf. Bevett. "Foreign Trade Prices in the CBHA," Cadridge 1971a.
Ractkovaki, op. cit. p 324.
Garbosov. op. cit. p 30.

15
ron orncm. use ONLY
39.

60.

61.

42.

‘3.

M.

65.
66.

67.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Paddejeu. op. cit. p 281.

There are any possibilities for this: cf. Hewett, op. cit. pp 30 ff.
Racskovski. op. cit. p 316.

Goehler/Heitkus, ”Socialistiache oekonouieche Integration und
gegenaeitiger Vorteil" [Socialist Economic Integration and Mutual
Advantage). in SOZIALISTISOIE AUSSENWIRTSCIM. 1972/12.

huber, ”Planning und Stinulierung der internationalsn sosialiatischen
Speaialisiermg und Kooperation" [Planning and Stinulation of Interna-
tional Socialist Specialization and Cooperation], in HIR‘I'SCHAHHISSBR-
SCRAP!“ 1975/6, p 517.

Bhlert/Luchterhand. "Die aktivere Nutsung der Vsluta-und Pinanzbezie-
hungen in der socialistischen oekononischen Integration" [The More
Active Utilization of Currency and Financial Relationships in Social-
ist Economic Integration]. in SOZIALIS'I’ISCIIB AUSSEMRISCIIAPT, 1971/12.

Buying power parities are used only in the area of nonco-nercial
transactions (services above all). Peak pay-eat calculations which
occur here are figured in m1 and can be charged to the ‘l'llbl accounts
of business dealings. (Prague agree-ant, 1963).

ﬂubar, op. cit. p 517.

Autorenkollektiv, "Hoerterbuch" [Collected authors. Dictionary], op.
cit. p 826.

ll. Ilaase. "Des Aulsnhandelspreissysten in 36H" [The Foreign Trade
Pricing Systell in the CHM]. in OSTBUROPA-UIRTSCHAFT 1975/3.

She-in. et. a1.. “Theoretische Probleee der Schaftung hocheffectiver
Volksvirtschaftaatrukturen und der Angleichung des Bntvicklungsniveaus
der Hitgliedslaender dea now” [Theoretical Problem in the Creation of
Highly Effective People's lcononic Structures and Approxilstion of the
Develop-ant Level of the Huber Countries of can, in HIRTSCIIAPTS-
WISSBNSOMH' 1976/6 p 597.

Cf. Racehovski, op. cit. p 317

K. Kuehne, "Die Hamche Theoria von den Punktionen des Celdes als
Heltgeld" [The Marxist Theory of the Functions of Money as world
Honey]. in c. Kohl-3y (ed.) "AuBenVirtachaft und Hachstul" [Foreign
Trade and Gmth]. Berlin 1968 p 162.

Cf. Stations. op. cit. p 180 it. "hard" goods are those whose quality
does not correspond to their price insofar as they are too cheap in
relation to the "soft" goods (goods of poorer quality).

16
ms orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.8. Steffene, op. cit. p 186.
69. "Dictionary.“ op. cit. p 97.

50. P. Weller. "Die Aueeemrirtecheftetheorie in der Plenvirtecheft"
[Foreign Trade Theory in the Planned Economy]. Berlin 1975.

51. Autlggrflttot etated. "bokunente ROW" [Doctnente of cm]. Berlin 1971
PP '

COPYRIGHT: Deuteche Geoellecheft fuer Oateuropekunde
e.V. Berlin 6 Munich, 1978

9126
080: 1826

17
1'0)! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH’ICIAL USE ONLY

mm: m, MIG", mum

3mm POLICY META"? FOR URBAN. RURAL GMT}!
Moscow vow! ransom in Russian No 12. 1978 pp 55-65

[Article by h. Strongman "Development and the Regulation of System of
3ettlesent"]

[Text] Regulation of the developsent of the settlement process plays an
ilportant part in further isproveaent of the systsa of mirage-eat of the
econow under the conditions of a deve10ped socialist society.

The process of urbanisation, unfolding unier the conditions of the scientific
and technical revolution and foraing the basis of the whole aodsrn evolution
of settleaent. is influencing sore and sore actively the level of develop-
nent of the city and the countryside. the systes of their interrelation.

the processes of tramfcrution of the networks of large. average and call
cities and the rural settlesents surrouniing then into interconnected systess
of settle-ant of a different rank. The systen of ssttleaent are one of the
.chief for. of couples change of the conditions and way of life of the
people in a rural locality. of creation of socially equal opportunities of
utilisation of the advantages of the city and the country, of overcoming on
this basis the socioeconoaic differences between the city and the country-
side. At the present tins drawn up on the basis of Jmt large cities luvs
been about 70 systens of settle-ant. where approxintely one- of

the population and alaoet half of the urban population is living. The
system of settlsaent are being transforsed sore and sore often into qmli-
tatively new for-nations. synthesizing in thenelvss the urban and rural types
of settleaent. Concentrated in any system of settle-eat. especially large
ones. is a considerable share of the m1 population of the oblasts in which
they are located.

At the present stage of mbanisaticn the forsation of new cysts: of settle-
sent seans the developaent and qualitative tramforntion of the city and
the countryside—traditionally isolated for-s of settle-ant in the past--
into interconnected unite in the fisssuork of a unified systes of settleaent
for the country. This does not seen. as certain scientists assuae.

18
you orncm. US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

settle-entuthe oramio Joining}! urban and rural population centers and
territories on the basis of growth in the ties between all elesents or
t

Webbesun at the stage '0! {creation of seam-oration: on the basis of con-

plioation of the syste- of relations between those
their center and the urban territories summing

and agricultural production. Therefore the min goal of state policy in
chum-by the uniﬁcation of the city end the village into a single socio-

spatial structure. This is determined. in turn. by

Iodern urbanization. First of all. by its intenotion with the processes
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The policy in the field of settlement should contribute first of all to

the development and distribution of productiVs forces and to increasing the
intensification of public production. to accelerating the processes of over-
coaing the socioecononio differences between the city and the country. to
bringing closer the level. conditions and way of life of urban and rural
residents. There appears in addition the necessity of working out two
different strategies of settle-ant developsent. This is conditioned by the
objective process of dividing the territory of the country into tic types:

a territory of already forced and developing systens of settlenent and an
interurban thinly populated once with sparse. prinarily rural settlesents.
Necessary on the territory of the first type is regulation of the established
systeas of settlsnent by some of realization of the progressive tealenciee
ofurbanisaticn. leading to overseeing the autonoq of the city and the
village. The approach to developsent of settle-ent on territories of the

territories of the two types the following points: planned regulation of the
processes of Joining urban and rural territories. industrial and agricultural
production; purposeful regulation of the processes of developsent and
cosplication of production. cultural and donestic and labor relations. Joining
population centers that are different in size and functional designation

Usually recognized as the basic features of interconnected systens of settle-
ment are. first of all. the forsation of a vast sons of intensive develop-ant
under the influence of two opposite tendencies: dispersal of the industry
and population of a large city on contiguous territories and increasing the

a me (instead of cclpact) lay-out and delineation of specialised functional
cones; third of all. spatial Joining of industry with intensive agriculture:
fourth of all. the formticn of a couple: oyster of coordination of urban

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concentration of production and population. the prey-ossive structural-
sectorisl shifts in the national econou leading to negation of the Very
fern of the cospaot city. the dying away of it as an independent.
autononcus fern of settles at.3 Along with this the opinion is «pressed

therefois is further developsent of the theory and a couple: of practical
sessures as the prerequisites for creating a ”sooioeconcsic sechaniss
capable of supporting the corresponding transforsation of the settlenent
process."5 The first attespts at solving this problea were generalised in
the concept of group system of settlenent. in which is stressed the sig-
nificance of the program-target approach to solution of econcsic ard social
problens of sodern settlement.

The processes of forsation of the econoaic basis of group system of
settle-est are tied in with the processes of fomticn of territorial-
seotorial production associations. for which 'beccning sore and sore
characteristic is the organisation of production based on the intonation
of the head enterprise. located in t central city. and the specialised
affiliates. loved beyond its lisits.“ The iaportant significance of for-
mtion of associations for developaent of the functioml and territorial
structures of settlement systess is obvious even from that as of 1 July
19?” Just in the six largest cities which are centers of group systess and
in the population centers of the corresponding oblasts--the Inningrad. noscow.
Gcr'kovskaya. Sverdlovshya. Kiev. and L'vovshyanzh percent of the
plants and factories mung up the association were located. and to their
share fell 36.1 percent of the personnel of all production associations and
39.3 percent of the output produced by then. The fact that the economic
basis of the group syste- is forned under the influence of progressive
tendencies in the structural clunges of productive forces. including as a
result of changes in the production-econosic structure of industry. the
min link of which is becoaing not an individual enterprise. but a coabi-
nation of thee. evidences the forsation of a mechanics of restraint

of the growth of large cities and intensive economic developaent of the
territories surrounding then. The correspodence cf the spatial structure
of settlesent systess to aodern tendencies of setting up fractional for:
of specialisation detersines the role of settlement systems as o mechanics
of realisation of eoonoaio effectiveness fro- the concentration of produc-
tion. Us are speaking in the given case not only about the "agglomeration
effect.” that is the econonic benefit fro- spatial concentration of produc-
tion and resources in a system of temtorially associated urban population
centers. but also about the effect which is yielded by a change to those
new for: of concentration like production associations and the new forms
of specialisation-am branch plants. specialised shops of large plants and
factories. and so on. Placeaent of then in population centers in the zone
of influence of lame cities is becoming an important prerequisite for
increasing the econosio effectiveness of complex developsent of settleaent
system. As calculations show. “in cities located in the zone of influence
of a very large city with s prOJectsd population of l.000.000-l.3)0.000
people. it is possible and econosically effective in the course of the

2].
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mture period to organize up to 25-30 branches of head enterprises with
the total nunber of elployees at uo,ooo.5o,ooo people and 8-10 indmtriel 9
service enterprises with the number of employees at 10.000-15.000 people.”

specialised branches and shops. This responds to the tasks of urban develop-
ment set forth in the “Basic Directions of Developsent or the 138R National
Economy for 1976-1980.”

specs beyond the limits of the ’arge citieeuthe Iain centers of the settle-
ment systems. The planning of the settle-ent system should be directed at

of the truiitionsl concepts of "city" and ”village“ as the chief units of
urban and mrel settlement. It is i-portent also to introduce new for: of
settlesent in the practice of territorial planning as low-level

units. to be used at all of its stages-«luring develop-mt of regional

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
50R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intensification of the whole aggregate of relation between the city and
the village. the increased coaplication of the structure of the production
sphere of the village and the change in the social structure of the rural
population in accordance with the desands of illlustrialiution of agricul-
ture and sgroindustrial integration. and there is nodernisation of the rural
way of life and so on.

However urbanisation still has not brought to life new territorial form

of orpniaation of the rural settle-ant process corresponding to the ob-
Jective process of the transition of the village to a new qualitative
state-macs autonosous to systea developaent interconnected with the
city. Therefore necessary on territories of the second type is the develop-
nent of other sethods of control of the developsent of the settlssent
process in cosparison with territories of the first type.

The urgency of developsent of new approaches to moranisation of rural
sottleaent is dsternined not only by the specifics of aodern urbanisation.
but also by the tasks of industrialization of agriculture. by the necessity
of iaproving its organisational and econosic for-s. It is beconing acre
an! sore inpcrtant for solution of this task to overoone the autonow of
rural settlesente on the basis of «pending the ties between the rural
locality am the city-wthe intersecterial and labor ties-«in the field

of geneul and vocational education. culture. Iansgessnt and so on.

One of the chief ferns of intensification of the ties between the rural area
and the city on the territories of the second type is the creation of
settlesent systels.

when working out neesures for isproveasnt of rural settlesent it is ilpor-
tant to consider first of all the coaplication of the Ike-up of the sphere
oftheuseoflabor intheruralarsaand thegrowthofthedenands ofths
rural population in the fields of labor. everyday life and culture. which
practically can. no longer be satisfied in the franework of an individml
village. even with the nodern level of asenities. The rural resident should
receive the opportunity to select the type of activity. occupation uni place
of work and to live under the conditions of a social environ-est providing
his with real opportunities for realisation of the basic feature of the
socialist way of life. All this is deter-med in considerable nsasure

by the laws of urbanization. leading to bringing the city and countryside
closer together by overcosing their autononous develop-ant. The process

of the increasing loss by the rural locality of the traditionally established
isolation frcn the city uhes further consideration of mral settlsssnt as
an independent problss incorrect. The aodsrn village is not a closed
systen. in the fraaework of which its chief socioeconcsic problens are
solved. Creation of settlsnent system in the rural locality will aloe it
possible sore effectively to oranise the vital activity of the rural popu-
lation in cosperison with reorganisation of the rural settlesent process on
the tasis of enlarge-est of autoncsom villages.

23
Iron onxcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

The new socioeconosic position of the countryside is being forsed in the
process of including settle-ants and territories as elesents with equal
rights in the couple! and dynaaic systea of settleaent. It is iaportant
to consider that the modern established and developing foras of settle-ent
are not an asorphcue suture of urban and rural population canted. and
territories. but a unified organisn with a specific ten-i rial an!
Nnctional structure. capable of purposeful develop-eat.

The arrival of the countryside at a higher level of qualitative develop-
sent is also a nnii‘estation of urbanisation. Just as the forsation of the
systeas of settlement transforaing the city. Such a dual character of the
process of urbanisation ensues fro- the deep leaning of it which. according
to A. Vishnevskiy’s definition. consists in that ”the historical process

as a whole engenders at a certain stage new conditions of the direct

interaction of people.“ with the realission of which ”processes of ren
organisation of the spatial sodiu- of habitation are also connected.“
This mans tlst the organisation in a rural locality of settlesent system
in which the interconnection of the city and the village is realised
corresponds to the internal laws of the aodern urbanisation process.

Possible. thm. is the reorganisation of a significant prt of the urban
and rural settleaent existing on territories of the second type on the basis
of forntion of interconnected systess unifying the urban and rural popu-
lation centers and territories with ccsprehensive soonoaic and sociocultural
developsent of the whole territory of the given oyster.“

Organisation of the systess of settlenent with a developed infrastructure
(particularly the social and tramportation) provides the population of
the rural locality and call urban settlesents with the opportunity of
enjoying those advantages which are accessible to the population of
established and developing settle-ant cysts. on territories of the first
type. This is first of all the real possibility of selecting the places
of work and the typesof activity. including without a orange in the place
of residence. and broader opportunities for least“ an occupation. for
education. advanced training. real access to infomtion. culture. and
broadening of couuucation. Thereby the coupler forss of settleaent will
contribute to the forsation of a new type of worker. possessing profes-
sional skills and a broad group of cultural and spiritual needs.

created socially equal conditions for realisation of all the vital activity
of the urban and rural population. the systess of settlesent will create
the conditions for keeping skilled personnel in the rural locality. It is
not an autonoaous large village. even with a asdern level of assnities.
taking shape as a result of settling together tron surrounding "unprosising"
villages. but an interconnected network of urban and rural settlesents of
different sise and functional purpose and in this seine the Joining of

the urban and the rural territoryuthis is the lost progressive for. of
reoranisation of the settlesent process under the conditions of the
unfolding industrialization of agriculture and the develop-ant of agro-
indmtrial integration. The purposeful creation of settle-eat system

2';
POI! OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICML USE ONLY

sents or the creation or groups of population centers in the hasework
or individual agricultural enterprises (which. in essence. is equivalent
to autonosous development of settlesente). Organisation of settlesent eye-

(or centers) of the eystes and with other settle-ents. The dewslopsent or
settle-ant system and the deVelopsent ot a highway and transport network

The practice of reconstruction of mral settlesent generally accepted

at the preoent tise is directed at reorganisation of the village itself
and is reduced to differentiation of rural population centers into pro-
sising. subject to consolidation and provision of asenities. and non-
prosising. subject to loss of population. Thus. aooogdine to the scheses
of regional planning out of the 1069.110 rural population centers existing
in the country at the tins of the 1970 census. it was planned to dishand
about 200.000. In a nuaber of oblasts of the BER 70-80 percent or the
settle-ants were deterained to he non-praising. In the Ukrainian 881! it

8 sillion people fros aore than 20.000 settle-ants.” The general

trend of reoranisation or the rural settlesent process at the present tins
is a sharp reduction in the nusber or rural settle-ants. Such an orienta-
tion is taken. for irstanoe. in the ”General Sohese or Settlsaent on the
Territory or the Ball." in which although it is proposed to rebuild the rural

locality. it is with the inclusion in their Ike-us or Jmt the network of
In addition it is

proposed for 220.000 population centers to undergo Just accelerated dis-
healing. and to {swerve out of the total nusber or settle-eats Jut

In evalmting positively on the whole the basic idea
of organisation of settlessnt system in the rural locality as the min
direction of reconstruction of the rural settlssent process. which equalizes
the lewd. conditions and way of life of urban and rural resiients. we

and the saving of outlays for develop-eat of territories as a result or
increasing the density all! nusber of stories of the residential building.

In our opinion. such an arguaent does not answer the sain question: on
what basis should we include in the group systeas. toned as an interconnec-
ted network or settlesents with a developed transport infrastructure.

25
m onxcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only the large villages well-provided with aaenitiss and tor what purpose
is it planned to eliainate a large part or the rural population centers.
Under the condition or trami'oreation or rural settlesent on the basic of
organisation or settlensnt systeas the creation or a whole couple: or
cultural and doasstic services in each village not only is ispoeeible. but
is also not advisable. since realisation of such Isasurss scene that the
has in fact should be enlarged to the sire of the cities. At the sale
tine the organisation in a rural locality of settle-ant systess will
yield the opportunity in a centralised way and on a higher qmlity level
to solve the problsns or cultural and dosestic services for ml resi-
dents. it will mks optional the organisation or a whole set of insti-
tutions in this sphere in each population center and me it possible to
preserve the established network or rural settle-ants of variom sires and
types. In connection with this the consolidation of rural cettleasnts {or
the purpose of providing then with amenities as a condition of inclusion
in the settlsasnt systea appars unwarranted. An increase in the density

residents first 01‘ all because in essence it deprives then or the oppor-
tunity to conduct private subsidiary taming. and it destroys the
established tenor of life. Stressed at the July 1978 Plenun ot the CPS"
Central Coaaittee was the necessity of orienting rural construction “to
providing the tanilies. as a rule. with individual well-med hoses

with attached {an plots an! cutsidi buildings for dossstic livestock. fowl,
and private seans of trampcrt.” 6

A well known sisplification of the problsn is also the substantiation of the
necessity of consolidation or rural settle-ants as a consequence of the
processes of concentration and specialisation of agricultural production.
of consolidation of agricultural enterprises. The structure of rural set-
tlesent should comider the basic clams in develop-em of agricultural
production and especially the processes of its concentration. However
there does not follow tron this the necessity of autosatically

sum-ting the rural settle-onto. since concentration of production in
scrioulture does not signify a Joining of wluultu‘al lands. The sub

antion of rural settlessnts increases the ties for deliv . o! wo rs
tothefield.tothe{araand back. '7 rke

non-choruses- sons of the ”HR. The sun sires o! the lots of agri-
cultural lands in sheet all cblasts or the sons (tor angle land. tron

1.6 to 6.0 boom-.3 tor tam. nos 0.9 to 2.15 hectares). the a or

plots-JIJ. ).'17 It is ilpossibls not to age. in this connection with
V. Arte-sake alri I. Poncnrenko. who «mess doubt about the advisability
of the mos-emeticns to plan for the future one settle-ant per tare.

26
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

especially in the non-chemosen sons with the presence in it of a large
nusber of irreducible ssall plots (sole than 1000 on a fare). a scattered
network of rural settlesente (am so villages 33 a fare) and a high cost
of resettlesent (LOGO-16.000 rubles per person). According to acne
calculations. the building and provision of asenities for prospective
settle-ants in the non-ohernosen sons will require not less than 50 billion
rubles. This scans that with the planned level of capital investsente

the cospleticn of the planed oranges in am settle-eat process will go

far beyond the lisits of the year 2000.1

Reorganisation of the countryside on the basis of its consolidation has
not stopped the outflow of population fros the rural area that is
superfluous for certain regions of the country and the process of

breakim up the network of rural population centers. In any regions of
the country the population is leaving not only the snll but also the large
rural population centers. Thus. in the Central eoonosio region along
with the reduction of the proportion of ssall population centers (up to
100 residents) by 9.3 percent. the share of large settle-ant with a popu-
lation of soc-1.000 people has decreased by 3.? percent. Also being
lowered is the degree of concentration of Ewlation in settleaents with
the nusber of residents at 100-500 people. This is evidence. in essence.
of the uncontrollability of rural settlesent in the frasework of a policy
aised at stsrp reduction in the nusber of rural settle-eats. the pro-hing
nature of which is detersined by their sins. This is connected first of
all with tint consolidation of rural settlessnts is‘ carried out in fact
without taking account of the preferences of the rural residents in selec-
tion of the place of residence and work. the social environ-eat and so on
and therefore the outflow of population. and especially of skilled per-
sonnel. m: the countryside still has not been able to be stopped.

The approach to reorunisaticn cf the rural settlesent process. the Iain
goal of which is to overseas the isolation of rural villages. should

be based first of all on refinesent of the very concept of a ”musing"
village. upceure and study of the factors of the pro-icing nature of
rural settle-ants will nice it possible to find an approach to classifica-
tion of the rural area for the purpose of singling out the territories

on which organisation of settlesent systese is the not effective. In
our view. such factors my bet firstly. access to the nearest town.
located ina.rural locality. an outlet to a route of at last cblast
significance: secondly. the attractiveness of the smrrouuiinp. thirdly.
the density of the settlesents and the population density: and fourthly
the level of esploysent in the rural econosy. In any case—with inclmicn
of the population center in tin systes of settle-eat or placesent outside
of it—the pro-icing nature of the rural settle-ant should be detersined by
a couple: of factors. ﬁnely the possibility of inclusion in the settle-
sent systes in any ways predeterninse the pro-ism nature of tho rural
settle-ants. The viability of settlesent systess in the rural area should
be deterlined by their potentials without additional capital investsents
toward expansion of the sphere of application of labor an! particularly
for developsent of nonagricultural types of activity. The creation for

21
son omcm. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

rural residents of conditions in settleaent system close to the urban con-
ditions for learning and choosing an occupation. for ssdical care and so
on signifies a realisation of the ”social” factors of the effectiveness of
production and mking up for insufficient attention to the 'humn" factor
of production. A coupler approach to developmnt of the urban and rural
locality in settle-cut system sakes it possible on the basis of concentra-
tion of invest-ants to detersine the lost rational sequence of their
utilisation and to cvsrccae the well known duplication of investsenis and
their scattering.

It should be noted that capital invest-ents in developmnt of settlemnt
system cannot be regarded as diverting scans fron the rural locality.

0n the contrary. investsents in developmnt of a city or a chain of rela-
tively snall population centers as support centers of the developmm of
a Vast rural region. in which nonagricultural types of activity are being
developed. the service sphere is concentrated. a social environ-ent is
being formd and so on. uill directly further the developsent of the rural
locality and contribute to the solution of the chef social problem-
preservation of the rural population and equaliseticn of the socioeccncsic
and cultural differences between the city and the country. _‘l‘he social sig—
nificance of these problem is so great tint it cannot be «pressed in
nonetary terse (for instance. in outlays for providing aunities to rural
eettlemnts) since not all elesents of the benefit fro- solution of the
social problem of the village can be subjected to such an evaluation.

The progressive processes of formtion and ccaplication of the ccspcsition

of the production sphere of the village owing to growth in nonagricultural
types of activity an! the change in the social structure of the rural popu-

lation are the real econcaic basis of craniution of settlemnt system on
territories of the second type.

Mover at the present tise a nuaber of the problem connected with
ormiution of settlesent system in the rural area remins to be worked
out. Thus. it has not been established to what degree the existence of a
city in a rural locality and its sise stimulate econoaic and social develop-
aent cf the villus. or the growth of its intersectorial. labor and other
relations with the city. In addition. it is ilpcrtant to establish the
possibility of using the established network of smll population centers

as the cronising nucleus or core of the settlemnt system to be set up

on rural territories which do not have cities the growth of which it would
be expedient to prcscte.

In this connection we will note that the atteapte to uplift the econoqy of
backward. primrily rural regions undertaken in the last decades in the
United States were concentrated arouni the idea of creating so-called
“growth centers“ as the support centers of developsent of rural terri-
tories. and especiallythe detCIinaticn of their else.

In this case the concept of “gratth center“ was not identical to the concept
of “growth point“ and was defined “as a cosplax consisting of one or acre

28
M OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ccmnities or population centers which. taken together. provide or
should if possible provide a nueber cf mnctions-ocultural. social.
for providing eeplcyeent. trade functions and functions in the service
sphere for itself and its adjoining rural hinterland.“21

As acknowledged by Aeerican scholars. the two largest progress with respect
to voluee of capital invatsents and coverage of territories-4M progress
for regich developesnt of Appalachia and the xrcgras "for public

works and econoaic developeent'nhad liaited success first of all
because the resources were distributed not in a concentrated way. but were
scattered aaong very snlla “growth oenters.“23 The choice of ssall
villages as "growth centers" proved to be an essential error of the
program of developaent of backward rural reacns in the United States.
Obvicmly detersinaticn of the sire of the center with which the rural
territories are connected in a unified rural-urban structure. sore pre-
cisely the "threshold“ with which is foresd the ability of this center to
effect the sooiceconoaic and cultural developeent of the urban and rural
population centers and territories gravitating tourds it. is one of the
chief problees of cruniuticn of settleeent system in the rural locality.

In our opinion. the city (or interconnected group of settle-ante) in the
rural locality as the focal center of developeent of the surrounding rural
region can be the deciding factor in supporting its viability. Such a
center inevitably will contribute. firstly. to increasing the cosplsmity
of the structure of the production sphere of the rural locality an!
especially to intensive utilisation of territories near the city. secondly.
to expansion of the sphere of application of labor for rural residents owing
to higher structural-functioml developesnt of the suburban cones and in-
tensive peMulus-like aoveeents of rural residents. which are imreeeingly
coeing fcmrd as alternatives to rural-when sigraticn. In this case
eoving the whole f‘aaily to the city becoees optional. which contributes to
keeping in the aural locality sons of the labor rssmross released fro-
aciculture. In addition. the city in the rural locality is the lass for
forntion of egrcindustrial coaplsxes and especially the organisation of
production facilities for processing agricultural raw Deterial. the output
of certain types of equip-ant for agriculture and so on.

Thus. the approach to settlseent mugs-ent on territories of the second
type should be based on consideration of the sin feature of urbrniseticn
and evolution of the se'ttlessnt processn-overcoaing the autonoecm nature
of the city and the village and the anlgamtion of thee in a single
socio-ssetiel structmas. Such an approach dennds especial flexibility
with "erect to asking planning decisions in each case depending on the
regional and local conditions.

The mraniseticn of rural settlsnnt. aiesd at keeping skilled cadres in
the rural area and equalizing the working and living conditions of urban
and rural residents can be ilpleesnted only when account is taken of the

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

brood group of socioeconosic preferences of therurel population. of its
growing tie-mic in the stone of lsbor. everydsy life. culture snd leisure.

The objective processes of reorganising the settlesent process end pr-
ticulsrlq the developssnt of couples: interconnected cysts-s of settle-
nent dean! s review of traditional urben developsent epprcechee to regu-
lstion of the city end the village ss independent for: of settlesent
The stste policy in the field or settle-ent should be crunised taking
into account. on one hand. the specifics of evolution of the settlenent
process on the territories or the two types mi the special features of
' the sodern urbsnisstion process. involving both the city end the village
in system settlesent. end. on the other hsnd. the demo of the popu-
lation itself reading settle-eat. The cosplex spprcsch to develop-ant
of urbsn end rurel populstion centers and territories is the prerequisite
for {oration of a unified unionwide cysts. of settlensnt snd further
isprovessnt of territorial plsnninc.

Footnotes

1. Best DJ}. lhodshsyev A.V. Icohetkov. FJI. Lie . "Sisten
rssssleniys v 3881!" [settlsssnt Systes in the USSR . Isdetel'stvo
“Rhone-ﬂu”. 197?. p 26.

2. v.1. unin. reineye eomniye soohineniy" [co-piete collected nuke].
V01 26. D We

3. MG. Vishnevskiy. ”Econcsic Probless ct Develop-s t of Form or Urben
Settle-eat“ 'Prcblen sovresennoy urtsnisstsii“ Problem of Mei-n
Urbsnisstion . Ind. 'Ststistilu". 1972): A. locintkov. "SOciOeoonosio
Aspects or 11ar Developssnt" (vomr llama. no 10. 1975).

0. Pchslintsev. 'On the Question of the Socioeconcnic ﬂsohsnisn of
Overccsing the Differences Bebtesn the City and the Country“ ('Vse-
soyusnsye muchnsys konhrentsiyst Problem] preodole sotsisl‘no-
ekcnosioheskikh reelichiy seshiu gorcdos i derevney” All-Union
Scientiﬁc Conference: Problem or Overoosing the Socioeconosic
Differences Between the city sad the Village]. Mh edition. noeoou.

1975 I YuJ. Pivsvu-ov. ”Sovresennsys urbsniutsiys' [Morn
Urhsnustion . Ind. “Statistih'. 19763 0.6. Momsv. A.V. Kocheﬂtov.
mt. netengurt. ”Sistelu rssseleniye v 831!“ end others.

lb. .8. Pohelintsev. Wrbsniution. a onsl Develop-eat sad the m

eoieetirie en! technin workerJ' arm I mmncmm
moor. Vol in. No 1. 1978. pp 7-8).

50 11:16.. p es

6. 0n the hsis of this concept st the pusent tile in our country s
‘Genusl Soho-e of Settlenent on the Territory or the 053” he been
worked out. in Ihich proposed for the ﬁrst tise in donestic urban

3O
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

9.

10 .

11.
12.

13.

1b.

15.
16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

develop-mt notice in a couple): of uecouree for inprovin; settle-
ncnt with the me of group eyetene an the rein trend in recon-
struction of the eettlenent proceee for the mture (eee. for instance.
G. Ponin. ”Soviet Urhen Develop-cut At e lieu Stage” (WT. No 11.
mu): m. Kcohetkov. M. mum. “General Schene of Settle-eat
on the Territory or the USSR: Gcele. Problem. Solutions" (Izvm'm
AN scan. 3mm momma. lie 5. 1976. en! cthen).

Seen 13.6. MSW.“ MV. Kochetkcv. 7.". Motown-t. ”318%“
neeeleniye v 8881!“. p 550

u.V. Suhctekiy. "Buvitiye cb“yedineniy..v prowehlennoeti“
Develcpaant ct Acecoietiom in Induetry]. Indetel'etvo ”hula".
19770 P e

6.8. lionkin. "Problem of Forution of the Bconcnic Basic of Group
System of Pcpuhtic Centers“ (in the collection “Problem ekcncuki
gredcetrcitel'otn" Problem or the Bocnonicc or um Develop-em].
Kiev. ”Nivel'nik". 197a. p as).

E”. 'Printeipy forniroveniye mppcvykh eieten neeelennykh nee "
Principlee of Pontion cf Grasp Syeteu of Population Center: .

Stroyiedet. 1978. p 1b.
vow: nmscm. no to. 1978. p 17a.

Inclueion c: e runl lccelity in e eettlenent ente- dcee not uolude
pneemtion ct eutonoecue m1 eettleeent. in urticuler. in the
south of Siberie end the Per Beet. in oertein lesions or Centrel Aeie.
hukheten. the cerpethienc en! othere.

See: V. Artenenko. I. Ponc-renkc. “Settle-eat end Co a: Regionel
Plenum.” (mum sn'smco WAIST". lo 6. 197 . p 83 .

Sect 'Regioml Settle-ent end Regionl P ." “ram gado-
otroitel'otve. Sbcrnik neuchrvkh trudcv' Central Scientific Beoeerch
en‘l Plenum: Institute for "then Development. Collection of Scientific
um]. 19; . p 30.

80" We. P “1e

mvm. a July 1978. p 3.

"Prcievoditel'me oily lechernoee sow BER“ [Productive Forces
of the lonohernonee Zone of the 33133 . Iaietel'etvc “m1". 197?.
pp 22. 23. $1.

31
[OR OFFICIAL USE OI!“
18.

19.

21.

22.

23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. Artenenko. I. Pononarenko. "Settle-ant and Couple: Regional
lamina." (momma swsxoco KmZYAYSTVA. No 6. 1976. p 8;).

V. Stern. “Raye of Develop-em: of M1 Settle-onto of the Nonoherno-
zen Zone of the lat-BR" (VOW lemma. No 10. 19715. p 52).

See: Ihid“ p 85.

B.J. Berry. “Growth Centers in the American Urban Syeten.“ Vol 1.
cﬁ.b. "388.. 1m. p “8e

Thus. in the progra- tor "public work: an! eoononio develop-em."
more than one-third of the aubeidiee use directed to population cen-
ters with a population of leee than 2.500 people and over half to
those with a population or lees than 5.000 (Regional Develop-ant and
Planning: International Perspectives. mited by LR. luklineki.
“ﬁe“. Ins. pp 1W1u7)e

um. mmen. “El-proving Aeceee to Scone-1c Opportunity: Non-otto-
politan labor ﬂax-hate in an Urban Society.“ Cub. thee" 1976.
pp 163-1616.

OOHRIGM‘: Indetel'etvo ”Pravda“. "Voproey ekononiki". 1978

10%8
G01 1823

32
Iron omcm. use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mminou

"DC 9ll.J(I-Ob)(57l.$l+57l.6)
MOTION“. acme 20mm 0' Ill! mm Mil 2MB

lioecw um‘nu M9111 IIMIK $83!. stun omncnrsnum in lueeien
lo 6. lav-Dec 1978 pp 65.79

[Article hy r. Ye. leklenov, V. l. Sevoet'yenov end I. l. Spehtor of the
088R Acedeey oi Sciencee' ler Beetern Science Center’e Pecitic Oceen lneti-
tute of Geogrephy: "Prectionel lconoeic Zoning of the leetern leyhel-Anur
lhinlinc lepect Zone (Concept end Ilethode)"]

[‘l‘ext) Proceeding iron the principlee of end experience

in econonic-geogrephic toning eccuuleted by Soviet eci-
entiete. the euthore outline e hroed concept of toning
which coneidere the inpect of the ‘l‘reneSih [l‘reneSiherien
Ieilroed) end MK [leylul-Anur lbinling, oi the preeent
end long-renge production-£unctionel etructure of the lerg-
eet populetion centere end the eveilehility of neturel.
lehor end other reeourcee in the territory heing eueined.

am Inpect on lent Siherien end Per Beetern lconoeic Zoning. lcononic ton-
ing occupiee en inportent piece in econoeic foreceeting end long-renge ne-
tionel econoeic develop-eat plenning. Dy reflecting the ohjectively exiet-
ing geogrephic differentietion of the econoey which hee evolved end of ne-
turel reeourcee end conditione. ee veil ee their ectuel end potentiel eco-
noeic interreletionehipe within territoriee dittering in ecele eed cherec-
ter. econoeic toning creetee the heeie tor eheping concepte of netionel eco-
nonic developnent (or euch territoriee end leye down the requieitee (or the
territoriel plenning end eenegeeent of regionel developnent. lcoeoeic ton-
ing pleye e epeciel role for territoriee of inteneive econonic utilitetion.

The 088! Goeplen hegen toning leerern Siberie end the [er Beet heck in the
1920‘e. lven then. the economic region nee onderetood to be e link in the
netion'e couple: netionel econoeic eyeten. end toning hed to provide oppor-
tunitiee tor building “regionel econoeic developeent plene heeed on the heet
uee oi ell potentiel et ninieel expendituree" ("Voproey ekononicheehogo rey-
oniroveniye asst" [Queerione or case lconoeic zoom]. 1957. p 103). n.
heeic toning linh one end reneine the lerge economic regione of leetern 8i-
herie end the Ier Beet. end neey vorhe heve been devoted to euhetentieting

33
FOR ontcm. us: om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that toning (Po-Ia. 1960; lolooovakiy. 1970; notw. 1973; "lkononichookayo
goograliyo 888!" [Icoaonic coography of tho 0883], 1973; lolouoov. 1976; Kio-
tanov, 1976. and othoro).

‘l‘ho accoloratod dovolopnont oi productivo lotooa in tho oaotorn rogiono and
tho incroaoing conoloxity ol thoir torritorial-ocononic otrncturo havo ro-
quirod noro fractional toning. ‘rho adniniotrativo-ooononic rogiona -- oh-
laoto and htayo .. vhich havo ovolvod havo cono to play an ovor-incroaoing
rolo in rogional dovolopnont (lodoohov, 1973. and othoro); thoao rogiona on
in turn dividod into introohlaot togiono. or ao thoy aro troquantly callod
in tho ocononic-goographic litaraturo. oinply "fractional rogiona" (tabla l).
A noro or looo otahlo thtao-lovol ocononio aoniag oyoton haa nov ovolvod for
Sihoria and tho [or loot. ‘rho ‘rranaSihorian litinline (Rana ih) ia tho ha-
aic ocononic pivot linking tho najor ocononio togiona. ohlast ocononic ra-
giono. and tho hull: of tho fractional ocononic rogiono (including noarly all
tho noot-dovolopod onoo) in thio oyoton.

rablo l. Southorn Par loot Fractional Boone-it Zoning Varianto

 
   

      
  
    
    

mm..- N. K. We own:

     
   

  
 
  

. Ctmaooo A. .\.. f H. A. n. 6 o-ov-na
...qu :- - wrists; 511m 3 1'» zﬂz‘a- m“? a.
ao- huuo'no mono (‘53:.3” .‘ arm-noun. «om
Cour-o! tonal uni-two-
mm woo-u «Om

 

«was: haw-x. k: ‘. ""

 

M-iniotrativo “nito
"notional ocononic rogiona colinoatod by variouo authora
D. A. Golovkin. l. V. D'yakonon. I. G. ﬂoyoraon. Yo. 8. Shapilo (1962)
II. I. Shul'lan. A. a. Stoponov "Ilooiyohaya £odarataiya. 'Dal'niy Voo-
toh' (ootiya Sovotakiy Soyuz)” [looaian adoration. “tar Boat" (3o-
viot Union Sorioo)]. 1971
3. A. I. Gladyahov. A. V. lulihov, I. I. Shapalin (197‘)
6. Horho of tho Scone-i“ Dopart-ont oi tho USS! Acodony of Scioncoo’
[continue on pogo tolloning]

o o

.0”.-

3"
ton onxcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[loy to ‘l‘ablo l. continua tron procoding pago]

Par Baotorn Scianco Concord! tho uningrad Branch of tho Stato
City Planning lnatituta. and tho cidroanorsoproyokt

mu

7. 0. A. tinbal'chich (1975)
8. Amrohya Oblaot

(A) l.
2

3.
(I) l.
2.
3.
(c) 1.
2|

5.
(B) l.
2.

Ant aroa (Primrokiy)
Mountain-taiga (Gornotayozhnyy)
loyako-luroinakiy
Amro-Zoyakiy

Nounainoua North (cornyy Savor)
loyako-Iuroinakiy

Amr laboring araa

Northvoat oouotain-taiga
Svooodnonokiy
Zoyoko-lurainokiy agroinduatrial
antorn Aunt (zapadnoanurakiy)
Northorn Mr (Savoroanurokiy)
loyako-Svobodnonokiy

Soothorn Amt (Yurhnoanurakiy)
luroinako-Iaychikhinakiy
Bootarn nor (Zapadnoanurokiy)
8o ladahinoko-Urgal 'okiy

9. Khaoarovakiy Kray (aouthorn portion)

(A) l-

6.
(I) l.

Yovroyokaya Antone-ova Oblaat

Urgal'akiy

moarovokiy

lhobarovak-Uaauri aroa (Rhaharovakoyo Priuaour'yo)
Inuouol'akiy

Yovroyokaya Anton-our Oblaot

Control rogiona

Iortharn Am: aroa (Snornoyo Primr'yo)
Khabarovok-Uaouri aroa

Iirobidrhanakiy agroinduotrial

Khabarovol: induatrial -

Rouoool'ak-A-Ir induatriol

lloauri aroa industrial (Priuoouriyakiy induotrial)
Riahnoa-urakiy

Sovotakaya Gavan' induatrialotranaport contor
lizhnoo-urokiy

(0) liorko of tho tor-or Laboratory of Anurokayo Obloat Inductrial Do-
volopoant and Diotrioution of lndoatry (V. c. Churoin. ot a1.)

m oxpandin; construction of tho IayblvA-nr

Mainline which. an A. N. Ko-

aygin aid at tho 25th Party Congrooa, "ia collod upon to bocoon a povortul
law: (or tho ocononic dovolop-nt of our far-oaatorn ragiooa" and tho aco-
nooic otiliution. now boson. of an onornouo torritory. tho ocononic gravi-
tational rono. havo lod to tho nacooaity of ro-oxonining oooovnat tho viova

35
FOR omcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which have evolved on the economic zoning of nany eeatern regione. Thin
lainline ie the powerful new econonic pivot of the 088R Beat and will con-
nect the practically unutilired territoriea adjacent to it. which poeaeee
very rich natural reeourcee, and focua their econonic interaction. Thie ia
already neceaaitating that we reveal the problene and directione of econonic
develop-ant of the IA! econonic inpact tone and define ite place in the eye-
ten of econonic zoning for Beatern Siberia and the Per Beat.

llaw centere and ranger of econonic develop-ant. acne of which will create
new regione at the intraoblaet level. will ariae aa the mainline in put
into operation.

The exiatenca of a apecific zone of route econonic impact ia obvioue to all
IAlI reeeerchera, but there are divergent ideaa about the ecope, character
and forne of ite utilisation. due to different underatandinga of the etatua
of thia tone relative to the circunjecent econonic givena. The varioua
pointa of view are largely repreaented, for exanple, in the worha of V. B.
8ochava (1975) end 0. A. Kibal'chin (1975). V. I. Sochava delineatee the
long-range economic-geographic ephere of influence of the IAII, including in
it both individual territorial induatrial and agroinduetrial eyetena of the
eouthern part of Beaten Siberia and the Far Beat. Sinilar view. are held
by a nunber of geographere and econoniete (taraeov. 19710; Shnitaer, 1976).
who view the minline being built here aa a region-generating axie of high

taxonomic rank. F. V. D'yahonov (1977) and It. ll. lasanehiy (1977) aleo view
the Mil aa a neat inportant level for conpreheneive develop-nt of produc-

tive forcea of the eaatern regione of the 0883.

0. A. Kibal‘chich (1975) doee not eingle out an independent ml none. but
viewe it no an area in which a nunber of eaetern USSR regione perfoning
different functiona in the union-wide diviaion of labor and nakim differ-
ent denande on that territory interact. ‘l'hie point of view hee been eup-
ported increaeingly by eubeequent reaearch (lledeahev, 1976; ushenteev,
l976; Sinonov et al.. l976, and othere). It ia noted in theae worhe that
IAN conetruction and eubaequent econonic utilisation of the zone are a ain-
gle regional-coupler problen. but one which will be eolved differentially
for each adniniatrative-econonic region with coneideration of ite potential
and etructure.

At the eane tine. delineation of a apecific belt adjacent to the route an a
zone of i-ediate econonic gravitation to whoee econonic utilization the MI!
will extend ite epecial influence in juetified (Sochava. 1975; Socheva et al..
l975. and othere). There ie a certain unity in thia narrower interpreta-
tion of the Ni zone aa a apringboard belt for utilizing the natural re-
eourcee of the adjacent territoriee. for concentrating extractive produc-
tion and ehipping out its output to other regione of the country and for

export .

A najority of the authore think utilisation of the aone'e natural reeourcee
will be noet efficient if chaine of 8-9 territorial-production conplewea are

36
FOR OFFICIAL use my
FOR OFFICE“. USE ONLY

croatod (tihal‘chich. U73; Ayaonhorg. l976; Hnalonnihov at al.. l976. and
othora). Ilowovor. adaquato substantiation haa not yat boon found for tho
apocitica and atasoo of tho (ornation and dowolopnont of tarritorial-produc-
tion conplonoo of dittaront taxononic ranlra. for thoir atructuro and intor-
rolationahipa with axiatin; olonanta of tho aconooy.

‘l'ho W Zono in tho lconooic Zoning Syatan. Tho intraatructuro in gonoral
and ita tranaport linha in particular oxart a groat influonco on for-in; tho
torritorial atructuro of tho productivo forcoo of tho tar But. which will
continua to ho a rogion of roaourcoa oriantation for tho i-adioto (utura.
tho rogion'a loading routo. tho tranaSih. waa and rooaina tho pri-ary lovor
for utilizing tho aouthorn and control torritorioo of tho Var loot. thia
tranaport mainline to tho coo-on link to a wajority o! tho noat inportant
tarritoriol-production atructuroa of tho aouthorn aono and datarninoo tho
.onoral outlinoo o! thoir linoar-junction natura. It haa ahapod a broad araa
of oconooic intluonco in tho northorn and aouthoaatorn aoctiona. ‘rho rail-
road boins built and tho torritory now hain; daoignatod tho MI! Iona aro oh-
vioualy oaaontiallv atill in tho aphora of influonco of tho ‘l'ronoSih. ‘l'ho
‘l'ranoSihorian mainline and tho ocononic and aciontific potantial dovolopad
along it aarvo aa tho aupport haao for conatruction of tho now railroad. 0n
tho othor hand, conatruction of tho MM and utiliution of tho aono'o natural
raaourcoa will graatly "doforo" tho torritorial atructuroa which hava ovolwod
in tho oconony of tho aouthorn aono of tho Par Boat. thia "dotornation” will
occur. firat. duo to tho for-ation hora of now production linho and thoir in-
tordopondonco to ono oxtont or anothor with oniotin; linka and. oocond, duo
to tho roatructurin; and rooriantation of a nuhor of oxiating production
facilitioa in roaponao to now donanda and opportunitioa.

Ono apocitic of tho I»! no a now rogion-ganaratin; axia in tho fact that
thia routo ia hoinc laid noarly parallol and rolativoly cloao to tho ‘l'rana-
olh (150-300 In apart in tho oaotarn portion). tho IN! aa a wholo will ho-
gin to play a poworful rogion-ganoratin; rolo ainilar to that of tho ‘l‘rana-
aih in tho futuro and will basin ahaping ita own aphoro of oconn-ic influonco.
Ao a roault. thora will ho auhatantial aupori-pooition and intorooction of
both aonoa of acono-ic influonco and a broad tono of intororouto intoraction
will ho tor-ad. fhua, tho tona of am intluonco ouat not ho viowod oithar
aa an oniatin; nor ao a proapoctivo indopondont ocononic rogion. [meant-
in; roaoarch nuot procoad tron tho concopt of ohaping and dowoloping an in-
togral torritorial atructuro for tho tar loot oconouy within tho oaatorn por-
tiona of tho trana ih and am.

‘raaha corroaponding to tho ocononic dowolop-ant goala of both tho country
aa a wholo and individual largo ocononic rogiona. ohlaata (kraya) and intra-
ohlaot ragiona will ho raaolvod during tho courao of conotruction of tho
layhal-Alur Iailroad and auhaoquont utilization of ita aono. Concrotiu-
tion of thoao taoka on! tho aoouonco in which thoy aro to ho aolvod flow
tron apocitic co-hinationa of linitad roaourcoo .. financial, labor. fuol-
powor. raw ootarialo .. on tho ono hand and tho difforont national ocononic
roquirononta within aaatorn torritorioo of varioua ranka on tho othor at
apociiic otagoa. All thia pradotorninoa a wltiplc-goal hiararchical

37
ron orncm. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approach to econonic zoning. In order to refine the utilization goale and
(one. the («notional conpleteneee of nanage-ent and degree or interdeterni-
nacy oi the eleunte of the production iteelf within the (rework of epeci-
tic territoriee. with coneideration of the adninietretiva-econoeic toning
hierarchy. not be correlated in each epeciiic inetence (eee diagran).

hierarchical Adeinietrative-lconoeic Zoning Diagree

 

 

 

 

 

TWW- ‘l’eppmopmw
(l) emmm (2) emu-occur
mm W
W mum-n1 .
(3) conme picnwluu (’0) W ‘
_._._._._.__.__._._.___._ _._..: '-
5 : “I
(5) i «mogul mm .
carer's. xp'aﬁ. AW m )‘poaue |
:IZIZIZI {ZIZCIIZIZIZI:f:.‘:.’:3:f:::I:
l :
2 ( i '
(a; I ‘ 3)
encampment! maul tenants-men
paﬂon m
--———--c uranium: rennin and . .
$10 ------- ---- mnpaeanuut yum: WW Manna
ll _. ..... .. optimum-mace»: ypoe-nu

l. renitorial-adeinietretive hierarchy
2. territorial-econolic hierarchy

3. Union republic

lo. 0hlaet. kray. A588

5. Dover adeinietrative region

6. Large econoeic region

7. Ohlaet-level econoeic euhregion

8. Fractional cconouic region

9. Direction of goale coordination

to. Direction of reeourcee-helence coordination
ll. target-progra- levele

the heeic approach to econonic zoning ie a certain relative independence of
the eanageeent etrnctnre iron the force of territorial-econoeic coherence.
ae vell ee the fact that the manage-ht functiona can he nore eeeily coor-
dinated and halancod (vhich ie in eeeence alvaye neceeeary) ea conpared with
production integration. It ie therefore alvaye poeeihle in principle for
the adniniatrative-territorial and territorial-econo-ic entitiee to not cor-
reepond coepletely. given the condition that inco-pleteneee of the one ie
conpaneated for in certain eeeenre by a eore conplete etructure of the
other.

38
90: orncuu. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iaoad on a targot-prograno approach to tho prohlon of utilising tho Mu
Iona (A. c. Aganhagyan. V. P. Hochin. Ya. I. Ayunharg. at al.. 1975. 1977;
Aryanin at al.. 1976; Vaailanho. l977, and otharo). it hao boon ouhaittad
that than nuot ha a datinita corraopondanca batwaan tho oyotaa of aulti-
lawal national acononic Iona-utilisation goalo and tho oyotan of acononic
rogiono. it haing nacaooary to dawolop corraoponding dowalop-ont prograno
for aach ouch ragion and it ohviouoly hoing daoiraahla to croata intordo-
part-antal torritorial aanogaaont-coordination orgono to inplanont thooo
prograoo. Much attantion hao racontly boon paid to tha nocaooity of croat-
ing ouch aanagaoant organo (Popow. 1977; D'yahonov. 1977. and othoro). ci-
van tho oconoaic toning of tho country'o oaotorn tarritory with conoidara-
tion of tho long-torn proopacto for om tona utilization. tho coaponanta of
thin rona nuot ha viawad at oaworal torritorial lawalo oi-ultanoouoly. At
tho 088R lawal (including tho RSI“). tho om tono Iuot ho dawolopod in ac-
cordanca with otatawido goalo. with conoidoration of tho contralizod diatri-
hution of linitad raoourcao (capital inwootunto. labor and Iatarial-tachni-

cal raoourcao) and of aatahliohing tho ratoo of minline conotruction. tha
oaquanca in tho which tho noot ioportant natural raoourcco aro to ho utilo

iood. oociodaaographic and apart policiao. and othoro.

For Baotarn Sihoria and tho tar loot ao a whola. tho prinry took io to
owitch in tho productiwa forcoo of tho tona in otagoo to tho national ocoo
nonic couplauo which hawo alroady boon davalopad in thaoo rogiono. In thio
particular inotanca, conaidaration mot ha giwan to tho haoic regional no.
tural and oocioaconoaic difforoncao. and tho long-tango om aconoay out to
intortacod with tho opacialirotion and otructura of tho acooony of thoaa
largo ocononic rogiono which hawo alraady awolwad. laood on thio. tho MM
tono io diwidad into two ooctoro. a waotcrn oactor (within laotorn 8ihoria)
and an oaotorn oactor (within tho Iar laotorn acononic rogion). Ono opoci-
fic o! tho waotorn ml actor in ito otatuo ao a ralatiwoly dovolopad ra-
gion with otaady opacialization and a divoroo infraotructura. nigh onorgy
availability and tho proaanca of a powariul conotruction haoo aro charactar-
iotic of thio rogion ao a whola. Ito ralatiwo proximity to tho country'o
wootorn rogiono and ito ranga of natural raoourcao will facilitata pratoro
ontial oriontation of tho waotarn Mil ooctor acono-y towardo intraunion ro-
quiro-onto. ao wall ao towardo motoring tho northarn rogiono of uotorn
Sihoria and Yahutiya.

Spocifica of tho oaotorn I»! oactor, which includoa Anurokaya Ohlaot, Kha-
harowolxiy Kray and tha adjocant lowar adniniotratiwo rogiono of Yahutohayo
“SI. aro:

a) lowar anorgy availability on conparod with Baotarn Sihoria and a
loon-dowolopod intraotructuro (conotrmtion. production-tranoport and oocial);

h) nocoooity of nora intanoiwo initial procaooing of individual natural
rooourcao on tho opot, duo to extra. raootanaoo tron conouaoro;

c) critical ohortago of labor rooourcoo, oopacially highly-ohillod onoo;

d) hora (aworahla natural conditiono (inprowing ao ono Iowoo out);

a) ralatiwoly hattar dawalopad local food haac;

f) oignificant oriantation of tho ontiro Far Iaotorn oconooly towardo
oxport-i-port tioo. fora-oat with countrioo of tho Pacific Ocaan haoin.

39
ran orncm. use can
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tho ahovo-notod (oaturoo of tho wootorn and aoatorn portiono of tho MN tono
aro avon noro dittorontiatad within tho houndarioa of tho autononouo rapuh-
lica. ohlaoto and hrayo. Prohloao of cloooly coordinating ocononic otruc-
turoa. oapacially along tho linoo of aorwico, auxiliary and local produc-
tion. lood oupply, davolopins tho conotruction hooo, and ac on. ara oolvod
at thia lavol. Tho dovolop-ont of actual and long-rango roaourca halancoo
(natural. labor. natarialo) io alao nacoooary at tho lovol oE ouch adninio-
tratiwo-ocononic rogiona.

Continuod diiiorontiation of tho goalo and taoho of utilising apocific tar-
ritorioo and tho formation of torritorial-production conplaxao raquiroo tho
dolinaotion o! rogiona o! intraohlaot ronh and tho incluoion in than of ap-
propriota ooctora of tho om ond TranaSih oona.

Concopt and Nathoda of 'ractional lconouic Zoning. ‘l'ho axporionco accuu-
latod in ocono-ic utiliution of tho oaotorn and northarn rosiono or our
country and ito gonoralioation ponit tho aooortion that tho haoic principlo
of tho initial otapoo of tho acononic utilioation of tho om nono in tho con-
prohonoiwo uoo for thio purpooa of tho oocioocononic potantial of tho aouth-
orn rogiono and tho tonation on that haoio of two-link, nutually-ouppla-
nntin; (coqanaatory) territorial-oceanic atructurao. Tho pivotal alo-
nanto of ouch atructuroo will ha tho noridian tranoport routoo connoctins
tho MN and 'i‘rana8ih. Tho soot dovolopad induotrial-tranaport contaro:
Showorodino. Swohodnyy, 17m. Zayah. Oral and othoro. mat ha dovalopod

at tho intorooction of thooo "lion-onto" hotwaon tho latitudinal trunk linoo.

thorn can ho varioua for-a of offactiwa acononic intoraction in ouch torri-
torial otructurao. muo, atahlo north-aouth tiao have alroady hoan davalopod
along oorvico linao. Conatruction Iatorialo and atructuroa for conotruction
in tho Ml oona aro hoing produced in tho TranoSih cono (including hoyond
tho tar-oaatarn oactor of tho lino); road-building oquip-nt ia hoin; oor-
wicod thara, tho food haao for tho I”! ma population in hoin; dowolopod
tharc, and oo forth. Taking into account tho otrict «land for tho ocono-
Iical uoo o! liwo labor in utilizing tho hm tono. ao wall ao tho rolatiwoly
noro haroh natural condition of tho northorn ropiono. which nah conotruc-
tion and production noro oaponoivo. it will ha appropriate in tho futura to
ahiit tho hull: of tho ocono-y'o oupplo-ntal and oarvica production noodo
into tho nanooih tono. Tochnical-ocononic calculationa (no. for onnpla.
thooo dono by lonoplaw, l9“. and othora) havo do-onotratod a oignificant
incroaoo in ootinatod conotruction coota in tho northarn rogiona of. tho tar
loot ao coqarod with rogiono adjacont to tho TranoSih. liorth-oouth tiao
along ohip-nt linoo (or raoourcoo and concontratao ohtainod in tho I»! uoo
will ha intanaitiod ao tho natural rooourcoa in tho I”! oono aro utiliud.
It will alao ho oxpodiant to procooa thou turthar in tho hottor-dovolopad
oouthorn rogiona on wall.

Thuo, in tho initial otagoa of non oono utilization it will ha noro affoc-
tiwa to croato torritoriol-production couplana whooo raoourcoo linha and
truncatod production infraotructuro will ha oupplo-ntod to ono axtant or
anothar in tho Ml! aona by procaooio; linko ond infraatructuro in tho ‘l‘rana-
8ih oona (Iahlanov. 1976).

ho
FOR onxcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONLY

It ie evident in thie connection that detailed concretiration of utilization
prograne dovn to the level of fractional econonic regione. each of uhich will
coneiet of two linhe (eouthern. ‘l‘rane ih vicinity; northern. IAN vicinity).

vill be eeceeeary to euccaeefully achieve the differentiated regional goale
of IAN sou utiliration.

leeed on thie epatial concept. we1 did fractional econouic toning for A-ur-
ehaya Obleet and the eouthern portion of lhaharovehiy tray. vith conaidera-
tion of the zoning principlee outlined in vorhe by I. ll. Koloeovahiy (1970)
and developed and teeted hy Soviet ecientiete (for nore detail. eee l. I.

Spehtor. l9”). Under the aoning concept being preeentad here. the nuclei
of the fractional regione met be for-ed fore-oat along the traneSih route.

Special attention hae therefore been paid to eingling out euch nuclei and
territoriee gravitating tovarde then ae the regione' eouthern linke. A to-
tal of 30 induetrial centere vere eranined. Their preeent and long-range
production-functional etructure and haaic production tine. including tiee
in the am eone. vere etudied. ‘l'he enterprieee of each center vere grouped
into three unite: heeic production. conconitant production end eervice (a
total of 23 typee of production vere ere-iced). The indicatore of groea
output volue. value of fixed production aeeete and nunber of pereone en-
ployed vere ueed to deecriba the level of develop-ant of unite in the indi-
vidual centere. ‘l'he reeulte of the evaluatione thue obtained. tranelated
into a point ecale. ehou the co-hinatione of production facilitiee in each
center and their dietrihution patterne acroee the entire eat of centere in
the eaetern ‘l‘raneSib eector (figurea 1-3. page folloving).

Sinilar characterietice vere aleo conpiled for exieting and proepective
eettle-nte in the eaetcrn IAN eector end for the interroute IAN-TreneBih
tone. the coepilation of territorially-fixed econoeic profilee per-itted
prelininary diecloeure of the current and proepective territorial-production
«ablation in the eouthern end northern regione and evaluation of the de-
gree and variante of their nutual aug-entation. Ae ie evident fro. the
graphe (figurea 2. A). the following regionogenerating nuclei are delineated
on the ‘l'raneSih: l) Shovorodino - I. lever; 2) liegdegechi - Sivehi (leee
pronounced); 3) Shinenovak - Svobodnyy; lo) lelogoreh; 5) ‘l‘eploeereh - Siro-
hidahan; 6) naharoveh; 7) Imonol'ek. llagoveehchenek. eiunated on a
traneeib branch line, aleo playe a region-generating role. The juetifica-
tion for delineating the given haneSih centere ae region-generating nuclei
ie eupported by indicee of induetrial branch localization and urban eettle-

Int epecielieation coefficiente for Anrekaye Ohlaet and naherovehiy [ray
(“table 2).

l. Aeeocietee V. S. Surilove. A. A. travchedro. S. P. Stepanova and r. A.

lhluetova of the Laboratory of Geography of the national lconony. Paci-
fic Ocean Inetitute of Geography of the USS! Acedeuy of Sciencee' Per
laetern Science Center. participated in proceeeing the uteriale.

bl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

lipuro l. Functional-Economic Proﬁle by ‘rreuoSib Soctor

     

1 no s'namnmm mm:
m: to

ioduotriel center. eloo; the ‘rrenoSib
by:
l. rotel beleoce (or tho beeic unit
2. totel point. for tho unit bola; oervod
J. 0vorell total point.

figure 2. Averege Levol oi Production Developooot et the Center.
production

points a

  
 
   

E}

typeo of ioduotriel

'“~ center production
omen I!!!

   

36 J I I ’Mﬂlﬂlulﬂi

l. Avorege devolop-ent point- of iudividuel production typos

2. labor of bougeoeoue production typoo in e coubinetioo of iuduo-
triel ceutero

Figure 3. Average hovel of Production Develop-out on tho ‘l‘rooeab Sector
production

   
   

point.

3 ﬂ (1 5
industrial centero elm tho TreoeSib

l. labor of production types at individual centere

2. Averego develop-at points of production typoo ot iodividuel cea-
tore.

he
ton orncw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.ooonououuuv gaucuun no 0532x— uonuao 95va .032“ u «3 o A. u «5“ anion 9:... 1301.300
32. 3:33:03 8303—302.» .3339 I.» 3 5.3.33 Z. 3 350*:- Saol no his as» 3
I 3.130 «A» 5 £2.93 Anna I.» 3 @053? 01.90.. no win In nu .— $3900 #3333: on» no
bun—.63 v.93!- ounomm no “SIS on» 3 m 5.331: uo £33.. An.“ «A» 3 venom? Smol— uo no»
II... «A» cu «a 32—) . Fm ”Goo: Sign 3—55 9:... 13:93.0 9: 3633389 canuouxnooa adv

             

           

        

         
  

     

        

  
      

             
   

  

         

  

v.2:
Eugen! «ac-Ion . an
£3880 .on 12.8.33 .2 :3 .o
«26:53 .3 oauvouo§m .3 9.33393 union .0
ngvunouun .oN uncuouuuoou usuaouh .h
{.338 .8 nonoaaaoxm .2 .8338 .0
Chen .0“ ~50 .3 3.3.33- .9938 .n
'15—. .nm 9.33: .3 .8333: 3. 9.3.3:
1.30.33 .3 aqua—val .Qu tun»- .8uv39no8uaodt .Q
“.8333?- .n~ 23.. .2 .81 3- Y
83308-0239: .NN “ﬂu—laud an. 9.3:! .Nu gushes-woo: 39:04.1— .n M
195.38 .3 v8; 2: nun-:1: no non-um .N E
3.33.... .8 3.38.1 .533. .2 us...» 1222:: .. m
n u u
36 3.“ 3.0 I SJ «n u 8.9 3.0 I u 8.0 3.0 3.0 a
5.... I B... I a... I 9... I 8.8 I I I a... n
....o 2.." Sn. .« R6 2.... ﬁne no; I 9... 2.: 5.. 9.: 0
36 I a... I $3. I an... a... I I I 3.. ﬂ...
:4: I 8.... I 8.». I 3» I I I I I E... M
.1... I 8.... I e..." I .8.— I I I I I 5..
......= I 2.... I 3.... I I I I I I I E...
on... I a: I B.” I 3.» I I I I I :6
3.: I a... I B.- I 8.0 8.. 8;. I I 3.: 3.:
s... 8.» 9... I 9.. I 5.. 2.”: I I I a... 36
3... l a... I e... I 8“» 3.. I tun. I t... 5...
8...: I 3.0 I 5.: I an e I I I I 2..” rd...
3... I I I 3.. I Rho I I I l 8.. an.
no I 8.2 I 8.... I Sn I I I I I So
:26... .— all..-
83... 3: Iran...

  

 

an»... «83 caoauunzsolm 31» no 33333.8
1..- »cuu Aux->835 van 3350 :33! «o :33 an .0023" con-3:08 succu- Auuoavan .u 0.38.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iotticular attontion hoo hoon paid to ovaluatin; natural rooourcoo, ton-not
linorolo ond row notoriolo, firot oo o factor of long-ton action ond oocood
ao o toctor of ohjoctivo diiioroutiation of oiniog induotry.

Analyoio oi tho diottihution oi ninoral and tow notoriolo toooorcoo dopooito
for (our oquidiotant holto. tho two (northorn and oouthotn) holto adjacont
to tho IAN. tho niddlo hole and tho oorthorn holt adjocont to tho transit».
and (or oight ooctoro (with conoidotation of dolinaotins additional halt

ooctoto within Amrohayo 0hlaot and Khahatovohiy tray). poroito tho follow-
ing conclnoiono.

'i‘ho hull: of tho oono'o loot ioportont oinoral ond tow-notation roooorcoo
an in tho togiono adjoining tho am. On tho wholo. ohout throo-iourtho of
tho dopooito oi Iotalo and no-otalo and non thon holt tho fool dopooito
oto concontratod horo. A thitd oi tho fool dopooito ond noorly two-thirdo
of tho coootrwction raw notorial io in tho holt odjacont to tho 1‘nno8ih.
‘i'ho ninorol and row-notoriolo haooo of Montoya Ohloot and lhoharovokiy
troy ditto: oohotontially in tom of oharo of tho dopooito, naturo of tho
opotiol diotrihution of tho roooutcoo. and otroctnro of thoir noourcoo po-
tontiolo.

In Amrohoya Ohioot. wo hovo oinslod out a ‘l‘ranosih bolt in which ahout half
tho ohloot'o oinoral dopooito oro concontratod. whilo tho mi holto hovo no-
third. Tho noiilo o! tho ”northotn" A-ll' link io non-otollic and notallic
ninoralo. ‘i'ho picturo io diiioront in lhahorovohiy tray. Ahoot throo-iourtho
oi tho hny’o dopooito oro concontrotod within tho holt odjacont to tho ”I.
‘l'ho proiilo of tho "northotn" link io totallic. nonoullic and tool ninot-

olo. and tho protilo of tho "oouthorn" holt io toolo ond conottoction row
utotiolo.

Tho oocond voty i-portant typo of natutol roooutcoo. wood. io diottihotod
loro hounpnooooly ovot thio torritory. which prodotoninoo tho poooihility
that hranchoo of voriouo linoo of tho lubor-induotry cooplox light oppoar
in tho otrwctm of oil tho oono'o (toctional oconolic rogiono.

“to-ocologicol tooourcoo, which dotoriotato oyotolaticolly (to. oooth to
notth in tooponoo to changing notorol ond ocono-ic conditiono of tho to:
loot. ploy oo iopottont rolo within thio tortitory. Agricultm will thoro-
(on ro-ain hooicolly coincidont with tho Amt otoa and oouth of tho uyoko-
Nuinohiy intorilwo (Shtorhon. 197$).

Tho opotiol diottihution oi linorol ond row-notoriol tooourcoo. in conjunc-
tion with othor oconouic and notnrol ioctoto. crootoo ohjoctivo roqoioitoo
for tho (oration of two-link co-pooootory rogiono -- tho "ooothorn" ond
'horthotn" no.” of concontrotion of rooourcoo hoin; utiliud and poun-
tiol roooorcoo, diiioroncoo in thoir typo-otroctoto. thoir dogtoo of intoro
chomohility ood tochnolo‘icol oooociotivity. and oo on. oro trocod pro-
ciooly.

5"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10R ORIGIN. "8! ONLY

‘l'ho torritorial franovorka of tho fractional acononic ra.iona ara addition-
ally ratinad vhon toning intar-roota araaa haaad on tranaport accaoaihility.
rooulting in tho dolinootion of fiva aoctora which gravitata tovarda corraa-
pondin. tranaport-routa coahinationa. In thia ragard. noarly all tho noc-
tora hava a pronouncad uridional almation along routaa connoctin. tho MN
and tranaSih. Bach aactor hao divaraa co-hinationa of natural raaoorcoo.

Synthoaia of all thou data. with conaidoration of tho davalopin. production
tiaa of tho indoatrial cantora on tho ‘rranaﬂih with tho Mil Iona. hao an-
ahlod no to conatruct a .anoralirad hlock diagrao of tho traction-l acono-
Iic rogiona (Iiwra lo). Aa it avidant iron thia diagraa. all tho tarritor-
ioo poooaao outticiantly voll-dovolopod (in viov of tho w) and quita oini-
lar tranaport notvork atrocturoa which vill par-it intanaiva oconooic intar-
action hatvaan tho northarn and oonthorn linha.

lium lo. Ilock Diagran of Iractional lcooonic lagiona of tho Southorn rar
loot

         

oaooaa aaooaa oaoaaoaaoaoa .Aé”..‘n5. an”

by:
l. Tynda [lagoon to hlock hay, lovor right]
2. am (I. llavar) l. oxiatin; railroada
3. 2aon 2. railroada undat- construction (In!)
6. ma. 3. roado
S . rovral 'alz I. . vatarvaya
6. 8vohodnyy 5. rogion hoondarioa
7. Ilagovaahchonak 6. hypothotical hoondariao of northarn
8. oral and aouthorn rogiona (aaa ‘l'ahla 3
9. lavatthovaya for tho no.” of tho fractional ra-
l0. lhaharovoh giona. daaionatad hora hy Ito-an
ll. i-ni Paliny Ooiponko murals)

l2. Kaooool'ak-on-A-ur

‘l'ho final houndariaa of tho fractional ocono-ic ragiona and thoir northarn
and aoutharn linka havo haan adjoatad to confor- to tho lovar adniniatrativo-

tarritorial divioion. Tho roaolto of thin toning ara praoontad in 'l'ahlo 3
and on tho up (tiara 5).

'05
Iron omcm. us: on!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. 23:3 83»! £333. in: .9:
33.633 0.2. no c.3383 -3898 .82. .832: 53.38:... ash .n
.325: aux-ad: 5380.— 3..
Acouuoouuu-oouau 5.5263 253.3: 53.3-39.0 no.8.— .n
83869:: 0—30».— unsoa «0 532.3.- . 9.3.3 bin .N
953' ~30 .0333 .9333»... ugh . 31.53093»; :—
83!“ 93393.

no

 

38 85:63 38 u..- ua-S 633:5 83:6
830' .33 “oak—Loom .33 72.333»: .o than. $32.13 50383300 $3.33
.388 .n 38 3. in: .518 2- 8:53
nonunuu-cu-«uuoavau .~ unusual .9583 .0033: 9.2.2.96. .0
33.333.01.50» :73 nun-9.x: no:
.3532. $331.: 253383 .9533
.83 63:08.3 .9».— vooa .9533 3.3)»: guano-.6. .n
900.. 3.903..» .33 60:95:80 .32.: P326...“
19- unuvmuz 830' .Cv 33:3. 33»: .o gauouuuuv .9533 .0033: uni—339 .a
«333 9:33 .3333 32.2.96. .n
:33. 25.30.23... .93 so: 31:3- )3 guano-5:33.93 .N
25:33.»! £33 £313 0300.35 .n nus-3.2.113 .qou
.3331... 833.3300 a... 18m .qooupu:
3833... .31333' no. 9:325 830-: .e 8.33: 3'33. 8.3.7an— .5
5533 25393.8 .n 5.6» .o
anon-nouuL-«uu-avan .« 83: .n
nun-93393098353 .7": 8393 3'33- uaooouu .e
on»! .n
9.333 832... £831: 3»: l.- .«
£33.82. ‘8: $333 30020. uni—neon .o weal—5 93qu z. A
n I-
138243 63:5 4890 33;. {dam 3.88.. 9.30
«962.! 55.3.88 in 3d 3.8-5. 82.5% sud-Md .88.! no“ .3» x
«685-. I...
50.6 «8.35 . I ll“ . .33
#65614 ﬁrﬂgﬁ {.gal- «a .9209! .8323» 6h“- ? 1! .18
$592.97 $29.39.. All—van .n‘tﬁg 3593a Slab...— .§§ hid-.8998: Luann-II: x—
ArI-urg «gt
.3- 38. ”Sign...
$38.36.“ng .130 3% .36}. aid-Ia
aﬂan 3&2... :39... Again 28 Exit—3‘5 €52.31» an neg «Inga. 18.n-

iloghu .EP is .3323 a 03.453 9.8.: {32291.55 :3 Shaina =3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"1101.
lo

3.

So

6.
lx'l.
3.

S.
6.

X01.
2.

:0

FOR OPl'IClAl. U88 UNLY

Iirohidsbsno-Urgal 'skiy

Indus tria l ongrarian

Intractiys industry (gold. coal). logging

Nachins building. light and food industry. agricultura. construc-
tion industry. wood procassing

thractivs industry (gold. tin. coal). logging and wood procassing.
transport sorwicss

Agriculturo. construction bass. food industry. wood procsssing.
Inchina building

Ihsbarovskiy‘

Industrial

bogging

liachins building and nstalworking. oil rafining; logging. wood pro-
cassing. including chsnical procassing; light snd food industry.
construction industry. transport sarvicss

Logging

llaavy industry. construction bass (production intsnsification)

loan-pl 'sho-Anurshiy
Industrial-transport
attractiws industry (gold. tin). logging
lischins building and logging. fsrrous Istallurgy. oil rofining.
pulp and papsr. transport sorvicss
utrsctiva industry. logging. wood procassing. nonfarrous nstsllurgy
lsavy industry. construction bass (production intansification)

Sovatshogawanshiyﬁ
Industrial-transport

hogging. ontractiws industry

Port facilitias and transport. ship rapair. fishing. wood procsssing

Dogging. sxtractivo industry

Transport. ship rspair. thorough wood procsssing. fish procsssing.
construction industry; antractiws and chsnical industry

lishnoa-ursltiy‘

u-bsr industry

Logging. antractiwa industry. fishing

Port facilitias and transport. ship rspair. fishing and fish pro-
csssing

lagging. axtractivs industry. fishing

Transport. ship rapair. fish procassing. wood procassing. axtrac-
tiva industry

Udshiyﬁ

logion haing dsvolopod by tho Pionsars

and 6. fishing and trapping

and 6. attractivo industry (phosphoritos. iron oro. alu-inaohsaring
raw Istarial). fishing. logging and wood procassing

no
son orncm. use ouu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0) the two-link ecructure to speciﬁc end leee pronounced in cheee regions.
hue. “coeecel” end “talent!" portion of the territory ere currently
Hula in reﬂone VIII end IX end will be 1m. in region 1:.

ﬁgure 5. lrecttonel Boone-1c Zoom of the Southern ter Beet Zone

 

2.2"“
‘(lwwgynxvrcxen ACO?

{\i 4* \
)

  
            

 
 

".n~ mwuuw‘ Mom!“
(I) no «a mum: «memo

OOOOOO

me. W «mo ”-00 00-” videos“
(lreechee of (Maury)

0‘ 0' 6‘ ©' (9'
@0 6» On On @n QM

(”'H‘IWMI CO‘CYAM ecvmumx "C1760.

  

           
       
   
   

          

Kathie-um
'eiwnvu;\

     
 

    

coeee-eo tee-e eon-e (0)
been "no ale-e (f) .

 
 

Ounerele end rev-uteri.“ reeoercee)

“ x
Eu In 8" Eu an Hie g" I” Hug"

'09
Iron 03mm. use any

Kay:
l.
2a
3‘

(a)

(b)

(c)

70!! OPPICIAL USE ONLY

tractionol ocononic ragion houndarioo

logion link houndarioo

Brioting railroado and roilroado undor conotruction (In!)
induotriol cantor oioo. hy nonhor o! raaidonto 0.000 poopla)

hora than 500
laoo than l0

(lranchoo o! induotry)

lo.
5.

(f)

Blactric povor onginoaring no.
Iual ll.
Chonical and patrothoaical 12.

Hochino building. notalvorking l3.
Logging and lunhoring lb.
Building notoriolo

'l'orritorial cachinationa of natural
horthorn link of tho rogion
Southorn link of tho ragion

(Hinoralo and rau-natariol rooourcao)

15.
[6.
l7.
[8.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
26.

Puol and onorgy rau natoriol
Iotrouo and alloying aotalo
honiorroua notalo

hora oartha

chalical rav notarial

Laﬂlt

Iood

Printing

hontorrouo notolo nining
lorrouo aatollurgy

IOOWICC I

Iining rau notarial
nonutallitorouo raw natarial
Building natariala

tinhor rooourcoo

Agricultural land

Soo ‘l’ahlo 3 for tho naaoa and doacriptiono of tho fractional ocononic
rogiono doaignotod by konan nuoralo (nuaorala uith tho A indox aro tho ro-
gion‘a northern link and thooo with tho I indox ara ito aouthorn link).

vane outlining tho production cooporotion of tho northorn and aouthorn linko
of tho dolinoatad intraohlaot rogiono it. tho yoora ohoad, thoro nay ho oig-
niiicant changoo in tho aoro roaoto poropoctivo. ho a rooult of tho overall
oconolic dovolop-ont of tho MI rono and tho appoaranco of favorahlo ocononic
proraouioitoo, tho profiloo of tho northorn linko night baco- mltifunctional.
with tho appoaranco of hranchoo of procooaing induotry. Under thoao condi-
tiono, tho um oono itaolf uill hogin to act aa a opringhoard. a oupport hoao
for aaotaring tho noro northern rogiono of Sihoria and tho hr Boot.

tho cooponootory principlo of toning, uhich ia haaod on tho torritorial pro-
xinity of tho TranoSih and tho oaotorn am ooctor, io oaaontiolly hroadar in

application.

l’or oxanplo. tho voatorn IAN aoctor ia typically farthor tron

tho ‘l’ranooih, but that dooo not oxcludo tho poooihility of applying tho cor
ponoatory principlo in tho ocono-ic toning of tho tarritory gravitating to-
uordo it. Thu. oignificant production and othor ocononic tioa light ho oo-
tahliohod hotvoon tho uoatarn ooctoro of tho Ml! oono and tho noro aouthorn
ragiono of lrkutakaya and Chitinokaya ohlaata and luryotakaya asst. Horo-

ovar. tho poooihility ia not orcludod of an intorrogional conponaatory out-
lot to A-urokoya Ohlaat and tho oaotarn :ono of mi influonco no o vholo.

oapociolly iron chitinokayo Ohlaat.

51

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All thia onphoaiaoo tho broad application of tho conponaatory principla of
torritorial ocononic organization in rogiono in tho initial atagoa of thoir
nowolopnont and odjacont to noro-dowolopod tarritorioa. ‘lho conponaotory
principlo onohloo no to "conatrnct" a torritorial diwiaion of labor and par-
nito tho long-tango opocialiration of fractional ocononic rogiona and thoir
intoraction in a "chochorhoard" pattorn: initially latitudinolly along tho
‘l‘ranoﬁih ronto and than. no woo notod. hotwoon tho aouthorn (trana ih oroa)
and northorn (IAN oroa) linha. and finally latitudinally along tho MI! rowto.
Such a "chockarhoard atrnctnro" of tarritorial acorn-it organisation facili-
tataa tho poaoihility of poriodically conhining tho tarritorial-ocononic nu-
cloi now hoiog dolinoatod in a halancod nonnor along varioua linoo to oolvo
nojor rogional national-oconooic prohlano.

‘l'ho intorragional ocononic intorrolationahipo dovoloping anong tho fractional
ocononic rogiono (thuo far. prioorily hotwoan thoir oonthorn linka along tho
TranoSih, hut in tho futuro. onong thoir northorn linko along tho In!) into-
grato tho fractional rogiona within adainiotrativo-ocononic rogiono at tho
ohlaot lovol and ahowo. ‘i'hua. in particular. tho tranaport notwork confi-
guration and tho torritorial divioion of labor which it ovolving aro croot-
ing proroouioitoa for tho foraotion of opocific circular torritorial-prodnc-
tion otrncturoo: in mrokaya chlaot -- m1 - 'l'nnda - tovral'olr - Swohodnyy
- am (Mr ring), and in Ihoharovakiy (ray -- Iowootkovaya - Organ . Inno-
nol'oh-on-A-ir - Ihohorovak - ltvootkovoyo (Ihoharovak ring).

It oppooro that conditiono noro favorable to coking tho ohlaot and tray oco-
nonioo noro conploto will ovolvo at tho lavol of thooa otroctoroo. loch
"ring" will ho ahlo to connoct tho torritorioa in a coaponoatory faahion
with a divorao oat of natural roaourcoo; tho ooothorn. ocononically toro-
dovalopod ocono-ic linka with tho northorn linka. which aro taking ohopo
undor looa-favorahlo natural and oconolic conditiono. Tho tranoport “ringa”
will in addition par-it grootor rolling-otock nonouworahility along trod:
and connocting linoo. In viow of tho fact that tho I»! ia a ainglo track,
tho affoctivonooo of tranoport oporation will ho groator if can of tuna-
port aro noon on o cloood convoyor “rovolving” in tho diroction of tho ha.
oic froight flown along tho Ml! for particular conhinotiona of froight.

Than. tho principlo of ahoping conponoatory torritorial-ocononic atructuroo

on tho haoio of difforont conhinationo of aouthorn and northorn rogiona con

ho put into practico ontonoivoly at variouo lovolo of ocononic and anninio-
trotiwo'otononic zoning. '

onuocwm

l. 'ilotorioly XXV o"yo:da ms" [Hotorialo of tho 25th 0P8" Congrooo]. Koa-
cow, 1976.

2. Ayunborg “rho MI! and Prohlono of uononio Utilization of Adjacent 'i'or-
ritorioo," in 11". so A! SSSI. son. 03330338“. Mill. Vol 1, lo 1. 1976.

52
you omcm. use our
‘0

10.

ll.

12.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aryenin. A. II.. leynneltiy. o. A.. Kihel’chich. 0. A.. lioehin. V. L.
end Slevin. 8. V. 'ﬁethode Queetione of Developing e hog-Henge Tenet
"ogre. of Bcononic utiliution of the Inpect Zone of the leyhel-Anur
rhinlinc," in the collection “Sovrenennyye prohleny ekononicheehoy
geogrefii" [Canto-pore” Prob‘eee of lcononic Geogrephy]. Hoecov. moo.
1976.

"leyltelo-Anureheyn negietrel'. - Voproey geogrefii" [Beyhel-Aeur lbin-
lino. Prohleee of Geogrephy]. collection 105. Hoecov. iiyle' led-v0. 1977.

leklenov. P. Ye. “Genetic end Structurel [eetnree of Tertitoriel-Produc-
tion Coeplex rotation." in the collection "Oeohennoeti teeneehcheniye
pxoievodetve i neeeleniye ne Del'nen Voetoke” [Peeturee of Reduction
end Populetion Dietrihution in the 'er Beet], Vledivoetok. 1976.

leloueov. I. I. "Oenovy ucheniye oh ekononicheekon reyonirovenii" [Prin-
cipiee of Studying tconoeic Zoninel. Noecov. mu led-vo. 1976.

Veeilenko. V. Ye. “Ptogre-no-teelevoy podkhod k oevoyeniye zony IAN. -
Voproey geogrefii" [A Tenet-Progre- Approech to Utilizing the I»! Zone.
- Prohlene of Geogrephy]. lo lOS. lioecov. Hyel' Itd-vo, 1977.

"Voproey ehononicheekogo reyoniroveniye $88!. 8h. neterielov i etetey
(l9l7-l922 33.)" [Prohlene of 083! Economic zoning. Collection of lie-
tetiele end Articlee 0917-1922)], edited by 0. ll. Inhizhenovehiy. Hoe.
cow, 1937.

Gledyehev, A. l.. lulikov. A. m. end Shepelin. I. I7. "l’tohleny re:-
vitiye i reeneehcheniye proitvoditel'nyhh eil Del'nego Voetohe" [Proh-
lene of Developing end Dietrihotin. Productive Iotcee of the Fe: Beet],
Hoecov. Nyel‘ ltd-v0. l97b.

Golovhin. D. A., D'yehonov, !. 17.. lieyereon. I. 6.. end Sheteilo. Ye. s.
"lxperience in Delineetin; Internel Bcononic legione of the '0! Beet."
in the collection “lizovoye ekononicheekoye teyoniroveniye Sihiti i Del'-
nego Voetoke (Heteriely eovcehcheniye)" [hover lcononic Zoning of Sihetie
end the Pet Beet (Conietence lieteriele)]. Itkntek. I962.

D'yelnonov, I. V. ”I”! . konpleke hwpnykh netodnohhotyeyetvennykh proh-
len dolgoerochnoy perepektivy. - Voptoey sequin" [the WI. e Conplex
of llejor Netionel lcononic bong-Renee Ptohlcne. - Probleee o! Geogrephy].
No 105. lloecov. liyel' led-v0, l977.

heed. ll. '1letody regionel'noso eneliee" (liethode of Regionel Anelyeie].
lloecov. Progreee led-v0. 1966.

hunehiy. l. I. “Ni lat zveno yedinoy treneportnoy eeti voetochnyhh
reyonov $88!. . Voproey geogretii" [The m1 ee e Link in the Unified
treneport network of the leetern Regione of the USSR. - Prohlene of Geo-
;rephy]. lo [05. noecov. Nyel' IMWO. 1977.

53
mn orncm. use our
u.

l5.

lo.

[1.

[0.

I9.

20.

21.

22.

23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

libel‘chich. o. A. "Production-Territorial Structure of the Intel-

A-ur lbinllne Input Zone." in mm. mu. on. v. W1, In a.
197:.

lietenov. V. V. “Scientific Prohleu of Perfecting lcono-ic Zoning.”
in the collection "Prohleey teorii i prektiki runeehcheniye proicvo-
ditel‘nyhh oil 838R" [Problem of the Theory end Practice of Dietrihoto
in; 038! Productive Porcen]. lloecov. linulu Ind-v0, 1976.

Koloeovekiy. ll. ll. “l‘eoreticheekiye prohleey ekononicheekogo reyonir-
oveniye 888R (kretheye ekheee icloxheniye). - Voproey genretii" [Theo-
reticel Prohieee of Economic Zoning of the USSR (in brief). - Prohleu
of Geography], lo 80. Hoecov. Nyel' ltd-v0, 1970.

lonoplev, l. l. “Delnevoetochneye here chernoy netellurgii" [The Per
Intern Perrooe Hetellurgy lone], Kheheroveh look Iui-vo. l966.

Krotov. V. A. ”Predicted Iconoeic Zoning of Siherie end the Per Beet."
in the collection "Bkono-iko-geogreficheehoye prognociroveniye (teoriye.
netody. oteenke renureov). Heteriely neuchn. covenhch." [Ronnie-Geo-

;rephic Porecutin; (Theory. Nethode. lveluetion of keeonrcee). Heter-
iele of e Scientific Conference]. lrlmtelx. l973.

Lethenteev, II. V. 'hthodologicel Approach” to Socioeconoeic evalua-
tion of the leylubA-ur hinline Zone,” in the collection "Geogrefi-

cheekiye iuledoveniye v cone IAN" [Genrephic leuerch in the IAN Zone].
Irkutek. l976.

Heelennikov. V. P.. Pout, ll. 1.. end renew. c. L. "leyhlo-A-urehye
ngietrel' (IAN) - trencportnyy eterchen' oevoyeniye reeureov krupnykh
territoriy e eketreul'nyli ueloviyeni . i eye trenxitno-ehonoeicheokoye
enecheniye. - llechdnnerodneye geogretiye-n. vyp. 6. Ohehcheyn ehonoeio
cheekeye genrefiye" [the leylul-A-ur Mainline (am) .. ‘l‘reneport Pi-
wt in “entering the leemcee of urge territoriee 91th Batten Condi-
tione -- end Ito ‘l’reneit-Pconoeic Inportence. - lnternntionel Geogrephy-
76. No 6. Generel Pconoeic Geogrephy]. lloecov, 1976.

Iedeehev. A. A. ”Ohleetnoy ekono-icheekiy rayon" [The Ohleet Economic
legion]. Novoeihirnk. Realm ltd-v0, 197$.

lledeehev. A. A. "Geographic Principle. of PAH Zone Utilixetion (Pol-

loving the exeeple or the Northern Trenebeykel)." in the collection
"(hogreficheehiye ieeledoveniye v zone lAll."

Pawn. ll. 1. "aconoeic-ceogrephic Zoning of Siherie end the Per Beet,"
in the collection "Prohle-y geogrefii Sihiri i Del'ncgo Voetoke" [Proh-
lene o! the Geogrephy of Siberie end the Per Beet], lrkotek, 1960.

Popov. o. "Perfecting llenege-ent," in PIAVDA. 6 July 1977.

5“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Roaiyakaya Eedcrataiya. Dal'niy Voatok (Scriya Sovetakiy Soyua)"
[the Ruuian Federation. Par Beat (Soviet Union Seriee)]. Hoecou. 1971.

Siuonov. Yu. 0.. laklanov. 1’. Ya. hevyazhakiy. I. 1.. Retedova, 'r. 0..
Spektor, I. R.. 'l'ikhotakiy. It. 6.. and ‘rreyvieh. A. I. "Problem of
the Territorial Organization of Productive Porcea of neurekaya OhIaat
and Khaharovakiy [ray in Connection with Construction of the laykal-
A-Ir lbinllnc," in the collection "Geograficheekiye iaaledovaniya v
aone WI." pp 23-31.

Socheva. V. I. "Prohleoy prikadnoy geografii v avyari a aoadaniye-
Iaykalo-A-urelroy Iagiatrali" [Problem of Applied Geography in Connec-
tion uith erection of the naylml-Aalur Howling, no 5. V6) lad-v0.
I975.

Sochava, V. l.. Shotekiy, V. P. and lulu. I. I. "The Daykal-Anur min-
line Route and Several Problem in Further Studying It” non. Ill-TA GEO-
GMPII 813131 I DAL'IBGO V0810“. lb (06. 1975.

Spektor. 1. R. "Geograficheakiy prognoz okruthayuahchey aredy i terri-
torial'oaya organizataiya khoayayatva" [GeOgraphic Forecaating of the
environment end Territorial Organization of the Economy] (Author‘e can-
didate diaaertation abatrect), lioecou. H60 lad-v0. 197$.

‘l'araaov, c. L. “The m: A Tranaport-Ioductrial Couplex." in nom-
suumm MISPOM'. No 11. 1976.

sharygin, H. D. ”nrobooye rayoniroveniye i lokal'nyye territorial'no-
proiavodatvennyy koaplekay" [Fractional Zoning and Local Territorial-
Production Couplexca], Peru‘. 1975.

shniper. R. I. "At the Moira of the Viaihle Future." in “MIRA I
ORGANIZATSIYA "MSW PROIZVODSTVA, No 2. 1976.

Shtarherg. I. c. "Regional‘nyye probleuy planirovaoiya eel'elrogo Rho:-
yeyatve" [Regional Agricultural Planning Probleu]. Blagoveahcheuek.
1975.

”Eltonooichcakaya Geografiya 8853, ch. 2. Bkononichcakiyc rayony" [3co-
oo-ic Geography of the 0553, Part 2. Economic Regional. lioacov, N60
lad-v0. 1973.

comma: Izdatel'etvo "lauka". "lzveetiya All SSSR. Seriya Geografichcek-

eya" . 1978

l 1052

050:

8166/0713 m

55
won orncm. use ONLY