APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00050R0001000‘00‘0-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040049-3

FOR OI'FIL'IAL USE ONLY

mas won:
23 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 24/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100040049-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from :nglish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was auansrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

1he contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSRIP 0P
MERIALS “PRODUCED seem mum THAT DISSBHDIATION
0P 'lﬂIS PUBLICATIOII 38 RESTRICTED POROPPICIAL USE MY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opus L/a413
23 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE

(F000 2 4/79)
Couraurs

MOE

Hiaaiona of Maritile Patrol Aviation (lo-and Daecribed
(Jean de calard and Hoeaeron Dupin; AIR 6 comm

10 For 79) .0.00.00.0......GOO....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Air Force Reoapitulatea 1978 Activities
(AIR 6 mm, 10 P“ 79) 00.000.000.09...00.0.0000.

Equipment for Coda: Aircraft Hodernization Offered
(Gerard Collin; AIR 6- cosms, 3 tier 79) ............

PORTION.

Italian Magazine Interview Mario Soaree
(Mario Soaree luterviev; rm. 13 Mar 79) ......

SPAIN

Baaqua Nationaliate Preu Denaude on Madrid
(mlo [6. 25 “It 79) DO...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

MISSIONS OP mmrm PATROL AVIATION COMO DESCRIBED
Parie AIR 6 0031103 in French 10, Feb 79 pp 26-28

[Article by Jean do Galard and Captain Moanoron Dupin, French Navy: "liaritine
Patrol Aviation Gonna"!

[Text] The French Navy'e priority nieeion ie to oneuro euc-
ceeeful eeploynent of ita etratesic niacin-launching oi
nuclear eubnarinee (sun). In conjunction with ite nuclear
reeponee capability. the navy Iuet aleo naintain a Iaritine
action capability indieeocieblo iron the toner. a capability
with nultiplo undatory objectivee: prevention or control

of criaoe not anenable to the etrategy of deterrence.
uintenance of the French flas'e influence. and protection
of national intereete. But the French Navy ie not oololy

an ocean-going fighting force. Not all of ite aoeined

taeke involve veepone eeplonont. Ito regular peacetiee
activity hae varioue aepocte: reecuins peroone at eea,
medical evacuation. protecting and aeeietins fieherlen.
relief aid to civilian victine or natural dieaetere, per-
ticipotion in ecientitic expeditione. eurveillance and
control of pollution of ocean vatere in Prence'a eea
approachee. In addition to ita carrier-booed aircraft-

a eubject recently given exteneive coverage in this nega-
zine in connection with tho operational introduction of tho
Super Btenderd aircraft-4nd ite helicopter unite that will
eoon be tho center of coneiderable intereet when tho Lynx
helicopter ie placed in eervice. Irench Naval Aviation hoe

a uritine patrol force vhoee unified co-and wee eatabliehed
on 1 October 1973 and groupe all pereonnel and equip-ant re-
quired to conduct long-range aerial uritine surveillance
nieeione. Captain Noeneron Dupin hoe co-endod PAM
[Haritine Patrol Aviation Co-end] eince l Decenbor 1978 and
ie being pronotod to rear adniral effective 1 March 1979. We

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eeked hie to deteil for ue PAM'e eienione. pereonnel.
equipeent. end ectivitiee. He thenk hie for the interview
he eo greciouely geve ue. Thie erticle ie beeed on thet
interview.

'i‘wo beeee, 67 Aircreft. Five Plighte

we ehell firet briefly review the French Nevy'e nrgenizetionel etructure en en
to better identify PATHAR'e role end poeition within thet etructuro. The
nevy'e higheet echelon coneiete of the chief of the nevel eteff, hie eteff, end
verioue directoretee. Prence'e coeetline ie divided into three nevel dietricte:
let Dietrict with heedquertore in Cherbourg. 2d Dietrict in Breet, end 3d
Dietrict in Toulon. In eddition to their edjecent neritine epece. theee
dietricte coepriee ell port. induetriel. logieticel, end edeinietretive fecil-
itiee eupporting the forcee etetioned therein. tech dietrict ie heeded by on
edeirel. the dietrict col-endent ("prefet eeritiee") who being reeponeible in
e wey for overell eenegenent of the fecilitiee hee euthority over ell nevel
ectivitiee in hie dietrict. To exerciee netionul eovereignty et eee, he ie
invented with reguletory powere for policing traffic or etetioning in coeetel
wetere. Re eleo hee e prieery role in nevy public eervice ectivitiee.

For nurpoeee of nonitoring. eefeguerding. end defending french intereete

thr :hout the world. the oceen eurfecee of the globe ere divided into eight
Ier .. ee co-end ereee. Authority over theee ereee ie eeeigned either to

die -ct comndereueuch ie the one with the English Chennel. North Atlentic,
end nediterreneen ereee--or to nevel co-endere.

The co-end of forcee inherently includee authority end reeponeibility for
bringing thoee forcee up to e proper etete of reedineee end neinteining thee
in euch etete. Operetionel co-end ie the euthority granted in everything
releted to the inediete preperetion of operetione end their direction or
execution.

In the event of e crieie or conflict. dietrict col-endere of the 2d end 3d
Revel Dietricte eey be eppointed Co—ender in Chief Atlentic (crown) end
Co-ender in Chief liediterreneen (cram) reepectively. ‘l'o fecilitete e
enooth treneition iron tine of peece to tine of crieie end help eeintein
continuity end unity of co-end. cncunn‘ end cm ere eeeigned. in peece-
tine. eir end nevel forcee neceeeery for euch priority Iieeione ee eupport of
the etretegic forcee end defenee of the eee epproechee. Theee forcee coneiet
neinly of the Atlentic end Hediterreneen fleete. nineeweeping flotillee, end
flighte of the "niche Petrol Avietion Co-end.

Before the Heritiee Petrol Avietion (to-end wee eetebliehed, there were two
nevel eir groupe: the 2d Group beeed in Lenn-llihoue with heedquertere in
Breet (2d Nevel Dietrict) end the 3d Group beeed in Niece-Gerono with heed-
quertere in Toulon. Iver eince Pam's ectivetion on 1 October 1973. ite
heedquertere heve been on the Dugny-Le Mrget nevel eir beee.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PATHAR is a separate con-and "charged with providing personnel. equipment. and
facilities, and directing their employ-ant." It is responsible for aaintaining
personnel and equipaent in a state of operational reedinesa. It directs flight
crew instruction and training. develope enploynent tactics. and ensures standard-
ization of operating procedures. The con-and's najor iteas of equip-ant are ite
b7 aaritiee patrol aircraft: 35 33-1150 Atlantica and 12 P2V7 Neptunea. 38 of
which are operational. All aircraft are based at Lann-Iihoue and Niles-Gerons.
Two flights of Atlantica--!light 23 and Flight 24 each consisting of seven air-
craft--are stationed in Lann-Bihoue along with Flight 25 equipped with 10 Nap-
tunea. Bach Atlantic flight is assigned nine lO-Ieeber flight crews. Plighte
21 and 22. each equipped with seven Atlantice. are based at Nissa-Garona.

The chain of col-and extenda free the ALPATHAR--Adniral Con-ending Haritise
Patrol Aviation Co-and--to flight co-Iandere vie naval air district head-
quarters (2d and 3d Naval Districs) and local naval air headquarters at Lann-
aihoue and Nines-Carone.

PATHAR Hieoione

PATHAR conducts three typee of aiosions. 0n the strictly silitary level. it
operationally supports the Strategic Naval Force (POST) by helping that force
asintain its high standards. It aonitore consunicatione of SNLB'a for security
violations and assists in reconnaissance of SNLB sectors of operation.

0n the nilitary level but with sons fallout on the civilian level, it flies
freedoe of the seas aissions involving eubaarinea and surface ships. PATHAR
conducts reconnaissance flights in all naval theaters of operation. beginning
with the sea approaches to French territory. These reconnaiaeance missions
cover the entire Hediterraneen and extend into the Atlantic to a distance of
nearly 2,000 kilometers or 1.000 nautical nilea. Patrol aircraft can also
guide strike aircraft to their targets.

Public service sissione flown by patrol aircraft are specifically assigned
and/or happen by chance. SAX (Search and Rescue) nissiona for aircraft in
dietrees are obviously specifically assigned Iiasions: they are conducted
within the purview of the ICAO [International Civil Aviation Organization]
and for the French Air Force. the agency responsible for ordering search and
rescue operations. Such liesions as sea rescue; antipollution control. sur-
veillance of fishing areas. and police of chipping lanes say be specifically
assigned: they are specific actions taken upon request in connection with
ships reported in trouble, pleasure craft in distress. and the aonitoring of
the love-ent of oil slicks. Or they may be chance lisaions such as spotting
ships in trouble or life rafts while flying a strictly ailitary mission.

All of these public service siaaiona coebined account for approrisately

8 percent of the flying tine logged by all PATHAR aircraft. with reference
to antipollution control. it should be noted that PATHAR aircraft coasanders
are legally eupowered to charge pereone with violation of the law. but the
enount of the fines ispoeed ie not a deterrent. even though this amount was
recently increased.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Miooiono in dooort arooo «on Iron PAM'a naritioo copobilitiao that roquito
ito flight crown to bo oblo to oporata occasionally ovor voot axponooa o!
dooart.

Sinco 1972, PAM haa boon working for tho Sonogolooo govornnont on o portly
toinburooblo booio by flying thooo 8M lioaiono incunbont upon Sonogol purouant
to ita oooborohip in tho ICAO. An Atlontic or hoptuno aircraft boood in Dolor
io ooployod for thooo niaoiono.

Laotly. PAM my bo collad upon to fly niooiono for thooo foroign govornoonto
with who. Pronto hao daionoo agroooonto. Thoao oiooiono any bo of o dotorront
natura or poooibly intorvontion oporotiono ao woo tho caoo in 1978. Tho lottor
involvod roconnaiaoanco flighta ovor inoocuro orooo.

Sinco tho crootion of tho now Rapublic of Djibouti. tho Pronch Novy hao kopt o
Noptuno oircroft in that country for tho purpooo of uintoining ourvoillanto
of tho opproochoo to Djibouti undor tho tom of an agroalont botwoan tho
govornoonto of tho two countrioo. Tho hoptuno aircrott end ito crow oro rotatod
wonthly ond aro under tho oporotional control of tho odlirol co-onding Pronch
noval forooo in tho Indion 0coon orao.

Eight Houra on Patrol, 13 Flying ﬁouro

Following in o doocription of tho capohilitieo of tho ar-nso Atlantic uritino
potrol oircroft. Ito lZ-Ion crow includao: two piloto. ono of who. in tho
oircroft co-ondor: a tactical coordinator; two novigotora, ono for geograph-
ical novigotion, tho othor for toctical novigotion; a rodor conoolo oporotor;

o rador oignalo Ionitor who oloo intorproto and uooo dato furniohod by tho
oircraft'a Hognotic Anooaly Dotoctor (HAD); two aonobuoy Ionitoring opociolioto;
and three loch-nice who aloo oorvo, intor olio. oo oboorvoro linking viouol
chocka through tho aircroft'o oido windows. An Atlantic oiroroft poworod by
two Rollo-Royco 6.000 ll? turboprop Tyno onginoo con patrol for 8 houro in on
one 600 nautical Iiloo fro- ito bone and roturn to booo upon cowplotion of its
patrol. Ono of tho aircraft's outstanding qualitioo ia ito onduranco: 1:! fly-
ing houro. 8 of thou on ototion.

Tho orrongooont and din-our of its viewing windows onabla tho Atlantic crow to
offoctivoly conduct vioual oighting niaaiono oqually above wotor and in tho
uiddlo of tho dooort.

0thor odvantogoa of the Atlontic noritino potrol oircroft lie in the dotoction
~copohilitioo of ito rodor, ito oquipuont for high-altitudo Ionitoring of
diotrooo-aignolling boocono. and in intorprototion and uoo of ocouotic doto
tronouitjad by tho Joubel oonobuoyo it dropo over ouapoctod orooo. An
oquolly' rich oourco of infomtion to tho HAD oyoten. 'on condition. of couroo.
that the aircraft io in perfect trio. MAD oquiplont connot pinpoint o
auburino'o oxoct location but con vorin ita prooonco for ottock purpoooo.

A
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For eaploymant against surface ships. Atlantic patrol aircraft are armed with
A8-12 missiles soon to be replaced by AH-39 [oncet air-to-surface] siasiles
and Mortal antiredar nissiles. The capability of guiding such strike air-
craft as the Standard 6. Jaguar. and Super Standard to their targets may bo
considered another one of the Br-llSO Atlantic's "weapons.”

Sosa 18.000 Flying Hours in 1978

All the aircraft in PATHAR's inventory logged a total of 18.000 flying hours
in 1978. 60 percent of which were flown during actual operations. in other
words. not in flight crew training. Public service activities accounted for
1.500 hours or about 8 percent of the total. The latter included about

90 hours in SAR operations and more than 600 hours in sea rescue operations.
Yet 1978 was exceptional in this latter respect because of the SBCHAR [Sea
Rescue] operations conducted late in the year in the search for participants
in the "Rue Race" [ocean yacht race] including [the still missing] Alain Colas.

Training flights are conducted at the flight commender'a discretion. Opera-
tional flights are conducted as part of specifically eaaignad aiasions. The
PATHAR commander has the dual task of constituting well-knit operational
flight crews and avoiding any specialization of crews in this or that particu-
lar type of mission.

Public service niseiona will no doubt become nora demanding during the next few
years. Antipollution control niasions will extend beyond their traditional
scope to include control of shipping for accident prevention purposes. Sea
rescue missions will demand more and more flying hours as a result of expand-
ing pleasure boat activity. Surveillance of fishing in certain "hot" sections
of the globe will also take up a large part of the available flying tine.
particularly in the Pacific. in the approaches to the Kerguelen Archipelago.
and in Guiana where surveillance of the fishing area requires dispatching an
aircraft (rotated every 2 eonths) to Fort-de-Prence [Martinique]. Lastly.
surveillance and protection will have to be provided for offshore oil rigs.

It should be reaeeberad, however. that the ailitary progressing law took into
account only the French Navy's nilitary expenditures. Another point to be
remembered is that naval district commanders are responsible to the prise
sinister for surveillance of France’s ZOO-nautical mile economic tone and
accomplish this task by coordinating their defense means and those of the
other governaent departeents concerned. such as the merchant navy. interior.
and PTT [Postal and Telecommunications Adeiniatration] among others.

Atlantic N6 Aircraft in 1985
PATHAR can "hold on" with its P2V7 Neptunes until the late 1980's. The

Atlantics are expected to reach the end of their service life in the period
l985~l990 with a sharp decline in their capabilities and number during those

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’OR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

1“: S yuan. [1ch ch. appuunco of the first Atlantic Nov annotation (N0)
aircraft in PM)!” mm about. 1985 V111 be moat mlcou.

comma Mr & Coo-on. Puts 1979
‘sou
08013100

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CNN'IRY SECTION FRANCE

AIR FORCE “CAPITULATBS 1978 ACTIVITIES
Perie AIR 5 cosmos in French 10 Feb 79 pp 28. to
[Article: ”Air Force Recepituletes its Activities in 1978"]

[Text] The l’sbruery 1979 issue of the French Air Force's sonthly news sess-
sine AIR ACTUALIﬂs cerried en erticle emerising the air force's eein
sctivitiee in 1978. The erticle sleo conteined e progress report on the stetue
of sejor eir force progrens es of 31 Deceeber 1978. We have extrected the
eeeentiel perte of this erticle thet recspituletee end cmletee the intone-
tion ve heve published throughout the yeer.

Total of £30,000 Flying ﬂours

The totel of epproxieetely £30,000 hours logged by eir force eircreft in 1978
represents en increese of 7.5: over the 1977 totel. Included in this total
ere individuel treinin; flights within eech unit end flying ties during the
perticipetion by certein unite in collective treinins exercises. The sost
isportent of these exercises were: "Deter," en eir defense exercise:

"Funch" end "Poker" involving eeployeent of tecticel end strstesic nucleer
veepone (these exercises ere conducted eeverel tines e yeer); "Peuee" end
"Teal." joint let Arny-FATAC [Tecticel Air Force] exercises: end "vet‘s."
(our joint eir force-nevy exercises involving etteck operetione st see. The
eir force eleo perticipeted in certein NATO exercises "so ss to test procedures
thet would eneble it to fight elonseide the elliee should the French govern-
sent decide sccordingly."

It sust eleo be noted here thet eir units flew not only resuler treining end
routine eieeione but eleo conducted eilitery operetions in foreign countries.
For inetence, 001'»! [Hilitery Air Trensport Co-snd] sctively perticipeted
in the operetione in Heuritenie. Ched. end Zeire. It eleo ureneported French
eleemte of the United “etione Interim Force in Lebenon. ‘l‘he Tecticel Air

torce. eupported by Stretegic Air Force tenker eircrett, esployed its eircreft
in Heuritenie end ched.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All Pilote Hill be Officere

A aaaeura approved in 1978 will have great iapact on aircrewpereonnel in the
coaing yeare. Succeaeful completion of pilot training will henceforth auto-
natically ed-it auch pereonnel to reeerve student officer training. Upon
coapletion of thia training, the young pilot will be appointed officer candi-
date and \ttain the etetua of reeerve officer on active duty once he hee
obtained the profeeeional rating for which he wee recruited. Thia new pro-
cedure will thue put an end to the peculiar aituation whereby the French Air
Force wee the only Heetern air force whoee pilote were not all officere.

Continued Equip-ant Developaent

the year 1978 wee marked by the following develop-ante relative to aircraft.
weapona. detection equipeent. end co-aunicationa facilitiee:

a. Develop-ant of the ‘l'raneall traneport aircraft'e refueling capability;
28 of the new veraion ‘l‘ran'all'e will be produced with this capability.

b. The firet eervice firinge of Magic air-to-eir aieeilee and Crotele -
eurface-to-air eieeilee by air force unite deaonetrated that theee eieeile
eyeteae recently placed in eervice perfora to perfection.

c. Delivery of the (int production-nodal Alpha Jet trainare. thereby
allowing definition of policiee and proceduree for thia eircraft'e uee in pilot
training achoole. end eleo enabling inetructore to be trained eo that the Alpha
Jet can be readily placed in eervice in 1979.

d. Hithdrawal fro: operational alert etatue of pert of the 8838 [Surface-to-
Surface Strategic Balliatic liieeilee] to allow inetellation in 1980 of the
new generation of 8-3 aiee-llee whoee qualification firinge are proceeding
very eatiefactorily.

e. Initiation of development of a reconnaieeance veraion of the Mirage P1
deeigned to replace the Mirage SR and eubeequently the Hiraga 3RD.

f. Initial flighta of the firet two prototypee of the Mirage 2000: 10 Harch
for aircraft No. l and 18 Septeehar for No. 2.

g. l‘iret Satrape height-finding redare were inetelled and placed in eervice.

h. Start of production of the Centaure air traffic control redara for air
baee uee.

i. End of operation REM? begun in 1972 and during which 27 local airfield
control eyetele were reeodeled or replaced.

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

,1. Four new Inetrument Landing SyItema were placed in aervice on air bacon
in Nancy. Orange Hots. und Huroroa.

It. Continued inatallation of the M70 [Air Force Radio Relay Syatee] and
electronic switching equipment.

Throughout 1978 the air force continued to intan. ify ita afforte to improve the
protection and defence of in inatellatione against all typne of threate,
notably by building aircraft eheltera. deploying Crotale niaaile and anti-
aircraft gen batteriee. and equipping baae protection and aecurity unite with
detection radare. night-vieion devices. and automatic intruder detection
ayateee.

Increaeod Technical Aaaietence

Technical military aeeietance furniehed by the French Air Force to foreign
air forcae equipped with French-nade materiel increaeed alightly in 1978.
More than 1.000 foreign trainaee received inatruction last year at air force
ochoola in France while nearly 600 air force officera and nonco-ieeioned
officere aerved abroad ae technical adviaera to foreign air forcea.

COPYRIGRT: Air 6 Come, Paria. 1979.

8061
cso: 3100

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omcm. US! ONLY

coon-m samon mm

800le FOR COMBAT AIRCRAFT motmunon om
Paria AIR & 00908 in French 3 Nor 79 pp 20-21. 23

[Articla hy Carard Collin: ”ﬂown-CS? Offara Equip-ant for Coahat Aircraft
Hodarniration")

[Tart] For tho paat aavaral yaara. Mon-C8? hac offarad varioua itaaa of
aqnipaant for tha nodarnitation of coahat aircraft. It ia nov furthar
intanaifying ita aarhating afforta. lta top-of-tha-lina itaaa ara tha Agava

radar. tha Cyrano ‘ HS radar. tho TAVSB laaar rangafindar. and tha V3110
head up diaplay.

Induction of lxcaaa "night

‘l'ha idaa of aodarniting cowat aircraft alraady in aarvica ataaa froa
axhauativa aarhat atodiaa and. in the final analytic. ia haaad on tha
following conaidarationa:

a. Codat aircraft parforlanca—cailiog. apaad. oparating ranga. ate.—
avolvc only vary alovly. Aarodynaaic advancaa and aircraft povar plant
advancaa ara hacoaing aora and aora aapanaiva. ‘l’ha coat of nav aircraft ia
vary high and counting.

h. 0n tha othar hand. hovavar. airfranaa of “old" aircraft hava a long aarvica
lifa. hanca tha tantation to ratain thaaa aircraft and aimltanaonaly giva
than anparior oparational capabilitiaa. It ia at thia point in tha analyaia
of tha aituation that apactacular advancaa in alactronica allov a coqrouiaa
to ha raachad. a coaproaiaa that ia aora than aatiafactory in that it alao.
raducaa aquipaant vaight and voluaa. 'l'hia aaana that airfraaa can ha ratro-
fittad with vary aodarn high-parforaanca «nip-ant. Tho Agava radar aomtad
in the Supar Btandard naval atrika fightar vaigha only ‘6 kilogram coqarad
with tha Hiraga 3'a lCC-ltilogra- Cyrano 2 radar. Ita antanna hat a aaall
3S-cantiaatar diaaatar hut acanning and cluttar filtaring tachniqoaa anly
coqanaata for thia aaall “actor and giva tha Agava radar axcallant par-
foraanca charactariatica. tha aana ia trua with tha VB no hood-op diaplay

10

'0! OFFICIAL 033 MY
10R OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

Cyrano b as radar in dovolopnant atago. Tho outor ring
or collar providoa roll atabiliaation, aa a ainilar ring
doaa on tho Agave radar.

unit when aodoat dinanaiona allov it to fit in noat cockpita uhila atill
offoring a noat offactiva fiold of view and aynbology. Loatly. va nood not
rocall that today a conputor packagad in a 1/2 an short one pmidaa a
wholo aoriao of intorfaco, atorago. and oonputin; apood capabilitioa.

Dndar thoao circunatancoa. alnoat ovary "old" aircraft can now aapira to
attain a vary high lavol of porfornanco at a aodorniaation coat naroly am
10 to 20 porcant of tho coat of a now aircraft.

ln othar vorda, it can ba aid that miniaturization and tho poaaibilitioa
furniahod by oloctronica offor Iany countrioa tho only ocononicolly accoaaihlo
aolution. nanaly nodorniaation of aircraft alroady in aarvico. Thia ia lika-
vioo tho only concoivablo approach for othor comtrioa that. for political or
logiatical roaaona. cannot acquito ouch highly nodorn aircraft aa tho Kiraso
2000 or tho 1-16. All in all, tho urkot in quoation ia quito largo. A
figuro of 2.000 aircraft ia aoootiloo nontionad. Tholaon-csr'a goal ia about
100 aircraft par yoar for tho nut fov yaara.

A Hido Choico of Poaaibilitioa

Timon-68PM approach ia conaiatont with tho vary naturo of tho targot Iarhotax
thoy oro hatoroaonooua. It io roodily apparont that thou aircraft diffar

11
'03 omcm. 088 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Ageve reder. Electronic printed-circuit boerde cen be
eeen on the reer pert of the unit.

widely in their origine end in their di-eneione, end coneequently in the epece
eveileble to houee the equipnent therein. They eleo differ in the known or
eeeuned requiremte of the eir forcee concerned.

The two redere offered ere eultieode eyetene. thereby enebling the: to cover
eeverel operetionel fielde. They ere eleo couple-eatery. the Ageve being e
heeicelly neritine reder end the (ﬁrm 6 e beeicelly lend reder. Thie doee
not. however. rule out certein overleppin; cepehilitiee.

The heed-up diepley eyeten ie eveileble in three vereicne: V3 110. V3 120
(Super Btenderd vereion). end V! 130. The nubere 110. 120. end 130 ere
ectuelly dineneione of the collinetins lene. Theee three vereione penit
eounting the eightin; heed thet ie beet edepted to the eircreft. It met be
reelieed. in fect. thet optima filling of the eeell epece eveileble below the
vindehield ie often e eetter of e few eillinetere' cleerence.

The electronice unite of both the reder end the diepley unit cen eccoueodete
ell type. of interfece. euele; or digitel. Coeputin; epeed ie edequete for
all oonceiveble epplicetione. Henry nodulee ere by "etepe" of 18K vorde.

Timon-CS! doee not Ienufecture eeneore. except eagle-of-etteck eeneore. But

here euin. mun-car offere e wide reue of poeeihilitiee vhoee coeplerAty,

coet. end perforIence ere edepted to different requirenente. A typicel mule
of thie eoduler epproech ie furniehed by the ettitude end deviation den.

12
FOR OFFICIAL US! 0131.!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Il‘here are three poeaible levele. The firet enploye a twin-gyro attitude date
generator-the one nade by SPIH [Mae-ureeent Inetrunenta Manufacturing Coupeny)
for exaaplo-without any eelf-conteined navigation Ileana. The next vereion
retaine the attitude data generator but hee an neeociated Doppler navigation
radar. Thia voraion can be further refined by an acceleroaeter-eaeieted
Doppler-attitude etatiatical coupling. Thie coupling Inkee it poaeible to
eieultenoouely improve ehort-range navigation (ground epeed), the Doppler. end
the attitude data generator. The meat advanced vereion replacee the Doppler
and the attitude date generator with an inertial platfora: one Iade by SAGE“
[Coepany for General Applicatione of Electricity and Mechanical for eraaple.

A final example of the poaeible colbinetiona: for certain epplicetione. the
Thouon-CSP end CILAS [lnduatrial Later Coopeny] laeor rangefinder nay be
eubatituted for the radar or appreciably enhance the rader'e ehort-dietance
ranging accuracy. whether it be the Agave radar or the Cyrano radar.

Thie wide range of poeaibilitiea offered by Tholeon-CSP has one key word.
That word in "homogeneity." The reapective capabilitiee of the coeponenta _
have to be integrated into an optiaired eyetea eo ae not to aka a eenaor
necdieealy "eophieticated" or convereely. eo ea not to coeproeiae overall
perfornance by an inordinately weak link. Thoneon-CSP'e experience and eire
offer a cuetoaer the coepreheneive eervicee of a priae contractor and not
thoee of a aere eupplier of juxtapoaed "black boxee."

TVA 39 Laeer Rangefinder

If an aircraft'e priaary uiaeion ia to attack ground targete. the Agave radar
lay be replaced by a TM! 38 laeer rangefinder developed jointly by “moon-081'
and CILAS. It lay aleo be ueed to eupplenent the radar. Mirage l and Jaguar
aircraft are equipped with the TM! 38. Thie laeer range in coepoeed of two
Iain eubaeaeabliea:

a. The laaer head containe the later eyetea and the quart: clock that
eneuree highly accurate aeeeureaent of the laeer pulae'a return tine.
weight: 9 kilograae. wavelength: 1.06 aicron.

b. Power pack containing the varioue pover auppliea needed by the entire unit
(3/6 ATE ehort ceee. 12 kilograaa).

The TAV 38’e principal characterietice are:

a. .Range ueeeureaent with an accuracy of 7 netere irroepective of dietence.
b. Maxim eeaeureaent range: 10 kiloeetere in clear weather.

c. Capability of firing 12 romde per ainute. at a mim- rate of one round

per aecond. but no liaitetion if rounde are fired at the rate of one every
tvo eeconda.

13
FOR omcm. 088 MY
FOR OPHCIAL US! 0)“)!

 

b! radar datactor unit.

Auto-atic guidance of tha laaar baa: in alavation and aaiwth aarvoa to
inoraaaa tho ayatan‘a tactical capabilitiaa. 'l‘hia guidance is obtained by
aaana of aovabla priaaa that provida a reaming fiald of 200 grad in alavation
and 260 and in azimuth.

For aircraft with a primary aiaaioo of low-altitudo pauatration and ground
attack. moaned-CS? ia davalopins a now Cyrano 6 NS radar apaoifically
adapted to ouch a aiaaioo whila rataioio: airoto-air coabat capabilitiaa
approxilatins than of tha Kirasa Vl'a Cyrano h radar (intarcaption and
coabat) iron which thia naw varaion ia darivod. The lattar will be available
in 2 yoara.

Tho Cyrano 6 l8 ia daaimad for vary low-altitude and bad weather panatration
aiaaiona uains tha following oparating aodaa: tarrain following. antioolliaion.
inatrulent latdown. radar diaplay of ground with caloulatad find point.
raadjuatnant on thia point an wall aa Dopplar diaplay with capability of
unifying tha radar aap around the find point.

In than oparatids oodaa, dansaroua aoboaa will ba diaplayad in rod on tha
Mad-down CR1 aoraan (baaad on Iaaauraaanta Iada of real ground oluttar). A
warn}: aiwl will alart tha pilot whanavar allowabla tolaranoaa bawa baan
an ad.

ll:

10R omcm. US! ONLY
FUR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

Air-tn-grnuud ranging say be used for air-to-ground attack but nine to check
whether the systea is operating properly during nil-veather low-altitude
penetration.

Air-toyair aiuuion capabilities include: airato-air search: automatic track-
ing: capability of firing guns or launching hatra 530. Hatra Super 530. and
Magic 550 missiles; adequate head-up display of lnforlation and air-to-air
ranging.

From a technical standpoint. the Cyrano a MS radar is a conventional I-band
radar equipped with an inverted Cassegrain antenna. Doppler bean-sharpening
around the calculated fixed point and 20 degrees beyond the aircrait's heading
provide high-resolution radar mapping around this point in the ground display
soda. hagniiicatiun of this area ("magnifying glass"),ensbles the pilot to
accurately read this nap.

'-
The Cyrano h HS radar operates in conjunction with a new television-tube
digital readout device that enhances the radar display and sakes the syste-
easier to use in flight: display of dangerous obstacles. great flexibility
in the presentation of symbols. and a long-range optical target identification
systea. -

Agave Radar

For coabat aircraft with primary air-to-sea missions, Thomson-CS? otters the
AgaVe radar produced jointly with Marcel Dassault Electronics for the Mirage 5
and the French Navy's Super Btendard. This light aultirole radar also has
excellent air-to-air and air-to-gtound capabilities.

It can be eaployed for the following functions:

a. Air-to-air: air—to-air search. automatic tracking, target designation
with heed-up display, and air~to-air ranging.

b. Air-to-ssa: air-to-sea search. automatic tracking of surface targets.
target designations. and air-to-aea ranging.

c. Air-to-ground: navigation and eir-to-ground ranging.

Considering its reduced size-~dianeter: 690 nillineters: length: 610 milli-
seters--and lightseight--fusclage nose: 65 kilograms--and its low canon-prion
of electric poucr--l.l kilowatts-~this radar's capabilities are reaarkable.

In air-to—air search. it can detect a light bosber at up to 15 nautical silos
(27 kiloseters). In air-to—aea search. it can detect a destroyer at note than
60 nautical liles (llo kiloseters). The radar scans 1‘0 degrees in sci-nth
and 60 degrees in elevation.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In air-to-ground ranging. neaaureaent ie eo accurate that the final error it
introducoa into fire correction computations in of the acne order of nagnitude
an that of the other coaponenta of the coeplete woapon ayaten.

From a technical etandpoint. the Agave radar in a conventional nagnetron 100-
band radar. It ueee an inverted Caaaegrain antenna. The aonopulae receiver
providea preciee automatic tracking.

V8 110. V! 120. V8 130 Mead-Up Dieplay Syetena

Thouon-csr hae delivered eore than 5.000 aonochrole dieplay unite to date.
The VB'e conaiet of a eynhol generator (1/2 an ehortcaee). the cathode-ray
tube and ite 111‘: power eupply nounted under the windehield. and laetly. the
colliaating optica. The latter offer a wide field of view (20 degreea)
thanhe to the uee of a twin codaining glaee. ‘l'he eighting heeducathode-ray
tube plue optice-oweighe only 8.5 kilograee and hea optima "eountahility. '
Sylbology reaaina fully vieihle under hrightneee of 12,000 m. [footlaaberte].
The head-up dieplay ie auitahle for all operating Iodee: air-to-ground. air-
to-aaa. and air-to-air. A cuera say be enployed for recording or inatruction-
el purpoeea. lte adaptability hea already been denonatreted on the following
aircraft: Super Standard. Jaguar. Mirage 3. Mirage 5. Mirage so. and the
A4 Skyhawh.

Me ehall conclude our eurvey of Thouon-CSP equip-ant with the 3P radar
detector unit. Production nodele of thin unit already equip the Mirage 3.
Mirage s. Mirage F1 and P5. ae well aa the Super Standard. It detecte redara
locked-on to ite carrier aircraft by aeana of four antennae covering the 8. 0.
X. and K0 hande. i.e. iron 2 to 15 gigahertr. All theee unite have built-in
teat and Ionitoring circuite and eervicing equip-ent.

Many contacte have already been aadc in connection with the foreign-built air-
craft market: A-d. 3-5. P-B. MC. etc. Then diecueeione have been held with
both aircraft manufacture" and fine apecialiaing in aircraft Iodification.

‘ro untion but a few: Vought. bochheed. Aero Servicee. General Dynamice.
Northrop. Lear Siegler. and l-syeteee. In my caeee. however. the retrofitting
work will be handled directly with the original Ianufacturer of the aircraft.
for inetance. with Daaaault for everything involving the nodernitation of
Mirage aircraft.

The nest likely coepetition in the heed-up dieplay ie fro- euch lritieh fine
no Marconi and Seithe lnduetriee. Ae for the radera. Agave'e coqactneee
ought to bring Mon-08? a great deal of succeae.

COPYRIGHT: A}! 6 Come. Peril. 1979

8061
cso: 3100

16

POI! OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION PORTUGAL

ITALIAN MAGAZINE Innavlrws MARIO SOARBS
Milan 9mm in Italian 13 Her 79 pp 69. 70

[Interview with Mario Soaree. Secretary of the Portugueee Socialiet Party,
by PANORAHA during the Socialiet Congroee. March 24., place not given]

[Text] Queetion: There ie nuch talk about auppoaed dengere to Portugueae
deaocracy. that do you think? '

Anewer: I do not think that at thia tine political and nilitery condition
exiat for a takeover by the far left or by the far right. But tron a
.etrictly denocretic point of View the eituetion ia unclear. The praeent
gowernnent doea not repreaent the will of the people. It waa put together
through the eitorte of the preeident of the republic. who bypaeeed the
political pertiea. ‘rhie ie not a nornal eituation in a parlianentary
denocrecy like cure. And then. thie goveruent hee proved to be right
wing, with right wing policiee. It haa nede warioue decieiona that
contradict the noet eincere hopce of the people. And it ie criticized

by the left, which ie to eey. the majority of Portugueee people.

Queetion: how cone there ie e right wing govern-ant in a country with a
eocieliut conetitution end with e Sociallat Perty which ie the etrongeet
of its politicel forcee?

Anewcr: It ie the fault of the entidenocretic attitude of the Col-Inlet
Party with in 1975 tried to aeiza power by force. Thie kept ue iron
unifying with the amnion. The Portugueee Cot-uni" Party wee. in tact,
trying to unite with the left ea a Ileana of extending ita power over all
the left. If we hed accepted the Commie: Party'e etrategy we probably
would have etopped the dewelopnent of denocratic forcee in Portugal.

Queetion: lbw ie it that the eocialiete with 36 percent of the vote are
not in control of the govern-eat? la it true that eoneone haa eboliahed
the right to vote!

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Answer: The socialists could not accept one or two ministers in a government
whose head does not represent the will of the people. The Socialist Party
has 102 seats in parliament, more than 20,000 representatives in various
local govarments, more than 100,000 members; we cannot possibly agree to
be part of this government since it would not reflect the results of
political elections in which we won a relative najority of the votes. He
still think that the results of general elections are a rather accurate
thermometer of the will of the people. The president of the republic,

so it would seem, is not of the same Opinion.

Question: “hen the first constitutional government fell in December of
1977, President Eases declared that if the government were to be formed
by the political parties, they would have to obtain a clear majority in
parliament. Because the parties were not able to reach an agreement,

Portugal now has a government that is not an expression of the parties
and which was ratified in parliament because the socialists refused to

take part in the vote of no confidence presented by the cons-mists. how
can this deadlock be resolved?

Answer: Up until this point we socialists have preferred to form alliances
with neither the left nor with the right. we have felt this was the best
choice in order to avoid bipeluritation of Portuguese society, which would
be extremely bad for democratic forces and for the social progress of the
country, given the current situation. But, seeing that President Ramalho
Eanes is now sticking to his decision for a government clearly by the
majority, either the parties must change their positions or we will not
have a government formed by parties in Portugal, and there will be new

and very serious risks for democracy.

Question: Does this mean that the socialists will try to reach an under-
standing of the situation, in effect abandoning their policy of nonalliance?
will there probably be a government between socialists and social democrats?

Answer: An understanding will, I believe, require elections during a stable
period of time, or to be less optimistic about it, early elections.

Question: Do you agree with those who insist it is necessary to change
the socialist constitution, even though it is brand new?

Answer: Any modification of the constitution should not be a coqlete
reworking of the one we already have. Only parliament, which will be
chosen by the next elections, as our constitution clearly states, can
undertake this revision. For many reasons we are opposed to referendum
and plebiscites.

Question: hhat do you think of the constant demands from the right to
entrust greater powers to the president of the republic?

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Answer: The personalization of power ie one of the cleeeic eyeteme need
by the right to frustrate and deny the hopoe of the people. when we telk
of the "inetitutionel leadership" of the preeident we ere Eecins en

attempt to regroee, to pley once more the traditional gene of the Portugueee
right, which through pereonelitetion of power eine to deetroy the progreee
of the people toward deuoerecy end reel eociel progreae.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 ARNOLDO Mondatori Editore, S.p.A.

8644
C801 3104

19

FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHIO!“ USE ONLY

coumv sacrtou smn

BASQUE NATIONALIS‘I‘S PRESS DEMANDS 0N MADRID
hadrid mm 16 in Spaniah 25 Her 79 pp 16-19. 21. 22

[Text] Without beco-ing an emergency the natter ia being lived and felt
with concern in Madrid. An unofficial apokaanan of the Hinietry of
Interior told cmm 16 laat week that on far aa Martin Villa ia concerned,
the poaition of Harri Betaauna [United People] of defending an independent
aocialiet and Baaque atata vaa completely inadniaaihle "becauaa it deniea
the unity of Spain."

"Not To Retreat a Millimeter”

Sectora of the Army. even the moat liberal. expreaaed thmolvea in a like
nanner. "Our poaition." aaid a colonel of the Ministry of Defenae to camera
16. "ia not to retreat e nillineter. Statementa like thoae of Kerri
Bataeuna laet week. denying the Spaniah nature of the Baaqua territory.

are queationa a united and diaciplinad army like oura cannot tolerate."

nowhere, parlianentary aourcea of the DC!) [De-ocratic Center Union] pre-
ferred not to diacuaa the auhject in official atatenenta. Ita position ie
that the parlialentariane of aerri Bataauna nuat go to congreee, take
poaaaaaion of their aeata, and attend eeaaiona regularly. If they do not,
the pertinent aanctione Iuet he ilpoaed on then. if neceeeery. taking
away their etatue ea parliaeentariana.

Apparently the ”CD ia trying to have the PNV [laaque Nationaliat Party]
place the parlianenteriana of Berri Bataauna into their parlie-entery group
and~"doneetioete" than, enpheairing the poaaibility that in thie faahion the
lierri Bataeuna parliaeentariana would never intervene again ea epokenen of
the Baeque nationaliate parlianentary group in delicate queetiona. but that
in than caeee. the apokeeean would alveya be Areallue or any other PIN
apokeeun.

Alfoneo Guerra of the P808 [Spaniah Socialiat Horkera Party]. eaya that they
are denocrate and. therefore. it ie not difficult for than to accept the
reeult of the eletiona. which neana that the Socialiet Party thinke it ie
very proper that lierri lateeuna won parliamtary eeata and they are not
eorry about it. "The“ who are aorry now." he con-onto, "are the "CD and
the govern-ant for their irreeponaihle policy in the Baaqua Oomtry. ailad
priaarily at undermining the eociggiat preeence in that region."

M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let Thee Settle It

Guerrs eddsz "They eccused us of the P808 of neintnining enhiguous posi-
tions on the subject of the ETA [Besque Fatherland snd Liberty Group], they
rejected Txilti Bsneges becsuse he did not discsrd the possibility of nego-
tisting with the STA end now they tslte notice they hsve done things so
badly thst they hsve sested the 31A in Parliament. Let then not turn to
us to quiet the ushers of nsrri Betssune beceuse we sre not going to do
it.

The PCB [Spenish Comnist Perty] elso egress hroedly with thet eveluetion.
"If the UCD hed not given the Bssque Country e tresteent chsrecteristic

of thst of the Prsnco regime, when they should heve cerried out s politicel
series of treneters to the Beeque Generel council. things would hsve pro-

gressed in enother nenner." seid Enrique Curiel, secretery of the cemnist
perlieeentery group. to this negesins.

As fer es the PCB is concerned, the present situstion csn leed to e very
serious period if the sepsrstion of the Bssque Country continues to hecoee
eccentueted with respect to the Spsnish dseocretic process. If errors
continue to he weds, this ssperstion will leed to en increese in the rsdicsl
independentist options end e vicious circle will he initietnd iron which

it will be neceseery to eesrge by sny eeens. '

This eeergence for Cerrillo's psrty is still possible if s stetuts o!
sutonoey is epproved with nexieue urgency. e etetuts which involves ell
the politicel forces. including the netionslists.

Hhst llerri netssune Is

ﬂerri letesune (United People in the Besque lenguegs) originstsd es en
electorsl coelition in Hey 1978 for the purpose of "libereting Buskedi
end constructing Socielise."

usds up of two legel perties. Besqus Netionslist Action [m] snd lesqus
Socielist Perty (383), end two illegsl. Psoples' Revolutionery Socielist
Psrty (lust) end Revolutionery Petty of Pstriotic Workers (MIA). it toss
for-ed ”es e per-enent teble ior debete. es en electorel exie end for the
eohilisetion of the nsssse." for "the desired unity of the netionslist left."

Its politicsl progree consists exclusively of six points:

Deeocrstic freedoes with recognition of the right to ssli-detetninetion
end legelizetion of ell psrties.

Recognition of the full sovereignty oi the lesque nstion end its territoriel
integrity (inclusion of Neverre) in s stetute of eutonony.

lnstitutionelizetion end preferentiel support o! the Besqus lenguegs.

21
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Urgent desecratieation of the\local administration.
Isproveeent of the living conditions for the working class.

Total asnesty and the progressive withdrawal of the forces of public order
and the police.

The political progran coapletely essuaee the clails of the Patriotic
Socialist workers Committee (KAS) which is asde up of “AS! and LAIA and
which the eilitery ETA considers “The only valid spokesman for a possible
negotiation with the government on the basis of these points.“ The four
parliseentarians (three deputies and one senator) elected by nerri Batasuna
on 1 March, have already made public their decision to "negotiate these
points directly with the government without resorting to the Spanish
Parliasent because we are not Spaniards."

herri Bataeuna obtained 150.000 votes in the Basque Country and 22.500 in
Navarre in the past elections. In four eunicipelities of Vizcsya. 23 of
Guipuscoa and one of Alava, it obtained an absolute majority. Sons of those
aunicipalities are of great ieportance. us is the case of hernani. Pasejes
and Oyartun.

The nationalist coalition will be conpeting in 154 of the 228 aunicipalities
of the Basque Country in the next aunicipsl elections.

Increased Cosbativity

In the Basque Country. where CAHBIO 16 sent two reporters and a photographer
last week. the subject was viewed in a different way: "Hess nobilizstions
and measures of forces capable of wreeting the autonosy statute for Busksdi
froe Madrid is what we shall put into effect after the municipal elections.
No one can expect that there be peace in our land if the central governsent
does not adopt political seaeures on the bases established by our coalition."
At the Bilbao headquarters of the Harri Bataauna coalition at “usher 18

Pare: Geldos Street, no one hides the euphoria or the increased coabativity
caused by the 1 March electoral results. "We are the second or third force
in worker and issigrsnt zones. we are the first Basque force in cuipuscoa;

if we join with Buekadiko Bsksrra we are the first Basque force of the left.”
enumerates Ineki Lasegsbaeter Victoriously. He is the spokes-an of the
coalition which represents the independentiet idology of the silitary BIA.

In the "second round,“ as the nationalists of herri Batasuna call the
eunicipal elections, they expect the results to be even sore apectaculrr.
"The other parties of the left do not have any representation in Busksdi.
There are eany city govern-ante in which the left is not present, therefore.
the votes of the left will cons to us inevitably," speculated Lasagabeetcr.

22
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Once the councilman are obtained. Harri Batasuna expects to do something more
than administer the city governments. Together with the "juntaros" (pro-
vincial parliamentarians) and representatives of mass organisations. such

as the antinuclear groups. the prosmneety committees, the KAS, and the
neighborhood assocetions. they will form a "Basque Assembly" whose principal
task will consist of preparing a statute of autonomy for the zone, different
from the one which the previous Parliament presented to the General Basque
Council.

"The bases for the statute are already established. All that is left to do
is for the representatives of the Basque institutions to meet in the
assembly and discuss them and develop then. This activity will make a
great impression on the people, which will bring with it mobilisations of
masses and the emergence of collective measures of force," is the confident
expectation in herri Betasuna. Because of them, they believe that hadrid
will see itself forced to take political measures and finally accept the
autonomous system of which the nationalists of the left dream. "If this
jells it will surely be of great importance." exults Lasegabaster.

But they have no illusions that the fight will be easy. "we expect the
Madrid government to react with all types of measures, including an invasion
of a military type worse than the one we suffered against Euakadi. He also
know that at any moment Spanish power can cause a bloody “Ulsteriaation”
(conversion of the Basque Country into something similar to North lreland)."
says the nerri Bataeuna spokesman. he adds: "w. would not be surprised.

Re have information that 'black-lists' of our leaders and members are

being made in Madrid and it would not be unlikely that they will begin to
exterminate us."

Nevertheless. lierri Batasuna remains firm. "Let us not forget that we are
the only political alternative that is not aasimilable into the Spanish
capitalist system of exploitation. No one can expect there to be peace in
the Basque Country as long as political measures are not taken. Re are
open to negotiations but always on the basis of the six points we have
already expounded. Up to now the only reply we have had is the violence
of the Spanish state: searches, blows and acts of brutality. They have
achieved nothing more than to aggravate things. Political measures are
needed and we are going to wrest them from Madrid by the power of the
masses." insists Lasagabastar.

Meanwhile. the three deputies and one senator obtained in the elections

last 1 March by Herri Batasuna will be used as world alarm bells on the
Basque problem. The nationalists of the left will not allow participation
in the parliamentary play of the problems of the Spanish state "that are of
no interest to us." Francisco Ortci Letamendia. Telesforo Manson. Parico
Solabarria and Miguel Castella will use their parliamentary prerogatives

and islaunities to act politically in and out of Spain. "They will go to the
international forums to denounce the situation of Buakadi, bring up human
rights. and call attention to our national problem," explains Lasagabaster

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

elnoet er the eeee tine thet the deputiee were treveling to the Inter-
netionel Court of Juetice et The Hague to deliver e "doeeier" on the
eituetion in the heeque Country.

In Ilerri Beteeune they do not doubt thet the Medrid governeent will plece

ell eorte of oheteclee heiore then, but they believe thet if the 000 doee

not ohtein the eupport of the other pertiee. it will not be en eeey. "They
euppoee thet they could force ell the pnrlieeenteriene to eweer to the _
conetitution before they eeeuee their poeitione. however thet ie iepoeeihle.
The Cortee heve to function under the preeent rulee which eey nothing ehout
the euhject. And if it were neceeeery to chenge thee. thet refore ehould

he eede with the perlieeenteriene elected on 1 Herch who would heve elreedy
eeeuned their eeet. Therefore. there ie e legel contrediction there which

ie inpoeeihle to eolve."

The idee of not eending their perlienenteriene to the Cortee excitee the
Berri Beteeune epokeenen. "Never hee eny party or noveeent of netionel
liheretion propoeed the uee of thie politicel weepone." he eepheeieee. ”He
ere the out inportent netionel liheretinn noveeent of Europe end other
regione of the world. Ageinet odde we have cnerger! ee e revolutionery nove-
nent. not in impoverished North Irelend hut in the rich heeque Country.
Certeinly Buekedi ie conpletely originel ond hee e proceee eheolutely in-
conperehle with other netionel revolutionary proceeeee. we heve eore revo-
lutionary poeeihilitiee here then in eny other pert of the world."

But whet ere the eepiretione of herri heteeune. e coelition of eeell pertiee
without e eufficiently cleer ideologyuexcept thet it decleree itele! to he
Herxiet-Leninietnwithout e revolutionery progree. without e politicel plen
for the future of Buekedi?

”Thet will cone leter ee e reeult of the dielectic proceee. It cennot he
prepered hetorehend heceuee the neeeee decided whet they went while on the
eove. For the tine being we ehell reetrict oureelvee to eelting quelitetive
edvencee on the roed towerd the revolution end independence which cennot he
recovered by the Spenieh cepiteliet eyetee. If we only eel: for en increeee
in wegee. thet denend ie eheorhed hv the eyeten eiter the increeee ie greeted.
But if we deeend thinge euch ee our own police or recognition of the right

to eelf-detereinetion of the heeque people. once thie ie ohteined. the
heurgeoieie cennot integrete thet conqueet into their eyetene of oppreeeion.“
expleine Leeegeheeter.

And whet if independence were to he given the. tonerrow? "lie would eccept
it. or couree." they eey. "hut thet ie unreelietic. Independence for ue
neene the one thing ee eocieliee. He knew thet they ere ohjectivee which
ere not going to he etteined in e ehort tine."

The epolteenen for the netioneliet coelition ineiete: ”hut hietery doee not
etop. eyetene hecoee exheueted end cepitelien ehell he overcone on e world
ecele. It will he then thet the working cleee will cerry out the rev-
olutionery proceee of trenefornetion of etructuree. end hoth ohjectivee

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OWICMI. I!“ ONLY

will be attained. Meanwhile. what we are eaelting in to nine qualitative
edvancee along that road."

Silence and fear

With ite propoeela. between utopien and revolutionary. lierri bataeuna

hae becone the nandatory point of reference ‘ r the aajority of the other
partiee in the Iaeque Country. The potential capacity for nobilieation of
the Narniete netioneliete in the light of the l Hatch electoral reeulte.
dieturbe note than one pereon. Thie ie not particularly true of the
eejority force in the none. the m. which reeeine confident that through
ite fornulae for obtaining a etatute of autonoey it will finally attain ite
objectiwee.

”The eolutione eought by llarri betaeuna." eeye the official epohaenan of the
part of Sahino Arena. lnalti Anaeageeti. "are not very reelletic end frankly

deeegogic . "

Anaeagaeti prefere to ehrug hie ehouldere with reepect to plane for a league
aeeeebly of the nationaliet left. ”they will continue their life. which we
ehall not Join." he etatee. "0n the contrary. we raaffire the exietence

of the etatute of autonoey preeanted by the General league Council to the
province Cortee.

"The eeeeebly of laeoue parlinentariane will out next 'Needey. the 20th.
to ratify that draft plan. And iron there. noreower. we ehell pronota it
an that once and for all the govern-ant of Madrid will underetand that there
are two alternativee retaining here: either they allow lierri lateeune to
radicalire the eituetion by continuing thinge ee they are now. or it begine
to negotiate eeriouely and ceeeee cloeing political pathe to ue.”

“Not hen the that Ileeentary nepecte"

The deleye and refueale by the con to eeelt a path for i-ediete negotiatione
are. in the view of the m. extranely dangeroue. "We are convinced that
they do not underetend even the soot eleeentery eepecte of the league probl-
in liedrid. Thie ie not a problen of govern-ant but an affair of etete which
concerne all of Spain. If the uco continuee to place obetaclee before the
etatute of eutonoey. the only thing it will conclude by deeonetrating ie

that the only thing that worhe here ie areed etruggle." eeye Aneeegaeti.

the 01:0 plane. however. are very different froe thoee league nationalien hopea
for. “the govern-ant party." eepheeieae uco Deputy Julen Gui-on froe

Virceya. "ie not willing to accept the draft plan of en agree-ant with the
new correlation of forcee reeulting iron the recent parliuenterian elec-
tione.

23
FOR OFFICIAL ”8‘ ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

Apparently. however. they will find no one with whoee to negotiate eny-
thing beceuee the eituation preeente iteelf aa a dialog of the deaf. "lie
cannot give up even one «an in the draft plan and the "CD ahould nahe a
note of thin." eephaeieee the WV apoltaaecn.

The beeque nationaliete are not alone ageinet the UCD. Other than Herri
bataauna. the reet of the political pertiee of the cone. which have obtained
legiolative repreeentativee in the recent electione. are prepared to re-
effira the draft plant of the league General Council next 20 Harch in the
aeeenbly of league parlianentariane.

"To reject our political aolutione ie euicide." ineiete Anaaagaeti. “how-
ever. they etill believe in Madrid that the baeque queetion ie reaolved an

if it were an abeceae. ieolating it and enaehins it. And they are pro-
foundly eietaken.”

Carloe Caraicoechea. preaident of the PIN. warned Adolfo Suaree of thie in
Caracae laet week during a brief eeeting m the occaeion of the inauguration
of the new Venezuelan preaident: "Either you decide to act aa a atateaaen

and not like a governnent nan. day by day. or the eituation in Buakadi will
be definitively beyond redenption.”

The uco doea not believe that ie no. Ae for on ”CD Deputy Julen Gui-on ia
concerned. the eituetion ie only ”worrieoee." he eeid: "Ilerri nataeuna

haa reached ita peak and cannot advance any nore. Anyway. lat then do an they
pleaee. we are going to reepect the conetitution and ate it be raepected.”

fragile Coexietence

The 9808 Socialiate. neanwhile. are etill not aura. Not yet recovered fron
the fruetration of the laet electione. they are reluctant to utter opinione
on the aberteale left. Int they do not hide their uneaaa. "He do not have
any etatenente to nahe.“ aaid the irritated laeque "nlnieter" of interior.
Joan Maria lenegae. leader of the 7503. ”lf they want to know aonething.
let then eat lierri lataeuna."

The Spaniah Iaaque right. grouped in the Statutory Union for the laet elec-
tione ( Iade up of peraonalitiee free the Popular Alliance). believea that
the politicel aituation of the cone ie "very grave." A proninent leader who
preferred to rennin unknown warned CAHIIO 16: "The detyrioration of
coeeiatence in the league Country can reach unauepected linita.”

Frightened Capital

In bueineee circlee. alarn and feare are growing in view of the eoeber

proapecta appearing in luehadi. ”If there are no negotiatione, the only
thing that can be expected here' in that the increaee in violence will run
parallel to the econonic deterioration of the region." eaid a netal
induetrieliete of Viecaye.

26
not OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICMI. US! ONLY

the majority of business leaders contacted by this sogaaine declined to
nahing atateaante ”under these circusatancaa." "at least until the picture
clears up a bit and we know which way thin thing is going." as was said by
another industrialist in the Vitcsya chasber oi co-arce. who refused to
give his nana.

The fears appear to be justified. Filled with victorious euphoria. the
netionalists of Ilerri batssuna. confident oi their capacity for aobilieation
end of the support they expect to receive in the nunicipel elections. show
their toughness: "we are not going to allow ourselves to be aseinilated. nor
will we ever becose eeeinilated into the eyatan oi capitalist exploitation

unless they externinate us.” declared tho spohasnan of the Marxist coali-
t on.

Arrigorriaga: Us Are All Nationalists

A few hilonetere iron bilbao. near the Nervio River. Arrigorriaga is a
typically Vitcayan industrial town which bacane tasous in recent nonthe.

It was there that Argala, leader of the silitlary b‘l‘A. who was blown up in
Angler. trance. last 21 Decenber. the victia of assassination. was born.
lived and is buried. A few days after his death. on Chrietnas bve. the
Forces of Public Order nilitarily occupied the town to prevent a large
gathering of I'M synpathisers. Perhaps as a reply. Ilerri batssuns obtained
the najority of votes in the legislative elections of l liarch.

with lb iewer votes (out oi a census of 7.000 voters) the basque Nationalist
Party obtained a close second place. "he are all nationalists here.”

warns Enrique Olivsres who was in charge of the PIN municipal election car
psign in Arrigorriags. ”This was the sanctuary for Argala. who was a friend
of all. a true leader who was above any party loyalty. an euinently nationa-
list patriot. The only thing the Iorcaa of Order achieved on Christ-as Iva.
was to radicalixe the population.”

However. the differences between the leit and nationalism in Arrigorriaga
appears to lessen. ”The goals pursued by Ilerri batssuna sreths sue

we are trying to achieve." said Olivares. "mist diiierentistea us is that
the we of the PM! are not liarxist-Leninists nor do we favor arsed struggle."

ilowever. in the coning elections the victory will be obtained by basque
nationalist. according to Petxi Ochoa Pena. number one in the HIV candidacy
in Arrigorriags. ”A vote for lierri batseuna in not a stable vote but a
visceral vote. "any persons who are not Marxists voted for than out or
pure indignation. 'i'hera nay now be youths who are enthusiastic about the

ilerri bataauna idea of holding a basque sssenbly. In the long run. however.
the m will obtain a aajority because its candidates are honest people

and known in the town." warns Ochoa.

27
M OFFICIAL "$8 ONLY
POR 077101“. 088 ONLY

libar noee Not Proclaie the Republic

Next 1‘ April the town of dibar in Guipuxcoena will celebrate the 40th
annivereery of the proclamation of the Republic. lt hoe a good reaeon for
doing ao. tn l9Jl it wee the firat town governaent of the country. which
after aunicipal electiona. proclaiaed the second Spaniah Republic, which won
for it the award of "very axeaplary city." Alaoet 68 yeare later. with only
10 daya of difference. the people of Bihar returned to the polle "ea on that
occaaion" to elect councileen and neyora for their city soverneente. hut
thia tiae regerdleaa of who ia elected. they will not repeat hietory. It

ie unlikely that any other Spanieh city would follow thee in a republican
proclaeation.

If the Socialiata win. "republicana at heart but aonarchiata in conetitution.”
in the worde of one candidate. they will not do it. of couraa. and will lake
all their efforta for recovering for tibar the choracteriatice of a ”livable
city." which it had when it waa republic. and which it hae loat heceuea of

an unbridled growth in the yeara which hav- paaaed eince thoae municipal
elactione.

The rsot Socieiiate received i.233 votee in the legielative electiona of
l “arch. only 69 euro votee than their direct opponent. the Iaeque nationa-
liat Party.

If the PIN won. it would not proclaim the Republic either and of courae
neither would the ucn. the third force in the poet eloctiona; not even
herri hataeuna. the fourth force with 2.770 votee. would do it. "no eetter
how ouch we would like to.”

One of thoee who will no to the polle thia tine, on he did then. will he
Benigno haecaran. nicknaead the "lay prieet." aeaher of the executive
coenittee of the Buehadi Socialiat Party (P503) and eon of a Socialiat
council-an elected in 1931.

Me relatea: ”They cane looking for ey father and no that day at 0600
becauee a full eeatlna of the city council had been acheduled for 0100.

the lechere of the body. with the exception of the nationaliet council-en.
eat for half an hour. Heanwhile. people began to arrive at the equate and
were looking at the window of the govern-out building. Shortly afterward.
it opened. a aanifeeto wae read in which the reeulte of :he election were
corroborated and the Republic was proclaieed. The tricolor flag waa raiaed
at 0730 while the people can; and cried with happineee."

the Iolente of happineae. however. were followed by eoeente of uneaee.
After the proclaaation. telephone calla were eade to other city govern-cote
of the cone and to the capital. San Sebaetian. They talked with other
Spanieh citiee and no one knew the electoral reeulte and. therefore. the
lepublic had not been proclaiaed. Uneaey. the council-en of Bihar decided
to coeniaeion the youngeet of then to so to the Civil Guard herracka. where

28
FOR 0??!CIAL US! OﬂLY
'03 OPPICIAL USE ONLY

tho ohtof of tho poot, Adolfo moot, told h1- that ho know nothing about
the lopubno bolas ptoclatnod.

Tho ouphorto boson to dtaappoar oa oontacta oonttnuod to to fruition.
Ton houto lator. at 1700. larcolooa follovod tho otopo of tho naoquoo
and o1ao ptoolotaod tho oud of tho aonorchy.

COPYRIGHT. 1979 emote 16, Infomoton y Publication“. 8.A.

8900
680: 3110 8ND

29
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY