APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02100: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ 000300484)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030043-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8340

16 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 8/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030043-0
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclose‘ in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGIT MUS AND REGULATIONS CWBRNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTEDFOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
Joint Publtcettone Reeeeteh Service

1000 North Glebe Roed
“Huston. Virginia 22201

12. Speeeedn. Omeeludee None eed Meee

The eertel report contetne inforeetion on each-economic, government, polltlcel,
end technlcel developmente 1n the countrtee of the ﬂeet Beet end North Mace.

y ‘ , e eel ecu-ten Aeelyeie. es . eetiptete

Polltlcel Sct‘nce Lunar-Ate!» Affetre _l.lbye LSultenete
Sociology North Airmen _lhur1tenle ot Oeen
Economic. “hire 2W0 _8yr1e
Culture (Soclel Selene“) _A£3hen1eten :‘reople e Deno- _'run1ue
Ethnology Luger“ ctetlc Republic _Uotted Ateb
Geoxrephy _nehteln o! Ye-en Mateo
technological let _Petelen Gulf _Reetetn
ﬂattery Sclencee _lxen tree Sehere
_lreq _Qeter _!enen Ateh
"8 ”mm-M00004.“ Tul- _Iereel :8eudl Areble Republic
Jorden :8penleh North
(welt _Atr1ce

Lebeoon __8udea

m. continua/amp SD. 50. 3K. 15

u. Avellebility sun-m
For Offtclel the Only.
united Nueber of Coplee Avetleble hon JPRS.

n-W
'“"""’ "'"' " " tons to»: an at uveoouceo

      

encode-06 Iona-On
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS MONO
16 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(rouo 9/79)
Coureurs

DEER-ARAB AFFAIRS
OPE: Officials Consider Uses for special mm

(m mm M, ab 79) no.noooooooooaosssosaDecca-000.

0.8. Strategy in Middle hat Concentrates on 011
(”www.mr, 18 Jan .0) OOOIOIOOOOOOOOODIO\OOO

um AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Poas1b111ty of Improved Relatuns Among North African States
Discussed
(“CBS TROPICAUX m momma, 26 Jan 79) .....

man

Cooperation Hit!) France Discussed
(tun-s moncwx H! mm, 26 Jan 79)

Contract with WHIP-m1
Cooperat1on um; French Company
Space Coopernt1on With France

Report on imam. Activities in the now:
(am- moncwx m mm, a m 79)

Contacts Abroad Concerning Housing Construction
(um- moncmx m mm, 2 m 79)

mm

was Dissatisfaction With Quality of Life mscussed
(“PM All-.m, 1811“”) QOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOO

KUWAIT

Canadian Pin Plans ms human-113, mucus in Country
(mun mum; m m m, Pbb 79)

PAGE

1

18

 

20

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)
”0660
Maine Reports Moroccan Attitudes on Algeria, Polieerio
(Abdeleziz Dehmni, Mohamed Bellini; mm: AFRIQUB,
28 Rb 79) 0.00..COOOOOOOIOOOOCOOIOIOIOOOOODOIOOOOO
80mm DIM

mom 011 Find: Bring Rev Development
(mmm, “b v) COCO...OOOOIOOOO-OOOOOOOOO

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

08C OFFICIALS cousman USES FOR SPECIAL FUD
London THE moons EAST Fob 79 pp 90-91

I'm“) Although“. mm mahonooduoﬂhodmloplncconnm m
fumuﬂhuonnhombythomunodmanﬂthowuwndd
tutlmumdhuﬂomtnccddmtomthﬂ null-bl. mm».
bohgbbckdboumofnhckotwnconﬂmmmntyuw
uWhowthoynhonldbonnentNaomiSokrmoﬂunthoophhns
Wenchhlumwlthhthoouuhauonofmmmm
CountrlumPECHndtlnmlthuholpodumnp.

llhmmlmundm Wadi-OPEC numb-I. a WEED-ﬁlth
cam. mmmg mdtbm'omnandy mmmwﬁ
mu...» model: mum landlr‘ w W””'
W cannula «a «swam-um . WW °°"’
can: mm unmananomc ”Mama“
m .m Spud-l Fund. mm In ww'ﬁnm
mammmm JmMMG-tﬂh “WM
untolulpthommub International Fund for ‘3' d“ 70 h“ 'n w
mummwmco MculmrnlA 'Dovolopnunl m mm but: 00
Win updb- {lFADLutwwﬁinm mint-nu”;
We!“ mm from one In m, a, mu m
mama. cnn- mum-1. “max-chum
nnlnunnnoubnnltofnd momma-Imu- «mmumi
unto: M ““0th m ”-3 M a, 0.
“(MI)"! W IDM hm.“ “dm‘nmw
but-u ﬁnwbdwto an hmuu’b “hum“...
thth-tﬂmnnnot numeric“ bumauwww
mi: magnum wo- bouhnoch. The Fund'l m“
mmmthnnln M Dimmr-Gml. Ibrahim Mina mu.”
unmmnduhmnlcon- summmumuw hubnmlfnhulnﬂd
mimic: which :- dcllbcmly mmmamw for by m. w
maimunw. “wanna-mu 15 mm!» "
mmitnum mdiththuuoﬂq m at," WWWJ
Mummwm m.mwm n! to: ~
““3““. .W M "m "u"- re mﬂuduubb
cnpnbnliue- m thou ailment to tho ). Ind
mphialmmhdy MMbmm~ Mum.&m
mnuddmnduooogywu mum-Wham “dimmohm
mm In ﬂue-nu under nonunion within ummmnun

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NR OMCIAL USE ONLY

thm wmmw “mm“.m wmwmmm mm memm&

Maw mum wmvm mm
WWWW WWW“. ”WWW? wmmmmmm WWW
mmmﬂ mmmwm wwwmmwmm mam
m » Mm at; max gm mm
WWW WWW“ mm m. Wm WWW -mw
mmr 3.. mmmwmmmsm m mmm m
m Wm“ mmﬁmmmmmm mmmm Mm

.mw

nummmw “
a It“ mm
WWW

mm
a» Would

Winn-dull“

tonne. will
Mania. N
M [units '21.. ch. in-

m

Mm;
NM and alum
America. Their

tom. of

W tho I'll: n

3%.:me
UM .

Madman!“

M n manhunt [PAD mbul
with comic CW

him“ In 'anﬁ'ﬂ. helm

M66! and. u
Jordan-Id
in Latin

1979 10 button Ltd.

COPYRIGHT
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

0.5. STRATEGY IN MIDDLE EAST CWCBN‘I'RATBS ON 011.
Perie AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic 18 Jan 79 pp 16-19
[Article: ”The Battle for Black Gold between the Eagle and the Bear")

[Text] "111 it becoee neceeeary to link the 0.5. P-15 fighter planes to
critical developeenta in the Hiddle Beat? The deal. under which Saudi
Arabia will receive 60 of theee planea-«the faeteet and aoat nodern in
the American araenal-wae aubjected to atrong Zionist. and even Iranian
preaauree. At the tine. Saudi Arabia held to the viewpoint that the aale
aynbolized the epecial Saudi-American relationahip and that Haahington
nuet nurture this relationship by approving the aale. The deal waa con-
euuated and delivery of the planea will begin in 1982. The controveray
over thia eale finally aubeided an an iten of political intereat. but not
for long. The problem has aurfaced again with a political and atretegic
twiat aa a result of Preaident Carter'a deciaion to and a squadron of

12 F-lS tighten-with approximately 300 technical aupport peraonne1---
to ahow the flag in Saudi Arabia'a ekiee. and perhapa to be based there
for a while. The planea nay reaain there an a firat, urgent delivery of
the deal due to the Saudi Kingdoa'a need to atrengthen ite strategic
defense capability following the power vacuul cauaed by Iran—-a develop-
aent aeen by the Saudis aa conatituting a Soviet threat to the Red Sea
area and the Horn of Africa.

AL-RATAN AL-'ARABI learned frou infer-ed eourcee in Haahington that ordere
have been iaeued theta naval exerciee ahould accompany the eerial auacle-
flexing exerciee in the Indian Ocean. It is believed that an ll-ehip taak
force baa been ordered to the Gulf area.

Sinultaneouely. theee novea are accompanied by a new atteapt to atrengthen
nilitary tiea with Turkey. Thia teak ha been given to Aaeietant Secretary
of State. Chriatopher Harren. Hr warren is bringing to Ankara an offer

of $200 aillion in new ailitary aaeiatance in return for eaaing reetric—
tiona on the use of Turkieh baaea by American planea.

Thie ia the aecond tine that the United Statea hae need its airplanea to
daonatrate ita aupport of Saudi Arabia. In 1963, Preeident Kennedy ordered

I;
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL US! ONLY

\

a squadron of P-IO‘ jet fighters fron Frankfurt to Saudi Arabia. ’The
planes perforned an aerial .exhibition in the skies over Riyadh and Jeddah.
According to diplonatic sources, the Carter Adninistration based its
decision to sand the planes on a letter sent in aid-1962 by President
Kennedy to King Peysal. crown price at the tine. in which the for-er
president pledged to guarantee the security and territorial integrity of
Saudi'Arabia. At that tine Saudi Arabia was in conflict with Bgypt over
Yenen. Cairo's intervention in Yenen on behalf of the Republicans pronpted
the Saudis to support the Royslists. the dispute bees-a critical when
Egyptian bonbers based in Yemen attacked the southern towns of Jinan and
Najran. located near the border with sten.

President Kennedy's letter to King Paysal was followed by the dispatch

of P-IM planes to Saudi Arabia. In a subsequent series of letters to
the king. the President established what. according to diplonatic
observers, anomted to an unwritten alliance between the two countries.
Subsequent to this exchange. the special. bilateral relationship between
the United States and Saudi Arabia grew and strengthened. The latest 0.8.
goveruent nove is based on this relationship.

AL-HATAN Ala'AnABl’s correspondent learned tron inforned sources in
Riyadh that the Saudi Governant asked that the planned overflights by

the P-lS's include the southern towns, particularly Khuays Hushit, as
well as the eastern petroleua region. The original 0.8. plan onitted
these locations in order to avoid the appearance of provocation, par-
ticularly since takeoff free the Khunays uushit base in a southwesterly
direction would bring the planes close to Aden's airspace. It is clear
tron this that the Anericans are trying to avoid provoking the Soviets
directly by liniting the overflights to Saudi airspace. The nova is neant
only as a deterrent.

The value of the overflights is viewed with skepticism by sons of the
najor 11.5. newspapers. The Washington STAR described the Anerican
strategy as "drowning in anarchy." It said that it is not able to under-
stand the strategy or the reasons behind the save to flea: American nuscles
in the Gulf. region. Many 0.8. papers highlighted the divisions within

the goverment over the interpretation and ranifications of the events in
Iran.

Although American sources claim that the Iranian problen will not be
repeated in Saudi Arabia due to funduental differences in the situation

in the two countries. they nevertheless acknowledge that the United States
felt. in view of international dwelopnents, that it met denonstrate to
the Saudis its conic-ant to defend the kingdoe against external threats.
basically. the operation is intended to deter the Soviets iron exploiting
the collapse of the Iranian govern-ant or taking advantage of their posi-
tion in Ethiopia or their air and naval bases in Aden.

5
m orncm use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The u.s. Government was also careful to leak the news that President
al-Sadat was for-sally notified of the move and that he had expressed his
support. the 0.8. air and naval measures appear to signal a renewal of
determination to secure the traditional route to India via the Arabian
Gulf.

American strategists believe that the collapse of the western-oriented
government of Iran may, despite its seriousness, have some positive effects.
The United States. they believe. lust secure its vital interests by in-
suring that its oil supply line through the Gulf r-ains open by reconcil-
ing its interests with those of the oil producing countries in the region.

It is well known that fraedos and security of navigation in the Gulf, par-
ticularly through the Home Straits. was the Only co-on denoninator on
which Iran. Saudi Arabia. the Gulf countries and the Western world were
in agreement. But all efforts to form a coma and fornal security
srrangeeant among Iran, Saudi Arabia and the other Gulf countries failed
due to Arab fears of the shsh'a expressed asbitiona for the area. These
alabitiona cans to the fore forcefully when the newly for-ed Arab Emirates
came into confrontation with Iran over the Tush Islands. which were later
occupied by Iran in 1971. Regardless of what ultimately happens in Iran
following the present crisis. this fear will always play a sensitive role
in future policies of the Gulf countries. The esergence of a militarist
revolutionary regime in lren--a likely possibility-4a bound to heighten
Arab anxiety about Iran's expansionist aabitions. 0n the other hand. the
rise to power of a leftist republic will raise fears that Iran may become
a base for extending leftist influence over the sources of oil and oil
supply points in the Gulf region. This is in addition to all the other
far-reaching ramifications of a revolutionary regime in Iran.

Aware of these possibilities, political analysts are convinced that.
barring the return of the shah to power. the security of the region hinges
on the eeergence of a moderate govern-ant in Iran. Thus. there was a feel-
ing of relief when Iran's Prise Hiniater, Dr Bakhtiar. announced that his
country will no longer play the role of "policeman of the Gulf region,"
and that it will restrict its attention to Iran's security.

Analysts are carefully aonitoring reports fros Iran. particularly those
dealing with the intense American efforts to prevent a rightist. aili-
tary coup d'etet and the collapse of the Bakhtiar government, which is
seen as a nucleus of a possible compromise leading to the esteblishent
of a moderate government, one with which it will be possible to deal and
that would not give rise to renewed fears in the area.

These reports have revealed that Can Azdeshir Zahadi, top advisor to the
shah and his ambassador in Hashington, has strongly disagreed with General
ﬂuysar over Zahedi's attupt to use ailitery hawks to convince the shah

to give the green light for a nilitary takeover and to renain in the
country.

6
roe ontcm. use our
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

According to Hashington, General Huysar. with the aid of the shah hinself.
was able to keep the nilitary huke neutral. He also convinced the shah
to leave Iran as soon as the Bakhtiar government received a vote of con-
fidence froa Iran's parliasent.

Asbassador Sullivan is said to have assisted Gen Robert Iluyser, a four-
star Air Force general, in convincing the Iranian nilitary establishment

to resain neutral. General huyser is the deputy couander of 0.8. forces
in western Europe.

Convinced that the shah cannot renain in power without risking a civil war
that would wreak havoc in the country and asks it an easy prey for Soviet
maneuvers, 0.3. State Departnent analysts felt that the United States nust
avoid a repetition of what happened in vietnsn in 1962, when the 0.3.
Goveruent gave the green light for a military uprising against its ally
President Ugo Dian Dian. That military takeover led to a period of con-
fusion and a series of ineffective silitary goverI-ents in that country.

Gomnting on the situation, Gen George Buis, the for-er president of the
National Defense Institute in Paris. wrote an article in which he reviewed
the 0.8. strategy in the Gulf region and the Indian Ocean. The article,
based on the 0.8. novas in Iran. states:

“The 0.8. strategy in Iran developed in three stages. all of which

boil down to the fact that the security of Iran. in the view of Aserican
planners, was essential to the success of Aserican geopolitics. The
importance of Iran grew as a result of that country's strategic location.
particularly as a center for co-unicatione and as a consequence of tech-
nical advances in the develop-ant of weapons system.

"The first stage occurred during World war II when the United States.
beginning in 19b3, accepted the responsibility for supplying its ally.
Russia. via Iran. It established what was referred to as the "Persian

Gulf Connand" with 30,000 troops, in addition to sending a silitary
delegation to take control over the Iranian police by placing it under

the couand of General Shawcraacub. a principal pillar of 0.8. ingelligence.

"The second stage of the Mericsn strategy followed the and of world Her I!
and the withdrawal of British forces frcn Iran. which shares a 2,600 b
border with the Soviet Union. The United States was detersined to make

Iran a strategic protectorate in view of its location on the northern
security belt against Russia. together with Turkey, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
It is correct to say that the arning of the shah's any with sodern weapons
began at this tine under the direction of a ZOO-nan nilitary delegation,

50 of when were senior officers. The nilitary delegation gradually assumed
greater control over the Iranian chiefs of staff and Iranian nilitary units.

7
m OHICXM. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The third stage is just beginning and is prompted by a desire to fill
the present power vacuum."

Observers and political analysts are now trying to assess the immediate
and future effects of the Iranian events on the Arab oil producing coun-
tries. Saudi Arabia occupies a prominent position in these considerations.
The prevalent opinion among the analysts is that the Iranian developments
will force the Gulf countries to seriously consider compulsory military
service and the establishment of a workable. common security arrangement.
Furthermore. they will attempt to settle border disputes in an effort to
remove all obstacles to their military and internal security. particularly
in the event of increased tension between the West. represented by the
United States. end the Soviet Union. should a communist--lesning govern-
ment assume power in Iran.

Informed sources in Riyadh told AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI that the issue of joint
security in the Gulf region is now paramount and occupies the attention
of senior Saudi officials. A new. high level Saudi initiative relating

to the security of the Gulf region is expected to begin soon. Experts and
planners are reportedly preparing for the initiative. It is expected that
Crown Prince Fahd ibn 'Abd al-Aeiz will head a large delegation on a
preliminary tour of Gulf countries to present the details of a joint
military defense plan. The tour will be followed by invitations to the
heads of state of the Gulf countries to attend a summit meeting in Riyadh.

Observers in Riyadh are nptimistic that the tour will successfully end
border disputes and open the path for a real and complete cooperation
toward a joint. military defense program. Informed sources report that
the tour will include Iraq as well. since the country is considered a
Gulf state and cannot be ignored in any future defense plan. Furthermore.
the sources indicate. Saudi Arabia's initiative is not intended to create
a narrow and parochial defense axis. The sources added that Iraq. which
has so far resisted all plans for a regional military alliance that in-
cluded Iran, may welcome participation in a new defense plan involving
only Arab countries. The official scheduled visit by Mr ‘Izzat Ibrahim.
member of Iraq‘s Revolutionary Count ; and interior minister. to Riyadh
in the near future will provide an opportunity to discuss security in the
Gulf region and to improve the countried bilateral relation. It is

hoped that the visit will lead to wider cooperation.

The Saudi position relative to developments in Iran was explained by
Prince Fahd when he announced that "his country's policy is to support
any legal government in Iran." It is noteworthy in this connection that
Saudi Arabia dispatched two oil carriers to help to relieve Iran's fuel
shortage. The oil shipment was among the largest received by Iran from
outside.

8
IOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
’01! OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Political obaorvcro do not orpoct tho Soviot Union to react quickly to tho
diapatch of Anoricon planoo to Saudi Arrbia doopito tho fact that IZVBSTIA.
which apaako for tho Soviot govoruoont, caotigatod tho Morican novo and
aoid it was directed ogoinot tho Iranian pooplo. ‘rho ‘Soviot papar alao
criticited tho dispatch of tho 0.8. naval took forco to tho Gulf wotoro.
At tho acne tino. Anorican oboorvoro notod on incroaoo in tho nunhor of
Soviot rodio broadcaato in l-‘aroi diroctod at Iron which woro strongly
critical of tho Alorican novoo in that country.

According to roporto gathorod by AL-RA‘I'AN Alr'ARAll'a Haahington corroa-
ondont Janoa Hora. Anoricona oxpoct tho diapatch of tho plonoa to Saudi
Arabia to havo a diroct and poaitiwo oitoct on tho v.3. attonpt to con-
cludo a peace treaty botwoon Egypt and loraol. 1t io boliovod that dovol-
opaonta will convince both oidoo of tho nocoaoity of noting all poaaiblo
concoaeiona toward tho roalization of a pornonont oottloaont in tho liiddlo
Boot. 'rho aano quortora boliowo that tho oigning of a poaco troaty will
inouro a oecuro and ataady aupply of oil to Iaraol to roploco ahipoonta
from Iran. which appoaro boat on cutting oil oupplioa to Iaraol for tho
foroaooablo futuro.

Our corroopondont alao loarned iron 0.8. Stato Doportnont oourcoo that.
in view of Iranian dowolopoonto. thoy boliovo lorael will nodorato ito
pooition and offer tho nocoaoory concoooiona in ordor to conclude a
aoparato poaco troaty with Egypt. Thoy booo thoir reaooning on tho
ooou-ption that lorool now ooroly nooda peace with Egypt. porhape lore
than over before. and thia despite the coat and what night appoar aa a
political victory. aidod by tho 0.8.. for Prooident al-Sadat. Tho fact
in that Iorool hoe loot a third baao oi oupport in Iron following tho
collapao of tho ahah'a rogilo. which had a do iocto alliance with laraol.
one that woo aupportivo of tho ohah'a oxpanainniat nhitiona in tho Gulf
rogion.

This lone colon in tho wake of tho collapao of another bane of oupport
for Iarael in Turkey. It in a know fact that in 1958 David Ben Curion
node a eocrot wieit to Ankara to nogotiato a pact with 'Adnan Hondorca
end hio foreign ninioter. Pati- Zorlu diroctod against the throat of a
reaurgenco of Arab nationalion. Honderoe alao felt threatened by tho
riae of Arab netionalian and aaw in it a deterrent to Hoatorn influence
in the area. But Hondoroa and hio rogino toll in the aftermath of the
coup d'otat led by Gonoral Guraiol. and Turkoy'a political direction
changed from one of oupport for laraol to aeeking better rolationo with
Arah countrica. Thia. in turn. led to a di-unition of oconolic tioa
botweon Turkey and Ierool on wall on to noro roatrained diplo-otic rela-
tinne.

Soon afterward. Iaraol'o third baoo of oupport in Ethiopia toll. loraol
had long bonefittod tron exploiting hporior haile Soloooio'o foara of an

9
m omcm us: out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inpending Arab attempt to transform the Red Sea into an Arab lake. The
Israelis offered the enmnorhalp against Somalia in exchange for a secret
pact that would permit the Israeli Air Force to use Ethiopian bases to
threaten Egypt's rear. But the Tel Aviv-Addia Ababa axis collapsed in
1976 following a military coup d'etat. Although tho ensuing military
regime initially maintained the services of Israeli trainers and military
advisers, Colonel Mariam. under Soviet pressure, ordered the Israelis out
of the country in March of last year, after it became evident that they
were supplying the United Staten with intelligence on Soviet moves in
that country. It is no secret that Colonel Mariam had graduated from the
harar Military College. which was established and directed by Israeli per-
sonnel during the Najashi regime.

In light of these facts which show beyond doubt that Israel has lost its
last secret ally in Iran, 0.5. State Department sources are convinced
that Israel will lessen its intransigence and modify its plans.

Inforned sources also disclose that the shah attempted to play a role in
mediating the Israeli-Egyptian conflict. particulary after al-Sadat's trip
to Jerusalem. Israel is said to have sent Moshe Dayan on a secret visit
to Iran on the eve of Al-Sadat's trip. The purpose of his visit was to
assess the shah's intentions and to find out whether he still perceived
Israel as a useful instrument in diverting the Arab's wrath from Iran and
its ambitions in the Gulf region. The visit also was aimed at evaluating
the shah's willingness to continue his strategic cooperation with Israel.

It is reported that the shah's responses were ambiguous, perhaps as a
result of his feeling that the United States has accepted Egypt as a
strategic equivalent to Israel in the Hiddle East and particularly with
respect to securing the oil network in the region. In contrast, the shah
in said to have once described the Iran-Israel relationship as a genuine.
but illicit, love affair.

"hen the Suez Canal was closed to navigation. Iran made extensive use
of Israel's Bilat-Askelon pipeline to ship oil to Europe from the Hedi-
terranesn coast. The shah also opened major opportunities for Israel-
an revealed recently by the Iranian opposition movement-~including the
military field in exchange for Israel's assistance to the shah‘s army
in putting down resistance to his government. Israel. together with a
number of the shah's close associates and members of his family,

was the beneficiary of a large number of Iranian construction contracts
and food delivery agreements. It is estimated that the Sulil Boneh es-
tablishment. which belongs to the Histadrut [Israel's Labor Union]
received contracts in excess of $150 million. Up to the moment when
violence erupted in Iran. 1,500 Israelis. representing a variety of
companies and industries. were reporteldy in Iran.

10
’0! OFPICIAL USE ONLY
POI OIHCIAI. "8! ONLY

Oil pl'eyed e decieive role in 0.8. etretegic plenning in lren end the
Gulf. It ie evident thet the eheh loet hie velue in the 0.8. etretegy
when he end hie huge nilitery epperetue eppeered uneble to eeintein _

the flow of oil end to end 'the lebor etrikee which threetened the eefety
of Anericene working in the oil induetry. when Heehington beceee certain
of thet. it dropped the eheh end begen to neke friendly geeturee towerd
the oppoeition, repreeented by lehhtier. Thie wee followed by en unre-

etreined ett-pt to eeee the eheh cut end replete hin with e netionel
govern-ent.

The cutoff of Irenien oil not only threetene 0.8. end ﬂeetern oil euppliee.
but touchee the U.8.-Hiddle Beet etretegy in e eore end criticel epot. A
eecure end dependeble oil eupply for Iereel hee elweye been e corneretone
of Anerice'e Middle Beet policy. Aeerice'e ebetting of the eheh’e eebi-
tione in the Gulf region wee in effect e defenee of Iereel'e exietence.

lren wee producing 280 eillion tone of oil ennuelly. or the equiwelent

of 10 percent of the world'e oil eupply. It occupied fourth plece enong
the oil producing countriee end eupplied 60 percent of Iereel'e oil neede.

It hee been obeerved thet the enxiety occeeioned by Prime Hinieter Bekh-
tier'e ennounceeent confining Khoeeini'e declered intention to cut off
oil euppliee to lereel hee dieeppeered froe Iereeli officiel ennounce-
nente. In fect. Iereel'e energy ninieter, Yitehek Hodei. recently eeid:
"Our etorege fecilitiee ere full end we heve errenged for reguler euppliee
from other quertere." Iereeli officiele do not eey who their new euppliere
ere. The enewer ney lie in the 0.8. guerentee of edequete oil euppliee

to Iereel, or in the Suez oil fielde which continue to be pilleged by
lereel. or perhepe, with the eid of Anericen intervention on lereel'e
behelf. through higerie. Poeeibly. too. the einieter'e renerlt refere to
oil euppliee free Hearico. which eeke up leee then 5 percent of Iereel'e
oil coneueption.

It hee eleo been diecloeed thet Iereel etteepted to obtein e ehere of
Norwey'e oil eupply fro- the North See fielde. but Norwey ie underetood
to have turned down the Iereeli propoeel. Norwey'e ehere of the North
See oil ie not enough to eetiefy ite own denende.

Since the June 1967 wer end until the 1975 dieengegenmt egreenent. Iereel
controlled the Bgyptien Abu Rudeye end Re'ee el-Sudr oil fielde on the
Gulf of Suee. M oil cerriere were need to treneport pilleged Egyptian
oil to the port of Bidet, end free there the oil wee loved through the
lereeli pipeline to Aehelon. It is notewortlvthet thie pipeline wee con-
etructed with the eid of e eubetentiel nonetery eeeietence fro- the
Rothechild Benk in Prence. It ie eleo eignificent thet Iereel did not
uee the oil free the Bgyptien field but exported it to Europe. When Egypt
regained control of ite oil fields following the dieengegenent egreuent.
the United Stetee guerenteed Iereel it would heve edequete oil euppliee

in all circueetencee. For thie reeeon. the United Stetee finenced the
construction of huge oil etorege fecilitiee. cepeble of eupplying lereel
for eewerel eonthe in the event of en oil cutoff.

L1
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During thie period. with aid from Anarican and Britiah coepaniea. Iarael
expanded ita oil exploration of the part of the Suez Gulf it atill con-
trolled. Thin operation centinuea in the Akka field. which auppliea 10
percent of Iareel'e oil needs.

Egypt ia expected to regain control of thin field 9 nontha after the con-
cluaion of a peace treaty that uould return the Sinai deaert to that
country. It appeara, however, that Iernel' in reviewing ita poaition and
demanding that the agreeaent be nodified to exclude the return of the oil
fielda. unleaa Egypt agreea to let Iarael operate the fielda jointly.

or pledge to aell it Sinai oil under a favored-nation etatua.

The neuapaper HAARIV ampreaaed the Iaraeli viewpoint when it aaid: "the
real proof of Bgypt‘a good intentiona doea not lie in the exchange of
albaaaadora hut in aeauring Iarael a ateady eupply of Sinai oil."

Thua, it appeare that the changing petroleum aituation ia having an effect
not only on the courae of Bgyptian-laraeli negotiations. but on the

atate of Anerican-Iarueli foreign relationa as well. Thia develop-en:
requirea cleee watching and follou~up to aee where it night lead.

COPYRIGRT: 1978 AL-HATAN AL-‘AIABI

9063
C80: 4002

12
FOR OYIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

mm AFRICA}! AFFAIRS

POSSImIﬂ OP Imam muons Am NORTH mom suns DISCUSSED
Perie mom TROPIOAUX 31‘ moms in French 26 Jen 79 pp 176. 177

[Articleu ”Alserie. Horccco end huriteniec hon Intreneigenoe to e
Poeeible conproeiee”]

[Text] Apperently. iron the very beginning in Alsiere Ibrocco wee coneidered
to be one of the countriee which expected Algerie to loee ite political

belenoe end. uybe. to hewe to choose it- real-e in e ecre liberel direction
following the deeth of Preeident hueedienne.

M e letter of tent. during the Ionth of Deco-bet new reeeone tor dieesree-
nent between the two oountriee occurred. he etteir of en erne drop et
Cope 81511 in Algerie. during the night- ot 10 to 11 Deceeber. which hed
reeeined reletivoly unpuhlioieed. provoked e eherp whence of violent
nutnel ecoueetione between Alsiere end Rebet. which went on for about e
fortnight. And on 26 Deceeber. unofficiel Algerien intoneticn celled
ettention. with perticuler we. to the cell in- the lletionel Relly of
Independente. e politicel group preeided over by the prim einieter of
lbrooco. eekins the Horoccene to :eoe "the expeneicniet deeism of the
ruled-e in Algiere."

Soliderity Ilith Homing Algerie

Occmins et thie tine. the deeth of Preeident nomedienne. however. did

produce expreeeione or condolence. noet frequently eocoepenied by pecityins
for-ulna. on the pert of the politicel groupe end their preee crane.

Following e lengthy reeilnder of "the decieiwe ecticn" token by accident
nounedienne for the liberetion of the ml). the eecd'etery generel ot the
Ietiqlel. n:- H'heled Doucette. who ie eleo linieter of foreign moire.

expreeeed hie eyepethy end ”prototmdly hopee thet motherhood end eoliderity
eeyelweyehethermee ctourection. eetheyhewebeeninthepeet. for
the center heppineee of the people of the united mentor Web.“

13
FOR onrcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the secretery general of the horoccen Popular Ilcvesent. Hr Woubi Aherdene.
hoped thet God "will guide the two countries towerd everything which is
likely to ooneclidste end to reinforce their soliderity end their bother
hood. end to ensure thee glory end sreetness.”

AL-MAGHRIB. the Journel of the Notional Relly of Independente. believed thet
the event "should incite horoccens end Alecriens to consider only the idsel
to which these two people eepirs": it sddsd in s were enbigucus wey: "It
is eore then ever neceesery to ewe-ins one'e coneoience. however painful
this eey be."

The legal opposition on this occasion edopted e sieiler ettitude to thet of
the govern-eat perties.

In addition. the 081-? [Socielist Union of People'e throes] has recently
held its congress (8-10 December). during which only e few young eilitente.
who cleie to be supporters of the exiled "mih" hohened had-i. criticised
the perty. which they considered not to be redical enough. As for the
cscretery gsnerel. Hr: Abderrehie Douebid. he did not tail to eesert. pries-
rily for the seke of the foreign delegetions. thet the 8ehrewi cleie is
without eny foundation. and thet there will never be eny question of giving
up the slightest parcel oi‘ netionel eoil. 0n the contrery. in the written
report intended for those who ettsnded the congress. the eeoretery generel
of the USE? reproeohed the sovernesnt lesders for being insufficiently
pusnscious. "If horccco hee not yet perfected its territoriel unity." he
wrote. "end continues to fees the prohles of the Sehers (...) it is beceuse
the soverneents of our country heve rejected end continue to reject the
global stretssy of liberetion which our perty hee proposed: to reepond to
the offensive by en offensive in ell erees. political. diploeetic and eili-
tery.“ Thus he entreeted the govern-eat "to ebendcn their heltins end
weit-end-see policy ... e direct consequence ot the enti-pcpuler end enti-
deeocretic options which have been chosen for the lest 20 yeers."

Mther. the USP? Journel. AL-IIUIMRRIR. did not fell to edd e (ow wishes to
its expreeeicne of condolence. which eppeered to inter certain difficulties
in Algiers: "we eincerely hops thet our Algerien brothers will be ehle to
overcome the prohleee they ere currently teciu. we hevs the eager hops
thet the succession will teke piece in e heelthy Ienner end by deeocretic
eeene." (28 Deceeber).

me Algerien press published. with en epprecishle dsley. e lone telegree of
condolence. presented es coring iron ”the 08?? end the Vsterens end Resis-
tence seebers of the Horoccen liberetion em. living in Algerie.” This
document preised the bettles fought by :he deceeeed in fever of "Just ceuses.
eepecielly the Palestine ceuse." his ections "in tevcr of the unity of the
Arebisn mob." hie "fire support ... tor the liberetion eoveeents in
mice. in Asie end in Letin Aserice." etc.... without my reference to the
Sehrewi queetionu it ended with the proeise to continue "the strusae tor
the Areb ceuee end the unity of the hshrsb."

1h
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"mih" Mohamed Besri. and several leaders of the Moroccan \mdergrcund opposi-
tion "in exile." attended the national funeral of President housedienne. But
the excerpts iron condolenoe telegram free the illegal ﬂorocoan acvesents.
published in the Algerian press. were scarcely in contrast to the content of
the seesages iron the legal opposition. ‘lhe Union of ilorcocan Revolutionary
Forces referred to the emple provided by the deceased in "the struggle eee
for the freedom of san.” The 23 lurch novessnt recalled his efforts ”in the
struggle against colonialisa. inperialisa and reaction.” ‘lhe aessage ﬁres
the Moroccan Unitarian Socialist Rally is described by the Algerian press as
"written in the ease spirit.”

l‘ahat 0n mum Affairs

however. Moroccan radio adopted a less discreet attitude toward Algeria than
the legal parties. Indeed. its political oo-entatcr felt it necessary to
add a kind of warning to the attestations and wishes of "solidarity. under-
standing and cooperation."

As a aatter of fact. the hope is thus expressed that the new Algerian leaders
will opt for a policy capable of solving "the heavy legacy of acouaulated
aietakes due to bed appraisals" of the situation in the region. It is thus
hoped that "the new leaders will use a different mad iron that used by
their predeccesecre"to get the Arabian me out of the ispasss it got
"bogged down in during a period which we hope is gone for good.”

The royal governaent nonetheless decided to be represented at the funeral

of President Bounedienne by a high level delegation. to be headed by the

prise sinister. hr Ahsed Osaan. Mt Algeria refused to receive this delega-
tion. This gesture is resented all the acre in Rabat because. on the other
hand. a war- welcose was reserved in Algiers for the lburitanian delegation.
which was received without any objection in spite of the already long standing
break in diplcaatic relations between Algiers and louakchctt.

King Kassan did not hide his disappointssnt; he recalled that a nesting
had been planned between President Doussdienne and hiaseli'. in a neutral
country. and he expressed the opinion that the leaders in Algiers are
divided into "doves” and ”ham." and that the latter are prevailing at the
present tine.

Moreover. the detersination of the noroccan governsent was confined by the
noninaticn. on 2 January. of a secretary of stats for Saharian affairs.
hiaeeli‘ a native of that territory. as was Mr Khalil Hana Ould ﬂachid.
Born in 1962. Mr Ould Rachid was. until my 1975. secretary general of the
Party of Saharan national unity. the only party authorised by the Spanish
authorities. Having thrown in his lot with brooco thres-and-a-half years
ago. he was already a seaber of the Rabat gevernasnt as secretary of state
to the prise sinister. frea April until October 1977.

15
m carom. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 6 January. Hr M'haned Boucetta went to Nouakohott and gave the head of the
mitanian state a aeasage fro: King Hessen. Il'he next day. his party's
Jomel. AL-‘ALAH. printed in Arabic. published an editorial. the restrained
tone of which was noticed: "Morocco would like to forget the past and to
open a new page with Algeria. 0n the other hand. Algeria longs for new hori-
sona. devoid of coaplicatione. in order to allow it to get out of a difficult
power crisis. Moreover. both countries are aware of the seriousness of the
internal problene which condition their econoaic and social dovelopaen .

If Morocco is currently extending its hand. an ha been deaonatrated by the
recent stateaenta aade by King ﬂaenan n and the projected nesting between
the sovereign and President Bouaedienne. the other hand should also be ex-

tended so that together we night open the door of hope for new fruitful re-
lations."

Ihuritania Favors Peace

If Rabat still wants to put sole hope in a hypothetical chemo in Algeria.
they cannot fail to note the developaent in the Pharitanian policy. Since
his accession to power last July. Colonel mtafe Ould ﬁche-ed Saleck has
adopted a caremlly nuanced attitude. he gives the iapreaaion of sincerely
looking for a solution. but ecaetiaee he seeato be procrastinating: to
hie a conwoaise probably seeae Just as tinely as it is hard to define.

However. i). Dacenbar various indications of the non-alignment of Nouakchott
with Rabat cue to 1 t. During an interview with the periodical mm
L'AI-‘RIQUE (l Secs-bar . Colonel Ould Saleok confined hie nuaarous talks
with the leaders of the neighboring countries. including Algerian with
regard to the Moroccan troops. he stated that due to the new situation
created on 10 July. arrangements ”are being nade...s as circuastencee
prove that the presence of these troops on our soil is no longer necessary.
they will be repatriated to the last Ian.”

On the other hand. a de facto interruption of the aeetinga with eaiaearies
froa the Polieario Front ie not seen in liouakchott as iaplyiu any romancin-
tion of such contacts: a. mUNMIID (ii Dace-bar) believaa to be able to
state that these contacts have been resuaed.

In his cable of condolences. on 27 Dweaber. to Mr Rabah nitat. Colonel Ould
Saleck expressed the hope that "the Algerian people will contribute in a
deter-lining aanner to the strengthening of the brotherly entente with the
other countries of our Arabian thumb." ‘lha lauritanian sinister of foreign
affairs. Chaim Ould Mohamed Laghdaf led the delegation which attended

the funeral of the president.

Since the beginning of 1979. aigne of the Mauritanian change have eultiplied.
OniJanuery. inhisnessegeto thenation. theheadofthehuritanian
state declared that "if a global agreeaent mains inpracticeble. all the
seams necessary to definitively end the war" will be taken.

l6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n 2 January. the minister of intonation announced that muritania intends
"to reestablish friendly and. brotherly relations with Algeria." He denied
that the sending of a muritsnian delegation to the tunerel of President
Bcuaedisnne had been coordinated with Morocco.

0n u January. thankim the head of the lhuritanian state for his various
expressions of sylpothv. Br Rabah Bitat stated that they represented a sign
of the sincerity of the “dytzanics of peace“ which were inaugurated on 10 July.
and seemed him that "as soon as this proqu hss been settled correctly. he
will find in Algeria a country open to the vast proaises of a daring policy
of brotherhood. cooperation and neighborliness."

After having let it be understood that Mamritania would be in favor of a
referendua in that part of the western Sahara which is under its control.
and having declared that in case of an obstruction ”Mauritania is deter-lined
to settle the question of the Sahara at its level ” Colonel masters Ould
Mohamed Sales): assured Jams mucus (13 January) that "the totality of
Moroccan troops will leave Yauritsnia before the end of larch." However.
the Polisario mnt. which is pursuing a global solution. has reacted nega-
tively to the huritsnian suggestion of a partial reterendus.

As for Morocco. it has declared itself in favor of a solution within the
frasework of the ow. which both Algeria and the Pclieario Front look upon
with distrust. because they feel that the current president of the ow.
General iii-airy. leans toward the horoocan theses and could direct the up
to now rather foraal activities of the Special Conittee. set up by that
organization to look into the probles. in that direction.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie. Paris. 1979

8&63
080: “$00

17
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGmIA

COOPEIATION VIII! FRANCE DISCUSSED
Contract With wimp-m

Paris MORE TROPIOAUX ET HEDITHRANWS in Much 26 Jan 79 P 181

[Text] On 19 January. Algeria entrueted a ﬁance-Italian coneortiun. coaposed
o: m1? [expaneion unknown] and 01’ mum-mm: [exponeion mlmown].
a subsidiary of the Italian group an [National hydrocarbons Agency]. with

the equiping of the installation for the liquitication or natural gas in the
third Areew plant. with an annual capacity of 15.75 billion cubic eaters.

The new liquification couple): at Areew. known as "mu. 3." will include nine
liquii‘ication lines. each or which will have a. capacity of 1.75 billion cubic
meters per year. Ae of the end of 1982 it will aleo produce 580.000 tone of
propane and 1650.000 tone of butane per year. In 1972 the Ranch m1?
company had built the liquification plant at Skim.

It is the first ties in 2 years that such an lapel-tent contract. valued at
a billion dollars. was signed by a national Algerian conpany and a French

company.

The contracts. signed in Algiers between acumen [national Coupany for the
Transport and mutating of Hydrocarbons] and the Franco-Italian concortiun
TEMP-all. bear upon the equiping and financing or the nine liquification
chains of the Anew plant. the general construction of which had been entrusted
several nonthe ago to the American Roster wheeler corporation.

The first contract. aaounting to 356 million French trance. deals with the

engineering and the ﬁnishing of the nine exchangers of the Areew plant.
thethirdandnoetiapcrtantotitskindtobemtinthieinduetrial
sector.

the second contract deals with the financing of the liquitication installa-
tions of the plant and with other French goods and services. It involves

2.5 billion trance in the for- o: bwar'e credit and MO nillion dollars
intheforaoftreeoredit. mesetwou-editewillbegrantedbytwo

banking consortia. the first one headed by the knit of Paris and of the

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. 083 OIL!

;

Netherlands- for the buyer's credit. the second by the National Bank or
Paris. ’ '

The signing of these contracts. which brought an end to a close oospetition
between a french process and an Aaerioan one. occurred a few weeks after

the Aserican authorities continued the cancellation or two inportant contracts
to buy Algerian liquifiod natural (as by the Anerioan ooapanies Tenneoo and

El hso. ,

Cooperation with Ranch Gospany
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX 31‘ mm in mnch 5 Jan 79 p 181

[mart] The ED? [French Electric Oonpany] announced that “Gas de France” and
acumen recently signed isportant tectnioal cooperation contracts in Arsew.
related to the liquification ooaplexee o: Skikda end Arsew. ‘meee contracts
are to be seen within the context of the protocol. which was signed by both
cospenies on 25 April 1978. to prosote a long tern cooperation which is to
concretiss their canon and respective interests in the area of liquified
natural gas.

The agreesent sakes special provision for putting 100 engineers. staff and
technicians at the disposal of Algeria to ensure the aaintenance or the
natural gas liquitication plants in sum and Arsew.

Specs cooperation with France
Mammoncauxrrmmmmmsmmnohasamnpiei

[Text] lhe beginning of space cooperation between Algeria and Pranoe was
the min theme of the activities during the two study days "on the field

of a plication and perspectives of the French space progres." which opened
on 1 January in Algiers.

This nesting was organised Jointly by the Algerian Ministry of Posts and
Telecomunicaticns and the Reach Rational Center for Space Studies, with
the cooperation of the French eebasey in Algiers.

During this neeting. the organisers nde a proposal to inforn possible
Algerian users (sinisters. national oospenies. research centers) of the use-
fulness of space sethods in various areas and to indicate the possibilities
of hench space technology for solving probless of all kinds (telecommunica-
tions. but also seteorologioal intonation and agricultural and geological
surveys) which Algeria is faced with.

COPYRIGHT: Rene horeux et Cie. hris. 1979

84163
080: M00

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POP. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

REPORTONURANIUHAOTIVITIEIRMHOGGAR
Mommmmummmsmmachzrsbwpws

[Articlex "(Iraniun ms the Roman 'Tractionel' and 'Union ninidre'
Associated in Studying its uplcitation’ﬂ

[Text] In its "Infomtiona 1978.” the mom ccspany Tractionel reports
on the activities of SONARB! [national lining Corporation and hploitation
Coapany of‘Algeria] and on the research it has entr. xted to the 'lractional-
Union ainiere association. Us are recapitulating here the essential data
involved.

SONAREH carried out a very thorough search caspeign in the region of the
Beggar. where traces of ureniua had been discovered. and its geologists
thus established the existence of aineral sense in Tingaouine and Ahenkor.
250 kn South-ﬂeet of Tasanrasset and 2.000 In South of Algiers.

These sineral zones are connected to the whole of the uraniun aineralisstion
of the African shield. which outcrops in the center of the Sahara. They
are currently the object of either intensive exploration or exploitation.
such as for example:

- the lines or scans Eur Region mm; Coepany] in Arlit and of com
[Akouta Mining Conpany in Akoksn. in the Air region (Niger):

- the exploration in the DJaddo end the Irhaser nountains (Niger). the
Ti'oesti mountains (Chad) and the Ragga: (Algeria).

As the existence of the mineral cones of Timouine and Ahankor had thus
been established. SONAR!!! entrusted the study of their exploitation to the
teaporsry auctionel-Union Iinie‘re association. The Union ainidre has been

associated with this project. priaarily taking into account its experience
in the area of processing through lixivistion.

The objective of the study was to define and select the min variants for
the exploitation of the deposits and for uranius production (0 308).

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘lhis ilplied the identification of the scans to be applied to asks the lost
efficient and the nest rational use of the natural. ham and. financial
resouroes. however. this type of study does Ml. imply. at this stage. an
exhaustive analysis of all the cosponents of the project.

It covered the following technical aspects: geology and cosputation or the

reserves: mining. processing of the ore: general industrial services:
safety with regard to radiation.

Horeover. certain eleaents have been added to these traditional ale-ants of
mining. the isportancs of which is increased by the very difficult local
conditions. In effect. it is a matter of building an industrial complex in
the very heart of the Sahara. Consequently. the prohlese of water supply
(search for potential som‘oes. lay out of pipes). of transportation (con-
stmction and exploitation. in tens of asterisls as well as personal)
andoflwusingfortheworkershsdtobecarefullyexuin .

OOPYRICH'I‘a Rene Moreno: at Ole. Paris. 1979

9‘63
050: M00

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF'ICIAI. USE ONLY

mam

CONTACTS ABROAD COMBINING 10081100 CONSTRUCTION

Paris mom momma: er mmmms in much 2 m 79 p as
[mum "construction: Talks Hith hence. the was and ﬂunguy"]

[Text] On 21 January. Algeria opened talks siaultaneoualy with ﬂame. the
USSR and Hungary concerning the iapleaentation or its prograa of housing
construction.

A French govern-ant delegation. led by hr moch. director of econoaic affairs
in the Ministry of mvironsent and Living Conditions. went to Algiers to get
to know the needs of Algeria in terse of housing. Il'he delegation. together
with the relevant authorities. was to set up a progra- ot cooperation between
the hench and the Algerian coapanies. speciﬁcally the legal (renewed: and
the financing conditions for the projects which are to he achieved Jointly.

After having not with those in charge of the BAD [Algerian Develop-eat ﬁnk]
and of the cm [Credit populaire d'Alg‘rie; People's Credit m of Algeria].
the Hench delegation set with the Algerian sinister of housing and construc-
tion. Hr Abdelssjid Aouchiche. It was also expected that talks would he

held with the leaders of the Algerian construction coepanies.

0n the other hand. the Algerian-Soviet talks on cooperation between the two
countries in setters or city planning and housing were started in Algiers.
These talks deal with Soviet participation in the construction of aevenl
thousand dwellings in Algeria and the acquisition by the latter of heavy
prefabrication unite. Finally. together with Algerian officials. a
Hungarian delegation is currently in the process of putting the finishing
touches on the estahlishaent of a nixed Algerian-Hungarian group for the
construction of 2500 dwellings in Annaha. in the extras betel-n part of
the country.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horsux et Cie. Paris. 1979

51563
050: 161600

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL URI ONLY

EGYPT

EGYPTIAN DISSATISIAC‘I'lm arm QUALITY 0? un DISCUSSED
Paria AL-HA‘I‘AN AL-‘AMII in Arabic 18 Jan 79 pp 30-23

[Arsiclot ”The Open tconony Policy Kakoo Life Difficult for tho Co-on
Kan

[Text] Bgypt'a ordinary citioona are beginning to awakon iron the illu-
aion created by the govern-ent'a prooo and intonation nodia. The illu-
aion that raiaod oxpoctationa of dollaro. gold. oilvor. plentiful food and
honey raining down iron the city rooted on the condition that Bgypt tow the
Anorican line in ita intornol, foreign and econonic policioo with tho Arab
world. People are rudely owakoning to tho fact that tho droon, which hoo
laotod nora than o year now. hao only led to oaorhitant junpo in conauner
pricoo and givan rioo to a flouriohing black oarkat.

Ohoervoro who cloaoly nonitor tho food aituotion and tho political acono
unaninouoly holiovo that ailenco in no longer pooaihle in tho face of ro-
poatod iruotration. oyatonatic hunger and a atroan of govornnontal policioo
and oonouroa that are creating an evor widening gap hotwoon tho wealthy
and tho poor najority of Bgyptiana.

Thio io tho cry ononating tron tho naoooo of tho poor ond tho hungry in
Igypt‘o hinterland. They are narching in tho otroeto in great uuhoro.
ohocuring tho on. The crowda are frightoning ond give the feeling that
one io witneooing tho roourroction of tho dead and tho day of judpont.

Crowdo ara ovorywherouin front of conat-or cooperativeo. on Duo and
otrootcar platforno. and in governont niniotrioa and ofticea. ‘l'he crowda
aro inoide and outaido tho huildingo. Their prohluo defy onuneration.

All tho while tho govorment'o horoaucracy extenda ita one in every
direction like an octupua. adding to the confuaion of tho crowda who oin-
loaaly roan the corridora of govornnont huildinga. They ouhnit their
opplicationo and conplointo to .ployeoo who hava no anoworo end who then-
oolvea aro drowning in the no of daily nioery. The cot-non non io up to
hio neck in oocial and ocononic prohlao. Bvon tho took of obtaining

hoaic food couoditioa haa hecono a nightmare. Thero aro critical ohortogoo

23
m ontcm. us: out!
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

of breed. tee. suger. stsples end clothing. Prices ere rising in e
frightening. hystericel senner. Unssploynent is spresding. Snell shops
ere closing. tgypt's educsted end professionel people ere lseving the
country seeking work. eny work. snywhsre under the sun. They cen no
longer survive in s lend in which freedoe hes venished. intellectuel
suppression hes becoee the order of the dey. desocrecy hes been suffo-
ceted end propsgsnde end distortion ere touted es the truth. They lsevs
bsceuss they ere denied en opportunity to perticipete in the decision-
eeking process. even on setters of such netionel ieport es the Zionist
occupstion. They ere denied en opportunity to help solve their country's
probless end rsise the eessss'stsndsrd of living. the sees sesses which.
for leck of specs inside, ride on the roofs of buses end heng free the
windows. Everything in Egypt's eein street shouts out; silence is no
longer possible.

People heve becoee fed up with life. The eejority of agyptiens ere tired
of living on the edge of poverty. They ere tired of wsiting everywhere.
Life in Cisro hes becoee e grinding sill. It grinds bodies with little
flesh. soeetiess skeletons. Their cries ere filling the sir end getting
louder. They ere drowning out the street noises. They remind us thst
silence is no longer possible.

As the tortured Csirene crowds weit on the sidewslks for buses to tske thee
to work they begin to coeplein. in whispers et first end in seell groups.
but soon the coepleints envelope the entire crowd. The seee story is
repeetsd throughout Egypt.

whet ere the coepleints of Bgyptien citizens. the leborers. the peesents.
the educsted cless. the soldiers end the professionsls? These ere the
people who eeke up the poor working cless end who inhsbit the crowded
neighborhoods of Ceiro: Buseyn. el-Seyiddeh Zeyneb. Bulsq. Shebrs. el-Dorb
el-Aheer end others. These ere the people who often leevs the countryside
for the big city. Ceiro. looking for work. They cone to live with their
reletives in overcrowded Ceiro. Those who cennot find s plece to live
settle for tents. public perks or set up tin huts elong the thoroughferes.
They often forcibly eeiee the setsrisls for building their huts while the
police wetch es en expression of defience end protest sgeinst dsily depri-
vstion end hunger. These ere our country-en. Precisely whet ere their
problees. end whet do they ssy‘I Who is responsible for this desolstion
thet hes becoee chsrecteristic of life in our cepitel city?

As one wslke down the street one is engulfed in e see of bodies end noise
free the horns of public end privete cers. One collides with others ss
one veinly tries to leeks out the street signs. One is totslly sbsorbed
in the crowds end their sighs. In the eidst of this jostling one experi-
ences firsthend the suffering of e whole people seerching for its deily
sustenence. "eery heeds heng on twisted bodies everywhere. Anger swells

2h
roe OFFICIAL US! Obit?
IOR OPPIOIAL 08! ONLY

within you so you stueble over sswerlinos thet hove broken end turned
into cooepools. You wetch in bewildereent eo etroetcer ceblos coeo loose
free the powerline obovo end the etroetcor tones to e deed stop. You
curse while you weit for help to errive. Everyone curses: the believers
end nonbelievers. Treneportetion officisls eloo curse. end cursing be-
co;es n unifying litsny. Those who do not curse ore suspected of being
responsible for the problee. for silence is no longer possible.

Prices rise hystericolly. The prices of soot, vegetoblos end nest etsples
ore skyrocketing. how did things doterioroto to this point? Even the
most levobhoedod people ore outroged by the unprecedented rise in food
prices. The effect of the retreet by the government from reising prices
lest yeor. following the events of 18 end 19 anuery. diseppoered in 1978.
Stetistice show thot prices rose by 59.5 percent between Hey 1977 end
Hsrch 1978. The rise is unprecedented end surpeesos increeses in wogos
end income. The increese hes brought the oituetion beck to the 18 end 19
Jenuery 1977 level end perheps worse. People wonder how the governnent
cen per-it this to hoppon. especielly in the fece of evidence thet the
lock of equilibrius between wsges end prices is o sure sign thet the
stendord of living is dropping. Sons ore wondering whether the government
is not ottenpting to better the econoeic oituetion by deliboretely lower-
ing the stendord of living.

Government stotiotice show thet prices rose by 11.6 percent in 1976. This.
figure vsried fron one coenodity to snother end free city to city. In
Ceiro. the overege increese wee 13 percent. while in the Cenel tone it wes
closer to 9 percent. The price of beveroges went up 61 percent. while
vegetobles end deity products went up 18 end 16 percent. respectively.

Meet end fish prices rose by 10 percent. The cost of eedicel. culturel
end sociel services went up 26 percent in 1 yeer. the price of furniture
increeeed by 15 percent end trensportotion by 6.5 percent.

Stetistics free the sons source indicete thet the prices of soot. eggs end
fish increesed sore then three tines between 1967 end 1976. end thet they
ere now double the 1973 figures.

th do prices rise. end whet is the connection between the price spirel
end the so-celled open econoey policy? Are the increesss inoscepoble end
represent the higher cost of inported goods, es the press would hove us
believe. or ere they the result of e deliberete. doeestic econoeic policy?
Also. why did prices increese greduelly in the post while they rise in
jumps now?

Or Pu'ed Hersi, professor of econoeics end forner sinister of supply.

eeid in on interview published on 29 Herch in ALPAHALI thet "until
October 1973. there woo no price spirel einiler to todey's." “There wee,"
occording to hin, ”o supply problee. specificelly e scorcity of cortsin
iteee. thet gevo rise to a block eerket. Infleted prices were tied to s
few itens. end the phenomenon wee only tenporery."

25
roe onrcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

After the October wer price increases begen in earnest when the government
itself raised the prices of tee. sugar, oil. rice and other food itsns.
Included in the price hike were gasoline. kerosene. natural and bottled
gas. The primary reason behind the price spiral. however. is the open
scone-y policy. which reeoved ell price restrictions and gave free play

to the principle of supply end demand. This econosie principle. however.
is not evenhsnded end is subject to sanipuletion by the sore powerful
entrepreneurs. nelely importers end businessssn. The prices of items in
great desend were raised to I point where only the wealthy could afford

to buy them. Many of these iteee were not persitted into the country
earlier or allowed to enter in lisited qusntitites. These were lostly
high-profit itsss end this feet ettrected e :erger nusber of people into
the isport business. Thus, what started as an open econosy has deteriorated
into en uninhibited. consuner-orientsd, profiteering economy.

Left -leening eeonosists such es Dr herei are therefore critical of the
government for not teking measures to sefsguerd sgainst an inflationary
price spiral at the time inport restrictions were lifted. They believe
that sosething should have been done to protect Egypt against the rampaging
price spiral being experienced throughout the world. Another view ex-
pressed by this group of econosiste is that the lifting of import restric-
tions should have excluded luxury its-s. which are affordable only to a
sssll class. They thus blame the government's policy for having exeeer-
bated the country's trade deficit. Another negative outcome of the open
sconoey policy, according to this group, is that it has caused the diver-
sion of huge sues of noney to real estate. creating ssssive increeses in
the prices of lend end buildings. The upshot of the government's policy
is that it geve rise to e profit-seeking class of people who cooperate with
foreign. capital-rich interests to the exclusion of domestic industry and
development. This class is concerned solely with isportso-luxury items--
and sells to the highest bidder. Hhile the lessee struggle painfully

to secure the basic necessities of food. clothing. shelter and standing
room on the buses. luxury cars fill the streets and high-rise buildings

go up everywhere. Hesnwhile. brokerage fees and sales cosnissions con-
tinue to rise. According to Cairo newspapers. 2 billion pounds in fees
and comnissions went to senior government officials. Smuggling has be-
cose widespread. end the black market punps huge tax-except profits into
the pockets of e few.

Beck to the common men in Cairo. what does he say and think? Perhaps

the best answer to this oft-repeated question is best found in an improuptu
conversation that we overheard esong a group of man and women in the
el-Seyyidsh Zeynsb neighborhood. He have recorded the conversation
literally and pass it on to the reader at this point. The conversation
provides direct evidence of the frustration of the masses and bears the
chsracter of the rusblings that precede explosions.

26
roe ontcm. use our
POI OHICIAL 083 ONLY

Lady to her neighbor: No one fears anything anynorel

Men: Pear whee? I tell you the whole world is ready to go to hell.
They don't give a damn. They prefer to go to jail. Jail is better.
They have food. a plece to sleep and their needs are tsken care of.

Lady: And those prices?

Rant The dirty eons of bitches. Don't eention prices. how could they
be eny higher?

body: book et eggs. How neny eggs does a hunan being need? Tell us.
how eany eggs does e person need when he sets eggs?

Han: Pennies need et least 5 or 6 eggs deily. Paeilies eat like eons
of (expletive oeitted).

Lady: Hy feein has only one egg. 1 only have two egg-leying hens.

Hen: Because you heve two hens it doesn't seen you don't need eggs for
your children. How can you buy these when en egg sells for 3 piastere?
Then how could you afford to buy enough eggs for everyone in your falily?
You don't have the [goverment's] treasury under your control.

Lady: I once had 7 hens.

Plan: We need to say the revolution would bring us justice.

‘oedyx One of ey hens died.

Hen: They told us each worker would have a television set. a refrigere-
tor end e car. Just to think of the worker having his own car!

Ledy (licking her lips): why, is this true outside Egypt?
Hen: But, what heppened?
Lady: whet happened is that their proeieee eveporeted in thin air.

Plan: If they would only lower the cost of living. He don't need care or
any of those other things.

Ledy: Hister. do you know the street sweeper who works for the city?

Men: The sons of (......) should give his a suit of clothing. he works
herefoot for thee. ,

Ledy: Hie clothes are ell patched up. he's going to step on a piece of
glass one of these days. He looks so ragged. It is unbecoeing for one
who works for the city. But look at eonething else. look et the hospital.

2?
rec OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when you enter the hoepitel. you find it filthy. Nureee weer petched
uniform. I event on the Koren thet when I entered the hoepitel the
nuree one end collected five pieetere fron eech petient. "th7" we
eeked her. "To buy e broon.” ehe nnewered. Cen you believe it?

Hen: Hhich hoepitel wee it ledy?

Ledy: Al-Munireh lloepitel. the one thet need to be nened King Pu'ed I
hoepitel. l eweer by the Prophet thet the nuree ceee end collected three
pieetere e few deye leter. "Why?" we eeked. we protected thet ehe hed

collected 5 pieetere e few deye eerlier. ”He heve to buy e nop." ehe
eeid.

Now. tell no. ehould the patient buy theee itene? l eeked. "Yen," ehe
eeid. "um: cen we do? Nobody buye ue anything. If we don't collect
tron the petiente. we can never buy theee things."

No coeeeentery ie needed. Theee ere the voices of people whone viewe do
not appear in el-Sedet'e preee. Theee ere the volcee which will eoon
drown out the redio broedceete thet cell for petience end uke lore
pronieee. Theee ere voicee of e deep hurt reedy to erupt.

OOPYRIGRT: 1978 Al-Ueten el-‘Arebi

9063
630: 6802

28
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GAMMA}! FIRM HANS URN MMACI'URINO. MIMI!” IN CM!

London 1113 Hum; M81 1n Bnglllh Feb 79 9 9’0

[Article by Harllyn Nit-boll!)

WWWWWWWW WWW WWWW WWWWWW WWW WWWWWW

WWWWWWWWW WWW W WWWWWW WW WWWW WWWWWWWWWW W
WWW WWWWWW WWW WWWWWWWW
WWW; WWWWWWWW WW WWWWWWW WW

W :me Emu

WWWWWWWWWWWWW WWWW WWWWWW WWWWWWWWW WWWW

[Toxt]
ii fgzgggsggsggs
ﬁiegﬁii if???

g =§§§&§—%§§
i z ..
Egiggégi Eggs
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

WWW

moazm mom momma arm-um on man, rousmo
Paria Jam APRIQUB in French 28 Feb 79 pp 25-26 1.0
[ﬁeport by Abdeleaiz Dnhnnni and Mohamed Selhnoi: "sum 8tepe to Rece‘l'j

[Text] Sahara...capitel Peril. Overlooking for a while hie reeervetiooe '
about the role played by France. liorocco’e King liaaean n cane to diecuea
the Sahnren affair with French Preeident Valery Giecard d'Betaing.

1t waa a private viait by the king...but thia did not prevent the French
preeident and hie royal gueat fron neeting four tinea. including two long
tete-a-tete converaationa from ‘lhuradey 15 through Monday 19 February.
‘l‘hie laat audience waa not planned. and it did not fail to arouee wild
hopea which eoon faded: "Contact hae been eetabliehed with Algiera," a
nanher of the lioroccan delegation aeeerted. hie face bee-ing. that a con-
tract with the king'a aeyera countenance:

lngratitude

For thie wieit to France llaeean II wee acconpanied by all the inportent
Moroccan pereonalitiee connected with the Saharan affair: Foreign Hinieter
H'haned Boucetta, llidha Guedira. private aecretary in charge of the caae

at the royal palace. liajor Colonel Abed Dlini. Secretary of State for the
Interior Driea Deeri and acne top arny officera. including Colonela harniaai.
Bennani. llkabaj, Douhali.... Another officer, "on e viait to Paria for
health reaeone," Major Colonel Loubaria who «undo the African Interven-
tion Force in Zaire, joined in the tellta.

'l‘ho atatenenta one of theee officere node to JIM amour. partially con-
fined by a niniater, illuetrate the Moroccan leadere' atate of Bind.
”Ibrocco hae alwaye cone forward when it hae been a queetion of helping a
pro-ﬂeetern nederate country to eaaert ite peraonality or ite independence.
We did our duty when it wae a care of defending zaire'a territorial integ-
rity. receiving the ehah of Iran in place of the United Statee and receiv-
ing Anwar el-Sadat on hie return fro- Haehington after the Cap David agree-
nente. Yet we had reaervationa about the eituatione in Zaire and Iran and
the eeparate agree-ant between Iarael and Egypt. but we kept our pronieee

31
M ORIGIN. 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

out of eoliderity boceueo we believe we belong to e club end not e olen.
nut in return we ere rowerded with e certein ingretitudo. Hooter-n eree
ore neted out to no porcinoniouely end ere tied to ewkwerd egreenente,
whereee on the other eide no peine ere epered with the quelity end quentity
of eupplioe. “thie dieorininetion ie conbined with e nuber of doliberete
tripe...." The tone need by thie officer confirmed the inpreeeion thet
the erny ie epeeking up end thet it ie coneulted nore end nore frequently
now thet the finel ecene ie drewing neer. The recent opereti-on egeinet
Ten-Ten ecceleroted thie novenent eonewhet. ”It wee e peinful but...
eelutory...nonent for no," enother officer told no. ”He took thie opere-
tion (by tho Polieorio) egeinet 'l‘en-‘ren like o elep in the fece. It node
ue ewere of the bounce of e greet denger. Hhetever the coet we not
check thie decline. which Algerie hoe not foiled to exploit egeinet no on
the politicel end diplonetic fronte. Right now we ere once egein prepored
to fece ell chellengoe, even if we nuet fight elone." we were eeeured

thet theee renerke ell reflect feirly well whet the king told the French
preeident.

however, it looke ee if the ecelee ere nore heevily weighted towerd poece
between Algerie end Horocco then towerd wer. Why? The new Algerien
Proeident Chedli Bendjedid inepiree the lioroccene with confidence: "no

ie e wiee nen who reepecte good-neighborlineee. All the time he wee lili-
tery couender of the Oren eree there were no incidente in thie region.

It wee not until he wee eunoned to Algiere thet bonhe were plonted to pro-

voke ue et Oujde (Morocco) end in return there were ettenpted oxploeione
et Hornie, noer 0mm..."

Theee e-o Horoccen leedere interpret ee e good eign the feet thet. long
before he eppointed hie firet goverueent. Chedli lendjedid ineieted on re-
ceiving King lhelid'e epeciel envoy Hinieter of Stete lbrehi- Hee'ud end
Ivory Coeet Proeident nouphet-loigny‘e cnieeery Dr Berreh, are, eccording

to the lioroccene. were peece envoye. Horeover the Ivory Cooet ie preporing
to receive lleeeen 11....

In recent deye the Horoccen king hoe hinted cleerly on eeverel occeeione
thet he would like to etert direct telke with the new Algerien preoident.
efter the nieeed rendezvoue with lloueri Bouediene...deepite 8 nonthe of
peineteking properotione. Thie ebortivo rendezvous hee nereover provoked
e etrengo controverey.

Algerien Foreign Hinieter Abdeleti: Bouteflike bee in feet declerod. in
reply to e noeeege fro- hie lioroccen colleegue li'h-ed Ioucette: "‘lhie
neoting did not teke plece not beceuee of Preeident noueri Dunediene‘e
eteto of heelth but rethor beceuee of dieegreeoente not only over the

ﬂeetern Sehere ieeue but eleo over the middle Beet end the Peleetinien
probla."

"thet ie untrue!" Ridhe cuedire, diecreet negotietor behind thie interview
which “meet took plece in Brueeele. retortod. "l’roperetione for thie

32
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

emit predated Anwar al-Sadat'a stopover in Rabat after c-p David. That
did not stop our secret consultations with Algiers. To try to portray us

in conflict with the Palestinian people’s just cause is a piece of pure
propaganda."

Abdeleris Bouteflike also expressed his "disappoinuant" that "Morocco is
not airing up the situation correctly" in "continuing to confer on the
Saharan atteirua decoloniration problen--the character or a bilateral
quarrel," whereas "Algeria affine aost solemnly that it has no quarrel
with Horocco and that it deeply longs to have better relations with it...."

One notes a slight inprovenent conparad with the fiery exchanges before
the nu congress in January.

And whet about the Polisario in all this? A large Saharan delegation was
in Paris at the seas tine, as King llassan n. at the PCP‘a invitation. It
included Poliaario Deputy Secretary General Bechir mate‘s Sayed. Politburo
leueber Our Mansour and Saharan Democratic Arab Republic Advisory Minister
ache-ad Sidati. He eeltad the Horoccans and the Saharans the one question:
"Did you neat?" Their faces showed neither assent nor denial.

Tailing proof to the contrary, the solutions which could have been envisaged
during thie royal visit ere nothing new. The nonerch and the Preach presi-
dent reportedly tackled eeparately two vital points: recognition of the
Poliaario and protection of territorial integrity.

The Moroccan position is well known: "Yes to the Polisario if it will
settle elaewhara...." There is growing talks of a kind of "federalien"
for certain Mauritanian regions, similar to that which Resident Valery
Giacard d‘Bstaing propoas's...£or Chad.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Mrique 6mm 1979
cso: 4400

33
roe omcm. use our
FOB OHICIM. USE ONLY

9mm: of cm

DHOFAR OIL F1903 BRING NW DMLOMNT

London TH! MIDDLE EAST 1n “311.11 Pub 79 pp 78-80

bum
”I
and
mm...
.. u
uh
up...
It
”WM
.9...
men.
9;
c m
‘
, '
u u
l. I
.n
. w

to chuck up on the $800. dcvclopunt of the Dhofcr oilﬁeld. and Infu-

[Toxt] The cconontc climate to changing in can. Fresh on finds in the
structure.

south an rut-1n; hope. for future them,
vcte uctor to coming to term with the concequcnccc o

the conclusions drum by our Dub“ coma

muwum gwmm “WWW cw» rmmmmmww Mm
“tamw.m mammwy mum m maa mm m
WWW wmm 1mmmmmw WmMWmmmmmmWW .m

m mm Wham Wmmmm aim“ mm

m $.de WWW. Rm“
WM” VWWM muwum WWW.
mm mm ”mem

mum uwm wmmmwmwmm mmwmmmw

m mm” Mmmmmm $me
“mm m m amemuwumumw Mmmhuhmw
mu W W.” Mmmmwm mmmmm

Mmmm .mmmm um, wwmm E

3“
ma omens use ONLY
:5; my? Egg;
if; gagiiégsgﬁi
Lséﬂémé ézii:
E 9? 3’32 §‘3E
ggigg§2§223132=
Egicéi?s§§g§§:3
i.§§§ ' 2';3
a g§§§-§%3§E§
g iggi ', 2
a §3§?3§?;§;§§§