APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00000R0001000.0000-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050006-9

FOR UrFlL‘IAL USE UNLY

JPRS L/8435
3 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 26/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00050008-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of s brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied ssappropriste in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GWERNIHG WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIHATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPEICIM. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8435
3 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE

(P000 2 6/79)

CONTENTS
comm?! SECTION

RWK

FRANCE

SPAIN

Haze Pact Key Fox-co Davaluntion
(mms mm, 29 Mr 79) .00....0000'0000000000.0.0...

Mitten-and Future Viewed in Light of latest Elections
(mm: Conte; mus m, 6 Am- 79)

Nations- Economic Policy: Reﬂections on International
Dependency
(Jew mt”; W) J“ n) IOOOOOOICCOII'OOOOCOIO.

Civil Aeronautics Construction Industry Viewed
(Joel Le Tbeule; Am a oosms, 17 m 79)

Briefs
Terrorist Kidnapina Target
Soviet Warning Predicted

Editorial Scores Single-Mindedness or Politicians
(mtori‘l; M10 16, 25 m 79) eeeeeeeee-eeasssoesasee

our, Pm 1'0 m llaited an
(cmem 16, 25 m 79

Editorial Advises Against Negotiating Hith m
(mi-aria, Juan Toms de Salas; mm 16, 18 Mn- 79) .

Militar Return To Increase Arm's Youthml rook
mo 16’ n m n) It.I0.0e.0OOOOOIOOOOOIOOIOOOODOOOO

-a- [In-wa-iso 9000]

NR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

PAGE

15

19
19

20

25

27
WK UrriCIAb US! ONLY

cmm's (Continued)

Briefs

Min Villa Attempt To Mt With an
Greater UCD Discipline

Uranium agitation

'Ilpou-ted' Inflation Threatens Wage Pact.
(mm W, 29 Mn- 79)

Statistics Office Sees Investmts Increase
(meme mm, 29 m 79)

Brief:
Continued nude Surplus

.1).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PM OFFICIAL vex ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION DENMARK

WAC-i3 mm MAY Pena: aevaunnov
Stockholm vncmis AFMmza in Swedish 29 Mar 79 pp 37-38

[Text] Copenhagen (VECKANS AFFXRER)--The government warned of a sizdile
devaluation of the Danish krone later in the year, when the Folketing on
Wednesday of this week voted through a new 10-year agreement providing for
annual wage increases of 10 to 11 percent. According to the government's
econoaists this gives a real wage increase of 2 percent a year to L0 [Danish
Federation of Trade Unions] aesbers. but independent Danish economists are
sure that the wage increase at the end of the summer will be eaten up by a
considerable tightening up of financial policy and a devaluation of the
Danish krone. which follows the D-aark [of the FRO].

The auto-atic feature of the Danish wage system aeans that even a note ex-
tension of the agreeaent will provide wage increases of 7 to 8 percent a
year. The sealannual wage adjustment in accordance with the price index

is expected to bring about annual wage increases of 4.5 percent. and to this
must be added a wage escalation of about 3 percent. Tito days longer paid
vacation in 1980 and another three in 1981 cost the employers 2.5 percent,
while the extra pay for overtime. etc., means an extra outlay of 1.8 percent.

without an economic tightening up. the balance of payaents deficit this
year will go up at least 8 billion Danish kroner. The employers think that
the wage agreeaent will increase unemployment. which now aaounts to
190,000. by another 14,000 over 3 years. The no, on the other hand, is
counting on eaployaent's increasing by 25,000 as a result of the increased
vacation.

The government coalition between the Social Deaocrats and the Liberal Party
has the clear objective of reducing the deficit in the balance of pay-eats
and reducing foreign debt by 58 billion Danish kroner. Since the mic
[value added tax] is already a good 20 percent and the excise taxes on
autonohiles, liquor. and cigarettes are among the highest in the world. in
the opinion of the experts the government has no other way out but to de-
value the krone. whose exchange rate is considered to be about 15 percent
too high.

ml'vwzurr: Ahlen G Akerlmds tryckerier, tockhola 1979

8815

cso: 3109 1

M OFFICIAL USE “In!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY MON FRANCE

MITTERRAND wrung VIEWED m LIGHT or LATEST ELscnoss
Paris PARIS MATCH in French 6 Apr 79 pp 52-53
[Irticle by Arthur Contg7

[Tex57 What can we learn of what the future may hold in store
for us from the latest election returns?

The first lesson is that the majority received a sharp warning
from the nation, a warning that it would be unwise to ignore
or forget. It was a defeat for the majority. or course, it
was not as bad as it might have been. The social climate is
so difficult, and information was handled so badly that the
Elysee could have done much worse. Still, it is a fairly
harsh blow.

The second lesson is that the president still seriously lacks
a large, highly organized, and deeply based party. He has
been working under this handicap since early in his 7-year
term. But the efforts which have been made to correct this
situation have obviously been inadequate. What he has is
more like a set of social clubs than a combat formation. The
only advantages he can make use of are those drawn from his
own wisdom or his courage. To he him, he has in essence
only a sort of strengthened MRP Popular Republican Movement7.
This is very far from the artillery, the tanks, and the avia-
tion support that will have to be found if he seriously wants
to face the harsh years of the 1980s. 80 for him this must
be priority number one: to find both in the party leadership
and in the party base the captains, lieutenants, and above
all, the sergeants, who are all so terribly missing.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

The third lesson is that the resident must be protected more
securely than he is now. Bit er he stands too much out in
the open, or he is left too exposed. This is both dangerous
and unhealthy. While this election was in reality more of a
local than a national contest that could in no way overturn
the country, we saw too many direct hits against the French
president. More attention will have to be paid to protecting
him from such risks, if they really want to preserve the
spirit and equilibrium of a constitution which has the in-
comparable merit of saving us from an Italian-style anarchy.

As the fourth lesson, some people would like to add that the
president himself is too imprudent, as for example when he

sent his son and son-in-law into the political arena. But such
a complaint does not hold water. It was actually very pleasing
that Henri Giscard d'Estaing, with all his young man's sin-
cerity, agreed to draw to h mself the shots aimed at his
father. After all, he gave up a lot to do this; in any poli-
tical undertaking, most of what you get is, as Harry Truman
used to say, "a lot of ripe tomatoes and rotten eggs." As

this young man obviously has a passion for politics, he de-
serves a great deal of credit for agreeing to be mixed up in
this sort of clash.

The fifth lesson is that, as we have often predicted in
previous articles, the Communist Party has fully recovered
its control of its resources and its strengths. The games
of some of its super-intellectuals on the arty fringes are
meaningless. The expectation of the socia ists that they
would make the Communist Party's share of the votes decline
to 15 percent was only a fantasy. So obviously, Georges
Harchais has in no way given up his fundamental strategy:
to strike his harshest blows against the Socialist Party;
to have as his number one objective to break the Socialist
Party; to accept a union of the left only as a purely vote-
getting alliance or as a last resort; to only make use of
the Popular Front in order to prepare for a National Front
once the Socialist Party is destroyed; and to grant no
respite in this undertaking. Let's make no mistake about
it: in the months to come, Georges Harchais will go after
Francois Mitterrand more harshly than ever. One would have

to be incredibly naive to believe in the seriousness of what
is called the Union of the Lefts. Despite some appearances
to the contrary, this is now only a dead myth.

3
Ion OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sixth lesson is that the socialists, by obstinately refusing
any change in strategy, are fatally blocking any chances of
bringing about a change in the system. Obv ously, once more,
they may well be tempted to showy off their laurels. For, by
lining up the best candidates and by yknowing how to attract
to these candidates the most varied and con radictory forms
of discontent, they got the most clearcut victory. They may
legitimately be pleased by this, even if they must start getting
accustomed to winning all the secondary battles and losing all
the major races. In any event, they are going to have a mass
of general advisers who will provide them with extremely valu-
able support in all the coming battles. And it is ust as
true that any observer must concede that the social st message
still keeps its power. And yet, for all this it is no less
true that the most serious part of the problem lies here: the
party has won a battle, but without a strategy. It has seen
its legions carry off a victory but without a coherent party
line. 8And this was the source yof the impression ever be
received of the extraordinary confusion reigning on e act on
night, Sunday evening. Politically France sees only dimly
where it is going because the Socialist Party does not know
where it is going g. So this is the question of questions:
where is Francois Hitterrand in allq this?

Between 1958 and 1978, his strategy was fairly clear.

In reality it was based essentially on two convictions and on
two assump ytions. The first, conceived at the time of General
de Gaulle' s return to power on 13 Hay 1958, was that the Fifth
Re public would only last for a few years, and that General

de pGaulle would collapse, crushed by problems, somewhat like
Marshal Petain. "You have Just voted for Vichy, " hitterrand
sadly told Guy Mallet who bad Just announced his support for
the general's return. Not without courage, he waged his

"war of honor" against the new republic and its leader. He
never gave up.

The second conviction was a sort of rather Gallic gamble. At

the age of #3 in the full bloom of his vig gor, his ambition,
and his talent, he found himself the only man in the center
left cap able of holding high the flag ofy the democrats against
Gaullism. Pierre Mendes-France himself seemed to be out of
the picture; he only recovered some years later and anyway,
since the war he had felt a devotion for General de Gaulle
that was as discreet as it was deep. Mitterrand found that
he alone could be Mr Anti-de-Gaulle. He felt he had both

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the strength and the resources for this, and his whole campaign
did keep the mark of a certain personal adventurism. Let's not
make any mistake: Mitterrand's greatest pleasure will have been
to have challenged de Gaulle directly, one against one, in the
1965 presidential elections.

As to the assumptions, they were Just as clear.

The first came from the "historic" lessons that he thought he
could draw from the post-Stalin period. Considering
Khrushchev, he said to himself that a new Russia was being
born. Khrushchev, in testimony of his "universal good will,"
had Just turned over Port Arthur to the minese, had asked
Tito's pardon had agreed to evacuate Austria (with the sole
condition that Vienna would remain neutral and would Join
neither bloc), and had begun a major two-pronged campaign,
against the personality cult "in the party," and also in favor
of the highly touted project of "softening up marxism."

Even if the memory of Budapest still rankled, and in the
shadows shed by the sinister Berlin Wall, there could still
be a great temptation to believe in the policy of destaliniza-
tion and then to imagine that this would carry the Soviet
party very far along the route towards "socialism with a
human face." Hitterrand believed this, or at least he said
he believed it. In any event, his whole gamble, even in the
grog of domestic politics, was unthinkable without such a

el of.

The second assumption was derived from the first. Since the
Soviet party would evolve in a good direction, the same would
happen to the French Communist Party. So a democrat, even
one who said he was not a marxist, could Join it without fear
or regret, in order to defeat the Gaullist usurpers. The
French Communist Party was quickly found to be a party like
any other party, one even capable of governing loyally with
other parties. An alliance with it no longer presented any
sort of danger. 0n the contrary working with it, becoming
friendly with it could only lead the Communist Party to
greater friendship, confidence, and loyalty. Hitterrand
remembered a saying of the American writer, Emerson, that
Franklin Roosevelt liked to quote: "If you want to have a
good friend, be a good friend yourself." By maintaining an
exemplary frienship with the communists, the socialists would
soon call forth an identical loyalty from them.

5
ma OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All the Hitterrandist strategy for 20 years came from these
four gamblas: the alliance 'to the death" with the communists,
Mitterrand's spectacular commitment to the socialist ideal,

the frenzied campaign against all the forces and all the forms
of Gaullism, the agreement with the communists on a Joint,
highly collectivized government program, the refusal to enter
into or even consider any other alliance outside of the

"Union of the Left," and the total basing of the entire

French left on this sole and unyielding calculation. We know

very well what happened to the four gambles and to the entire
strategy.

First of all, the Fifth Republic showed it was stronger and
lasted longer than expected.

Next, Mitterrand never succeeded in portraying himself with
the stature of a giant. Neither a "hero" in the de Gaulle
style nor a "prophet" in the style of Leon Blum, observers --
even those who were dismayed by it -- quickly found that he
did not measure up to the level of "History," nor could he

by himself carry off a dazzling personal adventure.

Furthermore, Brezhnev showed himself to be no less of a
stalinist than Stalin himself.

And finally, it was soon learned that the Communist Party was

only playing its own hand with its everlasting scorn for
"social democratic puerilities."

The great dream, already severely damaged by September 1977,
split apart one fine evening in March 1978 when Georges
Harchais, with an unprecedented violence, destroyed the Union
of the Left and with it, all of Mitterrand's plans.

or course it seems clear that Francois Mitterrand still
believes in his star. The conviction of being chosen by
destiny may remain strong within him. Even though he is now
being slowed down by age and he can no longer be as impetuous
as he was 20 years ago, he seems to be hale and hearty. And
he was in great form on Sunday evening. We can recognize the
force of h s ambition from the energy he is using in preparing
for his May congress and for the Meta congress, and in defeat-
ing Michel Rocard. In the depths of his being, he needs a
lot of energy and conviction to undertake his present trip
through his sections and federations, an exhausting round
throughout the country. Furthermore, we may well believe

that the conviction of still being able to assume a national

6
FOR OFFICIAL use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

destiny is still deeply rooted in him. To be convinced of
this, we need only recall the force of his television appear-
ance on Sunday evening. hitterrand, who traditionally spends
election evenings at his home at Chateau-Chinon, this time
left up to no other socialist -- outside of his friends Claude
Estier and Gaston Defferre -- the Job of interpreting the
election results on television. Undoubtedly he remembered

too clearly the time he gave Michel Rocard the Job of de-
livering a brilliant speech during the last round of the legis-
lative elections. On Sunday he totally "wiped out" Rocard,
and people such as Mauroy or Chevenement. He wanted to appear
in person on the three TV channels TR 1, A 2, and Fr 3. Then
on Monday morning he gave his opinions in person on the radio
networks. This s the action of a man who still believes in

himself.

His conviction of the precariousness of the Fifth Republic has
now yielded to another conviction, one Just as strong: the
fragility of the president. Just as Mitterrand in 1958 was
convinced that General de Gaulle would not last long in power,
so may he think the same of Valery Giscard d'Estaing in 1979.
Let's even be sure that he feels that not only will Giscard
not have any chance of running in 1981 but even that Giscard
will collapse before 1981. So now he is counting on Chirac,
saying to himself that Jacques Chirac if the Gaullists come
near 20 percent in the European elections, will manage to

have Giscard censured, then to have the National Assembly dis-
solved and even to schedule presidential elections earlier
than planned. He may even be flirting with the idea that
Giseard might resign. In any event -- and we are somewhat
underestimating the role of Raymond Barre ~- Mitterrand is
convinced that there will be a major political crisis in the
year to come. This is obviously a conviction that illuminates
as many hopes and plans as did his conviction in 1958.

But the situation of the Communist Party is quite different.
On one hand, no matter what changes take place in Russia,

the leaders who succeed Brezhnev will impose a first phase
that will necessarily be an ultra-Stalinist period, which
will last for some years. Logically we have to think that
if Russia one day sheds its Stalinist uniform, it will not do
so before 1985. That will come too late (if it ever comes)
to help Hitterrand's plan to succeed.

0n the other hand, the position of the French Communist Party
vis a via the socialists can no longer leave any room for
doubt. Georges Marchais has in fact declared an unrelenting
war on Francois Hitterrand, and Francois Hitterrand is the

7
son OFPICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first to realize that a communist party's campaigns are never
short. There is even a strong case to be made that Mitterrand
personally will never again receive the support of communist
voters in a presidential election. Dialectically, historically,
he is the last socialist for whom the communists will vote.
And that may well bar Mitterrund's way. He can persist in
sticking to the Communist Party, he may bear with infinite
patience blow after blow, and he may swear by all nis ods

his "unitarian" sincerity, yet he can not ignore himse f the
inexorable trap in which he is caught. Harchais's eye has a
terrible malice when it rests on Mitterrand: the eye of a
hunter or a poacher who holds his prey.

So Mitterrand is left with no strategy at all -- or to be more
exact, he is left a prisoner of a bad strategy, and apparently
incapable of changing it at least until the next congress.
But there is also a totally obscured national policy, and
above all, it is impossible for the president to make use of
an "alternation" which would in many respects be quite re-
freshing and salutary.

And this is the seventh and final major lesson of this strange
campaign which essentially brought a-broken majority into
battle and for which all the givens were falsified from the
beginning. Here we have a general political situation with
no other immediate solution but to rely on the experience
now in progress, with all the variables it may include. In
such a case we have to say that for the present majorit ,
no other political wisdom is possible but to tighten r 3
around the prime minister, who is more often mistreated by
his allies or his pseudo-friends than by his most real class
enemies. And the cantonal elections, after all, will have
brought about no change in the course of our rivers.

Unless Mitterrand is concealing some surprise up his sleeve,
for after the Metz Congress.

comma: 1979 par Cogedipresse St

7679
CSO: 3100

8
you OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

COUM‘RY SECTION FRANCE

NA‘l'lwAl. commit MIC?! MOTIONS on lN‘l‘M‘l‘lGMl. 039me
Paria FUTURIELB in Pronch Jan 19 pp 66-72

[Articlo by Joan Natouk, protoaaor or oconouica at tho Uniworalty or Nontpol-
liori ”Tho Patha of hpioaivo Growth”

front] I rocognlto that today tho choico ia hotwoon an attituoo opon to tho
world. with tho riaita it ontaila hut alao tho opportunitioa it ottora, and a
protoctionaiiaa which, it lioitoo to tho national lovol, can only load to dia-
aatiafaction of tho conau-on who aro doprivoo of cortain ilportoo gooda and
forcoo oraatically to roviao thoir way of living, it only to roduco onorgy
conauootion. Howowor. ouch a roviaion, although tooporarily painful, could

in tho long an load to a way of living that la in hottor hanony with tho
ocoayaton, noro natural. and finally hottor ahlo to guarantoo tho aurviwal

oi tho apocloa.

But it wo olilinato thia truly 'rovolutionary" hypothoaia and aaauno that tho
naintonanco or our proaont atanoard and way of living nquiroo tho oaintonanco
of a largo (low of ioporta, and thorotoro a coaponaating flow of oxoorto, l
contoat tho ”oxploaivo" wiow dowolopad long ago by our llhoral gowornlonta:
thia ia tho logic of tho "Nth" month of oxborto in [973. According to thia
idoa, tho oxponontlal growth of imrta ia an intangiblo quantity: conto-
quontly. tho only aalwation io to ho round in an inootinito growth in oxporta
at tho aaao rato. how. thio la a oangoroua. cootly, and talao wio's. lt ia
dangoroua, (to. tho puroly logical point or wiow, hocauao tho ”ti-o of a
tinito world" will arrivol tho noritota of tho now countrioo and tho taatorn
countrioa cannot ho oxtonood indotinitoly, conaidoring tho co-potition anong
all tho inouatrialiooo countrioa that aro oxploring tho co-orcial proopocto,
and tholr own dovoloplont.

‘l'hia oxoloaivo oolution la alao oxponaiwo, bocauao tho roal ”oxcoaa coat" of
tho aalo or a franc tor olatant oxport, with long staya in Oriontal unto.
chaaboro (including tipa),ia ouch highor than tho tooporary urginal coat of

a balancing autoioy grantod to a lano duck during tho tioo nocoaaary for ita
roconvoraion. finally. tho oxplooiwo aolution ia talao hocauao Franco con, ot

tho prico of aorioua planning that ia ailply out truly atimlatingmuickly
tocowor part of ita intornal Iarhot and oowolop auhatitutoa for tho oxponalwo

ioportaonlto own ooil. Hithout wanting to roduco tho Fronch to a Chinooo
frugality, it ia a ouoation o! “col-icing ooro on our own atrongthlﬁaa l hawo

auggoatod olaowhoro. 9
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with thoeo reeorVetione. i willingly edmit thet tho induetriel inperetive
reneine the order of the dey, both to conquoi‘nforeign nerkete end to re-
conquer oure. Md thet the protectioniet and nermly netionelietic tredi-
clone of certein econoeio egente end politicel pertioe nuet he oppoeed.

But i met recoil thet if the French induetriel febric ie new no longor
cepehle of reeieting foreign penetretion, if it ie each looeer end lore
full of hoiee then the Carmen febric, the. reeponeibiiity for thie feile to
20 yeere of ehort-eighted policiee. time and egein, with et leeet four
etehilieetion piene end e eerioue eiunp, which heve i'evorod the dieeoiution
of thie induetriel febric end prevented ite recreetion. in thie reepect,
the joint reeponeihility of en eheurd eyetea of credit Iergin .. coupleteiy
contrery to liberelien .. end the outdated oxenple of the French benking
eyeten ie enomue, eepecieiiy in the very low induetriel birth rete in
l'rence. 1 en not hiding the fect thet on thie point. epert fron feir

worde end publicity operetione, thinge heve chenged e greet deei in the leet
few nonthe.

The diegnoeie of the preeent eituetion requiree threo renerkel e) cepitellem
it e well-defined econoeic eyeten, in ire verioue forne -- conpetitive,
oligopoiietic, etc. for ue. it ie undermined by e certein nunber of beeic
oontredlctione, like the other cleee eyetene thet preceded it. Thie doee not
seen .. ee e certein ”ieftiet neeeienien" night leed one to believe .. thet
it ie inevitehly dooned in the ehort tern. it cen find within iteeif the
neceeeery reeourcee to edept. it he eireedy done to. it cen chenge into
enother cieee eyeten, juet ee oppreeeive for thou who ere not in power.

The Keyneeien revolution ie cepiteiieu'e edeptetion to e etructurei chenge

in lte induetriel beee. Thie hee gone fro. lerge piecoe of beeic equip-ent

to coneuner induetriee. In order for the chenge to eucceed, e profound chenge
in the living conditione of the eeleried workere hed to teko piece. ‘l'hle wee
"Fordien." ‘i‘he generei theory ie the logicei expreeeion of the new, inev-
itebie opereting rulee of the eyeten: one of the eeeentiei chengee which |e
included, end rereiy counted on, ie the fixing of the noninel eelery, which
oorreeponde well to modern conditione. I do not went to deprecete Keynee who,
et the use tine, expleined the cyclicel elu-pe, even with iierxiet ergu-ente.
i only went to eituete hie contribution in the development of cepiteiiel.

lie ere now living through e new chenge to which cepitelien hee been led by
the convergence of i the eutonetion which ie iteeif due to the urgent necee-
eity of pornenentiy euhetituting cepitel for iebor; the diecoveriee connected
with thie euto-etion, end verioue public initietivee (NASA, eilitery reeeerch.
eeroneutice, etc.): e certein eeturetion of deund in the developed countriee,
end the uneuitehiiity of the goode they produce for the denend of the new
countriee.

One not therefore go fro- houeehold eppliencee, eutoeohilee, oil, end tred-
itionel chenietry to eutoneted equip-ent, telecomicetione, pies-e .etei-
lurgy. nucieer energy, hiochenietry, genetic engineering. etc., but eleo to
the lerge-eceie production of nodernieed piecee of treditionel equip-mt for
the new countriee. In thie wey one cen explein (i cennot go into deteil here)

the etructwrel, letting unenpioyuent end infletion in the induetrieiited com.
triee which the Keyneeien policy, Pordieu, ie ep-perently unehle to eolve.

10
”OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

b) This slunp see-a to affect the industrialized capitaliat countries dif-
ferently. it aeeas to affect Great britain and ltaly sore, Ger-any and
Japan lean. Today it is affecting the United Staten, which up to now he. been

able to litigate its effecta by the inperialwe of the dollar and plain
iaperialisn .. two types of iaperialian that the nultinational corporations,
nostly of Anerlcen origin, are fighting vigorously.

‘i'hese differencea along advanced countries depend on two causes: their starting
situation after the war (workable lines or lack of then, availability of coal
or energy dependence, abundance of akiliod labor or lacit of it) and the choice.
lade in reconstructing their induetry .. initial choicea of the period l9“-
1955, and than additional or replace-ent choices in l960ol970.

Let us say that Ger-any and Japan, which were destroyed, did a good job of
reconstructing and chooaing, which explains their succese in exporting. but
this succeee, by guaranteeing a growing appreciation in the value of their
currency, enabled then either to inveat oven more or strongly to braiie their
inflation. This is the opposite of the vicious circle. Since the middle of
the 1960:, it has been essentially baaed on currency. But up to the laot
Chirac govern-ent, the virtue: of devaluation were otill believed in france.

c) France was unable or unwilling to take those choices, or nade then badly.
however, the colonial wars and the political disorders produced cone very
prooielng initiativea on the part of certain loadera of tho Fourth Republic,
who thought in a different way from any of those in the Fifth Republic

(1 an thinking, along others, of Pierre Mendes-France, Felix Gaillard,
Edger Faure in his ”first phase”). They were unable really to introduce
modernity in a reconstruction which, considering the existing equip-ent ..
which was much lore extenaive than in the devastated country of Ger-any .- was
performed al-ost ho-othetically. They reconatructed in the literal sense of
the word, when they ahould also have nodernited both the seam of production
and the social relations. In this area, the only innovationa outside of the
netionalicatlona were the paid vacations and the businese cos-itteee, which
have constantly been untied since their inception.

but the worst is that later, under De Gaulle, when anything waa poeslble,
the second round of choices, that of the l960s, wan left to the colplete
freedon .. as I dare to say in contradiction to the present propaganda .- of
"Nineteonth Century" buelnesa leaders, when only sis: was to take back the
nodest social gaina of the Fourth Republic. here i an speaking of the Major”
bosses or the large companies. cheptions? There were cone, of course. But
not enough to for: a critical mass. The lost obvious in thc behavior of the
iron-masters, who were aided by the govern-out in i966 with an annuity. men
the econo-ic behavior of any heads of nationaliced cotapanies waa acandaloua.
Vhy an electricity, doleotic flights, and telephone calla in Prance today
anon: the neat expensive in the world for the consumer?

And the PM}: [Snail and Hediun-Site buglneeses'li They are the lance-heed of
Ger-an industry in exporta. Our PHI: have often wanted to nodernlte. Th". V“
a whole generation of young heads of businesses who nade the right choices on

their own level. but the econoalc and aonetary policy in 1963-65, [970, and
”73-75 node than, allat syste-atically, the first sacrificea on the altar

of a recovery that is not over yet. 1.].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Couple-d with on unfavorabio ondow-ont in natural rooourcoo .. although our
forooto nnd our agricultural potontial oro undordovoiopod .. thio ohoonco of
induotrioi choicco iod to tho prooont aituotion.

To count on tho huado of tho big buoinouoo to carry out tho chongoo that an
nocooaary today, whilo owoiiing thoir profits by ooana of docontroiling
pricoo, anacka of naivoty or dioingonuouonooo. lndood, unlooo thoro woro

a proooing incontivo from tho govornnont, would you invoot 10 or iOO niliion
franco in Fronch induotry tonorrow, if you got thoo out of tho bluof Tho PM}:
will do it -- thoir horiton i: narrowor. But thoro aro not onough of tho-
any ooro, and tho ooployooo who want to opon thoir own buoinooa cannot do oo.
Only inporativo induotrial planning at tho lovol of tha inwoatnonto of tho
lorgoat buoinooooo .. ooworai of which. ooroovor, ohould‘ to nationalizod ..
can oako it poooibio to cotch up a littlo. and comet tho choicoo. Only strong
nooouroa to aid in tho crootion of huainooooo .. and to protoct thou during
thoir firot yoaro .. can oako our induatriol fabric uoro donoo. Thio will
tailo tilo. For 5 or 6 yooro, Gonony will hawo to agroo to aupport .ho Euro-
poan currency alono, without dovoioping ito political hogo-ony. Tho dip-
looato' Job will to on hard ao that of the non rooponoibio for induotrial
policy.

Moro oopocioliy or a olow growth. which ia nocoooory to avoid Iaooivo in-
porto, hoo to ho unoquoliy oharod in ordor to to rocialiy tolorahlo. Much non
for tho ooot diafaworod, and loao .. ovon ouch iooo .. for thou whooo inco-oo

on highor than avorago. Thia lo a difficult policy for o rightiat govorn-ont
to purouo.

tut tho noo-iiborolo opoaii of oolf-nanogooont, of reduction in tho rango of
incoooo, of tho croation of rooponoihility, otc. In fact, thoy aro in favor
of anarchical oolf-nanago-ont .. that io, o oituation in which on ownor, and
tho bonito, foco on morganitod poraonnol. I rogrot to ooy that thia io oloo

a Ninotoonth Contury concopt. It lust finally to odnittod that thoro lo a
functionol antagoniol botwoon priwoto capitolio': hooooo (to-arrow a clooa

of tochno-burooucrato, iiixo in tho USSR) and thoir upioyooo, to soy nothing
of tho oido claoaoo. Socioty in full of controdictiono and confiicto. Tho
intoliigont capitoliat ooiution conoioto of adlitting tho oxiotonco of thio
conflict and inotitutionaiioing ito dovoiopoont. Our mogoro togon to undor-
otond thot in 1968. TM roault io thot in addition to o collohorationiot
unionioo .. thot lo, ono thot occopto tho capitaliat fra-owork (IO [Horton
Forco'l) -. ond anothor unionioo thot rojocto it but la willing to can a
pooition on tho union plan (EDT [Fronch Dooocratic Confodorotion of hood).
thoro hoo grown up a unionion that io vory cioooly aooociatod with tho principol
opposition porty. for in viow of tho nonogoriol bottionocit, tho only outlot
soon to bo tlklng owor tho gowomioont. Vhonco tho inportanco of a car [Gonoral
Confodoration of Labor] that io an oppooition gowornnont in tho nationalitod
buoinooooo, ond ofton takoo pooitiona in tho privato ooctor thot oro contrary
to tho roal futuro intorooto of tho Fronch ocono-y. But it ond ito actiwo
oootoro havo all kindo of oxcuooo, conniloring tho obviouo colluoion botwoon
unogooont and govorn-ont for tho iaot 20 yoaro. And on thio loot point,
thoro hoo boon no now trond oinco April 1978.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in fact.aelf-eanageeent ia the baaic institution of aocialiae, and la fully
reelieed only with the auppreaaion of private ownerahip of the ueana of pro-
duction, and of aaiariea (even without private ownerahip). ln capitalian,

it may be turned aaide fron ita goal, if it ie not integrated into a truly
organieod planning and if it ia not backed up by powerful unioniao. He are
far from that. farther than Ger-any. He are all the farther in that I have
heard talk of nothing for nontha except eliminating the aocial coverage gained
by the workere in their atruggle. how can one hope for their cooperation on
ouch a baaiaf Uhat ia the nation without the-f To be aure, the abuaea Iuat
be eliminated, but they will diaappear by theeaelvea with unenployeent and
the change in working conditione, and the aanageaent of the health aector for
profit. There we encounter induatriai planning and the nationalisation of
the major groupe. Thia cannot wait. The conatent hylne to liberalie- have
awakened in a certain aector of eanageaant the ”Nineteenth Century" devil
which waa aleeping. firat there will be layoffa and a reduction in aocial
coverage. and then one will wait in vain for the ”aocial party." I believe
that preaent policy ia a dead and. One cannot hope to atinulate the defen-
eive, regenerative reactiona of a moribund induatriel fabric. Only a aeriea
of deliberate grafta can cave it, and then rejuvenate it. it will quickly
be realized .. ea aoon aa we enter the European oonetary ayaten -- that the
new policy ia econoeically and aocielly untenable. therefore we will change
it. ﬂence ey optiulae for the long run.

Albert'a Theorem

The report on the adaptation of the Seventh Plan, preaented in Septelber
l978 by Michel Albert, general col-ieear for planning. epecifiea that if
the arranganent of the Seventh Plan ia Iaintainad, ita adaptation ai-e ea-
aentiaily at three Iain goale. l) The laating recovery of our foreign trade
balance. tverythinu dependa on thia in the oediue tern: the rate of growth
and the level of eoploy-ent, the aolidity of the currency, the independence
of the country. and the buying power of ita citieene. 2) The adaptation of
our induatry to lore and more difficult international coopetition. lnduatry
alone providea four fiftha of Prance'a exporta. The econoeic confrontationa
which have continued to be intenairied aince the oil criaia bear eaaentially
on induatry. 3) The inproveeent of working conditione. Thia ia a eueation
of reaponding to the deeanda of the working people and facing the neceaaary
induetriei convereione and the conaeeuoncea of a aiowdown in growth.

Theae three goala are cloaely related. indeed, the authore of the report

add: “what ia the principal cauae of the audden, ai-ultaneoua riae in unal-
ploynent in all the developed countriea, following the oil criaiaf Apparently,
the audden, ei-ultaneoua drop in the rate of growth, which waa already in
eabryo in the ecceleration of inflation aince the end of the lOdOo.

"Uhat lioita the rate of growth in France today? Above all, the 'foreign con.
atraint,’ the neceaeity for a nation like ouro. which ia concerned with ita
independence. to balance ita purchaaee with ita aalea and to guarantee the

value of ita currency.

13
ma omcm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"And what should we do ao thet France can manage, relatively opening, to
eell pore and buy ieui There in only one aolution .. outeide o! the general

iupoveriahoent of the French: the etrengthening of hnelneeeee end oi their
coupotitive capability.”

Thue vhat hoe been named “Albert'e Theoren” and II the aouroe o: the new econ-
o-io policy can be expreeaed aa tollovei ”hployunt la linked to growth.
Orovth ia linked to the tonign trade balance. The roreign trade balance

ie linked to the adaptation of our industry.”

Soide en mllliam ea ! * Estimation
+30

 

.”5263“““6760697071717174757677

Figure l: Foreign trade talenoe by aeotor. Ordinetei talenoe in billions of
trance; etari eati-atee; «one: Seventh Plan indie", No 4.

covalent: Aeeotiation Internationale Futurihlee 1979.

1':
can
N... “M M 0:71an use an
FOR OPl-‘ICIAL USE ONLY

WORTH SMION NANCE

CIVIL MIMI)?!” WNmUCTICN IWY Vlm
Nil AIR 8 mam in French 17 her 79 PP 9. U.
[Report on preee conference of hinieter of treneport Joel 1‘ 'l'heule]

[Text] hinieter oi' i‘reneport Joel be meulc devoted e eeJor pert of hio
preee conference lcet week to the hench civil eeroncutice oonetruction
induetry.

French civil eviction nenufecturin; now eccounte for cpproxieetely one-third
of ell French coroneuticcl contraction. b‘hereee in 1975 it hed ehoun c
deficit. it ie now contributing to the eurplue in the belence of trcde in
the eeroneutice induetry ee c uncle. ‘i‘hic contribution eeounte to cpwoxi-
netely 1 billion frence if you teke into cccount the purcheu of foreign
circreft by Bench coepcniee. end cppzwoxiectely 2 billion hence for civil

eviction eenufecturing moped-1y epeeltin‘.
300 Airbueee Herketed

‘l'he einieter pointed out thet the epectrue of civil circccft built in hence
ic quite brocd. ren‘in; froc light cirplenee. executive cirplenee cal heli-
coptere ell the wcy to treneport eircreft. ‘ihe cinieter dwelt eepecielly on
the subject of the eirbue. lie noted thct in the ceee of the E end 3% plcnee
21 coepcniee hell pieced order-e for c totcl of 131 plenee end teken crtione
on 63 core. The fiml figuree for 1978 chow the 000 to be the beet-eelling
lerge tremport plene in the world efter the Boeing 7&7. lest you ite
eclee equeled the eu- totcl of the eclee of the 00-10 end #1011. Dior-cover.
there ere definite woepecte for new eclee: to leker (10 circreft) end the
Jepencce 10A [expeneion unknown] cocpeny (6 circreft). end verioue coepeniee
of the Middle het end efrioc ere currently nesotieting for the purcheee of
e totel of 37 eircreft. ‘lhe e in; of thece contrcctc would quickly bring
to 231 the totcl of Airbue e300 c either definitively cold or on option.

Since leet July c new eleeent hee been introduced into thie epectruea the
010 hee been put on the eerket. end the noticec of intention to purcheee
thie nodel involve e totcl of eppcoxieetely 80 circreft for eeven different
oountriee. Suieecir hee Juet ennounced ite decieion in principle to buy
10 of theee plenee.

1
FOR ('FPICI USE ONLY
FOR OFFKHM. “SI-1 ONLY

me sinister concluded by eeying thet et the present tine lore then 300
Airbus“ heve either been ordered. optioned. or ends the object of specific
notices of intention to purohese on the pert of the eir trunsport oospenies.
be meals eetineted the french indmtry'e shore of the totsl velue of this
eircrei't construction to be '30 percent and stated thet this share breeks
down to 3? Percent for eirtreses. 2? percent for engines end sore tun 50
percent for equipent. Gospering these figures with those for the Cerevelle
propel. the sinister indioeted thet the confined orders for the Airbus
elone elreedy constitute. {or the French evietion eenui‘ecturing industry.

e becklog of orders greets: then the tote]. production represented by the
entire Cerevelle program he feet is thct when concluded. the Airbus
proge- vill represent 16 to 5 tiles the production of the Gerevelle program

The ltdmtry Hill Meet the Ila-end

There is concern today with respect to the cepeoity of the French end
hlrcpeen eviction industry to lest the desert. to ‘i‘heule declered. however.
thet this concern is no longer founded on the skepticise of lest sneer. 0n
the besls of the inoreeee in eeles es of the end of 1978. Airbus Industry
hed elreedy tekenuet thet tier-ite decision to increese the rete of
production tron two plenes per eonth to six by 1983. me successes achieved
since the first or the yeer heve unused the schedule to be revised upwrd.
It is not inpoeeible thet the rote or six per Ionth will be echieved by 1982
end thet the rete of eight to 10 per Ionth will conceivebly be neoessery

beginning in i963 in order to nest the steted requirelents of the eir
trensport oonpenies.

AEROSPA‘MALB [htionel Industriel A-rospece Company] ehould provide for this
eherp increese in production by con-inning the efforts to inereese produc-
tivity thet it hes elreedy initisteu To this end:

i. As e first step. it is prepering ell ite veriom divisions end its
ettilietes to operete et full cepecizzy.

2. It is divesting itself of non-evietion releted ectivities in order to
devote its m1 potentiel to the teske thet pertein to its vocetion.

3. It is “king en eppesl to ell fires in the evistion industry. end in
perticuler to the subcontrectors. to perticipete (nose of the suboontrectors
ere being celled upon to expend by hiring edditionel personnel).

16. 0n the besis of its existing tectoriee, it is euboontreoting extensively
esong regionel indultriel enterprises. especielly those in the Toulouse end
Reese-Mire regions.

5. Vith the eid of the govern-cut. it is studying the possibility of
entrutim certsin types of work to non-evietion releted oospeniee thet ere
currently hsving difficulty in obteining orders.

16
FOR ore-mm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After it has distributed its production in the lost rational way throughout
the structure of French industry with the sis of effecting the saxisus
econosiea. WPATIALB will be able to increase its own work force. if that
proves necessary. It should. however. issediately take partial and lisited
steps to esploy highly specialised personnel.

For 1979. the supplesentary activities in connection with the Airbus progra-
will esount to between 800,000 and 900.000 additional Ian-hours. half of
which have already been allocated by ARIDSPATIALE. llhen questioned concern-
ing the awarding of subcontracts to Mault-Breguet. the sinister indicated
that the governsent should isplesent a policy or two-way subcontracting.
whereby AIMSPATIALB would cooperate in the Falcon progra- while Dassault-
Breguet cooperates in the Airbus program

The total of 10,000 persons currently esployed in hence on the Airbus
props: will increase to a work force of 16.000 or 17,000 as of 1983. Il'ais
increase. however. will be obtained basically through transfers rather than
through the creation of new Jobs.

Engines and muipsent
The sinister also spoke of the aircraft engine and equipsent industry.

On the subject of engines. he said that the participation of snow [National
Aircraft Ermine Manufacturing Oospany] in the production of the CF 6 50 can
be regarded as successful. imssuch as it has provided a substantial asount
of work for the national cospany. 0n the other hand. no Iarket for the

C!!! 56 turbojet engine has as yet been found. It is not yet known which of
the various civilian and silitary applications of this engine-«one of
which are currently the subject of negotiationnwill be put into practice.
or when. "Nevertheless." he declared. “the in~depth analysis sade at the
tise the progrss was initiated is still valid for the oosing decade.
horeover. Airbus Industry plans to launch-within the next few sonths--a
caspaign to establish contacts with air transport cospaniee with a view
prisarily to optisizing the European project for [reduction of a 'sedius
courier' plane equipped with this engine. This plane will be sarketed
with a view to putting it into service in 1985.

Turning to the subject of equip-ant. the sinister esphasised that this
sector is being structured so as to enable it to attack in sequence the
njor export sarkets. and added that it is waking an iaportant contribu-
tion-~under the aegis of Airbus Industrynto the developsent of the Airbus

”duct e

The French equinent ssnufacturers lust. however, reckon increasingly with
their British and Gersan cospetitors.

1?
FOR orncw. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Industry of the Future
The ninistsr concluded his discourse with the following ohservstionss

”At s tile when my eoonosic sectors ure experiencing difficulties in
every country on esrth, it is resssuring to know thst the trench sm-
nsuticsl construction industry is the pillar of the Mopeen seronsuticsl
construction industry. end thst it is doing well.

"As for the long-tears prospects. this sctivity--hecsuse or the edvsnoed
technology or the equipsent it esploys--ie one of those industries in the
developed countries which for sole tile to cone will not heve to fear
cospetition fros countries where low wages prevsil.

"It is an industry thst consuses little energy and is econosicsl in its

use of raw Isteriels in proportion to the value of the finished product.
and it is therefore s good industry for our country to choose for itself
in the interactions]. redivision or lshor.

”Pros the stmdpoint of trsde. en independent eviction industry enshles us
to cospete todsy epinst the virtul sonopoly of the United Stems. end to
foresee cooperstion--st the end or the current period-with the Asericsn
svistion industry on en even (end therefore realistic) bssis.

”Pros s sore genersl standpoint. it should be pointed out thet the svietion
industry represents one of the best maples of tangible Mopeen coopers-
tion in the sphere of industrisl sctivities--cooperstion thst is prepared
st the level of the industrislists end eventmtee in decisions tsken st the
level 01' the concerned governsents. which heve so far slwsys been success-
ful in finding solutions thet otter reciprocsl edvsntsgee.

"In eny event,” he concluded, ‘we lust prepsre for the future by developing
new products thet ere adopted to tosorrow's needs. end we met experiment-
slly detersine the potential mket {or these products. for success will
depend shove all on the cones-cm espects of this sctivity. In todsv's
world one sust be both inventor and serchsnt. but first end fore-0st s
nerd-ism.“

011’“!!th Air I: Cos-cs. Psris. 1979

10993
GUI 3100

18
FOR Oi-‘c'lCMl. use ONLY
FOR OVFICIM. USE ONLY

comm 830210! MOS

BRIEFS

WRIST mmmc TARGET-Cleude Btchegerey. preeident and director
generel of Ueinor [Steel Mille of Northern and Eastern France], but
requeeted police protection for hieeelf end hie fully; he feere e kid-

neping etteqt by the "eutononee" [terroriet group]. [Text] [Peril
PARIS NATO}! in French 20 Apr 79 p 63]

SOVIET "MING "Elmo-Soviet leedere will let Giecerd know on hie
errivel in Hoecow et the end of April the: they went neither of two

thinge to heppen: the rise to power of Hercheie end Hitterrend, which
would leed to e cold ver; or the Iilitery integretion of Europe. which

would leed to veruperiod. [Text] [Perie PARIS HATCH in French 20 Apr 79
p 63]

080: 3100

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CWNTRY SECTIW SPAIN

BDIMIAL SCGSS SINGLE-HINDBDNIS 01’ POLITICIARS
liedrid CAHBIO 16 in Spenieh 25 Her 79 p 3
[Bditorieh "The Ayetollehe oi Spein"]

[Text] He ere ell denocrete in thie country-with the exception of

Don Blee Pinernbut when the moment of truth erieee, elnoet every
politicel leeder believee thet those who did not vote for hie perty

ere inhecilee end thet if only the enert onee hed voted. he would

heve won. The eocieliet. Alfoneo Guerre, hee been the one who hee noet
explicitly expreeeed thie netionel entidenocretic eentinent publicly

in blaming the Spenierde for the defeet of hie perty in the recent
electione; but, of cauree. he ie not elone in thie euthoriterien

religion which we eurely inherited from General Prenco. But Generel Prenco

in turn inherited it from e rich lode thet rune through the netionel
eoul.

Since the pertiee of the left heve loet the electione, they heve elreedy
enn0unced thet they will oppose the denocreticelly elected govern-eat
with their torcee in the etreet end the unione in the fectorhe. A good
etert. If we win the electione. there ere no etrikee here, but if we.
loee thee we ere going to reach the nejority of fools who did not vote
for ue with etrikee end in the etreet thet we ere the enert once end

thet they cennot govern without ue. Thet ie, thet we ere going to beet
the verdict of the polle harder then e rug. And long live deeocrecy.

Ho euet truet thet thie brevedo on the pert of Don Sentiego Cerrillonwhich
inedietely received the eupport of the eocieliet union--ie no more then
thet. brevedo, end will not leed to fighting in the etreete end in the

fectoriee egeinet the goverment to perelyee it eltogether end thue ueurp
tho netionel will expreeeed on 1 Herch.

But the peroxyen of the entidenocretic religion finde ite beet eyetollehe
in the leedere of the ultre-Beeque llerri Beteeune coelition. Diepoeed.
it eeeene. not to let theneelvce be "ebeorbed by the Veetern cepiteliet
eyeteel," they ere determined. ee cen be deduced {run their eteteaente,
to convert the Beeque country into e pernenent bettlefield. Convinced
thet their 150.000 votee ere the only onee thet count end thet the votee

20
roe orncm. us'n any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the other partiea who received the majority along the Baaquea are not
worth anything at all, they plan a political action that may lead from
provocation to provocation. to a eituation of civil war in the northern
part of the country. '

If Alexia da Tocqueville were to riae from the grave. he would probably
another hiaaelf with a good Baaque beret rather than continue to witneaa
the aad apectacle of freedom and democracy being converted into droaa

by a minority of the enlightened.

The monochromatic government of Mr Suaree ia thua threatened by very
powerful forcea that are going to out by all neana to prevent hill

from governing in peace. In the field of labor, blood will probably

not flow but it may diacourage private inveatxnent that would thua

reduce the uncaploynent that affecta hundreda of thouaanda of Spaniah
fantliea. whore blood may indeed flow ia in the Basque Country. And
here the Suarez government cannot continue to apply the policy of
looking on and not doing anything. It will either diaplay a lot of
imagination and courage or the ayatollaha of the north on their own

will initiate the fourth or fifth Carliat war in leaa than two centuriea.

The goverment'a objective in the Baaque quaation moat be to iaolate

the ultra-Baaque enlightened onea and reduce the nuaber of deaperate
people who have given then their vote out of pure irritation over

what they conaider the very elow proceaa of autonomy for Buokadi.

And in order to achieve that. there ia no other way than to conclude

a pact with the aodarate Baequea for broad autonomy; without niggardlineaa
and without fear. "Without giving in to blackmail, but alao without
giving in to the logic of a centraliat atate. which haa alwaya worked
poorly in Spain and which it ia already time to tranaforn from top to
bottcn. me French model of centraliat atate never did do well in thaae
parta. and there ehould be no fear at all of tranaforuing it. That

ia the great national taak today, the only one that can eateblieh the
beaea ao that peace with fimneaa can flouriah here, and for aevaral
generationa.

COPYRIGlfr: CANDID l6. Informacion y Publicacionea. S.A.. Madrid. 1979

8711
080: 3l10

21
ran OFFICIAL US! MY
Pm OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CWNTRY 836110.: SPAIN

ORT. m 1‘0 FORM UNITED PARTY
liedrid CAHBIO 16 in Spenieh 25 Her 79 pp 27. 29

[Text] Hiee from experience end reelistic, on the morning of 2 Ketch
they celled one enother on the telephone end esked seriouely if the hour
hed not struck. There were no more votee other then those thet glowed
in the computer end in their hopee. The poeeibility thet the belt
dozen deputiee of the redicel left hed touched with their hende wee
veniehing with the light of day. The Spenieh Lehor Petty (as) end

the Horkere Revolutionery Orgenitetion (ORT) wee ineugureting enother

I. yeere out of the perlienent deepite getting 350.000 votee.

Perliementery Aepiretion

which is not bed for the redicel left. for e deemed left. precribed

end reviled by the eetebliehed left. for e left thet 2 yeere ego wee
still illegel, for e m thet celled Bledio Gercie Ceetro "Reeon Lobeto,"
end e Jose Senrone who wee going from "Intxeueti" coerede for life

end the CRT.

"The course thet eweite no is not et ell eesy, even ee e mitied perty."
edeite Senroeze. who elmoet repeets word for word whet Gercle Ceetro
also told CAHBIO 16 ebout the future of these two perties, both with
perlienentery eepiretione.

"But there ere other eronee of etruggle," he edde. "such es the nunicipel
or union ereee end other formulee to melt: our preeence in eociety. euch
so our orgenieetionel cepecity ee e petty end people to fact. the offenoive
of the right. where we ere ere going to reveel oureelvee so en inportent

pollticel force. Although. of couree, our preeence in the perliuent
would have neent precious help for no."

Gercin Cestro ie eleo optinietic: "The parties of the right do not heve
e eolution for the crieie of the vest, nor do those of the octebliehed
left offer reel elternetives beceuse they ere weighed down with any
linee of preeeuree. intereete end coneervetien. So thet in view of whet
is heppening in Europe right now. eepecielly in the Hediterreneen tree,

22

UN MYOVev "on Moe
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

the prospects are enormous." To the point that. according to Senrooe.
the future unified party expects to inspire the youth who today let
themselves be won over by ”pesotien."

hhat can be called the Spanish Workers Party will be formed early in

May after a process of debate within both parties at the different
organizational levels until they held simultaneous special congresses

on 28 and 29 April. and finally the unification congress. As a first
phase. the leadership of the new party will be collegial in order to
ell-lusts personalities and the susceptibility of the possible predominance
of one or the other and to achieve the cohesion and homogenization of

the two organisations as soon as possible.

Both Garcia Castro and Sanrona admit that the leaders of both parties

are pushing the union but they assert that there is no boesisa in

this. All questions are going to be debated and it is not a case of
trying to insure the future of the leaders. "He had already tried

the merger on other occasions. In 1976, we advanced far in that direction
although later it did not jell." recalls Garcia Castro. "I believe that
we were bound to unify and that there was only a problem of the data.

So that. frankly. it was preferable to do it before the municipal
elections rather than later. with a view to deriving greater yield from
the operation."

Unite in Time

Because the two also agree. in the words of Garcia Castro. “that there
are enough points of unity to work within the same party." To demonstrate
it. Senrona stresses the speed with which the joint steteaent released

on Sunday, the llth. was formulated. "because if the phrasing of the
document is weak. on the other hand it has great ideological and political
value. even thOugh it may contain specific formulations of each one

of the parties, because they are perfectly assuned by the other." They
do not discount the fact that some ideological and organisational questions
still remain to be reesolved. such as the territorial structure of the
future party (in the m. it is federal), but as Senrata says, ”if

we wished to settle all the differences between the two parties, we

could not form the party in l and a half months. The fornation of a
unified party will make it possible to create the framework within

which to debate and resolve those differences."

Carrillo Is Vexed

This is soeething. certainly. that has not set well with the secretary
general of the Spanish Coauunist Party (P03), Santiago Carrillo, who
has already hurled his artillery against the still inexistent party,
as also has his official organ. HINDO OBRERO.

Garcia Castro understands it "because Carrillo is the one who likes our
union the least." The secretary general of the m criticizes the
actions of the Burocasnunist because they are contrary to the interests

23
row. orrxcm. use out!
roe 0.'FICIAL USE ONLY

of the working class and regret: that he did not win any seat in the
parliament to insure the defense of the people's interests there. "But
I believe we will also influence the forces of the left from without."

Santa-n believes that the union of the left is important today with the
presence of Carrillo and his followers in the P02. "Forrw-atsly
camunise is not just sane people. Carrillo’s words in tevor of unity
are not continued by the facts. he would like us not to exist. But
he 1: way off if he believes he is going to make us disappear free the
leap.

Bread and Salt

The criticism of Santana refers to the silence of the Spanish Conunist
Party--although the Spanish Socialist work: rs Party (P308) has also
remained silent-which has not expressed itself regarding the proposal
to sign a pledge to support the candidates of the left in the best
position to obtain mayoral seats. "He know that the pledge would work
in its favor inasmuch as the P808 and the P03. in line with the results
of the general elections. will gain better positions than we. but

we want it to be signed. It is the same as always: first they deny

us bread and salt and then they ask for our support. because even though
we are smaller. we do not cease to be an important force."

And Garcia Castro expects that support of the P808 and PCB where the
candidaoies of the our and m are better placed, "because there will
be places where that will be true." and he warns the rest of the left
that "the workers will not tolerate anything else."

COPYRIGHT: CANDID 16. Informecion y Publication", S.A., ﬂedrid, 1979

8711
(180: 3110

2‘;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION SPAIN

EDITORIAL ADVISES AGAINST NESOTIATING HIT}! ETA
Hedrio CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 18 Mar 79 p 3
(Editorial by Juan Tones de Sales: "Autonoey for the Basques")

[Text] Once the electoral euphoria passed. the denons of Spain again made
their turbulent appearance. mrdering a general in Madrid. kidnapping and
extorting free e Basque businessnan. or robbing in hundreds of kilos. The
truce which the barbarians of the arsed struggle granted to our recently
born denocracy last a very short tine. Once again it was evident that the
consolidation of a regine of freedons in this lend requires as a prior con-
dition the solution of the very grave Basque problen. And every day tine
is growing shorter.

The basic facts of the problem are sisple. A significant portion of the
Basque population-u portion that has increased considerably since the 1977
elections-osupports a revolutionary and independent solution for the Basque
country. Bands of arned guerrillas. which are protected by that part of
public opinion, terrorize the rest of the inhabitants of the Basque country
and endeavor by every leans to aggravate the political and social crisis to
the point where it will explode. The strategy for independence and revolu-
tion at gunpoint no possibility for success, but it does contain sufficient
impact to stash our regime of freedoes to bits.

'l'o eelr for the ilpossible is one way to achieve the holocaust and death it-
self, but unfortunately it can nany sore deaths and my sore holocausts at
the ease ties. The secession of the Basque country is ispossible because
in this society there are groups perfectly capable of stopping it well be.
fore it happens. But in stopping it the forces set loose would bring about
the disappearance of our freedom for the unpteenth tine.

The first fact. therefore. is that Basque independence is i-possible. The
second fact is that the strategy of Spanish denocrscy in this year and a
half has not only not solved the Basque problen but has allowed it to be-
cone considerably aggravated. Tensions in Basque society are deeper than
it appeared. and there is no doubt that if the sane policy is continued.
the only result vill be lore of the sane; sore violence. lore death. and
greater danger for our freedons.

25
Iron orrtcm. use my
FOR anlClAL USE ONLY

The government‘s police on the Basque matter must therefore be changed
quickly. On the subject of violence and bareurousness there can be no
concessions: the policy of fighting erine must continue exactly the same

or even more forcefully. It is not necessary to change police strategy.
but a distinctly stronger effort to find political solutions must be made.
The government. the socialists. the communists and the Basques who love
liberty without constraints oust tackle the problem of the Autonoey Statute
with courage and without pottiness. If the Basques do not beeoee autono-
nous very soon. we will be genbliug with freedom in this country.

There is absolutely nothing to come to an agreement with the ETA [Basque
Fatherland and Liberty Group] on except perhaps the schedule in the jails
where the sen of the boobs and the gun should he looked up. But it is
necessary to reach reasonable solutions with those autononists who are
capable of choosing freedom, before the holocaust falls upon everyone.
President Suarez. who has produced miracles in other areas of domestic
life, has failed to date in the Basque question. And there is not too
much time left for his or anyone else to continue to fail. Agreement on
broad autonomy for the Basques must be resthed somehow so that they may
solve the grave problems their own society has created by themselves. If
an agreement is delayed. no fern of autonomy will be enough. If an agree-
ment is reached soon. the Basques will be able to govern themselves at last

without threatening all the dreaaa of freedoa and democracy in the rest of
the country. It is the government's turn to speak. and it has very little
time. So do the Basque moderates. and they also have scent time.

COPYRIGRT: 1979 Information Y Publicationes. S.A.

9015
C50: 3110

26
FOR onxcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION SPAIN

MILITARY REFORM TO INCREASE AM'S YOU'INPUI. WK
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish '11 Her 79 p 27
(Article: "Fewer and Younger")

[Text] The sergeant had explained it to him hundreds of tines: "If the
three stars are on his sleeve. he is a captain; if they are on the cuff,
he is a colonel." But the recruit could not grasp it. So the veteran
sergeant seized upon a trick that never failed: "Look. kid. the colonel
is the 3-star Ian who is the older."

Ten years fro. now the sergeants will have to find other devices for in-
structing the note dense recruits because there will he colonels of sons
40 years of age and hrigadier generals sons 50 years old.

Everything depends on whether the bill reforming the aysten of pronotions
and ranks of the Amy succeeds as it is one of the nest ieportant points
of the silitery reforl begun two years ago by the Ministry of Defense,
under Lt Gen Gutierrez Hellado.

The nest spectacular consequence of the bill will he the elisinetion of
6.300 slots for co-anders and officers of the Any, which will then have
15,000 of such slots plus 3,000 reserves. The pyranid of positions in the
Spanish Army, long too wide at the top. will he narrower: there will be
fewer officers. even fewer co-anders. and a greatly reduced nuher of
generals. However. tine. prosotions in the Operational Co-end Group will
be easier. and the tine required for serving in each position less.

The Horst Thing would lie Retirenent

Military circles—and those not exactly progressive—expressed satisfection
to cum 16 over the bill. which still requires the approval of the
Superior Council of the Amy. the government. and finally parlianent.

"It is well planned," they said, "because it will not cut anyone's career
short." One colonel confided to this nagazine that "at this point. after
having given the best part of lay life to the Arty. they couldn't do worse
than to retire ne. even at full salary."

21
ron omcm. use our
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

Asana sent nany Iilitary oen hone with full salary. and his shadow still
spreads over any attenpt to change the personnel structure of the arsed

forces. but reliable sources assured CAMBIO 16 that there will be no re-
tire-ant law. which asny feared. "All the rights that have been won will

be respected. and each one will retire in due tine and with the pension
due his.

Thus. if the refer. suffers froa anything. it is free tisidity and slug-
gishness. according to the experts.

"Seen free a certain perspective. the prenotion reform does not seen to
be very asbitious. It will take ten years before its effects will really
be felt in the Arsy. The refers itself will not start until 1983: seen-
while. it appears that the Academy graduating classes will be lusped to-
gether so that by that date. with rare exceptions. the sesbers of each
class will occupy the some positions. In other words. when the reform
begins. everyone will have the sase opportunity. And after that. 20
years of adjustsent--nuch too long. If we enter NATO. this reform will
have to be accelerated."

In the aajority of cosnands. the pace of the refer. appears to be adequate.
especially at the higher ranks. "Besenber that countries like Prance or
Italy took about ten years after world "or II to rejuvenate their officer
corps. Here. the inflation of officers goes back to the end of the Civil
war. It is a difficult task. and it has to be done with tact."

Steps Still To be Taken

"In addition. you lust realise that this could mean the renewal of Gutierrez
Nellado as minister because there will be no roou for hi- in the next Cabi-

net. no natter who forms it." CAHBIO 16 was assured both by ailitary circles
--who are convinced that the new sinister of defense will be a civilian-~and
by political parties.

The task of Gutierrez Hellado will thus toruinate with the reduction of of-
floors and the rejuvenation of the Arly. "which only a coarade could do."
in the words of one affable general.

There are still many things to finish yet. such as the Defense Organisation
Law. the Military Service Law. and the reform of oilitary justice in the
legal field. and. in operations and adsinistration. the new territorial
structure for both units and captains general.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Inforuacion y Publicaciones, S.A.

9015
650: 3110

28
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION ”MN

”I!”

MARTIN vnu Aﬁm 1'0 "321‘ 0111i Emu-Rodolfo Martin Ville. ninieter of in-
terior. wee in Geneva. Switzerland. laet out-er incognito to out with
pollute-military repreeentativee of the HA [Baeque I’atherland and Liberty
Group]. The interviev vee not held heceuee Martin Villa did not receive
euﬂiciont guarenteee that the neetine vould take piece in eecret. [Text]
[Hadrid M10 16 in Spanieh 18 her 79 p S] 9015

GREATER uco DlSClPLle-The "CD [Denotretic Center Union] deputiee will not
have the eene freedo- of novenent ae they did in the previoue legielature.

in addition to eisnins a letter of reeimtion in advance. in order to avoid
Laeuan-type tenptetione to so over to the nixed group. uco deputiee will find
that nheencee iron the-her eeeeione end co-ittee neetinse will coat the-
heavy finee. Moreover. the deputy'e entire ealery nuet he turned over to
the perty once eeeeione begin. [‘l'ext] [Hadrid canto 16 in Spanieh

18 Her 79 p 5] 9015

URANIUM mmnouumrm the next fev veeke ureniun proapectin; will he-
gin in 5.000 equere he of the Vich area and enother 3.000 I:- around Villenueve
do la Serene. The Spanieh Govern-eat. Natural Reeourcee Protection (Bonk o!
Bilbao) end the Anericen Chevron fir- ere in charge of thie project. [Text]
[Nedrid CAHIIO 16 in Spenieh 11 Her 79 p 7] 9015

(:80: 3110

29
roe omcm use on!
Ni Ol-‘i'ICIIiL WE OKLY

COUNTRY SliCi‘ION Sillillh‘

'lMPORl‘lill' lNI-‘LATIW “HIREATENS WAGE PACT
Stockholm VECKMS M’FKRRR in Swedish 29 Mar 7'.) p 5

luxcerptllhe Swediﬂilnflation rate. i.e. the rate that has de-
veloped during the first 2 months of the year. must be halved
if the wage agreenent is to hold. it is primarily an imported
inflation that we are getting here. And the govern-eat cannot
do anything about that.

in January the SCB's [Central Statistical Office] consuner price index rose
by 0.7 percent. that figure could be explained may by the fact that prices
always rise more than usual during the first math of the year. but in
February the increase was 0.8 percent. if infint ion continues at that rate,
we shall break through the year's price ceiling no later than July. And
then the sham-tee rule in the wage agreement will be invoked.

Now perhaps it can be said that the price increase in February. too, is
noraaliy higher than the average for the year. But it would have seemed
safer with a lower figure. During the first 2 months of the year prices
have alreadyciidrcd l.S percent. That means that the increase must not be
higher than 3.5 percent during the a months up to and including October.
in other words, the inflation rate must he halved.

Iivon if we can hold back homemade inflation. the trend abroad is disturbing.
The increased prices on oil and other raw materials will work their way into
the consumer sector. The table [not reproduced here] shows the development
of consumer prices both over the last 12-month period and over the last
3-month period. expressed as an annual rate. The last month is Decedier
for itnly, January for the linitcd States. France. Canada. Austria. Denmark.
the Netherlands. and Sorwny. and February for the other countries (percent).

Sweden's position has rapidly “proved. in February of last year we topped
the list with a price increase of i4.l percent over 12 months. This year
we are below the middle with an increase of suly 5.6 percent. But if the
last 3 months' inflation rate continues for the whole year the position will
worsen and the price rise will be 8.7 percent--and the wage agreement will
he limiten.

30

ow: AMF‘I’A' 9”. Inner
M MELON USE ONLY

2-.

go

 

Consumer Prices. Variation since Decewber i977. Vertical
scale: Percent. Left: l978 price ceiling: haxiinun in-
crease from January to Deed-bar 7.5 Percent. Right: I979
price calling: Maxim increase from December to October
5 percent

There is a risk that the year's price ceiling will be bro-
lten through no later than the sunner. But if that is due
to deterioration of the terms of trade. the wage-earners
cannot get compensation by revising the agreement upward.

liowever, it is not only Sweden that has experienced a rising rate of in-
flatlon this winter. it is hardly a surprise that England's figures are
on the way up again. But in Switzerland consuaer prices rose 1.1 percent
in February, the highest figure since 1974. And in the PRC the rise was
i.i percent in January and 0.6 percent in February, corresponding to snare
than I" percent as an annual rate.

These figures do not loan that inflation has now broken loose in Switzer-
land and the FRO as well. These countries will continue to have the slow-
est inflation rate in the industrial world. '

But the figures are one exa-ple along aany that show that the international
Inflation rate is again on the way up. ﬂorid aarket prices. not only for
crude oil and petroleu- products but also for a great any other comedi-
ties. are eliming this year considerably faster than they have in recent
years.

31
M OFFICIAL 158 0RD!
M OFl-‘XCIAL USE ONLY

‘lhis leads to higher import prices and higher cease-er prices in Sweden.
lint If we cannot at the same tine raise Swedish export prices to the sane
extentnus in all probability we cannot-me cannot compensate for the price

rises through higher wages. The increased inport prices will lead to a
transfer of ineole from Sweden to the world around us.

The government cannot do Inch to counteract this worsening of terns of

trade-when import prices rise lore rapidly than export pricesnexcept to
change the rate of exchange.

The guarantee rule in the wage agreement should have contained an act of
God clause that would lanke an exception of the effect of great changes in
world urkot prices. it can hardly be leaningful to seek compensation in

the wage agree-eat for an inflation that is caused by the OPEC statos'
price increases.

(iol‘YllllllT: Ahlen G Alterlunds tryckerier. Stockholm 1979

“if:
(250: 3109

32
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OJUNTRY SBCT ION SNBDEN

STATISTICS OFFICE 5385 INVESTMENTS INCREASE
Stockholl VBCKANS API’KRBR in Swedish 29 Mar 79 p 6

[Text] Industry's willingness to invest is increasing as the market in-
proves. In the preliminary national budget in January the Kl [Market In-
stltute] allowed for an increase in invest-ants for industry by volume in
I979 of only 3 percent. it was broken down into a decline of ll percent
in buildings and an increase of 8 percent in nachinery.

But according to SCB's [Central Statis-

tical Office] interpretation of the in-

vestnent survey in February. investments
in machinery are increasing by a good

10 percent and invest-eats in buildings

are decreasing by only a few percentage

points. Overall there is an increase of
about 6 percent.

  

  

m IIII
+ mama

The figures are really not much to boast
of. Investments in buildings are de-
creasing for the fourth year in a row.
And in 2 years invest-ants in machinery
have decreased by 30 percent, so that it
will be a while before we get back to
the 1976 level.

     

Under Iaone nonal conditions a 10 per-
cent increase in investaents in aachinery

'EII I I H
would he considered quite a lot so early

in the aarltet upswing. The utilization

Industrial Investments. Annual of industrial capacity is still very low
change in volume. in percent. "almost nor-a1 for the bottoa of a low
Above: Machinery market.
Below: Buildlngs

But the capacity Ieasure may not aean

very much after the invootﬂnt Sll-p of
recent years.

33
M OFFICIAL L88 ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'niere nre certainly unny investment plans that have been postponed and are
being brought out again now that the market picture is getting brighter.

(mwmurr: Ahlon a Akeriunds tryckorior, Stockholm 1979

8815
(ISO: 3109

31*

m AWM'I' 'N‘F AW‘U
M OFFICIAL 183 0101.!

COINTRY SBCT ION SWEDEN

BRIEFS

CONTINUED TRADE SURPLUS- -According to the Market Institute. the value '
of Swedish exports this year will be a good 110 billion kronor. But accord-
ing to the export fires themselves it will be 112 billion kronor. That is
the result of SCB's [Central Statistical Office] export survey in February.
At that time the fix-as revised their plans upward once uoreuthis time by
3 percent over the survey in Novesber. But it is certainly optimistic to

coaparo the export and import surveys and get a trade surplus for the first
half of the year of 5.7 billion kronor. The surplus for January and Febru-

ary only cane to 0.3 billion kronor. [Text] [Stockholm VECKANS AFFXRBR in
Swedish 29 Mar p 6] 8815

080: 31$ END

35
m OFFICIAL USE OIL!