APPROVID FOR NIL-ACI: 8007/08100: cuA-nopot-ooooonooo-noooaooua-o
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040053-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/a417
25 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N LATIN AMERICA
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040053—8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other charac teristies retained .

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
TRANSLATIONS 0N LATIN AMERICA

(rooo 6/79)
Coureurs

ram-mom mans

Paraguav's Options in Parana Triangle Discussed
' (Eﬂulﬂ ”$130! IA OPINION, 19 Feb 79) eeeooooeeeeeee

AMBNTINA

'LA OPINICQI' Interviews GONGAP Director
(Mariano do Nevares Interview; LA OPINION, 26 Mar 79)

writer Defines Conplsadties or nuclear Policies
(Alfredo Marta; LA OPINION, 23 Mar 79) Oeeeeeeeoeee

intro Rios Gsopoliticel hportenco Is Reassesesd
(33“18 ””130, IA OPINION, 2h "‘1' 79) eeoeooeeeoeeee

CUBA

'Om' W08 M’B Attitudes Toward 0.3., View
(Pm, 27 Mar 79) eeeeeeeoeeceeeseeeeeceeeeeeeeeooee

Success of Nonelined Smit in Havens Tamed Certain
UNIQUE-ASE, 19 “ﬁr-1 Aw 79) ooeeeeeoeeoeeeeeecese

Communist Leader Outlines View: on Draft Constitution
(M’ 3 Apr 79) 0...C0.00000000000IOCOOOOOOOOC00.00

- . . {III . LA - 14

POP OpﬁTPTlt. "G? anV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

PARAGUAY'S OPTIONS IN PARANA TRIANGLE DISCUSSED
Buenos Aires LA OPINIOR in Spanish 19 Feb 79 pp 6-7
[Article by Betele Areujol

[Text] Free the geopolitical viewpoint Paraguay has three possibilities
which nark its relation with the countries asking up the La Plata River
Basin: .

The first. of historic origin. can be expressed in Pareguey's close relation-
ship es a neuber of the ﬂiepsno-Anerican colonies of the La Plata River.

The real dianslbernent of the viceroyelty began at the tins of its creation;
however. it was aubejct to a delayed measure adopted in 1777.

This was when Spain thought it necessary to oppose the Portuguese aspire,
since, shortly before. following the lines of Portuguese interest, it had

put an end to the strategic Jesuit settlesents, which had colonized that
area free 1609 to 1767.

The administration of the great Peregusyen province, separated free the be-
ginning fron that of Buenos Aires. was dependent on the viceroyelty of Peru
only to end up (in 1777) belonging to the viceroyelty of the Le Plate River.

For that reason, Paraguay felt itself intimately linked to the tenporal power
to the Jesuits in Ansrice. Paraguay. the heart of native America, felt it-
self rooted in the establish-ant of missions.

Julie Velills Leconich de Arellegs (Paraguayan geopolitical expert) says:

"when the conquistedors. crossing over the Andes. arrived at Potosi, the
.advsnce of the La Plate River Spanish becese a retrocession. Although
thwerted end disillusioned. they seized the city of Asuncion to use as a

base and began the great task of colonizing and settling these areas dotting
the immense perimeter of the Provincie Gigsnte de las ladies with cities.

1

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"As this province lacked metals, Spain did not consider it very important.
The only possible and direct communication route between Paraguay and Alto
Peru Province-~via Chiquitoa and Santa Cruz--and the most suitable and scan-
omical for the export of minerals from the districts of Charcas and Potosi--
the route of the Guaranis and surely that which they followed from Tiahuanacu--
was abandoned. Bruad geographical areas were thus converted into no man's
land as though inviting the Portuguese advance. Hernandarias. who longed to
unite these three geographical areas which now constitute URUPABOL [Uruguay-
Psragusy-Bolivia]. stressed the negative aspect of dividing the province
(Buenos Aires and Paraguay). if the three settlements he suggested were not
carried out to completion: a city in Monte Ovidio, new Montevideo; another
on the Uruguay River; and a third between Asuncion and Charcas.

"Vera Province remained abandoned. its principal port of that time sow being
known as Parsnagua (Brazil). and this region. known fundamentally, strategi-
cally and economically as the Provincis Gigsnte del Paraguay. was the first
piece of the mother country to be absorbed by the Brazilian Empire.

"The policy of ﬁnance Aires. in violation of Argentine interests and those
of other provinces of the viceroyslty, has no explanation and even less jus-
tification."

The protagonists of ﬂuenos Aires. like all others. committed tactical and
profound errors, but it is easy. from the vantage point of the 20th century,
to understand the difficulties and desperation of the Men of May. Expeditions
aimed at unifying the viceroyalty (like that of Gen Manuel Belgreno to Para-
guay) did not obtain the expected result. A skilled economist. Belgrano
could not fail to see Parsguay's importance in the overall La Plata picture.
The short duration of the viceroyalty had not succeeded in creating stronger
ties among its constituents. The more meaningful and stronger port interests
had gained momentum much more quickly.

It was the Spanish court's shortsightedness which caused Paraguay to lose
with the missions a territory which included an outlet to the Atlantic Ocean
in what is now southern Brazil.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

In view of Paraguay'e geostrategic landlocked position. sinilar to that of
Bolivia. various gateways are possible. The Paraguayan option will deter-
mine whether it is a gateway to open or~-a Brazilian variation-to close.

Paraguay. the route to continuous progress, is the true way to the see.
That is why the Guarani landlocked position is not insurlountahle. Its
Paraguay-Parana rivers provide for the natural novenant of the economy. yce-
terday as today. Highways are an artificial form of communication which
Brazil established to absorb the wealth and move products via the ports of
Paranagua and Rio Grande.

The La Pla:a River provides this natural waterway. As the rivers take on

their proper role, the viceroyalty's waterway plan will again cone into
being.

3
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This plan will undoubtedly lead to a rapprochement between Paraguay and Ar-
gentina. The Yacireta and Corpus projects. producing power and improving
navigation in Parana. together with the Middle Parana project. are making it
possible to realize that rapprochement. which has not or could not occur at
any other time.

The second alternative is one which definitely makes Paraguay dependent upon
Brazil. It consists of three points:

a) Cross-country highways. Highways Brazil 277. which connects Asuncion
with Paranagua, and the Trans Chaco, which crosses Paraguayan and Bolivian
Chaco. connect Brazil and Bolivia by crossing through Paraguayan territory.

b) The Itaipu dam is a source of power and foreign currency. It involves
a decision which Paraguay must make as to how to use that power to serve as
a basis for development which may or may not be dependent upon Brazil.

c) Joining the La Plata River Basin with that of the Amazon River across
Paraguayan territory. Just as the Pacific coast is the outlet for Bolivia's
landlocked position. opening the way to the Amazon River Basin sakes Para-
guay emerge as the obligatory passage, the communicaiton route from the
Caribbean republics (Venezuela and Colombia) to the La Plata republics
(Argentina and Uruguay). Paraguay would become a valid connecting link be-
tween the Hispanic nations of the two extremes of South America.

At the same time it would enter the circle of the countries of the Amazon
River Basin. Paraguay would have to count on binational action with Brazil
to carry out the necessary projects involved in connecting the two basins.

Moreover, that project involving waterways from on high and in Brazilian
territory is (in accordance with what Paraguay has been maintaining up to
now) entirely within Brazil's interest.

The third perspective Paraguay has is. as always. an intermediate position.
It is for Paraguay to disregard the two biggest powers of the La Plata River
Basin and reunite the three smallest: URUPABOL.

On 20 June 1963 Uruguay, Paraguay and Bolivia signed a document whose basic
preposal was that the tripartite group would “establish and expand their
commercial ties and effect a gradual interdependence of their economies."
In referring specifically to URDPABOL, Lsconich de Arellaga states:

"The countries of the river basin may fail to use various products found in
this or that subregion, but, later. they will not be able to ignore the oil.

iron and gas of the Bolivian deposits; and still less will they be able to
rail to use Parsguey's hydroelectrical power.

1;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Mutun's iron ore is essential and useful. so long as it does not becoae the
monopoly of any particular country. He have the right to obtain it directly
from the producer. A Paraguayan-Bolivian association would make it possible
to use the iron and hydroelectricity in blast furnaces and it could then be
taken to a free port by Bolivia in Bahia Negrs.

"He stress Bahia Negra not through any Chablinistic spirit but through one
which is in the general American interest and realistic. since it is the only
suitable port in the area. Pusrto Busch. which wOuld be the logical place
from which to ship the iron production. is not a suitable port and could be
made adequate only through heavy investments. which do not appear possible

at the present time. Taking the iron overland by highway to Puerto Suarez
would involve greater and unnecessary exyenditures. which would add to the
costs and preclude the possibility of using Parsguay's hydroelectric power.
Moreover. Puerto Suarez permits only one ship at a time to pass through the
Tanengo Canal.

“Conveying the ore from Hutu. to Bahia Negra would be relatively easy and
eocnonical.“

The Paraguayan-Bolivian rivalry, inherited from the Chaco "at (1932-1935. the
last war on the American subcontinent), would thus find itself changed
through a policy which, using power coning from binational power plants with
Argentina or Brazil, would provide for producing Mutun iron ore in an initial
process (Bolivian sector), convey it via the Parana River (Argentine sector)
and unload it at the Uruguayan port of Rocha. Although positive for the
three countries. this plan is not realistic. Therefore. URUPABOL is stag-
nating. The three countries need what Uruguayan geopolitical expert Bernardo
Qusgliotti de Bellis calls the "Parana Corridor," which must undoubtedly be
nade a part of this plan. if it is to succeed.

In addition to the definite realization this year of the Yacireta project
and the extremely difficult execution of the Corpus and Itaipu projects.
Paraguay will come up with a new strategy. The three routes it can pursue,
generally stated, are as follows: a rapprochelent with Argentina, a rap-
prochement with Brazil or support by URUPABOL with a feeling of integration
which, without foreign aid, represents a very slow rate of development for
three countries of different characteristics.

COPYRIGHT: La Opinion, 1979

8568
CSO: 3010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ARGIM'IRA

'LA OPINION Imvms CONCAP 0mm
Buonoe Airee IA OPINION in Spanish 26 ”at 79 p 7

[Interview with Gen Nariano do Reverse. director of the National Rio do la
Plata Basin Gonniaoion. by Betela Maude]

[Text] The Itaim-Oorws issue. the visit to Brasilia by Foreign Hinieter
Washington Pastor. the statements of the new president. Joao Baptiste Piguei-
redo. all have kept the press interested in the Rio do la Plata Basin.

LA canon. in an interview with Gen Hariano do new... director at the
national Rio de la Plata Basin Consiseion, has obtained a rapid geopoliti-
cal overview of the nain wopoeals.

Gen Neveres. cautiouely enthusiastic about the problesatic victory. had the

renewing conversation in his ottice at the connieeion (com) headquarters.
The old building. which stands between the (hthedral and City Hall. provides
avieu hon itelarsewindows, atanangle, ofacornerotthenaaadeﬂayo.

The past,of this Mining, involving city goverment, and its future. invol-
ving done, will be Joined together.

[Westion] "hat is the origin of the National Rio de la Plata Conission?
[Answer] The com originated in the Rio do la Plata Treaty, signed in

Brasilia in 1969. Thus, it emerged tron an international conitnont that,
as such. is national law. The unseat organisation. mission and set-up of

the National Connieeion were established by Law 21,1084. promulgated on 30
Decenbea', 1976.

[mention] The progress and prodecte in the basin almost all have a long his-
tory. Sane. like Salto Grands, are already facts.

The inauguration of the den in May sisaii‘ie the kick-off of the hydroelec-
tric energy mares: in that context.

ﬂhat inportance do you attach to that fact?
6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Answor] Salto Grands is the first binational hydroelectric plant to operate
in the Rio do la Plata Basin. As such, it is anticipated that Itaipu, racy-
reta, Corpus and other plants on the Upper Ber-node. Upper Uruguay, etc..

that are under construction or will be built later. will fulfill similar
functions. In addition. this is a true ample of international cooperation.
and a mu interpretation of the spirit that inspired the Rio de la Plata
Basin Treaty and should prevail in the inplenentation of that treaty.

When it begins operation next May. it will constitute an important nilostone
in the process initiated in order to exploit the fornidablo hydric remces
that are available in that basin. Its operation will also serve to contri-
bute to an adequate supply of energy, with intensive use of the inexhaustible
sources of energy and significant savings in non-renewable resources. saintly
petroleum. coal and gas. Finally. it should be pointed out that its location
and operation will serve to integrate the nation. and favor physical inte-

gration with Uruguay.

[Question] At a lecture in Santa Fe. on the Middle Parana project. you aspha-
sisod the geopolitical importance of the dos.

Do you think that those ideas are still valid? I an referring to:
“The relevance of the policy of national "interiority. "

«The unification of the northeast and the central and northwestern parts of
”Bantino

«The conplenonting of the Rosario-metros Aires-Is Plats central nucleus with
the northern part of the country.

"The establish-ant of a gsostrategical pivot or operational base for the
culnination of national integration.

--‘lho necessary power for the developent of all of northeastern Argentina.

--The isplonentation of an independent national strategy that will be free
iron international hindrances.

"me correct geopolitical response to restrictions in the Upper Parana which
cause delays and openly threaten natioml develoment.

“The possibility of noutralizim foreign pressure on northeastern Argentina.

--The establieiuent of a geostratogic lsunching pad or base for the projec-
tion of national interests beyond our borders.

--The correct response to the physical insomity regarding the variants of
at: Parana. or to uncontrolod actions due to intentional errors in the Upper
in.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ~
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] The geopolitical reflections expressed at that tine are still po-
tentially valid, and will beoone tangible reality as the scheduled progress
are inpleaented.

ﬂush or Argentina's mture depends on the optinun use of the Parana River.
the stretch which goes fro- Oonfluencia to the ocean, as well as the natural
or nannade connections with the WIS, the Bernejo, the laguna and the
narshes of the more and the Uruguay.

[Question] Could you state the strateg that in your opinion should be fol-
lowed from now on in terns of hhether or not the Corpus Dan should be built?

[War] The Argentine strategy for the ass do la Plata Basin does not end
at the Upper Parana. which is Just one of the nanifcstations of our presence
and responsibilities in the basin and in the Southern Gone. At any rate. the
construction of Corpus is an irrevocable national decision. Therefore, it

is wrong to present the problea in terns of opposition: to build or not to
build Corpus.

0n the contrary, there can be disagreement about the timing of the construc-
tion. Today that depends on a satisfactory moment with Brazil and Para—
guay. It would also be wrong for our country to limit its attention to that
project alone. It is imperative that we carry on the studies of the Middle
Parana. isprove and expand river navigation, study the use of the Upper Ber-
neJo, in other words, carry out sany projects for immediate execution, and
include than in an overall plan which coordinates and optimizes the use and
yield of these resources.

[Question] Are you optimistic about the overall devalcpnent of hydroelectric
energy within the basin?

[Answer] One cannot be pessimistic. Nature has provided us with a potential
of acre than 20,000 segawatts, useable as hydroelectric energ. Cospare that
figure with that of less than 10.000 megawatts. the installed capacity of the
country, and add the other benefits to be derived from it, such as the atten-
uation of floods, the nanagenent of considerable flows of water. navigation,
irrigation. sediment control. etc. The task is a great challenge to our ina-
gination and capacity. Our mental attitude should conit us in the mture

to inplenent projects, instead of wasting tine discussing an irrenediable
past-

COPIRIGHTI LA OPINION , 1979

8926
cso. 3010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“WI!“

'13le ‘mm mm 01" mm POLICIES
Manon AiresIAOPIlIIOUinSpaniah23lar79pll
[Article by Aluedc Beoerra]

[Text] Nuclear policy is one of the neat complex things in this world, be-
cause in addition to the conplications of the technology itself. there are
political conplications. as well as strategic. industrial, financial and other
considerations that defy classification. For this reason, the countries that

desire to get a good gasp of the slippery world of the atoa are trying to
educate not only nuclear technicians. but also nuclear politicians.

The atoaic world is not an island in a sea of restrictions. 0n the contrary.
it resenblea sore a cooperatively owned building in which all depend on the
good behavior of the others and on the services which provide electricity,
potable water, contmication. heating and fuel.

Anyone who thinks of nuclear utters in isolated terns will an up against
the reefs before landing on the beach. ,

Argentina has signed inter-governnental bilateral agree-ants since 1960, as
well as direct agreeaenta between institutions sud: as the hticnal Atoaic
snug Collusion (am) and its counterparts in other countries. It line
also signed multilateral accords. such as the tasty of Tlatelolco (which

is in the process of ratification) and the Statute of the International Atoaic
Biergy Agency (mm). which is a m’osidiary of the United notions.

All this, in addition to the repeated official declarations to the effect ,that

Argentina is put-wing only peaceful goals in the use of nuclear energy. indi-
cates that Argentina is willing to cooperate in the international developent
of these new reamaroes. as well as to share the resulting benefits.

In fact, it is considering Joining the Isndcn Club. and wants the United States
to sponsor its candidacy. Frankly. Argentina needs a seat on that prestigious
board. which coaprises'the countries that export nuclear technology. because

in this aanner its exports (it is already exporting mclear technology) can
he sold to sore and better clients overseas.

_ 9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But all these nuclear issues. as well as the conventional ones. which unite
Argentina with other acre or less advanced nations. would not becone a thick
Jungle of comitnente which threaten to strangle the nature develop-ant of nu-
clear technology. The marrent controversy over the safeguards which should
be applied to the future nuclear installations that are to be mm in Argen-
tina. lies at that precise. unattainable joint where the best thing for every-
one is not the best thing for anyone.

To put it succinctly. we aust conproaise. and we are coaprcaising. Only the
negotiators know how for each one can go. The philosophy of the safeguards
scene reasonable to the extent that it tries to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons. The «towards are obligations that countries take on in
order to prevent transfers or molear technology iron being diverted for non-
peaoetul purposes.

But there are safeguards. and there are safeguards. Obligations are one thing.
and aortuges are another. There are the NPI‘ scdel safeguards. which are the
"total" ones enforced by the IAIA, and then there are the tendon Club nodels.
which are less rigorous. They are applied to exporters who above all want

to sake sales. In stands for hon-proliferation lreaty. which has been re-
Jeoted by Argentina. Brasil. Chile and Cuba. in this hesiepherc. and Mrth
Korea. Vietnaa India and South Africa in other parts of the world.

The m safeguards contesinate all the past. present and nature mclear in-
stallations or a country. whether internal or external. lhey are like the
poisonous carbuncles that cattle got. On the other hand. the others only
contasinate what they actually touch; they are not infectious or contagious.

There can be sexeguaru that do not har- people.

The truth is. sooner or later the safeguards will rule the world of the ates.
at least for those who were not nuclear powers in 1968. when the m began

to take effect. The roads leading to the NP!“ are sany and very tesptim. The
Tlatelolco treaty itself. so attractive because it distinguishes between nu-
clear explosives and :peaoeml explosives. has a tunnel that leads straight

to the m. It states that 18 sonthe after the 6 south period (for a total

of 2“ months) when 0. country has deposited its ratification instrunnt and

the treaty has cone into effect. the country nut sign safeguard agreeaents
with the 1m.

And the urn has 31st one sodel of safeguards. the m aodel. Therein lies
the rub.

(Tlatelolco will take effect when the Argentine ratification. the 0.8. ratifi-
cation cf Protocol I and the signature and ratification of cubs arrive. Ar-
gentina's ratification. as usual. will not exeapt Article 28. which contains
the requireaents for the treaty to be effective. Argentina will ratiiy the
agree-eat in the ease tors that Chile and Brasil did. It is not a latter of
”‘l'latelolciaing" bercre one'e neighbors do.)

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But it ie one thing for the eeteguerde to take power ate: new years, with
e great deal of effort, nnd mother for the power to be wondered right
here end now, tree. without e ehot being fired. ‘

It is e queetion of honor. independence end mgreee in all of South America.
It eleo oonoerne the pronotion or induetry end oonneroo with important coun-
triee euoh ee the hderel Republic of Guam. There ere A few billion dol-

led-e oeught in the niddle. weiting for the eetegmrde to put enough meme
on the Letin Mioen vengwnd.

Tho wieeet thing would be to eign e truce with the «regards. postponing
for e few yeere the ultinete reckoning.

OOPYRIQﬂ‘t LA OPIIEON. 1979

8926
cso: 3010

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm M

Em RIOS ammunm NAME IS BMW
MWGAMMOHMONUSMWMEPIO
[Articlo by htolo ArouJo]

[Toxt] ”lover hovo no boon ohlo to slonoo ova.- tho up of tho Rio do 1: Ploto
uithout our oyoo bolus inooiotihly drown to tho undoing roodinooo 0! intro
Riootobocoootluridzootmntry inthoworld. Uomnot oohcroooodto
ooy oo; notm-o hoo not arootod o noro wivilosod piooo of land. Egypt io
non-ow, Hollond ovupy. Promo poorly notorod. rho ontiro country io orooood
longthvioo by nountoinouo hivoo which oortly out into tho countryoido. otir-
rine up roin by inning tho cloudo. In tho oontor. botwoon two of thooo
ooinonooo, runo tho Gummy. oodo up of forty-omit otroo-o thot oubdivido
tho volloy ca: booin loft ond riytt uith o notuorl: of irrigotion condo. Pox-n.1-
lol to tho Drum runo onothor knifo. m- which ooro than oighty monto
run in noorly o outwit lino. obout ono ova-y loocuo. Anothor ocean on tho
oppooito oido. touordo tho I’mno. Tho ontiro. otupondouo country io oohrocod.
onvolopodtmmtbyttumonoondtholkum. mmmundit. htro
Rico, uhon thoro oro .‘ntolligont novigotion mo, oil]. to on oorthly parodioo.
tho contou- of you: ond uoolth. tho loot coon-sot cooplox o1 nourishing citioo.“
amorous. Domingo Pouotino Sonionto.

Thiotoxt. quotodwcuotovo F. Ciriglionoinomkconodmmmwu
mm mm II: mm ("rho Smionto new. or umtm'o Bivm"),
pointo out tho Waco of Mo Rioo oo o privilogod mvinco in tho oontoxt
of tho Rio do In Plato Booin. ond oopoomly in tho politicn pom- drown

up by Sonionto ond Albordi for tho turn of tho oontm'y. um. thot plan no

“(legged in tau of its coopolitiool obJootivoo. to {on tho oo-oollod Prcjoct
of o

In thot plon. tho Son'lonto rivor ochooo noo conceived and dovolopod on tho
hooio of tho port of homo Aizoo. and tho intone: loot tho fluidity of ito
vitol trade.

anti-o Rico. ”tho creator of citioo.” oo autoionto oollod it. cuo to Mill

o goopoliticol function oo on intmodioto ton-itory. for-in; port of tho Hooo-
yoto-io botvoon Argontino and hail. Thot hooopotuio no not intopotod into
notion-.1 torritcry, but bocooo o oort of filling hortuoon two rivoro, thot had
to ho crooood. 12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

Fortunately the “etretegic” reaecne gave rice to the um... which were a
veritable revolution in tone of integetin; the country. Col liguel mel
Baeaileaye intheaeaeeinemimber 36. inwhetheeueeupaeen
"Arsentin geopoliticel appreciation”:

"1.) Notional integreticn. not et e malcient level yet. in en iepcrtent tec-
tor in Argentina‘e participeticn in interneticnel coupe.

b) The nationel effort ehould be oriented towerde e general north-eouth direc-
tion. coepleting tiret the integration ot the northern region. leter thet

ci‘ the entire continental territory of the helvinae end the Inentine See.

end finelly the ielende of the South Atlentic end the Antarctic."

It ie clear that the eyetee in correct. elthough it nay be dehetahle. The
centrel eree. which ie coneidered to be intesreted elready in reletive teree.
ie eede up of the provincee of nuance Airee. Santa Re. Cordoba end lutre Rice.

Entre Rice ie pert or the highwey network thenke to the Hernenderiae Tunnel.
which rune under the river to connect Santa Fe and Penna. the two provinciel
cepitele. end thua edde to the velue of the neeopoteeien eree end hrinca it
into the free circuletion of weelth end the centul develop-ant of the country.

The hridgee over the Uruguey River are eeniteetatione not only of e naticnel
deeire to coordinate. hut eleo of a vieicn of Internationel Policy. The con-
etructicn tiret of the General Artiaee Bridge. which Joine Colon with Peyeendu.
end then of the Puente Libertador Generel San Martin. which Joina Puerto Un-
zue with Ray Benton. wee coordinated with the binaticnel Seltc (handle on.
which will curry on ita hack a third hiouway and ruined bridge et Concordie.

Strategic dieweeione ere cut of fashion. tne hridgee riee eplendidly over
the thaw. The mate-Brno largo couple: on the Perena Delta Join: the
province ct nuance Mree with thet of htre Rice.

The couple: involvee e project which will allow the crooning of the two lerge
ereeotthePerenanivern ParenadelaePeleeeendPereneoueeu. “rheyere
coeeunicated by a x-kiloeeter hidzway between the two meeinu. acroee Tele-
were Ielend. inch or the eain bridgee ie 550 eetere long. end hae highway
end railwey treftic on the core level. The medweye are located cuteide the
bridge town. The Zerate-Breec largo bridgee are coneidered to be unique
intheworld. Goingecroeethehrenaat 50eetereehovetheriver ieereel

pleaeure. me coapleted proﬁect ie an inpcein; eight.

The uncerteinty erieee becauee the noun-onto]. coupler. which wee beam in
1970. ietohelinkedwithmeleweychueothat itcanheconneotedtothe
Argentine coeet. hit that part in etill under conetruction. The buildim or
thercuteielBeonthe behind echedule. It ietocroeetheecuthctmtre
Rice end link the 200.000 equere kiloeetere of the Ileaopoteeie. through 120
kilo-eta of naval. potholee and dirt. to the eoet daneely populated region
of the country. At leeet. that in what it ie mppoeed to do. natty-five
kiloeetere the the Fedarel capitel. tel-ate. where the couple: begin. eerie

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the end of on grmdeur, otter '60 knonetere.

Uruguay. in the context of the Rio de lo Plato Benin, in the country with the
noet tutu-e1 effinity with Argentina. The vane of the heeopotuien eron

erieee iron the ilportnnoe o: the nroJeote under oonetruotion end on tho

drawing hon-d. the unﬁnished high»: produces en inge of incoherence which
in not underetood on on internetioml 19! e1.

coordination he. never been the strong point of Argentina. But the interns-

tionnl triage Joining lrny Benton (mm) with Puerto Uneue (mm Rice) ie
o heavily {requented neene of ecoeee to the country where coneroinl tiee ere
lore and note etrengthened on both sides. 'lhe etretoh under construction.

uhoee deny een no longer be ettributed u- geopolition teeter-e. ie for now
it einple example of incoherence.

COPYRIGHT: LA OHM”. 1979

B926
680: 3010

11;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'om' M188 m's Mutants WARD 0.8., mm
llewens DIEM in 8psnisb 1561 GMT 27 Her 79 PA

[Text] nsvsne. 27 llsr (Pm-o'l'he newspsper cm reports todsy thst Chine
swoided s confrontetion with the “psper tiger" (the United srstes) during
the 0.8. suression sgsinst Vietnen.

The morning newspsper recells thet during neny bombing nissions in Vietnu.
0.8. Air Force plenes penetrsted Chinese territory. It sdds thet in neny
of these cssss the Chinese leeders simply issued "serious wernings" to
ﬂesbington. Sons 650 such werningswers issued up to 1971.

The report sppesrs in the. "Sin Panto y Aperte" colum. It is the fifth
instell-ent of s series published under the bending of "Chine end the
Psper riser."

In the opinion of the when newspsper. the 0.8. wsr of suression seeinst
Vietns- clesrly revesled where tbs synpsthy end interest of tbs Chineu
leeders ley. Even though they did give eons uteriel eseistsnce to Vietnsn
end proclei-ed their solidsrity with Vietnse's struggle in their propsgsnde,
they elso took psins not to displesse the united Stetes.

Ststeasnts ends by Iieo zedon; to 0.8. news-en Edger Snow gave the green
light to the United Stetes to escslste its sureesion egeinet Vietnsn,
the newspsper recells.

In this regerd. it quotes Iieo es telling Snow in anusry I965 tbet "wsr
could only bust out if the United Ststes entered Chins." The Chinese will
only fight if the United Ststes stteclrs Chine, lien told the 0.8. unseen,
who wee widely known in government circles in Heshinston.

with the ebsoluts certsinty thet the internstionslise proclsi-ed by the
Chinese leeders wss s hi; hoex, the newspsper seys, Lyndon Johnson ordered
e rest-prion oi the lerse-ecele bonbin; of Vistnn.

It stuns thst lieo's ststensnt end «a: be possibly confided to Snow. not
(or publicstion but for rsley to 0.8. Covert-ent lenders, led to the

15

roe onxcm. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

leunching of e eupeign in the united Stetoe to pronote repproechenent
with the PRC.

Heeke eitet lieo'e interview with Snow. om reeelle. epproxi-etely 1,000
when of the 0.8. Che-bet oi Co—erce epproved e resolution urging the

govern-eat "to explore pethe lending to e note effective opening of chennele
of co-unicetione" between the United stetee end the m.

cm eeye thet in 1965 the "nu roux rams" corrohoreted the m’e betreyel
of Vietnen end the revolutionety world by etoting thet "Co-uniet Chine hee
pore inpottent concerne then ite concern ovet ite emedee in nenoi end

the Vietcong." Ae hietory hee de-onetreted, thie concern centered eround
tee-in; up with the United Stetee. The dteen hegen to cone true when licherd
Nixon ehooh hende with lino Zedong in Beijing in Pebruery 1972. cm eeye.

680: 3020

16

m ORIGIN. 08! our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sum 0' mum SM! II luvmm mu
MIWMIIM19llr-1Apr79p67

[MJ-mmo-utummmuuhmmuu
mxupsormpqmuuuamnmmuomuam
wwmm1.wmn«mmu.ummm umom
mums-mu M'I continual m. Ibo-nonun-
mnzmmnm.-Oau.-mm.muunmm«u
um.“ ammumnuumemumtouu
mmmmmm-unxm ”103mm“ me. u “mum
has mum may to when tho aum or at“. and consult a! gh-
Mumgmmmmmunun-wmx-
tip-21:11“ View mm to m1.

cm»; nun-mo u «manna- tho Ion-mu duo! c! Itch.

Aguquuuuummm mutual-tun. “mun-ch nun-1t.
mamummmWMIm.mmauuu-mwn-
11-," uwwmrmnwmnmsmm.umm
mmtmummnmugmmumwuwt
«Mummsmnmsamubwumnam.

17

FOR OPPXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It on IO'I h «on. palatial: in mm. at m «volley-nu 1:
can... (mu: pone: (mum ma the 1mm sum. mum a man).
an would bun humid to mun-at 1! hunc- mu Ind {and

Win M.

m mun mm '0! Mann. mind that Manhun- My mom
DI um. u "m amass « Luau-nun Ill continua." McLean-um
tam-Wm.“ «momma-amm-ummumm
9011““). 1am." an «:1: Added. an viu «mm a» mu um.
Ill much-d :9. 1!» km Mix.

the m1. m m ”(Mina unin£ Maid ml «loanin- in south
Mammmmmmmzam:mmmumt
act-- a nu: Aux-1a wouldn't man an am.- 11W- van an
magi-mummummmmmMMnmur

. It in”. 11ny me this “mun I111 chum quilt-nun.
”It can nun-my a! (he nu- Anrtua counts-100 I111. uh mu- rm.
in 9:. mm Inn‘s Im tau.- 3 m Wanton]. can. a 1003 u
0» m. ﬂu um... an 8m. use. mix- ”no run: n was.

Inmmnuum-nunormm‘.nun-mum
mus ad nu-upormm "It 1- m 0:- mm nu
monumuunmnmmmnumm.ummmn
Maumtmmxvmun‘wm.

mm. 1979 mun-mo

7779
030: 3100

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100040053—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040053-8
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100040053—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040053-8
STATINTEL