APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100010018-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010015-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS means
8 January 1979

TRANSlATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010015-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Naterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
IIILDOOIA'NIC DNA . 0M "3"” I. 8208 3‘ Recloleu'e Acceeelee Ne.

‘ pen an
8 Jenna 1979

Joint Publication Reeaaroh Service
1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

n. Supple-may Nam

The report; concaine preee and radio coverege on political. economic, military.
sociological, ecientific and technological developmente.

a. vacuum

JAPAN
Policicel end Sociological

ﬂilitary
Economic
Science and Technology

”8 linemen/03m Tone

m. cannula/Cm. so. so. 5!, 15c. 16!). 181, 19?, 223

'aNllIy Seance:

For Official Uee Only.
Limited Nut-bet of Copiee Aveilahlc From JPRS.

 

eeau name up”) V ween-rec “new"
WK atrium. 083 ONLY

am 5/8208
3 January 19'
TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(P000 2/79). !
Cosmos PM

POLITICAL AND 8001010010“.

'ASAIII JANARD' Analytea Ohira'a Victory
(MI am. 8 D“ 78)....0000000000OCOCOOOOOOOCOJIO.

'mmnu' Diacuaua Inplicationa of Attack on Ohira
(3010031113 m DAILY 'mmtp 2° 00013)... no. one... no

'HAINICIII' P011: 37 Percent Support Ohira on LB? Leader
mica: m! “M. 1‘ D“ 78)...0.10.9...OOCCOQCOOOI

'Yonnnu' P011 Show Slight Drop in ID? Popularity
(m M! rm”. 13M78)....‘00000000000000......

'mumu'x USSR Official. Kruglova Rope Sine-Japan“
Nomination

(Yam Sumkt; THE DAILY mam. 23 Dec 78)...........

Japan Defence Agency criticized-for Ito Secretiva Actiona
(Toahihiro Yannouchi; R180)! mm! W. .

n
12 M 78)eeonoooaeeeooeaaoeeoocaoeeeaaoooeeeeeoeooeeoo

300100410

Jopaneu Note v.3. Precaure for Higher Growth Rate
(mmtm sum. 16 M 7s)0000'.OOOOOOIOOOOOOOIOOOOO

Editorial: ' Irokan Proliua' on Crouch
(Editorial: W10!!! DAILY NW8. 1‘ Doc 78). . . ........

Parasite 'Sokaiya' Plague Japanaaa Maine”, Induatry
(Various aourcec, various datu).......................

Unit Share Synta-
Iiniona Paid to Sohiya Anmauy
ties With Dania Exposed

11

13

15

18

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

com-airs (Continual)

HPD Invootuuu Banking nu
Police Dtroctor Una Brook 1n rm
Corporation. Manger Pr“ Bounty. littoral
Stockholdou' amm- np: Short
Autumn in Pulmoh Noted

Ono P1:- koala scum

Sohtya lutornlnod at Theater
Arron: of hunting "not!

No Sohlyo Art-cud

Pollen m: 601! rowan-on:

Nun Should I. lulu Public

Ponce Cuckdovn Oran-ed

Jaun'n Nov-box Inporto Show 313;“: 0.1» Since 1976
(m JAPAN rm. 1‘ M 7a)....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0...

8019“)!- AND imam

mud. Power To lam Platonic n um he).
(MI “mm m. 23 M 78)(OOOOCOIOIOOOOQOOOOOOQO

- b ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SO

51
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDOICAL

'ASABI JANARU' mars onm's Vicinity
Tokyo ASAIII JANARU in Jepeneee 8 Dec 78 pp 6-9 ‘-

[Newe epot: "Dre-e of Revereel ﬂhich Vent According to the-Scenario“!
[Text] "Leep in Broad Daylight" Operation Given Birth to New President chin

The counting of votee for the LDP preeidentiel pri-ery election, which began,
on 27 November. revealed a eurprieing develop-exit. Secy Gen Heeeyoehi Ohire
led with a difference of 110 counted pointe between hi- and the incumbent
preeident. PH Fukuda. It wee e nationwide avelanche-like phenonenon, which
even the Ohire cenp did not anticipate.

Following the negative report of hie loeing battle. PM Pukude. who had with-
drawn to hie office in the official reeidence. appeared at 1.0? heedquertere
at 7:30 pe end agreed to a preee conference. ”Frankly, I an eurprieed.

Since I eaid I would reepect the reeulte oi the pri-ery, I have decided

not to run in the nein electione.” At that nonent, the new PH Ohire hecene
a reality. In the long hietory of the LDP, it ie the firet tine en incuehent
preaident hee been defeated by a challenger.

The preee ehot blunt queetione at the prine tinieter. euch ee "Hhet do you
think in the ceuee of your defeat"? end "You eeid that e voice fro- heaven
called for your reelection....whet did you lean by that"? P“ Mude'e fe-
nilier lofty tone wee euhdued end hie voice wee heevy. ”I heve ﬂy on
thoughte concerning the turn of the election. but e loeing general doee not
diecuee hettlee." ”There ere eoeotieee etrense voicee caning iron heaven.
you know." Ilin worde ehowed e trace of chagrin. standing up. he reputed.
"A loeins generel doee not diecuee bettlee.” ee he left the preee conference
hell.

Thirty ninutee later. Secretary General Ohire held a preee conference et
hie office. Reeponding to the cenereeen'e requeet. he eniled occeaionelly.
but it wee a forced enile. lle nee-ed tenee, ee if he wee not fully pre-
pared for the eudden turn of evente. Saying, ”Ien't it rether prenature
to eey anything"? he diecueeed hie eepiretione an the new preeident, in the
for. of repliee to queetione by the prone.

1
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1183 ONLY

"1 wish to express ny respect tor PM Pukuda on his decision not to run in
the nein party election. Pirst, for putting into practice what he stated
during the prieary. I respect hie deeply for his decision as ate-ing iron
his party spirit which caused hi.- to avoid inter-party strife, although he
had the ability to carry the battle further." '

Since it was Ohire who had criticized PM Fukuda as "a can of words. not
deeds“ and who rejected a proposal for settling the nin election through
negotiation. hie reearka could be taken as irony. However. his tense facial
expression inclined the observe to accept hie reaerhe at face value.

Ohire Cenp Expected Victory by a Nose

Ohire listed three aspirations as the new president. One, to worlt for her-
Iony and unity in a difficult period at home and abroad. M. to canvas
talented nen tron throughout the party end to ehetain strictly tron leaning
towards special interests. Three. to be thankful for the smooth end peace-
ful inplenentation of the party's first priasry end to review it iron various
angles. but to avoid regressing iron the basic party line. Inasluch as a
larger voice for the Taneke faction is being whispered about, hie r'ennrke
showed hie caution. "So-ethos. a single Ionent has great aignificance and,
sonetines. 10 to 20 years seen nothing. history is indeed strange." The
only tine he showed any auction was when he expressed this bet cf Ohire
philosophy. It revealed the Ohire brand of 'politics' whereby he chooses
his words carefully. calculating the future end avoiding irritation towards
the other factions.

On this single day, the chief role in the LDP presidential prinry shifted
abruptly tron PH Pukude to Secretary Genersl Ohire.

The najority of the press had anticipated a victory for m Muda by a wide
urgin in the prinary. The trend wee also clearly indicated in the polls
of the party ushers throughout Japan. which were carefully prepared and
carriednut by the respective Iedis. It was apparent that the Ohire canp
was rapidly catching up during the last stretch. but nevertheless the gen-
eral view was that PH Muda would win over Secretary General (mire by
sons 100 points.

If the nargin was within 100 points. Ohire and Fukuda would aeet head-on in
the eein election. The Ohire ce-p's eephasis on "a asin election, in ac-
cordance with party rules.” and the loves by the Mude csnp toward an ac-
co-odation through negotiation to avoid inter-party strife were naturally
considered to he develop-ents ads with the prinary election's progress in
wind. On 26 (hove-her) when the primary passed its zenith. PM tulruda
specifically requested a tell: with the press and said, ”The develop-eats
and results of the prinary should be given due regard in the min election.
I nyself shell do so.” There is no doubt that he pushed this on a Tuhuda
victory. This state-set resulted in bringing the incubent president down
without a main election.

2
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIA'

"I feel it in ny bonee that there will be telephone celle. lettere end tele-
grene, eeking tee to continue." "Hho elee cen conduct e Tokyo eunnit? The
world ie counting on Pukude." "A voice iron heaven celle for e Pukude re-
election." Ae theee Fukude quotee indicate. PH l’ukude wee lull of. confid-
ence ee he feced the prinery. The opening of Nerite Airport. the eigning
of the Japan-Chine friendehip treety. end the etebilieetion of cot-odity
priceeweuch echievenente end the feeling thet the eecend heli of the Pukude
edninietretion wee bleeeed with luck were probebly in hie nind. he hed eleo
Judged that the Teneke fection end reletione with the other fectione within
the 1.0? were working towerde e Pukude reelection. Consequently, the reeult
of the prinery wee e. "bolt iron the eky." It wee no doubt en unbelieveble
“dreue of revereel.“

In contreet. the Ohire cenp wee neking ite eovee under the etretegy thet

2 yeere would be the lieit for the Pukude regine. to be eucceeded by en
Ohire regine. 0f couree. the prieery end nein electione were the inediete
goele. but ultinte victory wee in Ohire'e wind. Since he did not expect
the llO-point urgin in the prinery. which compelled PM l'ukude to etep down
without e nein election iight, he did feel it wee en upeet victory. 0n the
other hend. there eppeere to be en interpretetion within the Ohire cenp the:
the victory wee due to the ell-out election cenpeign it hed cerried out. In
other worde. they don't eppeer to be ee eurprieed ee the othere.

The Ohire fection did celculete that it would win by e noee in the etretch.
At the eene tine. it took peine to keep the vote count iron becoming public,
in order to gein en edventegeoue poeition in the vein election. It took
every preceution to gein en upset victory. in ceee the vote count ehould
turn to ite dieedventege. At thie point, PM Pukude'e overoptinien worked
in fever of the Ohire cenp. The Pukude cenp, which hed toreceet "e reeerk-
eble nergin in the prinery" of none 200 pointe et the outeet. heetily reeet
ite goel et ebout 20 pointe. however, the need wee generelly eet for e
certein victory in the nein election. in the event tbet the prinery nergin
ehould be within 100 pointe. The Pukude cenp hed peved the wey for ite own
defeet.

Since the l’ukude cenp hed counted heavily on the floating votee beceuee of
ite incunbency end echievenente, it wee probebly unable to make en eccurete
foreceet.

when I wee covering the Ohire election heudquertero for the prinry on

17 Rove-her. General Heneger Zenko Suzuki received e phone cell free former
Upper Houee eenber Shintero Niehide in llokkeido. reporting thet "13.000 votee
ere in the beg. with leee then 10.000 votee for Koeoto. I don't know the
vote count for Pukude. but he'e eure to be eecond." Aleo. Diet-en lweeo
Keneko pereonelly brought in e report on the voting in Negeeeki. ennomcing.
"10.000 votee for Konoto; 7.000 for Ohire; end 5.000 for Pukude.” he

eteted triI-phently, "Pukude telephoned the benkere end other leedere in
Negeeeki to round up nore votee for hineelf. but there ien't e vote left."
Ohire hed 7.118 votee end Fukude received 6,608 votee. It wee evident thet

the foreceet on Ohire'e votee wee extreeely eccurete.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On this day. I talked with Maseya Ito. ferner secretery to PH Fukuda and
present consultant to Secretary General Ohira. on the outlook of the presi-
dential prisary. Ito said. "There is only one way for Mr rukuda to retain
influence within the party. That is to abstain from the main election."

At the time. I interpreted it an staining from the confidence that a reversal
could be brOught about in the sain election. However. I know now that hr lto
had increased his confidence in a victory in the priarsy. 0n the follow1ng
day, 18 November. Secretary General. Ohira. who was on a campaign tour.

spoke as follows at a press conference held in the city of cifu. "After
touring the various areas. I have deepened my confidence in an ultimate
victory. The situation has made a major turnabout toward the main election
with the support of my colleagues. I am sure of victory.”

It is a subtle declaration which could be taken as being based on the prenise
of a victory in the primary. 1 had an opportunity to speak with Mr Ohira

on 22 November. he impressed se with his high-spirited analysis. while hold-
ing a morning edition copy of HAINICHI SHINWN which reported a 70~vote gap
between Ohira and l’ukuda. "I feel that things are going pretty well. One or
two points in each prefecture could add up to a lot of difference. If the
votes cone in free Saitama. Nagasaki and “yoga (prefectures) it night mean

an upset."

The cadres of the Ohira faction became extremely cautious during the stretch.
Such remarks as. "You can't tell until the results are in" became co-on-
place.

Actually, the final forecast by the Ohira faction for the primary foresaw
706 points for Ohira and 669 points for Pukuda. The Ohira faction. which
could not count on the floating votes. concentrated on a heated caspaign
centering on the support of the "Tanaks army." Its estimate was fairly
accurate, since it was based on votes by fellow party members.

Prime Minister Seals Own Pate Through Overconfidence

About this time, howwer, the Pukuda caep still believed in winning the
primary. The theory of a ”remarkable nrgin" was still discussed by faction
members and it seemed that they were unable to grasp the situation until the
end of the prinnry. It is proved by the fact that, while the Ohira faction
was unable to win any votes in four prefectures, the Pukuda faction was
blanked in eight prefectures. The letter's careless defeats were con-
spicuous.

There is probably no disagreesent with the view that P“ Nkuda'e defeat
was due to overconfidence. however, there is an indication that the Ohira
and 'l'aneks factions played a role in PH Muda's overconfidence.

It appears that the strategy of what might be called “a lamp in broad day-
light” was put into effect. In other words, it was a kind of operation meant
to cause carelessness on thepart of the Fukuda faction.

6
303 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTIC!“ USE ONLY

This strategy caused the opposition to doubt the eagerness of the Ohira
faction in wresting political power. and the view was spread that the Ohirs
faction hoped to win second place. with the right to succession to be ceded
after a second term of the Fukuda regime. In addition, the strategy of the
Tanska faction was generally seen as taking the position that the Pukuda-
Ohira-‘l‘anaks alinement, or the so-called All Party Cooperation System. was
the best means to eradicate the damage done by the Lockheed affair. and to
create an Ohira administration within the continuation of the alinement.
The inner thoughts of former PM Tanaka aside, it is a fact that cadres of
the Tanaka faction were expressing such a view and that many ‘ranaka-faction
dietmen were in agreement. It is not surprising that PH Fultuda believed in
his own reelection on the basis of the Tanaka faction‘s "strategy." PM Pu-
kuda did criticize the fierce election campaign during the primary by the
Ohira-Tanaka alinenent as an attempt to spread factional influence into
rural areas. However. the reason his criticism was not expressed in terms
of "money politics"--an expression most disliked by the ‘ranaka faction-was
because he expected until the very last that the 'l'enaka faction would work
to harmonize relations between the Ohira and Pukuda factions.

However, at its general meeting held on the morning of 20 November when the
primary passed its peak, the Ohira faction resolved to "wage the main elec-
tion" according to its established plans. and in the afternoon the Tanaka
faction also held a general meeting, at “hich it instantly decided on a
policy to "carry out the main election according to rules and to participate
in unity." PH Pukuda's expectations were undermined and he was caught in a
trap. Pukuda stated on 26 Novedsr that "the present presidential election
which started with former PM Milti's description of it as ‘the root of all
evila' has taken a strange turn in Rovember. If left to its present course.
I am terribly afraid that it might produce a deplorable result reminiscent of
the 1972 presidential election." and he sent for the first times letter of
challenge to the ‘l'anska faction. He also made a sharp turn and approeched
the Hiki and Nakasone factions. however. by this time victory by the chin-
Tanslts slinemsnt was already decided.

The general view was that the "lamp in broad daylight" operation by the
Ohira faction was cautious and lacked clarity, and it was characteristic of
Secretary General Ohira. who detested infighting. It is true that this
aspect existed. It could also be said that the operation was successful
because the central figure was indeed such a person.

In January of this year, the Ohira faction teamed with the Tanalta faction
and exerted all efforts in lining up affiliated party members in order to
outnumber the Fukuda faction in the primary and to do battle on even terms
even if there should be a "Joshu coalition (Muda—Nakasons slinemsnt)."
In the main election. it would aline with the hiki faction to defeat the
Joshu coalition. While maintaining full cooperation with PM Pukuda, it
built up its position so that it could win so long as it was able to bring

about a public election for the party president. Once this position was

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

established. the so-callod ”secret pact on the succession from Pukude to
Ohira in 2 years." which was exchanged 2 years ago at the title of the
"toppling of Riki.” would become feasible. It would become possible to take
over the adainistration without a fight. with PM Pukuda declining to run.

At any rate. the Ohira faction was resolved that the Fukuda regiae would be
limited to 2 years. There was no rose for a l'ukuda reelection in the Ohira
strategy.

This strategy could be upset by a Cabinet dissolution and general election
ordered by PM Puku'da. The Ohira faction did its utaost to prevent this from
happening.

In May, In signature caupaign was launched to oppose any Cabinet dissolution
or any reelection aoves by PM Pukuda, based on the argment that ”there are
no issues on dissolution to be fought between the ruling and opposition
parties." Secretary General Ohira appealed to the party neabers that "I
will definitely carry out the presidential primary which has been realized
as the initial step in the party's modernization." he thus asde efforts to
forestall any possibility of a dissolution through sheer lack of tine.

PM Pukude's obsession with the idea of a dissolution and general election
steamed f on his lack of confidence in a win in the public presidential
prinary. Hhile revealing his desire for dissolution as a stepping stone to
reelection. PM Fukude stated on 17 June. "In order to carry out an orderly
public presidential priasry, I agreed with Secretary General Ohira to freeze
all preliminary campaigns at the end of October," and he loved towards a so-
called "political armistice." It was a condition which the Ohira faction
was obliged to accept in order to avoid dissolution. At a discussion Iaeet-
ing with the sedia on 11 July, PM Pukuda went so far as to state. ”It is a
political araistice and. if there are any leaves, we will avail ourselves of
our positions as president and secretary general to discourage then." While
working to incmbent president Pukuda's advantage. this "political araistice"
tended to lessen the existence of his challenger. Secretary General Ohira.

PH Pukude further stressed repeatedly that ”Ohira and Fukuds are united. and
the breakup of this relation will not augur well for the LDP." It was in-
tended to place the burden of ceding on Secretary General Ohirs'e shoulders.
Both strategies appeared to be succeeding ostensibly.

Zenko Suzuki. general chairasn of the Ohira faction. traveled to Mexico and
Argentina in early August for about 20 days, returning hose on 31 August.
This trip created the impression that the Ohira faction lacked the will to
wage an all-our fight. and there was reportedly a scene in which your fat-
tion neabers castigated Suzuki. Actually. the trip was made with Ohira' a
blessing. Heanwhile. tactics for the presidential priaary were being worked
out in unseen places. It was during this tine that the talk of a Pukuds
reelection began to emanate fro. the Tenaka faction. Ohirs'e popularity
consequently took a nosedive.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was decided to hold a summit conference of advanced nations in Tokyo next
year, and in August the Japan-China friendship pact was to be signed. Under
such conditions, it was not surprising that PM Pukude deepened his confidence
in reelection. This overconfidence resulted in his overlooking the extra-
ordinary Diet session in the fall, which was considered to be the final
opportunity for him to bring about a dissolution and general election. end
it was a factor in the decision by Nakasone, who was later to become a
direct stumbling block for PM Pukuda, to run in the primary. In other words,
it became the established view tnat, despite Nekasone's candidacy, PM Pukuda
would undoubtedly capture first place in the primary. At this point, the
Ohira faction cadres expressed the view that "the Nakesene candidacy has
created conditions which can give us victory."

Nakasone's Popularity Serves as "Reverse Kamikaze"

Nonetheless, the operations by the Ohira faction by no means succeeded as
planned. It can be said that the only point which went according to plan
was the 2-year limit to the Pukuda regime.

The gravest miscalculetion was regarding the sudden rise in Nekaaone's
popularity. In contrast to the increasing ambiguity due to Secretary Gen-
eral Ohira's "political armistice," the popularity of Nakasone, who put-
posely used hawk-like rhetoric. rose to a point where he was shoulder-to-
shoulder with Ohira in the various polls. It is ironic that this miscal-
culetion became a ”Kamikaze (divine wind)" for the Ohira faction. It re-
minds one of the adage, "fortune and misfortune are like the intertwined
cords of a rope."

first. because of Nakasone's hopes for the second spot, the possibility of
a "Joshu coalition (Pukuda-Nekasone alinement)" at the primary stage dis-
appeared. Also, the change in conditions enabled Ohira to receive full sup-
port from the Tenaka faction without feeling guilty toward PH Pukuda. On

21 October, chairman Eiichi Nishimura of the Nanokekai (Tanaka faction) made
a statement before Ohira's very eyes to the effect that the Tanaka faction
would offer its support for an Ohira win of the second spot. The same
Nishimura made a far more positive statement on 1 November, the first day
of the primary, that "we will fight as if it were our own election, our

own affairs." The Pukuda camp did not notice the change.

The Ohira-Tanaka coalition was criticized by the other factions for its
"money politics aid materialistic election." In other words, they were
able to campaign directly toward the party grass roots. The Ohira-Tenaka
union took the view from the outset that, ultimately, the number of affili-
ated party members would be the deciding factor, and they put full efforts
into preparing a membership list. Some dietmen say this took 2 months.

It is assumed that they began in secret a long time in advance. There is
no doubt the “Teneka army" was able to exercise its mobility, thus leaving
the other factions far behind.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There exists also the theory that Ohira believed, until the very last, in
the secret understanding between hilselt end PM Nkudn on the succession of
regiees siter 2 years. n story was circulated around Negatecho. the PM's
residents. that on the norning of 26 October Ohire finslly decided to fight
it out otter e phone cell tron PM Pukude. Sons (zenko sutulti) say that

14 October wee the dsy of decision when Ohirs first nentioned the "liquids-
tion of the Ohira-Pukude relationship." Rokusuhe 'l'snaka. who was involved
in the "secret understending." said it took place on 1 hovenber. the first
day of the prinnry. It is en interesting episode which explsins Ohirs's
delay in election canpeigning end his lack of s confrontstion attitude.
However. while only Ohire hinself could know the truth. under those condi-
tions Ohira spparently hnd visualized a light long before that. when I
talked with Ohirn in early March, he ssid in eﬂect. "PH Mode says eeny
things. you know. I don't know which is true. It is the end when one's
stetenents are no longer believed." Perhsps one should tehe the view that.
when Rokueuke ‘l'snake began to leak the "secret understanding on e succession
of regimes in 2 years" to the press this spring. st leest the expectations
for en "abdication" had dissppeered...sside free whatever statenent PM
Pukude nsde to Ohire.

lusdiately prior to the start of the presidentisl election. the theory of
e "seem understanding" egein energed suddenly in any for-s. They eppesr
to have been purposely spread by the Ohirs cenp in order to gsther synpethy
within the party. Anger within the party is else s powerful source for en-
hencing e fighting spirit. I! Ohire had persisted naively in hoping for
Pukuda's ”abdication," it would have been absolutely iepossible to gein e
"brillient victory” over PH mkuda in the primary with a margin of 110
points. ‘

oomtcnr: Asahi Shinbunshs 1978

5886
650: 6105

8

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICML USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOOIOLOOICAL

'YOHIUIII' 013008833 IMPLICATIONS OF ATTACK ON OHIM

Tokyo 1113 mm 10mm in Bngliah 20 Dec 78 p 2 on
[Bditorialz "shoot of Hiahina"!

[Text] The attaclt on Prise Miniater Ohira by an ultrarightiat at hie o!-
ficial reaidenco once again raiaee the apectar of the Japanoae totalitarian
untolity of the peat and Yukio Niehina.

It in not yet clear if the terroriet intandad to aeaaoainata the prime
ainiater. but the blade of the knife which he carried naaeured nora than
10 centiaetara in length. While feeling relief that Ohira eacaped un-
harned. we alao felt hatred for terrorien.

In the nanifeato. which tha ultrarightiat youth carried with hin, he ex-
preaaad thia view: "Yukio Hiahina vented to ehow the exiatence of a value
worthier than life." when queationed by police. the attacker eaid he thought
he could change the courae of politice by injuring Ohira.

We were atruck by the youth's anachroniatic thinking. which vaa ainilar to
[that of) the ultrarightiata who atoned the Keidanren building and aeiaed
it for aeveral houra in Harch 1977.

Rio taken Adoration

Sane intallectuala in their exceaaive adoration of the "Hiahina aaathatica”
even praiae Hiahina'a dangeroua antidenocratic ideology. Theae people ahould
raalire that their thoughtleaa pronounce-ante encourage rightwing terroriaa.
After all Hiehina held a very narrow-Iinded. dopatic viaion of what the
nation and aociety ahould be.

To return to thin age of illuaion ie the laat thing the people vent, de-
spite ita glorification by ultrarightiate. No doubt thoee vith fixed ideaa
nay grow inpatient with parlianentary democracy under which retort of .Of’
ciety takea place only alowly. But the Japaneae people learned by bitter
experience about a aociety doninatod by a uniform aenae of valuea.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Dropout Pro. Democracy

'l'ha ultrarightiat who attackod Ohira waa a dropout iron «sunny. and thara
aro any young paopla who balim that tho raalitiaa or their aociaty ara
far iron thair idaala. Ohira'o attackar waa attractad firat by a apaad-
happy notorcycla pack and than a rishtitt loudopaakar truck. which ayn-
boliaad tha ultrarightioto' dopatio inaga of what oocioty ohould bacona.

In hio narrow viaion. ha could only aaa a ahortcut to political roion.

Thla and other attacka by ultrarightiato upon prion niniatara in tha poatwar
yoarn raioa tha quaation of whathar tha police are not noro tolarant of
rightiat torroriaa than laitiat. ‘l'o prova thara in no aupport for or
favoritioa toward rightwins tarroriata, polica and authoritiao ahould control
battar than groupo.

The paoplo know vary wall that a danocratic aociaty will tolarata radical
opinionabut not tha danial oi duocracy itaall.

OOMlGﬂ‘l': The Daily Yoniuri 1978
080: £120

10

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR Oﬂ’IOIAL I!!! ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

'HAINIOIII' POLL: 37 PRICE"? SUPPORT ORIM A8 LOP LEADER
Tokyo MINICRI DAILY «m in Mltoh 1‘ Doc 78 p 1 0"

[Ton] Tho Int-ho: of thooo who govo o poottlvo ovolnotloo of tho loot
prootdootul oloctlon of tho mung uhotol-Dooocrottt Potty (um woo
oltghtly ooro thou than who mo o nosotlvo ovoluotlon in o rocont poll
conductod b'y tho mmcm. 'I'ho rotlo woo 37 porcont (olflmttvo) to 32
portont (noutlvo).

To o quoottou «no: thotr ovoroll ovoluotlon of tho oloctlon, ll porcont
of roopondonto ooowotoo thot ”1t woo good," ond 26 pottont oold thot ”it
woo (only good." l.o. 37 potcoot uvo o pootttvo ovoluotlon.

0o tho othor hood. 12 porcoot ooid tho: "1: woo not good.” out! 20 porcont
ropltod thot ”it woo not vory good,” conotltutm o 32 pottont nouttwo
mluottoo.

Tho poll woo couductod for throo doyo fro. Duo-hot 3 non; 3.000 olulhlo
votoro on o roodoo onpnoa hoolo otrooo tho hotloo. Sovonty-t‘lwo portoot
roopondod to tho quoottoom.

In tho (ongoing quootion olooot throo out of 10 (or 29 porcont) ootd thot
thoy hod no tntoroot to tho oloctlon.

lat non; thooo who oold thoy oupport tho m. 57 portont gowo o pooltlvo
ovoluotlon whllo only 26 portont ropltod in tho uoaotlvo.

‘l‘hlo phonooonon woo rovotood ooong thooo who ooid thoy oupportod on oppon-
ttou potty. Por lootonco. lo tho toot of Jopon Soctouot Potty (.15?) 26
porcont of tho oupportoro 3owo o pooltlvo mluotlon whllo o3 porcont ro-
pllod in tho noutlwo. In tho cooo of Jopon 09-min Potty (JG?) 15 porcont
of tho oupportoro roopooood fovorohly whllo SS porcoat govo o ooutivo ml-
notion.

By no, only 30 portont of "pooltlvo" roopondonto woro 1n thou; 20o ood

30o. whllo ooto thou 40 porcoot of thooo ‘0 or our govo pooltlvo owoluo-
tlon.

I].

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Anon; thoee who seve e poeitive eveluetion. 24 percent cited "contribution to
the nodernieetion of the perty" ee e reeeon for their eveluetion. end 17 per-
cent pointed out that the election wee ueeful to put en end to ”behind-the-
door" politice.

But 31 percent replied thet there wee no chense. 21 percent pointed out
thet "plutocrecy wee rife" in the election. while 11 percent eeid thet"‘it
wee conicel.”

In generel. nore people new e poeitive eveluetion then thoee who eppreieed
the election neutiwely.

Thie tendency wee nore cleerly reflected in thet neerly 60 percent replied.
in one wey or enother. thet they were for e continuetion of the prinery eye'-
ten in the LDP preeidentiel election.

Only 12 percent eeid thet the prinery election eyeten ehould he eholiehed.

Aeked ehout whether or not they were eetiefied with the reeult of the elec-
tion. 32 percent enewered thet they were "eetieiied" (with Ohire). 26 per-
cent enewered thet they were "dieeetiefied" while 39 percent eeid they were
unconcerned.

If theee figuree could be interpreted ee eupportin; end non-eupportin: retee
given to the Ohire Cehinet. hie eupporting rete et the etertin; period
would be e little higher then the 27 percent given to the preceding Pukude
Cehinet, 31 percent for the Aehide Cehinet. but lower then the 53 percent
for the ‘l'enehe Oehinet. ‘7 for the Hiki Cehinet, end 46 percent for the

Seto Cehinet.

COPYRIGHT: Heinichi Deily Newe 1978

C30: ‘120

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPPIOIAL 083 ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

'YG‘IIURI' POLL snous SLIGHT DROP IN LDP POPULARITY
Tokyo THE DAILY TM"!!! in Buglilh 13 Doc 78 p.1 0"

[Tout] Popular support for tho ruling Liharol-Doaocratic Potty (Lb?) has
droppod slightly. vhilo that for tho apparition Socialist (.18?) and Dono-
cratic-Socialiot (08?) partios has slightly incrossod, a poll rocontly con-
ductod by tho YMURI samuu rovoalod Tuoodoy.

Tho poll was undortokon on Novonhor 25 and 26 on ooao 3,000 pooplo through-
out Japan.

It coincidod with tho LDP prooidontiol prinary oloctiono. which vars hold
on o profocturol basis and cloood on Nova-bar 26.

Tho poll also ohovod that popular support for Koooito. tho Co-uniat Party '
(JCP) and tho Unitod Social Doaocrotic, Party (V80?) ruoinod tho oaao.

It rovoalod that 39.6 porcont of tho polloos oupportod tho LDP, 0.9 porcont
down frost tho proviouo survoy corriod out last Octobor.

Tho sproad of factional otriio within tho mt across tho country during tho
priurioo apparontly olionatod nony oupportoro of tho m. and this rooultod
in tho docroaso of popular oupport for tho ruling party, obosrvors holiovo.

Boson in thoir 30s and the arc rosidonto of largo citioo vars nootly thoso
who diocontinuod thoir support for tho not.

By profusion. thoy aro oolf-onployod, spacialists. tochniciano. in Main-
istrotivo posts or ongagod in clorical work.

‘l'hooo vonon do not holiovo that tho prinorioo vars hold cloan and fairly.
tho poll shomd.

Popular support for tho JSP incroaood to 13.6 porcont fro. 12.3 porcont
rogistorod in tho proviouo ourvoy.

13

PO! OHICIAL‘ US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It hed resettled en the 12 percent level in five eurveye etnce leet June.

The recent adoption or note reenettc ponc1ee by the .18? in atone-1c end

eecurity problem helped reelue the increeee to pepuler eupport. eheervere
eetd.

The 08? won e one percent increeee 1n pepuler euppert. up to 2.8 percent.
tapered with the three percent level from March through Auguet thte yeer.

Populer eupport for the new there]. club (we). Roulette, the JO? end the
030? were reepectively 1.6 percent. 0.6 percent down tree October; 3.5
percent down from the one month; 2.‘ percent. the one ee October. end
0.5 percent, 0.2 percent up free the previeue eumy.

COPYRIGHT: The Deny Yemturi 1978

080: 6120

1‘

m ORIGIN. USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

'YORIURI': 088R OMCIAL WVA MP8 ”NO-JAPAN”! nomuamm
Tokyo I'll! DAILY YOKIURI in English 23 Dec 78 p 7 0!
[Article by Yssuo Susuki]

[Excerpt] It wee rether surprising when Zineids Kruglove. heed of the All-
Soviet Society for Friendship end Cultursl Reletions um: roreign Countries
(son). sterted criticising the recently concluded Jenn-Chine treety of
pesce end friendship on the very first dsy of her recent visit to Tokyo

st the heed of s three-Ieeher lieeion to prosote friendship between the
Soviet Union end Jepsn.

In ey tslk with her, however, it heceee cleer the: the Soviet Union thinks
thet friendly relstione er the people's level between the two countries csn
not be proeoted esoothly without tskin; the Sine-depenese treety into con-
eideretion.

This wee the first ties for Kruglm to visit Jspen in 12 yeers.

Though she did not see much chenge since her first visit in 1966. she wee
euro of one thing when she egreed to en interview on the very dey of her
errivel in Tokyo—the eteoephere of Jepenese-Soviet reletione.
'Anti-Soviet rect‘

Kruglove eeid it wee s cruciel soeent end both countries should leeks uteost
efforts to proeote hileterel friendly relstions.

"After ell is eeid end done. we cannot deny thet the recent aspen-Chine

treety is enti-Soviet in its nsture. But we don't bless only the treety
for the worsening of the hilstersl relstions.” she eeid.

Despite the strong criticise of the treety. Kruglove stressed thst Hoecow

reelly vented to further pro-ore friendly reletions between Jepsn end the
Soviet Union.

15

PO! OMCIAL US! ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“He euet endoree thinge not by vorde, but by deede." ehe etreeeed.

ieplying thet the Jepeneeo Government'e declered policy of ”unidirection-
el diploeecy" ie nerely e verbel pley. She expreeeed the hope thet Jepen'e
new Prine ninieter Ohire will pureue e friendly foreign policy tovnrd the
Soviet Union by teking concrete etepe.

Kruglove pleye two other very inportent functione in the Soviet Union. She
ie e eenber of the Centrel Co-ittee of the Soviet Conuniet Perty end eleo
e deputy of the Suprene Soviet (perlienent).

Kruglove ie the higheet renking Soviet citizen. though ehe night not be e
governnent officiel, to vieit Jepen eince the conclueion of the Jepen-Chine
treecy of peece end friendehip thie eta-er.

Policy Shift?

Quelified eourcee in Tokyo recently eeid thet the Soviet leedere in' the

Krealin heve epperently evitched their foreign policy tooerd Jepen, vhich
heretofore vne cherecterieed ee “veit end eee" diplonecy.

The Soviet Union hed been refreining from eending eenior perty end govern-
Ientel officiele, including ninietere end their deputiee. to Jepen until
Tokyo ehoved ite villingneee to nend the etreined reletionehip by teking
eubetentiel etepe.

Under these circunetencee. it ie quite epperent thet Kruglove hed e very
inportent role to pley during her vieit in eounding out future directione
in Jepen-Soviet reletione beceuee e centrel conittee ne-ber eonetinee
etende higher then en ordinery cehinet ninieter in Soviet politice.

Her vieit givee the i-preeeion thet the Soviet Union ie trying to nend hi-
leterel reletione not only in the politicel field but eleo in- the culturel
eree in the coning year.

Cul turel Tiee .

Kruglove. in her cepecity ee cheirvonen of SOD, diecloeed thet SOD would
conclude e five-yeer egree-ent (1979-83) with the Jepen Aeeocietion of Gul-
turel leletione Uith Foreign Countriee on Cooperetion in Culturel Exchengee.

So fer the two eeeocietione heve hed only one-yeer egreenente.

One of the plenned projecte under the projected egreenent ie e eylpoeiul of
Soviet end Jepeneee vritere.

The firet eynpoeiul will be held in the Soviet Union under the title of

"The Uriter'e Role in the Contemporery Horld” none the in 1980. It will
be followed by enother eylpoeiu in Tokyo or enotber Jepeneee city under

the these of "The Uriter'e Reeponeibility ee e Citizen for Deetiny of Peece”
in the following yeer.

16
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 08! ONLY
A foru- by Jepaneee and Soviet preteeturel governere and city neyore vlll
aleo he held. Kruglove eeld.
The three-whet delegetlen vhleh Krusleva led had a very huey echedule

1n Japen. They let repreeentatlvee of elneet all the omeltlen partlee
and Irlendehlp eraanlutlene end vlelted any cltlea free Renaldo to

Kyuehu.
comma: The Dally helm-l 1978

C80: #120

17

M OFFICIAL 038 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND 8001010010.“.

JAPAN DBMS! AGENCY camctzno FOR us swumvs ACTIONS
Tokyo "IRON KIIZAI mm in Joponooo 12 Nov 78 p 5

[form colum h 'roohihiro Younouchi: “Doionoo Agoncy Hunt Chongo Ito Attitudo
Tovord Socrocy"

pox}? Ono of tho hinso I connot ogroo with in tho rocont dobooto on
outgoncy ﬁotonog loaiolotion” hoo boon tho Dofonoo Agency'o proclivity

tot ooctocy. It io my fooling that tho Dofonoo Aaoncy hoo uoutpod tho

pooplo'o "right to know” in docidin. to ounootly concool o number of notor-
iolo thought to ho fundooontol to tho pooplo'o conoidototion of tho prohloo

of ooorgoncy logiolotion.

Tovordo tho ood oi Auguot. socrototy Conorol Norouhi of the Sociol Doloctotic
Loom donndod thot 10 docuoonto cloooly tolotod to oootgoncy loaiolotion.
notoriolo relotcd to tho Dofoooo Agoncy ond tho_8olf Dofonoo Pol-co. bo oodo
public. Along thooo voro tho oo-collod Sonyo [rhtoo Arrovg7 Study ond o
docuoont ontitlod ”0n Provioiono Thot Should Do Addod to tho Logol Oodo in
tho Puturo." which io o 1966 Dofonoo Agoncy hogol Romrch Offico droft,

but tho Dofonoo Agoncy roiuocd to oolto ony of thooo ootoriolo public.

Further. in connection with tho oo-collod prohloo of copinp vith o outprioo
ottock. it hoo boon ototod that thoro oxiot "oocrot ordoro'_vhich outhotiu
tho uoo of vooponty hy tho Ait Sol! Dofonoo Potco ogoinot Lon oitcrof£7 vio-
lotins ﬁopon'37 oitopoco. hut in rooponoo to Commiot Potty diotoon

higoohinoko'o roquoot in tho Diot thot thoy ho ptovidod, tho- Dofonoo Asoncy

tofuood on tho groundo thot ”oocrot ordoto" oto cloooifiod.

Hotoovor. it woo outod in rooponoo to o quootioo (too Socioliot Potty dict-on
Ivotori thot ot ptooont in tho Dofonoo Agoncy thoro oxiot 90.000 cloooifiod
dotonoo docuoonto oo voll oo “2,000 cloooifiod osoncy docuonto. Thio hoo
to bo collod o ourprioin; mob» of ooctoto.

Rocontly, onon; roooorchoro conconod with quootiono of tho Gonotitution'o
pocifioo out! of tho citiuno' tight to boot. thoto woo o docioion to lod3o
o dooond with tho Dofonoo Agoncy thot tho oiotonontionod docu-ont ontitlod

”0o Provioiono Thot Should Do Addod to m Loul Codo in tho l’uturo" knovn ,
to oxiot ohould ho oodo public. -

18

POI omcm. 083 OILY
I'UK OFFICIAL USE UNLX

The reason for this was that the docueent contains provisions-a National
Defense Secrets Protection Act (Kokka Boei hisitsu hogo ho). a Special
Energency Measures Act (hijo Jitei Tokubetsu Sochi ho). and establish-ant
of e systes for general nobilisation--oonceived as energency legislation
that relind us of the stete-of-energency laws of prewar Japan. In view of

the Constitution. a grave problen which could not be ignored wso considered
to exist.

In reply to a written request which the five of us researchers involved signed
and took to the Defense Agency, the Agency prosptly and sinply responded with

a refusal to cake public the eaterials. ‘rheir reason was that "These sateriels.
at the ties. were internal working saterinls. Not being conpletely finalised.
they should not be disclosed to outsiders."

It very well nay be that there are instances when, for logical reasons,
materials such as drafts actually in the working stage within the sdninis-
trstion should not he released to the public. however. the docunsnt which
we requested should he cede public was prepared note than 10 ydsrs ago and
can already be called historical. Also, we have not heard anyone suggest
that the document has specifically been classified.

The officer in charge of the Defence Agency Legal Research Office that we
set with stressed that "if the docuent were sade public. it sight easily
be taken as the official view of the Defense Agency." However. the docunsnt
is the consequence of a fornal decision taken at a seating of Defense Agency
counselors on ll August 1965 to direct that a study of emergency legislation
be nade. and certainly the work done at the Legal Research Office was in
consequence of euch instructions. Moreover. if final approval at a seating
of counselors could not be obtained. there is an isplicit question of why
not. and I certainly do not find it unreasonable fros the standpoint of
citisens as taxpayers to demand the release of the docusent to the public.

Such a response on the part of the Defense Agency is basically identical
to the govemsnt's thinking when it cones to essrgency legislation. where
i-sdiate enact-ant of a secrets protection act is advanced.

Nonetheless. in the decision of the U. s. l'ederal Suprens Court which
sanctioned the disclosure of secret U. 8. Defense Department doculsnts con-
cerning the Vietnaa War, Justice Black stated. ”The guarding of nilitary and
diploastic secrets at the expense of inforaed representative government
provides no real security for our Republic."

Peced with a Defense Agency which does not possess this kind of awareness,
in s comtry which does not have a Freedom of lnfor-ation Act such as that

in America. is there nothing our people can do other than siny stand by
with ans folded?

I should like to register sy firs objection to the Defense Agency's
secretiveness. If the Defense Agency intends to study energency legislation

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?OR 0??!CIAL 083 ONLY

truly on behalf of the people. I inaiat that the relevant ueteriale be
opened to the general public and that they be subject to public diacuaaion
and debate.

(The author is proieeaor of Codutitutionel Law at Dokkyo Universiti)
comment: Nihon leiaai Shinbun 1978

9398-8
680: #105

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCONMIC

JAPANBSB'NOTE U.S. PRESSURE FOR R1688]! 63MB RATE
- Tokyo lumen! snnmm in Japeneae 16 Dec 78 Iorning edition p 7 on

[Text] Finance tiinietry and Bank of Japan officiala charged with interna-
tional aonetary affeire have euddenly hecone concerned over a poaaible re-
vival of the theory likening "nations with trade aurplueee" to "loco-otivea”
--e theory which appeared to have died. Thin concern wee pronpted by U.8.
' Treasury Secretary bluenthal'e etetenent at the 14 December hearing of

the Joint Congreeeional Economic Conittu in which he denounced Japan for
giving up ite 7 percent economic growth target for thin year. Bluenthal
aeid that Japan‘ in "violating ite public pledge." In addition, key 0.8.
officiale have lately begun criticizing Japan. Thin criticial of Japan ie
believed to he beaed on 0.3. feare that the U.S. econoly, the biggeat
"loco-otive” pulling the world econoly. nay face difficultiea next year re-
eulting in atagnetion of the world econo-y.

The 0.8. criticiaa of Japan ia likely to have a. delicate hearing on Japaneee
efforte to fonulate a budget-end adjuat the growth target for the next
fiacal year.

0.8. criticiea of Japan'a econonic aanegenent ie evident from Blulenthal'a
congreaeional teatinony and froe the 0.8". poaition at the 11 Decaber Dom
meeting held to review the Bonn Sui-it conference of Advanced Netiona. At
the neeting Japan clarified ite intention to give up ite 7 percent growth
target for thie year, to the greet diaaatiafaction of the United Staten.

The Finance Hinietry in also paying attention to a apeech by Senator church,
who in acheduled to becoae the next chair-an of the Senate Foreign Relatione
Omittee, aade in Utah on 12 Decenber. In hie epeech. Church said that:

1) The United States ahould cut back ite overeeae aeeietance and diecontinue '
ite overeeae inveauent promotional program; 2) The United Staten ehould
pureue doneetic policiea with enphaeie on increaeed productivity and on
other private econonic eectora and a foreign policy centered on the economy;
and 3) The United etatea in now being challenged not by the Soviet Union
but by Japan. Heat Ger-any and other alliea.

21

F’OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPIOIAL US! ONLY

Tho Pinanco Hiniatry holiowoo that tho now 0.3. thinking ia pronotod by
{onto (oxproaood by lluonthal) that tho 0.8. ocononic growth rota to: noxt

yoar nay "drop clooo to 2 pox-cont,” for loaa than tho originally ionoaat
6.3 potcont.

In addition. tho next 0.8. prooidontial oloction ia achodulod for 1980.
The Carter adniniotration kinda it diifioult to introduco («that dollar
dolonao and anti-inflation noaauroa which nay roault in fut-thal- aggravating
tho buoinooa rocoaoion. Thoroion. tho Pinanco Hiniotry ia worriod that
tho Unitad Statoa nay again alphaaito tho roaponoihilitioa of Japan. ﬂoat
(Botany and othor trado ourpluo nationa and twin tho ”locoootiwo” thoory
to prooouro than to achiovo highor ooononic growth ratoo.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shinbunaha 1978
080: 6105

22

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
m OPPIOMI. ”8! ONLY

”MIC

BDIMIAL: ‘DROKEN PROMISBS’ on em
'l'oltyo mum DAILY mm in Inglioh 16 Doc 78 p 2 00
[Bditoriolx ”Irokon Proniooo"!

[Tort] At a looting hold in lonn. Root Oomm.Hondoy, Japan told tho oi:
Hootorn induotrial donocracioo or tho virtual inpoaaibility oi nooting ito
intornotionolly plodgod 7 porcont roal ocononic growth rato for tiocal yoar
'78. which ondo noxt harch.

‘l'ho parlay. attandad by gowormnt roprooontotiwoo of tho oowon—Japan. tho
0.8.. britain. Italy. Hoot Gar-any. Canada ond trancouwoa hold to roviow
tho fulfillnont of public plodgoo nado by thoir loodoro at tho July omit
conforonco.

Tho lonn ou-it woo not tho lirot confah whoro Jopan'o “7 porcant growth
targot"-along with ito intontion o! drooticolly roducing ito hugo curront
account ourpluauwoo rovoalod. Similar pro-iooo hovo boon nado by Japan in
t.” ”to

It appoara quito appropriato and natural that Japan ohould toll tho oix
othor countriao of ito inonding iailuro to honor ito pronioo, now that a
7 porcont torgot in inpoooihlo to achiovo.

"a aro of tho opinion that Japan'o attitudo of frankly adnitting ito failuro.
without noking any oxcuooo. will onhanco intornational faith in Japan.

Extra-o prudonco io roquirod in tanking any kind of intornational plodgo.
Thuo. noting a plodgo ouch aa tho ”7 porcont growth.” tho attain-ont of
which woo in doubt iron tho vory boginning. ohould ho conoidorod an indi-
catiwo of a ooriouo lack of diocrotion.

'l'ho fox-nor Pukudo cabinot diogrocod itoolt loot yoar by failing to liwo up
to ito prooiooo of achioving 6.7 porcont growth and a $700 nillion doficit
in Japan’o curront occoutut balanco.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There can be no excuse for inviting ridicule fron other countries for two
successive years by failing to achieve proeiesd growth targets. although the
inproveaent in reducing tho current account surplus this year oust be con-
sidered as praiseworthy.

Needless to say. an ooonoeic growth rate. a naoroscopio figure. should be
coapiled only after taking into consideration nioroscopio figures of var-
ious econoaic activities. in this sense, aaking a proaise to attain a cer-
tain growth rate see-s illogical and indiscreet. in addition. the pledge
to tract the 7 percent growth rate was aade free a political consideration-
in order to ward off aounting foreign criticise of Japan's nassive current
account surplus.

Worse yet. the 7 percent growth pledge, once aade public. becaae acknowledged
internationally as an established fact. disregarding Japan's slis chance of
realizing it. Thie is evidenced by the International Honatary fund's request
that Japan attain 7 percent growth next year also. The carelessly node
proniee hes led an international body to entertain an illusion.

Prine hinieter Ohira also shares responsibility with for-er Preaiar l’ukuda
as Ohira was serving in one of the top posts of the ruling party-osecrstary
general-mat the tine Pukuda node the proaise.

however. Ohira's policy, aade known i-ediately after he It.“ the prine-
ainistership. or not adhering to the 7 percent growth figure. is co-ond-
able. although it eeened inevitable.

we hope the govern-ant will refrain in the future fro. asking public such
a aacroscopic figure as a 7 percent growth rate and. instead. nanage the
nation's econoly by placing lore aphasia on its nicroscopic aspects.

It is solsti-es difficult for us to understand the attitude of bureaucrats.
They insisted the 7 percent growth was possible right up until the change of
adainietration. No sooner had the adainistrstion changed. however. than
they abruptly changed their attitude. ‘l'heir quick reweraal should be con-
sidered as part of the custon of "saving face” ‘r‘or the an in power.

Another international pledge Iade by Japan was that it would ”double Offi-
cial Develop-eat Assistance (00A) within three years."

He feel this proaise was oiled at reducing the current account surplus
rather than proaoting international welfare. At preaant. the progress being
aade in fulfilling thio pledge is at a anail's pace.

we urge the govorment to iaple-ont. and swiftly, a substantive 6M plan in
order to avoid further ridicule from abroad.

oomrom': Hainichl Daily News 1978

080: 6120
2!.

m OFFICIAL USE 03L?
FOR OWIOML 085 ONLY

mm

I'M!!! 'soutn' PLAGUE JAPANESE 303mm, INDUSTRY
Unit ahere Syeten

Tokyo YOHIURI 8|“th in Jepeneee 26 her 78 p l

[Co-entery]

[Text] In order to expel the eoheiye In group of hecklere end bleck-
neilere hired by corporetione to obetruct enti-nenegenent novee et ehere-
holdere' neetingel. the pereeite of bneineee. the Ninietry of Jnetice
reportedly deeiree to edopt the ”unit ehere eyeten." Under thin eyeten.
e ehere with e fece veloe of $0.000 yen will be coneidered ee e mit.
Shereholdere holding leee then_e unit will not be elloved to ettend
ehereholdere' neetinge or have voting righte. Under the exieting eye-
ten. enyone with even one ehere ney ettend end. if not obetructed by the
eokeiye. eolt queetione or etete their viewe. lt ie thie eiqle proceee
thet nhee the eokeiye renpent. ‘l'he Hinietry of Juetice. therefore.
hopee to inoee none reetrictione in order to expel the eohniye. now-
ever. the neeenroe minet the eokeiye etill eeen inedequete. Let ne
coneider the chnngu mder the unit ehere eyeten. Hhile it ney eten

the growth of ndditionel. new eohniye. n eokeiye with en inveetnent of
50.000 yen nwltiplied by elphe (elphn refere to twofold increeee in cur.
rent price egeinnt tece velue) in e cert-4n "n \H H be enxioue to recoup
the lone reeulting Iron expuleion iron other enterprieee. The end reenlt
will be en enterpriee under the conlete dondnence of e powerful eokeiye.
The nbeolute enount of noney equeeted out of n fir-n would increneo rether
than rennin conetent. It eppeern the eokniye eociety in einply being of-
fered e thence to develop tron en inefficient hunting and collecting cul-
turn to e eteble cultiveting culture.

On top of thin. there eppeere to be en intent under the wit ehere eyeten
to get rid of the coneunere' novenent for the one-ehere ehereholder; end
it in queetionnble whether coneunere. who ere nlrendy week enough on it

ie. ehonld be denied on opportunity to eir their viewe. But the eneente

of the neeenree egninet the eokeiye ehould be directed egeinet corporate
peyoﬂe. No netter whet the eokniye night utter et ehereholdere' nect-
inge. the nenegenent ehould rennin unperturbed.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHIO!“ USE ONLY

Tho collapao o! Ataka 6 Co and tho bankruptcy of Bidai 0o ia prohahly duo
in part to tho uao of ookoiya to ahutout ohoroholdoro' criticiau. Banko
paying out aovoral hundrod oillion yon annually to ookaiya ahould tako a
loaoon troo ouch fir-o aa Kyupi [Cupid] Kayonnaioo. liitau-uroko. shionogi.
Altai llootric and Nippon hiniaturo looting.

COPYRIOBT: Yooiuri Shinbunoha 1970
lilliono Paid to 8okaiya Annually
Tokyo "IRON K81“! mum in Jopanoao 5 Doc 77 p 22

ﬁstula: "'Uniortmato ‘l'ioa' ﬂith aokaiya Continuo; huh Pay-onto laroly
(ul

(Toxtl Bntorpriooo. caught in tho uidot of tho atriu-
gont oconooic onwironoont of rocoaoicn and high yon.
aro not auppoaod to 'aquandor thoir nonoy. Yot. 80 to
150 billion yon ia paid annually (National Polico
Agoncy oatioatoo) undor tho guioo of contributiona
or adwortiaiog fooa to aokaiya. known oo "black
gontlooon" or ”ohady buainoao groupa.” Although
polico authoritioa havo crackod down on aokaiya
groupa which nudor about 3.200 poraono. viowing
than aa "antioocial groupo" liko gango, tho tioo bo-
twoon tho ontorpriooa ond aokoiya run vory doop.
Nowortholoao. tho tioo hao coco for ontorpriooo to
conoidar oavoring ouch rolationo at tho ora whon

tho aokaiya woro condonod an o nocoaoary ovil hoo
paoocd.

Total Payoffo Aro ‘l'op Socrot

Shortly boforo 0000, about 10 woird-looking individualo loitorod in front
of a cortain bank in tho huoinooa diatrict of Otuachi. Tokyo. ao oalariod
not: and wooon otrollod put on thoir way to work. Roaring wido tioo and
loud. largo plaid auito. tho individualo vaniohod hohind tho onloyooo‘
gato whoa it woo oponod.

Tho ookoiyo Iakoo round attor round of vioita to ontorpriooo to opon ac-
counts at botwoon 200 and 300 fir-o (hio nano io rocordod in my booko
and ho to paid at looot tvico a yoar). Thoy oporato oarly in tho turning
oo thoir turn for work will dopond on tho ordor in which thoir nooo carda
aro 'ouboittod. Thio io thoir "wiodoo of living.” and if roquirod to wait
until rogiatration (0800 at thio bank). thoy would hawo tioo to viait
oaothor fin.

At thin particular hank. oooo 2.000 poroooa. including rightwingoro and
ohody oagotino roportoro aro rogiotorod, 000 to 1.000 of which aro ookoiya.
An oooiotant oxocutiwo oocrotary of gonoral afiairo ooction aaid: ”thoy

26
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aro paid twico a yoar. iron 6.000 or 5.000 yon to 200.000 or 300.000 yon.
No ona io gotting a aillion yon. 'rotal poynonto aro top aocrot and cannot
bo divulgad.”

Following tho crackdown. a National Polico Agoncy official rovoalod:
"Financial inatitutiona pay tho noat to ookaiya. Hhon a bank initially
opono an 'account' and docidoo on tho anount of tho payoff. it oorvoa no
a pattorn (or othor affiliotod firna to follow.“ Anothor roaoon for
aokaiya'o inroada ia tho aaaiatanco providod by oacuritioa fir-o in hir-
ing aokaiya for oharoholdara' nootingo whon a.£irn'o oharoo ara liatod
on tho otoch axchango.

Many of tho aokaiya oporato undor ouch titloo an an "ocononic roooarch
inatituto" or a "political and oconoaic problana ourvoy aaaociation" and
carry nano carda with titloo u roproaontativo diroctor and praoidont.
Evan in a ono-nan oporation. ha in tho prooidont. llo alwaya carrioo in
hio pockat a book of racoipta for contributiona.

‘l‘ho vocational background of aohaiya io variod. {too for-or aalariod non
to auto nochanica and taxi drivora. with an unuaunlly high nuobor of bar-
tondora. Thoro ia ovon a "bartondora' group.” ‘l'ha bartandor. aftor ovor-
hoaring owoot tolaa botwoon koy aokaiya and top businooooon at Oinaa hora
and cluba. apparontly bogina to think "a pioca of papor [rocoipt] nakoo
nonoy. Thoro io no bottor doal than thio."

Ninoty Porcont of Vino Liatod on Stock Exchange

Latoly. aokaiya haa boon organiaod into groupa. Upon ontoring tho offica
of ono group. a coapany aong wao hoard: ”Thoro io a tonorrow whon looking
at th: aky. a iuturo in boiling blood [condonaod]. and nothing bad in our
path.

With handa bohind thoir back and logo apart, oworyono woo oinging ao a
.niddlo-raoking officor boat tino.

Mr H. tho loador. in 36 yoara old. A aanior unbor paya a now uabor bo-
twoon 20.000 and 30.000 yon. doponding on tho incone earned. and guarantooo
o nonthly incono of about 200,000 yon. It also haa a oyotoo, unliko oshor
ookaiya. of houoing all ita workoro undor one roof. in a unaion: of uniting
it cloar to a workor'a opouoo and childron that ”papa io a ookaiya": and
oaauring that hio incono will be at lout 10.000 yon groator than what ho
got in hio for-nor job. Mr I! did not dony that tioa oxiat with ganga:

"It'o annoy. fin: and laat. in this buainoaa. It in not unlawful. just
on tho brink of it. Ho cannot oporatc without tioa with outlawo."

Gonorally, tho anount paid by a fir- to tho ookaiya ia aot aoido in ita

annual budgot. ‘l'ho nonoy ia diatributod by a poraon in chargo in tho
gonoral affaira ooction. Tho aokaiya aro ranked A. B. c or 0 according
to thoir capability. A votoran dotoctivo of tho Pourth lnvootigativo

27
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section. Metropolitan Police Deperteent. eetieetes: "Of 1,700 fir-s
listed on the stock exchange. only about 10 percent have no connection
with sokeiye. Host unlisted fires eleo hold shereholdere' eeetings.
Counting these. e firn's budget for this purpose probebly evereges from
30 to 100 million yen." A white peper on shereholdere' eeetings prepared
by neiwe Securities Co in Noveeber reports: "Despite public criticise.
ties with sokaiye heve increesed in one out of two fine...A decreese.
even slight. registered only 6 percent."

0n the other bend. the eohaiye does not neceseerily ettend every ehere-
holders' nesting. According to the use white peper. 178 fine neintein
ties with 101 to 200 sokeiye. 150 with $1 to 100. end no with 201 to 300.
Fifty-six fires have cleieed effilietion with note then 500 soheiye. 'l'he
gverege number of eokeiye ettending shereholdere' neetinge renged free

' to 23.

Lately. there hee been on incrseee of sokeiye who hold few if eny shares.
as ten be Judged fro: such co-ents as: "Only one-helf of our solteiye
heve eheree in odd lots (Bonk A)." "Only 20 percent appeer to own shores
(pheneceuticel coepeny 3).” end "A shere ownership is not e criterie in
hiring; it is beeed on sffilieted group end the content of their publice-
tions (eutoeobile fire 0)."

Why do fine eelte peyoffs to sokeiye who do not own sheres or ettend shere-
holders' eeetings? Police euthoritiee ere keeping e close watch on the
soheiys which is "e group engegad in extortion. bleclueil end intiIidetion
to the point of violeting the lew."

Decieion Awaited Free Top lliererchy

One day. s veteren officisl of e nejor shipping fire. who despises eokeiye.
confronted e young nen with an i-provised nene csrd end eeid: "You just
gredueted free the university? Do you reelly know the world of sokeiye?
They're Juet like peupere. Do you went to be like e prostitute?" The
official wee eyepethetic efter observing the youth for 10 or 20 ninutu.
tinelly, when the officiel steted. "Aren't you e een? There nuet be eons
decent job which will bring perspirstion on your brow”; the youth enswered.
”1 en sorry." end never returned.

At this shipping fin. sons 80 solteiye report every Iorning end ere inter-
viewed in the order of their errivel. The person in cherge of solteiye ef-
fairs is Mr It. en 80 year old men with 15 yeere of experience. Mr K is
known to every sokeiye. Kr K steted: "‘l‘en yeere ego only executive
sokeiye cane and. being ltey figures. they readily understood our problem.
The world of soheiye is probebly undergoing e period of transition. with
the younger generetion seeking to replete their elders. I a fully ewere

of the mdesirebility of uinteining ties with soheiye. Peyoffs ere eede
es e cmtoe. Our fir- will not pey if ell other fine stop. However. we
heve no intention of naming the leed in ending the prectice."

28

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Thet responsible person is caught between the fire end sokeiys. it would
nsen e feilure to carry out his duties if ineppropriete questions or ob-
struction of proceedings developed st s shoreholders' nesting. An sssis-
tent executive secretery o! e benk in Oteeechi co-ented: "severing ties
with sohsiys would be difficult. Due to the ere or low interest. every
bent is (seed with e phenoeenon oi beck-spreed in profit esrgin end suffers
from depressed business conditions. I! this situetion continue. ties
with sokeiye would probebly heve to be drssticelly severed. This is not

s decision to be ads by s responsible person but by the top hiersrchy."

COPYRIM: Nihon Keieei Shinbunshe 1978
Ties With lenlts Exposed
Tokyo SIIUKAN snmcno in Jspensse 6 Apr 78 pp 110-111

(Article: "benlts end Soksiye Are '001! Pertners'; Rapid Pouriold Growth
in 5 Yesrs")

[Text] According to police estieetes. the eeount of cesh flowing iron
enterprises to soheiye lest yeer toteled iron 70 to 100 eillion yen. ‘lhs
sokeiye prospere. with its number swelling iron 1,600 in 1972 to 6.500 in
1977. The inroeds ends by gengstsrs hes been noteble. Benlts heve
"obsdiently" coopereted with sokeiye. For euwls. e survey by Osske
Netionel Tex Adeinistretion bureeu 3 yeers ego disclosed thet totel
ennusl peyoffs to eohsiye by the Senwe. Deiwe. Suedtoeo. Teiyo Kobe end
Smitoeo Trust leeks enounted to $00 eillion yen (15 lurch eorning edi-
tion of mum 311mm). According to one report. one-third of e11
"contributions" were nsde by beaks.

A Jepenese reporter sercesticelly reeerked: "The eotto of soheiye is 'e
Ionthly selsry fro. the beaks end e bonus from the esnufecturere’."

He continued: "Nowedsys, solteiye muelly eeintein ties with esgesines
end newspepers. At leest once every 2 eonths or even eonthly» "I. 980'“
will ecco-odete the. by plecing edvertiseeents. Henufecturers do like-
wise eech ouerter. ln eddition. eonthly lecture-nestinge or golf cone-
titions ere held. The benks reportedly set the psce in deter-ining the
“gm; of payoffs end elso introduce soheiye to fires to which they heve
n e oens.

Sansone esked: "th ere benks so week egeinst the sokeiye? Is it be-

ceuse their guilty conscience. ept to be picked on by eoheiye. cover teeny
fecets?”

The Jepenese reporter grinned end seid: ”Not neceseerily. They plece
uteost ieportence on esinteining public trust. even if they heve to pey
Ioney. They wish to mid eoy co-otion et shereholders' nestinil 01'
erticles in soheiye publicetions chsrging illegel 1oens (even if prope-
gende). Also. es with other enterprises. the position of the person

29
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

responsible for soksiye affairs nust be considered. It would be a dif-
ferent story if the top hierarchy stated: 'lt does not latter how long
the shareholders' nesting continues. foolish accusations will be strongly
reckoned with.‘ But. in reality. it is just the opposite. for the general
feeling is that e snooth proceeding lasting about 10 minutes would be nost
ideal. A chief of the general affairs departnent who thinks he is headed
for a pro:ising career would never lose sight of the top hisrarchy's in-
tentions.

In the United States. an organisation called the 880 (Federal Securities
Exchange Co-ission. an organ which nonitora unfair corporate practices
and which becsne known in Japan as a result of the lockheed incident)
would i-sdietely initiate an investigation and expose the fin (not the
sokeiya) if it discovered that a fire had used such a group as sokeiye
to tranpls on the shareholders' rights or had convened a nenipulated
shareholders' aseting. In the United States and Europe. there are no
peculiar parasites like sokaiya. This is because European and Ansrican
enterprises are not as secretive as Japanese fires and they carry out
their obligations to provide the shareholders with infornation about the
Ianagensnt. In Japan. in contrast. only a linited order of asnagsnsnt
personnel have access to inside inforeetion. To a Japanese corporate
society. which originally developed as governaent enterprises and pur-
veyore and later as s honologous entity called the saibatau. sharehold-
ers' neetings are probably a users forulity. hereover. the Japanese
society is peculiar. Prictions and disputes are considered abnorlal in
less society and. by the tine the issue surfaces. the difficulties auet
have been ironed out and a course of action deter-ined. The sokeiye is
a parasite eating away at this belief.

Duel Structure of hypocrisy and Nonsense

A British correspondent sercastically renerked: "lf sokaiya‘s financial
backing cones fro. banks. its psychological support cones fro- Japan's
Iajor newspapers.”

he continued: ”An enterprise basically is bad. and for it to profit is
bad. It mt rennin pure. Such hypocrisy is spread by the press. A
Ianager that reacts to such hypocrisy leaves eonething to be desired.

A bank executive who keeps a concubine has no direct effect on the bank's
profitability. however, it appears that such thinking is not understood
in Japan. This is the point that sokaiya feeds on.

”The soksiya tries to show that he is a true friend. just as nejor news-
papers often resort to pretty words to cover up reality. Enterprises.
particularly banks. utter nor-s1 steteaents like ‘trust is inortent.‘
but they are an incanation of the 'sefety first principle.’ and they are
pleased with such hypocrisy. In actuality. it is difficult to survive
in Japan without eons frenswork of appearance. ﬂypocritical behavior is
evident in public. but in the background nonsensical situations exist.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m omcm. oat om

ouch on tho antarpriaoo' 2 trillion yon annual aocial oxpondituroo. lt ia
no wondor that aohaiya proaporo fron a ahara of tho dual otruotura.”

mPYRIOIIT: Shinchoaha 1978
HP!) lnvootigatoo banking Tioa
Tokyo 20mm 8|“!le in Japonooo ls liar 70 p 23

[Articlot "HPD Diacovoro Major Pinancial lnotitutiono Soft on Soltaiya;
30 Million Yon in half a Yoar to Ono Group")

[Toxtl no a rooult of an invootigation by tho Rational Polico Agoncy and
Metropolitan Polico Dopartnont [HM]. activitioo of najor financial inati-
tutiono involving aokaiya woro diacloood for tho firot tino by tho 16th.

having cooo to light during a rolatod invootigation into a aokaiya. tho
Koji Takata group. Major city banko wara found to hawa contributod an
oworago nonthly au- of 700.000 or 500.000 yon to tho ono-nan oohaiyo out-
fit. confining tho gonorally accoptod baliof that "financial inotitutiono
oro aoft on aoltaiya." Thia ooftnooo toward tho oohoiya alao applioo to
ontorpriooa affiliotod with najor banko. lnvoatigatiwa authoritioo ooti-
Into. baood on caaoa uncoworod during tho yoar of 1977. that fro- 70 to
100 nillion yon hawo boon cootributod to aoltaiya. Tho National Polico
Agoncy wiowo tho aituotion with alorl oo tho ooaoon for oharoholdoro‘
lootingo in approaching. no a roault. tha agoncy’a diroctor gonoral.
Soitaro noanuna. attandod board nootingo of tho All Japan bank Aooocio-
tion and Tokyo bank Aooociation on tho 16th and nado an muoual roquoot
to tho banko' top hiorarchy. oontonding: ”Tho aoft otanco of financial
inotitutiono io ono roaoon for tho proliforation of oohaiya. Sowor your
rolationa with than fir-1y.”

According to tho ﬁctional Polico Agancy. during tho poriod of unrogulatod
political contributiono. an "indox" of tho onount contributod by wariouo
ontorpriaoo woo hoyod to tho contributiono by tho throo houaoholdo of
banking. otool and oloctrio powor intorooto. 0thor contributiono to
ookaiya woro alao dotorninod in a oinilar faahion. with corporato contri-
butiono boing baood on thooo of affiliatod banking inotitutiono in noot
caooa. For thio roaaon. noot aoltaiya concontrato thoir octiwitioa on
financial inotitutiona.

Tho firot ovidonco of thio woo tho nonnor in which tho Takato group
a-ooood nonoy. Loot yoor. following Tabata'o arroat and tho inwoatigation
into 771 rolatod ontorpriaoo. it wao found. ao tho tablo ahowo. that Tahota
had rocoiwod waat auto fro. najor bonito. including 0.6 million yon. tho
largoot. fro. tho lnduatrial bank of Japan: 6.35 nillion tron Long Tor-
Crodit book of Jopon; 3.5 nillion iron Nihon Saihon Shinyo: and 3.1.5 nil-
lion fro- Sunitono. Contribution by 20 banks in o 6 nonth poriod totalod
about 31 Iillion yon. with on additional on of about 150 Iillion boing
diaburaod by 751 othor ontorpriaoa. It waa proof of how ooft banking in-
otitutiono woro on oohaiya.

31

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l‘he ‘l'ekata group eeployed eight organitotiona. auch ae publiahing fir-a and
reeearch inatitutea which it controlled. to collect the honey. aeounting to
51 nillion. 96 trillion and 166 million in 1976, 1975 and 1976 raapactiwely.
1t collected nearly 600 million in the 3 1/2 year period ending June 1977,

nearly half of which cane fro. paople'a aewinga.

In addition, inwartigationa by the 0aeka Tax Mniniatration Bureau and
Kinhi financial Affaira luraau rowaalcd that 500 million wae paid out by
the five Iajor banke of 8anwa. Daiwa. Smitono. ‘l'aiyo Kobe end Suitoeo
'l'ruet during a 1 year period fro. October 1975 to Septeier 1976.

According to the National Police Agency. the soft stance of there financial
inatitutiona appeal to gengetere.

0angetere ere increaaingly changing their profaaaion. figuring that rather
than taking a chance with gaining or atilulante which are eubject to
atrict control. it would be eaaier to work aa aohaiycua aura and cafe
way to sake noney. The nuﬂar of ooltaiya has incraaeed froe 1.600 in
1972 to 6.500 at the end of luet year, with nearly 1.000 coeing iron the
ranhe of gangetera. Because of then. aharaholdere' uetinge reportedly
ere eubjected to greater violence and married doainance.

‘reb le

Contribution to the Takata Group
(total out paid in firat half of 1977. ac determined by the ”0)

Induatrial Bank of Japan 6.6 million
Long ‘l'erl Credit Bank of Japan 6.35 "
Nihon Saikcn Shinyo 3.5 "
Smite-o 3.65 "
mi 2.9 "
Hitaui 2.6 "
Deiichi Kangyo 1.8 "
Hitaubiahi 1.3 "
Senwa 1.35 ”
Kyowa 1.0 ”
Taiyo hobo 750 thoueand
Suito-o Truat 700 "
Dalwa 700 "
Hitouhiahi ‘l'ruat 650 ”
Saitena 350 ”
Total 350 ”
Tokyo 200 "
llokkeido Takuohoku 150 "
Hitaui ‘l'mt 100 "
Yeauda Truat 50 "

comm: Yo-iuru Shinbuneha 1970

32

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Police Director Urges Break in Tine
Tokyo romum SHINBUN in Japanese 16 Her 73 p 2

(Article: "'Asanuae Herning' Iaplies Need for Constitutional lnprovenent:
Enterprises lxpel the Sokeiya; Bnornoue Funds to Gangs")

[Text] National Police Agency Director General Seitero
Asanuns ettsndsd the board neetings of All Japan Bonk
Association and Tokyo bank Association on the 14th and
strongly urged the severance of ties with sokeiya. An
seasination of the background of his request revealed
s situation far beyond one's insginetion.

The reason behind the National Police Agency's appeal for severance of
ties with sokaiya is sinple and clear. According to the agency. sokaiya
hes increased rapidly in recent years. having grovn to 6.500 by the end
of larch lest year. four tines nore than in 1971-72. Nearly 1.000 of
then are forner gangsters. Soksiya also have neds their way into enter-
prises on the basis of "the nunbcr and strength" of gangs lurking in the
backgromd. Bnornous finds-obviously flov froa sokaiya to euch gangs.

Hhet are the consequences? The police are cracking down through three
leans: l) ease arrests of leeders. 2) choking off the sources of funds.
and 3) couplets confiscation of veepons. To shut off the sources of
funds. the police have kept a strict watch on ganbling and barbituretes.
But as long es enornous anounte of eonsy are funneled by enterprises to
the gangs through sokaiys. no nunber of crackdovns will solve the issue.
Another problem is the difficulty of prosecuting than as crieinals since
enterprises. fearful of losing "face." fsil to nake a police report even
where contributions virtually constitute extortion. To the sokaiya end
gangs. safe and guaranteed sources of funds are assured. In such a way.
the gangster sokaiya are increasing their take of contributions iron
enterprises each year.

The National Police Agency estisstes that last year the eoksiya collected
fron 70 to 100 billion yen fros enterprises. The HPD's investigation
lest year of a sokaiya group end a tax investigation by Osaka National
Tax Administration Bureau have confined police suspicions about vide-
spraad activities by enterprises. centered around financial institutions.

State-ants to police by arrested sokaiya. such as "contributions are ob-
tainable nerely by printing on s nane card the uses of a legitinsts re-
search institute." or "a person in charge of general affairs [dealing with
sokaiye] handed over a fistful of noney in the order in vhich they arrived."
reflect ins enterprises' besic nature of settling all letters with noncy.
Certainly. the sight of gangsters and bartenders who know nothing about
economic conditions or the co-ercisl code being treated with respect as

a "teacher." riding around in foreign cars and residing in nansions is

33

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

humorous. but it is "an abnornel situetion that cannot be condoned (Na-
tional Police Agency)."

Director General Asanuee's unusual request is based on such a situation.
leplying the need for enterprises to ieprove their basic nature. he pointed
out. "the age of resolving all problens with eoney is over. The sokaiya
issue cannot be solved on-scene by chiefs of the shares section or general
affairs, but through a courageous decision by the top hierarchy."

The reason for National Police Agency's decision to expel the sokaiya is
that enormous corporate contributions are a great source of funds for
gengs with which they esintein their organization. It is needless to say
that society desires the annihilation of gangs. Just how and where does
the link between nessive payments run counter to the desires of society
and the enterprises' social responsibility? That puzzles as we learn
about the enornous contributions which have been revealed by investigative
authorities.

COPYRIGHT: Yoeiuri Shinbunshs 1978

Corporations Endanger Free Society
Tokyo roam: menus in Japanese 19 Mar 78 p 5
[Editorislz "Enterprises Should Sever Ties Hith Sokaiys"]

[Text] Investigative authorities estimate that free 70 to 100 billion
yen were paid by enterprises to sokaiya last year. For this reason.
Director General Assume of the National Police Agency on 16 March at-
tended the board neetings of All Japan Bank Association and Tokyo Bank
Association to request that "financial institutions fir-1y sever their
ties with eokaiya."

The banks have not yet shown any definitive reaction. However. if they
continue to neintein ties with sokaiya. saying. "for us, it is mavoid-
able," or "it is a necessary evil," a serious predicament nay ensue. ﬂow
is the tine to heed the investigative authorities' warnings and think
seriously about eliminating the sokaiya.

Banks are the cornerstone of a free society. Unlike in the pest. how-
ever. they cannot use their financial strength to nova society in any vsy
they see fit. They should be conscious of their social responsibility as
an iqortant eleesnt of society. above all other enterprises. Yet.'finan-
cial institutions purportedly are the largest contributors to sokaiya. '
setting the pace for other enterprises. The investigative suthorities'
anguish is mderstandable.

Let's cite sons figures. According to investigative authorities. sokaiya
nuﬁered 1.600 in 1972, 2.200 in 19710 and 6,500 in 1977. eultiplying like

1%
NR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
roe ornctAi. use 0va

rats. In sone form or other, they are linked with gangsters, and nearly
1,000 of then have converted into sokaiya.

since 1975, shareholders' meetings have been held annually. A study is
underway to adopt a unit share systen whereby a certain number of shsrss
would be required to exercise shareholders‘ rights. Such noves to snend
the Couercial Code include nsasures to cope with sokaiys. However,
sokaiye are running reapant as if to deride such loves.

The expulsion of soltaiye can be said to rest not on the shoulders of the
law end investigative authorities, but on the attitude of enterprises,
starting with banks. In Tokyo, sore then 400 firms are affiliated with
the Special Violence Comternessures Council, organized by the HPD. In
Osaka, an enterprise defense liaison council, divided into 18 blocks,

has been for-ed with sons 340 fires listed on the Osaka Stock Exchange
as nenbers. The structure has been for-ed; the reaeining question is who
will idsue it with a soul.

The answer is clear. Director General Asanun explained at the hen]: asso-
cietion nesting, ”The sokaiya issue cannot be solved on-scene by chiefs
of the shares section or general affairs, but through a courageous deci-
sion by the top hierarchy."

It is convenient to utilize sokaiye to see that shareholders' meetings
end in 5 or 10 ninutes or to conceal corporate scandals. however,
corporate nensgensnt nust realize that it certainly would destroy the
stock conpany system that upholds the enterprises and the foundation of
a free society.

COPYRIGHT: Yoniuri Shinbunsha 1978
Stockholders' Heetings Kept Short
Tokyo 1011103! snmw in Japanese 28 Jun 78 p' 10

[Article: "Sokaiya Is Quietly Alive and Hell; Unconcerned With Recession;
Clapping of Bends at 350 Pine, the Usual lO-Plus Minutes of 'No Objec-
tion'“)

[Text] Shareholders' neetings are now in full swing.
A total of 349 fine, or nors than 30 percent of all
fine listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, are conven-
ing shareholders' meetings in Tokyo today and toner-
row. The facial expressions of enterprises' top

hierarchy as the financial reports 'sre nsde vary,

as oil and electric power fins are blessed with

high profits, while shipbuilding and textiles suffer
fro. structural recession. As in past years, share-
holders havs raised "no objection" to various propos-
Ials, and lost meetings have ended quickly. Although

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

the MM) hoe cracked down to "externinnte the enli-
cious eokaiyo this year." fires believe that "eekaiya
will never change, although they nay appear quiet on
the surface.“

The regular shareholders' nesting of Nihon Sakiyu (Takeo Takiguchi. presi-
dent), which had recorded its highest profit ever because of the high yen
differential of 170 billion yen. was convened at 0800 on the 28th at its
main office auditoriue in Niahi-Shinbaehi. Tokyo.

As chair-an. President Takiguohi reported on conditions in the petroleu-
industry and sought the shareholders' understanding. saying. ”Daund ie
eoving laterally. Recession is fading, but our gains were a result of
the high yen differential which, however, were returned to the censure.”

After President ‘rakiguchi reed proposals on financial accounts, charter
neendnent end retirenont allowances. a young shareholder stood up end
delivered a supporting stateeent. Following the calls of "no objection"
or "we concur" end a lapse of 31 ninutas. the neeting closed without
incident.

The fire'e ehareholdere' seating was rether lengthy coepered to those of
17 out of 20 firm listed on the Tokyo Stock Bxchenge. which lasted only
20 einutes on the 27th. At these neetings. there was only ties to read
the first proposal on financial reports. to reelect officers end-eke a
partial aeendeent of the charter. with hardly any tine for shareholders
to speak. This is in contreet to shareholders' neatinge in the United
Stetee where a full day is devoted to hearing free the shareholders.

heny fires noted: "It was almost within the sees tinefrene as last year.”

The longest shareholdere' neeting wee held by hokkaido Colliery 6 Steer
ship Co. lasting 62 ninutee. This wee due to an explanation by its chair-
nan. Yoshitaro Begiwara, of the reason for the firn’e renoval this fall
froe the first section of Tokyo Stock Exchange, attributed to business
difficulties ever since the horonai coal nine disaster. Said an officer
of general affairs section: "There was no way for eokaiya to cause a
confusion since it even knew we had no noney.”

Whenever a shareholders' seating proceeds without a hitch, hardly any
fire will deny that a sokeiye is behind the scenes. General affairs
section personnel of sone fires consented: "As a general conclusion.
even sokaiya appears to have prestige by heving a record of arrest
(Yashica)”; ”Docunents nailed by eokaiya to our fire are returned. but
now they are being sent to bones of directors (Rhyth- Hatch Co)": and
"Feniliar faces are coning as usual. but this year new ones have the
crass to show up (Nippon Hodo Co)."

Various fir-e agree that the NPD'e tough crackdown hes Iede "eoltaiye
quieter this year." but the actual situation appears to be "a slight

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ratreet after exeeeeive eurfacing around the tine of the oil ahock (Japan
Synthetic Rubber Co)."

At hibiya Sogo Seteubi Co. which held ite firet ehereholdere' neeting
eince being lieted in the eecond eection of Tokyo Stock Bxchenge in Noven-
ber of laet year. ”aekaiya appeared but did not utter a word” at a forner
HPD officer had been inetalled ae departnent chief in charge of the loot-
ing.

The groupe of one-ehare ehereholdere who. at the tine of the oil ehock.
need to converge on entarprieee reeponeible for pollution or vhich capi-
telired on the eituation end increaeed pricee are no longer vieible at
ehareholdere' neetinge. -

COPYRIM: Yoniuri Shinbuneha 1978

Activitiee in Fukuoka noted
Tokyo 83W sumcuo in Japaneee 20 Jul 78 pp 130-131

[Articloz "8okaiya'e 'Pukuoka' offeneive-Defeneive her; ‘If Not Good in
Tokyo. There Ie Alvaya Ilekata’”)

[Text] The black nonay received by eokaiya fron enterprieee total nore
than 80 billion yen annually.

The nutter of eokaiya totale 6.500 (figurea provided by Nationel Police
Agency. Actual nunber ie reportedly 5.000 ae none retain idle).

"Lately. hovever. around 20 percent of thoaa eokaiya have begu to con-
verge on a fee: local enterpriaea here in Fukuoka.”

1hue co-ented a local knowledgeable pereon in Fukuoka. vhich ha been
hit by an abnor-al draught and water in available only 10 houra a day in
the hakata deeert. he continued to epeak about the endleee flov of noney:

"A certain eecretarial eection chief of a bank kaepe a pile of 1.000 end
10.000 yen notea in the right-hand drewer of bio deck. and when a eokaiya
appcare. he hande over the noney in an unnerked thin brown envelope. A
najority of eokaiya are free Tokyo end Oeaka. Apparently. they are in-
portant figuree. for they etay at firet claaa hotela. huetle in the
{ahteubueineee diatrict to collect noney and leieurely pack up and

eave.

The deak of a eecretariel eection chief at another fir- purportedly in
etacked vith one day'e "navepapere" and ”negatinee."

"Although the publicatione rceenble none Iyaterioue docunente. they con-
tain remittance fem (not an invoice for payment) and receipte.“

37
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON Ol’I'NNM. "SK ONLY

0! couree. the euthoritiee will not tolerate the eituetion. On 26 June.
at e tine when ehoreholdere' eeetinse ere in full evins. the Much
Prefecturel Police. following the eueple of Tokyo DD end Oeeke Pre-
fecturel Police. eetehliehed e "ookeiye infornetion center" within the
Fourth Inveetigetive Section. Ilitherto, e eix-nen teen of detectivee ee-
eigned to corporete violence ceeee hed collected inforeetion. which proved
inedequete. The center'e function ie to ohtein inioreetion with the coop-
eration of the entorprieee.

Thie yeer. the police were nobilired to keep e watch over ehereholdere'
neetinse in the prefecture (noet ehereholdere' neetinge in Fukuoke were
convened on the 23rd by finenciel inetitutione end on 27 through 29 by

other locel enterprieee). Tho nunber of ective ooluiye in tho prefecture.
eccording to the inventigetive eection. ie "200 locele end 700 outeidere."

The eene individuel continued: "Tornerly. in Kyuehu. there were eight
ookeiye-u-‘three houeehold heede' end ‘five eenior einietere'uvho eein-
tnined cloee tiee with the etei! et locel enterprieee end oeeieted et
ehereholdere neetinge in e friendly etnoephere. leceuee of thie tredi-
tion in xyuehu. noet locel enterprieee tend to cover up for their eoheiye
end refuee to ehov their liete to inveetigetore...l’or eokeiye iron Tokyo
end Oeelte who infiltrate into euch e cliente. there ie no eeier piece to
unite noney."

Ae e reeult. Pukuoke, efter Tokyo end Oeeke, hee hecone the necce of
eokeiye. ”Nesoye in like e tightwed end we cennot do bueineee (eccording
to e eokeiye of eediun-renlt)."

Three Point Rejection Hovenent Begine

Bnterprieee. ohviouely. do not neceeeerily continue to nelte contribution
freely upon the requeet of outeidere. with the eteel end ehiphuildine
induetriee in receeeion. the econony in entire Kite Kyuehu in hit herd.
Turthernore. in llekete. turkieh beth eetehliehnente end ceberete euifer
iron e leek of petronege heceuee of weter ehortegee.

A eteﬂ neeber or e certein dietributins fire eeid: ”The 'celenity' hegen
eromd the tine bullet treine co-enced operetion end eir feree vent down.”
lie vent on to explein the etetue of enterprieee. eterting with co-ente

on ”needleee expendituree“:

"In thoee deye, eheree of locel enterprieee. priced et 200-300 yen per
ehere on the Fukuohe Stock Bxchenge. were cold in Tokyo by odd-lot deelere
for eeverel thoueend yen e ehere. He ere in e predicenent beceuee thoee
who bought one or two eheree et thet tine ere now converging on Pukuohe
ee ehereholdere."

Shereholdere proieeeing to he "etrons in nudere" would etuhhornly request
”deteiled finenciel dete." while thoee ceiling themelvee "right-winger“

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

would ooh ouch difficult questions on "Hhet ore your fire'e viowe on the
northern territoriel ieeuo?" Thoee "ohereholdere" ere well-dreeeed in
dork blue double-breeeted euite: wide tiee in prinery colore with pettorne
reeeebling e poieonoue noth; end gold-ri-ed epecteclee. Their ulterior

eotive ie to procure nonoy end goode. They ehout with only phyeicel
etrength to their credit.

"So-n of thoee proeont were tieid (honeet) ehereholdere eelting (or 'drink-
in; noney for tonight‘."

Bvontuelly. noney ie given to then to get then to loeve. ‘l'he problee.
then. ie the onount....

"bonito. electric power conpeniee end privete reilroede. ewero of the pre-
veiling rote in Tokyo end Oeeke. noon to pey eccordingly. Ae e reeult.
even unknowledgeeble eeell- end eediun-eieed firne euet follow euit [ec-
cording to e generel effeiro oection chief of e locel nenufecturerl.”

In the Tokyo nerket, the nininue contribution reportedly ie 3.000 yen. but
eworegee fron 10.000 to 100,000 yen. the enount depending on the eoheiye'e
ranking according to hie "ability." Sometime. peyeont ie node only once.
but when on account is opened, 10 peyeente ere node eutoneticelly eech
yeer. Ranking the eokeiye in difficult beceuoe hie opponent'e "ebility"
ie unknown, being eble to open]: only n few worde. "The eokeiye elweye
nention where he in eteying. without being eeked (eccording to the chief
of e gonerel effeire deperteent of one fired.”

A eokeiye once wee renked according to the hotel in which he eteyod. ‘i'hoeo
lodging et Niehiteteu Grend Hotel were ranked A. et Tokyu llotol, I. end et
bueineee hotole. D. Aleo. whether he took e plene to Pukuoke or the bullet

trein'e green car wee of uteoet interest to thoee on the offeneiwe end
defeneive.

"Sometime, e poreon cloning to be eteying et Niehiteteu Grend liotel
would only drink e cup of tee in the lobby end return to e cheep bueineee
hotel (eccording to none generel effeire depertnent chief)."

Some eolteiye would go into e new line of bueineee. propering end eelling
e "eokeiye roeter" conteining photographe end the beckground of eokeiye
for "30.000 yon." No doubt it conee in hendy. but the fect ie thet fir-e
ere compelled to neintoin ties with eokeiye even long efter.

leceuee of ouch tiee. entorprieee hove eeen their "budget increeeo 20 per-
cent ennuelly despite reetreinte." Pinelly, incidence begen to occur.

The "Iweteye incident" leet yeer in on cote-pie. At e ehereholdcre‘ seet-

ing of Iweteye Depertnent Store, the Tokyo eokeiye ueeulted the locel
oolteiye.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

"The incident occurred after the ahereholdara' neating. A scuffle had
broken out near the door and the local people were bruised or suffering
noeeblaada. so I cried to atop it. when it was over end as l wee tidying
up. detectives arrived and nsde soee erreate. Thanke to than. we were
even celled 'aaell Marubeni'...lt was oraey after ell we had done for
eokeiye (lwetaya staff neebar)."

This led to the formation. under strong prefactural police "supervision."
of the "special violence prevention council" oospoead of seven enjor local
firne. including banks end electric power toapaniaa. In addition. an
"enterprise protection neeeuree council" wee organirad by 2‘ other tires
(in Saptaabar of last year). Needless to say. the authorities are con-
cernad about the contributions as they serve as sources of funds for
gangs in Kento end Kanaei. Currently. various enterprises, encouraging
each other. are conducting a three-point rejection eowenant (no new rela-
tionships. no increase in contributions. end no tasporary relationships).
Thus, it can be said that a structure hae bean for-ad to seintain the
status quo.

True Colore of Self-Styled 'Hejor Figurae'

Said a local nadiun-ranked eokeiye: "This year. wherever I went, there
were always et least 10 detectives. There were always one or two detac-
tivea who aaened strong in judo." He went on:

"we and the fires do not like to aae such a situation. But the detectives
Ieka points by arresting such clever offenders (crininels) as eokeiye.”

This year there was no trouble and all tires were able to conclude their
ahereholdara' seatinga within 20 or 30 ninutaa.

"Even those fro. Tokyo were quiet because their buttocks were washed by
the “PD."

The eubject here is not about gay people. The “PD reportedly has neda
great strides in crime prevention thanks to the thorough investigation of
those eokeiye who require extra scrutiny. This is referred to as "wash-
ing of the buttocks by detectives."

"Banks in Tokyo and Osaka have begun to cut back on contributions by 20 or
30 percent. In our view. the banke are riding on the police policy. There
is no problen in Fukuoka, however, as the situation lags behind tokyo by

l or 2 years."

The topic of conversation in the “skate business district was the ap-
pesrance at this year'e ehsraholdera' seating of Mr Ichiro Hetsui, 91,

the oldest eokeiye (probably in the nation) and head of the three eokeiye
households in Kyushu. Rather then talking to his as he wee resting by
the doorway of his hone after the leeting, we interviewed Hrs Netsui who
said:

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ORLY

"People tron other prefecturee Iey telk big but. to our emeenent, they
live in eieple quertere end get en eerly etert on their dey‘e work. Ac-
tuelly. they ney be eutfering no there ere too my eokeiye.”

It eo. why do they converge free eter?

A young eoheiye. Hr Ryuichi Koike. now populer in Tokyo. expleined:
"Soheiye ere united in e group. A pereon who ie idle ie eelected to
collect for s or 10 othere. lle eelee iron the third or fourth cleee.
After eleeping with e rurel ceberet hoeteee. he would becone bold end
ect like e 'big ehot'."

In any event. iniprnetion. for eone unknown reeeon. ie not reeching the
"eokeiye intonetion center. . . "

OOPYRIM: Shinchoehe 1978
One Pir- Bxpele 8okeiye
Tokyo ASA!!! sumun in Jepeneee 29 Jul 78 p 11

(Article: "Sokeiye Finelly Bxpelled: Shereholdere' Meeting Held Pence-
fully; Preeident of Tokyo'e Medium-Bind Audio Producte HenuIecturer Hekee
Decieion After 12 Yeere on Contribution Cutoff")

[Text] On 28 July. the “th ehereholder neeting of Footer Electric Co
(airoeki Shinohere. preeident) wee convened et 1000 eherp et Pukuehi
Keiken in Akiehine City, Tokyo. Attending were 47 ehereholdere. noetly
enployee-ehereholdere; only two eokeiye were preeent. both of who. were
old "ruling petty eokeiye." but on thie dey. they reneined eilent through-
out. Aiter e chorue of "I concur." end "I fever." iron the ehereholdere.
Preeident Shinohere cloeed the meeting et 1006 with the etetenentx “flunk
you for your eerneet diecueeion." ‘l'he firet neeting held eince the deci-
eion nede eerly thie nonth to euepend peyoffe to eoheiye ended in only

6 ninutee without eny trouble. A totel of eight inveetigetore tro-
Akiehile Police Stetion, HPD, were on guerd egeinet the poeeibility oi
eokeiye ceueing trouble in proteet egeinet the euepeneion of peyoﬂe;

but there were no incidente end the police pulled out.

Honey Seved To Go to Children of Treffic Victim

The fin. e nediun-eized unufecturer of epukere eetebliehed in 1958.

hed eufiered en export decline beceuee of the recent high you offensive.
Ite eelee in the leet iiecel yeer were 13.2 billion yen. e drop of 19 per-
cent fron the preceding yeer, end eueterity wee precticed in the (in.
Further-ore. the mder of eokeiye. ehout 80 hot yeer. hed increeeed

thie yeer to 180. probebly beceuee of the fire'e increeecd cepitelizetion.
If contributione hed been node to eoloeiye et the ueuel rete. the OU would
heve doubled. "But euch e thing ie ilpoeeible.” Coupled with the problen

41

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

of tho high yon. tho poooiblo doubling of tho contributiono prooptod tho
fin to docido to toroinoto tho poyoffo.

Tho tiro hod a bittor oxporionco in o ohoroholdoro' oooting in April of
loot yoor whon 10 ooltoiyo. hochod by o lorgor gong. oonvorgod on tho ooot-
ing. Juot o tow doyo prior to thot. o right-wing annotation hod onortod
"ooloo prooouro." ooying: "According to inforootion. o oohoiyo group will
rooort to violonco. ho oholl quoll thoo if you loovo tho oooting up to
no." Hhon thoir propoool woo rojoctod. not only tho ookoiyo group but oloo
10 or onto right-wingoro intrudod ond couood turooil for on hour ond o holfo
Hhon tho oooting woo obout to ond. tho HPD otoppod in to conduct inwootigo-
tiono. cootonding: "Thoro in o ouopicion thot tho fin hoo oodo poyolto

to tho ookoiyo to rootoro noroolcy. If truo. that would ho in wiolotion
of orticlo 696 of tho co-orciol codo." Pottunotoly. tho (in woo vindi-
cotod. but tho oituotion hod couood groot poin to tho coopony oxocutiwoo.

Prooidont Shinohoro ooid: "A ohoroholdoro' oooting io hold to onoblo o
fin to lioton fully to tho wiowo of ohoroholdoto who oro noroolly unowoil-
oblo ond to hold diocuooiono. It would to idool if. on in Europo ond tho
Unitod Stotoo. oo ouch tioo oo noodod could ho dovotod to diocuooiono: but
horo. thoro oro oonotory conoidorotiono...l oo fruotrotod owot tioo with
ookoiyo." Tho ioproooion thot ho rocoivod ot thin tioo woo o tutor in

tho docioion to ouopond poyocnto.

Prooidont Shinohoro continuod: "Bocouoo of oociol cuotooo, wo howo boon
ooking poyoonto, nlthough wo woro oworo of controdictiono. l hopponod to
ho in tho oooo clooo in tho oilitory ocodooy oo tho prooidont of Kyupi

Go (o food coopony which hoo ohut out ookoiyo oinco 1971). "hon l hoord
about tho woy it hondlod ookoiyo ot oy clooo romion. l onviod thoo.”
Prooidont Shinohoro. ogo $1. coloundod tho tit-o with tho prowiouo prooi-
dont. In 1966 ho ooouood tho poot oo tho (iro'o oocood prooidont; ond.
rothor thon o ooloriod prooidont. ho con ho collod on owner. A onloriod
oucutiwo, to inouro tronquility during hio roin. lo likoly to oolto poy-
ofl’o to oohoiyo on "it in coqony oonoy ond dooo not hurt hio pockotbook."
For Prooidont Shinohoro. it woo o docioion thot ho ruchod ottor 12 yooro
in offico. ”I think o prohloo roooino whon oootingo oro oo ohort nowodoyo.
I hod proporod iooginory quootiono ond onoworo in tho hopo of providing
odoquoto onoworo to booic quootiono rogordlooo of poooiolo ookoiyo intor-
foronco; but...tho foct thot tho ohoroholdoro' oooting. tho tirot oinco
tho onnouncooont of the toroinotion of poyoffo. wont oooothly ohould ho
proporly owoluotod. lf wo «out o propor ottitudo, wo con oupprooo
oohoiyo. tfhot io cloor ond 1 tool roliowod."

0n tho oorlo doy oftor tho ohoroholdoro' oooting, tho fix-o docidod to
donoto o port of oonoy oovod--500.000 yon—to childron of ttoffic victi-
ond to continuo to do no coch tioo o ohoroholdoro' outing in hold.

According to tho orgonitod crioo provontion hoodquortoro ot tho 100. cu:-
rontly only 21 fir-o. including tho ohovo. howo totolly ohutout tho

‘2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

aokaiya, out of aoaa 2.000 nadiuo-oitad firaa and abova liatad on tha
Tokyo Stock Bxchanga.

OOPYRIGHT: Aaahi Shinbun Tokyo Honaha l978
Sokaiya Bntartainad at Thaatar
Tokyo 10mm snmwu in Japanaaa 6 Sap 78 p 23

[Articloz "Souiya Porcafully 8alla 'lnwitationa to lmrial Thaatar';

lntarpriaaa Porcad To Buy 300 Saata; s Hillion Yan Profit; m Prowna on
Cloaa Tiaa")

[Tart] Tha "unfortunata tiaa" batwaan aokaiya and antarpriaaa continua

aa bafora. 0n tha night of 3 Saptadar. a ”dram viawing party" aponaorad
by Claaa A aokaiya at tho luporial Thaatar in Marcuouchi. Tokyo. waa naarly
fillad to capacity and was a "raaounding auccaaa.“ Soaa 800 out of 1.1‘5
Claaa A aaata wara raaarvad for apactatora who wara providad with food and
gifta. Although tha aponaor claiaad: "It is a nonay loaing propoaition
to ahow our appraciation to patronising antarpriaao." invaatigationa by
tho fourth invaatigativa aaction. HPD. and tha Harunouchi Polica Station
ravaalad that profits aftar axpanaoa totalad about 5 aillion yan. Stapa
ara baing takan by tho oana aaction to raport auch "fund raining activ-
itiaa” to tha National Tax Ad-iniatration Agancy. but tha conatitutional
nakaup of tha antarpriaaa which cbntinua to daal with aokaiya ia likaly

to craata a atir.

‘l'aaroon 'Raaarvationa' and 'Black Gantlanan'

Tha draaa witnaaaad by tha "draaa viawing party" waa "81f Pira oi.
Sataukikan" atarring lautu Yauda; tha curtain roaa at 1730. fro- around
1700. "aokaiya" who could mily ba racognitad aa auch loitarad in tha
Iain doorway, handing a gift in papar bag to invitad guaata in anchanga
for a tickat. A coapany onloyaa. apparantly in charga of aohaiya af-
faira, waa graatad with coqlinanta and alilaa.

At tha antranca to an upatair taaroou a aign raad: ”raaarwad today," to
ragular cuatoaara wara ahut out. lntida thara wara 30 nan who apoaarad
to bc aoluiya. Thay wara convaraing in privata with familiar corporata
“0:. in charga of aokaiya affaira who had coaa to giva chair "graat-
inga.

“any guaata. aftar concluding thair buainaaa. wara aaan off by aokaiya
without avan staying until tha and of tha play.

Aakad about their ralationahip with aokaiya. thay would Iaraly aay: “I

cola bacauaa I racaivad a tickat froa an acquaintanca of nina." or "I
don't know anything."

43

POI! OPPICIM. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the fourth inveetigetive eootion end the police etetion. thie
”drene viewing perty" woe coeponeored by Mr 1'. ege 50. end Mr N. 30, both
Cleee A eoheiye.

both heil iron Riroohine end belong to the ”niroehine group." believed
by police to heve linhe with the Suniyoehi Allience geng.

They heve eponeored e "drene viewing perty" overy yeer for the poet
eeverel yeere end ere believed to heve elicited the pertioipetion of
Tokyo enterprieee while nelting their rounde end collecting duee.

According to the eene inveetigetive eeotion, the pair eeeeeeed 20.000
yen in duee leet yeer. end the enount ie believed to be ebout the use
(or thie yeer.

‘l'otel expeneee per pereon were believed to be eround 7.000 to 0.000 yen.
including the 4,200 yen Cleee A eeet. box lunch end gift. The exect
profit cannot be deternined beceuee of the "conplinentery tickete" peeeed
out to eokeiye friende end reletivee. but the use eection epeculetee
thet profite toteled e nininun of s eillion yen.

Meny wonen eleo attended. probebly beceuee the firm dietributed the
tickete elloceted to then by eoheiye to conpeny enployeee end friende.
They were obeerved reieing their eyebrowe et none 20 "bleclt gentle-en"
dreeeed in euite.

A eokeiye in the lobby etreeeed: "Not ee neny people are ettending ee
before beceuee of trouble iron the neon nedie end police. Only ebout l0
fir-e ere repreeented todey. The reeeon behind thie drene viewing perty
ie not to reiee funde but to entertein oorporete pereonnel who heve
helped no.”

The event wee held ehortly efter the "epeciel violence prevention coopere-
tive eeeocietion" (16 orgeniretione. coeprieed of 900 fine in the city).
eetebliebed under the eupervieion of the use inveetigetive eection. hed
urged ”nonperticipetion in the eokeiye-eponeored drele viewing petty."

Ae the "dune viewing perty” wee held no echeduled in epite of thoee
firne' etend, the one eection ie lenenting thet "tiee will never be
eevered ee long ee ouch e eituetion pereiete."

COPYRlcli‘l': Yoniuri Shinbunehe 1978
Arreet of Executivce urged

Tokyo You!!!“ Sill”!!! in Jepeneee 8 Sep 70 p 7

(Article: ”For Arreete of Reeponeible Corporete Officiele on Friendly
tone Hith 8okeiye"]

[Tent] ﬂith oontributione to eokeiye eeid to be 100
billion yen ennuelly. the tier between enterprieee

6‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! O'HOML USE ONLY

end eokeiye were once esein denonetreted by the
"drone viewing perty" et the Inperiel Theeter. The
HPD hoe decided to act firnly. eekin; public the
nenee of uncooperetive enterprieee end conducting
inveetigetione into poeeible breech of truet.

Imlee of Ceeee of 'lreech of Truet' Alon; Corporete Officere in (merger
luduced Peyoffe e here Pornelity

The cutbeck in the eeount of contribution wee propoeed by the fourth
inveetisetive eection. “PD. in View of the tiee between enterprieee end
eokeiye. etertins leet eutum when eeverel textile eille uere eufferin;
fro. e eevere receeeion. The reduction evereued ebout 20 percent, but
et eoee receeeion-etricken fine it renged fro. 25 to 30 percent.

The cutbeck then epreed to other induetriee. Since April of thie yeer.
even nejor city benke end eecuritiee fine. the eokeiye'e beet cliente.
heve Joined the ewe. for e totel of ebout 30 enterprieee, eccordin; to
the one inveetigetive eection.

Corporete contributione to eokeiye ere eede eolely to ineure en eerly

end peeceful conclueion of ehereholdere' Ieetinae. The nueber of eokeiye
ie preeently eetinted et 6,500. more then four tieee thet of lo yeere
ego, end corporete ”expendituree" ere on the rice. One eeJor city beak
peye ebou.t loo eillion yen ennuelly. or e totel of neerly 100 billion for
the entire induetry. Since it ie e burden thet cennot be ignored by en-
terprieee in thie tine of receeeion. generel ehereholdere heve begun to
object to unjuet "diebureeeente."

The Do hee velcoeed the reduction of contribution in vieu oi the repid

increeeo of eokeiye gen” end eince contributione ere their njor eource
of fuode. -

The eokeiye hee reeieted etroocly; tvo sen were erreeted for eendin;
lettere to enterprieee threetenins to expoee ecendele or etteqting to
extort eoney. To counter the ewe to reduce peyoffe. eoee eokeiye heve

even :leieedz "Actuelly. none of the fine heve cut beck. It ie sorely
telk.

The reductione were inleeented end they doelt e heevy blow to eokeiye
initielly. but eccordin; to e followup inventigetion end inforeetion
collected by the one inveetigetive eection during the ehereholdere'
looting eeeeon in June end July. enterprieee ell eeeerted thet ”they
were continuing to cutheck.” but the ”teke" of noet eokeiye hoe not ec-
tuelly decreeeed.

According to the one eection, thie ie due to: l) elthoush e epecified
eu- hee been cutbeck. en equel mount to peid oeperetely for edvertieing;
2) et the tine of new fiecel yeer. the «out of the contribution ie kept

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

at tho aaao lovol or tho margin of incroaaa ia narrowad; 3) no actual
cut ia oada. although to tho outaida. otorioa oro aproad about "having
otfoctod cutbacka."

‘l'o aupproaa aohaiya-aponaorod "apocial ovonto.” ouch aa drama viowing
partioa and golf coopbtitiona which aro a Iajor aourco oi iunda along with
contributiono. tho aaao invoatigotivo aoction hao auccoaoiully urgod

oooo 600 lino thia yoar to boycott ouch ovonta. But. it ia boing ig-
norod alroady. 0n 5 Soptoobor, tho drano viowing party at loporial
‘l‘hoator. undor tho aponaorohip of o gang-connoctod ookaiya. draw poraon-
nol tron about 000 “no. loatly froa loading antorpriaoa. thuo iruatrat-
ing polico invoatigatora.

Ao a roault of thia "countontond phonooonon." contributiona to aokaiya
woro found to bo in a hoalthy atato. "rho polico invoatigatiwo aoction
hoa docidod, thoroforo. to unity tho ontorpriaoa' aokaiya countonoaauroa
organication--"apocial violcnco prowontion cooporativo aoaociation." now
dividod into 16 bodioa. and to atrongly urgo about 900 ood’or “no to
oovor thoir tioa with aohaiya.

‘l'ho aaoo aoction aloo ia probing into poaaiblo brooch of truat caaoa
involving corporato gonoral aifaira poroonnol. ariaing iron 1) hickbacha
fro. aokaiya or awarda of oxponaivo golf priaoa. and 2) froquont invita-
tiona to apocial ovonta auch aa draoa viowing partioa.

Until now tho comtornoaauroa tahon agoinat aokaiyo haa boon o ropotition
of tho ontorpriaoa' cooplianco with polico roquoata for aovoronco of rola-
tiona and bohind-tho-aconoa brooch of truat octivitioa. ‘l'o ond thia
vicioua circlo. tho polico dopartaont ahould not only ioplonont ita cur-
ront policy but alao invoatigato tho ontorpriaoa which atill nintain
tioa with aokaiya and orroat thooo roaponaibla.

constant: Yooiuri Shinbunaha 1978
No Sokaiya Arroatod
‘l'ohyo YOMIURI 3mm in Japaooao 9 Sop 78 p 23

[Articlas "$00 hillion Yon Ila-ago Raoulta Pro. Porcod Saloa by Sakaiya:
ho Indictod"]

['l'oxt] Chiba-4n conooction with a mo involving intimidation and tho
aalo of hoawy duty ropoa at oncrbitant pricoa to govornnont agoncioa.

nonopoly corporation, govoruont and public hoapitalo and univoroitioo
nationwido by a aoltoiya group in Tokyo. tho Chiba Diatrict Public Procu-
rotora Offico on 8 Soptod’or indictod two non. Tadaohi loppu. 60. proai-

dont, ‘l‘oiyultai. National Dofonao Cot-toil. of Boppu liouoing Coqlox.

3-18-19. Nakamra-llinani. horiIa-hu. Tokyo; and ‘l'oahio Kato. lal ‘l‘achihawa
Aparuont. 2-2-11. liorinouchl. Suginali-ltu, Tokyo. on chat-goo of incl-ido-
tion. sworn-ant agoncioo and hoapitalo in 32 proiocturoa woro victiodud

66

M OFPICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by tho two ooh. lnvootisotiono by Chibo Protottutol Polioo ioto othot
poooiblo otiooo indiooto thot tho duoso on ultiootoly otoood 300 Iillion
you.

constant Youuti Bhiubunoho 1978
Polito Ilolt 001! Toutoooont
‘l'ohyo mum 8mm in Joponooo 12 Sop 70 p 23

[Attiolox "Polieo Stop 'htoooivo Ptotit' emotition by Sokoiyo for 00
Pooplo (too Loodios tit-o Schodulod for tho 20th")

[Tout] Yokohouu-On 10 Soptodaor. tho Konouwo Profottutol Polico. in-
tonod of o Tokyo-bond ookoiyo oponootod golf coopotition. with “on
o! loodin; fit-o in Tokyo oud Kooogowo ptolootuto liotod in tho tirot ooc-
tiou of tho otook oxohongo oo potticiponto. woo plonnod for 20 Soptodot
ot o sol! coutoo in llirotouko city. tollod on tho golf coutoo noon-oat
to concol tho ovoot.

Hood of tho coupotition hod boon rocoiwod tro- tho m. ‘l'ho oponoor of
tho gooo woo I! group. o oodiun-ronkin; Tokyo oohoiyo. According to pro-
tottutol polico. do potoono hod oatotod tho poo oohodulod for 20 Soptol-
501'.

Thio would hovo boon tho third yoot thot tho 3 group hod opooootod thio
owont. ”Appoolo” hod boon Iodo to lino liotod in tho tirot ooctioo of
tho otooh oxchongo: duoo woro oot ot 60.000-30.000 you pot potooo. At
00.000 yon pot hood ond 80 portitiponto, roughly 2 nillion you would hovo
boon nottod ottor oxponooo tot tooo ond ptitoo.

To tho polico toquoot thot tho unto bo ouopondod duo to tho undooitoblo
tioo botwoon ontotptiooo ond ookoiyo. tho gold Ionosooont roopondod:
"Whoa o toquoot for o morvotioo io rocoivod. wo chock it out ond rotuoo
if it io (to. ookoiyo. liowovot. on thio potticulor occuion, vo tonnot
bocouoo it'o olroody boon ocooptod.”

Ao o tooult. tho Kooogowo Protoctutol Polico howo propotod o liot of pot-
ticipotin; fir-o (too loot yoot'o tootot ood hovo nodo toquooto to oowotol
fit-o in Konouwo Ptofocturo not to potticipoto diroctly. Tho coqotitioo
io oxpoctod to bo concollod oo o odor of fir-o will ptobobly docido
ouinot porticipotioa. oopociolly in viow ot‘oinilot ooooutoo by tho urn.

comm: Yogiuti Shinbuoho mo

‘7

[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Names Should Be Hsds Public
Tokyo YMURI sum!!!" in Japanese 16 Sep 78 p l
[Co-entary: article froa colum entitled ”Editors Note")

[Text] The nusber of parasites-aoksiya—ia as high as 1,500 to 2.000
in a single enterprise. a aajority having free 100 to 300. A few enter-
prises are swindled out of more than 100 aillion yen by then.

It reminds us of countless parasites clinging to an aninsl. It is lanen-
table that this condition still persists even after a sweeping operation
by authorities to oust the sokaiya. These figures are based on a survey
conducted last June by tho MP!) of enterprises listed in the first and
second sections of tho Tokyo Stock Exchange which convened shareholders'
aestings. so there is no doubt that the actual figures are higher.

The reasons for this are clear. mun there is rhetoric by corporate
Ianagensnt about tho termination of relations with sokaiya. the fact is
that there are behind-the-scenes ties with than to insure snooth proceed-
ings at sheroholders' seetings. Although tho person who sctually cones
in contact with sokaiya nay insist on tho torndnation of relations, the
Isnagenent purportedly continues to nske payoffs. fosrful of the sokaiya.

The sokaiya. therefore. is unsoved by any operations to annihilate it.
Not only has it been getting contributions but lately it has diversified
its activities by sponsoring events such as the dress viewing party at the
lnperial Theater and golf cospetitions. Being an easy way to sake nonay.
gsngs are entering this field in greater numbers. This noney. however.
should have reverted to the coast-ere. been used for wage hikes for en-
ployees or for the shareholders' benefits.

In the lidst of recession. the enterprises' precious funds are paid out

to sokaiya to keep a lid on the spoils. The recent rslentle'ss tragedies
of bankruptcy or adorn-ant of accounts are probably due to the evil prac-
tice of using nosey to stifle 'criticisn ot the nanagensnt. Any action by
nansgonent to nurture the sokaiya are crininal acts which disturb the sound
progress of Japan's econony.

If najor banks and fires still insist on naintaining such ties to the tune
of yearly payoffs of several hundreds of nillions of yen. there would be
no alternative but to stop naking deposits in such banks or stop buying
those firu' products. The police should publicly disclose on each occa-

sion the sauce of enterprises which asks payoffs to sokaiya or participate
in drama viewing parties or golf cospetitions as early as possible.

COPYRIGHT: Youiuri Shinbunsha 1978

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

i’olice Crackdown Ordered
Tokyo m1 sumuu in lJapsnese 27 Sep 73 p 22

(Article: "National Police Agency Orders Crackdown on Sokaiya Activi-
ties ]

[Text] In view of the increased activities by sokaiya in sponsoring golf
competitions and dress viewing parties as a source of hands. on 26 Septem-
ber the National Police Agency instructed police headquarters nationwide '
to direct enterprises not to participate in such events so that the sokaiya
can be prevented iron staging such events.

The instructions cover three points: 1) stronger sppeals will he ends to
organizations such ,aa the enterprise violence prevention association
against participating in soltsiys sponsored programs; 2) requests will he
ends to golf courses which were previously utilised for golf coqetitions
and theaters not to accept reservations tron aokaiye henceforth: 3) warn-
ings will he issued to aokaiye to cancel golf cowetitiona and draee view-
ing parties when intonation is scquired concerning then, and requests
will be made to enterprises. golf courses and theaters to shutout the
sokaiya.

OOPYRIGKT: Asahi Shinhun Tokyo Honshs 1978

9097
C80: 6105

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M 0??ch“ US! ONLY

mm

JAPAN'S woman moms 8110" 810038? CAIN 31m 076
Tokyo The JAPAN was in English 1!. Doc 78 p 5 0"

[Text] Jepen's ieports licensed in Novenber shoved the largest yeer-to-
yssr gein sinco Septuber 1971. to hit en ell-tine eonthlv high. the Min-
istry of lnternetionel 'l‘rede end Industry (am) onnouw ..' Hednesder

According to the ennounceeent. the ieports totelod $8 225 at; :on in No-
veeber. up 28.0 percent over the sees month lest 3m. 1» .-.~ N 9rd
the previous record of $7.539 eillion in October.

Excluding lsrge eircreft, nucleer fuel end other .we r‘ in-
ported. the Novenber totsl represented s 25.6 percent in . . .. n a yesr
ego.

Licensed ieports in the April-November period, the fir ~‘gh . .ths of
tiscel 1978. totaled $57,272 eillion, up 15.2 percent o. .1 'ho nae period
lest yeer—e pece slightly eheed of the government's import :rv-1h terget
of 13.8 percent for the vhole fiscal yoer.

H11"! officials seid thet Jspen's inports for the uhole heal year would
exceed the government's tergst of 881.5 billion by 81 to 2 billion.

Menufecturcd goods ieports recorded s 76.3 percent surge vhile food inports
registered s 32.4 percent gein.

0n the other hand. ieporte of industrisl rev eeteriele eleost leveled off.

Beceuee of the big increese in Jepen's ieports of sutoeobiles [words lit ring]
goods. The share of esnufsctures in Jepen's totsl ieports rose fro- 28.0
percent in April to 38.40 percent in Hove-bet.

0n e yesr-to-geer besis. Jepen's imports of eutoeobiles registered e 129.8
percent increase. those of eircrsft engines e 312.3 percent gein. end
textiles e 86.9 percent rise.

COPYRIGRT: The Jeoen Tiles 1978
cso: 6120

50
1’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

SOIINCI MO 1mm

WSAI POUBR ‘I’O' BURN PLUTON‘IW A8 WI! PUB].
Tokyo ASAIII EVENING NM in Englleh 23 Dec 78 p l on

[Text] Reneei Blectric Power Co (Kenden) plene to burn plutoniue or e
light-weter reector et ite Nihene Plent in Puhui prefecture on c experi-
nentel beele. governnent end power induetry eourcee diecloeed Fridey.

Thle will be the flret tine thet plutoniue hee been burned ee fuel for e
comerclel reector in Jepen. At preeent, plutoniun ie ueed on e teet beeie
for two pilot reectore owned by the uni-governuntel pow: reector nueleer
fuel corporetion-u-the edvenced therIel reector (A11!) honed ”Eugen" end the
feet breeder reector (rm ne-ed "Joye."

According to the eourcee. the 1,960 hlloarene of plutoniun intended for the
hlheee reector--ectuelly e mixture of plutonium dioxide end lightly-enriched
ureniue-dwee purcheeed free ﬂeetinghouee of the 0.8. end will errive et Kobe
Port eboerd e 0.3. freighter eerly next week.

he rate of plutonlue dioxide in the nlxture ie 3.8 percent.

Kenden contreeted for the fuel for uee et the Nihene Plent free the “.8.
fire in 1972. but the reactor in queetionnnihene he. 1 reector. Kenden'e
firet nucleer nectar-developed trouble in July 197‘. end ite operetion
wee euepended for four yeere until July thie yeer. The ehipeent of the
fuel wee poetponed et Kenden'e requeet.

The u.s. Certer edninietretion edvocetee e nucleer nonproliferetion policy
end oppoeee the not of plutoniue which ie the principel rew neteriel for
nucleer bonbe. but the export of plutoniue intended for Kenden hee been
euthorlred preeu-ebly beceuee the contrect wee concluded before the birth of
the Certer ednlnletretion.

Circloe concerned with the developnent of etonic energy here ere peyin;
keen attention to Kenden'e erperieent.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present. the plutonius extracted by burning uraniue ie kept in stock
for use as fuel for the run. which is expected to be put into couseroial
operation in the 2000s. But if it is proven that plutonium can be need
for the light-water reactor. which is already in co-erciel operation. it
will lean that plutonius can begin to be used widely and it vill also lead
to econmising on uranium resources.

"Myer, it will eleo lead to the proliferation of weapons-grade plutonium
and touch off a wide controversy about eefety.

If Kanden'e experisent proves successful. the Ministry of International

Trade and Industry intends to pronote the use of plutonium for light-water
renctore.

COPYRIGHT: Aeahi Evening News. 1978

080: £120

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?