APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00060R000100030008-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000300665

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8363
30 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 10/79)
PROBLEMS or JAPANESE BunsAuancv

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030068-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICLAL USE ONLY.
IIBUOOIA'NC OAYA
SN"?

   

I. lam Ne.
ans um: _W
aaen a
30 March 1979

       

TRANSLATIOIIS 0N JAPAN, (P000 10/79)
Problems of Japanese Bu:.oaucracy

    
 
  

    

‘ t are“. Quebec“. Nana aad Menu
Joint Publication Reaearcln Service

1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

10. Pleiaec eat/Int Uait No.

I). T el Repeat a Facial
L

    
   

IS Sank-eaten Natee

the report contains preaa and radio coverage on political. econoeic. nilitary.
aociolozical. acientitic and technological develop-cote.

. ' y a Iaraoeat Aaa eta. s Daaeal'tate
JAPAN
_ Political and Sociological
_ Military
_ Economic

Science and Technology

‘7‘- lhatlﬂue/Opaa-laeae Tana

m. cosm Hall/rune so. so. SK, 15c.160. 181.1”. 223

I An! abiloty State-eat w. m
For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available Fro. .1988. mm

”.0 ”'3.” 10.". kaﬂ 0.”.‘" ‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JP” 5/8
30 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN

(2000 10/79)
PROBLEMS or JAPANESE BUREAUCRACY

CONTENTS

Analyses Focus on Problem of Japanese Meaucracy
(BWBI “Wu, “W 78) ecoeoeoooeeaooeeoaeooeoeoeoeoooeeec

Foreign Ministry nine to Peking, by mean Imbayuhi
Defense Agency Diecarde Kurieu, by same mums:

- a - [III - ASIA - 111
FOR 0"“:th USE ONLY

MYSBS FOCUS ON rmuus 0P JAPANESE summons!

Foroign Ministry Falls to Poking
‘rokyo SURGE! 3mm in Jopsnoso Nov 78 pp 166-187

[Articlo by Yutska lobsysohi: "Chins Drove Jspsn Into Mari-088R Axis'
Through Conclusion of Jspon-China Pooco and Priondehip Treaty; Option of
Foreign Service Officoro Should Do loviowed")

[Text] Formrd

"Diosstisfsction on the port of both psrtioo nskoa for good negotiation.“
So soon so often quoted co-ent nnon; diplonsto concerning diplonstic nego-
tiotiona. ‘l'ho sllusion doacriboe the these that indopondont notions in-
volvod in s nogotiation nutuslly roconiee thst inooeihility of bonding
the other porty to ito own will.

Ovor the poet 6 yoaro. the concluoion of e Jspm-China poaco and friend-
ship treaty hes been s nsjor iton on tho agenda of Jspen's foroisn rela-
tione and has proved to ho a real prohlon child. how thot it has been
signod. foreign Hiniotor Smoo Sonods and tho exocutive office etaff of
the Foreign hiniotry sro praising the-selves that the conduct of ”tho
ovent was worthy of slnoot porfoct nsrhs." If that is no. then according
to tho wiodon of foroign rolstiono officoro quoted obovo. ono hoe to sun-
poct that tho Japan-Chins tresty negotiation could not hovo boon ono favor-
ohlo to Jspon.

In reoponins the negotiations. Prino Minister Mods node the conclusion
of the treaty "provioionol to conditions ostiofsctory to both psrtioo.”

In reviewing the long drawn out negotietions between Jspsn end China.
Japan's diplonecy connot he said to have really osrned tho jubilant cries
of ”Oh. woll donol Hell done!" As a nsttor of foot. we can't eoo any
noritorious accowliehnont on the port of tho foroign office st all. With--
out ovalustin; tho content“ of the peace snd fricndohip treaty itoolf. wo
not why wee it nocoossry to conclude the treoty. What waa tho roaoonin;
for the conditions etipulatod end what were the hsoic procedural ooncopto

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l0! OHICIAI. US! ONLY

of diaouaoiona which would loot thoaa condition? Hut did thoao who ara
tho rocogninod diploootic proa in tho foroign oiniotry think of tha- ond
what wara thair concarna and how wara tho finol dociaiona ooda?

Loaving out vhot tho privota thoughto of individuolo on hovo boon or oro,
when foraign offica diacuaaiona and raoponooa ora tracod ono cannot but
foal cowlota onooaoant at tho futinaao of Joponaoa diplooacy.

Confrontod with tho aitnotion in tho Hiddlo Boot. Sino-Soviot hootilitioo.
localized worfora in Aaia and Africa. concorna ovor tho oonatary oituation.
inflotion. troda wora ond countlaaa other problclo. tho world ia in o tur-
noil and Japan cortainly ia not outoido it all. In tho nidat of thin atorn
of intorralotod problaoo in tho intarnotionol oaoo, wa oro propooing thot
wo hoiat a aoil of "autonoIoua diplooocy”! Do wo boliovo thot our foroign
offico ia copobla of aaan tho rolo of a pilot to navigata through thou
trouhlod watora?

Ho wioh to owoluota thia in thia papor-with conotont roforonco to tho pro-
coadinga of tho Japan-Chino pooco and friandohip pact nogotiationo.

Foreign Hiniotor Sonodo Angarod
It happonad ot a turning point ir. tho pooca ond fricndohip nagotiationo....

Foroign Hiniator Sunoo Sonodo gova a oound tonguo loohing to odaooaodor
to Poking Shoji Soto ond the adoniatrotiva lavol nogotiotoro ot tho
Viaitoro' Ball in Poking. ‘l'ho incidant about to bo doacribad tool: placo
on 9 Augnat aftor two oootinga with Ioraign Hiniatar lluong Run of Chino
during which tboro woo o baaic nffirnotion that a politicol agroaont on
tho trooty could bo roachod. Tho diacuoaion hod procaadod to o point
wharo Albuaodor Soto ond foroign Affoira Vica Miniator llon lionlong worn
to work on tho wording of tho trooty toxt.

It woo at thio point that Sonoda od that tho Chinooo had in thair
pooouaion tho provioiono of Japan; oozin- concoooiono portoining to
tho crux of tho nogotiationo, ”onti-hagonony-urticlao relating to third
partioa." Thia hod bean praporod by Japan prior to participoting in tho
Polling nogotiotiono.

Sonodo'a atratogy woo not only to hold off on offering thia propoaal but
to koap it cooplctaly aocrat and to non it an hia trump card only if tho
nogotiotiono oppoarod to ba on tho brink of collapoing. "hon it woo
loarnod thot tho Chinooo hod prior knowlodgo of the notura of thin trap
card it in not aurprioing that tho Foraign Hiniotor bocooo onrogod. Any-
ono would have boon.

”whon cliH>ing to tho top of a troo,” Sonoda criod. ”ono ohouldn't ovor-
look looking down to ba aura of a aafo daacont route." But the dooogo

bod boon dona.‘

2
rot ORIGIN. US! OIL!
m OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

However, aoee at the working level defend Maaeedor Sato on the gromda
that expoeure of our hand reinforced credibility in the einde of the Chi-
neea and therefore did not have a negative effect.

The actual develop-ante were ae followe: 0n the 10th at the leet neeting
of the working level negotiations. the Chineae choae to accept the tone
which Japan had thought to be noet favorable to it end not the lat ditch
teree which wee to be ueed ea a final conceeaion. Article 2 of the accepted
propoaal atatea that "neither Japan nor Chine will aeek hege-ony over any
area in Aaia or the Pacific... or in any other area end both will oppoee
any other country or group of countriee attenpting to eetablieh euch hegee-
onic authority." Aeida fron thia article, Article 6 etatea: "Thie treaty
is not to effect the poeition of the aignatoriae' relatione with third coun-
triea." Theee provieiona are contained in the treaty now in being.

but what wee the thinking behind theae provieiona end whet wee the route of
deciaion nekingt The fact ia that the other party, Chinm cane up with
then no it wee reaponeible for our being able to eave our ekine. It wee
truly a ceea of falling into it end coning out anelling like a roee. To
have achieved the deeired reault where even the final tun card wee known

to the other party could hardly be thought of ae a [triuph in the art of]
negotiation.

The following acena alao unfolded:

Soon after reaching an agree-en: to conclude the Japan-China treaty. Sonode
and the negotiating party in Peking celebrated the event with the ninietry
headquartera people at Keeuigeaeki. Tokyo. by telephone; Sonode who ie
highly enotionel. told the lietenere with jubilation overflowing eince
"Japan-Chine" wee the culninetion of practically all of hie efforte eince
eeauing the poet of foreign ninieter. "it cane about.” he told Vice
Hinieter Keieuke Arita at the other and of the phone line. "beceuee you
people did euch a good backup job!” Maaeedor Sato wae nearby but hie
expreaeion atrengely did not reflect Sonoda'e excitemt.

Untroubled Zaay Sailing

maeeador Sato did pick up the telephone inetru-ent and perfunctorily
expreaaed worda of celebration and in a low voice added: ”It probably
couldn't have been brought about if you hadn‘t been the vice niniater."
It'e doubtful that hie low keyed attitude could be blaned entirely on
fatigue fro. hie long niddlenen role in China.

He do not bring up thin apieode with the intent of focuaing the problee
pointa of the Japan-China negotiationa on Meeaedor Seto alone. Hithout
neking an ieeue of it, we‘nerely wieh to ehow how theee negotiatione were

concluded without the foreign office being in a atete of tote). ”bilin-
tion, without having a eingleneae of intent end without a conaenam of
Judgnent or action.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Japan-china negotiations constantly traveled down a sunny road. This
was probably the last big role for Massador Ssto who is a career diplonat
of ‘0 years and who had even held down the poet of vice sinister. what
happened to this aduseador?

Foreign Hinister Sonoda and Masssdor Sato were destined to clash at some
point over some issue. Since assuming the post of foreign ninistsr in Noven-
ber last year. Sonoda had Iade the aatter of concluding the Japan-China
Treaty his number one priority. As the contact nan for the foreign office.
Sato had the task of determining the possibility of reopening the negotia-
tion in Peking and Sonoda frequently expressed dissatisfaction with Sato's
actions.

The source of the friction could not be lisited to differences in posture

of the two toward the peace and friendship treaty nor to their positions;

it nay be said that it was rooted in such coaplexitiea as the diesieilar-

ities of their upbringing and nature, even to differences in their outlook
on life.

Even if sons foreign officers other than Sato had been adaaseador in Pekio‘x
from last fall through this year. probably none could have asasured up to
the require-ants of Sonoda, whose vision was conpletely nonopolised by
progress being nade toward a Japan-China Treaty. It is likely that Sonoda
had never experienced the travail of the career officer who constantly
kept a letter of resignation in his inside pocket and who had to lay aside
his personal convictions to climb the ladder rung by rung without ever
being able to fly his m pennant and who always had to keep a retreat
route open to make a quick getaway when needed; Sonods had probably never
had to come face to face with the need for avoiding trouble and of circum-
venting controversy until he assumed the foreign minister's chair. Then
when he did, there was Sato who stood out like a sore thw, easily picked
out fro. the stereotypes who surrounded his.

Massador Sato and the ”Nishiyans Incident"

Fundamentally. Sonoda and the elites of the Foreign liinistry were too far
apart.

Like for-er Priae hiniater Kskusi Tanaka. Sonoda has little in the way of
an educational background. is an activist with a military background who
doesn't know when to stop. Depending on anieal instinct. he rose fros the
tough school of youth group leader in Aukusa. In the Liberal Deaocratic
Party [LDP] he apprenticed himself to the late Ichiro Kono and using the
politician's glibnesa and high spirits. slithered around the party and be-
caae one of the activists responsible for the founding of the Pukuda re-
gine. which led to his being able to grab first the post of chief cabinet
secretary and then the chair of foreign einister. Contrast that background
with the teen who trod the acadeaic society's elite coune of First Higher
School, Tokyo University; then bureau chief. vice minister. and dassador

It
POI! OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

to the eejor comtriee of world. how euch e Inn differed froe bureeucrete
whoee prieery eie wee to evoid eeking eieteltee need not be belebored here.

Seto ie exemlery of the Keeuigeeeki [Foreign Hinietry] elite. he wee
educeted et Piret Middle. Piret higher end Tokyo Univereity before enter-
ing the dnietry. lie pleyed beeebell while in echool but fell 2 yeere
behind hie cleeeeetee due to illneee. hie dietinguiehed look edded to
Seto'e experience end outlook on life; he won e reputetion for e "big
figure" end clidbed the ledder ee e hopeful in the treety field.

Precticelly ell of the njor poet-wer eettleeente euch ee the beeic Jepen-
Koree treety. return of Ogeeewere egreeeent end the reetoretion of Okinewe
egreeeent ceee under the purview of the treetiee bureeu end Seto'e wee the
reeponeible hend in deeling with thee. About the only inetence in which
he wee teeted in e negetive wey wee the ”Niehiyeee Incident" which involved
hie to the extent of being queetioned ebout hie reeponeibility in e eetter
of breech of eecurity.

When thet incident eurfeced, Seto wee the chief of the eecreteriet end hed
reeponeibility over keeping all pepere in order. “the then foreign einie-
ter. Pukude. denoted Seto together with ‘l‘ekeehi Yeeukue. deputy foreign
einieter for foreign effeire (leter eeheeeedor to the 0.5.), end hed to
eet cold rice for ewhile before being eppointed to the poet of eﬁeeeedor
to Spein. for thie flew in hie cereer, eppointeent to the poet of vice
ninieter for which hed been e eejor cendidete. wee put in jeoperdy. Hhen
Niki foreed hie cebinet. the current vice einieter Arite wee held beck end
Seto ceee ell the wey heck to be eppointed ee vice einieter to eucceed
Togo, who ie currently edueedor to the 11.3.

Seto'e strength ie eeid to lie in hie eenee of belence end etebility.

Thoee who heve eerwed directly under hie eey thet "no in e euperior whoee
leed one cen follow with confidence." With open minded forcefulneee. he
teeed the office of vice einieter. But it would be difficult to find in
hie en ieege of e diploeet who flew hie own pennent end preeeed hie officere
forwerd in the field of foreign effeire.

Mueedorehip to Chine—thie wee epperently not e poet he perticulerly
wented. Although Seto hiuelf wee reluctent to eccept it, he wee tellted
into it by the Pukude cebinet which, heving decided on e policy of ettech-
ing nejor ilportence to Chine. wee detereined to get en ”eﬁeeeedor of
greet eteture" for the poet. he vice ninieter. Seto hed been upoeed to
the netter of the Jepen-Chine peece end friendehip treety but he wee not
perticulerly in emethy with it end felt thet. "Proe the Jepeneee eide. e
rueh to enter into thet tie ie not eerited."

Mention of "Foreign Bleeent" Sonode to foreign Hinieter Poet
Onto thie ecene ceee the eppointeent of Sonode ee Foreign Hinieter, en

ewowed edvocete of concluding the Jepen-Chine treety. Thie ceee ee e
"celeeity" not only to Seto but to the Foreign Hinietry on e whole.

5
'03 OHICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

Traditionally, the foreign Hinistry has been led by pros in diploaacy at
its hell. Ever since the country was opened up the post has been held by
non who were thoroughly fanilisr with the Foreign Ministry and who were

the greatest authorities in the field of diplonscy such as liunenitsu Nutsu.
Jutaro hours. hironori hirota. Kijuro Shidehara. Shigenori Togo, Shigeru
Yoshida anong other illustrious personsges in the history of Japanese
diplonecy. but since the post war period when it had to deal tenorarily
only with hacArthur's occupation force's headquarters (680) with the for-a-
tion of the Kishi cabinet in 1957 when businessnsn Aiichiro l’ujiyana was
appointed to the post of foreign minister, ”anateurs" have held the post.

Actually. the post of foreign ninister in recent tines has been held by
bureaucratic politicians whose overriding policy has been to avoid contro-
versy. Btsusaburo Shiins. Takes Fukuds. Hasayoshi ohira. Toshio Kimra.
Kiichi Hiyasaki. lichiro ﬂatoyansnnone is a foreign service pro but all
were picked on the basis of their administrative toughness and profes-
sionalism The exceptions are only Takeo Hiki and tentaro Kosaka who are
elites with good educational backgromds. comletely unlike the crude
politician Sonoda.

In other words. Samoa was a couplets "foreign elegant” when he lurched
hiw way into the hot-house cultivated elitist atnosphere of the foreign
office.

Sonoda's assumption of duties was a najor point in the progress toward the
conclusion of the Japan-China pact which had been under consideration ever
since the nor-alisation of Japan-China relations in 1972. In the Pukuda
cabinet shuffle last fall. Sonoda's eyes were on being retained as chief
cabinet secretary but when that wish was not realized, he garbled his
political future on concluding a Japan-China treaty.

Sonoda has been a aelf-proclsinsd pro-China hand for ZO-sone years and he
was a sort of a fish out of water in the Pukuda faction, the najority of
which, including the "Take" [lurk] faction group headed by for-er Prine
Minister Nobusuke Kishi. was pro-Taiwan. hopes for an early conclusion
of a treaty by the Japan-China extreniets clustered around the Tanaka and
Ohira factions including Susuau Rikaido. Han-i Beaki, Zenko Suzuki and
others who baca-e bedfellows in the "get Niki" mvenent were given a boost
when Sonoda assuned the [foreign ninister's] chair and Sonoda himself was
all for fulfilling their anticipations.

During the year that he was Chief Cabinet Secretary. Sonoda played the
role of cabinet spokes-an to the fullest to blast the Foreign hinistry
under the for-er incuﬂient ﬂatoyans for its ineffectiveness in handling
such setters as the Japan-Soviet fisheries problem. On assuming the post
himself, he assailed ninistry personnel and opened his address to then

in the following nanner:

"You people undoubtedly think thet the ens-7 has cone into your nidst...."
Taking the offensive in this nannar to gain control of a covertly antago-
nistic group of ministry officers was typically Sonoda. Sonoda than

6
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proceeded to put into practice the old adage that the man who is the big-
gest nuisance as an adversary becomes the noet reliable as an ally.

Less than a nonth after Sonoda assumed the ninistership. massedor Sato
returned hone fron Peking on a teqorary visit and reported that ”Chinese
sentiaent is not negative" to reopening negotiations for a peace and
friendship treaty. Needless to say Sonoda'a spirits soared.

But Prime Minister Pukuda was cautious. he refrained froa giving Sato
any clear signs; he instructed that contacts be liaited to those of an
unofficial nature and only give indications that ”there is an interest."
Sonoda quickly realized that with such meagre encouragenent. Sato. who is
not prone to be venturesoae. would taste no nove. Be decided that the only
way to get Pukuda to get the lead out of his bottoe and put some notion
into the Foreign Hiniatry would be for he himself to take the initiative
and pile up sons accoqlished facts. In line with this thinking. he put
together a story that he would nake a "January visit to China" early in
the new year.

On 6 January Pukuda denied the story branding it as "nonsense." *l'he
minister is in too much of a rush." he said. "No such schedule has been
set up."

It is needless to say that with Pukuda's strongly worded denial. Vice-
Hinister Arite and the senior officers of the foreign office who had been
unhappy about Sonode's solo performance. received, this tine, [a blow to
their pride] and the denial blew the New Year's spirit.

Lack of Cohesive Leadership

The shock inpact on the foreign ainieter of the prime ninister's "none-
sense" statement was great. Hhile taking the critical diplonatic view
of "Hhat does this do to the image of the govern-ant of Japan in the eyes
of foreign countries?" the foreign office crowd learned from it that
Fukuda had not reached a point of "decision" yet and that there was. in-
portantly, an extreaely delicate relation between Pukuda and Sonoda.

First of all, Pukuda is an anti-connunist. And he had the bitter experi-
ence of seeing the 11.8. and China close the gap between themselves over
his head while he was foreign minister during the latter part of the Sato
regime. Bis atteapt to salvage something out of that debacle by fishing
for a normalization of relations between Japan and China had fallen on
deaf ears. As salt gromd into his wounds, he was beaten in his bid to
seize political power as Sato's successor by the forces of ‘ranaka. Ohira
and Niki who had become united over the Japan-China issue. when one
realises how China had jinxed him. one can see why there were points of
differences between him and Sonoda who was solely notiwatsd by concluding
s Japan-China treaty.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Officials in the Foreign Ministry felt secure with Muda because his
track record showed hill to be one who did not force issues. but as the
prine einiater put sore distance between hiaaelf and Sonoda and displayed
an inclination to take things into hie own hands. they l-acane uneasy over
the possibility that he would drop hie support of their proposals and
procedural plans. It may be a little unfair to bless the lack of unity
of purpose on the self-serving nature of the Foreign liinietry officials
but they, caught between the cautious Fukuda and the eager Sonoda, had

to conduct their business on an ad hoc basis and be coepletely dependent
on the whine of the tile. This structure which lacked a basic principle
free which to act but which reacted to whatever event occurred was the
structure in effect until shortly before the treaty was concluded.

"If I pull, he will follow behind but he will not take the initiative and
lead the way...." Sonoda vein! this criticism frequently to his foreign
service officials always hinting that Seto in the field wee the subject
of his jibe.

The first of the discussions between Seto and Han Nienlong were held on
24 February. The crux of this session was to deterline whether Japan
could be kept from being drawn into an anti-USSR provision of "a unified
front against the USSR." even by conceding to "snti-hegeeony” cleueee.

No progress was nude and Sonoda displayed sone dissatisfaction with Seto's
"indecisive pedetration."

0n 6 March while the National People's Representative Convention wee in
progress, the second Sate-Ban discussions took place. No meaningful
progress was ads at this session either. Ssto who felt that the prine
minister's residence and the foreign office were somewhat out of step

with each other. turned the baton over to headquarters, saying ”mition
at hand has been exhausted; it is now up to Tokyo."

This snapped Sonoda's tolerance. he showed hie irritation not only at
Fukude but at hie rival Chief Cabinet Secretary Shintero Abe end his cohort
Yoshiro Kori and others connected with the official residence for their
viewing the Japan-China event too relexedly. Referring to the progress of
the Peking discussions. Sonods chided: "So brother Sato's a big shot?"

He began to openly push for working level negotiations. The fact that
A-bsseedor Sato had previously been given the post of vice ninister by

“1&1 and because Sonoda was a ringleader of the "get Riki" love-ant is
thought to be behind the delicate relations between Sonoda end Sate.

In nid-Herch. to parallel the visit of Chief Secretary Yeno's group of the
Roe-i Party to China. Sonods dispatched Takeshi Tejins, China Bureau Chief,
to Peking. ostensibly to keep the field abreast of the stnosphere in Tokyo
to facilitate coordinated action between headquarters and the enbassy in
Peking.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. USE OIILY

ltegerdleee of the intent of the edninietretive bureeu. Sonode wee ei-ing
et eonerhing elee. Three Ionthe efter heving returned to hie poet free
e vieit to the hone office et yeer‘e end, Seto in Peking eeened to be un-
certein ee to whether "the hone governeent intended to pureue the project
eincerely end whether the differeneee between the prine ninieter end
foreign ninieter were in the zone of concern." Sonode rebuffed hilt
"‘l'hoee ere not your concern: expedite errengenente for diecueeion by your

foreign ninieter on hie vieit to Chine even if euch diecueeione include
the enti-hegenony ieeue.”

Attrectiveneee end Dietruet of "Out-of-llore" Foreign Hinieter

from the viewpoint of Foreign Hinietry officiele, wee Sonode e conpletely
uninvited gueet et Keen-igeeeki? Not reelly. ln diecueeione with foreign
ninietere of verioue countriee he diepleyed neeterful tectice end rhetorice
leerned in coping with perlienent end in the election circuite.

He rode into Hoecow in Jenuery end geve e etreightforwerd eccounting of
Jepen'e poeition et e neeting of the foreign ninietere of Jepen end the
USSR. when Groeyko tebled e "Good Neighbor Cooperetion ‘l'reety Propoeel."
Sonode countered by tebling Jepen'e "Peece Treety Propoeel." In the put
when Jepen'e foreign ninieter net with the 0881!. he would be en coqletely
overwhelned thet he ween’t given e thence to fully expreee hie intent. Not
eo with Sonode; he feerleeely eeid whet needed to be eeid end got hie pointe
ecroee end ell in ell wee given good nuke for hie efforte.

Heeuro 'rekeehine. deputy vice ninieter for foreign effeire who eccoepenied
Sonode. co-ented: "lie pleye the diploeet'e role on etege very well with
e well prepered ecenerio end with correct underetending of the eituetion.”
It ie reported thet Sonode hee brought life end ection to the eel-vice end
her even given e lift to the eluQing ert of diplonecy.

The inege of the foreign ninieter eince the tine of Iichiro lletoyene who
wee nicknened "the Accountent” hee not been e proud one. heving been thoee
of Poreim Hinietry bureeucretic upbringing if they hed been nurtured in
the Foreign Hinietry or bureeucretic politiciene. ‘l'hoee who didn't heve
none epeciel ekille euch ee Kiichi hiyerewe with lenguegee end keen eenee
didn't heve cheriene or other quelitiee eought in foreign eervice officere.

The uncerteintiee end doubte the foreign eervice officere felt in not
knowing where Sonode we going or how he intended to get there reeled to
have e coeplenentery effect between his end theuelwee.

Though we heve becone eoncwhet eidetrecked. the feet thet Sonode kept ec-
tiwe "while leeving the engine idling et high epeed" probebly leed to
getting the reopening of Jepen-Chine negotietione beck on treck.

Did the Foreign Hinietry reelly went to conclude e Jepen-Chine pence end
friendehip treety? If the queetion were put to foreign eervice officiele

who viewed it free the etendpoint of foreign reletione, the enewer wee
no.“

9
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

Japan-China “a Doneatic Problea"

Why? Prinerily becauae they could find no reaeon for making a Japan-
China treaty e nuet. Sena were of the opinion beeed on anelyeea Iade by
the Foreign Hinietry. that reletione between Japan and China could be
developed with etability witl out a for-e1 peace and friendehip treaty:
eone had deep down feelinge that eince Chine wee prinerily notiveted by
pronoting ita "four nodernizetiona.” it wee eating too nuch of Japan to
get into a feveriah pitch over the aigning of the treaty.

Purtheraore. the USSR related diploeecy wee giving then enough headachee
without the addition of the "hegenony" bit. ‘l'hat wee the eingle biggeet
factor which contributed to the niniatry'a lack of enthuaiaen. Conce-
quently, until the direction of the political flow had becone overwhele—
ingly evident and the edninietretive bureau of the Foreign Niniatry had
been ehoved into a point of no return. there had been no coordinated and
concerted effort by Vice Miniater Keinuke Arite. Deputy Vice Hinieter for
Foreign Affaira Haeuro ‘l'ekaahina. Director General of the Aeian Affeire
Bureau Yoaulte Nakae. and Maeaedor Shoji Sato in the field to explain
the eituation and guide the politiciena toward the eatebliahnent of a
govern-ant policy leading to a aound beeie for a treaty.

If Japan-Chine relationa needed to be apotlighted [in ieolation]. a joint
etetenent would auffice to bring about cloeer relationa. Thoae who were
for thin epproech argued that. “Japan-china ie, in reality. a Japan-Japan
problen" leaning that political factione which were extrenely pro-Chineee
and thoee which were pro-Taiwan and/or pro-USSR were ao etrongly at odde
with each other that. they canceled each other out.

It had been generally accepted that the great aajority eupported the view
that. ”eince there'e no overriding need for it. no craeh diplomatic action
to conclude a treaty ie required." here. again. it ia evident that thoee
in charge of foreign affaira involving China in the Foreign Hiniatry did
not have n fire. hand on the reine.

he already pointed out. neither the activiete nor the coneervativea who
were aandwiched between the prine ninieter who ia a Ieeter political
tectician and the foreign ninieter. could do anything but einleealy float
around. their fatea in the hende of tine and place.

Hatching the lack of direction being given to the Japan-Chine treaty
problen. Director General Ohire co-ented bitterly: "Hhat do you expect
when the foreign office faila to nake frequent vieita to explain nettere
and advice the prine ninieter?"

There ia an inclination to believe that concluding the treaty wee on the
agenda as a political iten even during the deya of the Tanaka and Niki
cebineta.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Be that ea it way. the Foreign Hiniatry eeene to have choeen 1970 at
rendon and without nelting any analyeie on auch fudanental ieauee ae how
a Japan-China treaty would affect our poaition in the overall reletione
with the 0.8. and the 0881!. whether a Japan-Chine treaty wee eeeentiel to
reletiona between Japan and China. nor nelting any atteqt to explain the
ieeuea to the people. Putting it bluntly. Keenigaeeki took up the netter
of toning forth with a eettlenent ea if it were juet another hoeework
aeeignnant in an atnoaphere of lackadcieical purpoeeleeaneee.

Private (Io-ante of Poreign Service Officiele

At the reopening of the regular aeeaion of the Diet. Price Hinieter Iultude
eaid ae part of hie etatenent on policy: "[‘l‘he treaty] will be concluded
in a nanner aatiafactory to both partiee; the tine for reopening negotia-
tione in approaching.“ Theae worde were epolten while hie heated ”noneenee"
etateeent hadn‘t been given a chance to cool off and it departed fro. the
draft which had been prepared by the Foreign Hiniatry which wee nuch nore
noderete in tone.

Fukude who felt that e nore vigoroua poeture had to be diepleyed for donu-
tic political purpoeee. wee not eatiefied with the drafted propoeel and
ordered that "a text containing etronger nuancee be prepared." I‘hen taking
up a pencil hineelf conpoeed the text quoted above.

"The price niniater." eaid none foreign aervice officiala earcaatically.
"known that there's nothing concrete in the mill end in only trying to
ehow that there ia.” But that waa the extent of their protnat. Ae on cue.
Sonoda'a etatenent on foreign relatione pertaining to Japan-China, wee
identical to Pukude'e line.

when the oppoeition party voiced eupport for a "poeitive poeture" Sonode
inedietely rained hie voice by aeveral decibele.

of couree. during the queetion period the anewere given by the dermeed
foreign aervice officere expoeed the fact that the China Bureau bed pre-
pared enewere on the anaulption that the queetione would pertain to whet
wee to have been the central thene: "After all. concluding a treaty ian't
an overwhelmingly eeaential latter." but thin obvioualy enbarreeeing
inpaeee failed to atop Sonoda fron netting hie endorse-out epeech. even
though in private. the confuaed foreign eervice officera muttered that
”There ian't anything core etupid than for one party in a negotiation to
try to rueh thinga through.“

This kind of epineleae fear of expreeeing one'e own opinion openly could
be eeen in varioue quarters right up to the tine of the eigning in August.

Linita of Kaeunigeeeki Diplonacy

Keeuigaeeki doee not have ite foreign affeire policy on e coneeneua ar-
rived at fron diecneeione brought up fron lower levels. A nechenien exiate

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

for tho roopoctivo ooctiono of tho variouo huroaua to draft propooala but
in roality tho nu-bor of poroono who havo any authority to Iako policy
docioiono ia linitod to a vary fow oxocutivo officialo.

‘l'hio aituation dooa not allow for tho ouch noodod policy dociaion oaking
procoao in which all of tho concornod nonhoro of tho Ianagorial aognonto
got togothor and haoh out all intorhuroau probloaa. Such a procoao in
particularly oooontial in thia intornational oocioty of incroaaing intor-
dcpondonco whon coping with prohlona involving tho 0.8.. China. tho USSR.
or noro broadly. Aoia. Buropo. or the Hiddlo Boot. 'l'ho rogular coni-
woakly chiaf'a nootingo uaually conaiot of porfunctory raading of roporta
froa oach of tho diviaiono during which ovon tho old proo who havo had

20 or 30 yoara of oxparionco in tho foraign affairo fiold ovor voluntaorod
to oxproao hia convictiono on any aubjoct.

hicholoon in hio fanouo hook "Diplomacy" writao that tho charactoriatic
of a foroign oorvico officor ia ono who in unnovod by thingo or ovonto.
who dooa not naha docioiono lightly. and who can coolly not a thing or
ovont in iaolation. But wo fool cortain that ho did not inply that for-
oign affaira poopla ahould not havo convictions ond tho onthuaiaou to act
on thou.

In tho caaa of tho Japan-China poaco and friondohip trooty only a null
handful of officiala woro in any way concornad with tho planning phaoo.
Thoy woro booidoo Sonoda. Arita and ‘l‘akaahina, Nakao and on occaaiono
Doputy Vico Hiniotor for Ad-iniotration Toahio Yanataki (and until January.
tho curront adaoaodor to Hoxico. Nobuo Hataunaga) and to tho. could ho
addod ‘l'roatioo Buroau Chiof Soichi Olori. Poaaibly. tho prilo liniotor'o
privato oocrotary lo lowada who had boon aaoignod to tho prino liniotor'o
rcoidanco fro. tho Poroign Hiniatry could ho includod in this group ainco
ho wao tho pipolino to tho official roaidcnco.

In reality. thin group could ho oquoorod down to Arita. Takaahi-o and
”okao. and mtil a cortain tino. ﬂatounaga.

Vice Kiniotor Koiouko Arita who wao tho aonior “or of tho 3.300 for-
oign aorvico officoro at hooo and abroad. wao nichnanod "Piorco Paco"
within tha niniatry bocauao ho wao apt to fluoh in angor and bowl out
ovon huroau chiofo whon aonothing dioploaaod him. But hoing a Ian of
ouch otrong onotiona. did ho hovc hold ilaginativo idoao or havo tho
courago to confront and porauado Sonoda, Pukuda. or tho loadora of tho
LOP to novo foroign affaira ioauoo‘! ho. ho did not.

On tho contrary. hio ingo waa that of an ahlo official who concorna hil-
oclf with dotailo. Ila had a aolid background: Tokyo Univoraity graduato.
fifth aon of tho lator Poroign Hiniotor hachiro Arita and ho had anothly
oailod through a ounny caroor including north Morica Divioion Chiof.
Kiniotor to tho USSR. Buropoan and Ocoanic luroau chiof. and adaaaoador

to Iran. Hut woro hio thoughto during tho progrooo of tho curront troaty

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

negotietione end whet were hie deep-eeeted convictione concerning the
treety'! Hhet did he think ehould be the direction in which Jepen-Chine
reletione ehould develop? Uhet were Arite'e true thoughte on the rueored
differencee between the officiel reeidence end the foreign office or on
the confueed policy ieeuee or on the letter of neinline revieione? how
did he try to put ecroee hie convictione in euch uttere? In trying to
pin down theee pointe to peint hie portreit. we cen cone up with only e
very vegue inege of the Inn.

The Men who ﬂee Celled "e Legel Crilinel"

The een who ie given credit for being nore influentiel in e certein con-
text in policy neking then Arite wee Deputy Vice Hinieter for Foreign
Affeire Heeuro ‘l'ekeehine. he wee chief of the treetiee bureeu et the tine
of Jepen-Chine nomlieetion in 1972. Leter he beceee the chief of the
Aeie bureeu end wee involved in euch nettere ee the eirlinee egreenent.

It hee now becone pertly legendery but it ie eeid thet the lete Chou
ln-lei celled hie e "legel bendit" end edded. "we would certeinly like to
have juet one officiel like hie on our eidel" Ae e foreign eervice offi-
ciel. he ie exceptionel end hee geined the reepect end feith of both the
ine end oute end within the LDP. of the liherele end coneervetivee elike.

It ie releted ee e true etory thet once when Vice Hinieter Arite wee re-
porting on the Jepen-Chine treety to Pukude et the officiel reeidence.
Arite wee eeked. "lncidentelly. whet'e ‘l‘ekeehiee'e judgnent on thin?"
Sonode wee well ewere of the high pointe given ‘l'ekeehine in the perty
end in eerly epring. even before the foreign einieter'e Chine vieit hed
been echeduled, publicly ennounced thet. "Hhen I go to Peking I'I teking
'l'eknehine with tee.”

In the conduct of diplonetic reletione with Chine. Tekeehine etrongly
edvoceted thet e bold proteet be nede egeinet Chine'e hehit of ignoring
noreel diplo-etic chennele end reeorting to ectione end worde eined et
Jepen'e internel effeire. he ineieted thet euch e etep be teken to force
eoee rethinking on the pert of Chine but the vice einieter deeignete wee
et thet tine in between floore with reepect to reeponeibility over polit-
icel lettere no we don't know whether the edvice bore eny fruit or not.

Viewing the negotietione in ieoletion, we euepect thet ‘l'ekeehile'e nine
were only helf fulfilled. lie in e teen who wee gredueted fro. Tokyo Uni-
vereity end wee deteined by the USSR for 2 yeere efter the we: ended.

Aeie Bureeu Chief Yoeuke Ilene. unlike Arite end ‘l’ekeehiee who were of
the fection which entered the einietry during the wet. did not cone into

it until after the wer. lie in e Kyoto Univereity greduete end within the
einietry wee ective in the theeter. Even now, he ie en intellectuel who

writee ecenerioe under the penneee of Tenoteu lea-i. At the tine of
Jenn-Chine noneliution. he wee councillor under Aeie Bureau Chief
‘l'ekeehi-e end eccoqenied Vice Preeident Shiine of the m on e vieit

13
'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

to Teiwen. for over 6 yeere efter thet he held reeponeible poete in Aeien
effeire. firet ee deputy chief. then ee chief of the Aeie lureeu. During
thet period he perticipeted in euch eejor ieeuee ee the Jepen-South Koren
continental ehelf end conclueion of the Jepen-Chine treety. he will
probebly be eeeigned en overeeee eebeeeedorehip eoeetiee during the yeer.

Teking cere of edninietretive nettere end fielding perlienent'e queetione
ere cleeeed ee being eeong the meet difficult of teeke. But Nekee ie the
Iodel of efficiency ee e bureeucretic officer. elweye keeping hie cool end
even during the Jepen-Chine treety heeele. eeneged to never get ceught out
on the linh. At the expenee of eounding repetitioue. even theee officiele
never took ieeuee involved in the Jepen-Chine negotiatione into their own
hende; they drifted with the conetently chenging direction of the current.
never initieting ection end reectinq :nly when forced to do eo. At one
tine efter it hed becone cleer thet the Jepen-Chine treety wee to be con-
cluded. it eeeeed like the foreign office wee duty bound to pereuede Pukude
to eceept the feit eeeoepli end eend Sonode to Chine to note en eerly eet-
tlenent. But it wee not in euch ee Arite end Nekee to eeke e eove.

The Turnebout of Prime Hinieter Pukude

Prine Minieter Pukude who hed continued to hereee the foreign eervice of-
ficere by eeking. ”where liee the truth end eincere intent?" ehowed the
firet eigne of reieing hie heevy poeterior in fewer of reopening negotie-
tione during the letter helf of herch. Peredoxicelly. it wee chortly
efter the vieit to Chine by the Yeno group. fecetiouely referred to ee
the Foreign Hinietry "ueing the oppoeition to give the Chineee e firet
cleee eheke down." The Yeno group forwerded to the government the ueuel
Teng Xieoping erplenetion of Chine'e four Iodernizetione end ”nothing
lore then enti-hegeeony; it ie illogicel to eeeune thet thet ie eieed et
eny given entity.” The foreign eervice officere chorueed thet there wee
"nothing new” end thet the whole thing wee "within the reeln of eleteurieh
diplonecy."

Pukude. however, begen to ehow eigne of loving towerd reopening the nego-
tietione end eeeting between Pukude end the leedere of the foreign Hinie-
try-Sonode, Abe. Arite. end othere-wee eet for 22 Herch.

with good hunor reetored end epiritedly declering thet "I'e going to get
eole cleer inetructione.” Sonode rode into the Foreign Hinietry'e officiel
hell in figure vith e propoeed text of the treety drefted by the edninie-
tretive bureeu.

The focel point of the diecueeion wee the hendling of "hegeeony" end
”third country” end Pukude ecting ”juet like en eccountent." eehed for
deteile to be eeeured thet the wording would not point to enti-Sovietien.

He kept etreeeing the feet thet "I'e not going down unconditionally" end
in hie ceutioueneee. he feiled to give direct inetructione to reopen nego-
tietione.

16
P08 OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY

“that evening. Director General Ohira acid: "Thia would be A good tine for
the foreim ninietar to vioit china." But the aalvo fired in aupport of
Sonoda tailed to obtain any raaulta.

In apite of theee negative develop-ante. Pukuda node a nova. On 25 March.
he invited the coneervative-with raapect to Japan-Chineuelanente of the
LDP including the leader Kohichi Nadao and Diatnen Ringo liachi-ura. Knuro
Tauohi. haaayuki Fujio to hia private reeidanca for en intonal diecue-
eion. "If we leave the Japan-China treaty utter.” Pukuda told than. “juet
henging in lid-air. we'll be vulnerable to being puehed aromd by both
China and the USSR. And doneetically. we'll be giving a-nition to tha
oppoaition partiea." Ila folloued up by pereuading than to concur in re-
opaning nagotiatione.

Nadao and colpany ware privately well were that luhuda would cone out for
reopening the negotiationa einca the Japan-China iaeue wae one which had
political iqlicatione. They requeated. however. that the nectar be con-
aidared carefully in view of the fact that on 5 April it would be 3 yeare
eince the death of the late Praaidant Chiang Kai-aheh and Taiwan would be
toning out of nourning on that day; that it wae eaeential that the USSR
be kept iron baconing antagonistic. coneidaratione for the ieaua oi terri-
torial claina over the Sankahu lalanda. and the exiatence of the China-
USSR alliance agree-cot.

The conservative. lad by hiro Kichi Nadao baead their critician on "a

lock of historical coepreheneion of the thing called Japan-China nornaliea-
tion.“ At the botton of thie critician wae the charge that at the tine of
the normalization. the foreign office had no pipeline into Taiwan and no
fir- intelligence or aatinatea on Taiwan or how it would react; that the
Foreign Hiniatry'a intelligence and enalyaeo concerning Japan-0.8. and
Japan-USSR ralationa were totally unreliable. Moreover. they auepected
that. "It Sonoda were to viait (mine. he would «allow China'a propoai-
tion in toto.” the lat point waa aleo a atatenent of ”no confidence" in

the toreim aarvice officara' ability to prevent Sonoda fro- operating
einglehandedly.

About thia tine. a paper entitled. "Progreaa of the Japan-China Peace
and Priendehip treaty leaue" waa produced by the aduinietrative bureau of
the Poreim Kinietry at the reqneat of Hueyuhi l'ujio and othare and it
tended to further the controvarey.

Ripple Bffecta iron ‘rajina Papers

The paper whoae authorahip wae attributed to Chin Section Chief Tahaahi
Tajina analyzed the aituation ehould the treaty be pigeon-holed. uneigned,
in the following leaner: l) The credibility gap by China for Japan would

be widened; 2) The USSR would use it to apply further preaaura on Japan;
3) Stability of Japan'a foreign aervica would be ehaltcn to the point of
unbelencing it; an a coneequenca of the reduced ecope of Japan'e ioreip

15
M OFFICIAL 058 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

reletione (coepered to the eituetion in which Jepen concludee the treety),
the etebility of Jepen-Teiwen reletione would be. ”peredoxicelly. lein-
teined end even enhenced ee e epin-off effect." The peper'e conclueion
ie to the effect thet. “the coneeneue of the ergunente pro end con ie to
the effect thet [non-conclueien of the treety) would give the iepreeeion
thet Jepen dencee to the tune pleyed by the USSR.”

The pro-Teiwen end pro-USSR fectione criticised the peper on the grounde
thet the conclueione were beeed on feulty or eheky prceieee end theee pro-
teete leed to forcing the peper being nede public. Although eone eepethy
for Tejine wee expreeeed within the einietry-"it wee ueed by the oppoei-
tion eerely for the eeke of oppoeition"-it wee criticized for heving
"inedequete eupporting evidence."

The incident eucceeded in expoeing the weekneee of the Foreign Hinietry
ee en inetru-ent which in euppoeed to be founded on the doctrine thet
"diploeecy ie the exteneion of doeeetic politice." The coneequencee of
ieeuing the peper which wee euppoeed to be e philoeophicel diecueeion.
pointed up the feet thet the Foreign Hinietry wee directionleee end thet
there lecked e nutuel confidence between the ninietry end the politiciene
end thet the ndnietry'e cepebility to nuke en eetinete of the politicel
eteoephere wee inedequete.

On 27 Herch. with the LDP‘e intreperty reorgenitetion well on ite wey to
conpletion. e government perty in power conference wee convened. At the
Ieeting e peper entitled. "A Requeet Regerding the Five Dutiee of the
Perty" outlining the beeic poeture of the governnent wee eublitted by
Pukude end Sonode. The peper edvieed thet: "To give Jepen-Chine rele-
tione e firn end eteble foundetion would be in coneonence with the cur-
rent etetue of the internetionel eociety end would eolidify Jepen'e
diploeetic etending in it." end urged thet "en unbieeed view be teken of
guerding our netionel intereete."

About thie tine, the often heerd rumor wee to the effect thet ”Pukude

hee eolidified hie decieion to reopen negotietione but in not thinking of
concluding e treety ee yet." At thie government-petty conference. Yeeuhiro
Nekeeone. their-en of the LDP executive council. eeeuning the role of
repreeentetive of thoee edvoceting the eeperetion of reopening negotie-
tione froe concluding the treety. eeid: "To reopen negotietione ie e good
thing. But the eetter of the foreign ninieter vieiting Chine ie eoeething
elee. At the tine thet euch e etep ie contelpleted we deeire thet the
perty'e epprovel be eought.“ leceuee the etetenent wee eede by Nekeeone.
the only Ien who hed conetently expreeeed coolneee towerd the ieeue of
reopening negotietione. Sonode flered up end retorted eherply: "new to
proceed with the negotietione ie the Foreign Hinietry'e bueineee ien't it?
Diploeecy cen't be conducted if we heve to etop et every turn to coneult
with the perty. l'n eure you would feel thet eene wey if you were the
foreign ednieterl"

16
FOR OPIICIAL US! ONLY
To the phyeicelly big etetured Sonode. Puhude eeid eoothingly. "Hell. I
gueee you heve e point." end with reeervetione. it wee egreed thet the
party would proceed with preperetione on the beeie of e "reopening.“

Sonode end Nekeeont both eerved their epprenticeehip under lchiro hono
end hed counted with eech other for fevoreble poeitione. 0n the deeth
of Reno. the unreconcileble two eplit the fection in helf. The cleevege

wee deep end until the treety wen eigned. they were conetently et eech
other'e throete.

Subeequently. Pukude who wee eeen en the wen who would put order beck into
the perty. etepped beck to e ventege point fro. which he could wetch Ohire
hendle the teeh. At e joint neeting of the foreign eervice overeight cow-
nittee end the foreign eervice connittee. Sonode eede en eppeerence end
becene the one terget of e rein of errowe. euch ee:

"Porego concluding the treety until the Chine-USSR friendly ellience pect

which in entegonietic to Jepen ie ebrogeted"; "Don't get drewn into becoe-
ing the firet line for en enti-USSR front by the enti-hegenony provieion”;
”Clerify the territoriel righte over the Senhehu Ielende."

Confronted with theee jibee. Sonode hed to give up hie plen to vieit Peking

before the Jepen-U.s. eulnit (3 Hey). And coepleinte epilled over to in-
clude Puhude.

The Foreign Hinietry ehould heve beccze e conbet erene but one could not
any thet the coneervetive elenente or the liberele of the perty were over-
burdened with requeete for vigoroue eupport fro- the foreign eervice offi-
cere. The etloephere in the ninietry wee one of quiet ieoletion. An fer
ee the politiciene were concerned. eince the letter woe e foreign rele-
tione ieeue "which doeen't produce votee." no preperetione were node to do
bettle nor did they lobby very herd in either direction to influence polit-
icel clene.

The Senhehu lelende Incident Shock

During e tine when the Foreign Minietry wee leying low in the hopee thet

it wouldn't be overly effected by the confueion ceueed by the LDP'e intre-
perty reorgenieetion. e Chineee fiehing fleet ceueed en incident on 12 April
by violeting the territoriel wetere of the Senkeku lelende. Needleee to
eey thie put e criep in the eentinent for reopening [negotietione] which
hed been on the riee eince the letter pert of "etch. Ree it e deliberete
incureion? Accidentel? If it wee e planned incureion. wee it tied in with
the peece end friendehip treety? 0r wee it limited to e cleil of terri-
toriel righte? There wee e deerth of intelligence end enelytic findinge
were totelly leching.

There wee. however. en ebundence of gueeeee end rumore: ”The chineee heve
downgreded the Pukude cebinet'e credibility end hevo decided to teke e
tough etence"; ”The Chineee ere reeponding by epplying preeeure egeinet

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the hard line taken by the Seirankai and other conservatives who are in-
sisting that the issue of territorial rights over the Sankskus be clari-
fied": ”It is a daeonstration by sons tough ale-ants in the outlying dis-
tricts against the central govern-ant's weak-knead attitude toward Japan."

On-sita investigations indicated that the ships of the offending fishing
fleet were registered in various parts of China which tended to elieinate
the “accidental incursion" theory. Aleost simultaneously. Vice Hinister
Rang liao who was lasting with Representative hidao Den of the She-inren
[Social Daeocratic League] announced on the 15th that the incident was
"cospletaly accidental" and had no connection with the peace and friend-
ship treaty negotiations. 0n the issue of reopening negotiations. he took
the opportunity to state: "He are not asking any new conditions and the
anti-hsgsnony provision is not pointed at any specific entity." Since
reopening the negotiations with Sate and Han as the central figures was
imminent. the stare-ant was undoubtedly nsde to give assurance that the
anti-hegaenny provision was not aieed at a specific country. naesly the
USSR. as an induce-ant to Japan which had been expressing considerable
concern over that issue.

While China was using such means to accelerate the proceedings. Japanese
opinion was still divided. Sonoda. of course. was rushing around trying
to get the negotiations going while Arita. Takashine. ﬂakes and others in
the Foreign Ministry insisted on a caller approach. "Since there can't
be an easy sattlasent of the territory issue.” they argued. "it would be
wiser not to get ahead of ourselves by charging into the reopening of
negotiations things." Therefore. when on 21 April Deputy Chief of the
Asia nureau "an Xisoyun told Hinister (at the tine) Donowaki in Peking
that. "the incident was unintended and will be treated when discussing
the broad question of Japan-China relations." the opportunity was seized
to stteept to lake e "diploeatic sattlenent" of the incident.

But Pukuda and Abe resisted ringing down the curtain too precipitously.

In an ateosphare where the doneetic reaction was bound to be: "That would
be a real hegenony principle action!" Pukuda could not he blaeed for being
reluctant to settle the letter on the diplomatic fiction that the incident
was an "accidental occurrence.“ without going through nor-s1 diploeatic
procedures. Pinally. a teeporary settle-ant was reached on 10 May. after
the Japan-0.5. sue-it. between Sato and hen who agreed to reattiru the
joint agraaeent reached in 1972 that neither party would touch on the sub-
ject of territorial rights over Senkahu.

Inadequate Intelligence Pipelines
This incident clearly pointed up the inadequacy of intelligence available

to the toreign Ministry through foreign service channels and the lack of
pipelines which frequently play decisive roles.

18

IOR OPTICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

The undercover struggle of Deng end the opposition fection when eons
fregsentery inforeetion wee ends eveilsble to sole Dietnen in the for.
of Teiwen intelligence. Hong Kong intelligence, end even South Norse
intelligence.

On 21 April. the sees dey thet the Minister Donoweki-Heng discussions were
being conducted. e peseengsr liner of Koree Air Lines which wee cerrying
Isny Jepeneee peseengere, etreyed into USSR territoriel sir specs. Our
nilitery intelligence did leern of the incident but we could not but be
envious of the weelth of 0.8. sources of intelligence which not only found
out where the liner hsd lsnded but wee eble to get the incident which in-
volved the 1188!. South [ores end Jepen. settled expeditiously.

Sonode did not coqletely depend on the Foreign Ministry for intelligence.
He hed his own pipeline: For Jepen-Chine releted utters. he used people
involved with the Kokubosoku [Jepen Internetionsl ‘l'rede Pronotion Aesocis-
tion] (Aiichiro Fujiyene. cheireen) to leeks contect with Lieo Chengehi end
others who supplied his with infornetion. Severel lsgieletors whose inter-
este were not confined to dolestic setters hed sstsblished their own sources
of inforuetion since the foreign office's intelligence wee inedequete end
beleted. Recently, severel LDP Dietssn initieted e save to esteblish Jepsn-
0.8. end Jspen-Europe intelligence pipelines st the legislsture level es

e result of their being criticized for being uneble to eccoqlieh no more
then s rubber-necking tourist could on their trips ebrosd. The incident
points up the leck of confidence in intelligence collection ectivitise of
our officiel inetelletione oversees.

The foreign office consists of e eteff of 1.500 st heedquertere end 1.800
in oversees offices nusbering 158. These figures ere cowereble to Itely
end Belgius which heve such sneller populetions end economic end finsnciel
interests. In view of vestly increesed edninietretive require-eats in the
diplosetic eetebliehnent. edjustnents in personnel end budgetery require-
nente ere justified. Protests to the effect thet Sonode "is uniting no ef-
fort to recruit well quelified people end to increese effectiveness in the
field," points up the need for better quslity rether then greeter quentity.
Of the 40 steff officers in the esbessy in Peking which is et the very
front line of negotietione with Chine. it is surprising to leern thet only
e very few ere Chinese linguists. The usuel excuse is thet their counter-
perts in the Jepenese section of the Chinese foreign office with which the
bull: of business is conducted. ers knowledgeeble in Jepeneee. ‘l'het see-e
like e very less excuse.

Bechstsge During Negotietion Proceedings

The Senksku Islende incident blocked en opportunity to reopen negotietions
but the etnoephere improved efter the 3 Hey eu-eit between 0.3. end Jspen

due. prinerily. to e noteble chenge in Pukuds's ettitude. 0n the 20th.
Voerite lnternetionsl Airport wee opened end on the following dey. in spite
of its being e Sundey. Pukude invited Sonode end Abe to his privete resi-
dence. he wee in high spirits end seid: ”The opening of herite sirport

19
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

io o greet event which hoe token 10 yeoro to occonplioh; the Jopen-South
Koren continentel ohelf ogreonent hno been 6 yooro in tho noting; the Jepen-
Chino trooty could not be occoupliohod in the tinoo of either ‘l‘oneko or
Niki." a. tolkod oe if the nottor woe elroedy on occonliehed fect.

toting Sonodo by cowloto ourprioo.

Thot wee the turning point end though e deloy occurred due to lion Nionlong'e
illnooo end euboequont period of rocuporetion, the nogotiotiono ot on ednin-
ietretive level were reopened on 21 July. But the queetion ie whet leed
Pukudn to neko tho docioion‘! Pukudo hed been eeying that the upon-v.8.
conference woo the soot inportent oingle item on tho ogendo for tho firet
helf of 1978 end tho conoorvotive elenent oround hin hed boon inoieting

thet Jepen-Chine cone "only ofter upon-0.8. hed boon token core of." It
could be thot hoving undortoken tho Jenn—v.8. iton oucceeofully. ho wee
encourogod to toko on thie project. Coincidentelly. the opening of llarite
oirport fell on the one dey ee tho ineugurol core-oniee for ‘roiwon'o new
proeidont Chiong Ching-kuo. In March. Chiong hed been elected prooident;

5 April woo the third ennivoroery of Chieng Kei-ehok'e peooing. Agricul-
ture Hiniotor Nekogewe end the pro-Toiwen were of the diet hed been
eeying thot. ”The price niniotor won't ennounce eny decieiono until ell

tho core-oniol ovonte in Toivon hove been cerriod out." Thot ney hove hed
oonething to do with the tiling, too.

In rotroepoct. the whole procedure could be tor-ed oe being typicelly
Pukude but up to the point where he octuelly node e move. the Foreign hin-
ietry hed not been were of hie reel intent.

There were oono foreign oervice officoro like Yoeuke Nokoe who weren't
token by ourprioe: "Pro- the tine he oeouned the poet of prine minister,"
-~ ho eoid, "Hr Pukudo hed hie mind node up to conclude the treety. The only
hold-up hed been to propere the doneetic politicel otnoephere oo thet the
event could teke piece in en orderly leaner. There woon‘t nuch point in
rioting turnoil by ruehing into it." Thot my be no but e prine ninieter
who io the finel outhority in docieione involving foreign countrioe. cen-
not be excueed for foiling to divulge hie predeterlined intent to ot loeet
hie foreign linieter.

It ohould be noted. however, thot Pukudo'o keeping hie inner-cot convic-
tiono to hinoelf. prevented Sonodo from Ieking o cheep vieit to Chino end
credited hi- with o dieploy of loedorohip-‘in reveree. For Jopon which
locked ueeful otrotogic intelligence. one could be lead to believe thot
hie toctico turned out to be e weepon in the ieeue involving Chino even
if it woe only o unifeotetion of Fukude'e noture to diopoee of odninio-
trotive uttero et hend one by one in on orderly Ionner.

"Deng. Ching. Kong” Negotiotiono
Converoely. [the route token by Pukude] pointed up the lock of ony diplo-

Ietic etrotegy ot Keouligooeki end of ony progren leoding to reeding China's
bend. For oxenple, over 7 nontho elopeod fro- the tine Sonode begon tolking

20
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

about visiting Chine until he actually flew into Peking. During the
interim. Sonoda's wishful thinking was reflected in his countless announce-
Iaente such as "China visit during latter part of January"; "February visit
to China"; "Over the head visit to China in March"; ”China visit: 10 to
15 April"; "China vieit prior to su-it conference of developed countries.”
Although this keeping the auxiliary engine (himself) running at“ the
main engine (Pukuda) catches was a prime Sonoda strategy. it can't be
given many points in diplomatic negotiations. Not only the timing but

the purpose of the foreign minister's visit to China changed constantly
according to the explanations given by Sonoda and the administrative of-
fice of the foreign Ministry.

Then there was the matter of erroneously estimating Han Nianlong, Sonode's
comterpert in hie proposed China discussions. The foreign Ministry had
been viewing his as merely a protocol officer: the Chinese counterpart.
thought the Foreign Ministry. had to be one who could discuss matters at
a high political level or no important issues could be settled. Kasuei-
gaeeki'e estimate of lien Nianlong was that he was an inflexible and tough
foreign service officer."

Vice Minister lien'e illness forced a change in the scheduling giving some
of Japan's more capable foreign service officers to adjust their estinate
of him. A review of hie role in issues pertaining to Japan made it clear
that he was indeed a very competent foreign service officer. With this
revised estimate. it was decided that the administrative level discussions
be expedited by curtailing them to one or two meetings and to schedule

the foreign minister's visit to China for about the 26th or 27th. A Japan
Airlines plane was quietly chartered to carry out this program.

But when confronted with reality. the scenario had to be cowletely re-
written. Around 1974 when the initial steps in the Japan-Chins peace and
friendship treaty were taken by Vice Minister Togo and Chinese meander
Chm, Iisn'a name was tied in with the other two and the proceedings were
derisively dubbed the "tan (Togo)-Chin (Ambassador Chin)-Kan (ﬂan) nego-
tiations." [Pun refers to a state confusion] lien now made no secret of
the fact that he himself wanted to complete the treaty. As an opening
gaﬁit. he bluntly tabled China's basic position on "anti-hegemony” and
"third party."

Japan's position had been, "First. the problem issues have to be put in
order." and with regard to the hegemony problem. "if we carelessly get
drawn into this issue too deeply, we will find ourselves on a submerged
reef even before the foreign minister arrives."

Since lien had to commute to the neetinge from his hospital bad, they were
usually convened at 3:00 or 3:30 pm (China time) and each meeting with a
long rest period included. lasted only at most 2 hours or so. The atmo-
sphere under such circumstances, was not conducive to smoothly bringing
up political issues. Finally. even the foreign office had to revise its

21
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

estinate of lian'a influence, realizing that he had direct lines to Lieo
Changshi and even to Deng Xiaoping and could speak with authority equal
to even Huang'e. Under this revised estiaete of the Ian, the foreign
office had to put its thinking on an entirely new track.

Sonoda and Arita had been thinking in terns of having Rakes return hone
tenorarily when the adninietrative level discussions had borne enough
results for the foreign ainieter to nake hie Chine visit as a neene of
persuading Pukude to lake a decision. But nuch as the early introduction
of political issues was desired, it was eetinated that if they were intro-
duced preaaturely. unfavorable results would he obtained. Sonoda, of
course, was chqing at the hit and Sato end Nakae in Peking felt at a
lose as to what to do.

On 27 July. when the 5th nesting was to take place, Massador Seto re-
quested guidance as to whether hekae should return to Japan but Sonode
wouldn't affirI the trip. he reasoned: "In the heat of a battle. a con-
nanding officer can't be recalled: he cones hone only after he has spent
his arrows and broken hie sword or has settled the issue to the point
where the situation can be turned over to headquarters for final resolu-
tion. The judgment as to which category your situation fits auet be nade
in the field."

While the headquarters conplained that "insufficient aggressiveness" was
being displayed in the negotiations, July cane to an end and the 8th neat-
ing took place on 1 August. The eu-er heat in Peking was exceptional hut
to Sonode and Arita and other foreign service officere who had to burn

the midnight oil night after night awaiting official co-uniquee during
Tokyo's unusual heatwave. this was indeed a "long hot euuer."

Frustrated by the lack of any cue for him to go on stage. Sonoda expressed
hie inatience: "I an getting a feeling that the deaerkation line between
adainietrative and political discussions is fading." Knowing how Sonoda

was prone to show hie enotions. Arita and ‘l'aksahile tried to take an open-
ing wedge for the ”Minister to go on stage." They began to think in terns
of breaking off the edninietrative discussions at a suitable point and to
lake preparations for hi- to go to China during the first part of August.

Signs for 8 August Good

For the Japanese confereee, the tiling of the changeover to political
discussions without antagonizing or hurting the feelings of llan who had
professed his desire to see the whole thing through, was the source of
headaches. Hhen during a discussion session Sato touched on the poten-
tials of convening ”political talks" nan snapped back that "after all I
an also a politician and "I an prepared to participate in then” which

nede aatters even lore difficult.

On the 5th, Chief of Asia Bureau Nakae finally made the trip hone. The
Foreign ministry had had a meeting of the minds on "foreign ainieter visits

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

Chine on the 8th.” Although it wee e ceee of the eerlier the better. the
celender eigne were not good for the 7th end were (or "Greet Peece" for
the 8th.

During the evening of the 6th. the leederehip coneieting of Sonode. Arite.
'l'ekeehiee end Nekee iron the Foreign hinietry end Abe end Kori oi the
officiel reeidence eteli net with Prise Hinieter Pukude et e hotel in
Hekone where he wee teking e reet. The Foreign Hinietry group. perticu-
lerly Sonode. wee uneeey beceuee they knew thet Pukude hedn‘t been very
fevoreble to Nekee'e coeing hone.

But Pukude'e firet nove wee to not Sonode to neet with hie elone end
opened the eeeting with. "when ere you leeving?" Thie one queetion took
ell the wind out of Sonode'e eeil: he hed been ell eet to dreeeticelly

ennounce thet. "1 en willing to eecrifice ey poet to cerry out plenipoten-
tiery reeponeibilitiee."

At the neeting of the entire group. efter Nekee hed Iede hie report. Arite
expleined thet the 8th wee choeen beeeuee “0-3-78 wee 'euehirogeri.‘ e
herbinger of good thinge." [In Jepeneee cherecter. 8 ie eheped like
'euehiro.‘ e fem] The group hed e good leugh over thie. Sonode wee
overcone with gretitude to Arite who wee firet of ell e diplonet. for hie
effectionete reference to "herbinger of good thinge." The petty then
returned to Tokyo end by the tine it hed arrived et the l’oreign Hinietry.
e neeeege iron the Chineee. ”Helcone to Chine." hed elreedy errived.
Sonode'e eyee were filled with teere of joy.

Thus the iulfilleent of hie greet wiehuSonode vieit to Chine; eigning of
the treety. Ae icing on the ceke. it wee reported by the Jepeneee thet.
"The Chineee nede greet conceeeione." The Foreign Hinietry eoneeneue in-
cluded in which were the opinione of Arite. ‘l‘ekeehine. Nekee. end even
‘l'ejine. wee thet Chine’e beeic poeition on "enti-hegenony" wee puehed
eeide end wordinge eoet deeired by the Jepeneee in the treety'e Article II
on enti-hegeeony end Article IV on the third perty ieeue hed been edopted.

Although it hed been preordeined thet the negotietione hed to culninete
in "both pertiee being eetiefied." Sonode proudly ennounced thet [the
treety] "cleered up the whole thing including the trunk. the ehepe of the
brenchee. even to the iullneee of the foliege." but wee the etete of
conclueion ell it wee purported to be end could we ellow oureelvee to be
eo optinietic?

It is true thet during the finel etegee of the negotietione. Vice Cheirnen
Deng Xieoping. Poreign Minister hueng Hue end other Chineee leedere feiled
to show much vigor. But couldn't that have been beceuee the Chineee hed
elreedy fully echieved ite goel? In the finel eccotnting of the Jepen-
Chine negotietione. won't we find thet we hed been entrepped?

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OHICIAI. US! ONLY

Pinel Accomting of Treety'e Debite end Credite

Right of! the top. it nuet be pointed out thet the overell eccounting hee
not been correctly portreyed. Theee negotietione got eterted with pre-
lieinery telke between the two Vice Foreign Kinietere Fun .iko ‘l'ogo end
lien Nienlong who hed cone to Jepen to eign the neritine egreenent. Pour
yeete elepeed eince then.

In the beginning. Jepen never dreened that the couree of nevigntion would
be euch e heurdoue one; Jepen'e only purpoee (or it wee the pronotion of
pence in generel. never once thinking thet the theee of the negotietione
would drew ue into the whirlpool of Sim-USSR confrontetione. The Chineee
hed no intention of uttering into e window-droning type of treety which
wee neither toxic or nedicinel: they were in pureuit of for-ling e “Unified
Anti-USSR Front” end with thet forenoet in ite nind, it vented to include
the enti-hegeeony lenguege into the treety.

Adeittedly. there were veriencee in peripherel circu-etencee but the dif-
ference wee between e country whoee concept coneidered the effecte on world
politice end e ”country of politicel nidgete." During the epring of 1975
when the hegenony ieeue eurfeced. the Krenlin beceee egiteted end initieted
ettecke egeinet the Jepen-Chine treety. Hith Chine reecting etrongly to
thie. the cleevege within Jepen enong the pro-Chineee. pro-Soviete. treety
hewlte end treety dovee deepened nerltedly.

In April of thet yeer dreft propoeele of the peece end friendehip treety
were exchenged between Jepen end Chine. There were eone decieive differ-
encee in the beeic poeitione eince the Jepeneee propoeel eede no reference
to the hegenony ieeue.

‘l'he then foreign ninieter, Hiyetewe. end the edninietretive bureeu of the
Foreign Hinietry expleined: "we hed no objection to tie in en enti-
hegeaony etend into n joint etetenent which clerified the recognition of
the then exieting world eituetion end our politicel poeture. But we could
not egree to unit the eignetory netione to e poeition which could becone
unteneble in e chenged world eituetion."

Even during Diet heeringe. there wee no eign of retreeting e eingle etep
tron thie etend in thie ieeue. But when the treety negotietione been-e
etelled. the ieeue et eteke wee eoftened fro. the originel «enemy to
ergmnte over whether enti-hegenony l) wee e generel principle; end. 2)
would be eccepteble ee long ee it did not co-it either perty to net
jointly. The inconclueive ergunent over theee provieione forced the nego-
tietione to be broken off.

Jepen'e "Big Conceeeion"

1976 wee e yeer of violent chengee for Chine: Premier Zhou'e peeeing;
the ‘l'ien An hen incident; Cheirnen heo‘e deeth; the beniehnent of ”the

26
POR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. US! ONLY

geng of tour.“ 0n the other eide. Jepen wee in e etorly turnoil over the
Lockheed incident end the ”Get Niki” novenent. Neither perty wee in eny
poeition to teke up treety negotietione. But then the Pukude govern-eat
took hold end the ﬂue Ouoieng regiee begen to teke ehepe end the etnoephere
beceee conducive to thinking ebout reopening negotietione. Iron Chine'e
viewpoint. the doeeetic poeture hed to be re-eetebliehed end the world'e
reepect it hed during the heo-Zhou ere bed to be regeined to prevent en
opening through which the USSR could clip in. The conclueion of e Jepen-
Chine treety could be eeen ee e etep in thet direction.

At thie point the prine ninieter eede public hie etend with hie ”Clerifi-
cetion of the text of the enti-hegeeony erticle" (Generel eeeeion of the
lower houee on 3 Pebruery 1977). Thie knocked out the eeeuwtion thet

the eterting point of the negotietione would be e hot debete on whether

to include the enti-hegeeony ieeue or not end dignified e gient conceeeion
on the pert oi Jepen.

Regerdleee of the objective viewpoint on the utter. eubjectively. the
pendulum hed ewung iron "equidietent iron the USSR end Chine" to etrength-
ened politicel tiee with Chine. lieving eede thet beeic decieion. the
problee of how to expreee the enti-hegeeony ieeue end how to hendle the
third perty letter becene nere eubeidiery problem.

A certein Foreign Hinietry leeder eeid et e meeting thie epring: ”There
wee no need for Jepen to heve oppoeed the inclueion of the enti-hege-ony
ieeue even et the tine of the Hiki cabinet; convereely. every effort ehould
hevo been Iede for ite inclueion." The etetenen'. nede the lietener wonder
if hie eere hed heerd the worde correctly. Sy ebendoning the line which

it hed been following end by contredicting iteeli‘ to euit the eituetion.
the Foreign Hinietry loet ell cleiu for credibility end for heving hed
eny buic policy or plen.

Sonode'e ection et the reopened negotietione eteged in Peking were very
fleeboyent. he lived up to hie reputetion for being "e killer et the ini-
tiel neeting” [e neeterful epeeker]. "A good treety." he eeid. ”euet be
brought to fruition beceuee l cennot return to Jepen with :7 tell ‘uetween
ny lege; the only elternetive for ne would be to dieenbowel quit in
Peking." he epoke in e voice drenched in notion. ‘l'hie wee the ecene
thet got reve noticee in the pepere which reported thet Sonode hed the
Chineee fenele interpreter in teere with eylpethy.

It ie probebly true thet Sonode expounded Jepen'e etend "very boldly.
frenkly. end without tinting worde" (‘l'ekeehine'e quote). In the fine).
enelyeie. however. ween't hie ect put on in fulfill-ent of e etege eet
up by the Chineee? Hhether eo or not, Sonode on hie return to Jepen
breggingly deecribed hie neetinge with Deng xieoping end ﬂue Ouoieng
wherever he heppened to go. He even deecribed how he-to overooee e
feeling of reetreint while neeting with Dengo-etood up end epet into the
epittoon loceted neer the cheiruen'e feet when he net with Sue. Heybe

25
FOR OFFICIAL 033 ONLY
I‘Oll OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

thio waa typically 8onoda‘a oggtoaoivo drautico. but tron tho viowpoint
of lino ond Dong who woro looking at Japan-China rolationo and particulorly
tho offoct of tho poaco and friondohip troaty on tho big otratogy involving
tho confrontation with tho USSR and it! own nodornioation plan. tho dramat-
ico could vary woll havo ooonod liha .l child playing ganoo.

In any ovont. which woo tho oido that nado pointo by concluding tho troaty?
And what woro tho dooorita‘l

Putting aoido o critiquo of tho procoodingo. it would bo inpoaoiblo to dio-
cuoo all of tho proo and cono. tho gains and looooo hora. “hat can bo ooid.
howovor. io that "'l'hio fir-o tho rolation botwoon Japan and China” typo of
congratulatory addrooooa aro pronoturo. lt io truo that ouch aioo of tho
trooty oo mtual oquality aro on tho pooitivo oido and ahould ho nodo to
boar an obundanco of fruit but whothor tho goalo oro hopt alivo or aro
killod doponda on how tho two countrioo procood fron thio otarting point.

For inotanco. what about tho China-088R Priondohip Allianco and Mutual
Aaoiotonco ‘l’rooty which nuat affoct tho Japan-Chino treaty? That troaty
in which Japan ia "viowod ao on onony country" woo concludod by tho Poo-
plo‘o Ropublic of China undor tho laadorohip of Moo zodong in 1950. or in
tho yoor aftor tho Pooplo’o Ropublic woo fornod. ‘l'ho oxiotonco of that
inotrunont woo ono of tho roaoono for tho fornation of tho Japan-0.8. Socu-
rity Trooty (tho for-or ”ooturity") during tho following yoar whilo in tho
cold war onvironnont.

lt woo not oo long ago that both Chino and tho USSR donouncod tho Japan-
0.5. oocurity poct oa boing an ”incuroion of 0.8. inporiolion into Aoio."
and woo tho firot otop in “tho rovival of Japanooo nilitorion.” Iut oo tho
amino-038R confrontation dooponad tho cloavago botwoon tho two. tho 0.3.
and China bogon to cloao tho gop botwoon thouolvoo and following tho
nornolitotion of Japan-China rolationo, Chino bogan to proach not only

tho inportanco but tho oooontiality of tho ”Japan-0.8. oxio" for tho loin-
tonanco of oocurity. Simitanoouoly. Chinooo loodoro hogan to proclai-

_ that tho Sine-Saviot Allianco ‘rroaty. "triotod in our but woo dead in oub-
otanco." Noxt April. China will foco tho fork in tho road and a docioion
will havo to bo nado whothnr to oxtond or roocind it. lloocinding it hoo
boon nado public ao a condition for concluding tho Japan-Chino Poaco and
friondahip troaty. 8o "otornity" now hoo o hiotory of undor 30 yoaro bo-
couoo of chongoo wrought!

It oorvoo oo o ranindor that intornational rolationo oro living thingo and
trootioo which aro oignod in a flurry of happy colobrotiono can oonotinoo
bocono a noro ocrop of papor in a gravoyord. lioybo thio io a good tint
to round ouroolvoo that tho only two friondahip trootioo oignod by Japan
prior to tho Japan-Chino trooty—"Jopan-Bthiopio Priondohip ‘l'rooty" and
"Jopan-Cadaodia Priondohip ‘l'rooty"—havc long oinco bocono dofunct and
that tho participating comtrioo hardly rant-bor that thoy had ovor
oxiotod and aloe that both of tho othor portioo hovo undorgono rovolu-
tiono which hovo loft thou in o nuddiod, confuud ototo.

26
ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The queetion ee to which perty wee nore deeiroue of concluding the treety
ie greduelly becoei is cleer: the one thet needed it wee Chine end it wee
Chine which expedited it. Internelly y. Chine' e top priority proaect ie.
"unificetion of en enti-USSR front“ end doneeticelly it ie the four
nodernieetione." He get the inreeeion thet Deng ie neneuwering towerd
echiewing theee goele without cere ee to how hie ectione ney eppeer to
the outwide.

The nein thruet hee ehifted fron ”Surwiwel through eelf effort“ to "leern
free the enperiencee of the edvenced netione" end under thoee tone end
with eyee focueed on 20 or 30 yeere in the future. Chine ie eeeking eco-
nonic dewelopnent with the eupport of Jepen. 0.8.. end Burope. lt ie
neturel thet Jepen ehould becone the centrel piller in thie progree be-
ceuee not only ie it cloeeet geogrephicelly but hee ehown nireculoue eco-
nonic end technologicel growth in the 30 yeere eince the end of the wer.

The conclueion of e long tern Jepen-Chine trede errengeeent which will
torn the beckbone of Jepen-Chine reletione. will hecone e reelity nert
epring. Preperetione to ieplenent the progren under which Chineee crude

oil will be inorted for Jepeneee exporte of nenufectured goode end tech-
nology ie being put on trech.

The Chimu ein to epeed up the teqo of ite econonic build-up neehee
ideelly with Jepen'e efforte to find e wey for econonic etebility while
chenging over to e low growth ere. In nid-Septeder. during hie vieit to
Chine. hinieter of lnternetionel Trede end lnduetry [ml] lo-oto egreed
on e frenework for doubling the trede volt-e end extended the tile linit
by 5 yeere. to 1990 fron 1985. There ie report to the effect thet Deng.
during hie neeting with Sonode on 15 Auguet. eurprieed the letter by etet-
ing: “"In behelf of nodernieetion end dewelopnent. Chine will not reject
the poeeibility of eltering ite conceptuel etructure.”

Bven without the peece end friendehip treety. the reletionehip between the
two countriee mdouhtedly would hewe developed in en effective nenner. 0n-
like the reletionehip elong Jepen. 0.8.. end Europe. where frictione ere
noteble. between Jepen end Chine there ehould be e mtuelly coqlenentery
econony for the foreeeeeble future. On thie beeie elone, it ie probehle
thet there would be e neturelly interningled econo-ic flow between the

two neighboring countriee.

Chine wee ohviouely cheeing two rebbite: Stebiliution of Jepen-Otine
reletione end the expeneion of the enti-USSR front. The truth of the

letter eee. to be thet the Chineee cen he enug in the knowledge thet they
now hewe both rebhite in the beg.

Deng. with reference to the Soviet'e oppoeition to the peece end friend-
ehip. denomced the USSR: ”Thet’e beceuee they feer the enti-hegeuny
principle. The treety pute e criep in ite expeneion policy end pute then
in en ufevorehle poeition to leunch e eudden eggreeeive wer. In thie

27
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

linha, aha aaaaay (Japan-china) ia noa narcly a awo-counaay iaaua bua haa
najor worldwida :a-iticaaiona."

Tha Japan aaaaay ia aha titaa araaay ainad by China in 13 yaaaa and undo:
aha ”‘l'haaa ﬂoald Concapa” ia ia aha (iraa ao ba ainad wiah aha aacond
world in iaa 69-yaar hiaaory and it aaaaa paniaaabla ao ahinla ahaa addi-
aional imramca can ba aaaachad ao ia in ahaa ia ia aha firaa araaay
which conaaina aatatanca ao anai-haunony.

‘l'ha Naaional Paoplaa Rapaaaanaaaiva Conwanaion hold in March daaw up a
"ﬂaw Conaaiauaion. 1978." laa cornaraaona ia aha concapa of anai-USSR.

In inplananaaaion o! ahaa docarina. vigoroua acaiviay haa baan diaacaad

aa Africa. Europa. and Aaia. Thaaa acaiona can ha aaan aa para of an at-
foaa ao toll back aha USSR'a aakins advanaaga of China’a braak wiah Albania
and aaparaaion (to. Viaanan. In May. praaidanaial adviaar Iraaainahi who
ia known for hia aough aaaiauda aowaad aha 038R. whila on a aour of China
aaid aa aha walcona banquaa .ivan by Poaaign Kiniaaar lluan; llua. ahaa ha
aynpaahiaad wiah and appaowad ”China'a daciaion on anai-haunony.“ And

ha addad: "A aaaon; and aaabla China banaaiaa aha 0.8. and China can
banafia (ao- a nighay and “la-confidant 0.8. which haa worldwida concarna.”

In raaponaa. Poraian Hiniaaar Huang vigoroualy danouncad "aocial inpati-
alian (0888)." Alahouah ahata waa no dafiniaiwa prograaa aoward nor-allu-
aion. aha nuaualiay of banafiaa and loaaaa of aha awo counaaiaa' aaraaagy
involving aha 033R wara bluntly axpraaaad.

Sonoda quaaaiad luaainalai who aaoppad off in Japan on hia raaurn aaip
(to. China. of aha v.5. policy paraainin; ao aha USSR and Iraaainaki'a
paraonal viawa of aha 0881!. To juaaify hia inquiaiaivanaaa. Sonoda ax-
plainad: ”Than ia a diﬂaaanca baawaan 0.5.' 0883 policy which haa world-
wida ilplicaaiona and Japan’a which aawolva around local iaauaa bua unlaaa
wa arc fa-iliaa wiah aha 0.8. poina of viaw. Japan'a policy wiah rafaranca
ao aha 033a cannoa ha nada fin."

Iraoainaki’a atip ao aha Par Zaaa aawaalad. lilac it or not. ahaa aha
Japan-China aaaaay had an affaca avan wiahin aha Ira-awed: of aha dynamic
U.s.-China woald aaraaagy. Haa ia juaa a diaaoraion of faca ahaa Japa-
naaa diplolacy which lacha any (in aaaaaagy appaarad ao ha a flowar of
aha poppy? Japan doaan’a have aha aaaangah ao inaarwana in or inaaraaaa
with any powar playa of aha 0.8.. China. or aha USSR and naadlaaa ao aay,
ia could not avan aaaa-pa ao hold aha raina of Chim-Soviaa aalaaiona.
bua laavin; objacaiva inaanaiona aaida. ahouldn'a Japan’a rotaign Minia-
ary procaad wiah a tonic: aalaaiona prosta- wiahoua blindaaa ao block
out aha alpha of auabulana aaaa swirling aaoand aha pariphary of aha Japan-
China aaaaay?

Hiahoua dragging in a counaay auch aa Viaana- which axpaaaaaa concaan ova:
aha (or-aaion of a ”Japan-u.s.-China allianca.” aha Iajoriay which haa

avaluaaad aha aida affacaa of aha paaca and faiandahip aaaaay and who foal

28
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OHIO!“ "8! ONLY

thst Jopon got lost of vhot it ookod for-won ouch thinking pooplo ooo
in it ”Jspon-U.8.-Chino trodo cooporstion" oo tho ultiosto not rooult.

M doys oftor tho Jopon-Chino trosty uoo oignod. Choir-on liuo Ouofong
dopsrtsd on o tour of thros of tho ussn'o noighboring countrioo. looonio.
Yugoslovio. ond lron. It was obvious thot it vso s pooitivo opprooch to
088'! noighboro oftor tho ostobliohlont of fin footing gsinod through tho
pooco ond friondship trooty. lnotood of insisting thot tho trooty ”of-
focto only two counttioo. Jopon ond Chins." coo't tho Porsign Ministry
stroightforuordly stoto thst ”it hos intornotionol ruificotions"?

l'ho cuntsrw some: mutton of tho 0.8. ototoo thot tho upon-Chino
trosty is tho inotruoont which pushod Jspon into on ”onti-USSR oxio"; tho
frsnch pspor Ixonno osys thot tho conclunion of thot trosty is "uithout
quootion o groot ouccoos story for Chinooo diplooocy”: tho was of tho
0.x. hoord. ”shouts of dolight in Chino.“ Closing ono'o ooro ond oyoo
to such truths sod trying to got by vith rotioooliostions connot but ro-
sult in docoiving our pooplo.

Is Thorn o Puturo for foroign Sorvico officorol

Possibly vo hovo judgod tho currsnt trooty conclusion procoodings too
horshly. Iut tho foct io thot in tho ontiro couroo of nogotiotiono, it
is difficult to find ovon s singlo ioprint of o foroign oorvico officor'o
hondivork. Undor tho psrlis-ontory syston of govornnont. tho toroign
Ministry is tho spocifiod orgon which is chorgod with tho rooponsibility
for cor-tying out foroim policios oo dotorninod by tho politicol porty
cobinot. Tho 11.8. Donortnont of Stoto hos for sons tins, brondod Jspon‘o
so "o do nothing diplooocy” sad in foct. thst criticioo should bo oppliod
not only to tho foroign sorvico officoro but to tho politicol figuroo
obovo thoo such so tho prion oiniotor ond tho foroign oinistor.

To bo oblo to oointoin continuity through chongos in politicol loodor-
shipo ond roorgonitotions. tho broodoot possiblo oourco of intolligonco
ond o focility to soloct tho host poooiblo intolligonco should bo oodo
ovoiloblo to tho Poroim Ministry so thot crodibility obrood con bo ouo-
toinod. “rhot is tho function of tho Poroign Kinistry ond only tho foroiut
oorvico officoro con fulfill tho rols. For thst purposo. thoy not not
only hovo tho copsbility to ootisfoctorily oxploin Jopon'o position ohrood

but bo givon tho oochinor-y ond povor to clsrify its intontiono to tho poo-
plo to nsrit thoir confidonco.

Loot out-or Prioo hinistor Fukudo tourod ASIAN ond procloinod "l'hs ‘l'hroo
Southooot Aoio Principloo." (Nonilo proclolotion) Counting on this.
tho 0.8. Moooodor to Jopon. lunofiold ooid: "This is tho first diplo-
nstic initiotivo out-ed by Jopon oinco tho vor'o ond." Bo vent on to

soy, ”1978 will sort tho yoor thot Jopsn undo proporotions to stop onto
tho stogo of world politico."

29
FOR OPPICIAI. US! ONLY
POI ORIGIN. US! ONLY

ondowtodly thoro oro ruloo of protocol ond o country which io onwiouoly
in tho block oconooioolly io burdonod with fooro of roprioolo; but Jopon’o
diplouocy con no longor juot drift olong with tho tido ond otooophoro of
ito poriphory. Jopon oo ono of tho grooto in ocononico io bocooing tho
contor of owor growing roquooto for oconooic ond tochnologicol oooiotonco
froo tho outoido world ond tho opportunitioo for noking cootributiono oro
on tho incrouo for tho foroooooblo iuturo. I! Koounigoooki woro copoblo
of coping with ouch roquooto wo would indood bo hoppy but in ito curront
ototo. wo comet cloonoo ouroolvoo of doop oiogiwingo.

“‘l'ho Throo Bwilo” of Foroign Sorvico

mo doyo wo could drool obout gotting rooulto it oll gooo woll hovo long
gono. A Jopon otonding firmly with upon-v.8. in tho bockground. with
Jopon-Chino ond Jopon-lc oo ito logo. with diplonotic rolotiono with tho
Hiddlo Boot ond ASIAN oo ito oroo—thot io how Sonodo ooyo ho onvioiono
Jopon'o diplouocy. But dooo tho curront foroign oorwico hovo o ioroign
rolotiono plon for Jopon. oo poor in noturol rooourcoo. to liwo ond grow
into tho Oo'o‘t A Hoot Como journoliot oodo tho following oboorwotion:
"Optiono connot bo in linitlooo oupply in ioroign rolotiono but tho Jopo-
nooo ooon to bo undor tho inroooion thot thoy oro." It io truo thot tho
intornotionol onwironnont. tho intornol otrongth. ond tho dooootic oituo-
tion oll contributo to noting tho optiono to choooo tron vory norrow in
ocopo.

Diploucy io foundod on cowrolioo. Poroign oorwico officoro oro opt to
couploin thot. "olthough conditiono which ourround diplooocy conoot bo
dividod into block ond whito. (tho pooplo. tho nodio. ond tho politiciono)
oro too iwotiont in thoir donond for (inol oottlononto.” Sinco it io
nor-o1 for dioootiofoction to bo uprooood whonowor o goodly portion of
ono'o doundo oro not occoptod. ooybo tho Ioroign Niniotry io doonod to
bo undor conotont criticion.

lt io for thot vory rouon thot wo look for foroign oorvico oiiicoro to
hovo tho powor of porouuion ovor tho pooplo ond to note offorto to got
tho pooplo'o oupport (or thooo thingo which oro in thoir intoroot.

Sonodo iroquontly nohoo rotoronco to whot ho collo "Tho ‘l'hroo Bvilo of
Voroign Sorvico Officoro” ond ho choroctoritoo thou oo boing "hotoful
toword tho 0881!. do whotovor tho 0.8. tollo thou to ond to South loroo
thoy oro noon ond onooky." Such gonorolixotiooo probobly oron't linitod
to tho 0881!. 0.8.. ond South Koroo; tho foroign oorvico ofiicor who follo
book on roainiocing obout tho old country which io o thing of tho poot
or indulgoo in oolf-oorving octiono hoo no ploco in thio oro of pooplo’o
diplonocy.

Poroin oorvico officoro oro gonorolly cotogoriood oo boing unokillod

ot coping with porlionont or ot gotting olong with politiciono. but if
”diploncy io tho oxtonoion of donootic politico." how an o toroign oor-
wico oiiicor conduct hio diplolotic dutioo in ioolotion of politicol

30
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. 083 ONLY

pertiee. politiciene. end the legieletive body? In recent yeere. the
Foreign hinietry ie finelly getting eround to thinking ehout intreninie-
teriel inroveeente end hee eet up en orgen neeed the "Cepebility Bnhence-
nent Office” in en effort to i-prove ite ieege. 0n eeeuing the poet of
vice foreign ninieter e decede or en ego. ‘l'ekero Shinode (for-erly e
euprene court judge) eeid. "I would like to eolidify doneetic politice
end diplonecy. One cen’t be in foreign eervice without being fenilier
with hie comtry'e politice end people'e thinking." beeed on thet con-
cept. the etructurel reinforcenent now being contmleted cen be feulted
only with being tether beleted.

There hee long been neny enong foreign eervice officere who heve edvoceted
reetructuring the Foreign hinietry end pointing out epecific deficienciee

in poeture end policiee of ice pereonnel. The pointe heve been ergued et
eoee length in the poet eo we will not belebor then here.

The lete liechiro Arite. fether of the current vice ninieter. epeerheeded
e group of foreign eervice officere in the Teieho ere in forging the
"Geinueho Muehin Doehikei" [Society to Heheover the foreign Kinietry].
It reieed ite voice in behelf of 1) Open the foreign hinietry to the gen-
erel public to ellow the influx of quelified pereonnel fro. the outeide

ee e neene of building for the future; 2) Fulfill the ei- of etrengthen-
ing ite foundetion by offering nore lenguege treining end deepen the under-
etending of internetionel eituetione; 3) Fulfill the need for intelligence
end propegende ectivitiee end note it cepeble of coping with chenging in-
tornetionel eituetione end obtein budgetery requirnente (Approprietione)
to echieve theee goele.

Aren't thoee eine end concepte ee eppliceble todey ee they were when they
were voiced? The only difference ie thet currently there eren't eny'for-

eign eervice officere quelified to even perticipete in ouch e ave-Int.
COPYRIGHT: Iungei Shunjuehe 1978

Defence Agency Diecerde Kurieu
Tokyo DWI mum in Jepeneec Nov 78 pp 196-211

[Article by Sekee Keehiwegi: "Anelyeing Orgenieetionel Inpotency Bven with
Conetitutionel Anendnent Enabling Action in Beergency"!

[Text] Ununified Douale Structure

Triggered by the reeimtion of their-en Kurieu of the Joint Steff Council.
there hee recently been e weelth of convereetion piecee involving the de-
fenee egency end the eelf defenee force: Legieletive neeeuree to cope
with en caergency; direct retelietion to eurpriee etteche: low level flight
of Ieritine eelf defenee force eircreft; e creeh in populeted eree. lev-
ing experienced theee verioue "incidente" we begen to wonder whet the
etetue of the defenee egency end eelf defenee force ie. He couldn't help

31
'0! ORIGIN. US! OILY
POI OHIO!“ US! ONLY

but wondor whothot thoy woto hoginnins to ohow ortogonco ood loxnooo in
diociplino.

Tho ool! doionoo fotco hoo o hiototy of 28 yooto oinco it woo founded in
Auguot 1950 oo tho notionol polico tooom fetco. It hoo boon 26 yooro
oinco tho doionoo ogoncy woo foundod. In both inotoncoo. thoy on in
thoir thitd docodo ond wo docidod to uho on invootigotion with o-phooio
on tho ototuo in gonorol and tho concopto undo: which thoy oporoto.

‘l‘ho dofonoo oaoncy'o prodocoooot. polito rooomo, woo foundod hy drowins
tosothor poroonnol iron othor olooonto but ito nuclouo woo poroono hovin;
hod hooo Niniotty ond polico hockgtound hoconoo thio woo not to ho o oili-
tory totco but o polico tooom lorco.

'l'ho firot rooorvo fotco couchdont woo Koikichi Hoouhoro (currontly o
toptooontotivo in tho uppor hoooo) who woo thon govomor of Kosowo protoc-
turo tho ooloction of which hod boon chongod (to. bwtoowctotic ooloction
to opon oloction. Ao .ovotnot. ho hod :ono to Tokyo to proooot o concopt
popot on o Coobinod Shikoku Dovolopoont Plon. Hhilo on thio oiooion ho
woo toppod to hocono tho firot co-ondont. Koito Iloyoohi (currontly
ptooidont of doom Rod Crooo) woo noood chiof inopoctor (currontly collod
thio! of ground oto“ ottico). So ptocticolly oll of tho loodoro hod
Ito-o hiniotry hochgtoundo ood thio trood hoo continwod. A liotins of od-
liniotrotivo doputy chiofo—lhmoo Tau. hiooohi mi. Yoto Koto. Yoohio
Hitouwo. kin "ton-i. Yutoko Shilodo. Tokuyo wao. Ko homo-o (cuttont
odoiniotrotivo vico chiof)-ohowo thot thoy oll hovo hod hono hiniotty.
polico bookstoundo.

Loodoto in unifon woro. in tho boginoins. llooo Hiniotry pooplo hut fro-
ohout 1955, for-or ony ond novy non boson to ooouoo tho pooto ond oinco
thon. with ooo or two oxcoptiono. thl ; hovo oll hod nilitory bookstound.
'l'toditionolly. tenor lilitory pooplc ond tho polico hovo boon ot oddo
and friction botwoon tho unifonod potoonnol ond tho intornol butoowctocy
con ho trocod to thooo ocot tioowoo.

Tho hold thot tho huroouctocy hod on tho uoin ottucturo of tho polico io
oppotontly hoco-in; ohohy; in 1976. Kowloon Toohito bocono tho (irot
vico chio! to hovo hod o Pinonco ﬂiniotty hockgtound ond vico chiof
Hotuyon'o owccoooor io ochodulod to ho Akin Uototi (cuttontly chiof
of dolonoo tocilitioo ogonoy) oloo with o rimco Hiniotry bockxtound.
‘l‘otw lioto (cuttontly chio! of tho bwtoou of occomto) oloo o Iinonco
Hiniotry no. will ptobobly boco-o o vico chiot vio tho poot of doi‘onoo
hwtoou chiof.

Sou-o contoto oto boin; node to tho offoct thot ”it ohoold tooch tho ti-o
whon pooplo nuttwtod in tho dofonoo ogoncy con toko ovor tho loodorohip.”
lwt thoro io otill S or 6 yooto bofoto thooo whooo cotooto hovo boon
lioitod to tho dotonoo ogoncy to Ioturo outticiontly to ooouo tho our
top pooto. ‘l‘hoto oto o Ila-bot of roooono for thio: Rocmitio; boy
unoccunt condidotoo (through pro-otion ou-inotiono) (to- within tho

32
”I OHXCIAI. US! ONLY
POI OHIO!“ US! ONLY

defenae agency did not get underway until Japan fiecal year [JR] 1955:
noreover, there were only fron two to poaeibly five or air qualified
candidatea eelected to take the exanination with. on occaaiona. only one
candidate eucceaefully paaeing it. The top poaition held by anyone who
haa cone up through thie route ia now a defenee comcillor (between a
bureau and eection chief in the pecking order). 0f thoee who were re-
cruited in thie nanner before 1961 are now eection chiefa and thoee prior
to 196‘ are aection chiefa of auxiliary organe. for theee pereona to
reach the poete of bureau chief or vice chiefe will take 5 or 6 nore yeare.
‘l‘hat ia reaeon nﬂer one.

Along thoee who are categorized ae having been nurtured in the defenea
agency. there are thoee who firet carved in other niniatriee or agenciee.
0f theee people. aone are already eerving in euch key poete ae chief of
procurenent headquartere and ae defence bureau chiefa. but there ie
little chance that they will achieve the etetue of vice chief.

The bureaucracy within the defenae agency in etructured to have the li-
nance Minietry delegate to it. ite chief of bureau of accounta. H111 ite
fecilitiea bureau chief. the Foreign ninietry ite councillor for interna-
tional affaire. and the Niniatry of health and welfare ite bureau of
nedicina chief. In theae bureaua. noat of the aection chiefe are aleo
on loan fron thoee varioua ninietriee. It can be eeen that the civilian
contingent in thie etructure. in a looee congle-orate end eince noet of
thoee who are eerving at the agency etill have atringe which tie then to
their parent organization. it ie difficult to get an honeet. independent
coneeneua with the agency.

The nature of the aain atreen of thoee in uniforn ia aleo undergoing
changea; looking at the educational background of the calf defenae force‘a
Ianagerial clean and dividing then into higheet educational level con-
pleteducollege. junior college. higher achool [pup] (including the
forner undergraduate profeeeional echoole). niddle achool [high achool}.
forner nilitery acedeniea. and defenee college—in 1968 the proportiona
were: college. 23.1 percent; junior college. 11.5 percent; higher achool,
25.6 percent; niddle achool. l5.2 percent: for-er nilitary acadeniee.

11 percent: Defenee College. 13.6 percent. The breakdown in m 77 waa
college. 23.6 percent: junior college. 6.8 percent; higher achool. 33.6
percent: Iiddle achool. 15.8 percent; for-er nilitar'y acadeniea. 2.2 per-
cent: Defenee College. 20.3 percent.

Notable in theae figurea 1a the drop to a nere 2.2 percent fro- ll percent
for thoee who had graduated fron the forner nilitary acadeniea and the
increaea in Defenee College graduatee fron 13.6 to 20.3 percent. Initial
graduatee froa the Defenee College have now reached the rank of field
grade and it will not be long before they will be up for gucrel grade
aelection. In other worde. the najority of aelf defenae force officere
are ehifting tron for-er acadesy nen to Defenee College graduatee end in
another 6 or S yeare the leat vantage of for-er eced-y nan will have
veniahed.

33
[OR 0016!". US! ONLY
NR OPTIC!“ "8! ONLY

how do thaae diaappearing "aenior" officera view the current crop of eelf
defenae officera? with regard to the relationa between the uniforaed and
the bureaucratic civiliana in the agency. a certain foraer aanior officer
aeya. “The uniforaed groupa ia an 'oppreaaed racel'” Ila further co-enta:
"In ny day. we fought with our bureaucratic civilian coapatriota but with
it there waa an underlying friendahip between ua. Thinga aeea to be dif-
ferant now. There aeena to be a gradual diaunition of that deep-rooted

friendahip. In the old deya there were occaaiona when a bureaucrat would
cone to the ataff office to atudy for a year or two before returning to

hia poet. Thia doean't happen any more ao the opportunity to eetebliah

friendahipa at that level haa been lessened. horeover. we in unifora need
to believe that we were in the driver'a aeat aa apecialiata which gave ua
confidence in ouraelvea. Recently. the officera are young end aince they
becoae attached to ateff work and expoaed to budgete and defenae plane.

they beco-e adainiatrative officara. They don't have that ailivzary bear-
ingo-and I refer to that in ita favorable aapecto-that they uaei to have."

01d tiae civiliane’ reactiona affirmed theee co-enta. "The uniforaed
people we dealt with in the old daya were all people with coahat experi-
ence. They were people who were well aware that they auat not reveal any
got the unaavory traite attributed to the old ailitary and we autuelly
reapacted our reatrainta. So though we nay have had our confrontationa
and differencaa at work. we were able to get along well aocially an indi-
viduala. Although there ia contact between civiliana and uniforaed per-
aona now. differencea in fundaaental aocial concepta have made easy rela-
tiona batw:en thea aore difficult. I auppoae it ia juat another aign of
the tieea.

In recent tinaa. one often heara that. "The defanae agency haa loet ita
aenae of dedication.” If it haa. one of the reaaone for it in the fact
that enthuaiaan generated by the teak of ahaping the new aalf defenae
force and defame agency gradually waned aa noat of the conatruction work
waa coaplated and thoaa efforta were converted to the leaa “citing daily
Iaintenence and operation dutiea. He wonder if thia apparently weakening
aenae of dedication ia taking ita toll in eapirit de corpa. The aituation
ia aiailar to the difference between the exciting phaae of laying tracka
for a new railroad line and the routine of running traina on than when
that phaaa ia coqlated. In lentioning thia analogy. one ia reminded that
there aea-a to have been an unuaually high incidence of aiahapa on the
auper expreaa linea recently; when one raalirea that the aalf defenae
force and defanaa agency haa only one goal-that of being prepared for

the conplataly mexpected event-due can underatend bow eaaily it could
fall victin to boredo- oi’ paaaing what auat aeee like an interainable
nMer of uneventful daya. It ia an eventuality we do not like to con-
teeplate.

Salaried-en: Any

la the eel! dafenae force a ailitary organization? Thia haa been an iaeue
which haa been argued pro and con ever aince it waa for-ed. The tradi-
tional tone of the w? govern-ant on thia iaaue ia aa followe: ”The aelf

36
NR ORIGIN. “SB OIL!
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dotonoo forco hoo tho duty of coping with on invooion hy o foroign country.
If ouch on ontity in o oilitory (orco. thon tho ool! dofonoo forco in o
nilitory forco. But Choptor II. Articlo 9 of tho conotitution otipulotoo
thot it connot ongogo tho notion in coohot without outhoriootion. So
though it in on inotrunont of oolf dofonoo. it dooo not hovo tho outhority
to onorcioo thot copohility. It io not givon tho outhority of court
oortiol not dooo it hovo opociol oilitory lowo givon to ordinory oilitory
ontitioa. In thio oopoct ot looot. it difforo iron tho uouol oilitory
ontity.

Ho do not intond horo to rohooh tho rothor pointlooo orguonto on to
whothox tho oolf dofonoo forco in o nilitoxy ontity or not. According

to tho govornnont'o dofinition. tho oolf dofonoo forco in on oxtroordinory
Iilitory ontity. But in tho gonorol oonoo. it could ho viowod oo o oili-
tory forco. If it io on oxtroordinory oilitory ontity it in not hocouoo
it dooon't hovo court oortiol righto: wo would ogtoo to ito hoing on m-
uouol nilitory forco if it woro to ho dofinod on boing o oolorylon ouy.

Tho joyrido flight tokon by tho noritino oolf dofonoo fox-co plono during
tho night of 7 Soptodor illuottotoo tho ”oolotynon forco” oopoct. 0n on
inuloo. tho 27 yoor 0ch lot lioutonont who woo ot tho controlo docidod
to toko o look ot Tokyo. ho doubt tho hoouty of Tokyo'o night lighto ond.
hoing o hoooholl fon. oooing tho ho'ilporko tron tho oir thrillod him ond
tho two othor crow noiaoro. Ho con woll undorotond hio foolingo-oono-
thing liko tho oolorynon who tokoo o brook to go to tho novioo or to o
oporto orono. But wo con't hovo tho oolf dofonoo forco onuloting o oinlo
ooloriod clock. Why? Bocouoo in this opocific incident. the flight woo
hoing oodo without running lighto with tho inhoxcnt dongor of croohing
ond hocouoo it woo dono in cloor violotion of troining ordoro. In tho
old doyo. tho oircroft co-ondor would undoubtodly hovo boon ouhjoctod to
o triol by o uilitory court. In thio incidont, howovor. ho woo orrootod
for violoting tho lows of oi: novigotion: within tho unit to which he woo
ottochod. ho woo ounnondod tron hio dutioo for 35 doyo ond tho co-ondot
ond othoro in rooponoiblo pooitiono woro oithor toprinondod or rocoivod
worningo. Tho moltioo ootod out wot: foirly oovoro for thooo doyo.

Thoro woo on oorlior incidont: A pilot whilo on o troining flight oud-
donly folt on urgo to ooko o flying vioit to hio hone town ond ondod up
croohing. Although ouch incidonto which occooionolly occur do not roolly
oorn tho ool! dotonoo forco tho lohol of "oolorynon forco" in tho-oolvco.
thoy do contributo to it. Tho oolf dofonoo forco difforo tron tho lili-
tory of old in both noturo ond ocopo; it nokoo no incursiono into politics
ond in o (orco which oxioto for tho oolo purpooo of hoing proporod for o
hootilo invooion.

In ohout 1966. tho thon chief of tho dofonoo ogoncy ordorod thot oll oolf

dofonoo forco poroonnol ho in uniforn whon counting to or fro- hio duty
ototion. All thooo in tho otoff offico who wore diwioion chiofo or ohovo
woro providod linouoino tronoportotion to com“ ond thoy woro in uniform

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Their subordinates. however. had to travel by bus or streetcar and they
habitually wore civilian clothes and changed into unifore on arrival at
their offices and changed back to civilian clothes to sake the trip hone.

"To naintain the pride oz! being a self defense officer even while col-ut-
ing." it was ordered. "wear the unifora while in transit." The order was
respected while he was in office but after his departure, the mutants
gradually reamed wearing civvies until today alnost all have gone back
to wearing regular street clothes.

When queried, a self defense nan replied: "In the rain. if we are in
uniform. we can only wear a raincoat and nay not use an unbrella. People
around us don't like it when we get on a crowded public transportation
vehicle all wet." we get the iwression that the arrogance displayed by
the old nilitsry nan on street cars is niasing and we must adnit that we
favor the restraints shown by the current defense people. In Heat Germany,
the slogan for nilitary personnel is "civilians in uniform“ with the inali-
cation that they are civilians before they don their uniforns and that they
have the basic rights of freedon to neat. to form groups, and of speech
that all citizens have even while serving in the military. He would like
to have this principle of their being a citizen first applied to the near-
bers of our self defense force too.

The pay scale for Self Defense Force [SDP] officers is a level above the
pay for general govemnent employees for the reason that danger is in-
herent to the occupation. General grade officers are paid 35b.000 to
788.000 yen a month; field grade fron 258.000 to 361,000; and the classi-
cal "flowers" or coepany grade fron 135.000 to 271,000. The bureau chiefs
in the bureaucracy receives froa 276,000 to 620,000 per nonth so though
his treatment and privileges equate to those of the general grade officer.
his actual pay equates to the general officer candidate grade. Pro- this
it can be seen that the uniforn is given eone favorable considerations.

The director general of the Defense Agency has traditionally ordered that.
"The SD? will be strong in spirit" but Director General Kansnaru went a
step further and directed. "Be an SDP that instills fear." It is not clear
what an SD? which is feared describes but it is a fact that the SD?—
generally labeled "the salary-an force"--has not even reached the point

of being cadet ready. Sons years ago, a seagoing tanker named the Yuyo
Hsru went aground and it was decided that it would be towed out to see and
sunk by torpedoes. Then it was found that no direct line torpedoes were
available at Yohosuka and the target practice had to be postponed until

the appropriate weapons were delivered to the scene all the way froa Kure!

A similar situation exists with the Air SDP's air-to—air lissiles. There
nay be sons nerit to the explanation that, "Those situations exist only

because it is peacetime; should an incident occur. we will assulae an ine-
diate reaction posture." But the point of the issue is not in facilities
and hardware but in the training and spirit of readiness in nor-a1 tines.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

There in anple evidence to endorae the euepicion that the ealaryean atti-
tude hee eo per-eated the force that it will be ineffective in tine of
need.

He had an opportunity to obeerve e SAC teat at Cues. An obeervetion plane
fron Techikawa flew into Andereon airbeae on Guan without warning and die-
gorged inepectore of general gradee who ecettered to pilota' briefing
roona and other key poete to conduct teete on the epot. All pilota who
failed to paee the teete were ordered hone.

In coaparieon. the SDP'e inapectiona are nere formalities and alnoet cere-
nonial in nature. Inepection noticee are ieeued in advance giving aeple
tine to prepare for it; in noet inetencee only prearranged locationa are
inapected. Director General Sadenori Yaaanaka once eade a eurpriee inepec-
tion by autoaobile and wae eoundly criticized by the uniforeed officera
on the grounda that "it waen't nice to have the director general tone on

a tour without warning." ﬂee the force hecone accuetooed to being a eelery-
an army?

Big Ship. Big Gun Principle

It in a well known fact that the big ehip. big gun advocatee were in the
najority in the pre-wer era. It ie aleo generally accepted that that led
to the conetruction of the world'e largeet 69.000 ton Ya-ato and Hueeehi
which were armed with SS-cn gune.

The poetwar Haritiae SDP doee not. of courae. have either Lig ehipe or
big gune: ite biggeet veeeel ie the 4700 ton Heruna-cleee equipped with
5-inch gune. He cannot guerentee. however. that there in no trend toward
the big ehip. big gun principle. The Maritiee 80? once program“ an
8,000 ton heliport equipped eecort veeeel but it wee ecrapped in favor of
building two 6.000 ton heliport equipped eecort veeeele on the grounde

that deeage could dieperee more broadly where there were two veaeele in-
etead of one.

The Air 801’ will shortly be armed with 100 P-lS'e cleaned ee the heat and
met modern of jet fightere at a coat of 7.5 billion yen each. Appropria-
tion for :20 early warning aircraft hee aleo been requeeted. In mari-
eon with the firet jet fightere obtained by the Air 80? at 110 Iillion
per plane. the coat of the P-15 hee increaeed 68-fold!

He can underetand the uniformed eleeent'e deeire to procure the beat
available in the world'e ereenel of weapone an that the defenee poeture
can be neintained noet effectively. But the constitution etipuletee that
our defenee potentiale nuet be kept to the eeeentiel nininue and the LDP
government hee held defenee coete to under 1 percent of the groea national

product. A broad interpretation of eecurity guaranteee. it ehould not be
eeeentiel that we have the beat and the noet expeneive weapone in the
world in our areenal.

37
POR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
NR OWICMI. US! ONLY

Recently. relative to the eecurity guaranteee ieeua. the concept of crieie
aanageeent hae been attracting attention. The aalient pointa of crieie
unegeeent are: l) Crieia prevention meaeuree; 2) Energency meeeuree to
cope with a crieie ehould one ariae; 3) lieaeuree to cope with a eituation
which haa no any eolution. lneofer aa they pertain to Japan. we wonder
whether we ahouldn't concentrate on ”crieea prevention neaeuree" ae the
tune of aeauring our eacurity.

Magic Horde

The eechanian with which the independent action of the military ie kept
under wrape and politice given authority over nilitary effeira ia civilian
control. At the time the $0? wee created. the Jepaneee could not ewallow
the concept of the 0.5. type civilian control and Colonel Kowaleky of the
GHQ wrote that he had a hard tine eelling it to Director General Haeuhara
end his aubordinatea.

We are under the impreaeion that the "Alerican etyle civilian control" ie
not coupletely underatood even in ita home grounde. the 0.5. In 1969 a
big reorganization of the national defenae eetabliehaont wee uni-"taken.
At that tine Ferdinand Eberetaadt who participated in a managerial capa-
city in the national defence co-ittee of the Hoover Co-iaeion. aaid in
a apeech at the Naval Academy at a later date. “Civilian control in e aort
of a mythical expreaeion.... Nobody knowe what it means." It is ironic
that he who had made the greateet effort in eetabliahin; civilian control
throughout all of the military atructure and waa the one peraon more than
any other who ehould have known the definition of civilian control, wae
the one who made that admiaeion. It in not unreaeonable. therefore. that
its leaning eluded thoee who were involved at the time the SD! wee fomded.
He cannot eay that even today ita meaning ia fully underatood in Japan.

Although the expreeeion. civilian control. ie toaaed around freely an if
everybody knew what it meant. it ie yet to be firlly defined. In a paper
authored by Lincoln and Jordan who were inatructore at the Military heade-y
at Heat Point in the 0.8.. it waa atated that. "all people bow their heade
in reapect (to civilian control) but it ie a holy cow that hae never been
clearly defined." The following premieee that were aet forth by Louie
Smith in hie "The Strength of American Democrecy" are. however. accepted
by noet echolara:

l) The head of the atate ie a civilian and repreeente the majority of the
people; he ie reeponeible to the people and may be uneeated through exiat-
in; legal or political channele:

2) The conender of the military forcea who in a profeeeional military
men. in under the co-and of a civilian politician;

3) Military related crane and hence operationa conducted by military
pereonnel are under the direction of authorized civiliane who will coordi-
nete military related plane at all etagee; the civilians ao authorized
ehall be eedera of the reaponaible executive branch;

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICMI. I188 ONLY

A) The repreaentativoa elected by the people (neabero of Congreoe)

ehall dotornine the etato of var. the allocation of (undo to achieve lili-
tory objectiveo (eppropriatione). human reoourcoa required and general
neeauroe to be taken under enorgoncy aituatione and aointain apociiic

and general control over thoae who are to be held rooponeiblo for i-plo-
eontation (legielative control):

5) The judiciary io in a poaition to authoriae the military to eooune
reaponaibility for the protection of an individual'o baeic righto guaran-
teed hia under the denocrecy (judiciary control).

The baeio for civilian control ee doocribed by Louie 8eith ie being ful-
iillod by law in Japan at the proaont tino. Chapter V of Article 66 of
the conatitution etatee: ”The prino niniator and other niniotere of atate
Iuot be civiliana.” And the authority for muprene co-ander of the SD?
reato in the prine liniotor repreoenting the cabinet (Article 7 of Self
Dofonee Force Ragulationo) and that the prine niniotor io a civilian.

The defonae agency to oubordinate to the cabinet and ito chief co-ando
the SDP mdor tho direction of the prine ninieter (Article 8 of SD? Regu-
lationo). The director general of the Defenee Agency io a ainioter of

the national govern-ent and io a civilian.

Additionally. the following aoouree functiono to be under civilian con-
trol:

1he office of Parlianentory Vice Hinieter of the Defenee Agency in filled
by a “or of the Diet and io a civilian. Ilia nojor duty io to keep the
director general adviaed on political nature; the poet of the agency'e
adninietrative vice ninioter io oeeigned to a civilian official of the
detonae agency; he ie reeponoible for adainiotrative nattero of the De-
fonoo Agency and ie in an odvieory capacity to aeoiot the director-
general'a coo-and authority over the $07.

The officeo of Counsellor and of the Internal Bureaue are mder civilian
control and oven thoae who are outoide of the agency but have dutieo
pertaining to it ouch ao the National Defenae Comcil and the Finance

ﬂinietry vhich ban a check on budgetary uttere, all cone under civilian
control.

In the final analyoio. houever. the ultimate in civilian control ie the
Diet vhich ie the organ which controla the lake-up of the cabinet. ‘l'o
legielate on defonee uttcro and defenoe appropriation. it hae the
authority of overaight and deciaion noting. It alao controlo the cabinet
in eetebliohing baeic defense policies.

In ouch diveroe vaye. the SD? ia under civilian control in both theory
and lav. inactive inplenentetion. however. in the ieouo.

‘l'here have been occaaionol incidento where civilion control he been vio-
lated. The noet recent of thoae wee the otetenent node by for-er Chair-an

39
FOR OHICIAI. US! OIL?
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Joint Steff Council Kuriou: "In the event of e eurprieo ettack."
oaid Kuriou. "the SD? ney take ectione which euporcodo the low." 0n the
grounde thet thio infringed on the civilian control ieeue. the Choir-an
woo relieved of hie dutiee. Other emlu of violatione include the
Hitouye Plan iooue of 1963; evacuetion of the Toehikowe ioeuo of 1972:
the ioouo involving the tranoporting of notoriol to Okinewe which erooo
in tho eeeo year: and the utter of eeouning prior righto to opproprie-
tione for tho Fourth Defence Plan.

Reviewing thio oorioe of incidento hoving pertinence to nonconfornity with
civilian control. noot were token up by tho Diet and could be uood eo evi-
dence that civilian control in functioning effectively. They do point up
doubt no to whether it io being effectively eppliod by tho diroctor gonerol
of tho Dofenoo Agency within hie egency end whether the prine oinioter in
executing tho euthority given his in a proper nanner.

Tenure of Director Gonerol of Dofenoo Agency

There could be ooveral reooone for tho foilure of tho director general of
tho Dofeneo Agency to fully iepleeent tho control. Ono io thet hio tenure
in office io too ohort for his to fully groop the concept. He believe
that thio point ie well token.

Counting fron Keikichi Heeuhoro (who wee then given the title of Chief

of the Police Roeorve Force) in 1950 when the proeont SD? woo founded.

the current inn-bent. Shin Konenru. io the 34th director generel. In
other worde. there hove been 36 chiefo in 28 yooro, noting the average
tine in office of obout 9 end e helf loathe. Thie ie on eetounding figure.

when e new Illl tekoo office. the vice ninietero and veriouo bureeu chiefo
brief hi: on their roepective dutieo. Of couree. thio ie nor-o1 procedure
in not only the Defonee Agency but in ell govern-ontel niniotrieo and
egonciee. But theee briefingo went the entire dey for obout e month.
Even then, there io no way thet ell ho ohould know obout the egoncy con
be ere-ed into the newcoooro hood in thet period of tine, porticulorly
if he hoe hed no experience or knowledge of uttero pertaining to the
Defenee Agency. With thio in mind, the briefero try to give him o brood
bruoh picture ot firot end get into nore deteilo et e leter dete. ‘l'he
briefing elenonto ere opt to conoune coneideroble tine oinco they ore
enxioue to give no Iuch infer-lotion obout their functione oo poooible.

Specielized lenguege or jargon ie inherent in nettere perteining to the
military or dofenoe. Thio coueo for the ordinery pereon to oay, “I juet
can't underotand nilitory uttero" ie frequently due to thio languoge
berrier. when Nooki Niohinure becone director gonerol. he heerd the ex-
preooion HAP frequently in the briefingo. no hed eeouned thet the brief-

ere were referring to lope of o geogrophicel neture end it weon't until
coneideroble tine had elepeed thet he wee node ewere of the feet thet it
referred to the U.8.'e Iilitory eoeiotanco plenl

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
YO! OFFICIAL I!!! ONLY

“hon ouch thingo oro tohon into conoidorotion. tho onount of tino tho

now non dovotoo to otudying hocoooo o Iootor. 0! oil thooo who hovo hold
tho poot. Sodonori Yooonoko probobly out in ooro tint otudying thon ony
othor. Not only woo ho o diligont otudont ot tho offico but ho dovotod
ouch of hio tino ot hooo trying to oboorh dolonoo rogulotiono ond othor
rotoronco notoriol noting it poooiblo for hio to nootor tho booic knowlodgo
in o comototivoly ohort poriod.

Tho lotor Diroctor Gonorol Sonouko Pujiodo ronoino in our nonor'y oo o
poroon who groopod tho buoinooo in o ohort tino to tho point whoro ho could
obly roopond to quootiono ot Diot hooringo. Honding hin tho oubjoct noto-
riol for o hooring woo outficiont for his: to bono up on it ond do on od-
niroblo job to on ooooohlogo which woo ottondod by tow if ony poroono iron
tho oloctoroto. Ilo woo, to hio offico. on "oxcollont otndont booo."

hoot, howovor. took o long tioo to loorn thoir job ond ot hooringo tho
uouol rooponoo woo "l hovon't boon on tho job vory long nod will hovo o
govornnont'o oxport on tho oubjoct rcopond to you." 'l'horo hovo boon octo-
oiono whon inportont nottoro woro undor diocuooion. on moporotod oppooi-
tion “Or would protoot thot. "Ho con't nor-it o oituotion in which tho
cogniunt niniotor io unoblo to hovo onoworol”

Along tho 36 who hovo hold tho poot, thoro hovo boon oooo ropootoro.
Koikichi Hoouhoro oorvod throo tinoo ond Noohi hiohinuro ond Noon-i hold
hovo ooch oorvod twico. But ropotitivo oorvico dooo not nocoooorily noho
tho poroon o votoron: Koikichi hiohinuro hod to rooign ovor tho incidont
involving tho collioion of on All Jooon Airlinoo olono ond on 8|)? oircroft
ond ho woo guilty of noting o nloototoncnt; Nooki lllohimto hod to otop
down bccouoo of o foot-in-nouth incidont.

lt nor-lolly tokoo ohout o you for o poroon to loan tho run-mu of tho
dutioo of tho diroctor gonorol. Noodlooo to ooy. 9 ond o holf nontho io
ouch too ohort o ton «on Iron loorning only tho concopt o! civilion con-
trol. A 3 yoor ton ohould bo tho niniun. It io roportod thot for-or
Prino Hiniotor Tonoko onvioionod tho nurturing uporioncod diroctot gon-
orolo by forming o pool of two or throo non with good potontiolo ond hovo
thon oooI-c tho poot of o rototing booio. Thin noy ho o woy to fulfill
tho nood for apericnco but wouldn't tho opplicotion of tho v.3. oyoton
to which o civilion io oooimcd to tho poot for o poriod of 6 or S yooro
ho o doring but good oltornotivo plon?

Intro-Agoncy Intornohip

Civilion control in onhoncod by thooo who oooiot tho dimctor gonorol
including tho odniniotrotivo vico niniotor ond tho hnroou chiofo of tho
Dofonoo Agoncy, tho chiofo of otoff of ground. noritino, ond oir SDl'o. tho

choir-on of Joint otoff council ond othoro. 0n roviowing tho voriouo do-
ficicncioo of tho poot. o nuobor of tho- con bo trocod to tho orooo liotod
obovo.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
M ONICIAI. US! Oh“

we hove elreedy nentionod thet the officee end bureeue in the Defonoo
Agency frequently hove overlepping or duplicetive fmctiono. Heny of
thooe who cone to the Agency froo the police or other einiotrieo end egen-
cioo. otep right into bureeu chief poote. Pooeibly thooe people could
loern tho functiono of their new jobo if given 2 or J yoere but in experi-
once. they cennot coepeto with the cereer non in the Agency. Any poroon
who ie to eeoune the poet of edniniotretive vice einioter ohould be loved
up froo the Agency'o Dofenee lureeu beceuoe tho eree of thet burceu'e
cognieence includoo the following Ieking it the noot inportent one in the
Agency: 1) Hettero perteining to the booico end edjuotoento of defenoe
end protection; 2) Hettero pertoining to the beeic noweoonto of the son
3) Kettero perteining to the beoic otructure, coopleoent. orgenieetion.
equipnent. end diopooition of the ground. eeritino. end eir SDP'o; 6) hot-
tore perteining to the procurement end colletion of reference end intelli-

gence uteriolo; 5) Hettero perteining to tho beoico of treining of the
SDP.

Reoponoibility for ouch eejor functiono eo the procureeent of both dooootic
end foreign eilitery intelligence end SD? plenning end treining io concen-
treted in thet bureou. Penilierity with noot of the oooentiolo of the
Defonoe Agency therefore beconoo inherent to the function of the chief of
the Dofenoo Buroeu. He cennot but feel thet e peroon who trieo to func-
tion eo the edniniotretive vice einioter without hewing been chief of the
Dofenoo lureeu will lock confidence in thie nojor eree et leeot.

Another eiogiwing we herbor io in tho educetionel end nurturing eopoct of
the nenegeriel peroonnol. The executive cleoe people ere ohown reopect
beceuoe they ere eeoignod conoidereble rooponoibilitioo end euthoritieo.
Upon gredueting fro- college. they hed to pooo upper grede ominetiono
end. if picked up by the Defonoe Agency. opend e yoer'e intornehip. Dur-
ing thio period of internehip. they were eooigned bookkeeping end reference
noteriel collection tookeo-literelly. e period of on-the-job treining-obut
once they hed coopletod thie tern of oervitude. they were eooigned to e
working poet. tor one-ple. in the Defense Section of the Defenoe lluroeu.
one my be peired with e ocnior nonber to ouporvioo one of the ground.
neritine or eir ouboectiono. hie dutieo will include checking end col-
leting plene end epproprietione dreftod by the roeponoiblo eteff office.
The pcroon who propered the drefto io uouelly e peroon of ooro experience
who io probebly e firot or eecond field grede officer. Thio officer will
eok the new non to cone to hie deok where the oubject et hend will be
expleined to hie oo it nuet be oeid thet the greenhorn io being hended
conoideroble euthority right froe the otert.

At the one tine, it cennot be denied thet thio procedure which hoe been
in effect oinco the inception of the Dofenee Agency, eroueoo e cortein
degree of entegonion in the civilien towerd the uniformed non. But how
con this pottern be revioed? In other einietrioo end egencieo. oven the
key exocutiwoo in the Netionel Roilweyo for inotence. otertod out on ticket
oellcro end trein conductoro for the reeeon thet the future executive
ohould be feeilier with the work-e-doy nen'o problem.

62
POI! OFFICIAL 08! MY
ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ho aro of tho opinion that thia practioo ohould ha appliod to tho Dofonoo
Aponcy. Ho holiowo that tho oxocutivo candidato ohould otort hio coroor
with a yoar or two'a axporionco in tho dofonoo forcoa or in tho otoff
officoo oa port of hio nurturing procooa.

until about 196:. night watchoo in tho Dofonoo Money officoo woro ao-
ounod oololy hy unifornod paraonnol. But hocauao thoro won a fooling that
tho civiliono ohould ho trainod to copo with all prohlou on a 26-hour
haoio two young caroor non woro aaaignod thoao watchoa on a rotating hooio.
Thio, too. ohould ho lookod on aa part of tho caroornon’o oducation.

Rofonation of National Dofonoo Comcil

Tho national Dafanoo Comcil playa a najor rolo in offoctinp civilian con-
trol hacauoo whon tho priao niniotor io confrontod with a nood to obtain

o conaonouo of tho pooplo. thoro aro nany iwortant caaoo in which tho
National Dafonoo Council'o conplianco hoconoo oooontial.

Tho National Dofonao Council in comoood of tho prino niniotor. tho for-
aign niniator, financo niniotar, diroctor gonorol of dofonoo agoncy. and
tho diroctor gonoral of tho ocononic planning agoncy. Ho hawa roforrod
to tho iwortanco of tho National Dafonoo Council oovoral tinoo but wo
cannot atata that it hoo fulfillod ito rolo to uni-u- offoctiyonooo. Ho
oay thia hocouoo for ono thing. it hao not on an avorago of only two or
thrao tinoo o yoar. Though wo roalizo that tho adorn carry a hoavy
ochodulo noting it difficult for thou to find tho tiao. but convorooly.
it would ooon to indicato that thoy do not attach tho noritod priority
to thoao nootinpa.

Unfortunatoly. tho Council noon to linit itoolf to approving noaouroo
introducod by tho print niniator and concorno itaolf alnoot oxcluaivoly

to nattor'o portaining to tho Dafonao Money. Tho Council ohould ho a body
which addrooooo itoolf to broad ioouoo and to coordinating yariouo aocu-
rity noaouroo rathor than confino itaolf to Dofonao Money rolatod nattoro.

Tho National Dofonoo Comcil hao an adainiotrativo huroau in which com-
oollora fron tho varioua niniotrioa oorvo in oubordination to tho huroau'o
chiof. Thay oro thoro for tho purpooo of adjuotin; difforoncoa which
ariao anon; tho niniotrioo and agancioo. Though that in tho noninal fuc-
tion, in roality. thoir dutioo noon to ho linitod to acting on channolo
through which infomtion fro. thoir paront niniotry io raquootod and
procurod. Tho counoolloro do not noon to oxorcioo thoir authority to of-
fact any adjuatnonta or chanson in thoir paront niniatrioo.

Should tho Rational Dofcnoc Council ho rcotructurod and if no. how? Tho
Iajority opinion indicatod that it ohould ho noldod in tho ohapo of tho

0.8. 'a National Security Council. The najority opinion provailod and
otorting with tho 0.8. otylo civilian control concopt. Japan baa copiod
tho 0.3. in tho fonation of tho conpact Rational Dofonoo Oomcil.

b3
POI! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
NR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

In obout 1.953 tho Ioiohin Potty took on tho Socurity Agoncy-tho fororunnor
of tho Dofoooo Agoncy—vhich woo controllod by tho fol-nor Ilooo hiniotry.
ond odvocotod tho ootobliohooot o! oooothing ohin to tho 0.8.‘o Notionol
Socurity Council which includoo pooplo vith civilion bockgromd. lt io
ropottod thot tho bohind tho ocooo ouppottor of thio concopt voo tho
hottori group coopoood of non of tho old only ond hoodod by Colonol Ilot-
tori. Tho Liborol Potty, though cloioing thot thoro woo no tool nood for
ony kind of on otgoniootion. did not objoct to tho fox-notion of o oull
coopoct unit. In tho originol Notionol Dofonoo Council plon. tho group
woo to includo oooo knovlodgooblo poroono {too civilion ronko. ‘l'hio por-
tion of tho ptopoool voo dolotod by on oooodnont in tho Diot. Sinco thon
thoro hovo boon oovorol ottoopto Iodo by oooboro of tho Dooocrotic Sociol-
iot Potty ood othoro. to includo civiliooo but thoy hovo boon orguod down
on tho gtoundo of oocurity rioko ond for tho roooon thot tho Cobinot ohould
bo hold rooponoiblo for notionol policy.

Tho Notionol Socurity Council in tho ”.3. oporotoo undo: tho Notionol
Socurity Act oo onondod in 1947 ond in 1949. lto togulor oooboro oro tho
prooidont, vico prooidont. tho ooctotory of ototo ond tho oocrotory of
dofonoo. Ao odviooro to thooo (our. tho diroctor of control intolligonco
ond tho chio! of tho joint chiofo of otoff ottond oo oooignod nodoro ond
tho oido to tho prooidont (currontly lrzooinoki) ond tho prooidontiol
oocrotory (curtontly Dovid Horlin) oloo porticipoto.

Tho Notionol 8ocutity Council oooioto tho prooidont to coordinoto donoo-
tic. foroign. ond nilitory policioo for olooth ilploncntotion of oilitory
ond othor oxocutivo functiono to guorontoo notionol oocurity. Hon dofini-
tivoly, it hoo tho following dutioo oo dixoctod by tho ptooidont:

l) Bvoluotoo ond ootinotoo tho curront oilitory otrongthuboth ovott ond
covert—of tho ".5. to oooiot or worn tho prooidont on objoctivoo, offi-
ciol iotomtionol orronguonto. and of rioko ond chongoo involvod.

2) Anolyzo notionol oocurity policy oottoro which ooy pottoin co-only
to ooro thou ono of tho voriouo doportnonto ond ogoncioo ond odvioo tho
prooidont of tho ovorlopping foctoro.

3) Roport to or odvioo tho prooidont on hio opociol roquoot or ovon vith-
out hio muoot on ito-o doonod opproprioto.

Couporod to our Notionol Dofonoo Council. the otmcturc of tho Notionol
Socurity Comet]. io conoidorobly lugor. It io cowoood of noorly 90
profoooionolo (our dofonoo council hoo obout o dozen) ond ito dutioo (di-
vidod in tivo groupo ouch oo Buropo, Aoio. otc.) oro broken down into
plono onolyoio. progro-ing ood odoiniotrotion. It hoo two otondiog coo-
nittooo. tho co-ittoo on policy (co-pond of oocrotorioo of doport-onto
ond choirod oltomtoly by tho ooctotorioo of ototo ond dofonoo) ond tho
conittoo on opociol oituotiono (choirod by brootinoki and hoo control
of outgoncy oituotiono ond intolligonco function). ‘l'hoto oro. oddi-
tionolly. oubco-ittooo which on coopoood of oix doportoont undo: oocro-
totioo.

‘6
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
[OR 0'71““. 088 DULY

Pacontly. tho National Sacurity Oomcil uao inatruontal in putting ito

offorto to o popor callod tho PM No 10 vhich haa drawn vorldvido atton-
rion. 1t containa an analyaio of tho nilitary balanco botvoon tho loot

and tho Hoot and of thoir roapactivo atratopioo. Thio papor—a portion

of which vaa lookod to tho praoo—vaa diaouaood by tho Council and acti-
vatad an a "Proaidontial Ordor."

Tho roal povor in tho National Socurity Council appoaro to bo Proaidontial
Adviaor Irrorinaki. Ilo ia not an official Council “or but in hia capa-
city or proaidontial advioor and aloo aa choir-an oi tho apocial co-ittoa.
ho in acting ao an ovorall control oiiicor. lrrorinahi in tho iirat poroon
to ooo tho prooidant ovary norninu lrroxinoki‘a offico in tho voot wing

of tho onocutivo oﬂico building io juat acrooa tho hall iron tho proai-
dont'a offico.

Tho officiont and offactiva functioning of tho 0.8. Notional Socurity Coun-
cil ia attributabla to tho oupport it can call on iron a pool of axporta
not on1y in govornnont but iron tho acadonic. buainooo and othor aroaa in
tho civilian anvironnont. It in roportod that a "organisation ond ro-
otructurin; of tho Japonoao National Dofonoo Council in udor conoidoro-
tion. Although no do not nood ona at tho ocopo of tho 0.8.. thoro io
undoubtodly nuch that no could draw on iron it. porticularly iron tho
otondpoint of concopt.

I-aturo Doionao Concopt

In analyzing tho Dofonao Asoncy, paraonnol in. of courao. an iqortant
factor for conaidoration. Tho highoat priority. hovavor. Iuat bo givon
to tho quootion of what typo of o dofanoo p1an ohould bo concoivod and
what vould bo tho oppropriato ocopo of tho otructuro to inloaont it.
Thoro ha. of courao. alroady bocn a nountain of papora writtan and pub-
liahod on thooo aubjocto. what vo can oay at thia point in that if tho
provioiono of our curront poaco conotitution arc to bo odhorod to. vo
Iuot think in tor-o of dotinin; tho mini-\- doionoo nunc1o roquirod to
aaauro thooo proviaiona not only in torn of nilitary nooda but on a
such broador ocopo including natural rooourcoo. onorgy. and foraip rola-
tiona. Thia typo of broad thinking for uocurity ia fino11y catching on
an boin; oooontial but haa not yot boon inplanontod ao a national policy
concopt.

Up to now. tho Dotonao Agoncy haa propoood fiva dofonoo piano and thoy
havo boon iwlountod aftor boins approvod by tho sworn-oat. Thooo havo
boon thc Pirot Dofonao Plan («bracing 3 yoara. JP! 1958-1960); Socond
Dotonoo Plan (aponning S yoara. JP! 1962-1966); Third Dofonoo Plan (for
tho 5 yoaro. JP! 1967-1971); [Pourth Dofonoo Plan (for tho 5 yoaro.

JP! 1972-1976]; and tho najor dofonao plan (vhich var launchod in m
1977). Tho lirat plon covorad o 3-yoar upon and tho oubuquont oocond.
third. and fourth voro for S yoara oach but tho practico of putting a
tino limit on tho plana vaa abandonod vith tho ono which wont into oiioct

b5
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI ORIGIN. US! ONLY

in JP! 1977 in favor of a fornula for drawing up plana on an annual [fiacal
yaar] baaia. ‘l'ha nav progran vaa inlananaad bacauaa coaa of gooda infla-
aim and incraaaa in pay acalaa nada ia inouibla an adhara ao prograna
drawn up aavaral yaara in advanca. Planning. aharafora. vaa changad ovar
an a fiacal yaar baaia. la la an adapaaaion of aha ayaaan in affaca in
aha naaional dafanaa budgaaing in aha 0.8. callad aha rolling budgaa aya-
an or aha PPIS (Planning. Progra-ing. Iudgaa 8yaaan).

Up to now. aha dafanaa plana vara gancrally known by ahair aobriquaa:
"niliaary hardwara ahopping liaa.“ 1a nuaa ba adniaaad ahaa ona could
find liaala in aha poraiona nada public. on concapaa on how an copa viah
vhaa aiauaaion. Buapaiona could ba found in aha aaaaanana in aha Bacond
Dafanaa Plan which includad a aaaaanana ao aha affaca ahaa. ”To copa viah
localiaad vara viah convanaional vaapona": and aha non of aha axpraaaion.
"rapal" for aha firaa aina in aha Third Dafanaa Plan in aha paaaaga uhich
raad. ”hava on hand dafanaa povara ao affacaivaly rapal an invaaion.“ ‘l'ha
Pour-ah Dafanaa Plan includad a aaaaanana ao aha affaca ahaa. "‘lha goal ia
ao hava aha capabiliay ao noaa affacaivaly and nut afficianaly copa in
an want of an invaaion viah convanaional vaapona on a localiaad uarfara
acala." ‘l'hia ia approxiuaaly aha aa- in inaana ahough uaing diffarana
vorda aa ahaa conaainad in aha Sacond Dafanaa Plan.

‘l'ha nain ahruaa of dafanaa planning undarvana a cowlaaa changa in aayla
in JP! 77 viah aha advana of aha ”Dacia Dafanaa Povar Concapa." Wca
quippad aa ao vhaahar "ahara could ha a dafanaa concapa viahoua any baaia.”
bua aha axplanaaion in ovar aiqlificaaion. ia ahaa aha nav concapa ia ao
nainaain a baaic aarucaura for dafanaa adaquaaa only for paacaaina (ouch
a for nor-a1 patrol and raacaion. aarucaural baaaa for co-and. co-Ini-
caaion, aranaporaaaion. raacua work. aupply and guard duty) which could
for. aha fondaaion for grovah aa naadad.

Ivan aha concapa of coping viah invaaion haa undargona a changa: Hharaaa
it had baan naraly ao raaiaa ahraaaa in our paripharal araaa. aha thinking
nov ia baaad on a diviaion baavaan inaana and capabiliay on aha concept

of “pracluding ahraaaa baaad on daaarranca." lulananaaaion of aha nav
concapa vill ba baaad along aha following thinking:

”Thara ia no changa in aha concluaion ahaa inaanaa can changa aaaily but
an difficult ao diacarn. ‘l'ha vaaanaaa of global influanca and aha
graviay of aha raaulaa, hovavar. aca aa inharana brahaa againaa aha nak-
ing of fraavhaaling changaa in inaana. llaaiaaanca ao changa ia. furahar-
nora, in diraca proportion to iaa acopa.

”Undar ahia concapa. aha ahraaa of our dafanaa aarucaura ahould noa ba
calculaaad aolaly on aha baaia of capability of coping viah all anarganciaa
bua ahaa iaa paacaai-a aarucaura ba wall balancad viahoua having any vul-
narablo apoaa in iaa daploynana ao ahaa paacaaina vaach can ba adaquaaaly
nainaainad. Inaaaad of trying ao fulfill aha aradiaionally aapraaaad goal
of "coping with localiaad varfara viab convanaional vaapona" bua build a

66
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 08! 0|!“

capability of prodotornining tho oito, purpooo. and duration of tho
locolitod conflict and havo o otructuro capoblo of coping within thooo
confinoo.

”Tho noat difficult to ba forowonod aro thooo ninor incuraiono: thoy aro
thooo which roquiro no largo ocalo proporation but oro porpotrotod oo
ourprioo attocho and oro ovor in o vary ohort poriod of tilt. 'l'ho Iain
thruot of our thinking ia to bo proporod for juat thio typo of ovont at
all tinoa.“ (froo Dofonao Uhito Popor. ”Dofonoo of Japan” of July 1978)

Though thio oxplanotion portoining to thio typo of throat io put in noro
mdorotandablo languogo than proviouoly. oinco tho fact ronaino that it
io orcoadingly difficult to mcovor tho othar party'o intont boforo tho
fact. tho troditional nothod of nintaining a capability to copo with tho
unoxpoctad at ony tino and any ploco nuot alao bo a built-in factor.

Thoro in no doubt that tho thing callod tho booic dofonoo otructuro con-
copt io on offopring of "Dofonoo Strongth in Poocotino” by Tohuyo Kubo
(for-or Chiof of Dofonoo luroou. vita niniotor for administration of tho
Dofonoo Agoncy. and currontly tho chiof of od-iniotrotion of tho notional
dofonoo council). Tho popor woo probobly proporod to quoll tho mooainooo
uprooood by oppooition party “on oo woll oa out of our pooplo to

tho offoct that. ”juat how for not Jopon‘o dofonoo copobilitioo bo in-
crooood?" and to ohow tho oxtont roquirod in poocotino. 'lhoro io oqlo
ovidonco that nuch offort wont into ito proporotion but rogrottobly thoro
oro oono foulto in tho logic oqloyod.

locouoo of tho oovorol provioiono oto-ing fro. Articlo 9 of our conoti-
tution. our dofonoo cannot contain woapono ouch oo tho mm which could
havo a dotorront foctor. Oura io o nilitory otructuro uniquo in tho world
in that it io otrictly linitod in fmction to dofonoo of honaland. locouoo
it in uniquo in function. o uniquo oporationol philooophy Iuot bo food.

The Kubo concopt did not find approval along tho unifornod non; thoir
rooooning woo tho intinidotion io tho foundation on which all countrioo
build dofonoo otructuroo ond whoro it io iqoooiblo to forotoll o poton-
tiol ontogoniat'o intont [tho concopt of o puroly dofonoivo otructuro io
not foooiblo.)

Tho oorvicooon'o diooffoction woo put in wordo whon for-or Chiof of Joint
Stoff Kuriou ototod thot in tho ovont of o ourprioo ottock. "tho 30?
ohon toko oupro-logol action.” Thin could oignal tho oorvicoaan'o
brooking oway fro. tho fruotroting ”opprooood roco" ototo which thoy hovo
boon onduring.

Coordinatod Solf Dofonoo Concopt

Tho concopt which tho oorviconon hnwo boon nurturing io boginning to toko
oolid ohopo. ‘l'ho Dofonoo Agoncy with tho Joint Staff Council taking tho

‘7
M O'HCIAI. 053 DULY
POI ONICIM. I18! OJLY

lead. prepared two papere: a "Coordinated Betinate of the situation“ (on
e fiacal year and nediun range beeee) and e "Coordinated Defenee Plen" (on
a (local year. nediu range. and long range beeea). ‘l'he for-er ie ee

the title euggeete. en analyeia of the nilitary aituation in the countriea
which ere peripheral to Jepan. and the Coordinated Defence Plan ia that
plan which would be inlenanted in an energency aituation (under which de-
fenee and naintenance of etability actione are ordered).

Since both of theae papere are given top eecret cleaeification and ere not
available to any except eone epecifiad pereona in the Defenae Agency. the
contenta are not known. He inagine. however. that actione to be taken
eubaequent to the outbreak of an enargency aituation (0-day) are delineated
in coneiderable detail. heedleee to eay. the actione would be beeed on the
preniee that there wae an incident. Thie eituation ie the crux of the argu-
nent for legalizing i-ediate action in the event of an incident.

of the varioua dutiae aaeigned to the Haritiee 80?. the Iejor function ia
antieubnarine warfare (ASH): ehould an incident be perpetreted. one can
inagine that the antagoniet would undertake a blockade of our herbore and
baye and peripherel aeae with ninee requiring that our tranaport flaete
be eecorted and protected and all nerchent veaeelt' novenente be put under
regulated control.

The Air 80!? would. in en energency. have to undertake control of air navi-
gation and the Ground SD? eaeuna reeponeibility for overland traneporta-
tion and co-unicetion. It in not difficult to eeauc that plane for theac
fmctione are contained in the cleaeified doctnenta.

Should an energancy ariee. the actione of the three SDP'a would be coordi-
nated under an operational concept to be inlaented by the Coordinated
Defenae Plan.

Viewing it free that etandpoint. it would aeen that in the event of a
hoetile incident. the Ground. Maritina. and Air SDl'e would carry out their
operatione enoothly. But we don‘t think that that in neceeearily eo for
the following reaeon: The liaritioa SD? believee that ehould defenee on
the high eaee be broken. it ie finiehed and in the ease wey. the Air on
thinka that it'e all over for it if air defenee breake down; the Ground
80! covertly thinka that the reeponaibility for fining up the final de-
fenae ie ite.

It ie not iqlied that the three SDPe herbor entagonien toward each other
ee wee the ceee between the old any and navy. But it aeene that tradi-
tion haa found a way of being nurtured and there are eigne of walla grow-
ing up around the reapective aervicee. In thie reapect. beceuae the air
an cane into being after the war and wee built aromd for-er any and

navy nen. it diepleye a ranch more open and cooperative attitude toward
the haritine and Ground sun.

68
rot OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

In the peat. becauae of deficient capability. the Air SD! could not eupport
naval warfare from the air but currently. the fighter planee which are
being deeigned to attack ground targete. are being ueed for training to
eupport veeeele at eea. But now the old argument that “an air arm for

the navy ie eeeential" ie again finding voice.

When coneideration wae firat given to developing air-to-ground nieeilee.
it in reported that the air people euggeeted to the eea arm that, "Since
a new weapon ie heing deaigned why ahouldn‘t we think about developing
one which could he uaed againet tergete at eea?" The report adde that
the auggeetion got a cool reception.

There ie no eeaurance that interaervice walla like thoee won't grow higher
in the future. The plan we propoee ie to unify the Ground. Heritine end
Air 801% into a eingle entity.

A dozen or no yeare ego. Canada unified the three eervicee into one force;
it wee forcibly accoqliehed by the young 62 year old minieter of defenae
who fired the top military officer who oppoeed it. Same colored uniforme—
khaki even in winter-were ordered worn by ell eervicee. The unified force
wae divided by function; for exanple. the Teek Force Co-ender controlled
the ground taek force. defenee agath air attache were placed under the
air defenee co-and end eo on. There were eeveral huge in the new organi-
zational etructure in the beginning but it ie reported that Canada now

hee a etahle. unified nilitary force.

"hen the ground-to-air Nike mieeile procurement program wee introduced.
the Defenae Agency was confronted with a stiff juriedictionel equehhle
between the ground and air SDI'e. The Ground SD? ineicted that the mieeile
ehould be put under ite juriediction on the grounde that. the army exer-
cieed that right in the 0.5. The Air SDI? comtered with the argument that
ground baeed though they were. the air arm could operate them more effi-
ciently and effectively ee part of ita reeponeibility for air defenae.

The director general of the Agency who had the unenvieble teak of eaking
a decieion, gave aoee thought to dividing the Nikea between the ground

and air arme but apparently the argument put up by the Air 80? prevailed
eince the mieeilee were finally aeeigned to it.

The Air Tranaport Group which had control over the 6-1 traneporte and was
reeponeible for the movement of men and materiel wee placed under the
juriediction of the Air 801’. Since it wee under the eole control of the
air arm. thinge did not move smoothly when the Ground St)? needed trans-
portation. To overcome thie defect. eome Ground SD? officere were ee-
eigned to the Air Traneport Group to overaee ite requiremente. Thia odd
peraonnel arrangement did not work out aatiefactorily and thou gromd
officere who had been loaned to the air group were returned to their old
neeting grounde.

69
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"hither Goes the Defense Agency?

To fell these growing wells and unify the three SDPs is not as yet out
of the realm of possibility. He believe that such a unification would
also contribute to the more effective utilization of the defense budget.

Up to now, defense planning and budget estinating was done separately

by the various staff offices and then submitted to the Internal Bureau.
The Internal Bureau coordinated them and whittled then down to fit a given
framework. This system would work satisfactorily if the given framework
was sufficiently large but it seldon is. with a smell frame to work with,
even some of the major mainstay proposals had to be. on occasion. shaved
down to a point where its capability to support became questionable. Under
such circuutances items‘ of lower priority to a given service cowonent
were deleted completely. Let us assures that a Rarities SDP's request for
appropriations for landing crafts (LST's) were given a conparatively low
priority by the Haritime SD? and therefore was dropped cospletely fro-
budgetary consideretion. To the Ground SDP. however, these landing craft
could be an essential factor; most of the tanks are deployed in Hokkaido
and should an incident arise in the western part of the country. trans-
portation by sea would become the main factor in mobility.

Admittedly. if those low priority items which had been deleted by the
various staff offices could be restored during the coordination phase at
the Internal Bureau level. the problem would be solved. But the fact of
the matter is that the Internal Bureau has neither the capability nor
the manpower to prepare a well coordinated budget or defense plan. In
the case of the 11.5., the civilian body in the Defense Department has
both the capability and the personnel to accomplish those coordinations
on its own. Given those factors. we could start thinking ideslistically
in term of civilian control; but in the case of Japan. all we can do at
the current stage is to think of how the system could be improved with
what we have.

we hope that the above gives a broad brush description of the current sta-
tus of the Defense Agency and tha SDPs and the problens inherent to then.
This is e tine when the concept of reaction defense is being rekindled

and when much thought is being given to the defense function and estab-
lishment. The next 2 or 3 years could be crucial to the future fate of
Japan. Needless to say. that which will seal the fate is public opinion
but we cannot help but harbor a sense of uneasiness if we allow the cur-
rently iqotent Defense Agency to continue on its aimless meandering
course.

COPYRIGHT: Bungei Shunjueha 1978

8358
680: (0105 END

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY