APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82~00850R000100040013-2

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040013-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/3377
5 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 20/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040013-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original infatuation was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGlT [ANS AND REGUIATIORS GOVERNIM mssmr 0F
MTERIALS ”PRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIMTION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFl-‘ICIM. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mas wear;
5 April 191

TRANSLATIONS 0" WESTERN EUROPE
(rouo 20/79)

Courems

COWY SWIG!
"NICE

Nucloor Construction Horton-o Got Pout-Job Attontion
(611100 6"“.‘3 VAWRS Amnm’ 12 "It 79) ooooooooooo

Chino Intorviovod on Plono to: Economy
“ICC”... Chin: thM“: PARIS HATCH, 16 “'1‘ 79) ooooooo

PCP Congrooo Propooolo lotion: Chongoo in Cumin Idoolou
(1:00 AlttCr’ 1.3 m OBSBWATWR, ‘9 POI) 79) coooooooo

PCP Owen-no Son ”aiming to cumin
(Sditoriol, nomad motto; L3 mum. cassava-wt,

2‘ t“ 79) 0.00.00.00.00...0.000......OOCOOCOOOOOOOOCOOOO.

Dom loplioo to Joumolioto' Quootiono
(L'wms. 2‘ F“ 79) O.I...0.00....IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...

Dotoilo of PCP Intomol Dioputo Pmidod
(Aloin Toto, Nichol Bonk Intorviov: L'EXPESS, 26 Bob 79)

Briofo
PCP Dowty Socrotory-cnorol

ITALY

Anod Porooo Pmtionol Lou Eminod
(IL "mm. 23 r“ 79) 0.00000...O...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CW! semen MC!

NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION mm 681‘ POST-JOB ammou
Psris VALEURS ACTUEst in French 12 list 79 pp 66-67
[Article by Gilles Geetner: "worker Redeploynent in Chinon")

{Text} "Here in Chinon everything is fine or st leest nothing is wrong."
Such eteteeonts. unususl to any the lesst. st the nuclear power plents' con-
struction sites. eey seee provocetive.

In 2 yeers. however. the Chinon 3 (second section of the power plent begun
in 1977) work site hes hsd only 5 deys of strikes. A record! In contrest.
conflicts looting seversI weeks ere couon plsce et lost of the other pleats.

The sociel her-eny reigning in Chinon is no doubt relstsd to the decision
teken in lieison with the EDP [French Electric Coqenyl. the ‘I‘ours cheﬁer
of cos-erce end the m2 [Netionel Ewloylsnt i’sct Associetion] to set up
am [New Industries ‘l‘reining School]. Its lission is to prepsre for the re-
treining of the power plent's workers (there are 1,500 of then at the present
tine) so so to integrste then lore successfully with the region's enterprises.

Ihere we hove e esjor innovstion for since the stert of the nucleer progre-
no one has been concerned over thet problee.

Hes the bulk of the work finished? The workers peeked their begs end left.
Professionel trsining? An econonic inpsct on locel trede end industry?
Herdly eny ettention wes peid to thet.

In the final enelysis the only ones benefiting fro. those esteblishlents were
the cot-ones which were lore then pleesed to locete e substentiel source of
incole thenke to the business tex.

This lock of ictegretion with the econonic sphere produces e greet Isny dis-
edventeges. The risks of sociel conflicts heve increee-d enong en uprooted
populetion in which the retio of workers tron outside the sree subjected to
hersh living conditions is ususlly high. Strikes ere frequent. sonetines de-
genersting into violent sction.

1
1’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Chirwn srna itself had sons difficult mounts in 1966 and 1977.

The locnl population. in part lcular the tradesmen. generally gains front the
presence of these hunsn concentrations. It will be all the sore receptive to
nuclear diseidence if its profits are dooaed to disappear as soon as the cen-
structien work hast-been conpleted.

0n the other hand. the recently issued announcesent of the possible con-
struction of a third section in Chinon has not appeared to upset a population
eccusteaed to living peaceably in France's "nuclear garden." (In the depart-
nent of lndre-et-lnirs slene there will be five power plants in 10 years.)

In that connection. a ce-snt by the secretary general of the Tours chaﬁer
of cemerce. Didier Hsjau is significant.

"For ecologists.” he said. "it is the Angers-Tours superhighuay that is the
nein problen in the area."

When the construction of Chinon b was decided upon in 1975. they wished to
avoid repeating the errors Iade 17 years ago. The resorting by the principal
espleyer. the Grand ‘l‘ravsux of Harseilla to local nsnpover use lore systeastic.
The latter nou lakes up 85 percent of the civil engineering elployees at the
construction site. The tine lilit set for construction use better adhered to
because of that fact. A sizable advantage in that a single day's delay re-
presents a loss for IP of 3 nillion francs in earnings.

In Septeﬁer 1978 a "post-job co-ission" was set up with the cooperation of
the EDP. the lndre-et-boire prefecture and sons elected individuals. It as
given the task of studying the probleas of the reservoir of workers.

This co-ission aade it possible a few nonths later to facilitate initiating
a sore broader operation. Its name: "Rscines" ["lloots"-Initietivea to
Regionslize a Nuclear Plant's Construction Activities for Employ-ant and Sub-
contracting].

The nain artisan for the operation is the chief of the power plant's planning,
Michel Guillet. ‘2 years of age, an EDP engineer. A expert (he has had ex-
perience at several work sites).. Despite the prospect of regular transfers
in public service, he has been extrelely interested in the econosic future

of an area which he is nevertheless destined to leave in the near future.

The Rscines undertaking brings together the various parties concerned over
the fall out uith respect to employment.

The construction site enployers: Grouped uithin ADBSIC [Association of t'ne

Chinon Site Elpleyersl, their objective is to encourage local eaployleant.
Assured of ANPE's support, they are conitted to hiring only trainees fro-
the trade school that has just been established.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Locsl enterpricss: Once they sre orgenised into subcontracting groups. Bl)?
(the prin contrector for the work site) will entrust to thee the secondsry
edditionel work (ssnitery instelletions. hensers). Potentislly. this involves
80.000 to 100.000 work hours.

The school (mm) will thus serve es s prop to the ucrms undertaking. Built
in record tine. it is operstionsl (the first treinees ere expected st the end

of Herch). lte finencins is provided by the epprenticeship tsx. 1.1 percent
of ongoing treinina end the fund of the ewloy-snt poet.

The school's promoters hope to extend their sctivity beyond the strict frame-
work of Chinon.. The school could becoee s netionsl treinins center thet
would take in treinees fro. other nucleer pleats.

The project is en mitious one. But it includes the risk of prolotins dis-
idence over whet Is, one dsy becoes one of the key pleces for edsptins to the
antics: ere. Guillot is were of thet. Iut he nonetheless believes thet one
lust eccept the odds.

COPYRIGRT: 1979 "Vsleure ectuolles"

8096
650: 3100

3
m onrcm. us: out?
POP OPPICIAL US! ONLY

coumr section FRANCE

CHIMC INTERVIEW 0N PLANS W3 300m
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 16 Her 79 pp 106-67, 66
[Interview with Jacquee Chirac, former prime niniateﬂ

[Tart] The preeident wee on hie way to Mexico. The deputiee of the m1
[Rally for the Republic] parliaaentary group were at a working eeeeion in
Guadeloupe along with two Gaulliet niniatera, Alain Peyrefitte and Joel be
Theule. when Jacquee Chirac had a cominue having the inact of a polit-
ical bonb ieeued by hie eecretariat. hating hie arguments on the gravity

of the econonie situation end the lack of intonation. he euggeeted that
"aovemnta and pertiea join in deunding the convocation of an extraordinary
eeeaion of the National Neatly.” The purpuee of that eeeeion: The creation
of two co-itteee on aploylent and ptblic intonation. The oppoeition hae-
tened to agree to it but at the ease tile announced ite intention to file
ceneure eotione by the PS? [French Socialiet Party] and the PCP [French
Co-uniat Party] up to now eeparate and with different contente. Jacquea
Chirec'e initiative cane at a tine when opinion polle were expoaing a rather
clear-cut drop in the popularity of the preaident of the Republic and of hie
print ninieter, and when concern over the nainteining of public order in the
face of etrike violence wee epreading to the unione theneelvee. But to the
preeident of the. nepublit it eeened. in hie own worde. to be an epieode of

"a politico'e politice." before hie decieion to endeavor to bring about an
extraordinary eeeeion of parliaatnt. Jecquee chirac in the newepeper LB nouns.
dated Thuraday. l Hatch, etated that he ”dieagreed in no uncertain tar-a"
with the govern-ant not only on Europe. but aleo on econonic and eocial policy.
On thia latter point, which worriee the French eo mob, Jacquu Chirac agreed
to go further for PARIS urea in explaining hie plan for economic recovery.
Our interview with Jacques Chirac ia publiehed on the following pagee.

Jacques Chirec prlaina llie Btononic Recovery Plan to PARIS HATCH

lQueetion) Sosa people think. and the print linieter eeid eo Honday evening
on televiaion. ,that France wee facing a "queetion of eurvivel."

I;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

[Answer] 1 en e coulliet end on such I hove never enviseged ny country's
future in terse of eurvivel. but rsther in terns of will: "Indeed. we should
find out. so Generel de Goulle ueed to eey. whether eo-e greet netionel dreen
isn't eeeentiel to e people so se to support ite ectione end preserve its
cohesiveneee . "

[Question] Do eeverel occeeions you heve eepheeieed thet one of the lost
serious ills is the lock of infornetion. Now. the ninietere ere telking ell
the tine. Is it their technique thet ie bed? we: eheuld they eey?

[Answer] There is in feet e public infornetion problel. Public opinion's
contusion etene to e lerge extent tree the eudden discovery of A serious
economic end eociel eituetion whereee officiel etetelente were expressing
nothing but serene end eteedy optinien. This optinisn epecificelly ellowed
herdly my tool in the nedie for divergent eeeeeeeente. I do not heve the
hebit oi coepleining but still here in en exenple: beceuee the eituetion
hes becone worse. the criticism which the RM! end I lyeelf heve been Ieking
for 2 yeere hove suddenly been discovered. In recent weeke I heve neither
ewhesired nor softened thoee criticieu; they heve Ierely been illustrated
by reeulte which could heve been foreseen only too well. But noet of the
French people were only very veguely infer-ed of then.

[Question] Do you think. no eone deputies of the Left do (Crepeeu. for ex-
eeple). .thet hewing to the present policy is puehing Prence towerd e "revo-
lution‘l'

Sevings hove Been Diver-ted

(Anewerl I thought thet thoee deputies "of the Left“ no you cell the- hed
opted for revelutionery Herein. elong with the joint progren. they should
rejoice over the opportunities offered for revolution. For ny pert. I will
confine eyeelf to noting thet the feilure of the govennent'e policy it
giving riee to e dengeroue eituetion iron every etendpoint. I would not
prophecy e revolution. but this eituetion does worry ne.

[Question] If, es you reiterete. the policy nuet be chenged, people heve
to be chenged. Is thet exectly whet we ere to underetend?

[Answer] There hee to be e policy chenge. yes. People chenged. perheps, to
the extent thet thie is neceeeery in order to elter policy. In eny cone. 1
do not think it is nerely e netter for the leedere. A true econonic policy.
such so I conceive of it. in e denocrecy requires the underetending, edherence
end cooperetion of the country on e whole.

[Question] You euggeet giving s new inpetue to inveeteente. M questione:

If in the public sector, in whet i-edietely productive ectivity end with
whet funds? If in the privete sector. with whet neene of induce-net.

S

'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Even without resorting to some budgetary deficit. it is possible
first to reduce adsinistrative wastefulness. which is quite considerable,

then inproductive expenditures so as to develop productive invest-onto that
are factors in reducing unenploylent. For exanple, one hears that there are
too sany beds in nuaerous hospitals. that nedical actions are nultiplied with-
out any good reason and even to the point of harning patients. that the French
are risking their health by taking too nsny reasdies, that Social Security

at everyone'e expense is financing an absenteeisn costing the scone-y the
equivalent of a sizable part of its petroleun bill.

0n the other hand end in particular. private investnent represents a vast
potential that has up to now been discouraged. The French like to save. how.
everything goes on as though one wanted to divert these savings from productive
invest-onto. and especially fron industrial ventures. They have sought refuge
in real estate who-e costs they have caused to rise excessively. in the owner-
ship of gold. jewels. works of art, etc... They have also sought refuge in
Switzerland or elsewhere. In a sense they were not Iietaken since any in-
vestnent of this kind has proven as a general rule to be far lore profitable
than purchasing shares in French enterprises. if this disastrous course

were reversed. we would have an enornous auount of capital for renewing our
production apparatus.

[Question] but according to Barre any inpetus to the scene-y is necessarily
inflationary.

Paralyzing Patty Annoyances

[Answer] The aconouy's growth rate is not related to the inflation rate.

Sole countries. such as Great Britain. have experienced slight growth but

a heavy rate of inflation. That is Prance's situation today. Other countries
have experienced a greater growth rate with reduced inflation. At the pre-
sent tine. the problen is that of exporting enough and to have adequate pro-
duction in order to do so. It is not possible to inprove the productivity

of French enterprises without a parallel prolotion of invest-outs and real
growth. So everything lust be done in order that France say have increased
growth. So investments and the creation of enterprises lust be encouraged.

[Question] You said apecifically-on the subject of the economy-that a
stand contrary to that of the govern-snt must be taken. Hhat does that lean?

[Answer] I said that it would be "almost“ enough to take a course that was
the opposite of the present orientation in order to get onto the right path.
I will try to explain this lore clearly. Everyone is agreed in recognizing
that the French econouy lust be transiorssd, be readapted. so as to rennin
coepatitive and to survive. 0n the basis of that general established fact.
it is evident that:

l. The govern-ant has only very slightly loosened the yoke of the regulations
haspering enterprises.

6
FOR orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

2. It counte on the virtuea of coapetitiveneea to condo-1 ill-adapted activ-
itioa.

3. It In counting on that aane coupetitivonoaa to inepiro entorprieea epon-
tanoouely with a general atrategy for our future.

One can in fact bogin with thoee three pointe to aetabllah the neceaeity of
freedoe and planning.

Piret, the need for freedoa. Queetion any head of an enterprise. whether
eaell. aediua or large, and aek hia if he feele he ia rid of the obetaclee.
fonelitiea and paper work that are not juat uaeleea but aleo positively
daaaging to econonic efficiency. The conatruction induatry recently pointed
out-cone exenple among l.000-that theee regulatione. forealitieaand delaya.
which are totally ueeleae, add up to 10 to 15 percent of houeing coata. Aek
the ertieana of our towna and of our countryeide, ea I have often done. why
they do not hire an extra worker or two eince work ta available. They will
tell you that they went to avoid additional eocial inaurance and fiecal coate.

the petty annoyancea of labor inapection and varioua other kinda of diffi-
cultiea.

If one adda that the freaework for credit atill continue to eriet. I think
that on thie point the cauee haa been daterained. Official liberalial. to
atert with. hea not even reatored any real freedoa to enterpriaea.to re-
adjuat.

Second point. Theae atill paralyzed anterpriaea are told: Hell. if you are
incapable of adapting youraelvea--even to brutal cowetition free which the
Count: Market doea not protect youo-you fall into the category we wittily
call the "lane ducka." You can Juet pariah. lhe reeult will be a lore
healthy econoey.

Nonetheleea. enterprieee naturally endeavor not to pariah. Their peraonnel
hang on doeperately. occupy work aitee if neceeaary, aecure the eupport of
public opinion. and the govern-ant itaelf often ende up being loved and
granta acne eupport which more or leae alounta to eaergency teqorary aa-
eiatance. So iaprovenente are not achieved or elae poorly or very elowly.
Finally. third point. the poeitive atrategy of tranaforlation. innovation and
develop-ant to not forwleted either or in any event ia only being done very
elowly. very inconletely. without the country'e adherence or participation.
hence without any mbilieing effect and without any enthuaiaaa.

That ia the way it in beceuee no induatriel group ie eufficiently large to
deviee it on ita own to the fulleat extent and because in any event too my
factora depend on the atate (orientation of public inveateanta and on thoee
of the national aector. taxation. aid grante. credit. etc.). Hence we are
going into the battle without a battle plan. A great deal of luck would be
needed to win under thoee circuatencea.

7
roe current. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] You want to go back to planning. to a voluntariet policy. To a
sure energetic management of the economy by the administration's technicians.
It is the opposite of the economists' proeent tendencies. To which school
exactly do you belong?

[Answer] But I do not want "a more energetic management of the economy by the
adminstration's technicians." Not at all. The plan I want is a political de-
cision which in a democracy should derive from the nation itself and from its
representatives. A decision which must be established through concerted
planning by the economic and social officials who will also be involved in

its implementation.

The paralyzing bureaucracy. which I have just condemed, in recent years had
specifically fed on the abandoning of all democratic planning, on any plan
guiding our economy. So we have come to the point of having neither economic
freedom nor planning,whereas I am a partisan of both. I as not concerned over
knowing whether this thinking is in style among economists. Intellectual
styles disappear just as others do. Professors who would go only by Keynes
repudiate him probably before rediscovering him. I leave their disputes to
the schools and do not claim kinship with any of them. But we have tested
our theses in discussions with professors of political economy who are very
knowledgeable and they did not emerge from them weakened. 0n the contrary,
we have had the benefit of tehcnical assistance whose value I would be un-
grateful not to mention.

[Question] Some think that your program was quite largely inspired by Debre's
theses. Is that right?

[Answer] Let us understand each other. Sometimes I say "my criticism,"

"my ideas." for convenience in talking. They are mine but also to a very
large extent it amounts to a collective doctrine. Innuerable people have
participated in working it out. In particular Michel Debre who with his own
eloquence and sensitivity has also often been the interpreter of what we were
all more or less thinking and he has often been among the first to denounce
the ills we are noting today.

[Question] Barre has just denounced what he termed "false ideas" (by ilpli-
cation, those of the an). According to the prime minister (it was on the
occasion of the 150th anniversary of the RSV!!! DES DEUX HONDES). the idea
according to which ”the economy not not be sacrificed for the currency" is
a mistaken idea. According to him, of the countries which have overcome
their economic difficulties, the best are the nations with a "good currency",
Federal Geruny for example.

[Answer] Germany's situation is the opposite of what Barre claims. In
reality. Germany has a good currency because it has a good economy. The
proof of that is that every time Germany has re-evaluated the mark it has
been obliged and forced to do so because of the "excessively good" results of
its economic policy. The prime minister is mistaken when he considers that

8
ran onzcm. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL 058 MY

by neintaining the franc at an artificielly high level. the French econoay uill'
will be more healthy. It is the reverse that is true. If within the frene-
work of the European monetary ayatea France pegged the franc to the evolution
of the nerk, it would asan deflation. uneaployaent and a foreign trade deficit.

It is the Ger-an scone-y which lakes it possible for the asrk to be strong.

It is not by aligning the franc on the ark that the French econoay will be
strong. If the French scone-y becomes modernised so as to be coapstitive.
and if consequently it invests sufficiently. it will in the end have a healthy
currency. In other words, a stringent nonetary policy will not be sufficient
to resolve France's econoaic problans. There aunt be a good econonie policy
making a strong growth rate and full enploynent possible; a good currency
will energe into the bargain.

(Question! According to the prime einiater. another false idea is to say
that protectionisa guarantees euploynent. -

A Vitiated Gene

[Answer] To protect its ewloyuent France nust atop playing the vitiated
gates of savage conpetitivaueaa.

France is in a state of legitinate econoaic defenae in at least two situations:

1. In the industrial unpower sectors outvied by countries only slightly
developed where wages and social inaurance contributions are abnormally lov.
In this case. protective aeaaurea nuat be applied at the European level and
these countries would not have any repriaals to take against us for they en-
joy an exceptional situation: Only the European countries. among then France,
are playing the game of totally free trade.

2. Sons developed countries are not playing the cmetitive game. ‘lheae are
the United Stetea and Japan. when the United States retains the nechaniaas
for protecting its chenical industry. such as the "American Selling Price.”
it is the one connitting agresaion against free international trade. If
France and its European partners were to set up ainilar practices, it. would
be a completely normal counterpart to the Aaericen protective mechanism.

[Question] You say ”the struggle against unenloynent... would undergo cer-
tain bold tax reductions." Can you be aore explicit?

[Answer] Let no talk of the current situation. list should not be done is
seen clearly and. in contrast, what must be done.

Let no talk of the neat usual. unproductive investaent without any risks:
You become the owner of your house. The collectivity helps you with it by
deducting the interest on the loan, lut let us skip over that advantage.
What is sore significant is that your capital supplies you with what amounts

9
ma 017mm. us: our
POM ilﬂ'litlAl. "9W. ONLY

to revenue in the for- of the rent you do not have to pay. And that this
revenue. represented by the rental value of your housing, is not subjected
to the individual incone tax.

If instead of buying an apertnnt you bought shares, your incone would be
taxed on the basis of the tax on business profits: then. back in your hands.
to increasing taxes in accordance with the well known steps. In short. in

the first case (owner of your hone) the revenue fron your capital is not taxed.
in the second case (as a tenant but a shere..older). three-quarters of the
corresponding revenue free the sane capital is chopped off. The practical
conclusion: You have no interest in being a shareholder.

Many correcitva neasuree could be envisaged and since tax laws are rapidly
becoeing very conplicatod. i will not go into detail. I have nevertheless
proposed a very sinple nsasurs which would be axtrensly effective and which
would not even greatly reduce the state's resources: Putting the proprietor
and the tenant of the above ssanpls on the sans footing. reducing the taxes
on both until they are equivalent to a noderate rent, and beyond that. tax
then both sieilarly. In other words. up to l and one-half nillion or 2 lil-
lion centines a year. the revenue represented either by the rental value of
your hone if you own it. or by the dividends from your nheres if you opt to
invest your savings in industry, that revenue will be tax free in both cases.
in addition to the econonic advantage. it is obviously fair.

[Question] You say in your L8 HONDE interview that the govern-ant is a vic-
tin of its infatuation (free the Latin "fatuus." leaning foolish). you allude
to a quasi eonarchical state of the governeent. the sour reply you get talks
of a "politico's policy." Don't these exchanges of dralatic retorts distress
the french who would prefer to see everyone united so as to get away fro-
the store?

[Answer] You are correct in referring to a store. Even so we have only
talked here of the econonlc and social situation. of our internal difficul-
ties. But the increasing dangers should also be apparent in the international
nphere.

As to what you denounce as an “exchange of dranatic retorts” between poli-
ticiens. 1 call your attention to the responsibility incudient upon you too.
upon you journalists and connentetors. It is natural that you should seek

to spice up your accounts, hence to give a personal touch to the discussions
and perhaps asks the dialogue nore drastic than it actually is. Nonetheless,
you eust help the French to develop for the-selves serious views on problens
that are seriousnsnd the qualifier ”serious" is doubtless no longer strong
enough.

Whatever the etynology of the word infatuation lay be. it is nevertheless an
error to isolate oneself in self-satisfaction for it engenders blind optimise.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

1 did not etch e poleeicel effect in tireleeely denouncing thie error pub-
licly uith othere for 2 yeere beteuee ell oi the French ere intereeted in it.
but else in nuneroue privete co-unicetione eeeking e dreeetic eiiect ell the
Icon eince they heve reneined known eolely to thoee they were eddreeeed to.

Who in dreeetiting by epeeking of eudden criticiee or egein by etigpetiting
ee eggrueeion the requeet to convoke oerlieeent? he though e neeting of
perlieeent within the freeework of ite constititutionel ettributee end with
e view to becoedng more thoroughly inioreed coneiete of eggreeeion egeinet
anyone et ell. he though the beet contribution perlielent could neke to the
govern-ant coneieted in reeeining on vncetion.

Contredictorily. 1 en eleo reproeched for not betting e notion of ceneure

which would ceuee e politicel crieie whoee outcoee no one knowe. He heve to
be eore ecrioue.

let everyone join together in facing the etore. you eey. It would of couree

be doeireble. hut whet would euch e union be worth in en «nephew of inertie
or of e felee eeneuver.

People. do not hove on their firet duty leeving everything up to their leedere
end ellowing thueelvee to be led.

In e dteocrecy et leeet the principel decieione ere up to then.

The French euet reflect. put eeide illueione end ideologiee. judge for thee-
eelvee end then only their will.

Otherwiee eelvetion will not cone to the iron the politicene. I regret to
eey eo. nor (roe eny individuele united or dieunited. The iiret tech of
politiciene ie to tell the truth. elweye. even it it evohee unpleeeent re-
ectione end even too eoonx Eepecielly in the fete of the dengere which will

not weit forever for e netionel will to he creeted. one cepeble of etending
up to then.

comma: 1919 per Cogedipreeec SA.

8096
cso: 9100

11
m OHICIAL US! ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm mm mm

POP 60363888 PROPOSALS W CHANGES IN CW1” 1030M?

Perie 1.! NOW OBSERVER!!! in Reach 19 Feb 79 p 33
[Article by Irene Allier: ”The PCP: A Report on Deficienciee"l

[Text] Up to now here end Bngele. Lenin end Jeoree hed eutiiced it. The
PC? [French Comniet Perty] did not clein to deecend iron e lerge fenily
even if it boeeted of e euperior lineege. Now the 23rd congreee ie going
to chenge ell thet. All of e eodden. the PC! ie eultiplying ite grefte on
ite geneelogicel tree end ie putting ite roote down into e put to which
hitherto it took exception. Not only in it cleining to be the heir of ell
"populer etrugglee.” "ley end denocretic ideele” iron the 1789 revolution
to the Perie Comne. "the tint proleterien etete in the world.” but. get
reedy for e chock. it ie eleo "integreting." if only "in e criticel wey.”
"the Utopien end liberterien" thenee. even enerchic trede unionien end "the
eepiretione of Gurietiene for juetice end eoliderity.” In other worde. ere
Robeepierre end Cebet‘. Prondhon end lekunin (hen'e eneniee). Verlin.“
end Pelloutierﬁ“ Herc Sengnier end Georgee hercheie. pert of the etroggle?

Hell. yee. if one ie to go by the preeelale to the plen for reforning the
etetutee which. together with the other preperetory docuente for thin
congreee (of next 9 to 13 Hey). the PC? in eubnitting for ite 700.000 nee-
bere to diecuee. ‘l'he ehift doee not etop there: Not only in the dictetor-
ehip of the proleteriet toteliy dieeppeering ee wee enticipeted. repleced
by e "peeceful. denocretic. nejority end plureliet” peth to eocieliee. but
the treditionel reference to Merxiee-beniniee ie in turn being wholly en-
gulfed. The idee of ”ecientific eocieliee” ie being enbetitoted for it,

‘Etienne Cebet 21788-1336). euthor of ”Voyege en Icerie." which etrongly
endoreee e pecifiet end utopien col-mien.

“Eugene Verin, e bookbinder. eecretery of the Iiret lnternetionel. e hero
of tho Perie Co-une. ehot by thoee of Vereeillee.

*“Pornend Pelloutier (1867-1901). e trede unioniet who cene eround to li-
bereterien ideee. He contributed to e renprochenent between the enerchicel
end trede union cove-ate.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ron OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

doubtleea regarded aa nore ”open." in that though Marx and Bngela were ita
foundnre. the PCP point» out that it wee devolopad not only by Lenin. which
goon without eaying. but alao ”by other leadera and theoreticiana of the
labor novenent." No detaila.

A Laughable Satiefaction

Other doctrinal revieione in the forefront: Adherence to Iaterialien in no
longer a required condition for adeieeion to the PC? (to one nay be good in
practice without conforning ideologicallymhich takee the wind out of Her:-
ian'e aaile) and finally “the anpreeeion of the divergencae” with the aocial-
iet countriee ie officially included in the PCP'e etatutea: henceforth it

ie an integral part of the aupport it prowidee the international cowlet
noveeentl If one edde to that that aelf-nenageeent ie waking a apectacular
appearance anong the atatutory objectivee. one will concede that eolething
eeene to be going on in the PCP.

Unfortunately. what it going on in it atteeta far wore to a will to take up
the Left'e whole political apece and the ongoing identity criaie of a party
that wante at one and the eeee tine to be ”awent-garde” and ”of the Ieaeae.”
"revolutionary" and "gout-metal." than favoring a real renewal. a clear-
cut choice of atrategy and true deeocratieation. After the breakup of the
Left. the electoral defeat, the PCP crieie which laet opting wee bringing
back into queetion the tactic followed and delocratic centralial. one ex-
pected of the 23rd congreee concrete aware and the epalling out of polit-
ical proepecte. They cane: lt wae a refueal and politically an official
report on deficienciee.

Concerning delocratic centralien. the diaeidente will have only Ieagar eat-
infection. that about the ongoing public debate? Outeide tie-ea congreeeea
are held it will only be opened in the party'a tribunee at the diacretion
of the central co-ittee. Are individual candidaciee for the perty'a leader-
ehip bodiee authorized fron now on? Io doubt. But in the final analyaie.
it ie epecifically a leaderehip body—or the congreee-which will detenine
their validity. A laughable aatiefaction for thoea who clailed to know note
about the way in which their leadare are elected: Pro- now on they will be
told by how neny voteei And it ie not beceuee the party'e eecretariat-
which often paaaed for the I’CP'a real leaderehip—eeee ita role reduced to
"current lattere" (doubtara to the advantage of the political bureau) that
the PCF'e dacieion-nalting proceee will bacone wore deeocratic or note eaey
to underetand.

Actually. however. that wee not the goal being eought. And the propoeed
political eolution that the m leederehip will aubnit to the congreee te-
veale all too clearly why: Obvioualy there waa no agree-ant at the unit
either ae to the nature of the party whose develop-ant waa deeired nor a to
ita etrategy. not at to the outlook for ita future. for lack of a ayntheaia.
or even of e cowroniee. everything it going on ae though evaryone'a

13
M OWICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

argumente had been atrung together at the riek of thereby revealing that the

PCP. which no longer known just what it ie done not know either what it wanta
nor where it ie going. The range of ite doctrinal tolerance ie a poor tower
for the ehrinking of ite proepecte. the careful broadening of ite vocabulary

doea not conceal the vaguenaee of ite objectives.

Shot Iolte

Two exeeplee: Union of the Left and the attitude with reapect to the eocial-
iet countriee. in the firat inatente. they declare firet that they are loyal
to union of the Left. an "irrevocable choice." becauee there ie no alternate
atrategy containing the hope of power and because they haven't eeid they were
renouncing power. but then they deny theeeelvee the eeana for union: They
are rediecovering-for the firat tine in lo yeare-that the very ”nature of
the Socialiet Party. and not juet the preeent etate of affaire. coneigned it
to collaborating with the Right. Aeong the eocialiet countriae. the eaee
Juxtepoeition of contradictory ingrediente: They are not firing one ehot

"at the crilee of horror” of Staliniee. But eince the evolution of the ratio
of international forcee "ie a eaeter card for Prence'e deeocratic road to
eocialien." there ia no eueetion of breaking with the USSR. let alone eeking
a few thruete. The eocialiet countriee’ balance eheet. whatever ”the di-
vergencee" nay be. will thue be poeitive free the over-all etandpoint. The
diecueeion previouely envieagad by the PCP leaderehip iteelf. on the occaaion
of th-a publication of the book "He and the USSR.” aa to the nature of the
Eeetern European regilee. ie therefore cloeed.

In other worde. uneble to provide a alternate etrategy other than that of
union of the Left (which they do not want ae long an the Left hae not re-
coVered ite balance to their advantage). the col-uniete are ehooting the
bolte an a precaution. Obviouely. and until the day they are able to note
reaeonable celculationa ae to theeeelvee. they will have no other concern
than taking care of the patrieony and atteepting to have their capital in
nilitante and votere bear fruit by atruggling. for that letter. in the
final analyeie. the political eituation ie not ruehing thee. Uithout euf-
fering free it nay eore than free the union which wae gradually eroding
their eubetance they can take up their old table-thulping function and de-
vote theeeelvee to the workare' intereete ae an oppoeition without proepecte
but relaxed.

The dieeidenteT They will have the recouree of epeaking for a different
party and for another policy. but where? In the open tribunee of the
party'e preee? That reeaine to be eeen. They will try. Sooewhere eleeu
in any event. Plane for neotinge, colloquiee are in the air. Thie week. a
book including 12 addreeeee nade at the Vitry eeeinar eet up on 9 and

lo Deceeber 1918 by the PCP leederehip. which at that tine wae eeeking to

lb
IO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OI‘PICML 083 ONLY

bring its intollootulo book into lino. in to bo publion by Hoopuo. They
did no: oboy. but thoy how no illusion. u to their influence out o party

which could not listen to than without suddenly realizing choc :hoy on
operating in o void.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 "lo Nowol moorvotour"

9

809a
cso: 3100

15
no current. use on!
FOR OVVlCIAL 083 ONLY

00““! SWIM rm

PCP 0PM!!!“ 3m DWINNINC ro OMAN!“
Paria [.3 110mm. onsmnm in trench 26 Peb 79 p 33
[Editorial by Bernard Guette: "PCP: The Diaaidente are Organizing")

[Text] Georsea “archaic ia apparently unworried. liaen't he juat carried
off a great auccaaa by winning over to PC ranka for the European election
the recognited defender of the Languedocian co-uniata. E-anual Mattre-
Beugn. the preeident of the Regional Depart-ant of Agriculture for Longue-
doc-Rouaeillon and a aworn opponent of Count: Market expanaion? Let ue

be exact. The aucceee will reatore eone votae to the co-uniet party aa
long er the for-er preaident of the Federation of Table Vine Producere
doee not pereonelly take part in diecueeione of the perty'a political
options.

however. with the 23rd congreaa two nonthe away. dieeention ie rieins
again in the PCP renka. In fact. the intellectuala who revolved laet
aprin; are organizing and planning regular neetinge. The beat known
anon; than. hiatorian Jean Bllainatein. ia preparing to drop a bonbehell
with e cauetic fil- about Trotaky'e laet etruulea againat riain; Stalin-
iae. It will be ehown on ”Doaaiara da l‘ecran" [Televieion Docuantariea]
on 6 March (unlaea after the atrike).

Until now the diaeidenta were eatieiied to either lake their conplainta
bum in the bourgeoia preee or to draw up futile petitione addreeeed

to their party. Thin Saturday. 2‘ rebruary. they will take a further
etep. They are inviting their irienda. tboae who have already epoken.
and thoae who are etill ailent. to conpare in a too. reaerved for 100
people. their reflectione and criticiana of their party'a poaitiona on
foreign policy. Thia ie the agenda: the "poaitive overall balance eheet"
that PC ettributee to the regime in the teat; end diaeidence in the USSR.
Crechoelovakia. and cm. with two aenpla ceeee ee illuatration. The

firet in that of Moph lehra. teat Ger-an Co-uniet. out and out
Hartiat. in priaon for having advocated in hia book "The Alternative"

the "true” co-unien ea oppoaed to "actual" coal-unis. The aecond caae

16
ton orncm. use my
POI! ORIGIN. US! MY

is that of Jaroslav Sabata. for-er director of the Czech PC. signer of
"Charter 77." and arrested for having participated in e nesting with
Polish K0! [Workers Defense Co-itteel dissidents. Ilia son. rose-her.
caste last Nov-her to solicit the support of all the parties in favor of
his father. PCP refused to receive his. But there are any other sub-
jects on the menu of the challenging intellectuals: Vietnas, Media.
and the Chinese affair. This seans that within the "fresework of work
and reflection” which they are trying to create, there will be a great
deal to do. There should also be regular outings and at the close of
their first assembly. the intellectuals should launch an appeal for those
who share their positions to join than.

historic Reality

Divieive Efforts? Tending away fro. the constitution? Doubtless, PC will
accuse than of it. but for the challengers. this tine. the hour of devo-
tion to party discipline sea-s to have cone. To be convinced. it suf-
fices to read the last series of articles published by Jean Blleinstein

in LB HONDE.

Rarely even by s nonco-unist. has Georges Harchsis' policy been so
harshly attached. The proposed resolutions for the 23rd congress?

"Two steps becluard” compared to the 22nd congress. The ”positive over-
all balance sheet" of the twist countries? "A conpletely false pic-
ture of soviet reality." The defeat of the Left? "The truth is that PCP
leadership believed the 'co-on progru' was going to allow it to develop
its influence; but. contrary to its predictions. it was the socialist
party that profited froa unionist currents." The econonic crisis? ”He
oust have the courage to tell the workers the truth and to take the neces-
sary steps to econosic recovery." The relations between PCP and 083R?
"PCP is not disentangled fro. the bonds of privilege with 0381!.” The
suppression of the Leninist reference? "There should be an explanation
of what is changing. why it is being changed. and what is going to replace
it." Pinally. the internal deaocracy? "Host of today's party rules are
inherited fro the Stalin are."

who can say it better? Blleinstein again. with the fill he sade with
Yves Ciaspi for "Dissiers de l'ecran” based on his latest book ”Stalin
and Trotsky." The work is fiction. but historical fact is scrupulously
followed and the television viewers. twist or not. are going to dis-
cover. thanhs to PCP saber and one of the sost popular television pro-
grass. that there was a tine when the clash of ideas was the rule in the
bolshcvik party. that the rise of Ionolithiss finally rang the knell for
the hopes that had rested on the Russian revolution. and that fro. 1925
the original bolshevihs saw with horror the growth of the poisoned fruits
of their heroics and idealiss. This debate on "Dossiers de l'ecrsn" will
possibly sake sore noise than the debates of the 23rd congress.

COPYRIGBT: 1979 "Is Nouvel Observateur"

9376
(so: 3100 17

'01! 077101“. 082 ML!
NR OFFICIAL [18! MY

comm 8M1” mm:

BARR! REPLIES 1'0 JOURNALISTS‘ QUESTIONS
Porio warm: in Fronch 26 Fob 79. pp 94-95

from}? On 'ruooday 20 Pobruary. Roy-om! lorro woo tho gooot
of honor at a brookfoot givon by L'mms ot tho
Intercontinental hotol in Paria. Addtoooing 320 coopony
nonogoro. journolioto, union laodoto. writoro. politiciana.
and politicol ociontioto. tho hood of govornoont for 2 houro
onoworad quootiono (too tho ondionco. Ho would liho to
prooont hora tho loot ooliant pointo in hio ro-orho.
Following thio omry of tho oooantiol topico of hia
oconooic policy by tho praoior. I'm: docidad to opon

o doboto in ito cola-noon thio policy. It io ofton attackad
but thooo who ottoch it gonorolly do not onovor the fallou-
ing two quootiona: l. to thoro. under currant notional and
intornationol citcuootancoo. o poaoibility for o policy that
would bo baoicolly diﬂaront tron tho ona purouod by lay-and
lotto—nod. if yoo. whot in it? 2. If not. what naono do
wo hovo. within tho fronowotlt of tho praoont policy. to ro-
dnco moploynont in ohott-rango torno ond in a looting
oonnor? Roy-and Aron will opon tho dohoto noxt wool: by
onoworing tho (itot o! thooo two qnootiono.

ltonooic Policy

”1 havo no intontion of oithor hordoning or ooftoning tha oconooic policy
which io now hoing corriod out. ‘l'ho Iain outlinoo hovo boon dotaroinod:
detond Pronco'o ioraign trodo bolonco and ito curroncy: through the oupport
of oll, achiovo nodorotion in wogo incraoooo; ouprport atomic activity;
finally, toha oll oooouroo nocaooary in ordor to adopt tho Ironch oconony

to now worldwido conditiono ond do oo with tho oupport of ovoryono; .norcovor.
do thio through a oociol policy nd a rogional policy oinod at reducing tho
coot of changoo ond ponitting a note horooniouo diotribution of octivitioo
throughout nationol torritory.

Jobo

"This io not on indopondont variable. Thio io on ocononic ond oociol
varioblo which dopando a lot on other factoro. In othor wotdo. it dcpondo
on tho otrongth of tho ontorpriooo which in turn dopando on tho copocity of
tho ontorpriooo to pay wogoo. to produca. to ooll. and to noko profito oo
aa to bo ablo to invoot. If not. whot ora wa going to do? 9o crooto
artificial jobo. In ordor. in tho (utnro. to hovo o oatioloctory job
oituotion. to hovo oound jobo ond looting jobo. wo not firot of all
tootoro tho oconowy; wa not than noka onto thot our induotry will bo
odoptod to tho Iodorn conditiono of tho world and that it will be
coupotitivo.

18

POI OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

bionecery end Agriculturel Europe

"The beeie oi etebility ie e convergent effort by verioue countriee in-
volved in order to neeter the divergencee of evolution end eepecielly to
unite evolutione leee dieperete in teree of price. But we need one reetric-
tion here end nonetery conetreint ie euch e reetriction which we cennot

do without. We nuet not fell into the trep oi deificetion of noney: but w-
Iuet ndnit thet it ie neceeeery not to coneider noney ee e pure nene. ee
e pure inetruent which one cen nenipulete.

When we eccepted the lnduetriel Colon lhrket. we opened our urkete to e
Ger-en ihduetry which wee nore powerful then oure. Our annch induetry
benefited iron cowerition but we peid the bill tron thet viewpoint. Since
we heve en egriculture which ie in the nidet of trenefornetion. co-on
egriculturel policy wee one torn oi ehering the burden. within the Connity.
between Genny end Frence. ‘rodey we cone beck to eonetery etebility end we.
for our pert. eupport e little bit oi the burden reeting on the nerk eince
the upwerd preeeuree. being exerted upon the nerh. will be epreed out over

e lerger nuber oi currenciee. including the trench currency. He eccept it
beceuee it ie in our intereet end in thet oi the annuity; but we eel:
Ger-eny to teke into eccount the feet thet the exietence o! conpeneetory
enomte ie en enceeeive edventege—not to eey n ieproper edvntege-which
cornea iernere ere benefiting iron.

Aid for lnveetnente in Crieie hegione

”Regerding the eetebliel-ent of theee enterprieee. we will one to it thet
theee will be enterprieee thet per-it ue to hope for leeting eqloynent. we
do not w'ent ertificiel operetione. We do not went e eprinkling of loene.
neking it poeeible to creete ectivitiee. for 3 or e yeere which then euddenly
(nil. Ile went the induetriel iebric oi Ilorth. o! Lorreine. of the ereee
elong the Loire or the region of hereeille-Le Ciotet to be eble to heve
bueineeeee with e future.

lnveetnente in hence

"He met eeh oureelvee whether the conditione for neelietic invent-eat. for
effective inveetnent heve reelly been net. It wee herdly conceiveble. over
the peet 2 yeere. thet inveetnente in truce could be perticulerly lively.
we hot! to begin by reetoring e generel econonic eituetion end e perticuler
econonic eituetion involving the enterprieee eo thet inveetnente could
develop on e eolid ioundetion. "bet good ere ell the incentivee we provide
for inveetnente ii thoee inveetlente ere ertiticiel? Thet ney look good but
the end reeult often ie the ilporting of cepitel goode. end inebility of our
doneetic induetry to reepond to the incentivee given end. iinelly. e very
nodeet inrovenent in the eituetion conpered to the coneidereble reeourcee
oo-itted. I - convinced thet the enterprieee thet were eble to do no did
invent in lrence ad ebroed. l believe thet their inveetnente were. to e
greet extent. retionelieetion end productivity inveetnente. And they were

19
ran onxcm. use out!
POI OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

perfectly correctnbeceuee it ie their future which they are eefeguerding.
And. elong with their future. they ere eleo protecting the future of jobe
in the brnchee in queetion. He eey hope thet. once the finenciel eituetion
of the enterprieee hee been reetored. once the retionelitetion of the ectiv-
ity of theue enterprieee hee been eeeured. the tine will be ripe for e
reeueption of nejor inveetnente end. coneequently, e reeuption of the up-

owing.
Enterpriee Coepetitiveneee

"1 do not believe thet everything thet hee been eeid ebout the low level of
conpetitiveneee of trench induetry in true. There ere brenchee which ere
in bed ehepe on thet ecore but there ie e nejor portion of French induetry.
et leeet £02. in my opinion. which ie cepeble of coping with internetionel
coepetition. how cen it hendle thet? Piret of ell. by geining control of
production coete. he find thet. in countriee euch ee Switzerlend or Gerneny.
production coet control cm be echiewed ell the note eeeily if one hee e
etrong currncy with which to pey for indiepeneeble ieporte of energy ad
rew eeteriele. The governnent. for ite pert. hee leunched e policy which
will be further etepped up end which involvee the developeent of innovetion
end technology. rinelly, the enterprieee euet Ieke e Iejor effort in order
to find end ieprove their plecee on the big export eerkete end they euet
pureue en effective co-erciel end induetriel inventeent policy ebroed.

lnternetionel Coupetition

"He euet eefeguerd coqetition within en overell concept: the orderly
growth of trede. Right now. there in conpetition between developed
countriee but there it eleo conpetition toning fron e certein nlﬂur of
developing countriee. And the cetegory of developing countriee met be
differentieted. I believe thet it would be ecendeloue to clone the nerket
to comtriee which ere beginning to becone induetrielited end I einilerly
believe thet there ere countriee which heve elreedy echieved their econonic
teheoff. which ere elreedy induetrielited. end which benefit froe edventegee
which they no longer need. Ieeidee. we canotneven in deeling with

developing comtriee thet deeerve our eidueccept Juet eny kind of product
influx.

"It it true thet the governeent'e policy hee been pictured on e policy of
ebendoning the country to the nultinetiOnel. Burocretic forcee which
threeten the country'e ectivity. If we begin by putting our own effeire
in order end by properly Ieneging the enterprieee. my of theee negetiwe
eepecte would dieeppeer."

COPYRIGHT: 1979, SJ. Groupe Bxpreee

5058
cso: 3100

20
roe ORIGIN. US! ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL 088 GIL?

COW! SECTION MOE

DETAILS 0' PC? INTERIM]. DISPUTE PROVIDED
Perie 13mm: in French 26 Feb 79. pp 92-93

[interview with Alein Tdte end Michel Derek by Jecquee Roure end Jeen-
Louie Eyeeertel: ”Chellenge reeued in Co-uniet Perty: 'Gep Between
Leederehip'e Horde end Deede . . 3:7

[13:57 Juet 2-1/2 nonthe ewey fro- the 23rd Congreee.

the chellenge within the Co-uniet Perty ie ruining ite
epring-tiee vigor. 0n 'l‘ueedey. 20 Februery. one week eiter
t'ne publicetion of the preperetory texte in L'numam. Jeen
llleinetein. in 1.! ma. leunched e emre criticise of the
policy conducted for the put 10 yeere by the perty'e leader-
ehip. Never before hed e nether of the PC Leo-uni» Pert17
gone ee fer. eepecielly in hurling e pereonel chellenge It
Georgee Hercheie. th ell thie hute eince. officielly. e
diecueeion foru- ie to be eterted on 1 latch in L‘ml‘nl
Ieceuee the dieputente ere convinced thet the PC leederehip
wee quite deteruned to prevent the loot virulent onee nong
the: to expreee the-eelvee. And thet eppliee eepecielly to
Jeen Blleinetein. the beet-known elong thee. "It would even
be better." he eeye. "ebruptly to bring ebout e feceot!
rether then to ellow the debete to wind down into benelitiee.”
Thin deeire to beer witneee ie ehered by e ujority of the
chellengere. They know thet the epece reeerved to the. in
the L'Wm toru- will be neeeured in helf-linee. ”Thie

in going to be e roep. e lerlt." co-ented e ,Co-uniet jour-
neliet who wee pereonelly effected by the perty'e preee be-
ing brought to heel. The chellengere thue decided to go
public in order to nine their contribution to the Congreee—
with Seuil bublieherg7. under the nonege-ent of Antoine Spire.
e eupporter of Elleinetein. the for-er eeneging editor of the
PC'e Editione eocielee bublieherﬂ; with Heepero. where coma
Uoline end Yvee Vergee. dieciplee of Althueeer. heve juet
recently put out e collection with e tire: group of Iilitent
witneee etetelente: ”Hetch out. one perty cen bide enother.”
The new weekly publicetion mm, likewiee inepired by
llleinetein end repreeentetivee of other left-wing tendenciee.
will be e vehicle for chellenge no of 12 Herch. Michel Derek.
e Iilitent in the Jecquee-Ducloe cell in Maren-Provence,

wee one of the pioneere of dieeidence. he we the eperkplug
behind the "Appeel of the 300." which leter on becene the
eppeel o! the 1,500 end, on 29 Hey. in warm. he re-
plied to chergee of ”frectioniee” lede egeinet hie by the
perty in Iid-Jenuery. he enelyzee the doct-ente of the

23rd Congreee for L'muss.

21

708 OMCIAL 053 MY
FOR OHICIAI. US! ONLY

Question: "hat is your judgnsnt of the preparatory texts for the 23rd
Connist Party Congress?

Michel Sarah: I find than misleading. here is the first deception: I find
no self-criticise there. no serious analyaia an to the underlying reaaona for
the failure of the Union of the Left in March 1978. The only one bis-ed by
the re leadership is the PS Eocialist Part17. It is true that our partner
has responsibilities but theea are not exclusive. The prospects for union
which the party race-ended—without apparently putting each stock in than-
first of all are not credible anyway. how can one then put together an
alliance with "Social Denocr-gts" who are likened to "reactionary forcea'!“
After getting too euch unity at the top. without worrying about the grace-
rcota. the party's leaderehip mg aromd the other way; it now wants mity
at the base without having anything to do with the top._ I do not believe
that this is the beat way to give the country a political perspective.
Bapecially so since we did not properly respond to the following issue:
because the PC was not strong enough to naintsin unity. we could not get
anywhere with the rest of the effort either. Now, the party lsaderahip re-
fuees to go into this debate.

The second disappointmt involves the generally poeitive judgnsnt about the
socialist cmtriea. This brings us to the very linit of the acceptable.
Talking about the superiority of the soviet "new eyatq" when everybody
knows only too well what goes on in the 088! or in Ceechloeovahie-

wall. that is not serious talk. Regarding the kind of socialise we want.
that socialise over there is absolutely repulsive. It is shocking to
realize that the Central Co-ittee adopted this position unanilously.

Alain ‘l'bte: I would go even further than nichel. I believe that this text
reveals a hardening on the part of the leadership. It abandons the freedo-
of tone which it had displayed toward the USSR. now could one propose. for
France. a socialise that defends liberties and, at the sane tine. how could
one assert that the Soviet systsn is ”generally positive?" The attacks on
liberties in the USSR are lentionad as silple accidents. This bad faith is
entirely insupporteble.

H. Derek: Especially so since our party's Stalinist practices experienced
a stupefying resurgence last spring during the canpaign unleashed against
the dissidents-and our party certainly was not affected to the sane degree
as the co-unist parties that are in power.

Question: Here you satisfied with the text regarding democracy within the
party?

)1. harsh: We will see how this works out in practice. But the_ansndnents
sea-ed very liaited to us. here are two eques: the texts say that.

henceforth. we can have lore candidates than positions for which people can
run in the elections to the party's leadership bodies. And. after a aecret

vote. the result would be released to the delegatea. These are neasurea
O

22
NR ORIGIN. USE OIL!
POI OFFICIAL USE OIL!

of ole-eatery denocracy which will note all denocrato anile. Nevertheless.
thia ie eono progreea! beat autm Gaaton Pliaaonnier, without aniling.
explained that the high point of democracy resided preciaely in the feet
thet there ahould be no more candidatea than we have officoa to rm for.
And I render that. at Air-en-Prov‘nce. during a ”town looting,” about e
year did a half ago. they refueed to announce the roeulte of the voting
after one hour of diacuaaion.

but. beeically, nothing haa changed. Internal denocracy in still hobbled;
let no talk now about the cooptation of the leadera. 0f courae. thia pro-
cedure doea not ahow up anywhere in the charter but it renaina a reality
in the eyaten. The Congreao obviouely votea by aecret ballot. But it only
revoele tho deciaiona worked out at the top. Thia in a kind of denocratic
tinkering with a procedure that io not deoocratic at all. When. in the
courae of what Congreao. did the rank and file over propose any candidatea?
Never. never. To be really denocratic. you do not juet write the word
”denocratic” in every line of every apeech. l . aherxiet. I do not be-
lieve in the Cou‘ nothod.

Queation: Goorgoa Harchaie aeoerte that hie party, in certain aroea. ia
experiencing ”acne delaye."

M. Derek: ‘YOI. he ia talking about the delay brought about in 1956 by

“entice Thoree but he never triee to analyze thia aort of thing. Row. einoe
1952. how my party leadere and nilitanta have been alanderod before being
kicked out or barred after full-fledged triale? And did not the party

leaderahip proniae Charlea Tillon that these triela would be reviewed before
March 1978? That woe not done! “by? It would aeen to be high tine to ace
that juatico ie done to him without waiting any longer. I aey that. no long

at thia ie not done. the French road of aocialian to liberty will not be
credible.

Queation: But that mvoa ua further away fro. the 23rd Congreaa.

)1. Derek: 0n the contrary. It io our leadere who, today. invoke "reeaon

of atate" in order to atop my diocuaaion. And they co-it the party upon
roade that take no far afield fro. Harriet. "ban I read all thoee nationalist
reforencee in the preparatory texto of the Congroaa. I fear that thia will
only reewaken in public opinion a jingoiat apirit. in other wordo.

chauvinian. I know that Europe ia dounated by the truate and that aocial
denocracy loyally magea capitaliel. But the thing that worriee I; ie our
convergencea with the authoritarian right. reprooentod by the m [jelly

for the Republic]. It would be better to have conatructive diecuaoione

with our Italian and Spanieh conredee who include the European factor in

their otratogy while being fully familiar with the dangero apringing iron
that Europe.

Queetion: Doee not the eeverity of your critician conetitute a direct
challerge to the party leaderahip?

23
ton onxcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

H. Derek: L'mms eeked ae that queetion leet May. And I replied:
"probably." That ceueed nuch ink to flow. After thinking about it deeply.
I regret nothing. And I find that there in alweya e wide gap between the
worde and the deada of our leadera. Juut look at what ie happening in the
perty‘a publishing houaee end book etoree. The layoffa were decided
according to practicee worthy o_f_ big bueineea. without any coordination and
againat the advice of the 061' [General Confederation of Laboﬂ unione at thoae
enterpriaaa. Labor union libertiee are not even reapected by the leedere of
a perty that pranchee eelf-nanaganent. And it ie the pereonnel who euffera
the coneequencee of nenageaent aiatakee by officiale who keep holding on to
their joba. I declare that thia confronta ne with a problee of confidence.

A. rate: I do not think that changing the nan at the heed of the party

would bring about any najor aodificationa. The higher you get in the
hiererchy, the nore rigoroua ie cooptation. The Central Co-ittee conatitutea
an extraordinary breeding ground for officiale who know how to take the place
of one paraon or another without party policy being changed one iota.

Queation: "hat renaine of the critique movement which you launched in the
apring with the Appeal of the 300?

H. Derek: I an going to give you ay opinion. which aeana that I an only
epeaking for any-elf. becauae I an only a epokealaan or a leader of a ft notion.
juet aa I wee laat April and Hey. I believe that the appeal brought down a
nunber of tabooe. hereafter. the mine will expreee theneelvee freely-
eonething which we are now doing in talking to you. Not to attack their
party but beceuee the affeire of the PC concern all Frenchen. Thia ia a
new. irreveraible fact of life.

A. Teta: I an wore paeeiniatic. I believe that the leederahip haa Ianaged
to ieolate the challenge novenent. Thia ia expreaaed today by a trenendoua
diecouragenent anong the nilitente and not only song rhoae who. like we.
cane out with a challenge in the epring. Sane people reaain in the party
although their epirit ie dead. "any are waiting for the Congreee before
they take their deciaione. Othere have already left it.

Queation: Like you.

A. ﬁre: Yea. in lid-January. I no longer had any hope. Reading the
preparatory texts proved to ne that I wee right.

Queationz Michel Derek. your criticiena leave little roo- for hope. Why
did you etick with the party?

Ii. Derek: Undoubtedly becauat I etill feel that I an a co-uniet. coo-
pletaly. '

COPYRICRT: I979. S.A. Groupa upraae

5058

680: 3100
2':

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

20mm: BMION MC!

mus
PC? newt! sum-ammum PC! plan. to appoint. a: m «poo-1n;
conga». a «any «oratory-3m"! at tho puty. Gut-loo Pit-nan :-

«pox-tun: sou likely to be chum. [Tue] [tarts mm mm in Punch
23 Ha: 79 p 35]

080: 3100

25

m OFFICIAL 03! OIL?
FOR ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

CW MIG“ ITALY

ARMED FORCES pmiom. MUS WIRED
Milan ll. W00 in Italian 23 Rob 79 pp 20-29

[Tout] hilliona in aalwoaouaroy. navy and air forco
aro apondlnc 7 trillion liro to buy now woapono. um
aro thoy buying? who docidoa on tho purchaooo? And
oopocially. will thoy holp to dofond tho country hottar?

rho political acono haa otunk for yoaro. and ito iataot oructationo afflict
aloo tho crioio of swormnt in proaroao. Yat tho bothhaod ocandal con-
corna only tho purchaoo of 15 llorculoo C-lJO'anthat io. a nininal part of
ltalion amount. Bow wany othor Lochhaod caooa aro hiddan in tho huso
dofonao purchaoao? And awon without ouapoctina corruption and had faith.
who docidaa. and on tho haaio of what critaria. mm: Italian dofonoo
noodo noro oiooiloo or canoona. and what oiaailoa and what cannono?

According to Palco Accaoo. who ia raoponaihlo for dofonao prohlooo for tho
Socialiot Party. ooworal of tho docioiona takon in rocont yoaro to incroaoo
tho powor of tho ltalion anod forcoa aro. in thio roapoct. diaputahla and
diotuohingz ”aquippin; ouroalvoo with tornadooﬂrca oirplanoa. with a largo
nuohor of unpard tanko. with tho through-dock cruioat or a holicoptor-
carrior. rowoalo tho adoittod alhition to ulna Italy a oIall Iilitary powor
with offonaiwo capacity in tho lioditorranoan aroo.” who haa tohan thooo
docioionof ”l haya littlo faith in parliaoont’o capacity for control in tho
dafonoo aoctor," Act-o aayo furthor. ”hocauaa tho politiciano ara afraid
to concarn thuaolvoo with thooo prohlooo. Thuo tho oilitary do ao thoy
liko. buy what thoy want. without thoro haing any coordination anon; tho
throa anod forcoa: any. navy and air forco.

It io cortoinly two that political intoroat in tho prohlooo of oocurity in
Italy io acarco. Iron tho parlia-ontary rocordo it not.» that alooat nono
of tho doputiao and oonatoro who ara on tho dafonao co-ittoo—oxcopt for o
fow oxcoptiono. ouch ao tho oocialiot Act-o. fonorly a high navy official.
or tho loft-win; indopondoot lino Paoti. a for-or gonoral-tahoa ouch
intoroat in anolyaio of tho atratagic choicoo which aro a proouppooition
for purchaooo of woapono. Yot juot to naintain ito arnod forcao. Italy will

26
ton orncw. ust ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

epend 5.119.15 billion lire in 1979 (7.06 percent of the federal budget. lore
than l6 billion per day). And theee are expendituree linited to conventional
weaponry. becauee ltaly doea not have an autonoaoua nuclear areenel. even
though nuclear weapone are inetelled in ltaly. [See aection entitled "with
the Trigger in Ueehington"l.

la thie a alall amount. on Iaintained by Hiniater of Defence Attilio Ruffini.
who. epeeking in the cheeber in the debate on the budget for hie ainietry.
deecribed the draft budget for 1979 ae one for "aere aurvival?” Or in the
PD"? [Proletarian Unity Party] deputy Bliaeo hilani right when he eaye that
the defanee budget--calculeted on the bneie of the groae national product

and not on the beeie of the federal budget-~ie. rather. increaeing every
year. in conpliance with the wiehee of NATO. which in 1977 aeked ite partnere
to increeae their defenae expendituree by 3 percent each year? Or. indeed.
in the writer Carlo Caeaole right when he eaye that it ia not neceaeary to
epand even one lira for weapone. in view of the fact that in ceee of war.
Italy would have a reduced war-aking capacity anyway?

Uithout doubt. it eeergea free none data that the atate of health of the
Italian araed forcee in not of the beat. One axe-pie out of aeny poeeible
once: the level of training of the troope. ln hie l! eonthe of draft
eervice. a eoldier aanagea to fire only 120 rifle rounde. if he belonga

to a coabat unit. Otherwiae. only 48. An Italian cannon firee only

25 training ehote in a year. at egainat the 90 fired by a french or ﬂeet
Ger-an cannon. 120 by an Bnglieh cannon. or 112 by a lelgien one. Pinally-o
atill in annual teree-oa tank firee 36 training rounde in Italy. aa againet
95 in France. 110 in Heat Car-any. lid in England and 60 in lelgiua. In
order for aoldiere. cannone and tanka to ehoot. in order for planea to fly
end ahipa to eeil--for eilitary training. in a wordo-lll billion lire. equal
to 2.56 percent of the ailitery budget. will be epent in Italy in 1979. A
figure which the experte coneider very low-~certeinly far below what other
countriea epend: ”Arned forcee which do not train." Defenee Hiniater luffini
acknowledged in parliament. ”do not have a reaeon for being and conetitute
only n waete of reaourcea.” Add to thie the aggravation that keeping aoldiere
ineufficiently occupied ie alao coneidered one o! the caueee of the epreed

of drag abuae: 258 caeee verified in l977 ea againet 69 in 1973.

To get out of thia eituetion. to aodernire the arled forcee and note the-
aore efficient in 1979. the ltalian parlieaent hae decided to launch a aulti-
year plan with a total expenditure. at 1978 pricee. of aore than 7 trillion

lire ear-arted for purchaeea of new weaponex new eirplanea. new ahipe. new
tanke. new cannone and new helicoptare.

How will thie aoney be epentl Hill it really help? to enawer theee quea-
tione. IL nonno went to the Institute of international Affaira (lei). the
only independent reeearch center which follewa in depth the probleae of
defence in Italy. Chaired by Altiero Spinelli. who for yeare wee a con-ia-
eioner in the Etc and who ie now an independent left-wing deputy. and
directed by Ceeere Herlini. one of the ltaliana on the Trilateral Coalieeion.

2?
roe omcuu. use any
’Oll omcm. 088 ONLY

tho 1A1 collaboratoo cloaoly with tho lnotituto of Stratogic 8tudioo in
London. and it in tho ltalian torroopondont oi strut. an intarnational inati-
tuto in Stockholn which in tho world'o aoot authoritatiwo voica on tho
problono of woapono control. “thin in tho 1A1 analyoio.

Military Spanning

Tho aotiaatad appropriationo aooignod to tho hiniotry of Doionoo in 1978 total
6.316 billion liro. aa againot 3.531 billion in 1977. for an incroaao of

22.2 porcont. conoidorably highor than tho rate of inflation. Including

the oxpandituroo for public aaioty (carabiniari) and othor ainor oxponooo.

tho appropriationo offactiwoly opont for national dotonoo can bo conoidarod:
2.920 billion in 1977 and 3.378 billion in 1978. for an incroaoo of
22.3 porcont.

within thooa iiguroo. tho .00! naooiwo incraaooa aro undor tho hoading of
purchaoo of gooda and oarwicoo. which wont iron 1.678 billion lira in 1977
to 2.176 billion in tho following yoar: tho porcontago difi‘aronco in

29.3 porcant. Ii thooo data aro iurthor analyrod to doiino tho financial
load for purchaoo ol‘ woapona. tho rooulto aro aa iollowo: 999 billion in
1977 and 1.37 billion in l978-an incroaoo of 36.8 porcont. Thio ralatoa
to the fact that in 1978 cola tho iirot oubatantial appropriationa connected
with tho throo pronotional lawa for aodornioation of tho anod iorcoo.

with tho approval. in tho iirot half of 1977. of tho pronotional lawa for
tho air forco and tho any. tho logialatiwo frnoworh which will rogulato
tho oxpondituroo for Iodotnitation of tho arsod iorcoo until 1986 won con-
plotod. In contraat with tho navy law. which oatobliohoo tho aaounto oi
oxpondituro yoar by yoar. tho two naw lawa aro flonibla: altar an initial
anount of 33 billion (or 1977. annual appropriationo of 100 billion for

tho oir intro and 120 billion for tho any aro plannad in tho poriod
1978-1988; thoao oppropriotiona nay bo incroaaod in rolation to tho atato
of fulfill-ant oi tho program. owantual coat incroaaoo duo to inflationary
oil‘acto. and incroaaoo for raw Iatoriala and tho coat of labor.

Tho oftocto of thio logiolatod Iloxibility hawo alroady boon (alt: on tho
baaia of tho ootinatod budgato. tho air torco upondituroa Jinancod by tho
proaotional law ohould bo 168 billion and 293 billion (inotoad of 100 bil-
lion) in 1978 and 1979: for 1979. tho upondituroo (or tho army and tho
navy ahould riao. roapoctiwaly. to 200 billion and 295 billion (iron tho
initial boat of 120 and 133 billion). At 1978 pricco. tho total load for
tho throo lawa togothar (initially. 3.070 billion) hao alroady arriwod at
5.60 billion (at 7.000 billion if. an in wary probablo. tho navy law

io ratinancod).

In fact. all thio poaoa a aoriouo problon oi political control. Tho nodorn-
iaation lawa. ao contriwod. guarantood tho intogral fulfill-ant of tho pro-
gra-o ootabliohod. indopondontly of tho cooto. Thin appoara accoptablo if

28
'0! 0"“:th US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

government and parlianant take a direct part in the progressive carrying-out
of the prograna approVod and are in a position to have a najor voice in the
basic decisions. 0n tha other hand. while the "ailitary-industrial"
apparatus has been atrangthsning and organizing itself in racent years. tho
instrusents. capacity and will for control by the political power appear
insufficient; paradoxically. this is due also to archaic rssidual (seturas
of the nilitary structura. and in particular. to the low transparency of s
(rs-ework traditionally divided by sectors. a Iranawork in which it is
difficult to bring togothar olasents of unitary aanaganant and intarbranch
vision.

Arny: Tha progrens covered by tho prosotional law forecast a total outlay
of 1.985 billion lira. In the sector of "wheeled. tracked and arnorad
transport. coIbat and auxiliary equip-ant.” the prograna financed by the
law are the following: (1) purchase of 120 Laopard tanks: (2) purchase of
ausiliary tanks with the sans body as the Laopard (68 raliaf tanks.

65 bridga-layara and 28 sappars); (3) purchasa of 300 arsored troop
transport vahiclos of tha ch-l typs: (L) purchasa of 3.800 2-ton trucks;
(3) davalopnant of the Vcc-OO. a new tracked and arsorad transport and
conbat vahicla: (6) purchase of devicas for night vision and firing. All
this aquipssnt will be dslivarsd in the period botwsan 1979 and 1986.

As regards "artillary. artillary support. nunitiona and squipnant." the law
will per-it purchasa or 16‘ lSS-nn towed cannons of tha Ph-70 typs. jointly
aanuiacturad by wast Gar-any. Oraat britain and Italy. The cannons will
hava a range oi about 2k kilo-stars, graatar than that of the praaant
artillary of the aasa talibar. This also involves raplacanant oi the

battloIiald acquisition. target and surveillance radars; 30 will bs
purchased.

For building up antisircraft dafansa. which for years has been considered a
priority nasd. 60 nobila lisaila systans of tha ”Mai" type will be purchased.
to be usad against planes panatrating at low altitude. and portable nissilos
not yet specified. In addition. sodarnitation of 120 60/70 antisircraft
cannons is said to be planned; however. this program is not definite and
could be raplacad.

Considarabla uncertainty subaists in anothar aspacially important sector.
antitank chanaa. which in Iutura could be centarad on ayatana of short
range (up to l kilo-star). ladiu- range (up to 2 kilo-stare). long ranga
(up to 3 kilo-stars). and vary long range (up to 6-5 kilo-otars; nor-ally.
chase ara uiasilaa launchad by halicoptara). Actually. there are doubts
about the readiness sad availability in the early l980'a of two ayatens

of Italian sanufacture: the rotten: [Thunderbolt]. a recoillaaa cannon
daaignad for distances of lass than 700 satera. and the SPARVIZRO [Sparrow»
hawk]. a nissila which has a ranga of about 3 kilo-stars. For this reason.
the choice could go to loraign nissilas. such as the Pranco-Carlan MILAN
(for the nadiun distancas) and tha Ansrican cannon (for the shorter
diatancaa). It aaasa cartain. though. that antitank helicopters arsed

29
m omcuu. use om
TOR OPTICIAL 083 ONLY

with American row nieailoe (which the arIy already hao) will be purchaood:
in tho cooing yaare. aooo 60 helicoptera of thia type (Aguata A-lO9 and
after 1901. Aguato A-l29) ahould be bought.

The proootionol law for the aroy covara alao "eupplying of radio atationa
and tolecollunicatione equip-oat." In the 2-year period 1977-l978. 2.900
new radio etationa. vehicular and portable. hoVo already been bought.
Starting in 1980. oppropriatione for purchaae of high-frequency and long-
ranga radio atotione and new telecoaounicatione equipment are planned. The
producte are of varioua typeat radio linka. telephonic oultiplax equip-ant.
autonatic telephone exchongee. electronic tolotypowritara. rooote-control
and direct-dialing equip-ant. atc. Tho laat heading ia “oquipaont for
Ionogulont operation outoootion.“ In thio field. daliverioa of oini-date
procoaaora have already begun.

0n tho whole. it ia a nodornitetion prograo which goaa in the direction both
of purchaoing equip-ant to integrate and coaplata the oxieting equip-ant
(ouch ae tho Leopard tanho); to provide tho aroy with woopono and equip-ant
in line with technological progreoa and tho now uea concepte (in all tho
oodarn aroieo. increaaingly intenaive oachaniration of infantry. providing
epeod. protection and flexibility of woe. ia taking place); and to fill in
gopa (anticroit and antitank woapona) which are incroaeingly obviouo with
tho ioprovonont in airplane characteriotice and tho ioproweoont in tho
technical choractoriatico of aroorod equip-ant.

Naturally. ouch ooderniration would Iaho no eonoe if it were not accouponiod
by tho pooaibility of achieving an effective oilitary inetruoant through
adequate training and equally adequate lavela of oupport. Otherwiao. it
would be sore auitablo to create an inetruoont of aoaller dioeneione.
correaponding better to tho country'o econooic and iinanciol reality but
poaeoaaing high efficiency and operational capacity-capoble. that io. of
ropreeanting an effective deterrent.

Air Force: The progrolo financed by the air force law are (our. The ooet
ioportant it tho one for tho oultipurpoaa Ponawio-Tornado airplane (nonu-
focturad jointly with Heat Goroony and Great Britain). which ie progroaeing
noroally. The firat airplanea will go into aervica in 1980. replacing tho
F-lOAG'a. The 100 Tornadoa coeing to Italy by tho tioo the prograo ie
completed (198!) will be ueod ea followox 12 for training. in a two-aoator
woroion; 5k in the "iirot lino” group: and 36 ea reoorwoo. to replace looaoa
and to par-it overhaul cyclea.

The other three aupply prograoa are the following: (1) 100 Hb-339 training
joto. built by Hocchi: (2) antiaircroft oiaoilo oyotono of tho SPADA [Sword]
type. for defenae of tho loot ilportont baaoo; (3) 30 oighting. altitude

and identification radoro. which will bocooe operative by 1986.

The air force law io porhopo the one which hoe cauoed the loot arguoent in
tho paot. Ioinly becauao tho Tornodo airplane woe conaidored on oftanoivo

30
’03 OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

plane. In vlow of tho otnto of cooplotion of tho projoct. which by now io
punt the point or no ruturn. objoctiono or thio hind oto now roro. but tho
concorno nbout tho coot incrooooo (owing in port. in tho cooo of tho Tornodo.
to tho dovoluotion of tho liro in rolotion to tho cor-on work) oro otill
curront.

At tho boginning o! 1975. tho totol coot for corrying out tho progrono pro-
vided for by tho low woo 1.265 billion liro: thio coot rooo to 1.7b5 billion
by tho niddlo of 1976. to 2.170 hilliOn ot tho boginning of 1977 ond 2.533
billion o yoor lotor.

A cortoin nuobor of oir forco progrooo. old ond now onoo. provo to bo cowor-
od by fundo outoido tho pronotionol low. Along thooo oro tho furniohing of
hi 6-222 tronooort plonoo nod 20 hh-SP roocuo holicoptoro. ioprovooont of

tho ovionico of tho P-lObs. purchooo of SIDBHINDBR oir-to-oir niooiloo of

the now gonorotion. ond tho oxpondituroo for tho AHACS oirborno warning ond
control oyotoa. The ooot oigniiicont projoct which will ho dovolopod with
ordinary finoncing hoo tho obbroviotion An-x. Thin io n now tocticol oupport
plono which will roploco tho 6-918'0 and tho 0-91Y‘o in tho l980'o. It will
in oil probobility ho on ontiroly ltolion product (but with tho onginoo

built undor ioroign liconoo). In ony cooo. ony idoo of Joint production with
Root Ger-any ond Groot hritoin. por tho oxooplo of tho Tornodo ond tho

Ph-7o cannon. ooooo out of tho picturo. lnotood. thoto hoo boon tolh of o
poooiblo ogroonont with Swodon.

Tho oono col-ontory oo oodo for tho orly oo o Iilitory inotrulont io wolid
for tho oir forco oloo. Plonoo which rooch tho lilito of thoir tochnicol
ond oporotionol liio oro roplocod. Givon tho incroooo in oir dofonoo
copocitioo. tho oiooiono of ottoch plonoo hovo hocolo Ioro difficult and
oxocting; it io otto-ptod to ohvioto thio with. on tho ono hood, grootor
oophioticotion pornitting high opood ot tho lowoot oltitudoo ond oll-woothor
opcrotiono. ond on tho othor hood. with ooro couplox oquipoont oyotooo.
oopociolly for oloctronic worioro. Thio io o tondoncy which roiooo tho
totol cooto wcll hoyond tho olroody high prico of on oirplono puro ond
oilplo. Tho purchooo of tho Tornodo would coho no oonoo if ono woro
conotroinod to uoo it no on ottoch plono of tho l960'o-thot io. without
oquipping it with oyotono. ond oopociolly trio-oat. ouitoblo for ito
niooion (oroo boobo. ontirunwoy hoabo. looor-guidod. oloctro-opticolly
guided. or inirorod-guidod boobo).

Navy: It in vory probohlo thot tho novy low will ho o-ondod in ouch o woy
no to ooko it iinnnciolly (loxiblo. Thio would onto it poooiblo not only to
roiinnnco the "roducod" progron (l holicoptor-corrying cruioor. 6 onti-
ouhoorino frigotoo. 2 ouhoorinoo, 6 oiooilo-lounching hydrofoilo. l floot
oupply chip. 1 roocuo-oolvogo ohip. b oinoowooporo nod 27 Ab-le onti-
ouhnorino holicoptoro). for which 1.000 billion liro in no longor ouificiont.
but oloo to conoidor ogoin tho poooibility of building oll tho ohipo
originolly plonnod.

31
’0! OIYICXAL US! OIL!
POI OPPICIAL "8! ONLY

In ouch o caoe. two oiaoilo-launchins chaoera. two note frigateo of the
"Houotrole" [Northwoat Hind] cleeo. oia Iinoowoopeto. ono tronopott ohio
for oophibioua opotatione and nine Ab-ziz holicoptoro would join tho floot
around tho oid-l900’e.

Tho oddod coot. including tho “technicol-oporationel ioprovoaente" and
“coopletion of the oquipoont on board." would total 1.158 billion lire.
at 1979 pticoo. with tho 386 billion in prico rovioiono. tho novy low
thuo rofinonced would cone to coet 2.544 billion.

haonwhile. the delivery tioeo ore hoins outlined with stoator procieion.
Ao reaordo tho plon fot conottuction financed by tho ordinaty budsoto. tho
ftisate "Lupe" [Rolf] bocooo oporotionol in tho autumn of l977. ond o yoor
lotor. tho frigato "Sosittatio" [Sagittoriuol and tho ouhootine ”Souro"
[Roan]; in 1978. tho eubootino "Pocio di Cooooto" end tho frigote "Poroeo"
[Poraouol woro lounchod. Along tho ohipo plonned by tho proootionol law.
tho koel of tho ftigato "Hoootrolo" woo laid ot tho beginning of 1978 (tho
oi: unite of thio claoo will bo delivered botwoon 1900 and l983). while
tho oix hydrofoila will so into ootvico in tho 3-yoot poriod 1979-1981.

Novottholooo. roooono for indecioion are not lacking. both eo rogotde tho

docioion to build tho holicoptot-carriot cruioor and bocauoo tho navy low

and tho otdinory budgoto do not eooo to givo tho necoooory eonhooio to tho
ouxiliary ohipo. In fact. conottuction of only ono oquodton oupply ohip.

tho "Voouvio." io ochoduled; it will join tho "Strooboli." which wont into
ootvico in 1975. A foctor ouch oo thio could hovo o nosotivo influonco on
tho floot‘o oporotionol copocity.

intorbtanch Stratosy

The dizzying poce of technological progrooo which brinso woopono oyotooo
topidly to tochnicol-oporotionol oboolooconco. ond oquolly, tho dizzying
riot in their cooto. ond tho propor linito plocod on tho finonciol ro-
oourcoo which it io poooiblo to devote to dofonoo ptojocto. in tho faco of
ooro ursont aociol nocoooitico. i-pooe difficult choicoo.

But it io difficult. fro. onolyoio of the throo prolotional lawo. to undo:-
otond what unitoty ottotosic dooign governed tho important docioiono tohon
in pan: yooro. Thuo it io difficult to ootohlioh whothor tho oceno chooon
are the right onoo or not. For ouro. there hoo boon no docioion tohon in

tho politicol atone to which to refer and to uoo oo o otondord fox chockins
the choicoo oodo.

It io indeed tho rooponoibility of tho politiciono to eotoblioh tho fro-o-
work of politicol tofotonco which the oilitory ehould ohido by for dofinins
the oilitoty inottunont. Only if ouch o cloor fro-o of toforonco oxioto

io it poooiblo to ovoluoto tho coot ond offcctivoneoo of tho individuol
technical propooalo. to ooko choicoo. to toduco or oxpond the budgot. in o

32
you omcm us: om
FOR O??ICKAL US! ONLY

reasoned way. with awareness of the risks run and calculation of the benefits
which can be derived free then. In the absence of such a frasework. the
entire process fades into the indefinite. the more general the objectives of
defense policy are. the more it becomes ispossible to evaluate the correct-
ness of expenditure. there are no solely "technical” criteria: was it
necessary to buy the famous Hercules planes which are being argued about in
the constitutional court today? Is it necessary to build the new Italian
“through-deck cruiser? Is it advisable to saintain the present budget
division which favors the expenditures for the array? It is ispoasible to
reply in a couplets way: one can determine whether a specific plans or

ship or cannon or something else is technically valid. whether it carries

out properly the tasks for which it was designed; but no one today outside
the defense apparatus is in a position to evaluate whether it is right for
the Itelian arsed forces to have spent all that noney to carry out that task
in that manner. the only way to know. and hence to have a proper debate on
defense expenditures. is by precise determination of what it is desired to
defend. how. why and within what limits. with what priorities. But unfor-
tunately. the Italian political class has so far hidden behind the convenient
screen of NATO decision. general and inprscise. refusing to debate that which
it was its task to decide.

Italy has thus becose essentially a "forward base" of NATO (and in particular.
of the American forces). limiting its interest (and hence the major portion
of its budget) to defense of the northeast sactor-that is. Priuli and the
Veneto. where more than one-third of Italian war power is concentrated. As
the strategic situation in the liediterrenean changed and the necessity of a
sore active European role in the alliance becass more pressing. Italy did
not conduct any debate on these decisions and tried to continue as in the
good old tines. thus was created a void. which had necessarily been filled
directly by the nilitary adainiatration. but lacking sufficient political
cover. lacking a frame of reference and thus actually prevented iron asking
more courageous choices. In the absence of political decisions. bureau-
cratic routine naturally prevails. therefore. the predominant strategic
posture asses in fact to remain for the future too the one hinged on defense
of the borders wdth the east. the silitary establish-ant. which has little
propensity to basic discussion of military questions and is dissatisfied at
not receiving precise political directives which eight have aided it in its
choices. has in any case contented itself with managing the funds assigned
to defense in a fora substantially free of parliasentary control.

there are at least two negative results. the first is that we are still
witnessing a distribution of the defense budget in accordance with a priority
(first the army. then the air force. then the navy) which is no longer con-
aonant with the altered geostrategic iaportance of the Mediterranean area.

the second is that a unitary. interbranch vision of nilitary programing is
still lacking. and one has the impression that each armed force is proceeding
elong its own line of evolution and sodernitstion. without any coordination
with the others. But it is no longer possible for the three branches to

33
ron ontcm. usr. our
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pmcood along thie rond without thoir prograee being evaluated end approved
in function of the overall eilitary inatrunent which it ie deaired to achieve
and without adoption of atrict criteria for verifying coet-effectivaneee.

The rotor. of the arned forcee initiated hae certainly etreaelined eeveral
eervicee. but it hae not changed the baeic criteria of oubdivieion of the
budget and of etrategic orientation. It ie e ”technical" reform. with all
the linite of political deficiency already pointed out. The new neane which
Italy in acquiring are therefore naking technically lore Iodern an inetrunent
which ie "old" in ite political-etrategic principlee. Once again. there in
concentration on effectiveneae by eoctor. without finding the overall effec-
tiveneee of Itelien defence an a whole. It ie therefore neceeeery to re-
think. in new terne. the eilitary inatrunente which Italy neede. coneidering
the profound changee in the geopolitical and geoatrategic context of the
Mediterranean area. fitting the dietribution of defence reeourcee to thee.

According to the IAI. it would be advieable to concentrate in the future on
a eilitery inetrueent of reduced dineneiona but fully effective end capable
of purauing the eaaentinl objectivee of the country'e nilitary policy. In
thie context. the political clean ehould ect to give direction. to coordi-
note and control. and the final decieion in up to it. while reeponeibility
for finding anewere. on the technical level. goee to the nilitery--no
longer anewere to the individuel raquireuenta of each aned force. but to
tho lore articulated reouireeenta of the nilitary inatrment an a whole.
Iith unitary progruing for arny, nevy and air force.

With the Trigger in Raehington

In Italy there are ebout 1.000 nuclear werheada. Sone of then are eeeigned
to use by the Italian and forcee. according to the NATO agreenente. Sane
of then are etationed on Italian territory. but controlled excluaively by
the Anerican troope. finally. none of thee equip the Merican Sixth Fleet
etationed in the Mediterranean. But here. in detail. ia the eituation.

Nuclear Heapona Aeeigned to the Italian Arned Porcea

According to a etudy by the Stockholm International Inatitute for Peace
(SIPRI). the nuclear weopona aeaignad to the Italian and forcea ae of nid-
I976 wero: 126 lSS-nillileter howitzere; 12 203-. howitzera; lo honeet John
ground-to-ground niaeilea: 6 Lance ground-to-ground niaailee: and 72

F-106 fighter-boobere. From 1976 to todny. according to the International
Institute of Strategic Studiee of London. the lioneet Johne have been with-
drawn. while according to SIPRI. there are eight Lence eieailee today. not
five. An for the fighter-bonﬁre. in reality only two groupe of the F-lolo
type ere deeignated in Italy for uaing nucleer bonbe. and thua their number
in non realietically about 30-36. If one taken into account the fact that
in general. the nuclear warheede etored in Itely for theaa weapone are one
for each niaeile. two for eech fighter-boob“. and three for each howitzer,
one arrivee at ebout 500. Keeping aleo in nind the fact that other Italian

333
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carriere of eingle tactical nuclear warheade are certainly the 96 Nike
Horculea antiaircraft eieeilea. and probably the antieubearine planee (25).
one arrivea at a total of more than 600 nuclear warheede. which the Italiana
would have to uee with the "double hey” ayetu: for the uae of euch weapona.
authorization by the preeidant of the United Statea and approval by the
Itnlian Goveruent are necaeeary aiaulteneouely.

Finally. again according to SIPRI. there are elao in Itcly. aa well ea in
was Ger-any. Greece and Turkey. nuclear daeolition aim... the total number
of which-«till according to SIPle-ehould be about 300.

American Nuclear weapona in Italy

There in leaa intonation about the nuclear weapona controlled directly by
the Americana but atationed in Italy. The nuebcr of Aeerican airplaeee
baeed in Italy and equipped with nuclear weapona ia known (including thoae
belonging to the Sixth Pleat): about 20 fighter-babe" baaed at Aviano.

in Priuli. which belong to the 60th Tactical Group of the 11.5. Air Force;
about 60 attach planee on board two aircraft carriere and about 30 aeti-
aubnarine planee on board the me aircraft carriere atationed et Sigonella.
near Catania. beae well-known. though. to how many nuclear weapona are at
the diapoeal of the eurface ahipe of the Sixth Fleet. which haa ita logisti-
cal beae at Neplee. and the hunter-killer aubeerinee. a eupport ahip for which
in atationed at Maddalena.

According to en eetilete by an American aource. the tactical nuclear warheede
on board the American fleete in the Atlantic (the Second) and in the Hediter-
ranean (the Sixth) total about a thoueand. Knowing the eiree of the fleete

(5 aircraft carriere and 60 aurfaca ahipe in the Second; 2 aircraft carriere
and 15 surface ahipe in the Sixth). one can deduce that there are about

300 tactical nuclear weapona available to the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean.

35
ron omcw. use our
1.

2.

3.

S.

9.17 - 2.9 2.9
8.07 9.7 2.6 2.3
7.77 8.6 2.5 2.6
7e‘9 Beg Ze‘ ."
7.06 7.91 - --
79033 n '- ‘-

The figuree furniehed refer to the ordinery defence budget. It
ehould be kept in nind, for .Xluplc. thet the pronotionel leue
for the erned forcee. leunched in 1977. provide for expendituree

(which hove elreedy eterted. tron 1978) not coneidered in the
ordinery budget.

The increeee in public expenditure of e current neture in recent
yeere ehoue defense expendituree constantly decreeeins. even in
the preeence of conetent epproprietione. In eddition. (roe 1975
on. the expendituree for niiitery peneione heVe been reeoved fro-

the dofenee budget.
Poreceet.
Source: HILITAKY BALAICZ.

Source: SIPRI. Stockhole.

36
you ontcw. us; my
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
The Italian Mud Force. 1040

:09: 3.99“” 1-9

Iowan-tutu
sow-mm.»-
Imam-mm

Omm
(”2:33.“-

iaguw .. ,
Momma

()mmmmo-nﬁow “,unumm 6
‘Mmﬁ-W'W Mow-nuns)!“

III- UIUN 01m

  
 

Inn-nun...» mutant
8 con-macaw!

Um:
(3 U au-aoaou-aum:
m OHICIAL US! ONLY

[Table contiru nd]

 

' nvumout um)
A. n “yel'--.m
’ewemm

emu-mo
“me-mm
”'0'“.
ﬁmnw
“no." V
ﬁmew
cue-me

  
 
 
 
 
   
 

   
  

  
 

O vie-amen .0 0-0!“

M CI W een ”-0040
0 M00

”-MO-MO: Mom..."
"4°00 - .

 
   
 
  

mun-mo
6 I “Iowan-m
- MI-3a'laeeeu

   

”Add, 01!.- ‘OIO-M I

 

Key:

2. Pereonnel: 260.000 (not including carabinieti).
3. l "noted divieion
3 mechanized diviaiona
l necbanited brigade
S notorized brisadee
5 Alpine brisadee
1 parachute brigade
2 uphibioue batteliona
b. 1 brigade with Lenca ground-to-ground nieeilae
6 antiaircrafe battalione vith mu niaeilee
5. Tanks: 700 11-67%. 200 H-60'e and 500 Leoparde
b.000 troop-transport mocha of the 11-113 type
6. Self-ptopelled hoviture and cannone of 155. 175 and 203 .
ﬂovittere and cannone o! 105. 155 and 203 -
TOW antitank nieeiiee

[Key continued on following page]

38
ton omcw. use own
FOR 0??!CIAL US! ONLY

[Key continuod]

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
16.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

2b.
25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
3°.
31.
32.
33.
11..
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
A0.
61.
62.
£3.
66.
65.

Any eir force

lloiicoptere: 60 All-H'o; 140 AB-20lol205'e:
150 Ali-206'” 20 (Ii-£75

130 light plenoe

Cerehlniori (poreonnol: 90,000)

i ernored regieont with "-67'n end h-lll’e

l perechuto hetteiion

Navy

Pereonnelt 52.000

5 ettech euheerinee

c hunter-killer eubnorinoe (ontieuhnerine)

3 nieeile-leunching cruieere with helicoptere

i nieeile-lounching choure

t oheeere (including 1 for ueo ee treining ehip end headquarter.)
l0 frigetee

12 corvettee

l nioeile-leunching hydrofoil

I. gunboete

S torpedo hoete (d)

3‘ ninoewoopero (including 6 for high eeee. 20 offehore end

10 ooeotel)

l eupply ehip

2 troop end utoriol treneport ohipe

2 lending ehipo

Hore then 150 auxiliary end ninor ehipe (coeetel treneport ohipe;
lending croft; hovercreit; ooeetel ohop ehipe: teot ehipe:
hydrogrephic ehipe. tenkoro. netleyere. oelvego ehipo. treining
ohipe. towboeto)

2 bettelione oi urineo

Nevy eir force

holicoptorz: 26 Sh-JD'o: 30 A3-20‘I212'e

Air Yorco 5' "

Poreonnel: 70.000 (ebout 300 coohet plenoe)

l fighter-bother group with r-lO‘G'e

3 fighter-bonhor groupo with 7-1068'e

2 fighter-hooker groupe with 0-91Y'o

6 interceptor groupo with P-lOés'e

3 light tightor-bonbor end roconneiooence pleae groupe with 6-9lk'e
3 reconneioeenco plono groupe with nr-loac'. end P-lO‘c'o

2 Ioritilo rooonneioeenco groupo with Broguot Atlentice

l neritioo reconneieoence group with 8-2 1‘recluere

l troneport plono group with G-lOOﬂ'e

2 treneport plene groupe with 0-119'e

8 Nihe-horculeo entieiroroft liooile groupe

Training pioooe: SP-260; P-166: “3-326; 6-911: TP-IO‘G
Holicopterot 65 A3o67c/J'o; 60 AB-206l'o

[Key continued on following pogo]

39
ran onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OPHCMI. 08! 01“.?

[Key tonttnuedl

(e) A11 the forcee ere ”eeetsned" to M10. except the brlgedee deployed
in centre1 eouthern ttely.

(b) The etr delenee forcee (interceptore. enttetrcreft I1ee11ee end
reder netvorke) ere "under NAN con-end"; e11 the other foroee
ere “eeetgned” to NATO. except one 0-918 group. the treneport
plenee end the tretnin; p1enee.

(c) The coehet groupe ere coepoeed of 12-18 etrplenee. end the
treneport groupe. of 16-16 p1enee. loch group hee eeverel
odditionel plenee (ehout 20 percent. in reeerve for overheul work).
which uke poeub1e e conttnooue proceee of changeover. The figure
of 300 coehet p1enee 1nc1udee eer1t1-e retonneieoence plenee but
not theee eddtttonel p1enee.

(«1) Three of thee ere equipped for incureton end (town ectlone.

COPYRIGHT! 1!. 110100 1979

11267
(:80: 3106 3ND

’50
POI! OFFICIAL ”SB ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040013-2

' END or
  FICHE
um FILM

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040013-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040013-2

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPBZ-00860R000100040013-2