APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010000-6

' 11
'l .IRIIIIRQV 1979
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00850R000100010004-5

‘ FUR OH'ILIAL USE. mLY

JPRB 15/0197
3 nanny 1979

TRANSLATIMS (XI USSR HILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010004-5
NOTE

JPRS publicatinn~ contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are yuppllud by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
:sl’ Ilixcerptl in the first line of each iten. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation was
processed. there no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was su-arised or extracted.

l'nfaailisr nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or naaes preceded by a ques-
tion out and enclosed in parentheses veto not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. ‘i'ines within iteas are as
given by source.

'ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

~ ‘ iJir' MES ”30 REGUUTIOSS WEMIM WISH" OF
‘1?! 91"9 RﬁPRODWED «rum REQUIRE MT DISSSHIMTION
' is P"Bl.lCATIOS 3! RESTRICTED ”OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
- 1.: -- - ~ .

. Punt-Ma Ovaaoiaatieo ‘ an a“ Mina '- ' ohu/Tuh/Iaui Uok Ne.
mu mumm mm». mm. _
1000 North 61050 load '

Atllucon. Vlnlnu 22201 “

I2. See-win Oman-ma Nana cal Minn I2- Tvn d lawn t mu
Could
AI above

the report contatno tutor-anon on the Soviet nilttary and civil defense
eetabllah-enta. leadorahlp, docttlne. policy. planning. political attain,
orunlxatlon. and oqulplent.

Hllltary Druntzatlono
Military Pacllltlea
Military Peraonnel

”L Manama/0'00““ Yea-a

m. ( out: Fall/6v" 15c

' named." an“

M ontcm. USE OILY. United Ila“ of
Copleo Available Pro- JPIS

      

uuu~nyn - V v. a- n ween-59¢ nun-en

"B '0“ IA? I! unooocao
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB 13/84

3 Janna):

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(moo 1/79)
Counters

Develop-cut of mu: Civil Menu Synt- Analyzed
(Erich ”:de Puck; 08131110”. Doc 77)...................

lacyclopulu Batty: Tutu; of many mtg-at
(II. II. Annoy": savanna VOYEIIIAYA mmmn.

V01 3' 1977)....00000000000000000.coooooaoonooioonou00.00.00.

can Mann handout Coping 91th Mutual 011..qu

(mm mm 0mm V ”I'll 80
mm mm. 1978)..0.000000000000000...b.3000...
m ontcw. US! ONLY

um 01 sonn cum. om: 31m mum
Stuttgart WA in Got-on Vol 27 ho 12. Doc 77 pp 1057-1068

[Article by Erich Pordinond Punch (born 1897)) Coloul (tot). Iilitory
ocioaco writor. locturor. trooolotor; Goolor. no: ”Civil Dot-ooo in
tho mm Union”)

[root] In tho onto-I of 1972. Col Con A. Altuniu. who todoy io otill tho
hood of tho Hoin mutation for Civil ooionoo in tho Dofohoo anion-y
of tho Soviot Union. wroto on uticlo in tho om orun ontitlod “0n Coo-
bot Alon" (av... i Octobor 1972). [Ploooo ooo oppondix for ohhroviotiouo.)
In thot uticlo ho rotorrod to tho docroo ”On Al: Dofonoo In tho unitary
at tho 0889..“ which voo ioouod on Io Octohor 1932. 50 yooro onlior. by tho
Council 0! l’ooplo'o Co-ioooto (Senorita). oo tho hirthdoto of "civil do-
!onoo.” ‘rhio ton. of couroo, hoo oxiotod oo ouch only oinco 1961; mtil
thou. thlo mutation voo collod m. stoning "oi: dofonoo.” to o ooh-
ooquout ortinlo, ontitlod "Iain Phoooo on! Tducioo in Civil Mono“
(V1211. Iovdor 1976. pp 39-67). Almin wont All tho voy hook to Latin
uho. ouppooodly oo long on o in 1905, notod thot "tho pooploo oro aov
nun; VI!" ooo «ho in 1918 moody pointod up tho "oipiliconco of tho
hintoﬂond oo to: oo notion vottoro io concorood." tho populotioo to-
portodly ooo Iohilixod (or detouivo promtiono vhonovot ooo-y ointott
opproochod Potronod during world Ho: 1. During Civil Hot (1918-1921).
citioo throotonod by ooo-y oitcrott took locol ptotoctivo mourn. ‘l'ho
hiototion Col of mom A. Iolyoyov ropottod thot Pottosrod hod o pot-o-
hoot oi: dotonoo oyotoo in on orticlo ontitlod "tho Dovolopooot of tho
Cantry’o m. 1918-1961" (With. lo 8. 1973. PP 09-90. At that tho tho
idoo no to provido ptotoction ouiut m ond poiooo no hooho dtoppod
(to. oircrott. Ioor of goo ottoclw dating thooo yooro ooisod tho pooplo
no looo than (on of otolic Ivor tony. lointoino "om: A. Inchot in
”Votoouo in lot" Mich. 1966. p 19). akin; rolotoaoo to on uticlo
publish“ in WI! mu (Dofmo Ion“). lo 17. 1932.

Air dotonoo oooouroo (to. tho vory manning voro tom in tot-o of two
dittoroat dotoooo cotogotioo:

1
M ORIGIN. 08! OIL!
POI OHICIAL US! ONLY

1. ho anod iorcoo ongogo in octivo air dofonoo (m). uoing opociol
unito ond tho corrooponding woopono oyotono.

2. Locol civil dofonoo (IMO) handloo poooivo doionoo. in othor wordo.
tho protoctiun of tho population and torgoto.

Both cotogorioo dopond on tho oooo oir ohoorvotion. warning. ond roporting
oyotoo (“008). mu mm mm (an). Hoooow. 1976.
Vol 11. pp l63££.. roporto on tho dovolopnont oi thia was notwork which
ooorgod tron rothor prioitivo hogimingo and which to today highly rocog-
nirod and oprood ovor tho ontiro torritory of tho Raroow root countrioo.
‘l'ho poooihilirioo for intorlotion procoraont in kooping with tino and
oituotion roquirooonto oo woll on tho ropid tot-wording or doto rocoivd
woro ioprovod oonoidorahly duo to tho notation of tho toloco-nnicotiono
oyotoo which oxtonoivoly rolioo on radio oloctronico (8V3. Vol I. p 761.).
‘l'ho Soviet Union oontinnoo to work in thio tiold ond hoopo up with devol-
opnonto in tho "not. A hook outhorod by V. A. loronyuk ond V. I. Vorohyov.
entitled "Avtonotioirovonnyyo oiotony uprovloniyo ohtohov i voyonnykh «torn:-
hdoniy" (Auto-nod midonco Syotou), Iioocow. 1976. in o opociol choptor in-
vootigotoo "rho Antonatod Syotono or no diroction in tho Unitod Stotoo"
and in tho NATO oroo. Mlodgo dorivod iron ouch onolyooo io uood oo
foundotion for work on tho prohlooo of "ociontitic prodiction in war"

which hoocow givoo coroful conoidorotion (Yu. V. Chnyov, In. B. hihhaylov.
'Troporirovoniyo v voyonnon dolo." Hoocow, 1975; ooo oloo WA, No 5.
1975. pp A SARI). horohol of tho Soviot Onion Sokolovokiy wroto tho
following in hio hook Militoor-Strotogio" [hilitory Strotogyl (3rd Mition.
Got-n. Colom. 1969, p 538):

"Bocouoo tho onprooo oir dotonao co-ond hoo tho ooot cooprohonoivo dato
on tho air oituotion ond hocouoo it thoroforo oloo con hoot judpo tho don-
gor of an ottock on a porticulorly ioportont point, it not inioro tho
corrooponding civil dofonoo agoncioo which in turn will into:- tho popula-
tion.”

Dovolopnont of Poooivo Air Dofonoo

The paooivo oir dofonoo nouuroo. tokon during ﬂorid "or 1. during tho
Civil Hot, and during tho yoor thorooftor. involved octiono hy ult-
protoction oooociotiono which oprang up locally in a opontonoouo nanor
orwhichhovohoonootuphyoagorpartyorgono. rhoioonoofgoooooko
to tho populotion in throotonod porto of tho country hogon in 1920.
‘l'oclniciono boon to look into tho prohlon of oholtor oonotrnction. Tho
onthor ton-horn having road on illnotrotod «title on oir roid oholtoro
in nrhon rooidontiol hlocko in o nilitory-tochicol Journol of tho 088!
during tho niddlo of tho twontioo. ‘l'ho ortiolo roco-ondod thot o ohoot-
Iotal pipolino ho oxtondod iron oir-tioht roooo ovor tho root ond thot
trooh oir ho pooped nannolly through thot pipolino into tho Mount.

2
m OFFICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL 038 ONLY

The mo coupler received inpetue and sore epecifit for: free 1921 on
through the “eociety for the Pronotion of Defence end Aero-cheeicel Devel-
opeent" (Oeoeviekhin) whoee ectivitiee ere pronoted iron the top down end
which in orgeniud throughout netionel territory.

lnternetionel teneion. netting in during the thirtiee. ceueed the Soviet
governeent-edvieed by eilitery lendere euch ee l‘ukhechevekiy end othere—
to booet ite defeneee. M port of thin undertehing. the entire territory
of ective end peeeive eir defenee—by decree of the Ooumil of People'e
Co-ieeere (Sovnerkoe) of 5 April l932-owee treneferred to the People'e
Co-ieeeriet of Any end levy Affeire which on 20 July 1936 wee converted
into the People'e Co-ieeeriet of Defenee. A "W0 edeinietretion of mu"
(lebochye-lreetyeneheye lreeneye Arniye—led Barker end Peeeent Any) wee
net up in the People'e Conieeeriet for Any end Ilevy Affeire. Only the

6 October 1937 Sovnerkoe decree led to the edequete clerificetion of the
ereee of cometente end the eieeione. The Soviet edninietretive eechinery
etill worhe bureeucreticelly end in e rether undertone eenner eleo in the
defence eector. It conetently neede new inpetue to rennin in notion.

The nodernizetion of the weepone eyeteee. which bed becoee neceeeery, wee
eleo intended to reiee the W0 end the technical fecilitiee of the “'08
network to e level in keeping with the require-ente of the tinee. Pre-
ceutione wero tehen for the eeploynent of mo in one of wer in thou
border regione which were perticulerly eeriouely threetened. The petty
end toeeonol [fang Conniet Leegue] orgeniretione. the labor unions.
end the other eeee orgeniretione. eepecielly Oeoeviekhin. the Red Crone.
end the Red Creecent were eleo involved in thin effort. the W0 heed-
quertere in the pertinent border defenee district took are of eenegeeent
end eeeued reeponeibility. The progren involved the following:

Preventive neeeuree to keep the netionel econoey going in we of wer;

Coping with the effecte of boebing reide ee well en the eeploynent of
chenicel end becteriologicel (biologicel) werfere egente:

Beteblieluent of eedicel. reeoue. end deeege control eervice in wertine
but eleo in dieeeter cute;

Preperetion of en eir reid werden eervice which would go into ection in
me of panic. dieturbencee. deetruction. end lew violetione end which.
for eneeple. would heve to eee to it thet uncontrolled etreeee of refug-
eee would not interfere with the nobilizution or novenent of troope end
with intended eeeietence operetione (nee “Io-Brief. [In 1-2. 1971. p 13);

Propegende end politicel-ideologicel indoctrinetion ad inetruction of
tho populetion ee to rulee of behevior in wertine;

‘l‘reining of pereonnel eernerhed for m duty in their operetionel ereee.
no prectice elerte end enercieee.

3
POI OFFICIAL USE OIL!
'08 OFFICIAL US! ONLY

‘rho plannad aatahliJnont of "civilian oolbprotoction groupa" (druohiny)
woo begun in tho midantial diatricta or najor citioo or in industrial
pinto ad othar placaa of work locatad in proounobly thraatonod aroao;

in caaa of an air raid alart. thoaa group. vara i-odiataly to go into
oction in accordanca with tho inatructiona containod in tho oporationa
progran. Protactivo clothing and aquipnant voro raadiad. in tho root of
tho nation'a tarritory, tho effort vao continod naarly to intornativo pro-
paganda. Hiacallanoouo precautionary noaauroa vora loft up to local init-
iativo. According to tho hiotorian A. lolyayav (loc. cit.). obligatory
mo training courooo for nodaaro of the "civilian aaltvprotoction group“
vora inotitutod by tho Mot authorities in 1935.

Civil Air Doionao in World war It

At tho boginning of Horld "or II, diraction of panaiva air dolanoa (DINO)
uaa tranoiorrod to tho m (Paopla'o Co-ioaariat of tho Intarior). to
raliova tho hurdan on tho Poopla'a Co-ioaariat oi Manna; tho mo for
thia purpooo oatahliahod a mo nain odniniatration.”

Altar tho invaoion of tho Soviat Union by Goran troopo, Sovnarkon docroo
No 1812 vao iuuod on 2 July 1941: it no ontitlod "0n tho Gonoral Duty
to Train tho Population for Air Dotonoo" (Zakonodatal'otvo voyonnogo vra-
noni. Room. 1961. p 22). All non not aorving in tho arnod forcao or
otharwiao axanpt tron vartino duty. botvoon tho can of 16 and 60 and
vonan hatvaon tho agoa of 18 and 50. had to porticipato in HNO activitioa
according to that diractivo. rho mo nain adniniotration of tho m
aav to it that tho nocoaoary naaauroo voro takan. By 19‘2. noro than 6
nillion poopla varo in tho mo tornationo (A. lolyayov. VIZh. l. 1975.
pp73-77. ooo oloo furthor atatiotica thoro). Protoaoor 3. 8. toltukhovokiy
ducriboo um duty on follow in hia hiotorical work ontitlod "Vclikaya
Otochootvonnaya voyna Sovotolnogo Soyura Dbl-19‘5" ("rho Croat lathorland
War, 1961-1965"). “cocoa. 1959. p 67:

”Ming tho iirot daya of tho var. tho lioocov rogional party co-ittoo and
tho rogional aoviot [omen] oi workor doputioo took urgont noaoum to
organise tho protoction of factorioa. oloctric povor planta, tolagraph
and tohphonc mitotic”. and to proparo tho population for air do-
!anoo. In Hoocov and in othor citiaa noar tho bordar. tho Soviat pooplo.
.undor tho direction of tho local party organization, placod induatrial
ontarpriaaa and govornnont otticoa undor thair protoction and croatod a
“local air datonoo" GINO). rho linocovitoa ootabliahod new facility
unita. oolt-protoction grasps, a roll on air daianao and chonical dotouaa
poata (was) in ovory ontorpriaa. in ovory man-Int agancy, and in all
roaidontial buildup. According to a rooolution by tho lioocov city can-

nittaa. h apacial roginont vaa organiood for lira-fighting purpoooa. ‘I'ha
varinua borough lira-fighting coqanioa voro roinforcad."

mo. which an diractod by tho IUD during World Bar ll. according to
Soviot intonation during thoao yaaro cartainly provod itaalt—tor oar-pla,

A
M OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

in Stelingred, during the fighting for the city. end in Leningred (Belyeyev.
VIZh. No l. 1975. Altunin. VIZh. 11, 1976).

Air Deienee in the Atonic Age

After the :crninetion of cowet operetione in world Her 11, the Soviet Union—
which hed been ehocked by the effect of Anericen etonic boebe dropped on
Jepeneee citiee—i-edietely begun to put the precticel leeeone leerned
through mo in wertine to uee in order further to expend the eir defenee
eyeten. So long ee Iioecow wee indeterninebly behind on the develop-eat of
nucleer weepone end delivery vehiclee, it kept eeeerting thet etoeic wer.
with ite ceteetrophic eltecte. could no longer be e neene of policy. After
Sputnik end the teen. the concept wee chenged. ln propegende teree. we

firet witneeeed e pheee of poohdpoohing the effective nucleer weepone etrikee.
Then the theeie wee put out to the effect thet the veetncse of soviet ter-
ritory, the decentreliretion of pereonnel end uteriel. end the politicel-
norel superiority of the better-dieciplimd end lore clue-conecioue Soviet
people edded up to the Soviet Union's euperiority over any potentiel foe

(nee OSTEUROPA. 8-9. 1965. p 590; 2. 1964. p 120).

The m (Interior Kinietry). which epreng fro- the m. reneined the over-
ell ci' .1. \‘etenee co-end euthority. Tron 1955 onwerd. defensive neeeuree
tehen eo fer egeinet the threet tron the eir were extended to protection
egeinet .ﬂecte of nucleer eieeile enploynent. Thet ie when the euthoritiee
begen to neke ewecuetion plene. Theee releted to orgenixetione, government
egenciee. enterprieee. end linelly ell populetion eegnente not locelly ee-
ployed or needed. in other words. Ioetly children end older people. The
proble- ee to how the netionel econon could be kept going wee conteepleted
on e lerger ecele. The 008M! (All Union Voluntery Society for the Prono-
tion of the Any. Avietion. end Nevy)-which hed been eetebliehed in 1948 ee
the eucceeeor orgenieetion to Oeoeviekhin end which wee conpletely orgenized
by l9Sl--£ron 1955 on egein. together with Red Croce end the Red Crescent.
geve neee treining coureee netting beeic knowledge on mo teeke (eee
"civil Detenee minet NBC Heepone in the USSR.” OST-PROBLIHB, No 8. 1960.
pp 226-232).

By the end of the filtiee end the beginning of the sixties—”when imper-
ieliet circlee in the United Stetee end NATO pursued the edventuroue pol-
icy o! belencing on the brink of we: end of e creeh erle rece end when
their output of nucleer weepone increeeed." ee Altunin put it in V121:
(Kilitery-lietoricel Journel), No 11. 1976. p “—ective end peeeive eir
defenee were further boosted. At thet tilt, the "Stretegic Rocket Porter“
eppeered ee e new erned forces component in the netionel defence etructure.
leceuee of the trenendoue renge end deetructive power of ice long-renge
end intercontinentel nucleer eieeilee. they uehered in e new epoch in
weepone technology. in the theory of werfere. end in cadet operetione
eince they were euiteble for eeploynent on both ofteneive end defeneive
coebet eieeione. including direct derenee egeinet eneey menu. On top
of thet we hove their politicel-propegende welue ee e neene of deterrence.
threet. end bleclueil.

5
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we will only briefly refer here to the future-oriented space stretegy which
has already been included in nilitary planning (see OSTBURDPA, he 7, 1976.
p 567) and which operates with killer satellites; we night also briefly
aention here the subject of laser techttolou which is currently being pur-
sued uphstically in scientific research and with whose help cos-it or
other flying attack objects are to be destroyed. This kind of overview
shows how things fit into place and how every attack weapon which happens
to cone out (or which is only indicated in outline) i-sdiately causes
countarasasuree and new defensive devices.

The "Revolution in warfare" (mean, he 8, 1965. p 528f.), brought about
by the develop-ant of nuclear weapons and noteworthy technical advances in
the area of conventional eras. provided fresh impetus for defense thinking
in the Soviet Union in several respects. In July 1961. for steeple, as part
of the switch to changed cosbat conditions and security require-ents. as
well as the deteriorating unitary-political situation and the objectives,
the passive mo coaplu was organised as "Iain adninistrstion for civil
defense" and placed within the Defense Ministry; guided air defense system
were also taken over thus and gradually integrated here. the nain adain-
istration was taken over by a "chief of ussn civil defense." Next cane

the establisluent of subordinate adninistration and depertnents which init-
ially handled the integration work. The 008M? negazine mums ZNAII'IYA
(Defense Science) was designated as the civil defense bulletin. It has now
becoee inportsnt for ell organisations and persons active in this sector
as a result of the expansion and growing significance of this special field.
To stimlata the duty performance enthusias- of assigned personnel, their
work results are included in the systen of socialist conpetition and the
W0 decoretion in the fore of a clasp has been awarded for particularly
outstanding achiwenents.

We can read the following passage in a book written in Moscow in 19“ by
8. N. toslov and others. entitled "0 sovetakoy voyennoy nauke" (m Soviet
Hilitsry Science), bioscow, 1966. p 39M:

"rho esteblisl'nent of so-cslled civil defense mat be temd s new and
iaportsnt phone-anon in war today. In asdern war, the dividing lines be-
tween the front lines and the hinterland disappear sore and nore. Coabat
operations can develop along the front lines and deep in rear areas. His-
sile units and the air force can carry out nuclear aissile strikes against
targets in the hinterland. Air forces however can also carry out conven-
tional boﬁing raids. The ens-y can drop airborne troops far behind the
fighting forces. Sonatina strong groups of ens-y araored or nechsnised
for-tions Iansge to achieve deep penetration. This is why the hinter-
land mst be stud and in a position to boat off attacks by airborne
troops and diversionery units and engage ans-y tanks, which have broken
through. with its own resources.

6
m ORIGIN. USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Civil Delenee Expeneion

At the end of 1961.. Herehel oi the Soviet Union V. 1. Chuikov took over
civil defenee efter he hed loet the poeition of euprene co-ender of the
ground torcee in October of thet yeer tollowindthruehchev'e oueter. he
held thet poeition until 1971. Ilia eucceeeor is Col Gen A. Altunin who wee
pronoted to erny generel on 16 rehruery 1977 (an. 17 Iehruery 1977).

"hen nilitery rotor-e hecene poeeihle efterIOnuehchev'e deperture ec heed
of government (eee osmon, 11 1975. p A-SAS). e new dreft lew wee peeeed
in October 1967 (um. 13 October 1967). Ite Article 18 epeciliee thet
generel civil deienee eervice treining met he included in the progren o!
the newly-introduced 2-yeer ohligetory prenilitery treining (or youth. In
e p-phlet written by hi: end entitled "Grezhdeneheye ohorone v reketno-
yedernoy voyne" (”Civil defenee in nucleer rocket wet"). Noecow. 1968.
amihw liete the individuel defense poeeihilitiee erieting in eddition to
the collective one. Correct individuel hehevior in eny eituetion pre-
euppoeee teeilierity with the individuel threete. It in euppoeed to he

the tent of neeningful propegende end treining to inert theee defeneive
ekille end knowledge. On thet point. the nerehel hee thie to eey:

”It ie the duty of redio end televieion. the preee. the noviee. the cul-
ture). enlighten-eat eervicee end the eociel orgenizetione to preeent civil
defence knowledge to the meee end conetently to expoee the eggreeeive
ceeence end ineidioue intentione ee well ee ectione of the inperieliet
rohherenend to nuke it cleer to the people whet kind of e eituetion hee
erieen.

lie further etetee thet epeciel ettention euet he devoted to the ideolog-
icel end ecientific leVel of propegende end treining neteriele. Agitetion
met he nede eore inpreeeive through precticel inetruction. Civil defenee
exhibite in induetriel end egriculturel enterprieee. houeee of culture.
cluhe. end in recreetionel ereee could nerve ee infomtion end edvieory
egenciee. In hie penphlet (PP 1312.). Gnsikov dividee the prinery nie-
eione of civil defenee into three groupe. Altunin took thet errengeeent

over end eupplenented it in keeping with current develop-ante (V1211. lo
11. 1976. pp 44-56).

Accordingly. the firet group includee ell preceutione to he teken for col-
lective end individuel protection of the populetion egeinet eeee deetruc-
tion weepone end other wet-fete egente. elong with ehelter couetruction.
evecuetion end decentrelizetion in heevily populeted. threetened regione.
the procure-eat oi gee leeks. oxygen equip-eat for reepiretion. protective
clothing. nedicel eeeeurce. end the entire treining end inforeeticn coe-
plex in the citiee end in the rurel ereee. Altunin prohehly doee not spec-
ificelly nention chenical end hecteriologicel (hinlogicel) werfere egente
heceuee en internetionel egreenent. eigned in April 1972. hene the produc-
tion. develop-ent. end etockpiling of hecteriologicel (biologicel) end
toxic chenicel werfere egente end celle for the deetruction of exietiog
etockpilee (um. 11 April 1972). The denger oi redioective cont-inetion

7
FOR OWICIAL US! OIL?
M 0010!“. US! ONLY

continues to exist. the nogotistions on the elininotion of the abuse of
nsturol iorcoo end the developmt of new end sore dsngerous worforo ogsnts.
suggested in 1975 (ammonia me. No 18. 1975. pp lb end 29), reveel
thot worh continues to be done in this field end thot one nust expect the
possibility of the onploynent of such “:1.“ ogents. 'l‘reoty concepts tro-
quontly con be interpreted in dinorent vsys. so pest experience hos shown.

The nooouroo in the second group rolsto to the protection o: the notionol
econon in wsrtino. the soot inportent thing is to keep industrisl end
ogriculturol production going. The resolutions leter on odopted in this
connection by the 25th Potty Congress, so Altunin writes. cell tor gen-
orel governnent orgonirotion chenges end rogionol disconnections in this
sector end ore nentioned enphoticelly olthough no detoils ore given.

The third group includes everything releting to the repsir of donogo
couoed, so well so the ollocotion of suitsble nonpowor end the guorsntee
of onooth operotion. This is obviously oined ot the enploynent of tho
police units end their ouilisry orgsns which ore not included in the
listing of these points.

Active perticipstion by nonilitery forntione (isctory detochnsnts or
drurhiny. nodicol end technicol personnel, Konsonol groups. etc.) in
fighting locol forest. pootbog. or other big tires. so well so esploynent
in «not noturel disoetors (eorthquokos, hurricenes. floods) and their
sequels. in Altunin's opinion. gives personnel concern precticel experience,
increeses the oction reodinoos. end normer helps in obtoining better
tochnicel equip-mt.

Detuoing wsrtino duds is onother civil defense exorcise subject. The
srny press iron tine to tine reports on exercises which were stogod by
civil defense egencies in enterprises end "st other instellstiono" (Col

1'. hihoforov, mm, 5 Key 1976, end others). A redio report iron the
'mo-lneroh'snoltor (Voroshilovgred region) contoino the following psosogc
(um, 15 July 1976):

"Now the plent protection detechnsnt consists of spocislized sections and
groups. The lu-ond-order section runs petrols together with the nilitis
forces. he s result of this octivity we note thet, since the beginning
of this yeor elono. the outer of violetions ogsinst low end order in the
district dropped to less then heli."

Col of the Reserve V.Arkhipov rsther illustrotively reports on the estsb-
list-ent end e-ploylent of volunteer fenele nedicel dotoch-ents et on
electric poser plent in Vlodinir (xzv., 5 Pebruory 1976).

Additionel mercies oress end buildings ere being provided continuelly for
the procticel treining o! non-ilitery civil defense fornetiono which account
for by for the lergsst percontogs of civil defense end rescue personnel.
courses ore being given for meg-em: personnel in theory, precticel

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OYHCIAL US! ONLY

oxxortonco. ond training couroo noun-onto (Altunin. VIZh lo 11. 1976.

p 6). 1n oddition to tho obovo-oontionod nu ormintiouo. othlotic
oooociotiono oro boin; incroooingly nut! to: tho troininl prono- ond thot
includoo oopociolly (no (Gotov k trudu i ohorono~loody for noioooo on!
work) oo voll oo tho moniyo (balloon) oooioty.

Co-ond hochoniou

Tho intogrotion oi tho civilion oolt-protoction oooociotiono throughout

tho country. vhich opt-on; iroo individuol initiation. into o sonorol
sworn-out“ civiliu mo oyot- woo o diiiioult omlopoont procooo

rich in trictiono in vhooo courto it no nocoooory to roduco o voolth of
difforin; intorooto to o co-on donuinotor. Smrol pooplo'o co-iooor-
ioto (lotor on convortod into liniotrioo) no othor. porollol-octins odoin-
iotrotivo ouncioo odvoncod thoir ooporoto clot-o ior influonco. In od-
dition to porty ond oilitory concomo. thoro voro tho concomo of tho
notionol oconooy bronchoo. ocionco out roooorch. tho public hoolth oorvico.
tho toloconanicotiono oyotoa. tho contraction ohd tronoportotion ioduo-
trioo. tho oocurity oonico ond tho polico (Iilitio). juot to nation the
wot ioportont. Tho up-onA-dovn lino in tho choin-ot-co-ono Iona-oat
ond ouporvioory otructuro occordinﬂy oloo I'll: olou; o mltitroch no tony-
loyorod (portly oloo rivol) pottorn. 'l'ho controdiotiono thot con bo notod
in Soviot litoroturo ohov hov diiiicult it io om for tho initiotod to
doocribo thio dovolop-ontol procooo. lolyoyov, for oil-91o. (M. No 9.
1973. p 90) roporto thot tho diroctim oi octivo ond poooivo oi: doionoo
voo plotod in tho hondo of tho Pooplo'o (Jo-ioooriot ior Any ono lovy
Mtoixo olroody on ll» hoy 1927 on tho hooio o! o docroo ioouod by tho 810
(Swot trudo i ohorouy—Council to: Lobor oad Dotonoo). Tho coutrodictioo
in tho otot-onto by Altunin ond lolyoyov con bo uphinod in tho liuat of
tho doublo tuck ootup of tho oilitory ond politicol loodotohip which ot
Lhot tino voo ooro pronouncod in tho and Any (m [workou' no roooonto'
m Anyl) thou 1: u todoy in tho Soviot onod forcoo. Oooovioﬂai- out
into oction in 1927 no boco-o docioivoly involvod in tho mo oyotol.
Accordin; to bolyoyov (lot. cit.. p 91). ”tho polititol odoiniotrotion

of tho m hod tohon ovor tho gonorol diroction of tho diooont oociotioo
hock in 1926.” Initiolly vo voro thuo doolinx horo only with indiroct
oilitory influonco. not diroct mount of mo. Aport iro- thot. co.—
m tuturoo botvoon octivo ond poooivo oir dotonoo rooultod olroody iro-
tho foct thot both of tho. wore dopondont upon tho no oyotu on! both of
tho: voro ouporviood by tho potty. Tho :40 loin odoiniotrotion-drourd-
looo of vhothor it noy hovo boon moor tho Pooplo'o Co-ioooriot o! Dofonoo.
tho mm, tho m. or tho Doiouo Hiniotry—coordinotod pri-orily don;

o horizontol lino with tho ototfo oot up undo: ito duty ototiou. hoot of
tho yrocticol W octivitioo ond loot of tho reopouoihilitioo voro ro-
toinod by tho choir-on of tho executivo co-ittoo o! wrkor doputy Milo.
Thio yiov io oupportod by on ooooy by Col Con Grolwv, tho hood of tho poli-
ticol odniniotrotim uuior civil dotonoo, in on ooooy ontitlod ”Civil
Doionu io o hottor for tho Hholo lotion." in which ho ooyo tho following:

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m ORIGIN. 0|: 0|“

"Civil dcicnu in thc Mint Union in ortnnitu nccordin. to tnrritorinl
nhd producticu principlu. ‘l'hin nun. thct tho plnnnin. nnd uccuticn of
all mum In umlinhnd both by the councils of verb: dcputiu and
by thn ninintriu. Mom. and sovcrmt cunnin- vhich potion c cor-
rupondins nntnrpriu or ccononic iuncticn. 1h. edict- oi thn fruitin- or
the supra-t Mitt Uln. dated 19 men lﬂl. on than basic riutn and dutiu
o! tho diatrict and city councils of vorhr dcputiu cpcciiy thnt thcy
not not to it that tho maul Iilitcry duty in in propcrly inland
and that they at mpcnniblc for thc dirtct wt of civil menu

in tho urhnn or district crcu. 'l‘hc Import o! catcrprinu. purl-mt
conncm. institution. of mm. coluctivo inns. and acct. h!- on
rapcnnihlu tor thc prcpcrntion oi «icnu minnt nun dutruction vu-
pcnn. they at dividcd with catch-iv. right. and will (nil hack on cocicl
Inn crunisnticnn (or mutant. (...). mm hnvc bun at up to un-
cot civil «(not pawl and mourccn; thcy nut uu thn upcriucu

of nilitnry cndm cnd national ncono-y cpccinlintn in thn couru of thin-
cctiviticn. tinny “on 0! ch. nilitcry urn unimd to thou ntnﬂn (...).
Thu civil Mann cut! at citiu. districts. nnd Injor inntcllntinnn of

thc utinnnl many at cuppl-nntcd mtly by minute and tccluicinnc

u vcll u uploym iron thn cntcrprim. duty ctttinnn. and umiuticnn.
hum officcrn or rctircd oiiiccrt u n rule an in chum oi thou cults.
upncinlly on tht district lcvcl.

”It in known thnt um civil dot-nu mam-u nrc no conprchcnoivc thnt it
it inouihlc to carry this out without thc gliding activity oi thc party
cud itn win in than plnccn uhnrc thcy nrc cuppoocd to bc cccqlichnd.
In thin content it mt hn noted that till party uncut in thn republic,
tutu. roam. and district. u all u thn prinry pnrty oruniutinl
conntntly try to ctrmthn civil Manna (...)" (IVS. lo 19. 1911. p ii).

A W dinpctch iro- thc atrium nilitcry district than jut ha
in: pnrticipnticn in civil «in... u n ”or W: project. no.

"A noting o! thn military diatrict'c nilitnry cancil hu hon hold hon.
th- ruulto oi cocci-u to m hid in thc an: of civil dunno arc dic-
cuuod; Windminccmuportcdnnndthctubiorthccniu
you”. mrciu prur- vcrc spelled out. Col Gen 9. Iclmhho dolinrcd

n lccturc. n. nilitcry council's working nation we act-dad by the (ol-
loviau l. Maybcrdycv. chnitlnn. Council of linintcrn. ”that m; I.
muliycv. chninn. Council 0! Main-n. urn-in m; 6. may.
had at c cutrcl Ca-ittcc «puts-t. Inhchiunn Cc-nint hrty; n all
uninintcrooithnhtrnluinnmmncc. chair-nofthnrcml
mtivc cc-ituc. ad tho chitin at tho civil at.“ on“. in thc nin-

intriu nnd wot-nut win" (Ian. l5 m 1916).

Atthncndoihinnrticlc (vm.loll.1976.p“£.).iltninpruntd
autmotmmmmmotmucmmuub-
divucd into “ch. uthnlut point.houtnhlinhnnthnmtirc-

mt for ccututly m. panting. ad ctmthninc thn tochiccl

10
to: «new. I”! “I
M CHIC“!- UII OIL?

hooo of mu doloooo. a. «=pr thot 81th o wot-um to tho ottott thot

m otpﬂtcooto not ho now to don mpotottoo hotvooo mu
dotoooo at! tho on“ lotooo.

0111.1 M... hoopo

no too not “(oration on tho autooco of "one“: am: Mm ttoooo
to Soholmuy'o "Hutton ltrotou" (loo at” n mu.»

"loom no not met ttoooodouo dootroottoo ooo toouolttoo oo o malt
of tho oom'o thonooooloot ottthoo. to not ootﬂltoh o moo n‘ot o!
opotm “le «(nu tonottoo to to” with tho «com o! to on”
ottooh mint tho Motor“. an no, m1» «tool-nu o! tho mono.
nook.“nluoloorvmooloomvoh1o1oooovoyo. Mmthooo
«and thot tho, v11: ho Io o pontoon to «not uootot out-sou nth
thott on vohttloo.

"to ooko ooto thot em: doloooo ttoopo ﬂu ho to o pootttoo to mmluh
thou- doom. thoy not ho otottoood ot outtohlo “otuooo {too ht; otttoo
old Motrin cannon.”

“not outta, utototuro 31m oo Mot-own on tho otrouth. oohoup.

ood ”Loy-at o! thooo opoolol um. Accordingly. tho ”my vou-
intotloo Motrtn mum Vino: ("Mo Anon dot Vorochooor-Poht-
Stootn“ [no Auto of tho Horo- Pctt Coootttool. lhouh. 197‘) ton "Iho
motor, Ioloooo 191641977" (London. 1916). um hovo oo doto. tot
mono. on tho mun ottoogth at tho tooottuctuo um. tho un-
tuhtto; ton-to. no othor oooctol tonottooo o! thot not. My Iooo
Goon. hhuwytolonottvohooh'ﬁloxmmlomlumo'
(uni Oohloo 1976. p 16: ooo doo mo. lo 3. 1977. o 65‘). ooooho
otmmotmotmmmammquumm

hon out-too ot 60.000 on. 01th. “bunny. ho maul. oo thou
Moon dunno. tho mom-to of mm. oo-nxoottooo mum.
mun .1 Mo). toot-loot!" “term. .4 (“ﬂout m
toohooooo-ofthooohjoctotohotohooootothooooxooolmoooooo
top“: oottvttloo mount “to: on auto otﬂho.

fhooo-Ittomobotohooooltoootoooououtotuooototouutnto.
Mhovothotxooooo-ntutlooo ootvort.tho$tovottnopottottoo-ootot
vohuloo. ohtpo. ood “taut Minna-for obootvottoo no qloyooot
nu.oothoootot.dlmthook. “monotonootﬂho.tt1o
hottoottohoohlotomtorthototrttmhtttmthoou. to
vtovolthotoohomom-othomtouoolthommd
thoothothttooootttomthoMotmothuv-hycouooo-otoho
too—n. ttooouonootthotuhooho-totnoooooaoumhlyoooott
oltMWm-omﬂutomhmmbookﬁ

‘l'hoonotnoo ofoﬁhotoomttory School («0th mm. 7m
1913) ooootttotoo num- ooottxntioo o! tho odotnu no Mtho:

11
II «new. on on!
m omcm. I’ll OIL?

mom of olwll doloooo unlto. thlo tooohlo; lootltutloo. locotod la
loloohlhho. olwoo 3-yoot oouuoo undo: coolltlooo cuotooory lo ollltory
oohoolo (ooo mo. lo 2. l9". p l‘l). tutoring nun-1m:
opoolollool ollltoty trolnm. loodlo. to Manna; oo 24 lloutoooot.
and o outﬂlooto oo ooohoolo-toohololn for road omtmtloo. contrac-
tion tout. rodlo emulation. or ooolytlool oh-lotry. Court to-
potto loo. olt.. p 7‘) thot tho “rot connotoo loft thu tooohm lootl-
tutloo lo l9“. W17. tho Influx woo too hoowy—othorwloo tho lootl-
tuto would an (may try to nomlt otulnto. lt ooo ho umtol
thot lt wlll ho ma loto o Illltory oollop. It to hrthonoro to
ho non-o1 thot tho mlltuy And-y o! toot-om oorwlooo ood trmportl-
tloo-whloh opototoo doportoooto lo worlouo opoolol mun—u tho um-
tory tolloooo o! root-om union to Voloh (with o brooch lo Corny).
lloooow no nut-nod. oo woll oo tho ollltoty ooootnotloo oolloooo (ooo
WA. loo. olt.) on trololo. onlooro for olwtl Mono duty.

ho- tho ooooyo hy Alum (m. Io ll. ”16. p m and Iolyoyow «m.

lo l. l9”. p 7‘) wo coo ooo thot. oo port of olwll «hon. oolltlool
trololo; no owonloory quota. polltlool dololotntlooo. In tho coo-
oooloto' doootloo lo: polltlool olulro (zqollt. tot-ﬂy tolloo Cutout)
won no on bola; uttllool.

cm: not.“ Ao ltrotoslo Mt

‘l‘ho ooutoo o! oohlllootloo doployooot. and tho loltlol phooo o! tho wot
am on o ooll-thouﬁt-out olwll «(coo onoolootloo on tho woy lt
oyorotoo lo oooo of wot. Clwll aloooo not oooun thohooo (root and
not moot“ tho nothoot oooolhlo oonly of tho loreoo ln‘lho (loll
on! tho mm. M tho nor-nu mt omlooo. Mindy.
clwll “1.00. (to. tho outhnoh o1 woo, ployo o doololvo rolo to tho
outco- o! ouch o wot. toholovohly outod nthor utooolwoly on thot
oohjott (lot. clt., hootot oo ”Clwll Mun.“ yo «on». Guano oop-
plutod tho onm to tho “hot thot olwll do!“ dovolopo loto
o otrotouo tutor whloh lo looortoot to tho ootvlvohlllty of tho ototoo
('Voonnhmyo Olly omtohooo .ooolorotwo.‘ lbotow. 197‘. 9 mm. Iooo
olthouthonlhooo‘todoothlotoylodohohovohon-otlooodoo
to: zolotod out thot thlo oottor woo olooody mom undo: ltollo whn ho
pot oocouty tothonoroftholmtdlothohlotorl-o'lofmt

agonhlo £1wo-yolotmolmnqololtoo!otvlotory.lohhwoty

loco-octloowlththooodlotonllohlodolnoo otthohlotorlad.
“but“.mnhtotothoowuoouofomoooo-
owl-tot. pottlotu oaeotloo “uncouth pooplo. nthoolootloolly
Woothyollmtlotooonoloo. Ionlxoloothotnoolooooto
loolhothoomo-lhollou
toooﬂort. mound-Io

E
E
a
E
g!
g;
:3
POI OVPICIM. 08! UNLY

oncoming to Soviot oilitory doctrino (ooo mu. Ito ll. 197:. pp 93011.).
”waiving” tho Sirot molar otriho and tho ability tint-word to nount o
donioivo oountototriho tonotitutoo tho proroquioito for tho moon-(«l out-
tono o: futon omdoonilinto on o nojor ocolo with tho participation oi
tounttiu hovinn otonin woopono. ‘l'hio ourviynl nonoot of tho ototoo in-
olnioo civil tolonoo no o docioivo nonponont in ovoroll otrotonic wnr A
planing. In thio port of tho on-ont ottort tho Soviot union lihowioo
oooho to oohiovo obooluto oupotiotity bouuoo it nlono—ottotdin; to Moo-
cow'o juotiliootion pupoundouguotnntooo oocurity nnn poooo. 'lhio
ouporiotity o! tho protontivo (motion of civil doionoo nlono givoo tho
loviot Union tho motion to onuu in tho o-i-otrotonic onploynont oi
nocloor woopono ot o point in tino of ito own choooiu. Tho upotiority
thoory. to: tho lint tino oqhoticnlly introducod by dot-no niniotor
Inlinovohiy (mm. o lobmory 1959; ooo oloo WA. Io 5-6. 1959.

p 201) woo ot tint intotprotod by tho "not only oo o diolootinnl ttinh.

rainy. «port policy nohoto and nilitoty loonoro hove o ditioront opinion
on tho booio o! tolioblo infonotion.

ln tho (croword to tho book by boon Gouro (loc cit.. 9 ll). lot-o: Unitod
Stotoo odouodor by D. lohlot oboorvoo thnt tho noooutoo tohn by Noocow
(or civil dolonoo ond out-vial in an of W conotituto o {in cuponont
o! Soviot nilitory otrotony; thot thoy hovo boon conoiooubly otoppod up
in connoction with cooniotonco nnn dotonto no coworod to tho unitod Stotoo;
thot Koocow'o ottikin; powor boo thuo boa incrooood; ond thot tho tioko
o! o nucloot wot thuo hnvo boon-o looo for tho Sowiot union. ‘lho out
would. with thin kind of lo“. bo oblo not only to out-vivo but oloo win o
melon! wot. Juot no tritiul in tho ovnluotion pmidod by month“
Oillooon, tho tormpondont of mu mm ammo (m. 1!
Dot‘o: 1976). tho hon o nilitoty New. on tho booio o! doto in tho
union nonotino m. 10 voodoo 1976. tho nounino topotto on nu
diocovotioo nodo by horiun ootollitoo which took ointm- o! .iuntin
oholto: otmtnroo in tho Soviot Onion. Thou on «alum iontorioo.
groin oiloo. to-ninotiono canton. oholtoro for tho civilinn pop-notion
onn tho ttoopo. wooyono. oquinnont. nod totinno.

Con Goono noun. tho for-or dinctor oi intollinonco o! tho onitod Stotoo
Air 'orco. in o tomorootion ma. l2 fobmry 1977. 9 1?) wind hio
viowo to tho otioct thnt ﬂootow could 'ttiuot. outwivo, ond win o global
wot.”

M objoctivo obootvotinno nnho tho waning of tho “Mint ”xiv—which
tho Imlin mootonly rojoctod no o “(int of tho tannin-tin" (mo.
lo 6. 1917. III-3331.) nowortholooo om: jutiiiod. Ilootow'o nboolnto
nmmiq in tho oroo of civil dotonoo in bond conoidoubly to woohon

tho otrotoun ousting pooition of tho mo conntrioo no mint tho lint-
oow toot counttioo.

13
M OWICIAL US! ONLY
M OPPICML US! ONLY

WWII! m1:

lam—mama M II“ Int]; M—WIWMY mum.
[W “I“?! hand]: W m m.

runway mend mummy». and that: mung:

Morrottmmmn chem—u: «tau. (M «In... a: nu protoc-
ttou 3

low—cum” prodmouunhuyn chum-dean “r «Mu (1ml at:
a“ ”0:0ch and M at“):

”mum”. abundant”. mm” 1 ”yank-u: obumuon.
mum. and mum onus:

“mum-hence” oodoyotvtyn obomyo. nut-1mm 1 Hum
uuun'om mummy for tho traction a! bum. and “mutual.
mug-um

mom—«um». dobrml'noyo eunuch-sew ”Amway. “In. what:
t (unﬁt-mm Voluury society for th- Pto-ouon of tho Any. mu-
‘m. We

mar: bunch. 60th (our “team“. c.V.. mun 1977

5038
680: 0120/0397

oo-

1!.
WI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHIO!“ US! ONLY

MMBDIA mm TESTING OF MILITARY murmur
Moscow SOMSKAYA MMYA msxmmu in Russian Vol 3. 1977 pp 616-618

[Bntry by mu. Alehseyev iron the Soviet liilitery Bncyclopodis: ”Testing
of Hilitery Bouipnent" (lspytsniyo voyonnoy tohnildn

[Text] Testing of nilitery equip-eat is the oxperinentel dotsrninetion of
tho coebst, structurel end operetionel futures of test (pilot) nodols end
series-produced itees of eilitery equip-cot {or purposes of estsbliehing
their contoreity to tecticel-technicel specificetions. The dots obteined
iron the tests ere su-erisod in the tors of conclusions describing the level
of dovelopnsnt of the exporinentel nodols end the possibility of edopting
then. end the possibility of delivering series-produced erticlos to nilitery
orgenisetions. The besic technicsl docuont roguleting the require-onto for
en erporinsntel nodel is e tecticel-technicsl reek essignnent (112) issued
by the client. It indicetes tho following: the purpose and pool of the
dovelopnent. the tecticsl-technicsl. tochnicsl-econonic end speciel require-
nente epplicehle to the nodol. the coqosition end pheses of dovelopnent of
the desiul docueentetion. end others. Coordinstion end epprovsl of tho
tecticel-technicsl tesk eesignnsnt is Iendstory for orgenixstions of the
client end tho developer during the designing (building). testing end
ecceptence of the test nodol. The testing progren end nethods ere ooIpilod
iron the tscticel-tochnicel tesk sseiglnent require-onto. ‘l'he spproved
tocIuicel specifications (1'0) ere the hesic docusnt esteblishing the re-
quirs-nts for s series-produced erticle. They indicste the following:

the purpose. eres of use. loin tecticsl-technicsl dete. end the pore-store
of on erticle necessery for on objective essessnent of its suitebility for
delivery to the consuner, quelity control eethods. the types and extent of
tests of en erticle end its comment ports. the vsrrenties of the producer-
enterpriso. durebility. pecking end shipping requiresents. the rules for
dreuing up the design docusntetion. end so forth. The chsrecteristics end
pore-tors obteined in the process of testing the exporinentsl nodel. teking
eppropriste edditionel develop-ent into eccount. serve es the bssic dete for
developing the toctnicel specificetions. The technicsl specificetions co-
ordinsted end epproved by the client ere nendetory for ell enterprises in
the production end delivery of the erticle. so well es (or ell const-ers of
the erticle in the verificstion of its quelity. Technicel specificetions ere
not vorlned out it there is e stenderd in existence for e given erticle. uhich

15
roe OFFICIAL US! Oil?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ootobliohoo oll of tho oooontiol roquirooonto for ito production. qnolity
control. dolivory ond oo forth. I! it io nocoooory to includo now roquiro-
Ionto not covorod in tho ototo otondord. tochnicol opocificotiono oro con-
pilod. oorving oo o oupplolont to tho otondord.

Piold tooto porforlod undor conditiono opprooching octuol oporoting conditiono
to tho mint- dogroo poooihlo cowriu tho booio for tho tooting of. oxpori-
nontol Iodolo. Cortoin phoooo of iiold tooto oro roplocod by nodoling in
ordor to roduco tho voluo. til-o ond coot of tho tooto. liodoling io
oopociolly volnohlo in thooo coooo vhon it io inpoooiblo to rocrooto on
octuol oituotion ouch oo opproioing tho portal-onto of tho coIhot took with
cmlox oir dofonoo oodolo (cowlonoo) in o oituotion of noooivo oir roido.
rodiooloctronic countoroction. tho on of nocloor voopono. ond oo forth. In
ordor to colporo ond ovoluoto tho quolitioo oi nowly crootod (Iodotnitod)
mdolo vith roopoct to tho ooot inortont poraotoro ohtoinod in various
cliootic conditiono. tho volnoo of thooo porn-otoro oro corroctod (convortod)
for not.“ conditiono. Doponding on tho purpooo of o Iodol it io oubjoctod
to tooto vorying in ocopo. which oro dotinod by thoir progroo ond nothodo.
Tho progrn contoino tho objoctivoo ond tooto of tho tooto ond Iothodo for
dotornining ond ovoluoting tho choroctoriotico of tho nodol. prinrily

ito coobot offoctivonooo, tho tioo ollocotod for conducting tho tooto ond
booic nooouroo to bo porforood in ouppott of thoo. Ao o rulo, tho tooting
progro- for oxporioontol Iodolo tokoo into occount thoir opocific footuroo
ond io dovolopod on tho booio of o otondord progr. of tooto {or o givon
typo of nilitory oquiplont. ‘l'ho tooting ochodulo io worked out ottor tho
progro- hoo hoon opprovod. 'l'ho tooting Iothodo covor tho following: tho
typoo. tho procoduro, otondordo ond tochniquoo (Iothodo) for chocking o
Iodol'o confonity to tho roquirolonto of tho tocticol-tochnicol took
oooign-ont: tho cowooition of tooting. mooring ond oimlotion oquipoont;
ond tho procoduro ond nothodo for ptocoooing tho roonlto of nooourolonto.

Doponding on tho purpoooo of tho tooto thoy oro clouifiod oo plont (dooignor'o)
tooto. which oro oot up ond conductod by tho gonorol (chiot) dooignor, and
ototc (rongo. troop) tooto. uhich oro oot up ond conductod by tho cliont.

The former oro prolioinory. tho lottor occoptonco (iinol (tochotnyyol) tooto.
Plont (dooignor'o) tooto oro lntondod for vorifying tho confer-icy of tho
Iodol'o booic choroctoriotico to tho roquirononto contoinod in tho tocticol-
tochnicol took oooiguont, to porfoct ito olononto ond oll of tho loin
mooblioo. oggrogotoo. inotrmonto ond oyotooo, to portoct tho nodol oo o
vholo. nod to ovoluoto tho dogroo of otondordicotion ond unificotion. Tho
progro- ond oothodo for tho plont tooto oro dovolopod by tho ontorprioo do-
oigning tho producto ond oro coordinotod with tho Ionufoctuting ontotpriooo
ond tho cliont. Ao o rulo. tho tooto oro conductod by o co-iooion lode up
of roprooontotivoo of tho dooignoro. nonutocturoro ond clionto. ‘l'ho co-io-
oion'o ooncluoiono oro drovn up in tho for. of o don-out oxploining tho

toot rooulto. indicoting roco-oodotiono for corrocting tho dooign doom-
totion ond olilinoting ony doficioncioo (oolfunctiono) dotootod. roco-onding
torgot dotoo tot finol develop-ant, ond giving tho co-iooion'o concluoion
vith roopoct to onb-itting tho oodol for tho noxt typo of tooto or rotuning
it for odditionol work.

16
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

State (range. troop) toata aro intondad for dotornining tho baaic coabat.
doaign and operational choractoriatica of tho aodol undor tho actual con-
ditiono in which it will bo uood or a aiaulatod oituation. for oatabliohing
tho conforaity of thooo characteriatico to tho raquireaonta containod in

tho tactical-technical took aaaignaont. and for appraiaing tho ndol’a
euitahility for adoption by tho ailitary and tho poaaibility of ito aariea
production. According to tho nothoda and conditiona for conducting thooo
toata they aro divided into laboratory (bench) and cowrohonaivo (flight.
running. firing and othor) toata. Many toot itona (ortillory and infantry
woapona. troop co-snicationo oquipaont. aotor tranoport. and othoro) are
oubjoct to rango (laboratory and coaprohonoivo chocke) aa well an troop
toata. laaod on the reaulta of tho rango teata it io roco-onded that a

teat itoa ha adoptod or ito auitability for aanufacturo in a lot for troop
toata ia oatahliohod. The coahat offoctivonoao and the readinoao of an

itoa for adoption are dotorainod (clarifiod) in tho lattar. atato (range)
tooto are conducted at apocial footing groundo. which aro outfittod with

tho propor technical aatoring oquipaont for regiotoring and procaoaing tho
rooulto of tho aoaouroaento. targoto. routoo and fioldo for running toota.
andoling facilitioa. and oo forth. Tho teat (pilot) aodol hoing tootod in
chockod to aoo that it porforu ito ooahat taake (functiona) offectivoly.
taking into account oneay countoraction and oaorge'ncy aituationo. The ito-
io tootod for roliahlity (dopondahility. durability. controllability. Iain-
tainability. oorvico life. and no forth). doaiy: develop-ant and oxecution.
lovol of tochnical coapotonco. roaiatanca (to radiation. chaaical and
aachanical atroaaoa. during tranaportation and atorago. and an forth). roe
oiatonco to cliaatatic factoro and oxtornal phyaical fielda (gravitational.
Iagnatic. oloctroaagnotic radiation and ao forth). vaiaion of the condi-
tiono ooaontiol for tho coahat crowo to operato. rooiatanco to wariouo agonto
(CU docontaaination. diainfectant. radioactivo dacontaaination. and ac forth).
oil. fuel. and ao forth. The doaign duct-entation ie aloo chockad during tho
atato toata to oeo that it in ooqloto. properly fillod out and oorroaponda
to tho ayatoa (nodal) and ito olaonta. “tho apocific foaturoa of variouo
typoo of ito-a are takan into account in the program and aothoda for con-
ducting atato toata, which aro dovoloped and approvod by tho cliont and co-
ordinatod with tho dovoloporo and the ontorpriao aanufacturing tho toot aodol.
‘l'ho toata aro conductod by atato coniaaiona aado up of ropraaontativoa of
tho client. tho dovoloporo and producoro of tho toot nodal. Tho coniaoion
arrangoo for tho toota to ho conducted within perinda ootahliohod by tho
prograa and choclta tho rooting. control and aoaauring aquipaant and tho
ooaplotonooa of tho noraative-technical docuontation opocifiod by tho pro-
gram and aathoda. An act (roport) ia cowilod fro. the toot roaulta. It
ootabliohoa the teat roaulto. providoa race-undatiou for oliainating any
dofocta or aalfunctiona datoctod and for corrocting tho doaign and tochno-
logical docuontation. roco-ando target datoa for additional work and for
tho oliaination of any dofocta or aalfunction datoctod. and indicatoa tho
co-iaoion'o docioion an to the poaaibility of adopting tho nodal and tho
feaoibility of auhlitting it for aoriao production. A plan-ochodulo coworing
additional and final work on tho teat aodol ia omilod when noceaaary. An
itoa which hao paoaod all of tho atato toata coqlotoly ia auhaittod by the
oatahliahod procoduro for adoption.

17
M OFFICIAL US! 0111.!
70R OWICIAL “8! ONLY

‘l'he taeting of eeriee-producad itene of nilitary oquipnent includea acceptence
and tranafer. periodic end etandard teete. Acceptance and tune-

for teete are conducted {or purpoeee of checking the condonity of aeriee-
produced articlee to the requirenente contained in the technical docunente-
tion (technicei epeciticatione) and etandarde covering the haeic indicee
cheracteritinp the propertiee of the erticlee (cowoaition. etructure.

deeisn. treneportebility end so forth). their reliability. the level of
eqloyeent o! etandardieed end unified perte. and eo forth. Depending on

the production volune itane are euhjected to eelected (in the cane of naee
production) or continuoue (in the cane of enell-eeriee production) control
teeting. A repreeentetive of the client givee hie conclueion an to the con-
foreity of a batch of articlae to the apecificatione indictated. haeed on the
reeulte of the acceptance end trenefer teete. Periodic teete are need to
inepect tiniehed articlee uhich have paeeed prelininery acceptance end treneter
teete end ere conducted at certein intervale (every one. three. eix or twelve
non.he. for eunple) or after a certain quantity of the erticlee ha been pro-
duced. The purpoee of the teete ie to verify the quality at the nanuiactured
articlee tor conforlity to all epeciticetione contained in the technical docu-
nentetion (technical epecificetione) end the etenderds end the etability of
the charncteriatice. ee well ee to confirn the contonity to theee require-
nente oi articlee previouely produced end ehipped to the client. It the teet
reaulte are uneetiefectory even {or e einale eenple the acceptance of articlee
eubeequently produced end the ehipnent of producte previouely accepted are
helted until the defecte are eliminated. Standerd teete ere conducted after
cheneee have been node in the deeign of an article or ice nenufacturin;
technology (or purpoeee of evaluating the effectivencee of the changee node.
The client. with the agree-eat oi the nanufecturins enterpriee. deterninee

the need (or conducting etenderd teete end their extent. when good reeulte
are obtained in the etandard teete propoaed chaneee are entered in the technical
docunentetion for the iten.

‘l'hree phaeee of tearing—liter. eecond and third categorieeo-are eyetenatically
conducted in the 0.5.A. and the other Iain cnpitaliet netione. ‘l'eete of the
iiret cetegory are ninly conducted by the contracting tin. with the cliente
perticipatins. theee teete determine the conforlity of the cheracterietice
of an iron and ite eyetene to the requirenente eet forth. reveel defecte and
naliunctiona. and deter-ine the need for adjuetin; the require-en“ nade. he
a rule. teete or the eecond category are conducted at nilitery teetins promde
by client orpnieetione. with the contracting fir! participating. A coqre-
heneive check in node of the itcn'e confornity to the require-elite eet forth.
the reeulte of the firet category if teete are confirmed. and e conclueion

ie drewn ee to the poeeibility of uein; the iten in oonbet. fence in the
third category are conducted by the branch of troope for which the ire. ie
intended. the purpoee of thou teete ie to evaluate the codet cepabilitiee
of induetrielly produced eqlea end to deter-nine the met effective nethode
(or their conhet eqloynent and nethode o! operation.

mum: Voyenitdat. 1977

080: 1801
18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OHIO!“ US! ONLY

CIVIL DEFENSE NMTIORS COPING H111! NATURAL CAMHITII

Moscow PORIIROVANIYA GWDARSKOY OBORONY V some: so STIKHIYNYHI
3:08“!!le in Russien 1978 signed to press 25 Jen 78 pp 1-19. 246-247

[Annotetiom Teble of Contents. Introduction. end chepter l of book by
A. 'r. Altunin]

[Excerpts] Title Pege!

Titlel FOMIROVANIYA GRAZRDANSKOY OBOROIW V 303‘“ 80
summon: arosmmr (Civil Defense [co] Forletions
in the atmggle Hith Neturel Celenities)

Publisher! Stroyisdet

Plece end yesr of mblicetionl Moscow. 1978

Signed to Press Dete' 25 Jemery 1978
Nunber of Copies mblishedl 100,000
hunter of Peges' 267

Annotstion

Presented in the book ere the besic guidelines for the treining end enploynent
of co for-etions during nsturel celsnities. clininetion of their ei‘tereffects
es well es elieinetion of the eftereffects of lerge industriel eccidents end
cetestrophes. Reconsndetions ere presented on the tectics of fenetion opere-
tions end Iethods for cerrying out opsretions in the struggle egeinet neturel
celelities end in the orgenizetion of the Ieteriel. technicel. end ledicel
support to suffering regions. In this edition the sections on forest end peet
fires. eerthouekes. floods. end industriel eccidents heve been supplanted cud
chepters heve elso been uritten in which the operetions of CD forletions in the
stmggle egeinst Nd slides. lendslides. end evelenches heve been mined.

The book is intended {or the CD supervisory steff end the fouetion co-end
aid superVisory stei'fs.

19

FOR OFFICIAL 083 MY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents
Intmuct‘on IOOOOOOOOO- 00.00.I...OO00000000.0000000000000000000000000

Chapter I Principles of the training and Employment of CD Formations
During Natursl Calamities and Industrial Accidents ..............

1. Principles of the organization and training of CD formations

2. Principles of the employment of CD formations during natural
c.1u‘ti0' “Id 1M033r1‘1 .cc1dent. eesssseeseseesssseeeeesse

3. Political-indoctrinstional work in CD formations ............

Chapter 11 Employment of CD Fomations when Fighting Forest Fires ....
1s Bri.‘ ChnucOriUtiCU 0f fONUt f1“. eeseeseseaoeessssessees
2. Basic measures to improve foreet fire prevention ............
30 or‘mt3.tton of fou.‘ ‘1" £1.8th eesssesesssssesessessess
a. “.tm. of fuhtm fon.‘ f1". ...0........‘O..............
Se T“c‘c.l drill. in .nm13hlns f0".t fir... eeeesosseseesss
60 SCfet’ ““0“. "h.“ fighting fon.‘ ft". eseeeeeesssssseess

Chapter 111 Employment of CD Formations in Fighting Peat Fires ......
1s Bri.‘ cwmter£UticC of ”I: ‘1". ssesessseeeassssesssessss
2. Basic measures in improving fire prevention at peat
entermi.e. sseesseeeessssssssssesssesssesssessesesseessssses
3. Organization and ways to fight peat fires ...................
6. Tactical drills for extinguishing peat fires and safety

um". 9009'..00...0.0.0....0.000...OOOOOOOOQOOOOOICOQOOOOO

Chapter lV Employment of CD Formations When Eliminating the After-
.f‘”:. 0f EOWWWI eeeseessasseoseeeeeeseeesseeeseseesseeesse
1. Characteristics of earthquake and their aftereffects .. . . . . .
2. Basic measures for increasing the resistance of populated

points and national economic installations to the effects

Of .‘rtwm. .00.0IOOOOOOOCO0..00.00.000.000...OOOOOOOOOOOO
3. Remrces enlisted to accomplish rescue and urgent emergency

restoration operations when eliminating the aftereffects of

.I:tmum. soseesesees.esssssssseeseseesesseeeseeeseesssssss
6. Methods of accomplishing rescue and urgent emergency restor-

ation operations uhen eliminating the aftereffects of

.Cttmlk.‘ ma '“Ct’ ”m". essesseesseeesseesssseseessss

Chapter V BPIOMC of co Fomtiom Dari“ Flood. sessseeesseesesss
to 'r‘.‘ cmntUIutic. 0f £1006. esseeseseseeeeeeeseesseesesse
2s Mmi‘.t‘°n of the Mtt!‘ min.t f1“. sseeseeessssssssess
3. ﬁssures taken when there is a direct threat of floods ......
6. [teams and urgent emergency restoration operations during

flooding m .“Cty um". eessseeeeseeeseeseeeseeeesseeses

20

M omcm. USE ONLY

20
20
210

35
lo].
51

53
53

SS
58

60

232

69

76

77

88
93
100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter VI Employment of CD Formations to Eliminate Avalanches and
Icing l.OI0.00J...0......9.000.000000DOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOO0.0.0.0000.

ls cn‘rlctet10t1C. 0f IV.1anCh9. and 1¢1n8 asaeaeaaaoosasoeaoooa
2. Organization and basic measures to eliminate avalanches
and icing. Safety IBIBUICI seessaeaaaaaaeaeseaaseeseeeeoeese

Chapter VI: “910”": of CD Pomcim to Fish: WCIIdQS e e e a a a e a e
1e ch“.¢ter18t1c3 of lands1ides aaaeeseeaeaeeeaaaoeeeeeeaasaeaa
20 3.810 lethOd. 0f fighting 1andelides oeeeeaeeeaaaeaseoeeoeeea
3. Organization of the fight against landslides and safety

“wrCS eeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeaeeeeoeeeeeeeaeeeeaaeeeeeeaeea

Chapter VIII Enployment of CD Formations when Fighting Mud Slides ...
la cmut.r1.t1c. of Nd slides seaaeeeeeseeeseeeeeaeseeaeeeaee
2e ﬂute let”. of {1511:1118 Md .11des eeaeeeeeeeaaaeaeeeeaaeea
3. 3rganization of the fight against and slides ................

Chapter 1X Employment of CD Formations when Eliminating the After-
effects of Large Industrial Accidents and Catastrophes ..........
1. Characteristics of industrial accidents and catastrophes“ ...
2. Basic measures to prevent accidents and catastrophes .....‘...
3. Fighting fires at national economic installations ...........
la. Special features of eliminating accidents at oil and gas

field. eeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeoeoeeeeeeeOeeeeeeeaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeee

5. Resources enlisted to accomplish rescue and urgent emergency
restoration operations during industrial accidents and
C‘tutmms 000.00.00.0000.00.000000IIOOOO0.00000000000IOOIO

6. Organization and methods of accomplishing rescue and urgent
emergency restoration operations during industrial accidents
Md Cltutroms aseeseeeaesaeeeeaaesaeeesaeaeeeeaaeeseeeaeee

7. Safety measures when accomplishing rescue and urgent
emergency restoration operations during industrial accidents
m Clcutmm. 00.0000000.00.00000...OOOOOOOOOOIOOODOOOOIOO

Chapter X Employment of CD Formations when Eliminating Centers of
Containation Formed by Strong Toxic Substances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
1. Characteristics of strong toxic substances and of possible
centers 0‘ contamination eseeeeeaeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeaeaeseaeeoe
2. basic measures to protect against strong toxic substances
during matr1.1 ucldents eeeesseeeseeeesseeseesaasessaease
3. Organization and basic methods of eliminating centers of
contuin‘tione SOfety “wre' eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeee

Chapter XI Hedical Aid to the Stricken Population During a llatural
c‘luity .000IOIOOOOOIOOOOOOI900000000090....OOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOOOOO
1. Special features in organization of medical aid to the
stricken population during a natural calamity ...............
2. Insuring the readiness of the formations within the CD med-
ical service for operations during natural calaities . . . . . . .
3. Organization of f irst-aid to the stricken during natural
calamities and the operations of the medical aid teams . . .. . .

21

" FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

106
106

107
116
116
117
121
126
1210

127
131

133
133
1314
137

139

143

146

152

1510
156
160

163

169
169
170

172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Organization of medical assistance to the stricken during
natural caluities and the operations of f irst-aid
do:.¢mnt. eeeoeeeeesseeseaeeesoeoesoeeseeoueeeeeeeeaseeeee 173

Chapter XII Certain Questions of Supporting CD Formations Hhen
ruminating the Aftereffects of Natural Calamities and
Induacttal Accidents eeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeesoeeeeeeseeeeeese 175
Is Hedi-c.18upwrt eeeeeeeeeeeeseecssees-eoeeeeeeeeeeoeaassesses 175
?- M.ter1.l Gum“ eeeeeeeeeesoeeee oeeeeeeeeeeeeesoeeessotsose 176
3cm1c‘18upmrc eesseeseeseeese eseeeeeesseoe oosoeeeeeeee 1i?

..pter hill Equipent Baployed to Fight Nata. ‘-' ' ' s ......... "'"
l. Eminent employed when extinguish‘rg t- 9.. ' ' .l. ires . 179
2. Equipent employed when eliminating the a -1-‘r..:a . r.

earthquakes. industrial accidents, c» str. . n -ther

nat‘lr‘l C‘Iuittes ......‘IOOIOOOIIIOI'te' '- DIOIIOI. 205
5. Equimnt employed wher eliminating cen. : 'ai

contum‘tion eeeseeo-e..oeeeeeseo-.. . .- a ~ ..... "S
... Equiment employed when 01mins“ ' - .-.- I,

- (nu ulf. I Len for the l'-\-. . ‘ie: .r - I
l‘cpzring For the EireScnu- . .. . ... . . .

A! .' lw' I-asic Rcsqllrelncms i - I '2 u
'ntl -.mlznlctiona on Fire I'rt-ve -.wn -.- .3. .a

Att.rcment 11! Instructions on Organizing th- .N
Lo Battle Potent Fires Attached to Pa m
Soviets of Horkers' Deputies and Atta. .. ..e
Autonomous Rcwblic Councils of Hinisur. .........

Introduction

[Text] Recent achievements in all spheres of sci-Laue h---n Inn's
notion about various natural phenomena. Many of them, cw plained
and dis strous in their consequences, have now been we‘l‘ ar- :: -' ..11 :rar.
has learned to fight them. However, even during the r- ' ' o .v
scientific and technical progress, the natural effect... i' ... i.l‘.‘| 'x .wnes.
still not fully subjugated by man. inflict enormous damage tc t ,nla-
tion and economy of the states on our planet. Forests and peat - . s,
earttquakes and floods, and slides and landslides. avalancher. ' was.

and mrricanesnthis is far 'from a complete listing of the mo. :-.mon
natural calamities.

In some instances the activities of people themselves lead to the occurrence
of some of these calamities. For example, forest and peat fires often occur

as a result of the pomlation not adhering to fire safety rules. If timely
meawres are not taken such fires can grow to become a natural calamity.

Today fires are becoming one of the main dangers for man. Statistics on the
aftereffects of fires in recent years give witness to the truth of such a
conclusion. In particular. in 1972 alone there were 2.5 million fires in

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. 083 ONLY

the USA in which approximately 12,000 people periahed and approximately
300,000 were injured. The overall laterial eoat ia evaluated at ll
billion dollara.

Firea inflict great laterial harm on the national econoay of our country.
The foreat firea in 1972 and 1976 in a nuaber of the hraya and ohlaata in
the mm renain in the population'a wry.

Albeit paradoxical. it ia in theae very aane highly developed induatrial
atetea where the citiea and aettlehenta contain atructurea primarily built
of atone and reinforced concrete. with hot water. gaa. or electric heat.
with a well-organized fire-fighting aervice where the nulber of firea and
loaaea reaulting frou them becrae lore and lore aignii’icant. Hide uae of
new building nateriala with a higher degree of (inability. the coloaaal
acalea of the econony and auto-ation of technological proceaaea have con--
plicated the acconpliaiuent of fire aai’ety neaaurea and have increaaed
the probability of firea breaking out.

Alao of aignii’icant coat to the national economy are auch phenolena aa

the exploaion of natural gaa widely uaed in the national economy. lnatancea
of large exploaiona connected with an accumlation of natural gun-ethane

in varioua typea of buildinga are well known. when gaa accululatea in a
cloaed apace. in a tunnel for exaaple. then when lined with air it forna a
flanable Iixture which can ignite at any nonent from even the aaalleat apart.

An acumlation of nethane waa regiateted. for inatance, in the den at the
Kane cm I. yeara after ita water reaervoir began to fill up. In a mnber

of placea the Iethane waa detected in open lining pita deep within the baaic
rock. All thia indicatea the neceaaity to atrictly adhere to aafety neaaurea
when doing conatruction work in area that contain natural gaa and atiwlate
the neceaaity for training apecial energency reacue forlationa for operationa
in ainilar aituationa.

Earthquakea are along the moat dangeroua and deatructive natural caluitiea.
An earthquake that waa tragic in the nunber of livea that it took waa the one
that occurred on 26 July 1963 in the Yugoalavian city of Skople. It took
2.000 livea and left 85 percent of the city‘a inhabitanta hooeleaa. During
an earthquake in Peru on 31 Hay l970 $0,000 peraona periahed.

The worat earthquake in the USSR occurred on 6 October 1966 near Aahkhabad.
In 1966 a atrong earthquake near ‘l'aahhent laated aeveral daya. In 1976 in
Tadzhikiatan lore than 26 aubterrenean ahocha with a force exceeding 5-6
balla were regiatered. ‘l'hanIta to the fact that reaidencea. public buildinga.
and induatrial atmcturea were built taking into accwnt the poaaibility of
ahocka reaching a force of 9 balla. no «age waa incurred.

Flooda cauae great calalitiea. Given the unfavorable cahination of high
apring run off and atrong winda an unuaually rapid riae in the water level

in the rivera occura and thia can lead to dangeroua oonaequencea. liiatory
knowa Iany cataatrophic flooda which took thouaanda of livea and cweed

23

M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
M OFFICIAL 0“ ONLY

enormoue leteriel loeeee. True. during e bed flood which occurred on i
febtuery 1953 on the eouthern rout of Snglend end in the littorel regione
oi‘ Hollend 1.000 people died. in Dutch villegee were eeriouelr timed.
end the finenciel loee exceeded (.00 elllion dollere. ln Auguet l9?) due

to torrentiel reine the lndue liver in Pekieten end lndie overflowed ite
oenke. Mnty-two citiee end l0.000 villegee were flor .d. nore then l.000
people died. epproxinetely 800.000 people were left honeieee. end the weter
deetroyed more then i nillion etructuree.

floode often occur in our country. which ie rich in riVere end lehee. Thie
ueuelly heppene in the epring in the ﬂeet turopeen portion of the country
end during the «net ee the enow nelte in the eouthern Iounteinoue regione.

1n the fell of l9”. ee e reeult of ehundent relnfell eerioue flooding occurred
in Ireeteheye otleet of the helorueeien 88h. Thenke to the proficient end

decieive ertione of co foruetione poeeihle hen to the netionel ecomy wee
everted.

in e nejority of cuee flooding cen be foreceet end the neceeeery Ieeeuree
teken in tine to prevrnt the poeeible deetructive efterefi‘ecte of the
neturel celelity. Dihee end due ee well ee other hydrotechnicel etructuree
which per-it the reguletion of weter levele ere built to protect powleted
pointe end netionel econoeic inetelletione loceted in eonee of poeeible
flooding. However. there ere inetencee of unforuﬂn cote-mm: flooding
which ueuelly occure during e eherp chenge in the flow of the rivere ee e
reeult of verioue neturel ceueee. Aeong the. ere. for inetence. the flooding
which occurred in October 1963 in llorthern ltely due to the eudden diecherge
of lore then 237 elllion .3 of dirt into e weter reeervoir. i'he reeulnnt
flooding took epproeinetely 3.000 livee end ceueed emrloue finenciel hell
to the country'e econo-y.

A rock elide occurred in 1960 on the Zerevehen River in the ”their 88! 160 Ice
fro. Suerkend. The obetecle which blocked the river wee 200 e high end 600 I
wide. Thie brought e threet of flooding to Suerkend. loceted dowhetna.
Thenke to the extrue neeeuree teken-oputting diecherge chennele through the
onetecle ueirg the engineering equipent eent to the ecenenthe threet wee

e ilineted.

Lendelidee ere dengeroue neturel celuitiee. They often deetroy lerge ereee
of egriculturel lend. ruin roede. hulldlnge. end etructuree. Lendslidee Ieinly
occur in our country in the lounteinoue regione of the Crinee. Caceeue.
Cerpethiene. ee‘well ee on the eteep high oenlte of eeverel rivere.

Sngineer-technlcel lemree which ineure regaletion of the weter flow in e
dengeroue tone. the cepture end diecherge of the weter ewey fro. thie tone.
etungthening the henhe of rivere. end eo on ere teken to prevent lendelidee.

hud elidee which deetroy populeted pointe. reeidentiel end co-erciel huildiue.
rellroede. highweye. end hydrotechnicel etrucmree canoe e greet deel of
celuity. Thue. ee e reeult of e and elide which occurred in l970 in Peru.
eeverel citiee were deetroyed end 000.000 people were left honeleee.

2‘
M OFFICIAL 08! MY
POI omcm. 0" MY

lioode. iondeiidoe. end and eiidee ere often ceweed hy downpoure end
hurriconee. Iiurricenee deetroy buildinge end put erpoeed c-micetione
end electric power linee out of co-ieeion. Continuel Ionitoriu ueing
reder. eerth eeteiiitee. end epeciel high-eititnde eircrett to eonitor
the develop-eat end noveeent of hurricane ie eepioyed to ineure thet
the powletion recoivee tieeiy werning ehowt the threetoning denger.

One other denger-owelencheenthreotem een in the mntoinoue regione
where there ie enow cover. ﬁne. in l965 en evelenche in the nountoine
of Iritieh Colt-bio deetroyed e eining eettieeent end tilled 26 people.
During the winter of nee-mo tregio evonte occurred u e reeult of
eveienchee et roeort ereee in hence and Switurlend. i'hie ell took piece
oe e reeult oi the fort thet the correeponding protective eeeeuroe were
M‘ We

Protection egeinet eweiencho includee not only the conetrwction of cepitei
etmctwroe but eleo the building of fill ereoe lode of iocel Ietoriole

which cen oeeiet in diverting the direction of now-ent of the ewelenche
ewey tron protected ereee.

but. it ie not only neturol ceiuitiee thet cewee deetrwction of huildinge.
the deeth of people. end {inmciel loee. Luge eccidente end ceteetrophee
et conetmction eitee, treneportetion ereee. induetriei enterprieoe. end
other netionel econceic inetelletione eieo leed to bed coneequencee. hoet
often eccidente occur ee e remit of the violetion of on induetriel tecMology
or eei'ety mimt. For empie. during the eu-er of 1976 there wee on
eccident et the lceeee Che-icel interpriee in the willege of Seveeo (ltely).
A eefety Volvo on one of the roectore i‘eiled end poieonoue geeee eeceped.
The threet of poieoning hang over other lerge inanetriei eettl-ente beeidee
Soweeo. to o reeult en once-owe territory turned out to be unihehitebie end
the powletion hed to evecuete end work etopped et e amber o! enterprieoe.

The bottle egeinet newrel col-itiee ie coepiicetod md often invoivee threet
to life. it requiree free people the eenifeetetion oi civil ccuroge. eoif-
poeeeeeion ad orgenieetion. hopie hove heon taught to prevent their poeeible
eiteneﬂ’ecte in e tineiy eenner end to ehillmiiy end eeltieeely go to work

in the teceof edirect threet of flooding. At the one tieewehnowot’
inetencee when. due to coniweion end inch of orguieotion. people hoe-e the
wictine of nemrol col-itiee even when the eituetion woe not thet bed.

gun the tell of 1975 o tomedo d-oliehed the emetic wetor towel-e ot Sochi.
Adler. no lheem. tore the roofe on of huee. tore gigentic treee up by
the roote. hoched down electric power linen. end twieted reilroed treche.
Tone oi’ thouende o: well-orgenieed people ehiiitully led by perty ad Soviet
orgnne engoged nomre in hend-to-hnd cubot. fhenhe to thie. loeeee me to
the neturei ceiuity were reietiweiy ineigniﬂcut end the nonel life of the
citiee wee repidly reeetebiiehed. At the e-e tin. on the northern elopee
of the Cucoeue renge where e wriet group wee ioceted. Juet u: echo of thie
tornedo in the tornofhrriconewinde ndenowwee motored. lot. the
people hoe-e oonlueod. they penichod. led. ee o remit. eowerel periehed.

m orncm. I!“ MY
M OI‘HCIM. ll" 0'“

Thoro lo alvaya tho dangor or huoan looo during natural calnitioo. induotrial
accidanto. and tataotrophoo. Thouoando and own nilliono of hoopla can bo
oubjoctod to danaor in citioa. in our country. when no dioouoo hulan livoo.
vo oonaidor juotifiad all oaoondituroo and «torn dimtod touardo inourinc
tho oai’oty of tho population.

In the Soviet Union. co mm. unita [chaot']. and forlatlono. Iilitary

unito of tho USSR Anod Forooo. ao wall ao opocial oiniatorial and «partnontal
forlationa can bo callod upon to battlo largo natural calultioo and to
liquidato thoir aftoron‘octo. A grouping of torcao. tho coapooition of

which ia dotoroinod by tho tyooa and ocaloa of tho natural oaluitioa and
atoldonta. by tho naturo and voluoo of tho oioaiono to bo accupliohod.

ao uoll an by tho opocial toaturoa of local coaditiona. io croatod for

thou wrpoooo.

A largo rolo in tho battlo minot natural calalltioo and olininatim thoir
attoroﬂ'octo (alla to CD tonationa. 1t io thoy that poooooo tho ooro
ormirod and trainod mono and control organa and tho rooourcoo for
atoooplioI-ont of nacuo and ursont anorgoncy rootoration oporationo.

CD otai’fo aro. at a rulo. tho oporatin; organ attachod to ontraordinary
to-iooiono. Thor aocoopllah tho baaic work to orunioo tho roocuo of tho
population and of valuabloa ao uoll ao roootabliornont of vital activitioo
in atrichon powlatod pointa and at national aconolic inotallationo. CD
ataﬂ‘o participate in tho olaboration and organization of promtlvo and
proparatory Iouuroo diroctod touardo roducin. looooo during poooiblo
natural caluitioo. accidonto. and cataatrophoa. Nhon tho donor of a
natural caluity ariooo CD ataﬂa organioo tho notification of tho oop-
lation and uthorins of intonation on tho oiouation uhich io dovolooin.

at national ooonolic lnotallationo and thoy mparo propooalo for Inlay-out
of CD rooourcoo. Subooquontly ao to Korean oot about accolplioI-ont of thoir
aooiuod lioolono. tho otaﬂo organizo M and control and Ionitor tho
progroao of tho oporationo.

Thoro aro Iany ox-ploo of tho oolflooo and ouccoooful work of tho CO otai‘t’o
and forceo in tho battlo auinot naturol cal-itioo and accldonta and uhon
all-inating their aftorottocta. flow. a couplu oituation vao crootod in
Nova-bu 1975 in tho Odoaahaya and hiholayovakaya oblaoto of tho Ukranian
$33 and in tho holdavian 53: aa a rooult at a natural caluity cauood by a
povori‘ul oton. it no nocoooary to proficiontly adopt oxtraordinary Ioaouroa
for rapid rootoration of tho nonol activitioo of otriom citioo and rosiono
and of nationol oconuic inotallationa.

co otalto. oorvicoo. ml for-atiooo inplo-ontod tho docioiono or tho CD

chiofo in tho Ioldavian ssn and in tho Montoya and likolayovokaya oblaota.

Tina on otauo bocno tho Iain oporational organ of tho oxtraordinary co-iooiono.
thoy wont on rounJ-tho-cloob duty. oolloctod and Molina oporatioool

intonation on tho oituation. moored and duo-inatod tho inotructiono of tho
CD chioto own to tho omton. and Ionitorod thoit accoopliolnoot.

M OFFICIAL 083 OIL?
POI ONICIM. "8! ONLY

‘I’he co ioruation is the lease unit of the C0 iorces. the personnel of which
given nonal conditions carry out daily national econooic activities in their
labor collectives. At the use tine the iorsations have been supplied with
special equipent and. during the lessons. receive the requisite special
training ior operations in regions where natural calanities and industrial
accidents have occurred.

Know-how in battling large iorest and peat iires during the sinner oi 1972

in a number of the country's oblasts. the gigantic sud slide which threatened
the tract of Hedeo and Alla-Ate in 1973. the aiterei‘iects oi the earthquake

in Call in the spring of 1976. and the hurricane in Khabarovskiy Kray in
October oi the sake year convincingly showed the necessity and eiiectiveness
oi enlisting CD ioroations to fight natural cala-ities. as well as the inert-
ance oi planned practical instruction oi personnel to operate under similar
conditions. where this question is given the requisite attention. the battle
against nature is conducted lore successfully and the aftereifects the-selves
do not reach catastrophic disensions.

Operating in a cooplex and often dangerous situation. CD formations exhibit
courage and herois- when accomplishing rescue and urgent energency operations
and when saving the powlation and valuables. i’articipating in the battle
against natural calalities and when liquidating their aftereifects. as well
as the attereii‘ects oi large industrial accidents and catastrophes. CD for
nation personnel are accoeplishing their patriotic duty to the notherland.

The author expresses his appreciation to ii. A. Tarasov. Candidate of Technical
Sciences N. o. Tarahanov. F. c. halanichev. N. P. Khomenho. and L. l. Gladina.
who participated in preparing the asterials for this book.

Chapter 1. Principles of the Training and Esployoent of CD Formations
Durim Natural Caluitles and industrial Accidents

1. Principles oi organizing and training (:0 for-stions

Formationsl organized on the basis of national econonic installations2 are

the foundation of CD forces. These iorlations are named ahead of title.
supplied with transportation. special eminent. articles. and instruments
sceordim to established none. and are trained according to the corresponding

"05!... e

 

lFor brevity in the iuture co iorlations will be referred to as simply
ionations.

2here and in the iuture a national econoeic installation is understood
to be enterprises. kolkhoses. sovkhotes. orgsnizations. institutes. and
educational institutions.

21

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. US! ONLY

Creation and training of CD foaations is a natter that is not only extra-
ordinarily inportant but also very conplicated since they include a large

nulber of people. equipent. and transportation that is constantly occupied
in the national econony.

The organizational structure and technical equipent in the fornations lust
prilarily be detenined by their purpose and the specifics of the industrial
activities or the installations upon which they are based. Taken into con-
sideration here are the installation's production features and the availability
at the installation of the corresponding equinent and nechanisns required to
sccoaplish rescue and urgent ensrgency restoration operations.

linen training territorial fomtions one lust know which natural calanities
are the greatest threat to the given region and what aftereffects can occur
in the event of an accident at a particular national economic installation.
The CD chief of a city. rayon. and oblast trust evaluate the nature and voluIae
of possible rescue and urgent emergency restoration operations (SNAVR) and,

on this basis. deter-ine the co-position. size. and technical equipnent for
the formations being set up. It is fully evident that in regions with increased
danger of fire formations not have special fire-fighting equiment and gear
{or transportation of water. bulldozers. trenchers. and forest plowa. for-
nations in regions where flooding and and slides are probable Iaust be equipped
with flotation equipaent. rescue devices. and earth-moving equiment for
construction of dikes, run off channels. and other protective structures.

The predooinant types of equipent in regions that are susceptible to seisalic
activity naturally will be that used to raove rubble and to clear away
accidents involving plunbing and heating networks and to fight fires.

CD fornations are tanned and equipped so that. if they are called upon to

engage in SNAVR. this will not disrupt the production activities at installations.
One mat also consider the fact that formation lust be prepared for operations
in response to very coapressed suspenses.

Special attention when formations nre being Banned is placed on careful
selection of the col-and and supervisory staff. These people lust possess
not only good organizational capabilities and high volitional qualities.
but also met possess special knowledge and. where possible. know-how in
operating in regions where natural calcities or industrial accidents have

occurred. Late or what is verse unsubstantiated decisions by coaananders can
lead to bad consequences.

Depending upon subordination fornations are brought to readiness upon instruc-
tions fro- the corresponding installation. rayon. city. and oblast (kray) CD
chiefs. Deter-ined ahead of tine are' the notification sequence} place and
tile for forlation personnel to assenblel places. tiles. and procedure for
obtaining transportation. equipent. and funds! for-ation concentration areas
and routes for their love-en: and tine of arrival in these regional tine and
sequence for checking formation readiness.

28

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICMI. USE ONLY

The level of formation readiness is determined based upon results in their
accomplishing practical missions during exercises or based upon the results
of their operations when fighting natural calamities and eliminating the
aftereffecte of industrial accidents.

Responsibility for formation training lies with installation CD chiefs.

The following are the basic CD formation training missions! assimilation

by the personnel of the equimnt and instruments available to the formations
and the drills and methods of accomplishing SNAVR in centers of destruction
and in regions of natural calamities and industrial accidents.

Successful and timely accouplisl'ment of the missions with which CD formations
are tasked greatly depends on the level of training of their col-and and
supervisory staff end personnel.

Such methods of instruction as practical. demonstration. end instructional-
Iethodological lessons. group drills. end seminars provide good results in
training commend end supervisory personnel. Theoretical knowledge end practical
skills are reinforced end refined at couand end staff exercises end drills end
during special tactical lessons end exercises with formations.

The comand end superVisory staff in formations are basically trained directly
at national economic installation during the conduct of meetings end planned
lessons. Meetings of the comand end supervisory staff precede lessons with
formation personnel. These lessons are conducted by installation CD chiefs.
their dewties. loading specialists. end installation CD staff end service
chiefs. In addition. formation col-and end supervisory personnel are trained
at city end rayon (interrayon) CD courses. These courses also provide methodo-
logical assistance to national economic installation CD chiefs in the prepara-
tions for end conduct of couand end staff end special tactical exercises with
formations.

The training of formation cot-send end supervisory personnel also includes
develop-ent of firm methodological skills in the instruction and con-and and
control of formations and the organization of close coordination with other
formations. services. and departmental subunits [podrazdeleniye] during joint
mission accomplisl-snt. One should insure here that formation couanders care-
fully and confidently fulfill their responsibilities. skillfully orient them-
selves and proficiently make substantiated decisions in any situation. carefully

pass along these decisions to subordinates. and firmly implement the decisions
made.

Formation co-enders are responsible for the training and instruction of for-
mation personnel. Instruction includes training based on the progrme of the
universal coswlsory minimum knowledge the population requires to protect against
weapons of mass destruction. as well as special and special tactical training.

Various forms and methods of instruction are employed to train formation
personnel! practical exercises and drills. group lessons. passing norms.
competitions and formation inspections. as well as special tactical lessons
and exercises.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
During the speciel treining fornetion personnel study the leyout. operetionel
procedure. end rules for storege end cere of equipent. nechenisns. coemnice-
tions geer. inetmssnts. end essigned equipsent eveileble end they sleborete
the routines end nethods of opereting under veried conditions. The besic
Iethods for instructing forestion personnel et this stegs ere precticel end
speciel tecticel lessons. drills. end pessing CD norms. Their gosl is to
schisve highly treined students end to inculcete in then the skills end
ebility to operete with initietive under the conditions of e complex situetion.
The orgenizstion end netlbdology of precticel lessons depend upon e content of
the meteriel. the treining goel. the trsinee conplenent end the level of their
treining.

A precticel lesson includes. es e rule. en explenetion. deeonstretion of
the ections or routines. end en exercise (drill). The denonstretion Iskee
it possible to visuslly represent for the treinee the routine or action in
overell fore. Depending upon the goels end the content of the lessons. the
denonstrstion is sccuplished in verious weyst with the eid of specielly-
treined students. showing training fills. use of visuel side. end so on.
The bulk of the ties here is devoted to the exercise (drill) in which the
trsinees ecconplish the routines end netth of operetion.

Speciel tecticsl lessons ere conducted et full-scele sectors. in treining
villeges. or directly st netionel econoeic instsllstions. During these
lessons for-etions psrticipete in full conplenent with essigned equipentl
personnel lust heve individuel protective equipnent. dosimeters. end etteched
‘OOIOe

During speciel tscticel lessons fornetions eccolplish rescue end urgent
easrgency restoretion operetions under conditions that spproxinete reel life

to the neximn. Along with refine-cot of the individuel serious of the trsinees.
the sctions of the personnel in the eleeents end groups which go to sets up

the functions ere worked out during these lessons. es ere questions of their
contend end control. If the-es ere not fully elshoreted et the precticel end
speciel tecticel lessons. then the fomtions ere provided tile for edditionel
trsining besed on the decision of the corresponding CD chief.

Speciel tscticsl exercises ere the nest effective fou of precticel instruction
for fomtion co-end end supervisory stsff end personnel. These exercises
met rsise the level of treining of the students. Iske their knowledge lore
profound. and reinforce skills inVolving precticel activities. Speciel tscticel
exercises with fornetions ere divided eccording to purpose into plenned. inspec-
tion. denonstretion. end experilentsl.

The besic goel of plenned exercises is to refine the coordinetion of for-stion
sctivitiest workim out questions of coordinetion between then! refine-mt of
the precticel skills of More end steffs in for-stion cos-lend end control.
es well no training personnel end improving their resdiness.

During plenned exercises fornstion personnel refine skills in working with
equip-ant. instm-ents. end tools! they enter the routines of sesrching for
end extriceting injured end providing their essistence. they leern to deurnine
the locetion of protective structures end instelletion comnicetions end

30
FOR omcuu. VS! ONLY
accomplish urgent emergency operations involving them. Such exercises should
be conducted according to integrated themes which include the entire Volume of
problems and missions accomplished by formations in a situation which is most
like that which might occur realistically. taking into account characteristic
local features. it is advisable to enlist for the exercises several completely
manned general-purpose formations and CD service formations simitanewsly.

CD chiefs and the CD staff and service chiefs to whom the formations are
subordinate serve as exercise directors.

The director of a special tactical exercise personally and through his assistants
insures that formation couanders correctly evaluate the situation. rapidly
make decisions. issue brief and careful instructions. and demonstrate the

initiative. independence. and decisiveness in the actions of personnel. and
80 on.

During the planning and preparation for special tactical exercises special
attention is devoted to selection of the place (area. installation) where they
will be conducted. As a rule. such exercises must be conducted where there is
the most certainty of a natural calamity or emergency situation occurring.
Ilowever. in a number of instances. it is advisable to conduct exercises at
installations where it is necessary to accomplish a complex of operations to
prevent possible calamities. Thus. prior to the onslaught of spring rains.
corresponding formations during the exercise participate in practical operations
to strengthen and repair hydrotechnical stmctures. build dams and dikes. and
protect basements and the first floors of buildings against flooding. Inspec-
tion special tactical exercises determine formation readiness to accomplish
practical mission. as well as the ability of comaand and supervisory staff

to guide subunits in the accomplishment of SNAVR.

Routines for subunit comand and control under various conditions of the
situation are demonstrated at demonstration special tactical exercises with
fomtitns and they improve the methodological training of the supervisory and
command and supervisory staff.

Experimental special tactical exercises are conducted with formations for the
purposes of further refining the organizational and organic structure and tech-
nical equiment of formations. the routines and tactics of their operations
under varied conditions of the situation. detemination of scientifically
substantiated norms. as well as for the purposes of checking the capabilities

in the employment of new types of equipment for accomplishient of CD missions.

It should be noted here that the most practical Value lies with recommendations
and conclusions obtained as a result of an experimental special tactical exercise

which has been conducted under the realistic conditions of the elimination of the
aftereffects of natural calamities and industrial accidents.

formation training quality substantially depends on the availability and con-
dition of training facilitiesntraining villages and full-scale sectors equipped
with classrooms. special training areas. CD training points. mock-ups and
instruments. visual aids. and training materials. Training villages created

at large national economic installations and in cities. rayons. and oblasts

form the foundation of the training facilities utilized to provide practical
instruction for formations.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICMI. USE 0N1)!

full-scale sectors or specially equipped training positions are built at
those installation. where it is not possible to build training villages.
Rayon. (city. oblast) training villages are also employed.

One must take into consideration local conditions and the nature of the
possible actions of the formations when organising training facilities
for practical instruction. This makes it possible for formation training
to be most effective.

2. Principles of the employment of co formations during natural calamities
and production accidents

The basic mission of CD formations during natural calamities and when
eliminating the aftereffects of industrial accidents is to rescue people
and valuables. The nature and procedures which formations follow during
accomplisIment of this mission depend on the type of calamity or accident.
the evolving situation. the sire and readiness of the CD forces enlisted.
the time of year and day. weather conditions. and other factors.

Timely organisation and actively conducted reconnaissance which take into
consideration specific conditions to a significant degree influence the

success of formation actions during natural calamities and elimination of
the aftereffects of industrial accidents. Reconnaissance is conducted in

accordance with the missions of the CD forces and the nature of the actions
called for.

As a rule. the installation (rayon. city) CD chief assigns the reconnaissance
mission. lie indicates the goal of the reconnaissance. what information and by
what time it is required. where and for accomplishsnt of which missions the'

main forces are to be concentrated. and what resources to be employed for this

purpose.

In the regions of natural calamities reconnaissance determines the boundaries
of the center (region) of the calamity and the direction of its distributionl
installations and powlation points which are directly threatened! areas for
people to gather! approach routes for equipent to reach work areas} condition
of damaged buildings and structures and the presence in them of injured who
require Mediate assistance) the locations of accidents on technological lines
and municipal power networks. the condition of manholes and cut-off devices
and the mount they are damaged: SNAVR volumes. working conditions. and the
ability to employ mechanized equiment. Air reconnaissance can be conducted
in order to obtain up-to-date data on the scope of the natural calamity and
the overall nature of its aftereffects.

In the event of industrial accidents reconnaissance specifies the degree and
volume of damage. the ability to wort without individual protective equipment!
damage which might complicate the situation or make the aftereffects of the
accident more severe) areas where people have congregated and the degree of

threat to their lives! and the condition of industrial and municipal power
networks.

32
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
heconnaiseance groups (elements) conduct reconnaissance. Their number
depends upon the sire of the area encompassed by the natural calamity or
the scale of the accident and the opecifice of the national economic
installation at which the accident has occurred. Each group (element)
receives a specific mission. installation. or reconnaissance sector and
is supplied with commsnications and transportation resources. _

As a rule. reconnaissance groups include specialists who know the construc-
tion plan for the populated points. the specifics of the industry. and the
location of national economic installations in the region of the calamity. V
and the special features of the equipent at the enterprise where the accident'
has occurred. If the accident took place at an enterprise where strong toxic
substances are being used. the reconnaissance groups rust contain chemical

specialists with the corresponding reconnaissance instruments. as well as
medical workers.

Intonation gathered by reconnaissance groups is transmitted to thee!) staffs
where it is generalized and analysed in order to more fully evaluate the
disaster area for taking effective measures to fight natural calamitied er .~
eliminate the aftereffects of an accident. \ ' "

A grouping of resources. the composition of which depends on the type and
scale of the calamity (accident). the availability of resources. the nature
and volume of the work. and the special features of local conditions. is
created to battle the natural calamity and eliminate the aftereffects of an
industrial accident.

CD formations located in the area of the natural calamity or industrial
accident and where necessary. by decision of the senior CD chief-also for-
mations from neighboring regions and cities--are enlisted to accomplish

SNAVR. Formation personnel are notified about the assembly using a procedure
envisioned by the corresponding plans. Taking into account the surprise

nature of natural calamities and industrial accidents. notification must be

so . :ganized that assembly signals reach personnel in the shortest possible
time. Assembly areas and bringing installation formations to readiness usually
are selected within the territory of the national economic installation. with
assembly regions for territorial formations on the axes of their movement towards
the forthcoming work areas. The expended by the formation to master is included
in the established readiness periods.

.A CD resource grouping for elimination of the aftereffects of a natural calamity
and industrial accident is set up upon arrival of the formations and other forces
in the region of the natural calamity (accident). The first to go to work are
the installation and territorial formations from the rayons encompassed by the
calamity. They form the first echelon of the resource grouping. A second
echelon and a reserve which are employed to reinforce the first echelon. expan-
sion of the front of operations. or accemplishsent of preventive measures for
the marposes of localizing the aftereffects of an industrial accident are
created from the formations from neighboring regions and cities which arrive
130's

33

FOR OFFICIAL (IS! ONLY
son ontcm. "8! ONLY

formetions move directly from essenbly erees to the eree of the nsturel
ceiuity end industriel eccident. Since there they be. fires end rubble es
well es destroyed bridges end crossings elong the fornetion routes of move-
ment. neuesesry nuseures must be teken to insure their unimpeded novenent.

l-‘ormetions concentrete in the eree of the carnal celsmity (eccident) st
sectors designeted for them which insure repid sccess to work erees. For-
Iletions receive specific missions here. The formetion counender beers
personnel responsibility for successful scconplisment of the mission
sssigned to the formetion. Heving been essigned the mission. he clerifios
it. eveiuetes the situstion. mucus e decision. issues r. verbel order. end
orgsniees the work.

Hhile clerifying the eesigned mission the col-sender esteblishes the neture

of the forthcoming ectivities. the locetion. end the role of the formetion
subordinete to hie in the force grwping of the senior chief end in eccomplisho
nent of the overell mission. he subsequently issues preliminery instructions
to subordinetes to prepere for sction.

Evelueting the situstion on the spot. the cot-sender studies the neture of the
neturel celemity end eftereffects of the eccident end determines the volume
of forthcoming work end the cepebilities of the subordinete fornetion end of
etteched resources. He eiso eveluetes the neture of the terrein end tekes
into eccount the stete of the weether eiong with other fee-tors which influence
eccomplishnent of the sssigned mission. In his decision. the cot-lender deter-
mines the sequence of work eccomplislnent. the missions of subordinste end
etteched formetions. coordinetion procedures. end meesures to orgenise co-end
end control end comprehensive support to the fornetions.

The consider in his order points out the situstion in the work sree. the
mission which the formetion (where necessery the mission of e neighboring
formetion) is to eccomplish. locetion of medicel eid points. routes end
procedure for evecuetion of injured. the time opsretions begin. his locetion.
end the locetion of his dewty.

Heesures involving rescue work end prevention of cetestrophic eftereffects

of the celuity (eccident). prevention of possible secondery ceuses which night
bring ebout deeth to people end destruction to veluebles ere primerily cerried
out in the erees of neturel celenities end et the sites of industriel eccidents.
Hort continues without ceeeing until full conclusion.

During the opsretions the cosmender continuslly monitors his formetions. directim
their forces towerd successful sccoeplisI-ent of the essigned mission. hissions
ere essigned (pessed on) to subordinetes depending upon the situstion end even-
ebility of time vie direct verbel orders end instructions end ere issued per-
sonslly by the co-ender or vie the formetion steff. so well es by issuing

cos-ends end signeis. Orders. instructions. end conends oust be brief end
cleer.

3‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'von omcm. use can

Communications are the basic means which insure the command and control of
subordinate formations. Cole-unications are organised on the basis of the
order of the commander and instructions from the senior chief through use

of formation technical commnications equipment and by equiment additionally
allocated by the senior chief.

The formation comander must be continually aware of the situation in the
work area. when it changes he rapidly makes the corresponding decision and
refines or issues new missions to subordinates.

It is very important during work involving elimination of the aftereffects
of natural calamities and industrial accidents to maintain uninterrupted
coordination between formations. It is achieved through continuity in the
activities of the formations in goal. location. and time. and through mutual
assistance for more successful accomplisImIent of the overall mission. Upon
accomplishment of assigned missions formations move to their assigned areas
and prepare themselves to accomplish new missions should the need arise.

A cemandant°s service. which does not allow onlookers near the area of the
natural calamity or accident. is organized in areas of natural calamity and
industrial accident! it controls the movement of CD forces along movement
routes. as well as evacuation of the population and valuables) it maintains
mblic order and monitors to see that formations and the population adhere to
established movement rules) it guards vital road structures. crossings. state
institutions. and other national economic installations. Preservation of civic
order formations from national economic installations. as well as militia sub-
units. perform cosmandant's service.

3. Political-indoctrinational work in CD formations

Successful mission accomplishment by CD formations "during natural calamities

and production accidents depends to a significant degree upon the level of the
political-indoctrinational work with formation personnel.

Political-indoctrination“ work in CD formations is organized and conducted
based upon the overall statutes on political work within the USSR CD system.

Local party organs guide political work in formations. Party committees
(party bureaus) of those national economic installations upon which the for
nations have been created directly organize the political-indoctrinational work.

Local party organs assigned from among the party aktiv select formation political
affairs dewties to reinforce the political-indoctrination“ work in the
formations. They are assigned to formations containing 30 or more people and.
given specific conditions. to smaller formations as well.

Party organs determine the content. forms. and methods of political-indoctri-

national work with personnel and provide all subunits with technical means

of propaganda. visual agitation. educational books. periodicals. and other
materials.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e

FOR OFFICIAL I18! ONLY

Indoctrination of the personnel in a spirit of unlimited dedication to the
socialist motherland and the Columnist Party. unshakable trust in the glory
of communism. conscious accomplishment of their patriotic duty and high
personal responsibility for the security of the fatherland is the foundation
of the political work in CD formations.

l'he inflexible will of the Soviet man is primarily the result of his ideolo-
gical conviction. It is this ideological conviction that forms within him
steadfastness and courage. initiative. inculcates him with self-possession
and discipline. a sense of comradeship and mutual assistance-«qualities which
facilitate the heroic conduct of people in the most difficult situation.

Profound study of the materials of the 25th CPSU Congress. universal revela-
tion of the might and invincibility of the Soviet state structure. indoctrina-
tion of personnel with proletarian inter-nationalism greatly facilitate raising
the political consciousness of formation personnel.

with full effort until the job is fully done is an important goal of political
work for the battle against natural calamities and elimination of the after-
effects of industrial accidents. For these purposes all personnel are informed
in a timely manner about the evolving situation and the character of the forth-
coming operations. specific missions are levied upon them. and measures are also
taken for the support and develophent among the couand and supervisory staff of
high volitional qualities. initiative. independence. and the ability to correctly
evaluate the situation. make thoughtful and brave decisions. and find the most
effective few and methods of carrying on rescue operations. The comand and
supervisory staff and the party aktiv manifest special concern that the troops
in the formations maintain high moral-psychological and combat qualities.

Political measures are accomplished to mobilize personnel for organized move-
ment to work areas. resourceful, decisive. and skillful actions when carrying
out rescue operations. rapid search for injured. quickly providing them medical
assistance and eVacuating them as assigned. Continual attention is devoted to
developing within personnel the desire for the most effective employment of
special and engineering equip-ent and maximum use of its capabilities for full
accomplisMent of the assimed mission.

Formation colanders and political workers must manifest continual concern

about the material-technical and medical support. feeding. and rest for foun-
tion troops. adherence to the established mode and safety measures while working.
and timely designation of those who excell.

Taking into account the importance of careful coordination of resources enlisted
for the battle against natural caluities and elimination of sftereffects ‘of
industrial accidents. political-indoctrinational work envisions explanation of
general and specific missions of the coordinating sumnits. joint political
meamres directed toward reinforcement of combat cooperation. mutual aid, and
assistance during joint accomplisinent of assigned missions.

36

me OHICIAL USE ONLY
Ml 0"“:th 083 ONLY

Aleo of epeciel eiy-‘ficence ie eyeteeeticelly keeping fonetion pereonnel
inforned ebout the evolving eituetion end peeeinc on new eieeione to then.
relke with the couen‘ ud eupervieory eteff end the perty end Koeeoeol ektiv
end publicetion of epivele. Nintendo. end inettuctione ere widely ueed in
infometionel work. Iettle end ”fleeh“ leeflete eucceeefully ueed during the
Greet Petriotic Her ere beconine en effective infomtionel (on.

Comendere end politicel workere nuet in e tinely Ienner inforl petty oreene
ehout the politicel-norel etete of forletion pereonnel end of the politicel-
indoctrinetionel work conducted. The uee of certein nethode. forne. end typee
of politicel work in fouetione depende upon epecific conditione end the eitue-
tion which evolvee durin‘ eccoeplielnent of eeeigned eieeione end eo on.

The role of politicel workere in politicel-indoctrinetionel work with CD
fornetion pereonnel wee cleerly nenifeeted during. the elininetion of mu
foreet end peet firee in e nuber of regione of the country. bocel perty
argue. the perty co-itteee (perty bureau) et netionel econoeic inetelletione.
end prinery perty oreenieetione ineured the high reedineee end effective ectione
of the fonetione. Experienced perty ectiviete poeeeeein; precticel ekille in
indoctrinetionel work with people in the ehorteet poeeible tine nobilired for-
Ietione for ecconpliehoent of eeeiuied eieeione. when extineuiehin. firee
fometione often opereted in ereee eignificently renoved frol their beee
enterprieee. Thie required thet perty orsene creete Iohile operetionel
propenende eroupe. vein; technicel equipent. perticulerly the euto clube

et en coureee end fro- reyon culturel eectione end eupplied with the requieite
litereture, vieuel eide. end epeciel noviee. theee stoupe coMucted one politicel
work dir‘ctly on the ecene.

Appeele by petty cram end extreordiuery co-ieeione. morende, end leeflete
were widely ueed in politicel-indoctrinetionel work with fonetion pereonnel.
Foruetinn pereonnel welcoeed the newepepere end merinee which tented ebout
know-how in extinguiehine firee end ebout thou who excelled in the fire-
fighting operetione. Along with publicetion of eppeele. nuorende. end leeflete
epeciel redio broedceete free nobile etetione equipped with loudepeekere were
eleo deployed. The nobility of thie equipent kept the propenende up to dete
end nede it poeeible to repidly concentrete forcee where the eoet difficult
eituetion evolved.

Reelietic vitel conditione contimelly eet down rigid requir-ente for flexi-
bility end proficiency in the ornenitetionel end politicel work of ﬂotation
oo-endere end politicel workere. for en inprovnent in the role of every
comniet. The evente in the winter of 1976. when CD forced in the eouthern
pert of the Ukreine end Holdevie were celled upon to elitenetc the eftereffecte
of hurricene winde end heevy enowfelle eervee ee confiaetion of thie. The
difficult eituetion end the requth to reinforce the politicel influence
on people who were bottling neture night end dey eherply poeed the motion
ebout the continuity of politicel work et ell linke. of uploylent of the

loot effective forte end nethode of thie work.

The nieeion fecin; the fouetion troopeuelilinete the eftereffecte of the
neturel celeeity in the ehorteet poeeible tier-required thet eech fouetion.

J7

POI OFFICIAL USE OIL!
m onxcm 0“ ONLY

teen. group_- end pereon work et full peco, eelfleeely. not teking tine
or fetioae into eccount.

lndividuel indoctrinetionel work ecouircd enorlowe eignificenco. forty
orgene everywhere refined the eeeigmont of the perty ektiv in the forletione.
The utiviete tontimelly worked with the troope, Ionitorod to toe thet the

people were euppiied with everything required. concerned theneelvee ebout
their food end root.

The inportent eignificence of indoctrinetionel work directed towetde the
nobilitetion end hemony of the collectivee. to neveletion of tho creetive
cepebilitiee of people. to developent of e eenee of duty end mtuel eeeietenco
wee once egein confined by evonte in the block See eree.

Orgenieetion of politicel work with forletion pereonnel hee ite own epeciel
foeturee when elinineting the eftereffecte of induetriel eccidonte. hero.
ite for-e. nethode. end Ieene ere deterlined. ee e rule. by tho reletively
elell eroe of tho working eector. by increeeed desende to edhero to eefety
eeeeuroe. end by coeproeeod mpeneee ee well.

forlotion ectivitioe during tho elieinetion of the eftereffecte of induetriel
ectivitiet en cherecterizod by greet coeplexity end eoaetinoe even by denger
to peoplee' livee. Thie circuletence opene up for perty orgeniutione e brood
field of ectivitiee to inprove the norel-politicel end peychoiogicel treining
of fomtion pereonnol.

Morel-politicel end peychologicel treining ie on integretod moon of indoc-
trineting for-etion co-endore end troope with thoee idoologicel. norel, end
pe'ychologicel quelitioe which ellow then to eucceufully cerry out reecue

end urgent energency reetoratlon operetione, en well ee work involving eli-ine-
tion of the eftereffecte of neturel celuitiee end lerge induetriel eccidente.

A lending role in thie proceee felle to norel-politicel tempering. lt ie thou
very politicel convictions on the port of pereonnel. their viowe end deede thet
croete in the for-etione thet high epirituel uplift without which eeeignod
nieeione cennot be eucceeefully eccolpliehed.

'nie mrel-politicel quelities of the Soviet people ere formed by the entire
not. of our life, by the contimel goel-oriented ideologicel-indoctrinetionel
work of the petty. by ell of ite orgene end orgenizetione.

The foundetion of the norel-politicel end peychologicel tapering of fonetion
personnel ie prinerily leid by the idoologicel-indoctrinetionel work within
the lebor collective. for it ie here under the euptrvinion of the petty orgen-
itetion thet the ective vitel poeition of ite nonbere ie foned, citizenehip
ie tught. e eenee of petriotic duty end the roedineu to cone to the defenee
of oocieliea‘e coweete ie inculceted. end reletionehipe of friendship end
coatedely enamel eeeietence ere for-ed.

ldeologicel work conducted within the fornetione tin-elven feciliteteo the
Iorel-poiiticel end peychologicel tempering of “motion pereonnol. It in

38

roe OFFICIAL USE OIL!
M OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

directed toward develop-eat within the personnel of a psychological readiness
for operations in a difficult situation. for the sudden aanifeatations of
nature's natural forces. for the develop-ent of the ability to withstand
danger. to ward off its negative eootional and physical effects. to success-
fully conduct rescue and restoration operations.

the high degree of personnel readiness requires that every formation be
her-onions. coordinated. easily controlled. that it be able to successfully
accoeplish its unsigned sissions. This broad and ultifaceted problee is
successfully solved only given integrated. planned. profoundly thought out.
and goal-oriented pressures on all aspects of the life md activities of
fornation personnel. Such pressure begins free the day that the individual
Joins the fortation. they first explain the sissions and responsibilities
to the trooper. Subsequently loral-political and psychological training is
conducted continually during the process of peoples' daily labor activities.
during lessons in exercises. when eliminating the aftereffects of natural
calultles and industrial accidents.

He know of many fousations where the contend eleeent. political workers.
party. and Kolsonol aktivs skillfully use various methods of indoctrinationsl
work to bring people together. This includes popularization of the achieve-
cents of co otliclmiks. individual indoctrinational work and broad developent
of socialist coepetition. creation of a coopetitive spirit during drills.
lessons. and exercises. As a result the level of formation training is
improved and discipline in then is reinforced. In turn. the harlony of the
foreations. the high authority of couanders and political workers. trust

in coerades. and correct mtual relations between thn insures a general
psychological uplift and also facilitates vitality and successful actions

on the part of every collective nenber.

Exercises and repeated drills by persoan in the accoeplisluent of both
individual routines and activities as well as in the total couple: of rescue
and restoration operations in a situation that approxinates reality to the
maxim- provides a high psychological return. for it is here that a vital
principle of psychological taperinguintroduction into peoples' activities

of the per-issible eluents of stress. danger. and risk-ois inplenented.

Stress is achieved by increasing the physical and nervousopsychological loads
on personnel. by creation of a psychological nodel of a real situation. as well
as of conditions which can occur as the aftercffects of natural calaeities and
industrial accidents are elilinated. The elelonts of stress and danger gradually
train people to overcooe the highest psychological load. to actively and resolv-
ingly acconplish the tasks assigned to thee in a difficult sicuation.

It is no lower a rarity for trainees to he called upon to go through strips
of fire and water barriers. to love about slot; obstacles while wearing in-
dividual protective eminent. to clieo a store or fire ladder. to cone off
a tower using a rope. All of this and other elenents introduced into the

CD for-nation training systa. namrally within reasonable lilits and adhering
to safety measures. has a noticeable effect. People train themselves to

physically and psychologically overco-e difficulties which they might encounter
in practice.

39

roe OFFICIAL USB OIL!
m ontcw. I!" ONLY

Noni-political and paycholosioal tanparina ootsinod by (auction porsonnol
duriu tho trsinin; procoss is visibly Isnitostod during tho olilinstion of
tho altoroﬂ‘octo of nowrol csl-itioo. in porticular thooo liko tho heavy
snovotorl in tho Block Soa sros. flooding in laninsrad. tho sottMuakos in
control his. ond forost fir'os. Undo: tho lost difficult conditions poroonnol
oporstsd bravoly and courageously. uorhod ooltlosoly undsr mst strosso
ds-onstrstina in tho procoss initistivo. hrsvsry. high conociousnoss. mi
disciplino.

torution porsonnsl arc ofton callod upon to do roscuo work olom vith tho
population uhich finds itsolt in tho arcs of natursl oslalitios. Thorotoro.
{oration co-andoro. politicsl uorkors. and tho party aktiv undsr tho guidanco
of local party organs lust activoly participoto in tho political work must
tho inhabitants. oxplsin to th- tho ovolvina situation. tho toquirod safoty
assouros and horns of conduct. and tho routinos mi Iothods for bsttlin; noturo.
‘l'hoy last support tho inhsbitants' sou-control and sslf-possoosion and thsir
trust in amounting tho calcitios and rosstaolisl-ont of noml liviu and
working condition.

”010 CAUION

l. p ll At lossons ond onorcisss potsonnol acquit-o skills and tho shility to
oporsto in a situation thot opproxi-otss roslity to tho taxi-m

COPYRIGHT. Stmylsdst. 1970

7869
60' 1801 D

60

M OFFICIAL USE OIL!