APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00880R0001000‘0038-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NILY

JPRS L/8402

17 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSCIAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 21/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infomtion pri-arily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
trans-issions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and uterial enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was suuarized or extracted.

Unfauiliar nales rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion marl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as approprigte in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itel originate with the source. Tiues within itels are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Gweruent.

COPYRIGl‘l' MUS AND REGULATIONS WERNING OWNERSHIP OF
“1'3!!an RZPWDWED HEREIN REQUIRE MT DISSDIINATION
0? THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED ”OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apns L/aao
17 April 1

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(P000 21/79)

CONTENTS

GEOPHYSICS, mum MID SPACE

Varied and {anon-cunt. Role or Satellite.
(N. I. Shtel‘ll; M'm, 1976) anoooooococaooooooo

Mutton mum Free Solar notes in Near-Mb Brace
(V. M. Retrov, at. a"; mum ISSISDOVAI‘HA,

1979) oooooococoonoonocoooooonoonooooooooooooaoonooooo

MHCATIOIS

Engineering, Psychological Planning of Mantle Control
On“.
(A. I. Gumtonov, cf. 31.; mm mm
Psnmomorcmmo mammomlm A80 re, 1978).....

Rlectrmtlc Devices in Radionlectronlc Appnrntm
(hand Alekneyevich_ mm; mmnmma
more!“ mtomm WI, 1978)

Polycrystalline Semiconductor Fill in Microelectrmicl
(Vlndinir Mikhnylovich Koleohko, Alekonndr Ada-ouch
Kovnlevnkly; WWW! mama
mumvonuncov vmomomm, 1978)

Computer Methods and Programing (mam-1m. hthodn in
Home” or Electrodynamics)
(v. I. Dnitriyev, A. s. n'mny; nonsm'm
mom I mmavmrm: calamari: mom v
mam! monmm, 1978)

tactic Worn/mien
(In. A. Binvnlk; 2mm, mumn cmonmm,
mm mm, Feb 79)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)

Hire Detectors of Elementary Particles
(Yu. v. Znncvokiy; movomcm my
mum ems, 1978)

tactic-mama Logic Ihito with Controlled Movement of
Domino

(u. A. Boynrchcnkov, ct 51.; momma
mama m mm mm s umvnmm
mm, 1978)

Contactlcu Logic Circuit meeting and Simulation
(I. v. Antlk, at u.; smmwm mm I
mmomm ammmmm Immnsm 51-4,

1978) nooon...coto.00.0.0.0antenna-000000000000...

new Book on Antonnn Relocating and Technology
(A. A. Pistol'korn; mun, swam: 8mm, 1978)

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0792427.“. USE ONLY

GNMSICS. ASN.0!!!“ MD SPAS!

K

VMIED AND IMPORTANT Rm}; W SWITBS
Noocoo macs-mu in [union 1976 pp 13-15. 37-60. 76-0! ond 97-182

LSolocttcoo In. tho hook "(motif by H. I. aton. 088’. M of
sung“, Sortoo “Peon-o o! Stucco ood Toehotcol Freon“. 'lmtol'otvo

look-J
[Sp 13-127
Lrut] Lohototory to Spoeo

Tho thud Sovtot ootoluto to tho (all me of tho lord voo on mutt:
oclootutc lohorotory to opneo. mm to in tochtcol doto. on! tho
n-hor of oxporhooto mud 1t modal tto ptodocooooro b o otoot
dool. Ito votoht no 1,327 to. helm tho night at tho octoattﬂc d
muting mot“ tooothor nth tho pooor moo-460 to.

Tho dumb; of tho utolnto took into “Monaco o “hot at opocule
toqutmonto oooocutod with tho contacts-o on it of “than: octontluc
oxportonto ad tho plot-oat o! o lmo quantity 0! och-tine on! ooooortno
opporotuo. 'l'ho poootbtuty o! mootpnool Inna-co a! mum octatﬂtc
metro-onto toqutrod tho thorough on.” of I“ of tho octnttﬂc opporotuo.

Tho ow: pox-tun o! auto-onto tor tho mule otnduo tqothor with tho
pour omo on pxocod “this tho ootontto oo oo nun-not 2r- locuod
ta ta atone: portion. no pug-oat c! ooootttvo ol-nto (noon) at tho
opporohho woo dotontood by thou- porpooo. “no. tho oopotuoto: ooo plocod
in tho ootortor ooctton of tho ootoluto, to «do: to m tt tho hon-Io
aotuco It. tho mom opporotoo. Tho code to oototo ooro tutollod
olthtn tho ootoluto. All tho othor moo ooxo plocod cutouo tho houotioony-
ooolod hcuotn‘. The. tho photmlttpuon that oorvod to rocord amount
ooh: roduttoh voro Into-o4 on tho notoriou- ooctton of tho heinous. Ono
upottc all too tutootton ooouotoro tho: ooooutod moon to tho oppor
icon of tho ot-oophoto Ion mtollod to gunmen coooo ooldod tote

tho ohou not: of tho .toﬂor portion of tho ootolltto. tho mm
opporotuo II. plocod hoot th-.

A otohlo emu“. wi Lain the satellite was guaranteed by a system

a! thonormlottaa itch no cmuorobly portoetod 1- who to thot
ﬂood n tho (trot utollttol. Tb temperature was regulated by changing

tho brood ctmhtton o! uooau tutu... oo Ion oo by My tho

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cootticiont of. natural radiation of its surfaco. For this, adjustahlo louvors
consisting of 16 individual ooctioos woro installod on tho latoral suriaoo of
tho satollito. 'lhoy voro oponod and closod hy oloctric drivoo controllod hy
tho apparatus in tho thornorogulation systu.

'rho uao ol‘ nolar anLerics as :\ paver source nuia it poosihls to obtain scion-
titic intonation for a long tins. ‘lho solar s-icooductor hattoty was
arransod in tho for: oi individual soctions on tho suriaco of tho housing.
Pour .all sootions wan installod on tho antorior hotton, tour on tho latorsl
surfaco, and ono on tho roar bottos. Such plats-oat of tho soctiono of tho
solar hattory guarantood its nonal oporation mardloss of tho oriontation
of tho satollito in rolation to tho sun.

‘l‘ho mltiplo-chanral radiotolnootric aystsn of tho third satollito diﬂarod
in its high rosolntion. It could trans-it to earth a largo V01!- o£ infor-
nation on tho rooults at tho sciontitic nonsuronuts.

‘l'o rocovd high ohory partlclos a luninoocont notor woo usod consisting of a
uryt‘. ml or oodiu- iodido and a photo-altiplior with a photo cathodo.

'l'ho mar-onto rooults ohowod that in all caooo without moption Ihon tho
satollito notorod a hand of latitudos 55-65° both in tho Rorthorn and in tho
Southorn hisphoro a sharp incroaso was ohoorvsd in tho braking x-ray radi-
ation, govornod by tho honharrhont of tho housing with oloctrono with onorg
on tho ordor of 100 toll. lt woo also ootahliohod that tho radiation inton-
sity incronsoo with altitudo. both 02 thus things woro a consoquonoo of
tho ontranco of satollito into a zoos of intusivo radiation thich sou
rocoivad tho n-o ortornal zono of tho radiation holt.

Uith tho holp of tho photomltipliors dosipod to rocord tho corpuscular
solar radiation for tho first tino oloctrons woro found diroctly with onorg
on tho ordor l0 haV. A stro- o! thsso oloctrons was rocordod at altitndo
tron 670 to 1.88) in. 'l'hoir intonoity (hiring tho do no groator thn at
night. whorohy it cootimouoly chanson with an incroaoo in altitudo and
gaonopotic latitudo. Sinoo tho position (oriontation) of tho satollito was
known. than tho diroctin of nov-snt of tho particlos linhad to tho stro-o
oi oloctrons nos soocoosihlly dotorninod. It as found that they, so a rulo,
nova porpondicnlar to tho diroction of tho motic torts lino. ‘Ihoir volocity
o! lav-ant ouoodod a groat doal tho volocity of solar cormoclos. noasurod
iron ohoorvation of tho aurora horoalis.

Dotornination of tho donsity of tho uppor atnosphoro this tino was nods hy
ohoorviog tho chanso in tho par-star of tho satollito orbit duo to tho
broking and rocordin; of proosuro with tho holp of ionization and lunatic
nononotors.

A study of tho para-stars of tho ionosphoro was also nods by dittoront nothods:
ohsorvatiou of tho sproad of radio wavos -ittod by tho poo-rial radio trono-
nittor of tho satollito. and with tho holp of tho apparatus inotallod on it.
oo-callod ion traps for tho diroct moor-oat of tho conoontration oi posi-
tivo ions along tho satollito orbit. In addition, with tho holp of a radio-
troquoncy nass opoctronotor tho conpoaiticn of tho positivo ions was otudiod.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
n v. I nun-u uuu. \vovul

In otdot to nnoouto tho nopotic north liold nt srnot oltitudno o oolt-
orionting nomotuotot woo inotollod thot nnoonrnd tho conploto intonoity
of tho nonotic Hold ot tho oltitndo of tho ootollito'o othit.

0n tho third ootollito tho intonoity of tho pun-ow coonit run won oloo
rocoodnd. ond oworinnnto worn not up to dototnino tho quantity 0! hoovy
moloi in opoco todiotion. Sovorol anon motdod inpocto oi nicronotoor
potticlon.

Tho lounchina of tho third ortiiiciol ootollito thot oniotod mo: 2 yooro ond
nodo wot l0.000 :nvolutiono oronnd tho north ponittod tho Soviot noiootiotn
to Not otudioo on oll pointo of tho corrnoponding onotion of tho progr-
ot lntornotionol Gooyhyoicol Yoot.

[3p 37427
Choptor 3 Ohjoct o! Stndiooo-tho bloc:
Spoco Lohorotory

Tho clooont onlootiol body to on. tho only noturol ootollito of Booth, tho
noon long hoim tho onnot of tho on o! opocotliuhto Inn oonoidni'od tho noot
otudiod hody in tho oolor oyoton ottor our plonot. In tho noot odvoncod tolo-
ocopoo ono mld diotinguioh on tho lnno: ourfoco dntoilo with ctono dinnn-
oion of l In and ovon looo. Pith tho holp of photonotoro nod opocttogropho
tho noilont monono in ito rofloctin‘ ohility (olhndo). color ond Inch non
worn rncordod. Iron oitor tho Soviot ontonotic ntotion "halo-l" dononn of
othnr opococroft mohod to tho noon tho poooihilition oi undying it grow
tonothohly.

Tho noon with ito crototo ond rm ionotiono. mntoin cnootn. "noon.” and
“hoyn” hon oooootiolly hoot-o o giont nciontific lohototory.

ﬁlly in non drown townrdo tho noon? Hoot noploinn tho intomt of ociutioto
in our ogo-long ootnllito?

In onownrina ouch quotiono ono otton nioro to non‘n ottivio. to know hio
unmodiu wotld. ‘l'hin in undiopntohly no. hat in tho octnol ntriving for
knowlodon thorn lion on ohjoctivo noonooity for tho turthnr invootisotion of
lowo of nntnro ond thn non of th- for tho good 0! pnoplo. Tho annuity of
oocroto ﬁnch tho world of ntoro nnd plnoto hidno will hnlp to oolvo only.
oooningly, pnroly torrnntriol pmhlono.

It in difficult to inuinn lifo of nodnrn non. tho tochnolou of todny “that
tho oxtonoivo non of ninorolo. Vory gtnot roooutcoo oro onpnndnd for thnir
proopocting. kplorotion of now iioldo will hocun noon oifnotivn if wo hovo
o hottor "cognition of tho mitotion oi out plonot. tirot of oil it in
nooooooi'y to ohtoin dotoilod doto on tho oonpooition ond ottnotntn of tho
dnop intoriot of tho north. on woll no “motion on tho ootly otogon o!
oniotonco of tho north. Iownvor pooodonicol. tho noon: to tho qnootion of
how tho north in monitod con ho ohtoinod on o noonlt of otudyin. tho noon.

. According to Ida-n idooo. tho noon. may. in o rnoichno oi oolid poo-
plnnototy hodioo, thot worn not onto-pound by lorth in tho proonno o! ito

I
tornatlon. Throughout tto hlotory tho noon hao hoon oxpoood to onallot
gooloslcol chanson than ﬁrth. Karo andV-onuo. Tho nrooooooo o! ovolutlon
loft nany trocoo on tho lunor ourlocoucrotoro o: dtuoront olxoo. Sono
oclontloto oro prono to hollovlm that to tho najortty o! coooo tho crotoro
unto tornod no rooulto of “pasta of notoorltoo on tho lunor mfaco. Ono
can hopo that on tho noon o conotdorohlo nonhor of trotoo o! mlutlon oro
prooorvod that rotloct tho oorly htotory o: tho oolor oyotc. tron thlo vlov-
polnt tho noon to ovon of grootor uportonco tor otudloo thon tho planoto.

‘l'lnao. otuoy of tho noon to lnooporohly llnhod to tho prohl-o of tnvoutuatlna
Barth. lto hlotory and ovolutlon, otructuro ond conpooltton of tho lntorlor.
Wool and zoologlool procooooo ocwrrln; to it.

ﬂoat, for omnlo. con on analyolo of onploo of lunar rocho oont to Forth
provtoo? Attor dotornlntu in than tho concontratlon o! “throat radloottlvo
olonnto ond proacto of tholr hroahdon tho opociolloto ootohlloh uhon tho,
onto fouod. Thin mo 1t pooothlo to nvool onpplloo o! lotont rodloottlvo
anorgy tn tho doptho of tho noon. A totol th-lcol analyolo of tho ooaploo
one! an on tho contont in th- of a nuhor of ooottorod olonanto ohov uhlch
procooooo rooultod to tho tornotton o! th1o ouhotanco. voo it n a liquid.
noltod torn or did it rnaln oolld. cryotolllno. Spoclol otudloo lndtcoto
uhlch twaturoo ono prooouroo octod on tho uhotanco and what naturo thooo
foctoto hod. Anolyolo of tho honor ouhotanco vlll holp to opon ollghtly tho
curtoln ovor tho oorly otogoo of plootoq fornatlon.

Tho for otdo of tho noon oloo lntorootod tho oclontloto. tor ovon tho .alloot
dlftoroncoo in tho otrncturo of tho uolhlo and for h-lophoroo of tho noon
naho 1t pooolhlo to undoutond tho naturo of tho ﬁnal otaso in tho braking
of tho coloottol hoop-“tho opoctol point.“ dun oo o conooquonto of tho
tum raccoon ollcltod hy Booth tho posted at oxlol rototooo o: tho noon
hot-o oouol to tho ported of lto rototlon oronnd Barth.

‘l'ho noon opono onornono poropocttvoo hotoro astronomers.

0n tho noon uhoro thoro to no otnoophoro tho ontlro romo of olottronasnotlc
rodlotton “1o opon" and ocooaolhlo to dlroct ohoorvatlon and lnvootuotlon.
‘rho rooulto ohtalnod horo nako it pooolhlo to judo tho pholcol condltlm.
contont of hydronon ono tonporotnro ot «throat potnto to tho oolor corona.
and tho chronoophoro. tho phyotcal procouoo to tho intorplanotory nodlu.
no voll ao in tho 1onoophoro ond atnoophoro otBorth.

m o lunar ohoorvatory ono con nako o opoctroocoplc dotornlnatlon of tho
ch-lcol oupooltlao of tho planoto in tho ontlro tango of tho opoctru. tn
odor to It: ltnoo of woo ond olnonto that oro moccooothlo to ohoorvatlon
rm Booth.

“rho noon to an wool ploto to otudy tho ortnory coonlc royo all tho any to
ononloo to tho hilltono of hlllluo o! oloctron-volto. arch o pooothlllty

for otudym huh onorg portlcloo will puntt oclonttoto to puntroto doopor
into tho oocroto of tho otrncturo of nattor. ono noto oucooootnlly oolvo tho

prohl- of controlunc thotnolnocloor prooooooo. Mololoto ﬁll ohtoln on
tho noon tho noot anotaouo laboratory vlth on wool vaunn. and low t-poro
atnroo.

a.
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As tho artificial sotollitos hovo show: a coosidorablo Ito-hot of torrostrial
prohlons can ho solvod only in spaco. Busing Iany thousands of hilonctoro
tro- tho surfaco of tho osrth tho instrunonts alroody havo diocavorod in tho
ooao and on dry land cortsin rooonrcos that oro hiddon tro- tho ohoorvors
locatod on Earth. Pro- tho noon ono can ohsos‘vo tho earth ohjocts in sits up
to sovoral tons of actors-ohondrodo of tisso snallor than thou diich ono can
too on tho noon fro-n Earth by using tho ans loath-alto. This is oxploinod
by tho fact that tho atooophoro of Earth that is dusty and in continuous
notion is in diract proraiaity to its sortaco.

l'inolly. without hrookina my fru tho roal potontialitioo of solutes, and
only slightly ontoriog into tho roaln of (mtasy ono can raiso the question:
Hos tho ti-o not cuo who pooplo, having opant ouo important oiooralo in tho
oorth'o dopths and having found th- on tho mom will considsr it otpodioot
to dolivor thooo ninoralo to Forth? It is two that apparontly it will ho
inupodiont to transport thon tu- thoro in thoir natural (on. But tho
possibility is not omludod of twin; tho Iinoral row notorials of colos-
tial hodioo into typos of nattor and onsrgy convonioot for transporting.

As Acsdo-ician c. P. Korolov notod. organization on tho noon of a pomnont
ociootitic station. and ouhsoqoontly an imhstrial facility will par-it tho
noo of. nutmchod and as yot m roomrcos of this grost colostial body
clooo to no for scionco and tho national oconay.

Us noto that tho voluo and divorsity of scientiﬁc intonation about tho
noon which ocionco today poooosoos thslts to spaco roooorch sro dotoninod
first of all by tho potoottalitioo of tho scientific apparatus installod
aboard tho opaco stations. And thooo potontialitioo. in tun. aro govomod
by tho night and ovorall dinoosion lioitotions. sham rooontcos, longth
of oxistonco of tho stations. paculiaritios of thoir novuout aim tho
trajoctory. and tho naturo of tho intonation tranonission. ‘l'ho tasks
fulfillod vith tho holp o! opoco stations can ho rosy divorso. “rho studios
conductod by than lutually supplant oach othor. and urich our hovlodso

about tho noon. During tho olapsod yoors astronustics has ochiovsd ont-
otandin; ouccoosos in this diroction.

[3p 75.327

Orbital Sciontific Station ”Salyut"

Tho ooxt stago in Soviot spoco rosaarch vas tho croatioo and launch into
orhit of tho station “Salyut"ua Ioltiplo-pnrpooo orbital ociontifigtotion
capohlo of aching a broad tango o! tasks in tho noar-oorth ontol- spoco. Tho
croatioo of tho station and its proparatioo for launching to a groot altont

was pmotod by tho oxporionco ot dovol and toot oat-sod -
crafts in tho sorios “Soyuz.” oping ‘98 "I. spaco

wring the flight of. tho low-ton orbital sciontific station "Solynt" too
noin prohloss rousinod to ho solvod: study of tho poosibility of Ian's

laogthy stay in opoco and tho conﬂict of h
r to. . in a road progr- ot ociantitic
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A largo progru of oodical and biological Mari-onto with tho participation
of tho crow oonhoro of tho otatioo woo onvioasod to uolvo tho firat of thooo
prohl-o. A oot oi oomros woo dovolopod to guormtoo tho cooprohonoivo
phyaical training of tho coononaoto it. opaco. oinco tho yhyoical load 3“. it
poooiblo to a cortaio dogroo to cooponooto for tho oboooco of gravitotional
forcoo whoa ooh opondo a long time in woightlouonooo. and crootoo tho coudiv
tiooo for occoloratod roodaptatioo of tho orgooioo ottor roturo to tho oarth.

In ordor to oolvo tho oocond prohloo it woo oocoooory to ploco in tho goaloo
o! tho otation a lorgo labor of ociontitic inotru-onto whooo total might
ouoodod l,200 kg.

In tho planning of tho ototioo it was aloo kopt in oiud that tho fulfill-oat
of a oatoratod progr- ot ociontific and toclnical upon-onto and tooto of
tho oo-boord oyot-o and aggrogatoo uudor cooplox conditions of o lonthy
opoooilight will provido tho tint oxporiooco of oporatim opaco opporotuo o!
a now typo-nomad orbital otatiooo.

‘l'ho dovolopora of tho ototion "Salyut" woro hood with tho problo- of. ﬂoating
a ociootiiic laboratory oxiatiog for a long tioo in tpaco with chongoablo
crowo. Tho uoo of opococrafto in tho oorioa ”Soyuz" woo oovioagod for tho
dolivory and roturo of crown. and tho tranopotting of individual cupooooto
of «pip-out, objocto and rooulto of roooorch.

In tho croatiou of "Salyut" it woo plonnod to conduct ocioatific otodioo on
it while manned whon tho tronoport croft docko with tho orbital
block of. tho ototioo and tho crow io locotod in ito capartnonto, oo wall ao
during tho flight of tho orbital block of tho otatioo in on atmtic mode
without a crow.

According to tho plan a portion of. tho oboorvotioo rooulto conﬁnetod on tho
otatioo not ho trauoittod to oarth by a rodiotoluotric oyotu, mlo it
woo providod that uothor portioo ho dolivorod in o tronoport opococrolt.

Thu tho poooihility woo guaratood for trooportiog tro- orbit to oorth uood
photo and novio ootorialo. photo nuloion blocho. cootaiooro with biological
ohjocto. oil-board logo with ocintiiic ohoomtiooo of tho comto. In
tho cooplox of tho orbital otation croatod for near-auto orbit of 7 Juno 1971
won-o inclodod: tho orbital block put into orbit without a cm. and tho
trnnoport craft with crow to ho dochod on orbit with tho orbital block. Tho
fixot cro- inclodod enoodor 6. ‘1'. Dobrovol'okiy. flight ongiooor V. II.
Volhov, and tootin ongiooor V. I. Pataoyow who worked on tho otatioo for

23 WUo

Tho total woight of tho ototioa ortor docking woo 25.6 1'. including tho woight
of tho orbital block ottor it woo put into orbit-48.9 ‘1'. and tho night of
tho trohoport craft in orbit--6.7 1'. lhoro woro ovor 1,300 individual
tutu-auto and oggrogatoo on board tho ototioo. Tho goo-otric choractoriotioa
o! tho otatioux total longth in tho dock...“ condition 23 I. loath of tho
orbital blooko l6 o. maxi-n di-otor of tho orbitol block 4.13 o. Ion-
crooo dim-ion o1 tho otatioo with open oolar hattotioo 11-. In onto: to

6
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fulfill ociontiiic axporioaato. viml ohoorvation. and photo and owio photo-
graphy thoro voto 27 illuoiuatoro in tho ooduloo of tho otation.

In ordor to trauotor tho cm In tho tranoport crait to tho othital hlock
and hook thoro it a docking junction. Aftor dockiu tho crow con mi: and
root both in tho oodulao o! tho ototiou. and in tho amo of tho trooport

ctatt. hvy ttaooion'in; ditoctly thrash tho m unlt. vithout pin
out into outor opaco.

0h tho otatioo ”Salyut" for tho tint tioo tho poooihility oao providod of
«pairing and "placing opporatuo and mil-ant in flight by tho cm. ‘l'ho
placooIIt .d layout of oqoiruont aod inotu-oato van oada oith mrd for
tho poooihility oi aocooo to th- in tho can of any dung“ or mltunctiooo.
0o hoard tho ototiou thoto to a oat of toola. attach-onto and oottaiu apato
parts.

Tho rooulto of tho ocioutiiic and tochhical otudioo fulfillod on tho otatiou
“Salyut' aro voty ctouivo. A ymiuaat placo in th- io oocupiod by

oodical and hiologicol otndioo. aotrophoical otodioo, aa voll u a capto-
haooivo photographic W which haloqo to no of tho ooat. uncut dioac-
tiona of tho appliod uoo o! aotrou-Iticouotudy of tho «win-at and aatutal
tooourcoo of Earth. Tho til-dingo graphically iodicato tho high otticiaocy

of opaco photography tor oolving aaoy ociootitic and notional oceanic prohl-a.

0f groat inportnco aro: tho tint uparioont in ostra-atooophoric «tron.-
ical otudioo with tho holp of a otollot toloocopo cmttollod by tho cocoon.“

”Orion.“ otudy of conic taya uoing o photo-gluon hlook thou ooot to ﬁrth
in a traupott cult, and a Ian-bar oi ociootific and tochnioal apart-onto to
work out undo: full-ocalo condition oyatooo ood mot“ ooooooory toi-

dooigoiog opaco appatatuo.

Tho oopociol rolo of oadical and biological otudioo coodutod on board “Salyut”
io dototainod by tho principlo W for tho dovolopoot of aotrountioo
of Mountain; Ian'o loath: atq undo: couditiouo of o opoco flight. at

tho ototioo for tho tint tioo a oot oi roaoutcoo vao toatod to mom

for tho ohm-toga o! phyoical load on tho mani- oi tho aottouauto undo:
conditions of mo gravity that iocludod a main; truck. load ooito. and
cortaih othor coupononto. Tho biological oxporionto oucutod by tho aotro-
oaut: won diroctod tooardo oolvim a who: oi quoatiooa liohod to tho

croatioo of cloud ocological ayot-o ot lifo ouppott for opacoctaft of tho
futuro.

Tho tirot flight of tho ototiou 'Solyut" oado a groat contribution to tho
dovolopoot and pottoctioo of opaoo toohoolog. ooo tho iii-at mod-ant in
oorld aotronautico to croato loos-ton orbital otatiooo. ad graphically
ohovod thoit mat potootialitioo ao oultiplo-purpooa apaco lahotatorioa

capahlo of providiu tho oolution to am moot poohlaoa in tho intoroota
of unkind.

7
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
In Doc-hot 1976 the otatiou ”Salyut-lo" won put into orbit. On tho 268th
opt-it altar 2 woalto of ﬂight of tho otation it dockad with "Soyuz-l7." and
comta A. A. Oubarov and G. H. Grochho owitchod to tho otation. For o
nonth of tho flight tho crow fulfilled a largo voluno of otudioo and nepoti-
nonto. Upon couplotion o! the work tho conunaoto tranufarrod to a pottara
oi conoorvation cortain ociontitio inatn-onta and o unhor of tho oorvico
oyotono. including tho oyaton of life nupport. ‘l‘ho atation again hogan to
oporato mtononoualy. Throo and a halt aontha paoood thua. Than tho aocond
crowo-P. I. Klimt and V. I. Sovaot‘yanov workod aboard tho otation for noro
than 2 nontho. mun. tho ontira tino tho oyato-a of tho atation functionod
iluloaoly. and atudioa waro conducted according to tho aooignod progru. A
conoidoroblo volt-a of ociontiiic monarch woo corriod out. This intludoo
fulfill-ant of nodicol and biological. tochnical. ao wall on a largo coplox
of opoco-phyoicol oaporinonto doaipod to who any ouootiono of aotroplwoico.
aolor-torroouol bondo. goonhyoica. and roooarch of tho aarth'o natural
roowrooo.

Tho oxpodioncy of tho mutation of certain opoco otudioo on tho orbital
atotion ”Solyut-lo" who cuaprohonoivoly dimuad by tho ociontioto. nor. both
tho ioportonco and tho aigni ticanco of tho uporinant woro conaidorod. ao
wall on tho poooihility of ito raliohlo inatrunant analyoia.

Our 100 difforoot oxporinonto woro aoloctod. and tho all aro of graat input-
tmco for dittoront tialdo of ocionco. tochology. and tho national oconuy.
"Solyut." in particular-~an oxcollontly oquippod aotrononical ohoorvatory.
oquippod with opporatuo, capablo of porcoivins alnoot tho ontiro opactru of
olactraagnotic aniaaiono. Conoidotablo attontion woo tocnood on an invooti-
gotion of tho ultraviolot oolar radiation with tho holp of an orbital oolor
toloocopo and dotrution opoctronotor. and tho conducting of aotronnical
ohoorvationa in tho r-roy rocion of tho opoctru. Dooono of oolor opactra
waro obtainod nainly tron rogiono ot tlarao on our atar. tho (indigo oako
it poaaiblo to invootigata tho diatribution of tanporaturoo. condition oi
ionization and oxcitation of atou, and othor phyaical charactoriatico of
thooo inportant and intorootin; tot-nation on tho oolor our-taco. Tho coo-o-
nonto waro aaoiotod by aciontiato at tho ground aotronuicoi oboorvatorioo.
Thoy aodo roco-oondationo on tho ooloction of objocto of oboarvation, and
tho oporatin; pattorn of tho on-boord apparatno.

Studioo of x-ray aatronury aboard tho ototion "Salyut-b" woro carriod out
with the holy of two may talooconoo-o'l’ilin” and "RT-4.”

”ruin” woo dooignod to at xoroy radiation in tho rogion of vavolonstho
iron 1 to approxinatoly 60 . It woo rocordod by four dotoctoro. Tho
toloocopo had a opoctronotor with eight entry channalo to onalyto tho
rocordahlo radiation. Tho oonaitivity of tho toloocooo roachod roughly 0.0l
quanta par l enzlo. i.o.. procticolly wan outticiont to invoatisato all tho
km oourcao of may radiation.

Tho attach-ant of tho optical axio of tho toloocopa to tho otollar ally woo
providod by two atallar photonotora tint rocordod radiation of tho ataro in
tho bluo and yollow ragiono of tho apoctru.

8
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Of oopocial valuo voa intonation rocoivod {rm tho l-ray oourco in tho
couotollation Gloom. Thio oourco ia locotod in a binary ayat- couaiotio;
of o Iaooiva not-o1 otar and an ohjoct inviaihlo in optic rqo. Ihooo oooo ia
clooo to lO aaoooo of tho ouo. Poooihly thio io a ”block holo.” Ito full
anorgotico ia indicatod by that fact that tho luinooity of this x-ray sourco
io l0.000 tiooa highot than that of tho aun.

Tho oxpotiaootal otudy of ouch ohjocta michoa our halodgo about tho on-
lutiou of otara and tho {Mal propottioa oi apoco anti tiooutho oai.
lava o! natuto. In tho mire-Ia of tho "black holoo” tho Noical conditim
ato so umoual that cnplotoly how phoouaoa can ho found that on not upro-
ducod Manama-trial ccoditiooa. Tho took of ooporiaooto oith "n.4-
ihcludod atudy o! uisoiooa in tho oott x-ray mica. Tho fact ia that soft
tadiatim ia otmly ahaorhod by tho fill of tho input opaoin; of tho ootor.
Booovat thoro ia onothor mucollsct x-ray radiation by opocial optica and
ditoct it to a aaall ootor of photooo. 'nu colloctin; optica can ho vary
attonood pataholical lit-ma. Thoy aro also an mollont filtor thot doaa
hot tron-it tho hard x-toy radiation.

Comta A. A. Guhorov and G. K. Grochko ohoorvod tvo raaiduoo o! "oupot-
novao": mo in tho couotollotiou Voia. tho othotnin tho coootollatiou Carina.
Tho brightoot of. tho ooml ataro no also ohsot'vod. P. I. [link ad V. l.
Sovaat'yahov focusad prioary ottontioo on otaro that ooro looa bright. but
poosooood a III-hot o! opocitic foatutoa, in particular imluly flaohin;
otars.

During tho uporiaant tho list of ohjocto of ohoorvatious no altorod hosod
on data of tho ground observatorioa about tho activity of tho ataro. In addi-
tion. in tho procoao of analytin tho colloctod intonation auotiaoo it
hoe-o oocoooary to obtain oottaio additional data, and to tool-ck tho moaolto
of praviouo ohsorvatiooo. nun tho comto “I. aim a corroctod aooigo-
hoot.

For tho tough diroction of tho toloocopo axio on tho otudiod ammo tho cm
firot oriontod tho otation in opaco. and than Iaintaiood tho aooipod orioo-
tation for tho ontiro aoaoioo of ohoorvatious. Io: tho furthot fioo adjuot-
Ioot tho toloocopo itsolt no oquippod with a apociol ayato- of control and
oatro-oriontation.

Mona tho gaophyeical atudiaa fulfillod on "Salyut-Io," ooo ohould prilorily
n-o tho oxpori-ont "Spohtr" and ”hiooiya."

Tho took of "Spoktt" includod noaoumant of tho par-tots for tho uppor

ouoophorondonoity, c-pooition. t-potaturo. and imotigatiou of tho iotor-
actioo of tho anvitvuant vith tho opacocraft.

During tho flight of tho opaoocrattoho appootaaco on thoir houoin of a
potontiol tolativa to tho plao-a M it too ootod moms tiaoo»
tho apporatuo oo-inaly no olactricolly chargod. In odor to iotorprot tho
oooourooamo aado on tho aatollito. and to: tho nor-oi functioning at tho
on-hoard ayot-o it io vary iapottaot to boo tho mount of thio potootial.
Tho pooitivoly (or metivoly) chargod homing will topulao (or attract) ins
and. cooooquaatly. undonati-oto (or ovaraatiooto) tho mound ion

9
FOR OFFICIAL SSE ONLY
concentratione. having eatehliehed the lava governing the appearance and the
anount of the potential it ia eeey to conaider errora introdwad by then into
eeeeurenente. and provide high efficiency of certain on-hoard eyeteea.

One of the take of the ewe etudiae--to explain the featuree of interactim
of particlee in rarefied etaoephere with the eatellitee. The eurface of the
atetion "Salyut-lo," for ee-ple. vaa contimoualy hoehcrded by each particlae.
An individual inpact accompanied by a rebound (reflection) of the am. on
eolecule camot provide perceptible reeulta. hot contiauove inpacta reeult in
the deceleration of epacecraft by the rarefied ateoephere.

ln ewe caeee thie deceleretwn linits the tine of exietenca of the apparatua
in orbit. requirim coneiderahle outlnye of energy to coepmeete for ite effect.
In other caaee-oit provea uaaful and ie need to return the long-range epece
prohea to earth. and during their landing on the planet. It ie cleer that for
a preciee calculation of deceleration it ie inportant to have a good know-
ledge of the laws governing auch colliuiona of the particlee vith the aurface
of the apparatue. Thia ie eepecially inportant in the developent of rocket-
apace eyet-e for nultipla me.

The maerme atteepte to atudy in the laboratory the effect of rarefied atao-
ephueon the now-ant of a aatellite (in the one way an airplane nodele are
taated in aerodynuic tunnele) encwntered ineuruountahle difficultiaa. The
prinary one ie linked to the need to create atreue with velocitiea reachixu
30,000 lulh and over. Another ie governed hy the eharp difference in the
cupoeition of the upper atnoephare fro: the eurface ateoephere and ite varia-
bility. It r-ained to nova the studies to the actual apacecraft in order to
inventigate the proceee of neutral particlaa hitting ite ehell.

The experinent conaieted of for-in; been of ataoapheric particlee, directing
th- at different anslea at the target. and neeeurinz the characteriatica of
the acre-I reflected fro- it.

The apparatua need to fulfill the experth coneieted of two euheyet-e:

to analyze particlea of the approach etreae and thoee ecatterin; after inpact
with the target. Theae included analyzere, electron blocks. and aapodn
alectruechanical device that guaranteed eeelurcaent of the epatial diatri-
hution of the particlee flying off fra the target. The energy of the par-
ticlee in the undieturhed atnoephere eaa aeuured by an L-ohile analyser.
uhoea longitudinal uie coincided with the direction or m of the
atation. here the aethod of changing the inhibiting etraea on the network
of the analyzer vee need.

The range of poaaihle anergiea vaa divided into a nunher of aectione. The
atreale of particlee vere naaaured cucceuively in each of th-. Theae date
nade it poeaihle to deter-nine the epectnn of energiee of particlee in the
approach atren. The work we conducted alternately firat vith ions. than
with neutral particlee (prelininarily ionized in the analyzer). Thue, the
nail: phyeical cheractariatica of the ion and neutral conponente of the
atnoephere were aeamred independently, and it hecaaa poeeihle to reliably
detenine the nut and changer both in the t-peratnre of theee cupmenta
and in the potential of the craft in relation to the aurroundin; ionoapheric

plane.
10

FOP. ()FFICH‘L L'SE (‘NLY
Tho tooturoo at tho uporinont "Spohtr" oloo includo tho foot that it ponittod
o procticolly uioultmouo iovootigotioo by coo iootmnoot of tho chotutor-
iotico of tho ooutnl ond ioo coopooooto of tho otooophoro. Tho high roto
(coco in ono oocood) o! moon-onto oodo it poooihlo to find moll-ocolo
motion-inn in tho otmceumo of tho ohooophoro. longthy coutinuouo nonun-
nonto crootod tho protoquioitoo for finding lono-ocolo mifonitioo. And
tho otudioo with nfloctod portioloo in gonorol voro not up for tho tirot tioo.

‘l'ho outporinout "Spoktr" brought ooo intonotiou Ihich ptoviouoly no inocooo-
oihlo to tho roooorchoro.

Tho uporinont "hiooiyo" no oloo linkod to u invootigotion of tho uypor
otooophoric lgoro. ptinorily tho plonotory diottihutioo of thoir t-porotun
no ito thong“ during o oopotic oton.

It in noot commiont to judgo tho t-porotuto of o goo fro- tho vidth of ito
opoctrol linoo, linhod to tho volocitioo of tho uittod otm. In Ohio: to
oooouxo tho tonporotuto of tho uppor otnoophoro it provod loot couvonioot to
uoo tho rod lino of otuic canon. 'l‘ho intoooity of ito luinooconco ovoi-

tho ouriooo of tho plonot io miim. It io otmor in tho polo: rogiooo,
but individual bright opoto oppoor oloo ot louor !otitudoo, oopociolly in tho
:ono of incnuod concoottotiu o! olocttooo nou- tho oquotox'. Tho luinooconno
of tho rod lino io intonoifiod doting “patio otmo. decoding to ito inton-
oity ooo con troco how ottor o oopotic otm iron tho polo: lotitudoo to tho
oquotor vovy oocillotiou in tho uppor otooophoro on optood. *ioh out-poo-
thouoondo of hilaootoro.

0i groot inportonco io tho locotion of tho hondo for intonoiiitotioo in tho
togioo of tho oquototiol ionoophoric may. *ich hoo o ottoq oifoct on
tho oprood of rodio mm, on! on rodio cwicotioo hotnon tho lax-thorn ond
Southom H-iophoroo. It io inpattont to kno- hov tho t-pototuto and inton-
oity or luninooconco in tho oppor otnoophoro oro diotrihutod in oodor to
couttol Ionnod opococnlto.

Tho intonoity ond width of tho nd lino hovo boon ooonmod iro- tho oorth'o
outfoco for non, yooro. Optic ohoorvotitno two ootollitoo hovo noticoohly
uponiod thoir tango. Mano tho flight of tho ototioo "Solyut-lo" ocionco

hod doto on tho plonototy diotrihutiu: of t-porotoro in tho uppor ouoophoxwo
ond ito thongoo daring oosnotic otono in tho poriod of uni-no oolo: octivity.
In tho poriod of tho uni-I. i.o.. thou tho ototion "Solyut-U' loo flying

tho otnoophono loo coonidorohly coldor on! ito hootin; during wotic otcno
occur-nu undo: ditforoot couditicu. ‘l'hio io day it no ioportont to

contimo ouch amt-onto in odor to meal tho ocopo o! oocillotiou in

tho diottihutian o! tooponturo in tho oppot otooophm vith o ulotivoly

wok inﬂux of onotg in- tho oIn. For thio toouu tho olporinnt "hiooiyo"
m not up.

'rho oooourina oppontuo canoiotod of o photoolocttit photaotor to dotonino
tho intonoity of tho rod lino oIIi on intortor-otor with ophoricol qurtt
plotoo oooourio; ito width. Dilltiplo-loyor diolocttic cootingo mo oppliod
to tho plotoo. Ono of th- no i-ohilo. tho othor no futonod to o piou-
oloctric eoruic to me. on oltornotin; voltogo no fod thot oltotod tho
diotmco hothon tho plotoo. Ion tho nvolongth no oltotod of tho light
tton-ittod by tho intorforc-otor. Uhich ponittod melding of tho contoun

11
FOR (ll’FlCl/‘K. USE ONLY
at tho lino and o dotoroinotioa of. ito width. Bum tho otort of tho oooouro-
oooto tho co-onouto inotollod tho inotn-oot on on illuoiootor on! oiood in
ot on -ittiu lqor.

Tho lioo ooporioontol tochoiquo mod o thorough odjuotnont ood voriticotion
of tho chorottoriotico of tho iotortoroootor. Tho odjuotooot of thio oppo-
rotuo fro tho oorth woo cortiod out with tho holp of o luor. to ﬂight in
ordor to entrol tho tuning thoro no on oo-hoord optic otoodord thot uittod
liooo with uoigood choroctoriotico. 'l'ho voriticotioo of tho opporotuo with
tho holp of thio otondom. oo woll oo oioio; of tho iootnooot towouio tho

rogioo of luoinootonco. oopociolly charm ooaootic otoroo, roquirod tho porti-
cipotioo of tho co-ooooto.

'l'ho crow of tho orbitol ototion "Solyut-lo" woo oloo hood with tho prohl- o!
ohoorvio; ood photogrophio; tho oorth'o nix-loco ond oeooo in tho morooto of
ociom ood tho ootioool ocooooy. Ao o rooult o lorgo uhor of block ond
whito. color and opoctrozonol photogropho with voryiog molotioo woro not

to ooxth. 'l'ho photogrophy oncaopuood lolly oilliooo of upon hiluotoro o!
dittomt rogiono of our motry.

Tho flight of tho ototion "Solyut-lo" onto osoin ohoood with oll coavinoimooo
tho pry-ion; ooturo at tho ooio poth for tho mlutioo o! ootmouticoutho
crootion of orhitol ototiuu which hovo not only oooromu ociontiiic hut oloo
ovor motor procticol ioportonco. hy yroootio; tho oolotioo of tho ooot
ioportoot oconcoicol. ocolosicol and othor tooho focus unkind.

At firot slouco it coo oo- otronso thot in tho oao of highly dovolopod tooh-
ooloxy. ootoootico ood roooto control thot o no ohould ho on hoord o oooco-
croft. especially since uutomath mehines have demonstrated their merits fairly
convincingly ood ottoa oloo odvontogoo. It to no oomt tint on invootigotioo
of outor opoco io linknd to o gout outloy of nmrtu. And in thio roopoct
tho mtuotic opporotuo oro coooidorohly ooro ouitohlo. oopociolly tor otudyio;
tho oooo ood ploooto in tho oolor oyotoo. Soturotod with divoroo «intuit
opporotuo thoy ooho it poooihlo to ohtoio, ood thn to troo-it to oorth to
rodio tol-otric ond tolovioioo chamolo o lono voluoo o! infamotion ohout
thooo mioao ond tho phyoicol procooooo occurring thoro. In our country
utmtio opporotuo of tho rotunuhlo typo hovo hon crootod which on who
of dolivoriu roulto of Hour-onto to oorth for thoir ouhuqoout procoooiu.

"ha: tho poylood of tho opoco ohjocto iotludo tho night not only of Ion hio-
oolt. hut of. oll tho lire-support systems, tho {rut-work of tho ociootitic
progr- io ioovitohly cmtrictod. ood tho qoootity ot otrictly roooorch
tooth-onto io lioitod. Coooidorotiooo for o road- donor owoitin: Ion in
opoco on olwoyo oddod to thooo diocuooiono.

ﬂowovor oll of thio otill dooo not ooos. thot one too gonorolly do withwt on
in opoco (lighto.

'l'ho loin took lintod to poootrotion into opuo. ot lout in tho our tum.
coooioto of on our doopor knowlodgo of tho world attending no. Woo new
outor opoco hoo hooo cmortod into on topaz-toot lohorotory of oodoro ocioooo.
whoro no coo aoko dotoilod otudioo of difforoot procouoo ond phoouooo.
including thooo not yot known to ociootioto. not thio ooono thot oo opoco io

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ponotrotod tho roaaorchoro inovitohly will taco non oiton prohlono which waro
not toroulatod proviouoly. and thorotoro in ordor to oolvo th- a haoicolly

not! opproach io roqnirod ovoty tino. In thio roapoct non poooooooo uniquo
potantialitioo.

Ono ohould not forgot oloo about tho ouhcmciono activity of tho hunan brain.
about intuition which liao hoyond tho potntiolitioo oi cyhornotic nochinoo.
tor both tho ouhconooiouo and intuition play an axtr-oly ioponant rolo in
tho prooooo of tho ocintilic atndy of natnro. (bly no can oftoctivoly

atudy tho Moon. lo pooaaoooa tho uniquo capabilitioo of not only ohooi'wing.
hut aloo acowlotin; and analysing tho obtainod intonation. otorin‘ it in
hia natty and uain. it for tho rapid nahina of a corroct docioion in union-
ooua cimotancoo. ﬂora in no oachino nado by “on hando that in capahlo
yot oi doing thio.

Tho nodorn alto-atic nochinoo count otudy that ohich haoical ly cannot ho
rodncod to an alroady ohtainod hnowlodao. ‘l‘hoy aro capahlo oi otudyin; only
ouch procouoo and phonI-ono that aro alroody hoiliar to non in thoir nain
ioaturoo. It io two that rocontly tho ociontioto havo carriod out axtonoiwa
work on tho croation oi oo-callod houriotic mgr-a for alootronic conpntoro.
Datoilod proarona aro hoiu dovolopod on tho haoio of o gonoraliution of tho
rooaarch activity of paoplo. in tho idoal nachioo, aquippod with a honriotic
progr- tho procooo of ociontiiic roooarch in a curtain fiold not ho inplo-

nantod iniopoodontly. llonovor tho tool potontinlitioa o! ouch pron-o an
otill conparativoly coll.

lb will raturn to opacitic oxnploa. Taho, tor mlo, tho prohl- of
otudyin; polar flaroa that playo a prinry rolo in tho prodiction of radia-
tion oa£oty oi apaco ﬂighto. low thooo otndioo aro cart-ind out with tho
holp o: autonotic motto-onto. Uoually tho mtonotic oochino io goidod
according to tho optic cantor of tho flora. ﬁich oitan hoo a vary fantaotic
and indofinita ahapo. and can fall tron tho iiold o! vioion of tho inotruont.
Suotiooo in difforont rogiou of tho oun oimltanoouoly two-throo flaroo
dovolop. Tho ontuatic nochino rocordo ouothins ovoragod. and tho infor-
nation will ho inaccurata. Tho co-onont on tho haoio oi poroonal uporionco
and crutiva initiatiwo can ooho on oporationol ohonao in tho progr- of
atudioo. and provido a canoidorohly nova cuplato pictnro of tho optic ohoor-
vation, dototnino tho ooction o! gonoration oi tho flora, otndy tho conco-
nitont phonnona, and on forth.

Ono ohould aloo noto tho oopocial rolo of tho co-uant-ociontiat in otndyin;
ohort-torn irrogular procooooo in opaco. Ina-I nly mtuatic oochinoo ohoorvo
th- nany data can ho loot non. tho lug-ton infatuation. Tho opocialiot
not only iocnooo attontion a th-. hut alao cacchoo tho concuitant phono-
nono in tho cup“: of otudioo.

xwon tho nornal vionol ohoorvationo tr:- opoca havo moptional rito. Tho
worhoro oi agriculturo. it " ouplo, ano intonotod in tho condition of tho
ooil in tho pnplantios pariod. ito noiotnro cont-t, t-poratoroo-and all

of thio on giant torritorioo. Sailoro aro intorootod in tho condition at

tho ocoon onrfaco. ito wavo action. and iiohonon-oin tho prooonco o! tioh

in o cortain rogion. At tho o-o tioo tho intonation ouot ho rapid. oopoci-
olly if thio concorno data on diiioront ol-ontary phon-ona. And in thio

1}
FOR OFFICIAL use on”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reepect the preeence of e epecieliet ehoerd the oreft ie invelnehle. Not
only will he inetently eVeleete the eituetion. hut eleo eehe qoelified conoln-
eione on the develop-t of e certein neteorolosicel proceee. will give e
um werniu. and no forth.

The co-on-It-eoieuiet cen nehe tepid chemo in the progre- of etudiee fr!-
the vie-point of eeleotin. etudied ohjecte. Dy nein; diveree end feirly
couple: epperetne he provide- e coneiderehly fuller picture of the optic oheer-
vetioe. lie will give ouch en emple free the field of neteorology in order
to m‘Me

(he of the fwd-entel probl-e fecins ecienceuenergetice of the eerth. i.e..
the influx end expenditure of heet of our plenet. ‘l’he ecientiete ere inter-
eeted in how Ilch eoler redietion ie eheorhed in different micne of the
eerth. how it ie dietrihuted over the eerth'e eurfece. end how Inch enemy
the eerth givee off into epece.

Thie ie thet infomtion thet neteorrolog extr-ely neede. eince precieely the
influx end expenditure of energy detouine the cheuee in weether end clinete
over the entire globe. The nein herrier to heet eniuion--the cloud cover of
the pluet. Therefore it ie neeeeeery to nehe e thorough imetisetion of the
optic propertiee of ite diffemt forne. Deily the eetellitee in the eyeten
"lhteor' eupply ue with en monnne quentity of infomtion in the fan oi
televieion ad the infrered inqee of the cloud cover. homer not ell the
{one of clonde cen he cleerly recorded on theee photogrephe. The. cirroe
ere elnoet not noticed on then. end eilver clonde ere not recorded et ell.
Thie prohl- ie only in the reeln of e quelified oheerver on boerd e epece-
“mo

Studiee of recent yeere heve ehown thet eenoeole heve e eignificent effect on
weether end clinete. theee ere the nelleet petticlee both of terreetriel. end
epece origin thet ere flying in the etnoephere. One of the noet prnnieie;
nethode of deteuining the epetiel dietrihntion of eeroeol in eltitnde, ee
well ee ite optic cherecterieticenoheerwetion end enelyeie of the crewecnler
eureole of the etnoephere. The eolntion of ench e teak with the help of ento-
netio nechinee ie etill difficult. Here nen ie eleo needed.

The preeence on hoerd e epececreft of e cone-eat ie inportent for neteonolo-
eiete for yet mother reeeon. Oarrently ecientiete here cone to ouch e etege
of develop-t of etudyin; proeeeeee doterninia nether end clinete on eerth
where one one with the help of neurenente nede fru eetellitee detenine
the quentitetive neteonolo'icel per-etere of the etnoephete. arch pere-
netere in the first plece ere tupereture end eir h-idity. One ehonld note
thet e quentitetive prediction-«he noet preciee. end coneeqnently. the noet
pruning. Uith the help of electronic c-putere one cen predict how the
etnoephere will he cheqed with theee atertin; dete. It in neturel thet
mu fr- eetellitee here hevn en indirect netnre. einco they fly et
en eltitnde of eeverel handrede of hilonetere. He ere intereeted in the
lqer of ecnoephere thet ie only ehont so In thioh, where the weether ie
“cooled." The eitnetin ie eneloeone to thet exietin; in eetroplveice. All
thetwehnowehont theme-i etereheehnenohteined frudete of etudyiq
their nieeione. he to the edvencee in rocket end epece technology it hee
hecue poeeihle to lift reeeerch epperetne into epece. By neeeurie; there

1‘6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tho ontnntono {rc- oorth tn dtttoront rogtonn of tho npoctn- tho octonttntn
ttod. tn porttculor. tho por-ntorn thny on tntorutod tn.

0! neuron thto to o vory cuplox took. l'nn nn-plo dttinmt dtntrthuttonn n!
t-yoroturo and oltttodo con cornonpond to can out of rodtottnn. And om
unllorrorotnthnnooontod-nnntrnnllt tnlorsoormntnthottnol roultn.
Thornforotnntwdortoohtotnmhonpnrtnnntoldototttnmeonnorytohow

vory c-plnn opporotno. thot con ho controlled by o nhtllnd npoctoltnt a:
boon o nponocroft.

loudloon of into tho otndtoo vtll ho corrtod out-«In non-Ind croft or on
outmot’.c otottonn. tt to nocooooxy to crooto opoctoltnnd nctonttftc oppo-

rotuo. At tho ttrnt ntuo n! uplnrtu on! dnvolo’tu tnchtqnu bx- ronootch
tho dtroct porttctpottnn of no-nnout-nctouttntn would Mo o “not otloct.
Tho opoctoltnt on board o opnoncrott vtll nﬁo o cnnploto ad dototlnd onolyntn
of tho ohoorvd phononnnnn. vtll rnvnol tho objncto on! proconnoo nhtch on

of gnotont tutoront for tho ntudy. vtll gnaroltno tho roodtngn of tho tantru-

noato, vtll chmo. t1 roqntrod. thn prosr- of noun-onto. and vtll cnnttnno
tho onportnnnt tn tho noconnory dtrncttnn. Tho nctnttnto con ooloct tho

opttnol opporotun noeonnnry for non tn tho tml onolyntn to contact dototlod
ntndtoo. and tho pottntn o! ttn oporottnn.

An vo ooo tho octtvo porttctpottnn 0! non tn ntudytn; nutnr npoto to noconnory.
Thornton tho otopn Mort-hon tn on: county hr tho loytq of nnro nortotn

ﬂu roltohlo pothn for non'n ponotrottnn tnto npoco on ennplotoly notorol.

[pp 97-18-27

Choptnr 7 - Some Results of Space Research

It to known thot tho cont of npoco (ltghtn to totrly htlh. Ion-nor tho out-
lnyn for tho dovolopoat a! npoto m not nonnolonn. Moon tn ttn dovol-
omt hovo prnnotod o nhorp rtno tn o nhor o! {toldn of octnnco ond toch-
noloc: htoloy nod nodtctnn. ontrnnuy out oorodyn-tcn. rodtn outnonrtns
and mtcnottcn. son dyn-tcn n4 oloctmtcn.

Tho progrono for tho tltghtn (or tho nojnrtty n! Sovtot notolltton orn clonoly

ltnhod to tho ooluttnn of o unhor of nottonol neonate prohlnnno-tmontt-

gotten of tho ot-nnphnro ond north'n nopnttc ttnld. ontohltﬁnt 0! cu-

ntcotton through npoco. novtuttnn vtth tho holp ct notnlltton. uplorotton
of ntnorolo. out no forth.

hot dnon otw of open .tvo non?

Co-tc Inyn

“rho north to uhjoct to tho conttmcuo octton o! o conttmol nttn- of choruod
upon. porttcloo, vhono voloctty ct now-out to clono to tho opoodo of ltght.

(m tdoon on tho noturo nnd propnrtton n: co-tc royn nrn boa-tn non nod
noro cuploto.

15
The first intonation on coaaic rayo boloms to 1912 when the Austrian ﬂoss.
while conducting arpsrinents on a balloon advanced the hypothesis that radi-
ation of very great penetrating ability falle on the border of tho atnosphero
ﬁrm the world or speco. ﬂess' hypothosis was supported ten yearn later by
Hillikan who called the hitherto unknown rays coseic. According to Hilliksn‘s
hypothesis conic rays develop by oeans of energy released during the synthesis
oi' heavy elanents fro- prinordisl hydrogen distributed in the universe. and
thoso-ophotono of snot-we energy that possess great penetrability.

The experinsnts of note and Kol'yorstsr reoultsd in the hypothesie um. prlmm‘y
co-ic radiation consiste not of photons. but rather of charged particleo.

Flore the interaction of cosnic rays with the substance rooults in couples pro-
oaoeeo within the snbstonce. as a result ot which nony secondary particles are
for-ed. The discovery by Andoreon of tho poeitron was s coneidorable advance
in this direction. In the opinion of Dirac this particle could not previously
be found as a consequence of its very short life.

then a positron neete an olectrm both the particles are annihilated, their
neee ie tranoterrod into energy which is snitted in tho for: of photone.

Carlson and Opponhoin alnsost eimltaneously explained the nature of showers
of conic rays. According to their theory the dovelopent o! a shower occurs
by none of tho birth of pairs by photons and onission by photons by electrons
dnrim braking in a field of nuclei. Those processos occur near tho stoic
unclear, without producing changed in its etmcture. In each elenontary act
only two particlee develop. and although the shower-forum radiation cmists
of electrons and photons. tho particles that poesoss great panotrability can-
not be considered electrons. I'eddoreoior proposed that those are new par-
ticles with a single charge and ease greater than tho ease of e nor-a1 free
electron. but conoiderably s-aller than the noes of. a proton (consequently
they lore called u-eesono ).

The nost inportant “as. in the invoetisatioo of the now world of particles
began in 1947 with the diecovory of tho "oneoon which proved to be parental
in relation to the previouely known shoeoon. In tho deetmction of the
venom in addition to u-eeson another neutral particle is born. The ease
of the latter io ouch caller than tho nose of the electron. There are two
such neutral particles with practically zoro lasso-tho photon and the neutrino.
it is ortrenoly cooplicatod to find thu mtrino. since it interacts with
subotances very weakly: tho photono arc recorded accordiu to the eecondery
electrons eoittod by th- in the process or fomtion of pairs. After not
finding photons ace; the products of u-neson breakdown the physiciets drew
the conclusion; the noutral particle with zero naeo euittod during the break.
down of nonoeona is the neutrino.

In the one year Oppenhein advanced a hypotheoio that subeoquontly proved
correct: the neutral nosono can be rapidly broken dose: into photons that
are included in the opposition of comic rays observed in the ataoophere.

The new orporinents showed that tho cosnic particles that interact the nest
strosuly in the atnoephere are protons. neutrons and ﬁ-ooone that did not
euccood in broehing down into N ones ona.

16
FOR OFFICIAL usr. omxz
'rbs nubar of protons. nsutrons and "-losons rapidly incraasss with altitnds.
tbsrsfors in ordsr to study mclsar intsractions att-pts wars aads to conduct
apariasnts as bigb as possibls. Apparatus of sounding balloons was parisctad.
that trailad for dqs tbs air ocssn at altitndss up to 30 h. Bars tbs r-ark-
abls divarsity in tbs prayioosly m sbort-livsd "slusntary" particlas
was srplainsd. In l953 tbsy wars dividsd into two groups that rscsivsd tbs
nus of ham mono and lopsrons. sbarsby botb could in antral. as wall as
cbarasd. lisavy assono' an liabtsr than protoas. but bsaviar than "-Issms;
bypsrons ars hssvisr than protons.

1s tbs "50's, as it suit; up tbs sain lantharbs in tbs ovulation 0! tbs
pbysics at conic rays a siqls pattsrn of all pbsnonsna linksd to tbsss rags
bsgn to ba tor-ad.

Ilow it could bs fairly coniidsntly statsd that a mbsr oi tbs hypotbssgs
listsd abovs wars srronsons. At tbs s-a tins saw conclusions wars contirasd:
tbsss wars tbs pussncs in tbs oupssition o! conic rqs in tbs atnospbars

of slsctrons and protons oi .rsat scary. tbs ssssrtioa is rslation to tbs
birtb o! assono is tbs ataospbsrs. and tbs aristsnos of dittsrsnt typos or
nsons.

Tbs luncbin of artificial sartb satsllitss opsnsd unions potsntialitiss for
tbs satting up of basically nsw arparinsnts in cuts: spacs. It bac- pos-
sibls to go bayond tbs linits 0! tbs atnospbsrs, and thou also baryond tbs
linits of tbs action of tbs sartb's lunatic fisld, and to invsstigata tbs
ps‘insry co-ic radiation dirsotly.

A3 wan already stated, 1n outer space there are particles of practically any
snsrgy. Tbs basis oi tbs prinary conic run is protons. slsctroas. and in
nallsr quantitiunnuclsi of atons o2 dittsrsnt ch-ical slants. According
to tbs aodsrn idss tbs trajsctorias o! tbsss particlss, in appnacbiu tbs
asrtb. ars bant by tbs sarth's caustic tisld. Hbsa tbsy collids with mclsi
of nuns oi atnospbsric aasss braabdoln oi both :1. "nissils' and tbs "targst"
occurs. Protons and nsntrons with biab snsrgy ars round in tbs daconposition
products. which in turn intacact witb otbsr molai in tbs ataospbsrs. A
portion of tbs snsm oi tbs prinary particls goss tor tbs tornatioa of now
sbort livsd particlss. snob as u-Isscn s and baavy assas.

An invsstiution of tbs morplnstary fiald wltb tbs bslp of spacscraft nads
it possibls to ravsal a unbar or now pbsnusns. and radically rsviaw tbs
idsas on tbs procsssss occur-rm in tho anvirons oi hrtb. “sanctions
iron satsllitss showsd that tbs intsnsity o! tbs lowssnsrgy portion at conic
radiation is not constnt in tins nd is linbad to tbs activity of tbs sun.
nus. in tho pariod of. tbs grandioss tiara on tbs sun wbicb occur-rad a 23
Psbruary 1956 tbs intansity of conic rays toss roughly in 20 aimtss 25-50-
fold as conparsd to tbs nous]. lsvsl. It is asst-ad that this phat-non ras
.ovsrnsd by a stun oi biab-sssrg solar conic raysuparticlas, prinarily
protms. -ittsd by tbs sun ﬁring tbs ﬂats.

Yurtbsr studiss of tbsss rays bays tbs goal or arplainin tbs nacbani-s o!
tbsir sansration on tbs sns. conditions of sprnad in tbs intsrplasstary spars,
and -argsnca tron tbs solar systn.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

horn Spoon. 0! Priooxy Coolie mo
Alan tho vortieolo-unhor of. porticloo pot l .2 por unit (1 rod) of oolid
mlo in l o. ole»; hotimtolo-oaom in oV

Coooidorohly non oftoo. olloot outhly, thou oro looo Ml ilmo of
tonic royo with ooonioo l00-500 Nov. Mr tho lunatic tiold o! Booth
doviotoo tho porticloo with ouch mm. m: thoy oro otrmgly ohoorhod
in tho ootth'o ouoophoro; to room th- it io ooeooooty to any honoring
oppontno to mot oltitudoo with tho holp of holloooo and ootollitoo.
Prociooly tho ootollito oppototuo nodo it poooihlo to nodal oolo: conic too
of tho loooot oaomuup to l Nov. Ion to o coooidotohlo oooooto tho chum
cupooition. an! .orgy opocttu on! mm o! oprood o! thooo mo in opoto
not! meooohlly upload.

Iooidoo tho light. hoot on conic rqo tho on entimoholy .ito otro-o of
Wm plo-ouoolox wind. Thio otto- ot ioniood goo of low doaoity io
tho onto: portion at tho oolor cm thot hoo o ioirly high kinotic t-por-
oton. looopo of ﬂu ooo: tho on ocean c-porotivoly olooly (oith volc-
citioo lo-zo lilo). hut tho torthor In. tho on tho volooity riooo 20-70-
fold.

rho on“ o! plo-o quolitotivoly dittoro 2m tho an. of ohonod indi-
vidlol portieloo. oinco in it tho hoy rolo io ployod by form at olootro-
ototic intoroctioo hotoou ion and oloctmo. no plan it chomtoritod
by tho toot thot tho onony of tho oloctnototic intonation o! tho chmod
porticloo caprioiu it io motor thon tho mom on! tho thot'ool now-oat.
Doopito tho .oll mutation of potticloo io oolor wind tho oloctricol
fiold hido thn. 'l'ho logistic iiold aloe otfocto tho hohoviar o! porticloo
in plan.

'l'ho high oloctricol continuity of plan mxlto in o otroa; bond of tho
fiold with tho oodiol. oo o conooquolco of ohich tho auntie tiold con ho
vioood oo it "£20m into” tho plo-o. 'l'ho oolor wind ooiuo tho oopotic
fiold of tho om. utoodiu it olon; tho dilution of ito nay-oat. ‘lho
motion of tho on givoo tho {coco linoo 0! tb upotic liold tho ohopo of
MM. mfdo 18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLE
FOR UFFICIM. USE ONLY

Tharo ara a lumbar o! hypothaaea on tho origin of galactic conic rayo.
Cortain aoiantioto hypothoaira that oilliooo at yaoro ago in tho cantor of tho
glory on orplooioo occurrad of ammo atroogth. Ito anorgy vao ocattorod
in tho for: of dittoraot aoioaiooauviaihla light. radio uavoa. portiolao. A
portion of thia Margy ma tron-ittod to conic rua. Vithin oilliooa of
yoara tho £oatoot of tho porticlaa rooohad Barth. Litarally in rocaot yoara
it haa boon oatabliahod that tho ago of tho galactic coaoic roya dooa not
orcaad loo aillion yoaro, Uhilo tho lottor uploaioo in tho cantor of tho
goluy occurrad no oora than 10 oillion yoara ago.

Othor ooioatiato aaaart that a largo portion of tho couic rayo oora born
daring laoo povarful orploaiooo o! oupar nova otara. Ihich in tho ouvirooa
of our aolar oyatao occurrad in aovoral mam yaara. In tho procooa o!
oxplooion a quantity of anorg vaa roloaaod oquivaloot, poaaibly, to tho
anorgy cootainod in tho atiro oaaa of tho m. Tho particlaa fox-ad ao a

ronlt an accoloratad oo o oooaaquanca of tho alootrcooaootic gtocaoaaa aili-
lor to thooo that occur in aolar ﬂoroo.

'l‘ho oraa occupiad by tho Iapotic fiold of Forth ia collad tlo aarth'o Inpat-
oaphoro. Ito bordar in tho amotically cola tine io locatod on tho diurnal
oido at a diatonco about l0 aarth radii. and on tho ahadod oida ia raoovod

a diotaoco thraa tiooo groator. .

Thraa rogioaa that ditiar in thoir proportioo ara dofiood for tho raal soo-
oagnatic tiald: iutaruol. ortarnal and boundary.

In tho environ of ﬁlth tho oopotic tiold na-bloa an undiaturhod dipolo
fiold of a unitonly-oasoatirod ophoro. Tho cantor o! thio dipola ia ahiftod
roughly by 500 In twardo tho baton hairphora. 'l'ho mtio aria. in
addition, doaa not coincida with tho axio o! rovolutioo of mh. Tho roal
mic fiold ditiara fairly aigniticaotly tr:- tho otrictly dipolo. It ia
charactorirod. in particular. by canoidorabla local aha-alias. rhoao affact
with altitudo rapidly dioappoaro. hora. aa ohm by ooaaora-oato on tho auto-
matic otatioua "Lou" and aatollitoa. it day-Ila oloo on utornol factora.

Daily variatiooo on found in tho Inpatic tiald, that dovolop oaioly (hiring
tho day (oolar variatiooo). fun on variation with poriod. «pal to half

of a lunar doy. and oyotuaticolly changing with tho phaaa of tho noon (lunar
variotiona).

Tharo ia tho hypothoaia that tho oolar-diunal variatiooa ara gmrood by
tho aloctrical curronta in tho uppor atooophora that occur aa a cnooquooca
of ita heating. ohila tho lunar-diurnal aro datarlinod hy tidal mo.

Tho mu hava ohm that otarting with a oortoin diotanco fﬂ- tho
cantor of Earth (6-9 of ita radii) tho lunatic tiold atmly ditfora fru-
tho tiold of tho dipolo. charactorizod by hishar intonaity.

Tho boundary mo of tho oopotoaphara artama aavaral aarth radii and io
diotioguiahad by a oharp drop in tiald intaooity. fluctuation. and a gradual
troooition to an intorplaootary (told. (it tho diurnal aido a front of

19
FOR OFFICIAL us: own
otanding inpact uavoa io found that ooparatoa tho oasnotoophoro tr. tho
undioturhod oolar vind.

At mat diotncoo on tho diurnal oido tho lunatic tiold of Earth it

oquooud out by a otro. of plaona oi aolar wind. conotrictioa tho iorco linoa
auoh that on tho intotiaco tho ptooauro of tho otroaa io oqualitod with tho
prooouro of tho Iaanotic fiold. Tho aquatic iiold of Earth on tho nocturnal
aido io auhjoct to ovon groator diatortiono. It hat hoan oatahliahod that
atartin with tho dittonco of moral tona o: thouoanda oi klluatora tho
fiold of Earth gradually paaooo into a auntie tail. that atrotchoa tar
hoyond tho linito of tho noon.

Tho sonognotic tail to dividod by tho plum layor with aaall intonaity of
tho aquatic fiold.

Alhado and mayhem of Earth

Tho oatollitoa tondor groat aaoiotanoo in atudyim tho otroao of radiation
ooitting {ta Earth. Tho rotlootod and natural radiation of Earth ato dio--
tinguiohod ootordiu to thoir opoctral charactoriotico. Tho hordor hotvoon
th- in vavolonctho in tho aroa loan. thatohy tho amoo o! largor vavolongtho
ontonpaaooa tho natural radiation oi Earth.

Baaod on mom noaouruanto it has currontly boon ootohliahod that tho
amount of rotloctod aolar radiation (alhodo 06 Earth) avoragoa 351. Tho
ruining 651 it ahoorhod by vator and tho oarth'o ourfaco. and lo toolittod
in tho long-vow aoction of tho apootru.

Tho roiloctin; ahility of individual olnonto of tho oarth‘a turfaoo ﬂuctu-
atoo in broad liaito and daponda on aoaoonal variations. Soila have, tor
ox-plo. alhodo tron 0.03 to 0.08. oand-otru 0.25 to 0.6 in tho mator
portion of tho vioihlo rango. Tho alhodo of iroohly iallon now-4m 0.6
to 0.9; tho alhodo of tho vhitoot cloudo-oup to 0.8 in tho vioihlo oootion
of tho opoctru, Ihilo hoyond ito liaito duo to tho ohoorption by tutor and
vapora it ia roducod to 0.5 at unvolongth 2.5 pl. It to charaotoriotic that
tho mto n-od horo of tho alhodo havo aa apprailato naturo. oinco thoy
oiniticaatly dopond. tor oxaaplo. on tho aoount oi tho anglo oi incidonco
of rho into-inc tadiation.

Pra- tho guorol noon calculatod .ount of alhodo of tho aarth roughly 701

la .mnod hy rofloction of tho cloud covor uoually covorin; half of tho
oarth'a aurtaco.

Tho nilottim ability of tho aquoouo outfaco oipificantly dopoda on tho
altitudo of tho tun.

Tho conplaity of tho prohl-n oi noaouriu tho oorth'o alhodo conaioto of tho
fact that tho thoroal radiation porooivod by tho apaoo apparatuo it only

partially liﬁod dirottly to tho oarth'o aux-fa“ and clouda. Carhm dioxido
and uator havo atrong ahoorptioo handa in that tango oi vavoloutho in uhich

20
FOR 0FFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4/: -

 

mum. autumn by mt

Mai; natal-own“ mutt-y. H x a” as". along two-mm
“I 3

Kay:
1. Solar noctu- 2. Specta- 0! reﬂect“. of arch “ch as cm
itch clouds

3. With chill... ﬂy

 

Thoracic“ Wham mm, of W Surface in can sun (1). vi“
Light and (2). was an m s n x r1 (a). mu Strut; m (4)
Along vented-om a! albedo. an batman-mm. a! m in due...

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the earth also suits, and thus, has a strong affect on this radiation. In the
area of the epoctrm 15.3-12.5 .il the earth's atmosphere has a window of true-
parency. however also in this range a certain absorption of radiation by dust
and water vapor is noted.

The atooephsre is a gas shell “Handing the earth. In the lite of unkind it
plus an ausptimel role. we breathe atnospheric air, the air ocean protects
us iron the prieary coeeic rays. r~ray and ultraviolet radiation of the sun.
and astoorites. Pro- here it is understandable why the acientiete are inter-
ested in the properties of the atmosphoro.

In accordance with the nature of the change in air toaporature with altitude
the atnosphere is divided into a mbor of layers or spheres: troposphere,
stratosphere, oesosphera. thsroosphare. and arosphere which are divided into
transitional layers. '

The lowest sphars--tha troposphere. and its upper border fluctuates about ll
ha. The densest air is in the troposphere--it has 901 of the entire nose of
the atoosphere. Hero phone-ens occur which torn tho concept "weather"
prinarily {creation of clouds and precipitation. The tropoophere ie charac-
terired by a decrease in tsnparoture with altitmle--6.5o for each kilo-star.
The stratosphere is above. It stretches roughly to 50 he. Although the
stratosphere contains less than 12 of the atoospharic loss, it is distinguished
by diversity of the physicoch-icel proeaasee and fulfills the role of a
natural protectiVe screen. Precisely here the ultraviolet, x-ray and corpus-
cular radiation of the sun is ahoorhed. while the ionization of the upper
ateoephors by solar short-wave radiation ashes lag-range radio cmicotion

possible.

The couple: processes of thereel and less orchauo in the upper etnoephere
deter-ins the dyn-ic nature of this sadism and have u: affect on the condi-
tion o! the ateosphero at the earth's surface, and the tonation of clients
all weather on earth.

Over a III-bar of centuries science has acumlatod data on pressure, taoper-
atnre. density and the gas content c: the earth's air shell. But until
recently only a thin surfs“ layer of air was accessible for its thorough
study. The area of research was suewhat expanded with the appearance of
airplanes ad oeroetats. Then in order to investigate the atmosphere pilot
balloons ad radiosondes began to he used that tree-itted over the radio
data iron altitudes up to 30 b. By using indirect nethods o! research of
the upper atooephere (study of the spread of acmetic waves in. super
powerful explosions and Observations of. sotaors) the scientists in the 1930's-
l960's explained the general laws governing charges in density, pressure.
tqorature with altitude and thy obtained the first spotty data on the
conpoeition oi the upper atnoephare. The scientists case to the conclusion
that the atmospheric t-perature contimally is reduced up to altitudes 3-13
kn, while shove that it is eaintainod practically constnt. (hr the whole it
no cmsidared that the stratosphere is a layer that has cuparotivoly little
want.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. .-.uu- \I-‘l'. \'I“II

Soon of tho idooo voro oltorod ovon hotoro tho oppooronto o! ootollitoo. Tho
in tho ottotoophoro otrm oir curroato won found on! poculioritioo in tho
oprood of o round oovo tron otrong oxplooiono. Tho vovoo voro hoonl voll
out to tho oito of tho oxplooiou. thon o tnoo ot oilonco occuro, ond thon o
mo 0! oudihility. Tho notnrol roooon tor ouch o Won. in tho opinion
of ho ociontioto. could ho tho ihcroooo tn t-porotnro of tho otooophoro ot
grog. oltitudoo.

Tho roooorch rochoto ond ortificiol oorth ootollitoo holpod to savor thio
out! now othor quootinno. lloro tho cloooic nothodo voro uood for mooring
pot-ton of tho ot-oophoro (oonaotric. thorluotric. nod to forth). Tho

wind woo otudiod hy out-honing ootolliood rodor tortoto. A non opontruotor
ooo uootl to onolyzo tho otooophoro.

0n high-oltitudo rochoto tho ociontitic onorotuo no plocod in on ojoction
contoinor-utnootic oochino thot nodo it poooihlo to ooho non-arena o! poro-
ootoro in tho unpollutod ooction of tho otooophoro. ln nrdor to otudy tho
cmpooitlon o! goo o-ploo taro tohon tn glooo cylindoro. Stohilitod rotor.“
contoinoro oloo hogon to ho hood thot mrontood o coootont orioototion of

tho oooouriog inotru-oato in nlotion to tho inidont otroa.

Bolov 20 h. daoro lonthy oxiotmo of ootollitoo io topoooihlo. otodioo
on conductor! uinly with tho holy of rochoto. Mr thoy Ioho it poooihlo
to troco tho dyn-ico o! chngoo in tho ouoophotin poroutoro ooinly only
(or oltitudo. oineo hour-mo o! poruotoro for tioo roqniro lmhin of
o mot unhol- of rodroto in tho couroo of ouo upon-oat.

At oltitudoo ohovo 200 h- oooouruonto with tho uoo o! ootollitoo thot onen-
pooo with thoir orhito proctlcolly tho ultimo plooot on vidoly hood.

'l‘ho oodorn idooo ohout .ho otmcturo all votioticoo in tho nor-otoro n! tho
nontrol otooophoro ot stool: oltitodoo oro hoood loinly on doto ohont tho
ovolutioa of ootolllto orbito. with hoo Iodo it pooolhlo or: tho halo c!

oorodynoolc colculotinno to dotontno tho hrohin tmo. on! ml).
otnoophoric dmity.

Uo will dvoll hriotly on tho noulto o! roooonh of the nppor ouoophot'o
ohtoinod in rocont yooro vlth tho holy of ootollitoo.

reoporoturo of otooophoro. Tho noon “unto of otooophoric tupoooturo for
tho Northorn Boolophoro ot oltitudoo up to 300 i- no givon in tho (unto.

It gim tho limit doviotiono in tnnporotnro fro- tho noon court. It to
choroctoriotic thot in tho tongo ”-50 In tho tolporotnro io introoood. oiooo
olooot tho ontiro ultroviolot ooction of oolor rodiotinn io ohoorhod no: tho
uppor horhor at the atom loyot comopondin. to thooo oltitndoo.

Tho totol quontity of otono in tho otonophoro io inoipiticont; tho thichnooo
o! ito lqor rolotivo to otondorrl otooophoric conditino dooo not mood
oovorol nilliootm. honour tho Voloo of otono io mo: it ohoorho tho
ultroviolot rodiotion ond thonol rodiotion .ittod hy Eorth. mm
orgonic lilo on our plonot.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Diottihution of T-poroturo in Altitudo (30-30 h) onnl Linit Doviotiono
1r- Noon mt (-. +)

In tho noooophon tho t-porotun io roducod 2:. son to 90°. to tho thouo-
ophoro ot oltitudoo ohovo 90 in tho tonpontun of tho oir continuum riooo.
ruchim ot oltitudo 300-000 I:- 1.ooo°c. ond continuing to :ioo with oltitudo
to 2.000-3.000°C. “cutout. oo o conooqnonco of tho otron; toroloction of
tho oir tho phyoicol concopt ot t-porotuto of tho mire-nut hoto hoo o
mint notuto. choroctoritin; only tho volooity of noloanor not-oat.

During tho do tho otnoophomo io hootod. hut ot night to coolod. thou-um
thoto oro diam! Voriotiono in tho t-poroturo pronto. Tho nonin- ond
ninimn of thou voxiotiono occur at choc-06.00 III 14.00-16.00 locol tino.
For unto. ot oltttudoo obovo 200 in tho tqorotoro io ohonod ot night
ﬂu can to “00. Min. tho do"!!!- 1200 to 2.500 K. 'nno. tho noxi—
drop in tonporotuto on tho up”: how: at tho thonoophoxo In: tho noctunol
conoitiou in tho nini— to tho dinnol in tho notin- o: oolor activity

con moth 2.000°.

Tho ooooonol voriotiooo gonna! ha tho rodiotion holonco no notod up to
oltitudoo 60 h. Abovo tho potton io oltotod tho oppooitoutho vintor two:-
otnroo oro ohovo tho ol-or.

Donoity of otnoophoro. Tho duality of tho uppor otnoophoric loyoro io dot”-
ninod. u olnody nontionod. by ohoorvotiono of tho broking at ootouitoo an
chouo in tho poriod of thoir rototion “and Iorth. (h o abhor of ootol-
iitoo inotn-ooto hovo boon inotonod to nooouto otnoophoric mom.

It ho ho- !ouni thot tho otnoophoric donoity io conoidorobly hiahor thou
propood on tho hooio of thooroticol colalotino ond Mono main-bu.
Tho noturo of tho diottihution of noon dnoity in tho tango o! oltitndoo so.
”0h.nﬂtholinitdoviotiono£mthonooo-oontmptooontodintho
“mo. 91th oltitndo tho don-it, of tho otnoophoro dropo. hovim oignifiunt
coon-o1 and dint-not vortntiau. Tho tho ooooonol voriotimo hovo non—
volnoo ot oltitudoo 63-75 In. nothing 252 in tho high lotitudoo ond ISL-in
tho niﬂlo. A doctoooo in voriotiono o! donoity ot mot oltitoooo. in tho
opinion of ociontioto. io unhod to tho mono contoo of tqontumo diotnt-
mﬁuhuoltiudoomtohino-cmlmthminvintor. Tho
otndioo ooobctod a tho ootonitoo in tho ootioo ”Coo-0o.” ohoood thot tho
dint-Int uriotiono on ohoorvod in m linito. Thu ot oltituﬁo 200 h

210
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

donoity tron night to thy riooo lJ-told. ot looor oltitudoonlJ-fold. Tho
diutnoi voriotiono hovo o mm noturo. omﬁn‘ om ohorply ot tho lowot
lotitudoo with o todation in oolor ootivity. Annual and ooloiomol voriotiono
in donoity oto notod thot on linlnod to diototbonooo otBotth'o nopotic iiold.
oo won oo o 27-ooy poriodic voriotion thot io dotoninod by tho oquotoriol
poriod 92 onto: rototion.

   

- ____4__|——-_._._.
:7 x” I.” I." 3"
goon-3,...-

Diotrihntion of Atnooyhotic Donoity in Altitudo (”-300 h) on! Linit Dovio-
tiono 2m Noon Inonnt (o. #1

Study of tho ot-oophon io input-toot Alon In- tho viowpoint of invootigotin;
ito ion on! noioculot oonpooition. ond oloctton concontrotin in tho iono-
ophoto. 'i'ho lotto: nohoo it poooihlo to rovool iottoro ducting tho noturo
o! opnood of rodio oovo oyot-o of tom-rm ourfoco ond opoco contention.

In ordot to dotonino tho ion cupooition of tho otnoophoto nooo opoctruotoro
no uood which with tho holy of. on olottriool or nopotic “old ooporoto tho
iono according to nuooo.

A Int-hot of non opoctraotric onolyooo of tho nontrol capooitiu of tho
uppot otnoophoro contend noinly ot oltitndoo too-zoo h with tho holy of
roohoto continual tho offoct of tho novitotiuol divioion of organ on! nolocu-
1or nitrogon in tho otnoophoro ohowo 100-200 h. on! oloo ponittod doto to

ho ohtoinod on t-potototo ond portiol tutontntion o! onloculor nitrogon
to oltitudoo 1000 kl.

Analyoio of tho ion c-pooition of tho on“ ouoophon nodo 2n- nooontwo-
nonto hook on tho third Soviot ootonito in tho “no of oltitndo 225-9” h
ohowod thot in tho doti- horo pooitivo iono of otnoophotic canon dainoto.
Pooitivo inn woro oloo W with non tutor u. inch could ho Monti-
£iod with iono of otnic nitmon. pooitivo iono o! otuic iootopo o! oxygon
with oooo lat-hot 18. oo volt oo pooitivo iono o! nitit oxido. Ioto it woo
romlod thot tho ion cupooition of tho uppot otnoophon io oinificontly
oltomod dopondin; on oltitudo. Tho yon-atop tontont o! hoovy iono of noioc-
ulor anon. nittit oxido ond noloculor m dmo with oltituoo. thorohy
noot intnoivoly in tho intorvol 225-270 b. not! at oltitodoo ohovo 400 In
tho eontoot of iono of noioeulot canon io 1,000 tinoo icon: thoo tho iono
of otuic moon.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
with the help of the eeriee of eetelliteo "Elehtron" et eltitudee 6004.200 be
e lerge usher of eete epectre were ohteined for ione of hydrogen, nitrogen,
heliu end oxygen. end coneiderehle verietione were eleo found in the ion
capoeition with geogrephicel letitude. It '0 reveeled thet the lone of.
heliI- in the taperete letitudee of the Northern lie-lephene in e period of
low eoler ectivity ere only e eeell cwpenent. Thie reeult eltered the exie-
tence of the view on the etructure of the externel ionoephem o! Serth,
according to which helit- ione et eltitudee l.000-2.000 k- Eore e hypotheticel
"helioephere."- It wee found thet no euch ehell exietu in the eerth'e iono-
ephere.

Study of the perenetere of the upper etnoephere contiuuee. Preciee knowledge
of then hee enoreoue precticel importance. That. the dietrihution of deneity
over eltitudee ie coneidered in e celculetion of opti-el criterie for putting
hooeter rechete end eerth eetellitee into the calculeted orhite. in the cree-
tien o! optic ohjecte with eyeteee of precieion orientetion. end in eolving
prohlene of controlling flight in the upper etnoepheric leyere.

Aetrmicel Oheewetory

One of the eoet encient oclencee. eetronuey. for e nilleniue could only pee-
eively etudy light coning fro- the plenete end etere. end true it creete ite
ideee on the phyeicel propertieo of the celeetiel hodiee. helm on eerth the
eetrmmiete had to reconcile theeeelvee with tho eteoephere thet iepeired
oheervetione of the thy.

Redietion of celeetiel hodiee penetretee the eerth in two window of tune-
perency: optic. etretching in the renge of vevolengthe fro. 0.3 to 1-2 ue.
end redio window-«roe eeverel eillieetere to l0-30 e. The eein epectrun of
coeeic redietione ie eheorhed hy the eteoephere. ‘l'hue. ultreviolet redietion
ie eheorhed hy ozone et eltitudee 30-70 h in the tense 0.3-0.18 He. by eolec-
uler ongen et eltitudee below l20 lee in the renge 0.18-0.l ue. end by etuic
oxygen end nitrogen et eltitudee up to 200 he in e renge leee then 0.1 ul.

Lon-we‘re conic redio uieeion ie reflected by the ionoephere loceted eleo
e greet dietence (rm ﬁrth.

A eignificent ohetecle in eetronoeicel ooeervetione through the eteoephere

ie eleo ite turbulence. Therefore the etere ere viewed in e teleecope eye-
piece not in the fore of u cleer defrection dirk, hut in the fore of blurred
epote; et the use tine the hrightneee of the ieege in reduced. Stere loceted
low ehoNe the horizon ere oheerved eepecielly poorly through the thickneee

of the eteoephere. The light ie retrected in the eteoephere. end the epot
elternetee with epectrel horde.

For thie reeeon lineer reeolution for the eurfece of the noon ie l Inn, for
the eurfece of Her-«150 he. The turbulence her a: eepecielly etrong effect
during the operetioe of teleecopee with eirrore over 2.3 e in die-eter. which
eervee ee en edditionel ohetecle to the uee of eodern gient teleecopee.

26
FOR OFFICIAL use oazm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in oir travol dowolopod. wooihilitioo anoorod for lifting toloocopoo with tho
holp o! aorootato. Pn- ao oltitudo of 20 h cloar photograph voro oado of
"grain“ at tho ooo 0.3' in oioo. Bvoo aroator poooihilitioo won prooootod
to aatrouqy by tho uoo o! oatollitoo.

Uhat roquiruoato an oaoo o! o toloaoopa iootallod on a apaoooraltl Io prio-
cipla tho, do not diifor fro- tho roquir-ooto for tho ooooro uriaoo tolo-
ooOpoa. to tho oootor o! tho oirror thoorotioally an molar rooolutioo on
ho providoo on tho ordor 0.006" Inch will oaho it poooihlo to diotimiah at
diotaooo 500 h ohjooto with liooar also 1 a. Iowowor practically with tho
«ll-oran- oi 2 c- oirrora c. ho oaoo with molotioo 0.2”. Vith molution
ot a toloaoopo 0.1“ and with poaaihility of «on. long upoooroo ooo oao
ohoorvo otaro up to tho 23rd otollar rim. to Moro yoaro orbital ohoor-
vatorioooayappoarwithnaportorootthoprinoryoirmopto3oaod
amlar rooolution up to 0.0l" in tho oltraviolat roam of tho opootru.

 

l. Antaooa of cola-trio onto: 5. ”undo:- winn- for control jota

2. Solar oloooota 6. Jot tor 4ocolorotiac rotatioo and
3. Solar mo for ayat- o! controlling liotiu all! volooity
prociao oriootatioo 7. 'i'oloooopo

lo. llocho o! oloctrooic oqnipoot

‘l'ho oatollitoo doaipod to carry out utmical ohoorvatiooo ca havo an
inotruoot «wart-oat of tho ohoorvatory oquippod with a radio oogioooriox
ayat- ot auto-am Mm. oooriu dovioo and lochod oh-hor ponittio.

approached-wrinotaoonoo apooooraftndacoooo to it hymn.
‘l‘ho ohoorvatory can ho doohod to a omod orbital atatioo.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A draft space laboratory-satellite for aedical and biological. geophysical
and astronaical studies is known fr. literature. 0n the satellite with a

crew of 4-6 people a telescope in particular can be installed.

In accordance with another such plan of space astronuical observatory the
crew is placed in a special nose capsule that serves at the seas tiae to save
the crew in case of an accident. After the satellite has gone into orbit the
fuel tank that is released fru fuel is drained and filled with caprsssed
air. The crew also aovss here, using the tank as a working nodule.

Aetronuical studies in space will. apparently. be conducted in different
ranges of wavelengths. limever these will priaarily be spectral and photo-
astric observations in the ultraviolet. infrared and subailliaeter regions of
the speetrtn. As recording “cents of the telescope photonultipliers sad
electronooptic transforasrs can be used. photoaateriale and television transo
aitters. It is interesting that the American orbital astronaical station
launched in l968 into orbit with altitude 800 kn and equipped with optic tele-
scopes with disasters up to «o a aade it possible to obtain data in the ultra-
violet region of the spectrua about l0,000 stars. If the dineter of the
telescope is increased to 3 a. the nusber of studied objects can rise to a
Itlthme

The objects of x-ray astronony can be the theraal radiation of plasaa. the
reverse Coapton effect of electrons on infrared photons, or eynchrotron radi-
ation of relativistic electrons in aegnetic fields. To study than proportional
gas-filled counters can be used with a window ends of beryllitn (thickness to
100 pa) or organic files-ceaylsr. for-var. and polycarbonate (up to lo ua
thick). with the help of proportional counters one can detensins the stre-
frns a source. its spectrum similar size and position. Ito-lever as a conse-
quence of the weak resolution of these sources the specta- is deterained very

roughly. The angular position of a fairly bright source in coabination with
a aodulation colliaator can be obtained with accuracy up to l0”.

The already obtained results are praising. The satellite "mama" (United
States) and the rockets launched to altitude up to 200 ka with siailar astro-

naicel apparatus found over $0 discrete roray sources. of which no acre than
l5 were identified with the know optic objects.

In order to conduct studies in the radio astronalical region of the spectru
the opening in space of antennae whose diaaetar can reach several kiloaeters
presents definite technical conplerity. One antenna can be taken into space,
while the other ruins on earth. Although the resolution of such a radio
interferoaeter can be fairly high-oup to 2 2 l0'5 angular seconds, its cre-
ation is lided to great technical difficulties that include precise orieno

tation and precision synchronization of both sntemas separated by thousands
of kilaeters.

28
FOR omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

.9th of Spoco lodio htortoroootor

rum moot-clog contoido (cu. largo fields: cliootolou. oynoptic
ootomiosy. ooroiog ad tom. Cliootoiog otudioo o nay-ya: pottotn
o! wootho: tn- individuoi mien of tho oath. oottin u ito took tho
dotoniuotion of tho chotatoriotico o! nor-oi woothor condition. Synoptic
atom-ole” otudioo tho .oooni ptocooooo in tho otooophoro thot dovoiop co
iorgo opocoo. It dowoiopo nothodo o! woothor (muting. urology ad
am otudy tho uppor icon of tho otooophoto ad tho imphoto.

Quotation of than“ in woothor on oodo by tho hydtoootoatologicoi oorvicoo
o! dittoroat couattioo thot doily “than iotmoticu on: tho todio ad toio-
graph thot io miotod with tho holp o! o voot hotwah of hydto-otomlogiool
ototiao iocotod a dry lad. woto: ad in tho oir. Only within tho li-ito of
on: country thoro on not #000 ouch atomlogicoi ototiono ad 7.500 ootoot-
oiogicoi pooto. ad Ivdrologicoi ohoorvotioao on corriod out in 6.000 poioto.
0w: 2,000 ototiao mod tho otooophoro with rodio wovoo. Wenonah of
opaiol oirplaoo ad ohipo to and. load on o! thio mo quantity 0!
intonation ropidiy atoro tho I188! lydtaotomiogiooi Contot. Tho ootoot-
oiogicoi ototioao aria tho d” ooho oovoul moat-onto of tho voiodity

ad wind diroction. tapontuto. oi: hidity ad lay otha potaotoro thot
choratotioo tho cut-rat condition of tho ot-oophoto. Dy minim tha tho
ociatioto composed oynoptic oopo ad nodict tho outhor. May houro in
odvaeo. ad ouotiooo ova doyo tho coptoino o: ohipo m oonod of opptooohio.

otmo, tho woohoro d “ammo-«hat poooihlo {recto ad uino. ad “you--
about oton fmto, wind ottagth ad vioihiiity.

Emmi» attor how mo tho aoaol of atomiogicoi ototiao ad how
rich tho aporiaco of an yoooo o: ohootvotia, no lotto: how odvaeod tho
oodon mtruato. oil 0! thio io “attic“: for o procioo woothor toro-
cootit.. Thio io aploiaod. tint. by tho but thot on: 70! at tho oatin
outfao of tho ootth io mood with ocoao ad oooo. whilo o couidotohio
portion of tho dry lad io doooi't. Ioatoino ad polo: mica. Mn it io

diﬂicuit or ova i-poooihio to piao ototioooty notoorologicoi pointo.
Sound. out with tho atat ototiao it to W cuplicotod to ooho ohoor-
votiono. Ih oto locotod at tho my butt. of tho oi: oeoa. ad thontm
how hoot of oil hot hon-o in tho ioni- icon of tho ouoophooo with
thichooo 3040 In. Tho oi: urn-to ttop gnot opaoo not only in tho mo.
hut oloo in oititudo. ad ohmvotiao of tha ot individuol pinto do not
pmido o caploto ad viohlo picture.

29
FOR orncm. us: ONLY
Therefore nany el-entery phenonma are to unexpected and eonetinee tragic.
The in 1963 the cyclone that cue iru the Pacific Ocean to the coaet of

the Sea of Ohhoteh produced unprecedented enowtalle that dierupted telegraph
and railroad co-unication: on the eano daye in Ueet Europe unexpected colde
reeulted in the death of over 700 people. He will not eoon forget the earth
quakee in ‘reehkent and Chile. the Honda in France and Yugoelavia that occurred
in the loot decade.

Nelly niefortunee caueed by the el-ente could be avoided if we knew in tine the
developent o! elenental upheevale. To learn to toreceet theee phenuenao-ie
the tiret taek. and the eecond even nore conpliceted taekuto learn to control
the clinate nechmien. Then one will be able ”upon order" produce raine end
elininete loge. exclude droughte and r'loode. cyclonee and hurricane»

The launchinge oi the artiiicial earth eetellitee. eepecielly the Soviet eatel-
litee in the eeriee ”Coenoe" and "Meteor“ and the berican ”Tiroe." ”Ni-Ne.“
and ”Aeroe” penitted the weather torecaetere to be i-edietely involved in
the develop-eat of a univereal eyet- of weather toreceetim.

Of couree it ie incorrect to coneider that epoce obeervatione will be able to
conpletely replace eurface neteorological eervice. The tech of both in

to. by eupplenentuu each other. conpreheneively expand and deepen the inior-
nation neceeeary to e neteorologiet.

Currently rational proportione are revoaled in the dietribution of "work"
between the neteorological eatellitee and the enrface weather eervicee. At

the one tine exploration ie underway of each (one and nethode of obeervetion
of the weather paranetere tron epace which could replace obeervatione conducted
on earth: eomding oi the dietribution o! noieture content. tenperature
eounding through the entire thickneee of. the etnoephere. and evaluation of the
condition of etou activity and the quantity of felliu rain.

He will look at the general featuree that dietinguieh the nouel eynoptic nap
fro eatellite intonation.

The eynoptic nap containe data on the weather obtained tron different neteor-
ological etatione located often at great dietancee tron each other. an it
the conventional eigne are placed for the ronee of cloud cover and poeition
o! ironte. the zonee of precipitation and the centere of cyclonee obtained
by interpolation tron individual obeervetion of neteorological etatione end
ehipe.

The eatellite intonation, ae it ie accepted to eay. in the plane of the
inage providee continoue eituatione and detaile characterietic for the

photo inagee.

Study of the photographe obtained tron eatellitee on the etructure oi the
cloud naeeee pernite a revelation of the trajectory of aovoent of the air
neee to which the cloud belonge. and con provide an idea on the pattern of
winde at different altitudee.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A dotonination of tho contour of rotor vapor in tho ataoophoro ond ito vari-
ationo providoa inportant natoriol tor a dotoction oi tho thornol and rotor
balanco of tho atnoophoro. and tho hoat and noiaturo oxohango hotvoon ooo and
dry land. Hator vaporo hovo a atron; oiioct on otnoophoric tonporoturo.

Daring ovoporation occunalation oi hoot occura which to anoonpaniod by procip-
itlthmo

Sotollito notoorology ukoo it pouihlo in photograph of cloud covor to
rovoal tho vortical otahility of tho atnoophoro and tho intonaity of tho
vortical oxchanao oi hoot. which opono up tho poooihility of dotoninin; tho
condition of voothor in tho boundary layor of tho atnoaphoro tor a largo Inn-bar
of para-otora. 'l'ho optic and radiuotric nothoda oi roaoarch 2r:- aatollitoo
noho it poaoihlo to roliahly diotinguioh tho cloud covor {run a onow cover.

and conuquontly. traca not only changoo in tonporaturo of tho undorlyin;
ourtocoa. but aloo changoo in tho anon covor of dry land. ond ico covoro of
C...»

For ohoorvationa of tho cloud covor oi oorth. onov and ico fomtiona o tolo-
vioion opporotuo in inatallod on oatollitoo. with tho holp of which photo-
grapho oro nodo in tho vioihlo and inirxod ooctiono of tho apoctmn. Tho
photogropho in tho intrarod royo can ho nodo during tho dq ond at night. At
night they oro tho only aourco or intonation. but during tho day thoy haro
uniquo intonation that dittoro fro- that ohtoinod in tho vioihlo opoctn-o-
thou aro dota on tho lnyora of cloudo and thoir vortical dovolopont. In
addition tho fairly high oonoitivity of tho intrarod guoo nahoo it poooihlo
to find worn and cold air noon. and to ovaluoto tho tonporatuno tiold of
tho air naaooo.

Studioo of tho procooooa of uoathor (motion using photograph tron notoor-
ological oatollitoo havo hocao an inportant noano of finding atorno and ico
fiolda. and tracking tho now-ant oi otorna ovor ocoana rhoro thorn an no
notoorologicnl atationa. 'l'ho pattorn of an action on ocoana, liho tho
viaihlo otructuro oi tho clond covor. providoo apociiic intonation ohout tho
diroction and volocity of wind in tho lovor layoro of tho at-oophoro. and
union it poooihlo to rocord :onoo of procipitotion. It in two thot intor-
protation of oatollito photosnpho io cuplicatod to a conaidorohlo mourn
by tho foot that tho brightnooo of tho clouds in o conplox functin o! a
largo mnhor of factoro.

Tho rut-ho: of throatonin; ol-antal Ma includu tropical otono. Tho,
oro divoroo in dinonoiono and intonoity, thoroforo it it inportant to find

and traco tho diroction oi thoir dovolopant. with tho holy of tho utollito
"Tirol-5" in 1962 tho ovointion of a typhom van ouccoufnlly ohoorvod tru
tho nuont of ita birth to ito Morn. Tho poculiority of tho coditin
of tho cloud tovor durim tho poo-ago of tho typhoon conoioto of th prom
hoforo tho noin not. of clouda "of a prohrricano" lino of omllo in tho
for: of a hand of convoctivo claadinooo. 'l'ho naclono of tho not. of
cloudinooo of tho typhoon Inn for-ad by donoo mluo low-lying clondo pro-
diopoood to chomoo uhon caning upon dry land. Tho photograph nado it poo-
oihlo to find a link hot-non tho dinonoim o! tho otrnctnro of tho

51
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oloudineee end the next-\- vind velocity, end in perticuler. to eetehlieh

upirioel dependencee oi the diueter o! the olondineee cone of the etorn on
the need- vind velocity.

The tomedoee (etrongeet etorne) oheerved in the United Stetee end Metrelie
ere chereoterieed by the pneence of e eo-celled neternel cloud eyeten. neer
ehich en extended oftehoot ie loceted. The tomedo ie often eurrounded by e
cloud Ieee. Bright eonee o! cloudineee up to 300 he in dieeeter ere ecum-
letione o! rein clonde. The vind velocity in the tornedo eone exceede loo nle.
One of the pewlieritiee o! the dietrihntion of cloudineee on eerth ie the
epirel-eheped eyeteee linked to lerge-ecele cyolonee. Photoerephe o! theee
eddiee ten eerve ee e neene o! enelyein; nether tomtlon. eince they beer
£eeturee o! e epecitic cyclone. here one cen find the preeence of dry end
noiet eir. end lie the poeition o! eonee eeperetm the eir neeeee. Succeeeive
photogrephins o! the developent o! e cloud eyet- in e cyclone eekee it
poeeihle to trece it in dyn-ice end eetehlieh the nonent the cold end vet-
!ronte epproech. end the noeent of meat of the cold front into the none

of the wen tront. And finelly. one cen enelyee the etege of hreeludovn of

the cyclone.

0n e uher o! photogrephe of the cloud cover eonee of cloude o! e celluler
etmcture ere diecovered. uhoee resuler etructure ie governed. ee in unused,
by the epproeinete etehility in wind velocity ee eltitude increeeee. Such e
zone of celluler cloudineee ie loceted on the periphery of e nejor enticyclone.

The leyer o! cloude end foge thet tore. for emple. during the novenent o!
noiet eir over the colder eurtece of the oceen in the coeetel tone often ere
reveeled on televleion hegee of the cloud cover ohteined Ira eetellitee.

The reenlte of reeeerch on the typee of oloudineee ere inportent. hell cloud
el-ente vieihle tron eerth end eervio; to detenine the type of cloud cover
by the oheerver under nonel condition often cennot he («and a: knee ohteined
tron e eetellite. The field of nell comli euetinee cen eeen to be e thin
cover o! leyer cloude.

Veet bright cloud neeeee with dieeeter on the order of. lundrede of kilo-etere
ere umlly e thick leyer of cloude. The regione of lower hrightneee in the
ehepe o! irreguler epote often contein cumlue-rein cloude. The cloud neeeee
with low hruhtneee coneiet o2 oirrue, high-emu or cumli o! good veether.

Anelyeie or the neteorolo'icel infomtion ohteined tron eetellitee ehove thet
elthough the epece photogrephe neke it poeeihle only to ohtein nepe of cloude
end opticelly denee tonetione on the ehole they provide en idee ehout eeny

neteorologicel phennene.

The the nentioned typhoone heve cherecterietic cloud for-etione loceted
ueuelly et eltitudee up to 12 he. therefore tr- then no cen cupile en
opinion ehout the eir corrente et theee eltitudee. The eltitude o! the
border of cloude ie detenioed heeed on the epectrel near-ate of the
output. redietion.

32
FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
Although not! author torocooting io hoood on on onolyoio of tho otooophoric
prooouro iiold iroo which fronto oi oir oouoo oro dotoroinod. it to hooic-

olly conoidorod pouihlo to huo voothor iorocootin; on ohoorvotiouo of
chongoo in cloud covor.

Tho ootoorologicol ootollitoo hovo olroody providod powlo with o lot of
uootul intomtioo. For onoplo. in l967 tho utollito "(boson-1“." includod
in tho oyot- "Motoor." found thot tho North Arctic Ocoon ire. wronglo Iolond
to tho Boring Gulf no proctioolly £r~oo ire- ico; thio ponittod novigotiou
to ho otortod o loath oorlior thon tho unol poriod. Pith tho holp of tho
ootollito ”Tiroo-z" in l96l o typhoon woo ohoorvod and prodictod in tho
mica of Nov Zoolud. In tho outoro ooctioo of tho Noditorroaoon Soo jot
otro-o occurring thoro uoro rovoolod.

In tho rogiooo of tho hiooloyoo thot oro ditiicult to rooch tho ociontioto
with tho holp oi rnoto photozropho ootohlioh tho procioo rotor pottorn o!
rivoro toodins tho iioldo. cotton plutotiooo ond gordooo. 'i‘ho ohtoiood
infomotion oodo it poooihlo to build irriaotioo otructuroo with round for
tho propoood intlux oi rivor actor in tho ou-or poriod.

Notoorologicol ootollitoo hovo oorood Iony tiooo of tho gonorotioo and dim-
tion of oovoooat o! oojor cycloooo. oo o rooult oi wioh tho rooidonto o!
tho coootol roaion voro our-nod in odvonco of tho throotoning donor.

Tho photograph ohtoinod by ootoorologicol ootollitoo for cupilotioo of
oyooptic oopo on both. dovolopod in o corroopoodios oomor. In tho Unitod
Stotoo. for omplo. too oothodo oro uood for tho dovolopooat. Tho tirot
coooioto of dovolopiq tho photograph diroctly ot tho roooptiou ototion ond
projoctins tho ohtoiood i-qo ooto o coordinotioo grid. 'l‘ho continuation
of tho cloud covor io tronoforrod to o otondomd synoptic lop, uhoro tho
orporioncod oynoptic ootoorolosiot prolioinorily onolyuo tho insoo ond
oolocto tho ooot Voluohlo infomtioo. Thin oothod io uood to ohtoin doto
choroctorizing tho oynoptic procooooo at o lorgo ocolo, ouch oo tho pooitioo
of o cyclono cootor. Tho mood oothod oonoioto of tho coootructioo of o
googrophicol coondinoto grid dimtly CI tho photogroph.

ﬂoro diotortiooo oro coooidorod thot oro iotroducod by tho optic oyotoo oi

tho vido-onglo coooro. nod for ooch photoxroph on iodopondont coordinoto grid
io conotructod occordim to tho oriutotim of tho c-oro in rolotiou to tb
locol vorticol.

In addition to infomtioo ohout tho cloud covor o! oorth thoro io yot
ooothor cuplox of ol-onto ohout ohich vo moivo doto tr:- ootoorologicol
ootollitoouthio io iotouotioo on tho arm a! rodiotioo caning to tho
oorth ood givoo of! by it. In portiwlor. on o uhor of ootoorologicol
utollitoo tho took no oot of ohtoioin; lono-ocolo tioldo of rodiotin
oocopin; into world opoco iro- tho oorth'o ourfoco ond ot-oophoro which oro
in tho fiold oi vioion of tho rocoivoro. Sinco tho oocopin rodiotioo io
dotor-Lood by tho rotloctio; ood .ittin; proportioo of torrootriol ohjocto.
ond by tho noturo of tho oir mooo, thou (r. on oulyoio of tho t-porol
ond opotiol voriotiouo in rodiotiou fioldo ooo in priociplo could coopilo
on idoo obout tho corroopouding voriotiono in tho fioldo of ootoorologicol

)3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aluonta. and note an analyaia of tho cloud cover that intoracta with tho
corroapondins air naaaoa. and traco thoir nova-onta in apnea and chansoa in
tilt.

Tho roaulta obtainod on tho radiation-thorn“ pattorn of tho ayato- earth-
atnoaphoro era uaad to dovolop a theory o! clinato and conatruot an atno-

aphario nodal.

‘lho quotity of intonation tranaaittod by tho notoorolog'lcal aatollito in
turn alona can be conparod with tho intonation obtainod tron lS.000-20.000
aurfaco atationa. All of it nuat ba procoaaed bafora tho hasinning of tho
noxt turn. A aaaoion of intonation tron-iaaion begina upon co-and tro-
earth or in accordance with tho flight program Intonation fro- orbit can
be obtainod diroctly, without baing atorod aboard, which ia oopacially valuo
ablo for rapid woathor forocaatins. In tho tuturo tho teak will bo oat or

obtaining ”a apaca noteorolosical nowapaper" at any tina of day and oven mry
hour.

How nany aatollitoo are roquirod to guarantao ouch hourly intonation? It
aoona that eyorything dopoMa on tho orbit of tho aatollite. For omplo. it
tho oetollitea are launched onto an oquatorial orbit. than to aolvo thia
problu it ia autiiciont to hava two aatollitoo with a 2-hour poriod of rota-
tion and ahift in phaaa by a half-poriod. In thia caao at any point of tho
equatorial bolt ono can obtain teloyiaion photographa at hourly intervala. If a!
multnneouuly alx to oight aatollitoo ara launchod onto a polar orbit. than in
tho lowar latitudeo teloviaion photographa will be obtainod at a rato of
alightly looa than an hour. while in tho high letitudoa thoro will bo an over-
lapping in tino and am. noro at aix hour intorvala world nopa of tho
geographical diatribution of data obtained tron tho aatollitea can bo cupilod.

According to othor calculationa tho aatollitoo ahould ba put into orbit at
altitudo 500 h and with alope at an angle to tho polo in direction to tho
weat. by uoing a ayat- of thaao aatollitoo launchod with a auccoaaivo ahift
in tino with ouch ragard that they intoraoctod all tho latitudea at apocitic
tino intarvala ono can practically continoualy traco tho notoorological pro-
oaaaaa ovor tho ontiro earth atnoophoro.

0t definito inportance cm alao ba tho projact of a ayato- nado of throo equao
torial aatollitoo that havo a atationery orbit at altitudo 35.870 h- with
period of rotation 24 h. In thia caaa tho aatollitoo will rovolvo oynchro-
noualy withoerth. no if auaponded ovar apecific pointa of tho equator. The
valuo o! tho ayat- conaiata alao of tho poaaibility of using it ea a nail
boa whore infatuation can bo concontrated tron othor notoorological aatollitoo
and than tranuittod to auriaco pointa of intonation collection. ‘l‘ho teak
in tho tuturo ia ontlinod-oto create a univeraal waathor aurface. Thia
roquiroa attention of all the noaauring procoaaea axocutod at tho hydro-
notaorological atationa and local woathor buroaua. 'rha tact ia that any
notooroloaical obaorvationa aro undo only viaually, ainco thorn aro no
advncod inatn-onta. and aonotinaa phyaical principloa that par-it auto-atic
obeervationa. Thia. for oxuplo. ia recording of a ”bar of at-oephoric
phononaa. ahapea of clouda. and avaluation of tho waather.

3‘0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the opinion of a nunber of cpecialiata autonatic hydroeeteorological renote
neaeuriln eyetena wet baccne the reference link in the conpler autonated
ayeten. One eyeten will be able to enconpaea the region of 20.000 ha. and
tree thoueanda of skilled epecialiete fra heavy labor. Over the entire
region of ohaervatione the prinary neaeuring inetnnen to will be arranged
that nake auto-atic eeaeurenente and tron-it the obtained intonation to the
hydroneteorologicel point.

syeten of Space Co-unication

‘rhe dietence of radio wave epread dapande on their length. Long wavea can
envelop the earth. although here they loee the greater part of. their energy.
Short wavee guarantee conaiderebly greater diatance of radio conunnication as
a coneequence of nultiple reflection tron the layere of ionized gee located
at low altitudee and the earth“. aurtace. VHF waves are spread

only within direct vieibility. ﬂawever precieely in thia range or wavelemtha
the cal-eet Operation in the ether is guaranteed. Here nany radio etatione
can operate eimltaneouely on VHF without interfering with each other.

In the last decade the ecientiete and deeignere have developed a nunber of
neaeuree directed towerda increaaiu the dietance of radio and televieion
co-nnication; lore advanced eyet-a have been planned. the power of the
trancnitting and eencitivity of the reception otatione have been lncreeeed.
end a network of retrenenitting linea hoe been eet up. however continuoue
radio inetallation even of a nediwecale European country requiree the
creation of any dome of tramnitting atatione linked by apecial ceblea.
For our country that hae an enornoue territory and regiona of ditficult acceee
thia taak ie extrenely conpliceted. For each line of cable or radio-relay
animation that coneiate of a large usher of internediate retrananitting
etatione requiru the inetallation of expeneive traneceiving apparatu.
conetruction work, ecurcea of power. and conetent naintenance. For exuple.
for the radio relay line Hoecow-Vledivoetok 150 eurfece retran-ittm were
needed. and for the cable line of the cane lentb-oover 1.000 .plitication
pointe.

Currently three Iain typea of «mutation linea are ueed: nain. of with a
large nunber gather at a central point, tron rhich along a canon nain channel
cununication occure with other analogme pointe. where linea. again branchim.
are not to the ueere; eta-Intention liner between the co-inication oentar
and a roving object (chip. airplane. helicopter); mication linee between
saving objecte. The Iain our of the eo-celled c-ercial cmicetion whore
number ie conetantly riaing ia inplaented on liner of the tiret type. For
ext-pie. whereaa in 1969 the mber o! trenaatlantic twooway telephone 01-:-
nicationa between Europe and the united Statee waa 2 nillion (345 chennele)
according to prodlctim for 1980 it mine to provide about 120 aillion
co-nnicatione. which requiree up to 12.000 chennele. The duend of the
nilitary eervicee elao rieea tor linea to guarantee coordination and func-
tionim of any unite.

It in known that one eurtace radio etetion can encupaee with ite "radio field"
roughly 15.000 W. And if the retranonitting device in mama not on a

35
FOR OFFICIIJ. use ONLY
neat. but on board a satellite, than one can create a conunications syste-
capable of enconpassing the entire world.

The principle of the use of satellites to provide long-ram radio co-unication
consists of the fact that in the micstion lines operating in the VHF

range they fulfill the role of internediate stations rebroadcasting radio
signals fron one suriaca station to another. As in the noreal radio relay
lines passive and active satellite rebroadcasting are distinguished.

In the first case the satellite is a sinple reflector whaee shell has. for
sample. the shape of a sphere (the American satellite rebroadcaster "Echo”).
Passive rebroadcasting needs considerable power of the trannnitting and high
sensitivity of the reception stations. as well as low orbits of the satellite.
Despite the evident advantages of such a retransnitcer (high reliability and
wide range) it is not considered pronisim. This will be discussed below.

In the second case on the satellite the signal received froe earth is upli-
fied and subsequently transeitted to another surface station. Active retrans-
nitters can operate both with delay and without delay of col-unication.
During the operation with delay of co-Imication the satellite. flying over

a point of data transnission receives and stores the obtained intonation,
while above the point of reception upon cos-and iron earth trans-its it. In
this case the satellites can be launched to low orbits (on the order 300 he)
and have considerable powers of the trannitting systus. Hmver the nail

altitudes of the orbits linit the activity of the cwnicetion section to
2-3 minutes.

If operation occurs without delay of co-unication the satellite continuously
trans-its to the user the obtained intonation only at another frequency.

ﬂare connnnication will be carried out only in the case where the satellite
simltaneously is visible iron the sites of reception and trans-lesion. Trans-
eission without delay is possible also betwen nore distant objects on earth
through a syste- oi satellite-retransnittars linked into a single chain.
Retren-ission with delay is used in the systen ”Kur'yer." while contimousoo
in the syst- “Holniya” and "Rele."

Passive retransnitters are divided into stabilized and unstabilized. The
stabilized include flat reflectors. reflectors of on-board scattering. and
short-circuited antennas. hmver stabilized passive retran-ittars require
the us of electronic control syIt-e for the spatial position of the apps-
ratus. which reduces to zero the nain advantage of these systus-oreliability
and sieplicity inherent to the passive reflectors. The unstabilized refleco
tors include sets of Luneberg lenses, V-reflectors. clouds of "needles," and
netallic spheres.

Passive retranenittors are usually hollow spheres several tens of neters in
diueter whose surface is covered with alts-int- foil. For exuple. the Anar-
ican satellite “Echo-2" launched in 19610 was an inflatable sphere lol I in
diueter with a shell nade of plastic file that had a nirror netallired coating.

Later drafts for the satellitas "aapor Echo" were developed with disaster up
to 300 e.

56
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
.vn vol Ivan“ Udla quu

The nail: deficiency o! passive satollito rotranoaittors is tho mat loeooo of
energy of tho railoctod signal troa tho satellites with nondiroctional radi-
ation baaa proportional to the iourth degreo of distance; in sctivo retrans-
aittors tho duping is subject to tho law of second degree.

Coaporison or tho weights of passivo and active roiloctors that guarantoo tho
s-s ro-saission power par unit of active power shows that an increase in tho
dinonoions of passive ostollitss to obtain .roator aopliiication and power
results in an ioponissiblo increase in weight.

A cooporison of the quantity of intonation that can ha ratran-ittod in a
unit of tioo also is not in favor of tho passiVa systoos. m- with altitude
of tho orbit l.000 h the rate oi intonation transaission with ragard (or
real liaitot one ie l0s bit/o for a paesiva ophorical satellite 30 I in dis-
Iotor and lo bit/s for an active oatsllito with power l H.

Dotoninotion of tho spocitic orbit tor a sotollito rattan-ittor is an
extremely complicated quootion linkod to the uloction of o umber o! othar
cnponuts and para-otoro of. the oystu: tho mobar and location of the
surface pointo. tho Ina-her of channels. li-itationo plocod on the delay tile
of tho oignol. par-ours of tho boootor rockot. and characteristics of tho
aatsllito ond ouriaco otation.

Expanoion of tho constitution rono by incronoin; the altitude oi tho satollito
orbit is significant roughly to 8.000 In. liaro circular orbits sro aoro ouit-
ohlo Ero- tho viewpoint of. tho otability of tho cc—mication zone and tho
ratio signallnoioe. An advantage of switching tro- an sllipticol orbit to
anothorutho satellite con have greater weight as caparod to tho satallito
that is put into a circular orbit whose altitude equalo tho apogee of tho
ollipticol orbit (with tho on nights of tho booster rocksto). In odditim
on tho elliptical orbits cmication on be providod aoro oconooically
batwoen surface otstions locstod in s liaited range or latitudes.

Preciooly on an elliptical orbit with par-otoro: porigoo 697 h. apogoo
39.380 huths Soviat mnicstions satellite ”Holniyo-l" was lamehod. Tho
large mount of orbital occontricity., tho location of tho apogeo over the
Northern. and tho porigoo war the Southom unisphoroo guorontool'. cmica-
tion unions in tho prooonco of one ootollita botwoon hoscow and Vladivostok
to 9 hours with a total period of molution ll h 68 ain. howover tho
rotranolittoro with elliptical orbits aloo have significant delicionciss: it
is noceooory to altar tho npliticatioo of tho our-board atoms as a come-
quanco of tho variability in diotonce to earth. and with porigoos loss than
370 h docolorstion in tho otooophoro mults in instability of tho orbit.

At what sltitudoa then is it expedient to launch tho rotran-ittoro?

It has been ostsblishod that thsre exioto o critical altitude on tho order
9,250 in below which one can uoo nondiroctional antennas and caporativoly
silplc satallitoo. At aroot altitudoo it is aoro upodioot to on dimtional

otabiliood antonnoo. ﬁnch roducoo tho roquirod Ina-bar of utollitos that
prowido micotin within the one region of tha oarth'o wrtaco.

37
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.1' _'

‘-‘._!__,_

 

Zone of Coverage of latth'a Sui-tau by Nation Sate11itee Leueched at
Different Altitudea: lattuhy due o! tee eate11itea an altitude 11.000 In.
right-oh, one of atatioaety eate11itea (a1titede 33.000 he)

Key:
1. Eat 3. 01-bit with altitude 11.000. 100 h
2. Heat 6. Stations, othit

The ee1ectioe of a1titude o: the orbit ie enacted by apeoe condition: x-ray
radiation. ape-aye. u1ttaviolat tedietion. and high vegan. Protection
(toe radiation can he ptovided he: the col-teem ehie1din. In particular.
it heaheencuputed that to ahie1d£toepratmthathevahiaheeeuiae
thickeaaa or the ahield eatetie1 on the aide: 25 a ia teqaired. ad thie
reauita in an iepenieaih1e riae in the weight of the aatite aate11ite.

Gnu-teeny altitudee 1eea than 1.350 b ate «widened atticiot tot athita of
co-mication eate11itee for ahp1e ant-e all! intracmtieeetal Wide.
and ova: 10.500 In (or copies ayatue that provide manta cm-
cation.

now any aate11itaa ate needed to eaintaie continua micatioe between
surface atationa 1oeated. for mu. 5.000 in iron eech other? It ie
couaidered that it the aate11itea are put into an othit 1.500 b in a1titude.
there mat ha 400 o! thu. and with e1titude of the othit 0.000 Ito-60.

38
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR (ll-‘I-‘lClM. "SI-2 ONLY

'rho aoat noticing io tho idoa of vain; ototionary oatollitoa for co-anication.
A ayato- nodo oi throo atationary aatollitoo. uniformity diotrihutod ovor
tho orhit can provido roooption of radio and tolovioion trananioaion at on,
point of tho oarth. with tho motion of tho polar rogiona. A ooaporioon

of. tho aouoo of oovorago of tho ayot-a aado of too oatouitoo locatod at an
orbit of 11.100 ho. ond ayatona oi atationory aatonitoo ohova thot in tho
lattor oyot- tho aono of eovorogo io conoidorohly anator. Tho "tram-nit-
tin; otticionoy with tho uoo at a atotioaory aotoliito dooa not dopoad on tho
location of tho aurfaoo atotion. ohilo at Iowa: orhita it ia roducod at tho
otation ia tarthor any tron tho motor. llovovor ouch a oo-nication ayat-
oloo hao a mhor of aigniiicaat ahortcuima. Thoy inclndo: low roiiahility
aim tho naitunction of no utollito diarupto tho oporation of tho ontiro
ayoton: tho hood (or groat outputo o! tho transittora locatod on tho oatol-
litoa: tho hood to uao on tho aatollito a ayato- ot atahiliution on Mon-

tation: tho groat “gird honor of tho ”thou that put tho oatollito into
orbit; and tho conaidorahlo doloa in tho oinol in tino.

Ho will dual! in aoro dotail on tho loot factor. Thorn ia a ptaoticai tolor-
moo for dolay tiao of tolaphono aimia-oin tho toiophona chain with coo-my
aprood of tho aim! tho dong not not mood 0.23 a. with tho noo oi Mia
iinoa ouch a dolay mitt in tho appoarnoo of an otho. In odor to inprovo
tho quality of tho “not in tho long chaino ocho-harriara at. uood thot
intorrupt tho aigncl truaniooion in tho tino of motion. honour tho uoo
of oeho-harrioro can toouit in intonnptiono or diatortion o! opooch.

 

Dopendonco of "night of ABS at kittnd Paar

Roy:
1. Paaaivo aphorical roﬂoctor 2. Activo ABS
Alan; horizontal-ou-cittod your in dh rolativo to l H.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
For a aatellite on a etationary orbit the aignal delay in tiee will reach
1.27 a. therefore ite uee for telephone coa-unication ie hardly expedient.
More proniaing ie the uae of auch a eatellite for tranenieeion o! telegraph.
phototelegraph and televieion eisnela.

Another inportant factor that deteninaa the aelection of the orbit ia the tine
required for replacing the eatellito in orbit. The eudden nalfunction of
apparatue can. for ample. occur during the breakdown of the power eourcea.
dieruption in the functioning of tha cosponente of the eloctronic apparatue.
or orientation ayetea. In thia cue the tine neceeeary to replace the antel-
lite with orbital altitude “.000 he ia roughly L: h. while for a eatellite
with etetionary orbit it ie three tieea greater. ll! addition it ie neceeaary
to conaider that at low orhite the ulfunction of one of the eatellitee when
they are located in a ring reeulte only in the decreaee in the zone of contin-
uoue coverage or a ehort interruption in co-unication. the nelimction o! a
etetionary ASS (artificial earth aetellite) will produce a long interruption
in co‘Inication.

It ie coneidered that co-Inication linee that one aatellitea will henna
econuically juatified if the duration of trouble-tree operation of the eatel-
lite will be eeveral yeare. Thie factor nakea etrict require-ante for reli-
ability of the devioea inetelled on the eatellitee. “they met withotend nach-
enical and themel inpacte. operate under conditione of a vacuu and high radi-
etion, and withetand acceleration to l5 3 with vibrationa with treqmncy up to
2.000 lit. It in known that reliability can he iner by providing etendby
co-unicetion chamele and apparatus. however thie reeulte in an increeee in
the weight. overall dinaneione and input. which contradicte the linitatione

on theae paruetera placed by the characterietice of the hooeter rockete.

In the creation and operation of the eatellite co—mication ayat- the nain
coet ia dietributed between three “mute: the eatellitee. the neane oi
launching. and the etetione. The coat of the eatellitee will be nini-l it
they are aade in the torn of enall paeaive retraneaittere. and the greeteet
for active retran-ittore with atehilired directional antennae. In addition
if the «nice life of the satellite ie leee than l.$-2 yeare the aain portion
of the outlaya for operation will he outlaye for the replac-ent o! a eatel-
lite.

“rho coat of the neana of launching deponde on the conple.:ity of the launching
nethod and the power of the rocket deeigned to launch the aatellite. Thua
according to foreign date the approxinate coet of lam-chi.” ainle
nonatahiliud eatellite retro-ditto:- in up to 93 000,000 and or a
mltiple-iunction ratranaaittor up to $10,000,006.

The nein capetitor tor epace co-unicednn on traneoceanic liner in under-
water cehlee. howaver e conperieon of the coat of operation or theee ayatoe
above the advantage of the opera ayeten. In fact. outlaya tor the nainte -
nnceof a traneoceanic line extending 5.500 h are roughly $27,000 for l
television chemel ae conpared to $10,000 in the ayeten with e eatellite.

The introduction of eatellite retrananittare ie currently following the path
of uein; th- for rediootelephone. phototelegrephic. and telograph emi-
ention.ae well an to trane-it televieion program
to
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tho conatructioo of a broad notwotk oi‘ auriaco taoaption atationa oi apaca
cmicatioo ainilar to tho atatiool in tho doaoatio ayat- "0thita" will
Iaka it poaaihla for a apaco htidao to ho ona o! tho nain ion-a of meta
co-mlcation. 'l'ho oatallito oo-unicationo oyat- ia ouitahla for rapid trana-
aiaaion of oataorolosical napo. and nowapopar diaa which panita tho population

oi mota miooa in out countq to ho auppliad with control nowopapata tho day
thoy cuo on tho ptooo.

A no laaa inportant rolo ia opaco co-unication in taloviaion. Duo to tho
ayat- "OIhita" tho prograaa of tha caottal talaviaion havo haan Ioda availahla
to natty oilliona of Sowiat viowota. It would ha iapoaaihla to ctaata a oiailor
hatwork oi' pron-n rocaption of control talovioion in ouch moto miona of
our country aa tho miona of tho aatr-o north and tho fat aaat. and mo!
in ouch o ohort tino without uoin; aatallitaa. Hith tho holp o! oatollita cou-
nication diroct tolavioion tran-iaaion ia inpl-antod hatwaan Europo. hotica
and othor raaiona of tho world. In a tow yaara. any najor country will ho ahla
to tron-it that: radio and talavioion program to tho outioa planot. It ia
two that hora tho prohl- arioaa of tha incapatihility of tho tolavioion
oyot-o ao a conooquanca of tho diﬂaranca in otondaxd oignalo and typao of
roooivato that axiat in diﬂaront cmtriaa. Thua. tho otandatd “hat of
linoo in tho taloviaion ayot- in Motria. Balgiu and tho USSR-~62}. tho
Unitad Stataouszs. and Unload-J05. ‘l'horo aro diilot'oncao in tho ”dilation
of tho channol of aound occupant-ant. too ax-pla in Auatria. Irma. and tho
Unitad Stataa ital-plane, aodulation io uoad. in Iolgiz- and “land-«uplituda.
Tho ovatall width of tho hand in Motrin-J. in haneonllo. and in Salad—-

5 "it.

Main; roaulta of tho oparation of axpatiaontol oatallita cmication
ayata-o hava aado it poaaihla to oat up a Int-hat of now taalu ohooa aolution

in tho noar tutura will provido a high-quality jup in tho ctoation of a
univataal ayatu o! naaa aatvioa.

'l'ho moha- oi ouch taoho includo. for unpla. naintonanca o! a outfaca co-and-
noaourig cuplax that guarantaoo flighta of oatallitaa and intatplanatary
autuatic atationo. ’l‘ha functioning of tho ayat- o! aatallito co-Inioation
to: thaaa putpoaoa will oaha it poooihla to abandon tho branch-i notwork oi
airplono and ahip tracking atationo uood todq to c-lnicata with tho apoca-
cratt. Export-onto an undamy to omniza air traffic with tho holp of
co-lnication ayataoa haood on aatallitaa with otationary othito, oharohy data
at. tho coordinatoa of an airplano an oant iron tho airplano to tho aatollita
and furthar totnn-ittod to tho outtaoa otation for collaction o! data for
thoit tran-iaaion to tho control diopatchoto point. Plano an hoin; uninod
to: tho uaa of a co—lnication oyataa to collact intonation fro- notoorolou.
oal aatollitaa. notaorological halloooo, and mtoaatic waathor otationo. ao
wall aa ha- aatallitao daoismd to atudy tho natural mom-coo of oath and
tho aocrato of tho ocoana. Apparatuo ia haio. davolopad for aatallitaa that
aakaa it poaaihla to rattan-it radio pm“ and tolowioion moo-o diroctly
to tho donoatic rocoivata. hy-paooin; tho intanodiata moption atatiouo.

Tho quoatiou arioao of otaatin; oatallita tatrm-ittora on othito m Han.
Vanna and tho noon ﬁich will nako it poaaihla to inpl-ont cmioatioo a:

'01
Fox OFFICIAL use ONLY
the epacecraft with the earth at the lac-mt they are located on the aide of
the planet not viaihla from earth. One of theae plane providea for putting
the co-unicetiona eatellite at the point of lihration. at a dietance on the
order 65.000 he fro. the noon above ite far aide.

llavigat ion 'l'hrough Space

Generally it ia not very coaplicated to detenlne one'o location while on dry
land near reference pointe. lt ia coneiderahly nore «replicated to do thia
uhllc. for eraeple. on an airplane in air or on a ahip far fr:- ahorea. It in
neceaaary to conaider that here the taak coneieta not only. of accurately deter-

lining the coordinatea. hut aleo laying a couree that guaranteee arrival at
the point of deetination.

At the cane tine the ever increeeing velocitiea of airplane flight and the

inoroaein diotencea of nor-ant of ehipe advance higher rennin-ante for the
nethoda and some of navigation.

Ae far back ee ls yeara ago in the United Stetea a deciaion wee eade to increaee
the accuracy of the Deana of chip navigation in the Navy. which ahould guarantee
detenination of the ehip coordinatee with error up to *2 nilea in a tine no
greater than 10 ninutea. In relation to auhnarinea that are ceiling in the
auhnerged etete for nontha the latter paraneter aoquirea eepecial urgency.

‘l'he urchant Iarine haa aleo develOped definite requirenentn for the neane of
guaranteeing the navigational eafety of ehip eailing: the accuracy of their
readinga nuat not he leea than 12 of the dietance to a dangeroue place during
navigation in the ocean. and dorm nova-eat in herbore-ono leee than 50 n
with diatance to the neereat dangeroue point leaa than 3 nileo.

lining the nov-ent of a ahip ita location ie detenined periodically. And

in the intervele between theae Innate deed rochoning ie “planted with
regard for different factory-current velocity. wind velocity. wavee. for

dead reckoning graphic. analytical and automatic cathode are uployed reapec-
tively on graphe. fomlee and tahlea. or calculatorao-dead reckoning analyzere.
For any of the nned nethode the initial ie intonation generated by the eye-
tene of couree indication and eeaaureaent of the ahip velocity.

The couree ie deternined with the help of gyroacopic coepeeaee. whoee root-
nean-aquere error in neeeur-aent ie roughly 0.5°. Velocity ie naaeuned in
loge; the relative error of their eaaaureeent ia ll. A deficiency of theae
inatruaenta coneieta of the fact that they do not coneider the neteorological
factora in the neaeurueat proceee. syn-a haaed on eeaauroent of the true
novenent of the apparatue-oinertial eyet-e are free of ouch errora. however
they aleo auffer a aerioue deficiency-«hey are not capable of detenining
coordimtee nore accurately than thoee that were huilt into thu. ‘l'oday inertial
eyet-e are known that are capable of providing a root-nean-equare error of
coordinate etorage of 0.1 eilelh. Therefore on lengthy narioe voyegea inertial
cyetene not he periodically corrected.

Ae ie known. eince ancient tinee eailcre have detenined the poaition of the
ehip at eea or ocean with the help of atare or planete hy eatrononicel eathoda.

1.2
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Thio oothod io toirly “1.1.510. But it eon ho uood it tho oky to not oovotod
with clown and tho horizon in cloorly vioihio. ﬁich dooo not occur thot
otton. It to omugh to ooy thot in tho horthon lotitudoo of tho Pocitic

0coon tho ptohohility of cloudy voothor (cloud covor ovor 8 pointo) to lo-
001.

In otdor to dotonino ditottioo by o otor soniouototo oro uooduoottonto, vhooo

occurooy dopondo not oo nah on tho pottoction or tho inotn-ont u on tho
upotionoo of tho noviptot. 0n tho ovotoao it to 0.7'.

lodio moving hoo providod tho novigotot vith dirootioo lindm dovicoo.
Tho oothod of pinpointing locotioo vith thoir holp coooioto of tho omltono-
ouo dotoninotion of diroctiou on too ttonooittin; rodio ototiono. uhooo po-
oition io plottod on o lop. Tho todio «moot-in. dovicoo ooko it poooihlo

to dotonino locotiou with occurocy *1: oi tho diotonco to tho ohon rototomo
rodto ototiono. And it thio diotoaco io 1.000 ouoo. thou tho orror ooh roooh
10 oiloo. BMW! tho octioa of o ootmh o! long-diotooco rodio noviution
ootupooooo loinly tho ooootol rooiouo ond diroctiooo of tho ooin notino toutoo.

At tho o-o tino o considonhlo portio- ot tho ocoon io outoido tho uooo o!
thoit octioo.

Out-tout) tho noono of novigotion oro uployod in o canola thot includoo. in
pottioulu. throo inortiol noviutioo got-o. rodio ooxtonto. on ootronovi-
sotioo potiocopo. olocttoooanotic log, tout-u indtoototo, dopth moo. on!
olocttouic cooputor. amt om thio cooplicotod navigation“ caplox coa-
not suoroatoo tho roquitod oocurocy o2 hovigotion ovor tho ontiro ootth.

In tho ooorchoo for ooro octuroto oothodo ot dotoninios coordinotoo ot min.
ohjocto tho oyocioliot tut-nod to AIS. Thou uoo tot muotiouol purpoooo io
poooihlo duo to tho noturol motion m oot'th. oo o vooult of which ot

ooch about in tho ouo can with high narocy indicoto tho pooitiou o! o ootol-
lito rototivo to tho outh‘o ourtoco. Conooquontiy. hovir. dotoninod tho
pooitioo of o W“ objoot tolotivo to tho unnotionol ootonito ooo con
cmputo tho pooititn o! tho ohjoct in tho ootth'o not. of coondinotoo.

rho loin odvontqo of o novigotionol ootouito oyot- to tho poooihility of
oolvim novisotionol prom-o ondot ooy ootootologicol condition with toil-1y
high otcutocy. Such o oyoto- oohoo it poooihlo to oowo mund-tho-clock in
udi-itod author of uooto on o iono woo of tho oorth.

Tho ootouito rodio novigotion oyot- to o hit-[y cooplox oot o! quip-oat.

It includoo: oovoxol novintionol ootonitoo tototia; oromd tho oorth
accordion to oooignod orhito ond hovina on boat! opociol rodio «mooring
oquip-ont: on-hootd rodio noviution ototiono inotollod on ohipo or oirplonoo
to sown tho uvigotiouol potooototo ond c-puto tho goosrophicol cootdinotoo
of tho locotiono of thooo ohjocto; o notwoth of ourtoco ototiooo to control
tho poruotoro of ootollito othito: o cuputor contot too'tdinotim tho oath

of tho ontiro ootonito novigotioul oyot- ond ptodictih; tho oph-otio
(procawtotion of cootdiaotoo) of ootouitoo for tho scoot tino hoood on
dot. of tho control ototiouo: ti-o oorvico thot oohoo it poooiblo to rochoa

‘03
sort OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFPHZIM. USE ONLY

tioo with occurocy up to mm o ond thot ioouoo tino conoctiono; radio tolo-
ootric ond cu-unciotion oquipoont to tron-it cc-ondo ond dittoront infor-
ootion from ootth to ontollitoo ond hock in ordor to sunrontoo animation
of tho control pointo with o coopotot contor.

Tho oporoting priociplo of tho oyotoo io hoood on tho on o! ootollitoo oo
roioronco pointo thot ooho it poooihlo to ohtoin tho nocoooory diroction lind-
ing intonation. It tho ootollito io in on orbit with known olononto, thon
it io oooy to cuputo ito oph-orio. And by hoviog o tohlo of opho-otidoo.
ono con opporontly cuputo oloo tho coordinotoo of our ohjoct. howovor in
foct it io ouch ooro caplicotod.

It in nocoooot-y to conoidor tho chongo in tho ootollito orhito ovoi- tioo. Tho
roooono for thooo phone-om could ho nought in tho oii-contorod noturo of. tho
oorth'o tiold oi gtovity (on! conooquontly. tho voriohility in tho (moo of
grovity). in tho ofioct oi iotcoo oi rooiotonco of tho otooophoro. grovitotion
of plonoto, ond oo lorth. Thorotoro tho tool: of procmputim tho pooitico of
tho ootollito with round for tho tool diotuthoncoo io vol-y voluinouo.

Thoro io o hum tochniquo for ptodicting tho pooition of o ootollito dovolopod
for tho oyot- "Tronoit" (Unitod Stotoo). 0n tho out-loco oi tho oorth ot o
coonidorohlo diotonco iron ooch othor {our rodio ototicno for tucking ontol-
litoo oro plocod. o cooputor contor. o ototion to: input of infomtion to tho
ooﬂlitoo. ond o tino oorvico. 'i’ho tucking ototicho oooouro tho poto-ototo
of ootollito oavooont ot that non-It whoa it pooooo ovor thu. ookoo corroctiono
ood tron-ito tho intonation to tho cooputor contoi'. 'l'hooo doto oro and to
dotonino tho orbit, ond thon oro tron-ittod to tho input ototion. At tho
ouont of oppootooco of tho ootollito in tho oono of visibility of tho oocoud
ototion tho tint oondo to tho ootollito tho nocoooory indexation ond ioouoo
o cunt! by which ito working otoroso io frood of old doto ond it ototoo tho
now doto. Tho corroctoooo of tho now input oi tho now doto io cootrollod.
ottor which tho otorogo io dioconnoctod for holf o doy. until tho ootollito
ontoto tho :ono of notion of tho ototion. hit-tho: tho ootollito in occovdonco
with tho progroo will onco in 2 oimtoo tron-nit intomtion. 'l'ho croft hoo o
opociol inphooo rocoivor whoro intomtion oftor procoooins io printod on topo.

For o toliohlo dotoninotion of tho locoticn o! o ohip 2-niwto intot'volo oto
outficiont. Nowovor tho cooploxity of ctootihg ouch o not. in linkod to tho
poooihility of ooking o otoroao dovico with o lot-go copocity of tho o-oryo-
25.200 hinoly oiano. whotoby tho occurocy of dotonining tho coordinotoo it
high (choroctorizod by root-ooon-oquoro doviotion of ootollito coondinotooo-
0.25 lilo/thy).

Currontly tho ootollito novigotionol oyotou do not uko it poooihio to contin-
uouoly dotoroino tho cootdinotoo of owing ohjocto. oinco duo to tho ootth'o
rototion ormnd on oxio ot ooch point on tho oorth'o ourfoco tho ootollito

con ho ohoorvod only oovotol ti-oo o doy. on! ooch tioo for o cooporotivoly
ohort tioo. If thoro oro oovorol ootollitoo, for oxooplo four. tho oito of
tho owing ohjoct con ho pinpointod ovory 2 houro.

lob
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to deteneine the coordinatea of e ehip in principle inpulee. upli-
tude. phaee and frequency nethode or eeeeureeente can he ueed. on whoee haaia
one can aet up a number of radio navigational ayatue: mgle-neanuring. die-
tanca (indium. Doppler. and coehined. In order to uee any of theee nethoda oi
neeeure-anta on a navigational aatellite it ie neceaeary to have a trenaaitter
that operatee in a pattern of tron-itter-retraneeittar of inquiry eisnele.
The oacilletiona .itted by th- are received at the object (airplane or ehip)
and ueed to deteneine coerdinatee. At the a-e tine the aatellite ephueridee
ere tran-itted to the object referring to the mate or navigational Beaure-
eente. 'l'he epheeeridee can. ior exnpla. he introduced periodically on a radio
channel into a atorage device of the aatellite and be fed to ita trena-itter
for additional nodulation oi the tren-itter oaoillationa.

Angle-neaaurin; eethod. m the aatellite a traneeitter ie inetelled that
generatee continoua oacilletiona. Hith the help of the radio navigational
etation located on the airplane or ehip by direction finding of the aatellite

tru-itter ite mler coordinatee are defined (altitude. eel-1th, or their
derivetivee).

ln deteneinin the eite of the object in. anaular altitudee the neth of
proceeein neeurim reeulte ueed in aetronoq ia eeployed. Manure-ante are
diliicult due to the great Insular velocity of nova-ant of the aatellite in
relation to the object of oheervation. and ea a coneaquence of thie the prep
aneed coneiderahle oblique ehifting in the objectuparallex. however here
the rapid change in altitude oi the arinuth oi the aatellite nkea it poaeihle
roughly in S nimtee to obtain nore than 2 poeition linee.

ln deter-lain the aite of the ehift in. the ninth it ie propoeed to
aucceaeively aeaeure two ari-athe on the aatellite with a einltanaoue accurate
interaection oi the eeeeure-mt lute; the poeition oi the cratt ie located
ae the point of interaction of two linee of equal eaimthe.

Diateme iindin; eathod. It ie propoaed that the ohaervar can neaeuru the
inclination of dietance to the aatellite. The object to be coordinated ful-
iille the role of the inquiry etation. while the radio engineering equipent
of navigational aetellitao-the role of the traneponder.

Having neaeured the dietance at out t1. one can find the aurface of poeeihle
poaition of object c1 that ie a epheru, in thou center the aatellite ia located
at the eonent of neeeur-ent (aee Pigure). The aecond anrtace of poeition c2
can he detenined having neeaured eimltaneoualy the dietance and up to the
aecmd navigatinel aatellite. or to the one object. hut at aunt of tine t2.
The third eurfece ie detenined ei-ply. aince the altitude of flight ie knoun
(for the airplane) he... and coneequently. the geocentric altitude cuputed
true the cantor of earth, B-Raoh -. By making in the center of earth a
aphere with rediue II we aleo will obtain thie eurface.

The three eurtecee in intereectlon will provide two poaeihle locatione of the
object: the true (1) and {aleo (2). whereby the true ia datenined ainplyn
it ie too far apart fro. the (aloe.

'65
run nrncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁ-tml Alum!

Sch-e of Dietanca Pindinc Method of Dataninin; Object Poeition fru Two
Satellitee

Doppler nethod. The idea of the nethod coneiate of deter-min the relative
eatellite velocity. In the hegimin; when the eatellite ie at the horicon.

the velocity of change in the dietance ia the uni-n: at the nonent then the
line of righting of the eatellite ia perpendicular to the vector of ite rela-

tive velocity the chuue in dietance ie cloee to taro; it again rieee to the
will at the next nonent in tine.

Roughly the one pattern of chane in the frequency par-eter of the radio
“anal. like the change in dietance can he obtained with the use of the widely
known Doppler effect. lte eeeence ie that with a change in the relative
position of the tree-itter and receiver the frequency of the eisnel received
by the receiver differe fro the frequency of the dual nitted hy the tranc-
aitter by an mt called the Doppler ehift in frequency.

Dy neaeurin the frequency of the einal received fr. the eatellite one can
deter-inc the tine when the Doppler ehift of frequency equale zero. Thie will
he at the naent when the ohaerver entere the plane perpendicular to the vector
of relative eatellite velocity.

‘l'here ie yet another nethod for deter-icing the rite of the object that ie
heaed on the nu of eatellitee' etationary equatorial orbit when they can he
viewed at i-ohile radio atara. If three tatellitaa are put into a etationary
orhit that are eeparated fro- each other by equal diet-area their totality
will panit the navigator to deternine the poeition of an object at any point
in our planet. except the polar regime.

In thie caee it ie not neceeeary to eolve eqntione of eatellite novoant: it
ie anfficint to late a correction for the change in eatellite coordinatee at
a coneequence of the effect of external forcea. The accuracy of deteuination
of the oheerver'e location. apparently. will he no woree than under the ordi-
nary aetronoical neaeur-enta. thereby the nain nethoda of neaeur-ent can he
the navigational nethodeo-hiah altitude or diatenceofinding.

#6
FOR OFFICIAL use omx
. -.. -—. o -v-v-u vuu uuu

Tho navigational paroootoro of oatollitoo can ho ohtainod with optic. viml.
rndar. Dopplor and photo-optical oyatao. Vioual. optic and photo-optic
oyotuo havo lioitod uoo according to tho tioo of day, for oraoplo vhon tho
oatollito io atill illuoinatod by tho am. but tho oky io alroady dually.

llowovar tho optic ayotuo aro ooro accurato than. for oraplo, radio onginooring
naking it poooihlo to dotouina diroction with orror no woroo than 5-l0". Tho
photo-optic oyot-a can guarantoo ovon groator accuracy.

Advantagoo of tho radar oyat. of ohaorvationo o! navigational oatollitoo--
thoir ouitahility for all woathor and round-tho-cloch uoo. a wall ao rapid

hour-onto. Ilowovor tho ongular accuracy of tho ooaour-ont oi dirootion
otill dooo not arcood 30“.

Tho Unitod Statoo hao lannchod oovoral uporinontal oatollitoo whooo goal io

to voriiy tho pooaihility of croating a navigational oyaton, tor-llation or
nothoda for ohaorvin oatollitoo. and croation o! navigatialal charto.

Tho tirot launching woo unouccoaainl-otho aatollito toll into tho Atlantic
Ocoan. Tho aocond novigational oatollito "Tranoit-ll" waa lannchod in l960.
It wao oquiwod with inotrunonto tor noaouring navigational paranotoro. radio
tol-otric dovicoo. apparatuo guarantooing tracking of tho oatollito. inotm-
nonto (or controlling on-board oyatono. and powor oupply oooroo. Tho op“.
atim principlo of tho oyaton 'Tranoit" wao haood on tho Dopplor otfoct. ln
ordor to roduco tho inflnonco of tho ionoopharo on tho accuracy of ooaoura-
nonto tho oatollitoo worn oquippod with radio tran-ittoro onitting {our
cohoront (who. Tho aatollito uood ono ophorical antoma. with whooo

holp both trauuniuion of navigational and tolonotric data, a wall oo rocap-
tion of co-ando woro carriod out.

Howavor tho lmnchiu of tho ootollito "Tranait-ln” woo not no ouccoaalul aa
orpoctod. It did not go into tho plamod circular orbit with noon volocity
925 h. Tho roal paranotora of ito ollipticol orhit woro: altitudo of tho
parigoo 375 In. apogoo 75!. In; ao a rooult tho tino oi oriotonco of tho oatol-
lito war roducod tron 50 to 6 yoaro. Tho oatollito apparatuo during tho
maria-1t oporatod oatioiactorily. which nado it poooihlo to guarantoo accur-
any of tho location datoraination on tho avorago 0.5 h.

Exporinontal launchinga oi navigational oatollitoo havo ohown. in tho opinion
of tho Anorican apocialioto. tho poooihility oi croating a navigational oatol-
lita oyotan on tho Dopplor principlo. lt hao boon ootahliohod that for tho
niddlo and onall latitndoo a prociao conoidoration of tho otfoct of tho ionoo
ophoro on tho paooago of radio wavoo io poaoihlo.

Tho aain roaoon for orroro in prodicting tho orhito of high-altitudo oatollitoo
io tho inaccurato blowlodgo of tho oarth’a gravitational iiold. On tho avar-
ago orroro in prodicting tho orhit a day in advanco woro 0.5 niloa. ohilo

oxtrapolation of tho orbits for lo dayo prodwod an incroaoo in orror up to
3 niloo.

A rooult of tho tor-alation of tho orporinontol variant in tho oyot- "l’ranoit‘
ohould ho tho oporating variant hoood on four oatollitoo with circular orhito

*7
son OFFICIAL use mm
at altitudoe about 1.000 I:- (thio will make it poaeihlo to pmlong their
oxietonco tine up to 50 yeare and the rodiue of the zone of eatollito oheorv-
ehility up to 3.000 kn).

'l'he outlooke for a epaco navigational eyete- are vaet: it can ueo ohipe and
euhlarinee. largo linere and voeeole oi the tanker fleet. and traneocoanic
airplanee. The ueo of thie eyeton will per-it airplanae and ehipe to eoloct
efficient routee of tracking. reduce the outlaye for eaarch and reecue work.
and can prooote eafe navigation.

According to tho calculatione given in the magazine AVIATION ma: (United Statoo)
the data obtained fro- navigational eatellitoe will per-it a reduction in the
length of traneoceanic routee on the average by as ainutee per day and guar-
antee an annual econu-ic profit on tho ecalea of tho oceanic merchant urine

of $130,000,000.

Chapter 8 . spew—Mona for International Cooperation

Since in the course of apace roeearch prohlaae aro aolvod of a planetary

ecalo. hero ae in no other area the iaportance of international cooperation ie
great. In thie reepoct that fact ie characterietic that tho etart of the space
era falle within tho International Geophyeical Year-on neaeure that hoe no
precedent in tho paet. Over 5,000 ecientific etationa, oheorvatorioe and expe-
ditione of nany countrioa have contacted atudiee on different eoctione of tho
IGY program

Further advancoe in tho inveetigation of the near-earth epace, tho pom.
planete of tho aolar eyetn. and interplanetary epaco are inaeparahly linked
to tho oxpaneion of tho front of experimental work, perfection oi the tech-
nique oi epaco oxperinenta. and tho purpoooiul and eyetenatic incroaeo in the
otforto of ecientiete in thie area. Ae previouely in tho inveetigaticn of
Antarctica. today in tho inveetigation of epace a etago hogine of coaprehen-
eivo and eyet-atic etudiee in which oepecially great iaportance ie given to
tho coordination of work of eciontiete of different countrieo, and cloeer
international cooperation in tho fulfill-ant of couproheneivo lengthy ecion-
tific prograae.

International cooperation in opaco reeeerch today ie carried out on any chan-
nele. There are international organiutione eapecially created for thie pur-
poee. bilateral and mltilatoral agree-ante have been concluded. international
congreeeee and conferencoe of. aciantiete are organized. and an exchange of
ecientiiic and technical literature ie undemy. One of tho tone of «ion-
tific linke ie tho collective vieual and photographic oheervatione of eotolo
litoe inpleoonted eimltaneouely iron oany countrioe.

Cooperation along ecientiete of the fraternal countrioe of aoocialiet cooper-
ation hao acquired a broad nature. True to the principlee of internationali-
tho Soviot Union generwely eharee ita accmlated knowledge and experience
in all fieldo of ecionce and todmology. ‘l‘hie cooperation ie eproadim note
and note to apaco ecionco no technology ao well.

1.8
FOR OFFICIAL use out;
. v" -v. -w"... vvu ...,_.

At tho looting of tho roprooontotivoa of oocialiot countriao in Novuhor 1965
tho USSR propooad carrying out joint apart-onto with tho holp of Soviot
oatollltoo and goophyoical rockoto. Tho tirot ouch work woo tulfillod on
"Km-261." Ito oaln porpoooo-to iovoatigato tho naturo of tho aurora horo-
alio. Tho procoaooa ouch once-pony thooo grandlooo goophyoical phonaona
aﬁoct tho uppor atnoophora hoot otrmly in tho polar togiono. but aloo touch
tho oniddlo and ovan lowar latitudoo. Thorotoro it io vary inpartant to oako
aimltanoouo ooaouroaonta tron on board a aatollita and on tho ourfaco soc.
phyoical oboarvatoriao and otationo oporating on a oingla plan. Tho axpari-
oont on tho oatollito "Kama-26W woo tho tirat work of ouch typo. Scion-
tioto of Bulgaria, lunar-y. tho 6N, Poland. Ruanio. tho USSR mo Crochoolo-
valtia participato in it.

Tho Soviot Union haa aloo prOpoood ioplooonting launchingo of oatallitoo and

goophyolcal rockoto with apparatuo dovolopod and oomfacturod in tho cooper-
atlng cwntrioo.

'I‘haro wara oony difficultioo on tho path to crootiug tho tit-at intonation“
oatallito. It woo nocooaary to oolvo cuplax organizational. toclmical and
aoiontific prohl-o. In cartain owntriao participating in tho cooporation
tharo wao not onwah aporionco and trainod poroonool. But novortholaoo
alroody within 2.5 yoora altar tho adoption of tho agrood upon prograo tho
tirot ootollito of tho aocialiot countrioo. "lntarcoaooa-l“ took up lto ocion-
titic watch on orbit around tho oarth. It woo dooignod to otudy tho ultra-
violot and x-roy rodiotlono at tho tho. and tho lnfluonco of thooo ulooiono
on tho otructoro of tho uppar atooophoro of oarth. Sciontlfic inatmonto
oomtacturod in tho GDR. Soviot Union and Czachoolovakia woro inotallod on
board ”Intorkooooa-l.” Tho aciontiott of Bulgaria. Illusory, Poland and
Rooonia participatod in tho davolopoont of tho ociontitic progral ond in tho
out-iota ohoarvatlono. Ono of tho ooot olgniflcant rooulto of thio oxporioont
woo tho finding of polarization of x-ray rodiatlon of tho ooh. ‘l'ho otudioo
or ultraviolot and x-ray oolar radiation voro than coutinnad on a Inn-bar of
oubaoqmnt oatoltitoo ”tutor-coma.” Uith tho holp of. ”Intorco-oa“ ooaouro-
oonta waro oado oi‘ tho daaractoriatica of tho oarth'o ioooophono: concou-
tration of oloctrono and pooitlvo lono. ao wall ao tho oloctroo t-poraturo
noar tho oatollito and tho noon concoatration o! oloctrono hotwaan tho oatolo
lito and tho ground racoption pointo. Sciootioto o! a tutor of oocialiot
countriao participatod in tho tor-notion of a ociantiric progroo o! thooo
oatollitoo and tho tochnioal Minoan" for tho out-hoard ociontifie oppo-
ratuo. ao wall ao in carryim out tho ohaorvotiono.

"Intorcooooo" ootollitao hava aloo boon mod to onalyxo tho radiation oltu-
ation in tho noar-oarth opaco, otody the link hot-ooh tho dyn-ic procooooo
in tho radiation balto o! Earth with oolar activity. and invaotigation of tho

naturo and opactruo of low-(rm olactruopotic oooillatlono to tho
uppor lonoophoro.

Tho ouccooaiva apart-onto on tho oatollitao ”Intorcooooo" woro pro-otod by
tho extonoiva grand aotrono-ical no lonoophorlc ohoorvationo carriod out

by oany ohoorvatorioo and ionoophoric otationo of tho aocialiot coontrioo.
‘l'ha owltanoouo uoo of tolanotric intonation tron oatollitoo and data of

ground ooaauroonto conoidorahly antich tho pictura of tho otudiod procooooo.

'09
Fox OFFICIAL use ONLY
FUR ()l-‘l-‘HIIAI. llh'li ONLY

In addition to the eatellite etudiee progren "Intercoeeoe" includee experi-
nente cerried out with the help of neteorologicel end geophyeicel mckete.
locket etudiee euppl-ent the eatellite experieente, end et the one tine have
en independent ieportence. They neke it poeeible to obtein the cherecterietic
of e verticel eteoepheric eection. including eltitudee not ecceeeihle for
eetellitee. The date of. rocket eeeeure-ente cen be eeeily linked in tine end
plece.

In order to conduct euch experieente the Soviet Union has preeented to ite
partnere neteorologicel rockete, ee well ee e powerful geophyeical rocket with
lifting eltitude about 500 Ice. The firet rocket of euch type--"Vertikal'~l"-o
wee leunched fru the Buropeen section of the USSR on 28 Nov-her 1970. In
the experinente conducted with ite help. et ell etegeeo-fron the creetion of
the apperetue to ite teeting. inetelletion on the rocket end leunchins-othe
ecientiete of Bulgerie, hanger-y, the GDR. Poland. the USSR and Czechoelevekie
perticipated. The teek of the leunching included: neeeuruent of a number of
etructurel pereeetere in the ionoephere, inveetigetion of eoler redietion.
etudy of phyeicel end chcicel propertiee of eeteor perticlee.

Colleeguee of four scientific reeeerch inetitutee of the USSR end eix ineti-
tutee of other eocieliet countriee perticipated only in the developent end
eemfecture of the scientific epperetue for thie rocket. A reilroed platfor-
wee required to deliver the ground unit eenufectured in the GDR for the exper-
ieent thet wee designed to conduct the conconitent neeeuruente of radio wave
eheorption. The totel weight of the ecientific end eervice epperetue on the
rocket wee ehout 1.3 T.

The eucceeeful experieente conducted on the progre- "Interkoenoe" will he
continued in future yeere on new eetellitee end reeeerch rockete. Here the
coeplexity of the ecientific teehe to he eolved continually rieee. end the
jointly created apparetue ie being perfected. New socieliet countriee end
new collectivee of ecientiete ere being edded to the work on direct eeeeure-
eente in epece.

Beeidee direct eeeeurnente fro- on board the eetellitee end rockete the
ecientiete find out neny new thinge about the univeree by ueing eo-celled
indirect nethode of obeervation. bong the. optic oheervetione of ertificiel
earth eatellitee occupy a proninent plece (vieual. photogrephic. end photo-
eetric). Such oheervetione eeke it poeeible to inveetigete eteoepheric den-
eity et the eltitude of the eetellite'e perigee, irresulerity in the eerth‘e
gravitationel field. to eeteblieh geodesic linke at greet dietencee end in
difficult to reech regione. to conduct en eph-erie eervice that it neceeeery
to predict the eevenent of eetellitee end control the operetiou- of their
ecientific apperatue. Optic obeervatione ere en ieportent neene of tracking
epece ohjecte on which the eourcee of energy have dried up.

The joint norlv~ of the ecientiete of the eocieliet countriee on oheervetione
of er.t ificiel earth eetellitee and the uee of theee oheervatione to eolve
ecientific end precticel prohleee began with the leunchins of the firet Soviet
eatellite in 1957. Initielly euch work wee cerried out bend on bilateral
«rename. The acct-llated experience pereitted, eterting in 1962. e

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OK "PI’HHM. "SIC ONLY

trunnion to nnlcuntnrnl cooperation to: obonrvntton of nrttﬂntnl unl-

ucu. dutch eponnd up the poutbntty o! 1.91th can alpha counttuc
march pron-n matting tho connect” work of W tn may out“...

: A “If”
F‘

    

“mu.....-..n-.——..~.......u- .

  

.-"ago.......-......--—-..................

"an..."

Flight pattern of rocket "Vertlknl'-1"

Key:
1. Wu; of cover of rolmnbln 3. Fun toll

malnu- nnd mun-1m of rod
nth scant“: equlpent. sensors 6. 0pm“; of mu

2. Clan; of can: null onpnrnunn
of nimble concunnr

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An important slensnt in the cooperation of socialist countries in the field
of space physics is also joint observations carried out on astronoeical radio-
astrono-ical and geophysical observatories and stations. which creates the
prerequisites for a successful carrying out of geophysical experinents on a
planetary scale.

The cooperation of ocielist countries is spread not only to the field of
scientific research of outer space. but also includes the practical applications.
for steeple in the operational weather service with the purpose of increasing
the quality of forecasts.

In addition to the develop-ent of an intrastate systua of co-unication through
artificial earth satellites the Soviet Union is actively participating in the
creation of an international syst- of space communication. When the active
stations “Orbits" began to operate in February 1970 in limelia transmissions
on the system "Orbits" went beyond the borders of the Soviet Union. Then a
station was set up in Cuba. In a nueber of socialist countries scientific
research and exporinsntal design work is underway on a systa of counnication
through artificial earth satellites "lntersputnik."

A good foundation for cooperation is the advances attained by the USSR scieno
tists and other socialist countries in aviation and space biology and nedicine.
as well as in the related fields of sciences. The scientists of Bulgaria.
Hungary. Poland. Ronnie. Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union are conducting
joint research on eons than twenty topics. In the detereination of these topics
the traditional scientific directions of research institutions of individual
countries were considered. their equipping with the necessary scientific appa-
ratus. and the presence of trained persomel. Already the first specific
results have been obtained in the fulfill-ant of joint work on the problns

of space physiology. radiation safety of space flights. and phanacoch-sicel
protection frat ionizing radiation.

An investigation of the physical properties of outer space with the help of
satellites and rockets. space eeteorology. space cmnications, space biology
and nedicine-~-these are four of the Iain “cents in the progrn "Intercoms."
four of the trends in cooperation with the socialist countries in investigating
and developing outer space.

Over a number of years the successful cooperation has continued in the fulfill-
ment of space experisents of Soviet and French specialists.

In October l967 the first experiment took placu that was provided for by a
Franco-Soviet agreuent. Apparatus developed by the French scientists for the
fornation of noctllucent clouds was installed an Soviet meteorological rockets.
The experinent had the goal of measuring the tmperature of the upper stoo-
ophcric lsyers. Observations during the experiment were carried out sinultene-
ously fro- thc earth's surface by a Soviet specialist. and fran on board the
airplane laboratory by French scientists.

The Soviet and French scientists are jointly investigating a couple: of electro-
nagnetic phenoeena at logistically-associated points of Earth located in the
Northern and Southern H-ispheres. Both on the island of Kerguelen in the

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
u v“ Va | Ihlvlh val. \vnul

Indian Ocoan. and in tho aottl-ont of Sogra in tho Arkhangol'okaya ohlaot tho
Soviot and Fronch ociontioto oro working togothor.

Tbo Fronch apparatuo for tho orpori-ant to invootigato aoiar radio onioaion in
tho ootor tango of radio unvoo (projoct "Storoo“) hoo boon inotouod on Soviot
automatic otationoin tho oorioa "Nara." Bork haa boon carriod out to croato
a radio intorioruotar with booo Earth-noon. Tho Pronch iaoor roﬂoctora havo
roachod tho noon in Soviot apococrafto. According to tho progr- oi Soviot-
Punch cooporation in tho link! of otudying outor opoco tho oatollito "Orool"

hao boon iaunchod that to doaignod to invootigoto tho oppor atnoophoro of Earth
and tho naturo of tho aurora horoalio.

Uithin tho fro-anti of tho Soviot-Pronch progron "At-aka” omoxporinont hoo

boon corriod out on oounding tho nagnotoophoro by rapid oloctrono and on tho
iotnotion o: artificial aurora boroalio.

Tho cooporation oi Soviot aciontiota with ociontiata in tho dovolopin; countrioo
ia ovoiving ouccouiuuy; tho dovoioping countrioo aro atrivins to thoir too-
oitio contribution to outor opaco otudy. ‘l'ho Soviot Union io participatim in
vorko to proparo roaoarvch on an intonation“ (who: aito Khu-bo in India. Tho
Unitod Statoa. Franco and othor countrioo booidoo India and tho Soviot Union
aro participating in thooo atudioa. Alroady to:- moral yoaro tho Soviot
notoorological rockoto hovo rogularly atartod tron thio toot oito. In Hay

1972 an ogroooont vat oignod hotvoon tho USSR Mada-y oi Soioncoo and tho
Indian organization to otudy opoco for cooporazing in crating and launching
tho firot Indian oatouito. Tho aatoilito vao dooignod by Indian ociontiota.

it voo mfacturod at Indian ontorpriooo, but a Soviot rockot put it into
orbit in 1975.

In a nunbor of comtrioa oi Aaia and Africa Vl'dl tho holp of tho Soviot Union
otationa havo boon crootod and oro hoim cuatod for oboorvation oi artificial
oarth ootouitoa and othor opaco objocto. ﬂolp in tho organization of ouch
atationo and trainim of national poroomoi for thoir oaintonanco noko it
pooaihlo to inclodo in tho gonorai work of imotisotio; and dovolopin. outor

apaco thooo countrioo which ao yot cannot contact indopondont otodioa on
rookoto and ootollitoo.

'l'ho iahoratorioo of non, countrioo in tho vorld havo rocoivod for otody onploo
of lunar aoiI oont to oarth by Soviot antenatic otationo "Luna-16" and ”unna-
2°.”

rho nocoooaty conditiona oro availobIo for a roaiitation of cortain joint opaco
program hotvoon tho ociontioto of tho USSR ond tho Unitod Statoo. ‘rho im-
dation for Soviot-nnorican cooporation in thio rogion vaa laid by a opociai
account concludod botvoon tho USSR Mada-y of Scioncoo and tho Unitod Statoo
National Aaronautica and Spaco Abiniotration on 8 July I962. Lator, in
Octohor 1965 it voo auppiooontod by an agro-ant on tho preparation and oottin;
up of joint work on opaco biology and oodicino.‘

 

*I'ho publication vaa iaouod in 1975 in throo voiuoo-oin tho Soviot Union
(in tho publiohing houoo Nauka) in Ruooian. and in tho Unitod Statoo in

ml‘.ho

5)
son OFFICIAL use ouu
FOR OFFICIAL "5H ONLY

The acientiete and apecialieta of both countriee have agreed upon the imple-
nentation of cooperation in the firet place in three directione: apace neteor-
ology. epace co-unicationa. and atudy of the earth‘e nagnetian.

In l9“ the first Soviet-Marian experinent wae carried out in the field of
epace col-unicatione with the help of the Anerican paeaive col-unicatione
eatellite "Echo-2.“ Through a direct co-nmication channel eatabliehed between
the world neteorological centere in hoecow and Haahington a regular tranenie-
eion of noteorological intonation both ordinary. and that received fron the
eatallitee ia being carried out. Soviet-American negotiationa have taken
place on queetiona of cooperation in the field of lunar cartography. An
exchange haa taken place of obtained aanplee of lunar eoil. Meneiw wort
hae been carried out to prepare a Soviet-Anerican epace flight on a near-earth
orbit with docking of the apacecraft.

The eolution to the probl- of docking of crafte in orbit ie one of the noet
inportant edvucee of epace technology of recent year-e. It to known that
putting only 1 kilogran of weight into an orbit of an artificial eatellite
requiree about 50 kg of etarting weight of the booater rocket. One can imagine
the weight that a rocket not have at etarting that ie deaigned to carry out
a flight of nan to planete in the aoler eyatu. It will be numbered in the
lnindrede of thoueande of tone. Such booater rookete are unique deaigne that
require a couple: etep-by-atep working out under ground and flight conditione.
Coloeaal aterting otruetut‘Il are neceeaary for their launching. It ia conai-
denbly ncre econonical to enable interplanetary craft noceeeary for nan‘e
flight to planete of the aoler eyetea fro- individual conponente put into
orbit by conparetively low-power rocket booetere.

Expeditione to planete in the aoler ayetua are eeneeleaa without docking not
only around lerth.but aleo around the deatination planet. where apparently
orbital baee etatione will be created. tron th- to the eurface of the atudied
planet flighte are nade both by autonatic probee, and crafte with crew which
after the fulfill-mt of the reaearch progran begin to return to the orbital
etation. ha thie baae crafte with coo-manta will aleo blaet off for

earth. All of theae operatione are linked with the carrying out of approach
and docking of epacecrafte in orbit.

The tonal-row of aetronautica ia the creation of large orbital acientific
atetione with lengthy exietence. Theae etationa will be eet up aleo fron
individual blocka by their aaeenbly in orbit. It will be neceeaal'y to provide
continuoue eupply of the etatione, replenial-ent of the fuel auppliee. change
of aggregatea and apperatue with the help of traneport craft. All of theee
operatione of course require the nultiple execution of operatione of approach
and ducking in space.

And finally. the rendering of aaeietance to a spacecraft in trouble in aenee-
leu without the approach and docking with it of a craft that hae cone to ite
rcecue. Thie can occur. for exanple. during the breakdown of equip-ant which
guaranteea the deceleration of the craft during deacent fron orbit and
landing on ﬁrth. however nutual aeeietance in epace ie practically inpoeo
eible if the crafte are not equipped with the neceeaary none of search.
approach and docking. and 11 one camot ewitch fraa one craft to another.

5‘0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'rha striving to crosta tho tachnical foundation for a syston oi muusl holp
in spots was ono of tho nain roasons for tho signing on 24 May 1972 hstvoon
tho Savist Union and tho Unitod Statss of an oars-ant which. in particular.
providss for tho dsvolopnont of joint naans of approach and docking oi apoca-
crafts and stations. This aarssnont snvissgad as tho first sxporinsntal ataga
tho iaplnantation of docking and a joint flight of tho Soviot spscacroft
"Soyuz“ and tho horican craft “Apollo" with tho Iutusl switching of cos-o-
nauts iron ons crait to snothsr. uhioh was succossiully omutsd in 1915.

‘l'ho signim of this agrosoont vos procoodsvl by a nu-hsr o2 asstings o! Sovist
and borican apocialists (thoy hogan in l970) at Ihich principlos of coopor-
atinn hatvaon tho Soviot Union and tho Uni-tad Statos in solving tochnicsl proh-
l-a linhod to docking of craits and stations voro vothad out. For work on
difisrant aspocts of this progr- oovorsl working groups vars sat up which not
nsny tinss to discuss tho principlos and spacitic proposals for tho orsstion
of joint systoas that would panit docking and transition 2r:- crsft to craft.

Sines tho vary hoginning it was ovidont that tho task of prapsring tha crafts
"Soyuz" and “Apollo" for tho inplsoontotion of tho program approach, dockin.
joint flight and transition of co-onouts tron craft to crait was vary ampli-
catod and its solution raquirod grast otiorta by both tho Sovist and tho Anar-
ican sidos. Tho fact is that tharo oars no contacts hotvoon tho dsvolopors

of tho spacooratts. ‘l'ho dosigns vars hasod on dii‘iorsnt principlos sinco at
that tins noithor aids hd dockim in lino.

In ordor for oach craft i! nocsssary to approach and dock with any othor craft
it is nocossary to carry out throo Iain cnditions: cupatihility of tho
docking auragatss, i.o. all dsvicos shich diractly adjoin during docking
conpatihility of tho rasourcss that guarantoo tho sssrchim sad spproachim
of tho crafts; and cupatihility of tho par-stars of tho atoosphoro in tho
craft. in particular its cupooition and pussuro.

In addition to tho cupatihility of tho docking aggrogatoa tho dosign and
autaaatics oi oath of th- had to ho univoroal. activo-psssivo or. as it is
now custonary to say. androgynous. In othor words. osch docking aggrogato
mot oxowto all tho nocassory functions both on tho activo craft. and on tho

passive: for my craft can ha in tho position of sxpoctin; holp and in tho
roln of calilu to assist.

Tho extant dssigno of Soviot and Morican docking aggrogatos difionod so mch
that mtual docking was conplotsly oxcludod. Morowsr, tho joint dovolopaont
of a dssign of dockim mrasatos shovod that nono of th- cmld ho usod as
tho foundation for croating a no! univorsal aggrogsto. This is pri-arily
hocsuso on "Soyuz" and on "Apollo" tho dentin ass-bliss vars aodo on tho
sch-a "pin-cons“ (pin with clup on tho active craft and rocaption cons on
tho passivo).

Tho Soviet and Anoricu: spocialists had to dsvolop a dosign of a cuplotoly

now, co-platsly coapstihlo androgmou docking aurogato with poripharsl
arransusnt of tho locks which could ho ussd on both "Soyuz" and on "Apollo."
In l972 Iodsls of this aggrogato passod laboratory tasting.

55
FOR OFFICIAL use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tho coapatihility of. tho rooourcoo guarantooins tho aoarch and approach of

tho crafto woo a no [on coaplicntod taak. Tho aotivo cratt. uoing radio mi-
nooring or optic rooourcoo had to find (of couroo. with tho holp of grand
oorvicoo) tho paooivo craft and approach it.

The mln-englneo syotcm of the uutlve craft. makes it. possible for It

to Ianouvor. hy charming all air coordinatoo of ita pooition (throo coordinatoo
of tho cantor of non and throo angloo) and tho corrooponding conpononto of
volocity. no a raoult of tho Ionouvor tho activo craft mat approach tho
paooivo with aooigmd accuracy for all tho rolativo paraaotora or volooity and
nutual pooition in opaco. and suarantoo in tho final onalyoio nochonical
contact on tho docking aurogatoo of both craita.

Ao a rulo. tho paooivo crait with tho holp of ito radio ayat- aaaiato tho
octivo trait in carrying out tho ooarch and approach. In cortoin caooa tho
paooivo cratt orocutoa a linitod nanotwor upon co—and fro- Barth or tra tho
activo croft. But it can alao happon that a craft in trouhlo will not hovo
tho poooihility of mouvoring. In tho orbital ayatoa of coordinator it will
in thio caoo ho oil-ply a hotly occupying o ronda pooition in opaco.

During tho ooarch and approach tho radio ayat-a or both crafto oporato jointly.
For thio thoy Iluot ho conotructod on tho «no principloa. uoo oinglo nothoda

of noaouring par-otoro of rolativo novonont. tho oano typo o! nodulation.
natchod froquoncioo. powor at tho tron-ittera. oonaitivity of tho rocoivoro.
and hon pattarn of tho antorunao and othor charactoriotico.

In ordor to dotor-ino tho rolativa pooition and paroaotoro of autual oovouoont
of opoco ohjocto oach of tho crott. hoth "Soyuz" and "Apollo“ havo thoir own
radio oyotuo. ‘l'hoir choractoriotico. includim tho charactoriatico of tho
intonation uood ounificantly differ. In tho joint oxporinontal (light it
woo docidod to inplonont tho aoarch and noaouronont of paronotora of rolativo
oovanont (radial volocity ond diotanco) with tho holp of tho radio oyatan of
"Apollo" which actod aa tho activo craft. 0n "Soyuz” tho rociprocal part of
tho radio oyoton of "Apolld'utho tranopondor waa inotallod. During approach
of tho crafto tho optic oyataa woo aloo uood with tho holp of which "Apollo“
could ohoorvo “Soyuz" ﬁrm a diatanco of aovoral hundrodo of hilonotoro, or
wall a dotoroino tho molar poaition of tho righting lino. Por optic aaa-
auto-onto in darltnoaa (frat a diotanco of oovorol tom of hilonatoro) inpuloo
light hoacono woro inatallod on "Soyuz.” 0n tho final cannot at approach
tho procioo outuol pooition of tho crafta wao dotoninod vioually.

All tho unmrim intonation ontorod tho on-board conputor which aodo rocono
nondationo nocoooary for cmtrolling tho croft.

Aa for tho third condition of coupatibility. tho catching of amophoric para.
notoro of tho crafto. it dooo not roquiro oopocial orplanation. It io quito
owidont that ovon aftor tho crafto dock tho coauonauto do not tronotor tron
out to tho othor if thoro are aigniticantly difforont ataoophoroo in tho
cratta. 0n "Soyuz” tho otnoophoro woo practically analogous to tho oarth'o
atmphot'o thich wo aro accuotaod: prooouro 760 nil; , contont of oxygon
17-331, nitrogon 32-662. "Apollo” uood atloophoro with 1001 cootont of
moon and prooouro 260 nit. Such a ditforonco in amorphoroo did not

56
FOR orncm. use ONLY
pernit the traneitional ImLclm to be opened after docking o: the cratte
and co-unication between the living cupartnente. lt waa aleo inpoeeihla
to have rapid traneition of the crew nenbere fron one craft to another.

It waa alao inpoeeibla to unite the atnoephere of “Soyuz” and "Apollo" alao
bacauae the air conditionim eyetone on theee cratte were conetructed on
conplately different principleo. Contimoue regeneration of atnoaphere occure
in "Soyua”--apecial devicee abeorb carbon dionida and releaee pure ongen by
breakdown of alkaline netale. The inteneity oi thie procaae in controlled

by autuatic devicae regulating the atnoepheric copoaition. 0n "Apollo”
carbon dioxide ie aheorbed by nonreooverabla abeorbere. while the neceeeary
content of oxygen ie naintained by the on-board eupply in cylindere. Unifica-
tion or the atnoephare o! the crafte with ouch ditierent eyetue of air

conditioning would have reeulted in a diaordar in the autonatice or theae
eyet-e. and dieruption of their nornal operation.

For the joint (light "Soyua"-"Apollo" creation of a traneitional (docking)
nohle wee provided with a unique loch-gate ohanber which after docking wae
arranged between the nanned capartnante o! the crafte on the path of the
co-onwte trn one craft to another.

The traneitional nodule wae a caponent part (conpartnent) of the craft "Apollo"
and it wae put into orbit together with it. In order to awitch, for anuple.
iron "Soyuz” to ”Apollo" the Mt had to open the trap dobr in the tran-
eitional nodule in which by thie tine the atnoephere had been created corres-
pondim to the atnoephere of "Soyuz“. enter the nodule. cloea behind hin the
trap door and pan through the proceee or deeaturation. The preeeure in the
tranaitional nodule wae gradually reduced. the percentage content of oxygen

woe increaeed. by the end of deeaturation in the traneitional nodule a purely
oxygen nediun had been eetabliehnd with preeeure 260 nllg. The wt wae
prepared to tranefar to "Apollo."

The ravorae paeeage aleo occurred through the lock-gate chnber "tranaitional

nodule" and woe acconpanied by a gradual change in the paruetere of ite
atnoaphere.

Ae already noted. deeaturation ie a lengthy proceee. and eeeontielly, encludee
the rapid traneition fron craft to craft. One can do without deeaturation and
radically aolva the prohlon of traneter only by bringing the paruetere of

tho atnoephere in the crafte cloee together. for eat-ple by reducing the
noninal preeeure in the conpartnente of "Soyuz." The fact ia that in the
tranefor of the coanonaut to a purely onygen nediu with preemre 260 uh

the nitrogon dieeolvod in hie organi- with preeeure no greater than $00 .llg
does not preaent a danger. In thie caee one can abandon the procoee of deea-u
muting. Such a variant. although it ie linked to a nuber of difficultiee
and inconveniencee, vac adoptod for the joint flight of the crafta “Soyuz“
and ”Apollo" an the nain variant.

The joint flight of "Soyuz" and “Apollo” also required extaneive work in
relation to flight control. It hea ite own problne of capatibility-otech-
nical and organizational.

57
FOR orncmz. use 0qu
Tho joint flight. outuol nonouvor. opprooch and docking of tho crotto woo
inpoooihlo without voliohlo rodio co-lniootioo botwoon thou. ond cow-
nicotion with tho ground troching pointo. In ordor to guorontoo ouch om-
nicotion on ”Soyuz“ ond “Apollo" odditionol rodio oyotooo woro inotollod
oporoting on (roomioo occoptod both by tho Soviot ond by tho Moricon oido.
Rolioblo multichannel comniootion ond o procioo intorootion of tho

Sowiot ond horicon ground co-oond onoonring rooourcoo ond light control contoro
woro oloo roquirod.

Tho Soviot ond horicon opociolioto jointly dovolopod o dotoilod flight progroo.
Tho inportont tool: woo oloo tho opociol propototion of tho crowo. thoir
troining. fooiliority with individuol coupononto or oquipoont of tho othor
croft. otudy by Soviot coononouto of Snglioh. ond Aooricon oi Ruooion.

Tho prcgron of ociontific oxporioonto on hoord tho opococrotto "Saws" and
”Apollo“ providod for both indopondont ond joint otudioo. In 1973 ot tho
Horch on! July oootingo of Soviot ond bot-icon opociolioto fivo joint ocion-
titic oxporioonto woro opprovod.

Tho oxporioo nt "ultroviolot ohoorption" woo propoood by tho Moricon ociontioto
and dooignod to nooonro tho concontrotion of otonic outygon ond nitrogon in
outor opooo ot tho oltitudo of tho flight of tho orolto. Tho ociontioto of
tho lnotituto of Spoco Roooorch oi tho USSR Acodow of Scioncoo porticipotod
in tho dovolopont of o tochniquo for corrying it out. Tho opporotuo woo
nonufoctnrod in tho Unitod Stotoo.

Tho oooonco of tho oxporioont conoiotod of tho loct thot on ono opoooctott o
oourco of rodiotion woo inotollod in tho rocoption opporotuo. ond on tho othor--
V~ro£loctoro. 3y rocording tho chongoo in intonoity or rodiotion on tho poth
fro- ono croft to onothor ond book ono con drow oonculoiono ohout tho capo.
oition ond tooporoturo of tho otooophoro ot tho flight oltitudo. Corrying out
tho oxporioont roquirod foirly cooplox nonuvoring in orbit ond woo otortod
oftor tho tinol ooporotion of tho crotto.

It ohould ho notod thot o rolioblo dotorninotion o! donoity of otooophoric
oxygon ond nitrogen in caplotoly nocoooory for o doopor ltnowlodgo of tho
phyoico of tho oorth'o otooophoro. until rocontly tho ooin tool for tho otudy
of tho chuicol coopooition in tho uppor otooophoro woo oooo-opoctroootoro of
diiforont typoo. ﬂavour tho flight of tho opooooroft in tho uppor otooophoro
io occooponiod by tho roloooo tn- ito ourfoco of goo porticloo. ito own
"otooophoro" io fonod oround tho croft. Ito donoity con ho oltorod doponding
on tho intonoity of oolor illuninotion. light oltitudo, and no forth. At tho

nooo tioo it in difficult to conoidor ouch chm“. ond thoy rooult in orroro
in otooophoric poruotor oooour-onto with tho holp of oooo-opoctrcootoro.
with tho «on of tho oothod of ultroviolot ohoowtion tho influonco of tho
"otooophoro" of tho croft con ho cooplotoly oxcludod. Tho oxporinont "ultro-
violot oboorption“ oloo poi-oittod o conporioon of tho findingo with rooulto o!
olroody oodo oooo-opoctraootor noun-onto.

Tho oocond oxporinont--"ortificiol oolor oclipoo" woo propoood by tho ocion-
tioto of tho Inotituto of Tortootriol Motion, Ionoophoro ond Rodiowovo

58
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Propegotion of tho USSR Acedo-y of Scionooo. Tho oxporinent could he corrioo
out only with tho portioipotion of both crofto out-in their joint flight. The
opococroft "Apollo" thot hod o round crooo ooction took upon itoolf tho rolo
of tho noon. while tho oclipoo woo photogrophod iron on hoord ”Soyuz.“ of
docioivo ioportonco in tho orporioont woo tho procioo colculotion of tho mo-
ment on! ootchod now-onto of tho crowo coming out tho ooneuvoro.

In oddition to on ohoorvotion of tho oorono tho export-out includod photo-
grophing tho "otooophoro" orouM tho "Apollo” croft. 0n hoord "Soyuo" o
ooorch woo oloo corriod out for coronol royo on the nooturnel oky when tho
oun woo olightly below the horizon.

Two export-onto woro ooeooiotod with biologicel problem. Ono of tho- otudiod
tho oo-collod tone-fooling fungiuo opooiol opocloo of oold thot dooo not
roouiro for dovolopont any opooiol coalition end nutriont oodiuo. The fungi
oultiply with tho help of uniquo rm oporoo, whereby ovorydoy one fume
throwo out ono ring. The oxporioont woo oot up in ordor to invootigoto tho
prohlo- of genetic chomoo. oo woll oo tho influonoo of rooiotion on living
orgoni-o. 'l‘o corry out thio orpori-ont tho Soviot ociontioto oovolopod o
opooiol inotmont “Rito-l.“

Tho other hiologicol «peril-3t. ”oicrohiol onchongo." hod tho took of ovolu-
oting tho noturo of noturol oxohongo of oicroorgoniooo undor corditiono of o
opoco flight hotwoon crow ooohoro ond hotwoon tho crowo of difforont crofto.
Tho finding ore being uood to for-note roco-ondotiono for tho provontioo
of hum: dioooooe in long epooo flighto.

And finally tho loot group of joint uporinmto woo linked to en invootigotion
of tho influonco of woightlooenooo on tho procooooo of ooltim ond cryotolli-
rotion of difforont ootoriolo. Tho oxporinonto woro propoood by tho boricon
ociontieto ond unitod undoi- the senor“ conﬂtionol nuoo "univorool furnoco.”
The Soviot portion of tho ociontific progroo of thou otuoioo woo dovolopod
in tho Inotituto of Hotollurgy of tho USSR Acodooy of Scionooo.

The “univerool furnoco” woo inotollod in tho docking nodule of the “Apollo”
croft. while tho oooploo for tootin; were ploood on tho croft "Soyuz." ‘l'o
otudy tho effect of woishtlooonooo on tho procooo of nolting o oixture of
notolo with difforont opociﬁic choroctoriotico oluoinu- woo ooloctod oontoiniu
tungoton glohuloo orrongod in o cortoin tower. The oixturo woo hootod under
conditiono of weightlooonooo up to l.loo°. ‘l’ho gool of tho experinont woe to
invootigote tho booic poooihility of crooting by ootollurgiool ooono undor
conditiono of woightloeonooo conpooito ootoriolo with proviouoly for-ed otruc-
turo Ira olo-onto with oignificently difforont weighto. lhwlor tomotriol
conditions tho proceoo io i-poooihlo.

, The ohtoining of oonocryetolo of oooiconductoro nodo of liquid oolt woo invooo
tigotod with the ample of gown- contoining 202 oilicon by night. Tho
procooo of ophore-fonotion under conditiono of woightlooonooo woo etudiod on
the “pl. of oelting oluoimo poulor.

The export-mt ”univorool furnoce" loid the foundotiono for production in the
future of nonocryotolo in orhitol opoco ototiono. The initiol ootoriolo will

59
FOR orncm. use can
be namiactured on Barthand oont into opaco. while the finiohed item will
be oent back to Earth.

Already during the flight of the craft "Apollo” a dociaion wao adopted to
conduct yet another joint aciontitic oxporinont. For the firot tine in world
practice in opaco reooarch obaervationo were aada of x-ray aourcoo iron on
board two nannod apparatuo. ”Apollo" had an x-ray toleacopo analogouo to tho
taleacopa "Pilin" inotallad on the otetion ”Salyut-h." Simltanooua oboor-
vationo or thooo cloae in tine take it pooaiblo to carry out a autual coapar-
iaon of noaoureeento. analyze the otreae of radiation with different toeporal
ocala, and exclude the effect of oyatanatic erroro in inotrunonto.

‘l'huo. whoreoo at tho iirat otage the cooperation of the USSR and the United
States in opaco roooamh vaa li-itad nainly to an exchange and diocuoaion of
iindinga. the conpariaon of techniquoo. and at beat. coordination of certain
plane. tho joint flight of "Soyuz" and "Apollo" nado tho firot otep towardo
"coapatibility" of tho progruo of two apece powora in tho direct oonoe of
the word. It daoignatoo a qualitatively new atago in the dovelopeont of
aatronautico that ia of great importance for ito future.

A conoidorablo tau-bar of public and intergoverneental organizationo are
currently involved with the queotiona of invootigating and uoing opece in a
certain plan. In the faaily of ao-called opocialitod inatitutiono of the
llnitod Nationo alone the probl-o of developing opace are of it: oreat to the
International Union of Toleconnunication. the world Hatoorological Organi-
zation. United Nationa Organization on Education. Science and Culture. the
world Health Organization. the International Organization of Civil Aviation.
and othoro. Along the public ooiontific organizationa queotiona of apaco
rooaarch have a direct relationahip to the activity or a number of aciontific
uniono and coenittaoo that are united by the International Council of Scion-
tific Uniono. The Aaaociation and Inatitute of International Law have nado
their contribution to the fornulation of legal aopecte of apaco develop-ant.

Theao and many other organizationa contribute to the develop-oat of inter-
national cooperation in the atudy and uoo of outer opece. In addition to
than there in a tall group of organizations that haa been eapecially out up
to coordinate, regulate or inpl-ent international and national prograeo for
the inveatigation and devolopnent of outer opace. They include the Co-ittea
on Space Reaeerch. COSPAR. It waa oatabliohod on the initiative of the
International Council of Scientific Uniona in October 1958 in order to
continue cooperation in inveatigating upper layero of the ataoophere in apace
that waa for-ed in the period of International Coophyoical Year. The
coalittoe unitea the leading acientific inatitutiona of over 35 countrioo
and 10 international ocientific uniono. whooo activity ia linked to opaco
reoearch.

Among the intergovermental organizationa involved in apace problem a
loading place belongo to the United Nationo Co-ittoe on the [Joe of Outer
Space for Peaceful Purpoooo. The co-ittee wich includoa 37 atataa it a
center for cooperation in the peaceful uoo of outer apaco. The Soviet Union
hao node ito conotructivo propooalo on all quootiona diacuaaod in the cou-
I‘ttuo

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the couree of recent yeere coneidereble progreee hee been ettnined on the
peth of internetionel cooperetion on legel queetione of developing epece. 0n
lo October l967 en urea-eat we. eigned on the principlee of ectivity of
etetee to reeeerch end uee outer epece. including the noon end other celeetiel
bodiee. Sterting on 3 Decenber 1968 the eecond internetionel «recent on
epece ecquired the force of en internetionel lewo-the «recent on reeoue of
coenoneute. the return of coenonmte end return of objecte leumhed into outer
epece.

The nein eignificence of theee don-ente edopted on the initietiwe of the
Soviet Union coneiete of the creetion of euch e lecel order in epece which to
the unim- dearee would pruote the developnent of broed end equiteble coop.
eretion of etetee in the etudy end uee of outer epece for peeeeful purpoeee.

"Spece nuet becone the erene of ecientific reeeerch. internetionel cooperetion.
end not the erene of hoetile conflicte." theee worde. expound by L. I.
Brezhnev at the eeetin. in honor of the heroic flight of the coenoneut G. 1'.
Beregovoy expreeeed the eeeence of the Soviet Union'e policy in the field of
epece development.

ﬂowing been the firet to ley the eteller roed for unkind the Soviet lbion
plecee ite echiev-ente in reeeerch end the uee of outer epece for the eerwioe
of peece end internetionel cooperetion.

Chepter 9. outlook for Spece Reeeerch*

Currently epece reeeerch in entering e new pheee. It ie heconin; e nornel
type of ecientific reeeerch ectivity. while epece ie beconins e work eite. end
e lehoretory for ecientiete. After the firet. one cen eey. reconneieemce
experinente en ere beaen of eyetcetic reeeerch. while the future decedee will
undoubtedly be netted by even greeter edvencee. In future yeere the nein prob-
l-e of reeeerching the neer-eerth epece will rcein further inveetigetion of
the eerth'e upper etnoephere. nepetoephere. end eoler-terrutriel honde. we
ere only epproeching en underetendin; of ouch phone-one of neture ee eurore
boreelie. neanetic etorne. end the redietion helte of lerth. The only wny to
gueee the nechenien for their occurrence-netting up of conpreheneive experi-
nente on Berth end in epece. end the einulteneoue etudy of theee phenuene

ee e whole.

Uorke on geophyeice ere sreduelly outgrowin; the freneworh of neer-eerth
outer epece end going into the interplanetery eediun. Inweetigetion of the
proceeeee occurring there ie ertrenely neceeeery for e eore deteiled explan-
tion of eoler-eerth bonde end deteninetion of the effect of the nun on
lerth. 'l'heee problene will be eolved beeed on lerae eutonetic etetione that
cerry e conpliceted net of human.

 

*rhe predictione end projecte dieeueeed in thie chepter hevo been publiehed
in Soviet end foreign preee at different tinee.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Beeidoe the peeeive. purely mooring aethoda on ever greater role will be
played by active exparinanta in apaceuectiVo intrueion in the procaeaea
occurring in the epaca nadiue. with the help of eourcaa of plea-e. electron
and ion been. Such experieanta will make it maaihle. in particular. to
verify my hypothaeea on the etructura of the aegnetoaphere and the behavior
of particlaa in it. the nechanien for foreation of aurora horeelia. end in the
final analyaiauraiaing of the queation oi the controlled effect on the near-
eerth apace.

The further development of extra atnoapheric alzudiea of the aun in the x-ray.
ultraviolet. infrared. auheillieator and radio rengea of the apectrua ia
planned. and apecielized aolar aetellitea will be created.

The etudiea of eolar phyeice are eaeocieted net only with the fect that the
proceaeae on our etar detenina the phyaical condition of the interplanetary
eedim. atnoephera of planata and life on Earth. The aun ia the cloeeat etar
to ue and auppliea intonation on the proceeaen in the etere. Inveatigation
of the aun eakae it poeaihle to explain queetiune oi the treneiornetion end
trannaiaaion or energy free a central eource into the photoaphere and further;
the origin. evolution and diatribution of the uolar eagnetic field; nature of
differential rotation. eolar activity. and high-energy phanonena on the run;
cheeical coepoaition and nature of the photoephere, chronoaphere and corona.

The further development of reaearch of the noon. Venue. and Mara beaed on
rocket apace technology will be continued. Alwad liaa the eaaaive creation
of reaourcae for atudying planete, their euriacea. interior of the ateoaphera,
radiation end eagnetic fielda.

The accumlated experience of apece reaeerch indicatea that the broad circle
of acientific problem. primarily probluee aaeociated with investigation of the
noon and planeta can aleo be aolved with the help of automatic nechinea. A
proeieing direction ia the realization of plane for atudying planeta hy auto-
matic eechinea that poaeaae a high degree of anatomy during nov-ent over the
aurface of the celeatial bodiea, and the ability to perceive the enviroI-ant.
analyze it and rake dociaione on further action: depending on the aituation.
The creation of such aucoeatic reaourcee is linked to aolution of the problem
united by the concepta of artificial intellect and integrated rohote.

Nevertheleea the direct participation of can in the experimente on board apace-
crafta ia a neceaeary factor of apace reaearch and the future in apaca heloage
precisely to nan. Mtouatic uachinee lay the path for his. The flight of

To. A. Gagerin earked one of the greateat conqueua of hulan thought of the
20th century. After "Voetok" newer and newer apacecrafta were launched.

People have already been even on the noon. he a result of all these flighte

it waa proved that nan can live and work in apace. and carry out planetary
voyagea. One of the next problaa on this path will apparently be the creation
of long-ten orbital epece laboratoriea.

Hhat horizone are opened up by the creation of a large acientific couple: on
a near-earth orbit? Wet doee the aolution to thin publu provide unkind?

62
you orncm. use may
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Firat of all the national econonic importance of orbital atationa ia inerti-
nable. Re have already epoken of the problana that can be aolved with their
help. One can nae ouch probleaa aa nappitg of the earth'a aurface. in Of
now alaoat half of the territory of our planet (according to the data of
0113300. about 40!) doee not have detailed nape. The topographera ot orbital
etatione will be ablo with high accuracy to aetabliah the coordinatea of very
dietant pointe. pinpoint the poeition oi objecte on aerial photographa. and
deter-nine the coordinatea of ielanda, reete and ahallowa. By carving enornwe

eectione of the planet they can eigniticantly accelerate tho napping of
regiona of difficult acceaa.

Orbital laboratoriae will render an invaluable aervice aleo in the atudy of
natural reamrcaa of the planet. Inveatigation of the coapoeition of the
terraatrial cruat. the nonunifornitiea in ite nan. exanination of gravitational

and nagnetic anoneliea iron on board orbital apace etatione will help to
reveal previouely unknown depoeita of ainerale.

Proa orbit one can atudy the water reawrcaa of ﬁrth. 0n photographa obtained
tr- apace anow and ice covera are clearly viaible. Detenination of the
correlation of territoriee tree tron enow and covered with anew ie of eapecial
intereet for predicting tloode. nice it poeaible to deternine the Bloodplaina
and river deltae that can be filled with water. and najor baaina with atagnent
and running water. Analytic of photographa aalcae it poaaible to eatabliah

the region of. exit of werground wetera to tho aurtace, the ealinity o! aoila,
and their eroaion. And all of thie on the scale of entire countriea. The
world hydrological aervice created on the heels of orbital atationa will nake
it poeaible to obtain axhauative ideae on the water reaourcea of our planet

and fomleta acientific reco-endatione for their expenditure.

Scientific laboratoriee in orbita will per-it n conaiderable expansion in the
reaearch work to inveatigate the near-earth outer apace. The nagnetic field
of earth will becoae a conatant object of etudy. which will pronote an
increase in the accuracy of navigation. and a nolution to navigational prob-
lua in aviation. Hagnetonetric apparatue inetalled on board of ouch etationa
will pal-it aagnetic photographing Inch more rapidly than by aurface nethoda.
and over a considerably greater portion of the earth'e eurtace.

Biological laboratoriea will aleo appear on orbital apace atatione. The
biologiate will be able to conduct exteneive haeic reeearch on the affect of
a lengthy stay in weightleaeneaa on living organic-a. and inveetigate qua»
tione linked to nan'e adaptability to umeual conditione of apace flight.

No leee inportant ia the problem of the exietence of life «stride Barth. Ite
eolution. poaaibly. will be helped by atudiea at the nicrobial content of
the upper layere of the ataoephere. and clinical analyaia of aeteora.

The figure (p 6‘0) preeenta one of the nany publiehed plane for an orbital
atation node an a cylinder with two walla. Such a deaign followa Ira the
require-ante of that-cl. anti-radiation and ant i-neteor protection. The
outer screen ia nade of berylliun. while the ixner wall it aluninun. Within
the cylinder there are reeearch laboratoriee and a control center. The
deeign providea for outer ch-bere for conthcting reeearch directly in the
apace nediun.

6}
FUR orncm. use ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Plan oi Othital Station o! Rigid Doom tor Conducting Goophyoical. Aotro-
oo-ical ad Nicol-Biological Studioo

Kay:
1. Spoco laboratotioo 6. Rockot oppatatua
2. Mtonna 7. Hodical laboratory
3. Aotrooooical and soopllyoical O. ‘roloscopo
laboratory 9. 'roloccopic toilocto:

lo. Bloch-ical laboratory
5. Control contor

Tho ctowo of tho orbital atatiooo will conduct a who: of otudioa of an
ioduotriol uaturo. oinco acioatioto astuo that any production procouoo

can ho cartiod out mch Iota oaoily in opaco than on earth. Thu tho forco
of gravity undo: torn-trial conditiooa pro-oteo tho oottlin; of hoavy coupo-
mto in oolidiiyiu; liquido. whilo light coopmooto main on tho outta“.

It 1. poooihlo that undo:- cenditiouo of wightlooouooo ouch liquid- will ho
coolod and hardoaod with an oqual dogroo oi doooity. and: objocto ao hall
boarimo. looooo. Iii-rota and now othoro will ho producod in opaco with ouch
accuracy that it iopoooihlo undo: torrootrial condition. Tho advautasoo in
tho quality and mom oavinc. for canola. in tho produtioo of ball boarima
undo: opaco cooditioao. thoir strongth and durability mlotoly juotifioo
tho outho for tho ctoatiou of an "orbital plant." Tho oloctroototic tioldo.

6!»
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR UFI-‘lClM. USE ONLY

capillary forces and forces of surface tension can because instrunents in the
treat-ant of cost objects in space. Enouous outlooks are opened for the

optic industry. in particular in the production of large-high quality lenses,
of especialinportanca for astrononista.

It is evident that in the future on the near-earth orbital stations unique
estronaical observatories will be set up. The astrophysicists will also
obtain excellent potentialities for their studies.

One can inagine a relatively inexpensive space astronomical observatory with
two large telescopes. The station itself will be the second stage in the two-
stage rocket. During the putting into orbit the second stage. equipped
with one liquid-propellant rocket Quins will be a tank for fuel within which
all the nechaniens of control and different equipsent will be placed in a
special coapartnent. In the nose section there will be a capsule with the
crew of the station. Subsequently the capsule will becone the neans for
returning to Earth. At the nonent of putting into orbit the tents of the
station are filled with fuel and the crew is located in the capsule. After
going into orbit the tanks are purged by a streas of nitrogen. Simultaneously
a multiple change occurs in the orientation of the rocket to heat the tank by
solar rays. Then one of the crew embers. passing into the central compart-
esnt free the capsule wearing a spacesuit hernetically seals the tank and opens
the trap doors for the equipsnt conpartnents. After checking with nitrogen
the hernetic sealing the tank in filled with air and the renaining crew
nenbers enter it. The central conpartnent is transferred to a working condi-
tion. and than the shields of the nose cone are opened on «loss inner surface
the solar batteries are located. The station receives current. One of the
crew nenbers in a spacesuit goes outside and enables the external equipment.

For the creation of large orbital space stations it is evidently necessary to
use assenbly in orbit of individual components previously supplied there.
Asoasbly in orbit will significantly thew near the periods for creating large
stations. Their ass-ably directly in orbit of sections and blocks supplied
fron Earth will sake it possible to obtain a design that is nore adapted to
orbital conditions. In this case it will not be necessary to calculate the
design of the station for those considezable a-erodynaaic. inertial. and thernal
loads that acconpany the launching and flight on the active sepent of the
trajectory. If the station will be put into orbit directly fru Barth, these
loads result in a heavier design. although the duration of their action will
conprise a negligible fraction of the total existence tins of the station in
orbit. lf necessary one will be able to adjust the ease-bled station in
accordance with the changing scientific and technical tasks.

The orbital stations will be nade up of the most diverse ass-ably units, for

exasple fron housings of the last stages of the rocket boosters or special
nodal sections from which can sssanbls stations of different target purpose.

Each section can be, for exeaple, a laboratory of specific purpose or a
living compartment, and have equipnsnt which after essenbly of the station
because a coeponsnt part of the general syst- of energy supply and life

support of the crew. The noat expedient is the geonetrical shape of a nodal
station-~sphere or cylinder. The sections of such shape have the least

65
FOR ovruzm use ONLY
FOR (WHCIM. llSI-l "NI." '

weight with the assigned useful volue. They are convenient to ass-hie and
fit well into the contour of the rocket boosters. The station that is

essonhlod tron cylindrical and spherical blocks can hove a different configur-
etion.

The Iodol construction in opace will make it possible to reduce the tins neces-
sary for the asso-hly of orbital stations. and nechanira to the min- tho

ssmhly operot ions.

For outside work the cos-onsut-ass-hlar will have speeusuits with autononous
life support system. In order to preserve tho specific position in space it
will he necessary to equip the «mutant with s stabilization eyetsn. It will
include sensitive ole-onto, for ens-ole gyroscopes, and executive organs--
einaturo jet enginee. For noveasnt outside the station tho Wt-assenblar
will have to have individual neans of advance: waist liniehn engines. jet
pistols. and so forth.

 

Asunhly Capsule

Key:
1. Hunting stabilizer S. Illulnetor
2. Trap door 6. Special annoying tool
3. mneuvor jets 7. Surveying glove
lo. mter rail 8. Power cable. co-Inication and air

hose

However, lengthy work outside the station still presents considerable diffi-
culties for the mtl. Heightlessneso, for mole. will inpair the
execution of many. oven the east ole-eatery owrstiono of aseo-hly. Neither

a puller. nor tools with the uni-- torque on! the weakest inpsct energy

66
so: orncm. use may
FOR OFFICIAL USE “NIX

will help here-oone approach to error can repulu tho coeeonaut a considerable
distance ﬁrm the craft.

Perhaps. it will be necessary to completely abandon threaded connections in the
docking assemblies of the sectional design. having replaced then with welding.
or develop special adaptations for welding which would exclude the necessity

of rotational nova-ants, for ex-ple a tool that has a zero torque.

Certain designers propose using in the work of the cos-onaut on the external
surface of the craft a special outfit in the fore of a tripod whose upper sec-
tion encupesses the back of the cos-onset. while the legs with hinge comec-

tion attach securely to the outer lining of the craft. The coenonwt will be
able to work with two hands.

The consonant will be able to carry out certain work in orbit without going
into open space. but by using hall henstically sealed capsules which will
be sent into orbit on board the spacecraft (or orbital station). In these
capsules nan will be able to work without a spacssuit which inhibits the nove-
eent of the cosmonaut. For convenience of work and to provide safety the
capsule can be fastened to the servicable object by atrom but easily opened
and closed cleeps. The capsule that has six degrees of freedom will have to
be equipped with note: units to control its novuent and stabilisation. ‘l’be
cosnoneut in the capsule and involved in the easnbly of the station in orbit
will have to have certain notor habits to preserve orientation in space and
possess visual-Isotor coordination to control his body and the capsule in space.

Special flying asmbly apparatus will also be created. saething like space
twin cranes controlled by nan. Such apparatus will preferably have s hornet-
icelly sealed cabin for two people. autonoeous eotor unit for naneuvering in
orbit. and different apparatus for control and cos-unication. including a calcu-
lator. To fulfill the assenbly work it will have nechanicel ares-manipulators
which can carry out all possible operations. The manipulator area will be
namfactured from natal pipes. in whose joint ssell electric notors will be
installed that put thn irto notion. 0n the outer walls of the housing of

the astrotug in special cleeps industrial holders and fasteners will be

suspended, as well as tools necessary for the assessny that are subsequently
reeoved in the process of work by nechanical area.

The power unit of the astrotug can consist of liquid-propellant jet engines
foutened on hinges. On board the astrotug in addition there will be a ssell

power unit to supply the control apparatus mad the life support syst- of
the crew.

It is seemed that the astrotug will be conpletely ssmbled on Barth and

not require any finishing in space. After the coepletion of its main task
it can be used to correct the orbit of the station and for its external repair.

The orbital stations will be connected to Earth by transport ships rated for
multiple use. a so-callcd space shuttle. Ideally the shuttle lust fulfill a
flight from Earth in the sane way as an ordinary airplane, pick up altitude
up to the assigned orbit. deliver to the point of destination its cargo.

again enter the ataosphere. land on an ordinary airport runway. and be ready

6?
FOR OFFlClnL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the next flight after oervicing and filling. Such a tranoport machine that
oerviceo the oopent "oarth-orhit” io otili unreal for todny'o otata of oci-
once and technology. but the intoroediete deoigno approaching it which could
be created by the end of the l970'o already exiot in drawingo.

The ocheoo of flight and layout of ouch a tranoport craft are ohm in the
figure (9 68 l. The craft conoioto of three rocket blocko: two hlocho of tho
firot otoge are located along the oidoo of the block of tho oocond otago. no
actor unito of all three otegoo are engeged oi-ultanoouoly. thereby tho notor
unit in tho block of the oecond otago until oeparation of the blocko of tho
firot otege uooo tho fuel roleaoed fra- thuo. The oeparated blocko of tho

firot otage. by uoing lovablo vingo and turhofan enginoo return to the launching
region. After the fulfilment of the flight took the block of the oocond otage
doocendo fro- orbit and returno to arth to the launching rogion by uoing
novablo vingo and turbofan engines.

.’ ‘
(gt)
.r \\\
/\/.<:\-DI\‘ ‘s‘
__ ___>..~‘
Flight Pattern of Transport Craft
Key:
l. End of ooction of vertical lift lo. attrance of units of firot otage
2. Separation of units of tirot into denoe layero of atooophoro
otoge 5. Return of units. of firot otego
3. Exit of units of oecond otage to launching region
into orbit

however no oettor how coloooel the progreoo that heo been attained in the
technology of opececrafto the traneport flight: earth-opece-oarth will remain
unoconaical until we learn to uoe the natural rooourcoo of the oolar oyotu.
Nov we have to carry on opacocrafto reoourceo ior novuoont not only on the
path fro- Ferth, but aloo for return. It io little to oey that thio donqu
the difficultioo of flight-othio at leeot quediupleo then.

In opace we can find geological fonetiono and nedia in the one broad diver-
oity ao on Earth. The direct develop-ant of tie lunar and planetary virgin
ooil io beginning before our eyoo. He already know that on the noon there

68
FOR omcm. use can
aro valloya and oloVationo,canyono loao conopicuouo to tho oyo. doop trougha
in cratoro. olnoot vortical alopoo, winding volloyo ainilar to tho channoIo
o! driod up rivoro. low donoo which could he tho roots of mo "huhhloo"
blown up in' incandoocont rock. and onornouo carpoto or tonorly liquid
natorial (poooihly lava).

0n tho noon at firot tuporary. and thon porn-tom lunar hahitohlo hooocuan
b. “t “Po

For tho lunar oott loro prinarily it io nocoooary to croato fairly confortahlo
rooidancoo. For thio wrpoo it io advontaaoouo to non artificial or natural
dooponingo in tho lunar mtain naooivoo mich will protoct tho roaioonto
tron notooritoa and radiation dangor. It io not oncludod that on tho noon non
will find cavoo and "tuhoo" oinilar to thooo that on ﬁrth aro tornod not for
ire. volcanooo hy rivoro of nolton rock. But on tho noon tho torco of gravity
in lowar. thoroioro ouch "th can provo largor than on Barth. 0f courao
ouch rooidoncoo nuat ho hornotically ooalod. and oquippod with lock gato
dovicoo for oxit into tho oxtornal airlooo opaco.

Many ociontioto conoidor that on tho noon initially dwallinco and auxiliary
buildings will ho conatructod of inflatahlo hauionin; plaotic that will ho
innatod with ouygon tranoportod iron Sarth. ‘lhon it io propooad that thio
omon will ho contimwoly sonoratod with tho holp of chic“ troatnont
oyatono. It to aloo poooihlo that for thio wrpooo planto will ho uood. oinco
thoy precioaly proouco tho owyaon that wa hroatha on Earth. 0n tho lunar
haao thoy could rogonorato tho atnoaphoro, ahaorhing tho carbon dioaioo
cxhalod by pooplo and roloaoins ouryzon.

It will hacono nocoaou-y to obtain mason at tho oito. and not only onygon.
hut alao ao nany an pooaiblo othor conotantly upondod ouhotancoo and notoriolo.

of couraa tho hoot oourco of canon would ho wator conoioting of 90: or thin
olancnt. But if thoro io no watar in a pura torn. than for thio purpoao coil
and rocho can ho uoad which aro rich in cryotallinod wator. ‘l'hio wator can
he "ovaporatod" in a oolar colloctor at t-poraturo 3.000%. Such tonpora-

turo will ho croatod by color rayo concontratod by a cyst. ol lonooo and
nirrora.

If thoro is «hit. carhonato on tho noon, thon by having it in a oolar col-
lector one can obtain oxygon. carbon and carbon nonouioo. . It io truo that
thio roquiroa a tcnporaturo about 6.000%. Tho calculationa ohow that with
an am of tho colloctor of 0.810 n2 265 l of onygon par hour will ho ouccooo-
fully ohtainod. which will pmido lifo for 15 pooplo.

Hctala and oilicon. noot likoly. will hora to ho attractor! tron owidoo-o
thora aro nony chamo of findin rich oro oopooito on tho noon.

Oxygon, wator. food producto. tool and applioo of oloctricity in otoraco
hattarioa probably will ho accumulator! duriq tho lunar day in ouch quanti-

tioo that are roquirod for tho longthy lunar night-on poriod of inactivity o!
oolat units.

69
son omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unique prohlene are eeeociated with the creation of lunar treneportation

that ie capable of acting reliably in the eevere lunar eituation. and in e
eediu of light gravity. Even now there ie no ehortege of plane for different
lunar all-purpoee vehiclee.

A: in known during the developeent the moat diveree typee of propellere

were analyred: caterpillar , walking. and even jumping. However the wheel
wee acknowledged ee the poet optimal. High reliability coebined in it with
«my and einplicity of deeign.

The coneiderahie length of the wheel eyeten nehee it poeeible for the eechine
to overco-e wide creche and projectione. with thie type of propeller the
rubbing perte can be reliably protected free the effect of epace vacuu- end
penetretion of lunar doet. The wheele that have individual drive lake it
poeeible to continue nova-ant even then ease of then ealfunction.

A lunar vehicle on a gee blanket ie aleo propoeed for paving the coe-oname
over the lunar eurfece. According to oalculetione under conditione of lunar
gravity azd vacuum to provide eoveeent of the lunar vehicle gee preeeure of
3. S x lO ng/csn2 will phe sufficient. The lunar vehicle ie rated for two
coo-onute. The control enchanie-e. gee eupply end eain actor of the appa-
ratue are counted on a central platform

in the opinion of a umber of ecientiete the lunar vehiclee on a gee blanket
will guarantee greater velocity of covalent end higher capacity for croee-
country travel then wheele. They will be able to develop epeed up to 50 III/h.
overco-e cratere up to 3 e in diaeeter end roche up to 0.6 e in die-etcr.

The caterpillar lunar ell-purpoee vehicle with rocket eyetu-oie yet anather
variant of the lunar all-purpoee vehicle. Equipped with three etahle catero
pillar eupporte and rockete it can creep over the lunar eurfece and cake
ehort flighte above it. Such an all-purpoee vehicle hae very high eeneuvero
ability. it can be turned practically on the epot and can he loved fun that
epot in any direction.

Thie variant of ell-purpoee vehicle ia rated for lengthy autonomoue expedi-
ume with a Iultiple crew. It can cover dietancee of hundrede of kilo-etere.
lte energy eourceenfuel conponente. etorage batterien and redio-ieotope
thereoelectric generatore.

with tine the noon will be covered by a network of her-etically eeaied lunar
reeidencee and enterprieeo. In the nu-erwe lunar iaboratoriee experieente
will be carried out and eetrophyeical etudiee that are inpoeeihle on Berth.
Baeed on the lunar Iinerale unique induetrial conplexee will be built. linen
activity on the neon will be eeeociated with an anemone nt-her of new pro-
jecte and conpletely unueual eolutione in the field of conetruction.

me to the intaneive developIent of the noon the prohlu erieee of a large
number of treneport flighte in order to eupply to the lunar eurface ecieno
tiete. angineere and eervice pereonnel. It ie coneidered that the loot effec-
tive eeane of co-Inication hetween the Earth and neon can prove to be the
aeroepace airplane.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘lu \'ll lbll‘l- l'o‘l’. \Il‘hl

lte take-off will be horizontal no in the eodern airplanoe. The ranjat-rocltet
anginea and dovicea for air liquefaction will guarantee acceleration up to
hypereonic volocitiea. The paaaeuor conpartaent will be eaparated from the
booater airplane with 6-forca alightly over 1.5 g during the flight along a
bolliatic trajectory beyond the “site of tho atuoephere. after which the
airplane will begin deacont to land on the aeroepeca field. while the paaaongor
co-parteent will be put onto tho final trajectory for flight to tho moon by

tho jet engine that givaa it tho necoeaery velocity.

The enginee of tho craft will operate alnoet continuously during the entire
flight, otherwise it would be naceeaary to give it a rotating nova-ant to
create an artificial gravity force. 0n tho areateat eagpont of the trajectory
tho lunar craft will be accelerated. than it will bo turned by 180° for dece-
leration and tranafer to tho orbit of a lunar aatallito.

Even with very advanced jet engine unite the lunar apececraft will not be able
to land on tho lunar eurfaca without additional atagea of eimlo action. There-
fore inatand of landing tho craft on tho noon one can provide for its eoeting
with o apace etation located at tho libretion point. where the peaaongere are
tranaferred to a apociol landing apparatua.

In tho development of planeta, judging fro- overything, tho one ooquence will
be preserved as for tho noon: firet exploratory automatic probea will be eont
to the environa, then a eoft landing on the aurface of tho planet by auto-atic

etationa, finally tho firat expedition. that merit the beginning of the aottleo
cent of tho planet and tho uaa of ita reaourcee.

Studiea of Venue and "are are of great inportance in the first place for under-
atanding the origin and evolution of the aolar apt. in general. and of Earth
in particular. A atudy of Here is important aloo fro- tho viowpoint of
biology. 0n the ample of tho Moricon progra- "Viking" a ehift ia clearly
visible in the center of gravity of the aciontific reaearch towerde couple:
oxperinenta including both a broad circle of toata to invoatigate the organic

chantry of the Martian aurface. aewell ea carrying out purely biological
experimenta.

Hheroaa one of the planota on which the acientiara placed great hopoo until
recently wee Velma. now Hare haa occupied the firot place. The conditions on
Vema atrongly linit ita atudioa oven with the help of umannod apperetue.
it is evident that it will be nore difficult for wan to create conditiona for
landing on thia planet in the near future. More ia a lore hoopitablo planet.

The probla of name flight to other planete coneiate, however. not so ouch

in the coeplexity of conditiona on there celestial bodioa, ea in the diatanco
to than. Thua, for axe-pie, here in the porioda of oppoaition (me in 2
yoara) ie located 56 nillion lo- froe 3arth, i.e., aleoat 150 tinaa farther

fro-a ua than the noon. A Ina-bar of other probl-e are aaeociatod with diatanco.
In order to travel to Here with return to Earth man he! to negotiate hundreda
of nilliona of hilo-otera in apeco. and thia will take about 3 yearo. None

of the modern apacecraft are capable of carrying on board ouch a quantity of
supplier of oxygen and food in order to guarantee for thia period the living
conditions even of a mall crew. For expeditiona of 10 people it would be

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

necessary to have supplies of water. oxygen and food products weighing about
70 1'. And this is without consideration for a possible delay. Therefore a
flight to Mars would require not an ordinary craft, but an earth in minaturs.
The scientists call u "closed-cycle system," where us of wastes would
be set up in order to continually restore the atmosphere to reproduce the
food products on board.

All lumen vital activity in outer space would have to occur in a continuous
single cycle. i.e.. in such a way that everything that is released is absorbed.
and everything that is absorbed is restored, so that it can be used again.
Discharges of the organism can be used to grow plants which are used by men
and animals for food; in addition the plants, absorbing carbon dioxide and
solar energy will supply oxygen necessary for the organism.

In order for the turnover of substances to be stable the systml must include
producer organisms that creata organic substances: consumer organisms that are
fed by the producer organisms; destroyer organisms that break dewn the organic
compounds of the wastes of vital activity of organisms of the first two types
to an inorganic substance; finally inorganic components of the system forming
a medium in which these organises live. As an energy source in such a systu,
as in the turnover of substances on Earth. there will be the sun.

For man's flight to Venus or Hers an engine is not suitable that operates on
ordinary chemical fuel, since the duration of the voyage proves to be extremely
great. For this purpose more powerful energy sources are needed, more pre-
cisely. sources with a high degree of energy concentration in a unit of mass.

Nuclear energy contained in an star is a million times greater than chemical
energy. Therefore it is nest probable that mclear energy will be used for
the interplanetary flights. One of the most suitable at the first stage will
apparmtly be the solid-phase nuclear rocket engine. The "heart“ of the
reactor in such an engine will be a vertical cylindrical core consisting of

a solid matrix made of refractory material, within “rich vertical rods of the
fissionable material are placed in regular order, contained in a pipe made

of heatproef material. Around the core of decay there is a reflector consisting
mainly of the same material as the core of decay. i.e.. of elusnts or group
of elaents of low atomic weight. such as hydrogen. deuterim. beryllim or
carbon in the form of graphite. Between the rods of the atomic fuel control
rods made of boron compounds are placed in a regular order. Pure manila-23$
can be used as the fissionable substance, but nest likely uranium carbide or
uranil- diomids will be used that have a lower working temperature.

The interplanetary craft will have an enormous weight. Therefore its
assembly should be carried out in orbit from individual completely prepared
blocks. Initially the actual craft (without cosmonauts) will be put into a
base geocentric orbit. Then rocket blocks with nuclear engines will be put
into the ease orbit-obooster rockets to transfer the craft frms e gsocsntric
orbit to trajectory for flight to Mars. and sustainers to transfer the craft
from a trajectory for flight to "are to an areocentric orbit for subsequent
transfer from this orbit to trajectory for flight to earth. and finally for
transfer from this trajectory to a geocentric orbit.

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All tho tockot hlocho will ho put into orbit couplotoly ptopotod with tho
working body. hut it will ho poooihlo to toplonioh thou with tho holp of o

tronoport opporotuo of mltiplo uoo. Tho oouo tron-port oppototuo will oupply
coma and tho nocoooory rooouacoo to tho Hortion croft.

Tho oonnod loading nodulo of tho Hortion croft will conoiot of o loading ond
o flight otogo. wring tho tlight to noro tho landing oodllo with tho holp
of tho on-hoord omino will doocond in. on oroocontric orbit and ontor tho
otooophoro of Moro by uoing oorodynonic docolorotim.. “non tho volocity of
tho oodulo io roducod to tho locol volocity of oound. o thoml-protoction
octoon of tho docolorotion ongino unit will ho diochotgod ond tho coopottoont
will lond with tho holp o! thio unit ond o porocluto oyotoo.

‘l'ho took of tho iirot coo-mun londing on tho liottion ourfoco will includo
oognotic. grovitotionol. ond ooi—ic otudioo. colloction of ooil ouploo,
ohtoining of. otooophoric o-ploo. ooorch for liio. otudy of tho hohovior or
lifo (mo undo: Hortion conditiono. and oootch to: wotor ond othor noturol
notoriolo on tho plonot. For now-oat of tho co-onouto tho landing Iodulo
will ho oquippod with o oolf-propollod vohiclo.

Aftor tho fulfill-out of tho progr- of tooootch tho coo-count in tho launching
otogo of tho loading oodulo will hloot of! iron Noro. “to: roturn of tho
onpodition to tho croft ond tronoior of tho coo-ouuto to tho orhitol oodulo
tho lounchim otogoo of tho loading ooduloo will ho rolooood.

‘l'ho routo of tho flight "Moro-huh" will pooo noor Vomo. Thio will Iolto it

poooihlo during tho flight noot thio plonot to otudy it with tho holp of on
unomod oppototuo.

Tho crowo of tho Hottion croft will ho oont to Earth ovidontly hy tronopol't
crofto of uultiplo uoo. In principlo tho Hortion cult. hooidoo tho orhitol
oodulo ond tho oomod landing modulo con includo oloo o oohlo tor doocomt to
oorth. Tho incroooo in tho woight of tho crott in thio cooo will ho olight.

It in oloo ovidont thot it will oloo ho upodiont to provido in tho conotmc-
tion of tho croft on uuonnod oppototuo which could load on tho ourtoco of
Hon ond thou roturn to tho croft with onploo of Hottion ooil ond rooulto of
otudioo. Aftor on ovoluotion of tho doto ohtoinod (to. tho mood londing
oppototuo o docioion could ho udo on tho londim of tho upodition.

0f couoidorohlo inportonco in tho invootigotion of tho outohirto of tho oolor
oyoto- ond tho glont plonoto-Jupitor ond Soturn. Spociticotion oi thoir
co-pooitionutho corrolotion notwoon highly volotilo. oilicoto ond iron coupo-
nonto--io of hooic importonco for on undorotondim of tho diffotontiotion of
o protoolonotory cloud ot difforont diotoncoo tro- tho oun ond conditiono of
ouhotmco condition of tho plonoto. Tho incrooood brightuooo of Jupitor in
tho todio tango torcoo uo to ooouuo thoro io inctooood hoot .iooion by tho
gimt plonoto which could concool tho mdi-onto of otollor onotgy, ond oro

o typo of "otoro thot hovo not tokon ploco." 'l'hotoforo it io uodorotondohlo
why tho opociolioto oro intorootod in flighto to Jupitor by outclotic incor-

plonotory ototiono. mo con hopo thot oo o rooult of ouch flighto ioportont
ociontitic rooulto will ho ohtoincd.

7}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Quite recently practically all the acientiete rejected the poeaibility of
exietence of life on upiter ae a coneequence of the “toxic“ atnoephere of
thie planet. Today. however. the narrowneea of auch a view ie beginning to
be recognized. Modern epace theoriee aaauu that about 4 billion yearn ago
the earth aae enveloped in gee eiailar to that which now eurrounde Jupiter.
But preciealy under ouch conditione prinitive lite on Earth wee born! Only
at a later etage, when plante energed were coapounda containing hydrogen in
the ataoephere euch ae methane and anemia gae equeezed out by oxygen. And
only after thie did the animal world appear.

Thue, one can aecme that Jupiter ie at tho etarting etage of biological deval-
opnent. Thie can aleo explain the unusual coloring of ite ateoephere. typical
for teeny caplex organic colepounde.

We to the eetrononical inetn-ente eent into a near-earth orbit we will learn
very quickly whether thie ie fantaey or reality. But evidently it will etill
be a long tile before a named interplanetary craft will be eent to- Jupiter
with ite ateoephere eheken by terrible atone and ehowere that are incompar-
able to thoee on Earth. wring thie century and a coneiderable portion of the
next nan apparently will be able to tread only on the neareet planate of the
eolar eyetee, Mercury, Venue and Vera. After the inpleaentation of aanned
flighte to Venue, Mara and Mercury the potentialitiee of the eolid-phaee
nuclear rocket enginee will apparently be exhaueted. For a lengthy flight in
the yet unetudied. regione of the aolar eyetea nore ecmaeical engine unite
will be required.

The inpulee nuclear jet enginee (IUD) and thermonuclear can bacon auch unite.
The external inpulee IUD ueee energy from the exploeion fra a large number

of anall chargee located on board the rocket. Thaae chargee eucceeeively are
releaeed fro. the rocket and exploded a certain dietance fro- it. Hith each
exploeion part of the expanding gaeeoue fieeion iragnente in the fore of plane
with high denaity and velocity collide with the rocket baeeo-tha propelling
platfora. A quantity of plaeea covenant ie traneaitted to it and the plat-
fora ie advanced with great acceleration. The acceleration ie reduced by the
doping device to aeveral g in the noeecone of the rocket, which doee not
exceed the lilite of endurance of the bt-en organise.

in the internal inpulee till) the nuclear diecharge ie exploded in a ”co-me-
tion chuber” filled with a working body which ie heated. and then eecapee
fro- the engine, creating thruet. Here all the exploeion producte in the
entire weight of the writing body are ueed to create the throat.

The reaction of hydrogen convereion into heliua will be ueed in the thereo-
nuclear rocket engine. The deeign of the thenonucleer engine ie einpler.
Pro. the viewpoint of coat and econuy it aleo eurpeeaee the inwlee IUD.

Both typee of enginee "ilepulee and thermonuclear" will provide epecific

thruet correeponding to the energy requirenente of a flight within the eolar
ayetal with panieeible length of the voyagee.

7'.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(2)

Malaw-
[as/dawn

    

(8) la-ﬂacrumr .‘ﬂztxt":
h——_._

 

Sch-o of Ecologlcal Systo- o: Cloud cho

my:
1. Solar my lo. Food
2. Stale-coll“ also. 5. Food
3. my»: plants 6. Ant-cl.

’- mm

FOR OFFICIAL "SE 0NI.Y

 

Sch-a of lntaretallar Ehoton Rocket

Key:
l. Reflecting “duh" (eirror) 6. Main cceparteent
2. Heater engine 1. Living areaa of coca-ante
3. ‘l‘enke with entieatter 8. kitten
’0. Take with eatter 9. Spherical oheervatoriee
5. Shielding ecreeaa lo. Central control poet

ll. Space rocket glider

A flight to the nemet atera will tdse yeare or dacadee. lot will it be
poaeible to reach atara whoee light reachaa the earth in hmdrede or even
thousanda of yaara? It ae-a that only a negative answer ie poeaihle to this
queetm aince the travel tiee nultl exceed the average «ration of lat-en
life. Two aolutione to thia probla- are theoretically poeaible.

Firetuona generation of people to eatahliahed ca been! an interstellar
apececreit. ad within aewerel generations their many will teach the
diateuce worlde. The ”condo-to create eetaholic preparation which will

be capable in a aipiticant way of delaying the biological activity of the
organic- of the crew e-hera, ao that their liven will laat eeveral centuriea.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH’ICIAL USE ONLY

There exists yet another problu. According to Einstein's theory of rela-
tivity the rhytl- of tine on an object uWing with great velocity is reduced.
And the reduction will be especially perceptible when the velocity approaches
the speed of light. A flight to a neighboring galaxy. Andraeda. on a photon
rocket in tins treasured on board a spacecraft could be coepleted in 9 years.
On earth about 750,000 years would have passed. This period is so great that
during such a ties the surface of the earth and its climate could be changed
so such as to be unrecognissble.

Although the practical realization of photon rockets and interstellar crafts
in general evidently will encounter exceptional difficulties truly unlimited
possibilities for spreading into space are unfolding before mankind. Theore-
tically it is capable of penetrating as far as it wants into the universe
surrounding us. It is also probable that other, nonrockat methods of now-ant
into interstellar space will be found. For example. gravitational waves. the
effect of electrical and esgnetic fields in the interstellar space will be
successfully used.

However all of this is still too far ahead.

The nearest plans for interplanetary voyages are so enticing and attractive
that they force the scientists to concentrate attention on the- as the primary
tasks of astronautics.

The propht-tic words of the founder of rocket technology, astronautics and the
theory oi interplanetary cosmnicstion Konstantin Eduardovich Taiolkovskiy
are beginning to cone true: "Mankind will not rs-ain forever on Earth, but
in the pursuit for light and space will tinidly penetrate beyond the lieits
of the atmosphere. and than conquer the entire near-solar space."

COPYRIGHT: lsdatel'stvo "Natalia", l976

9035
cso: em. /0982

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OEOI‘IIYIIECS, ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

RADIATION HAZARD PROM SOLAR FLARES IN NEAR-BART“ SPACE

Moscow KOSMICHBSKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA in Russian Vol 17, Issue 1. 1979
pp 122-126

[Article by V. M. Petrov. A. V. Kolomenskiy and H. V. 211']

[Text] 2. Methods of Estimating the Dose and the Risk
of Exceeding It

On the basis of a statistical model of radiation condi-
tions caused by solar cosmic rays a method is expounded
for estimating the absorbed dose of protons from solar

cosmic rays and the probability (risk) of exceeding it

in orbital space flight. Estimates of the risk-dose

relation are given for various variants of the orbital
flight.

A model description of the radiation conditions due to solar cosmic rays
was obtained in the paper [ll as a result of an analysis of statistical
data. This description is the starting point for the analysis of the

dose of solar cosmic radiation and the probability (risk) of exceeding it
in space flights of various duration.

The procedure for estimating the dependence of a dose on the chance of it
being exceeded is based on application of the Monte-Carlo method. This
procedure consists essentially of the following. A great number of flights
of a certain type are considered; they are called histories according to
usage in calculations by the Monte-Carlo nethod. In each history random
characteristics such as origin times of flares, total proton flow per
flare. characteristic hardness of the spectrum, perturbation of the geo-
magnetic field present during the proton flares, intensity of the per-
turbation are considered. From the characteristics found for each history
the doses in the spacecraft compartments are calculated taking into
account the flight trajectory. Then, on the basis of all the doses
realized. the relation between the dose and the risk of exceeding it is
constructed for the flight variant under consideration.

79
Iron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The accents of origin of proton flares are determined by direct nodelling.
and the tine interval between two consecutive flares is calculated
according to the formula

tk - tk.1 '- ln yd. (1)

where kg in the peanut of origin of the kth consecutive flare. g is a
tendon nunber distributed uniformly over the interval from 0 to l, luthe
frequency of flares. If ‘k a T, where T is the flight duration, the
history is terminated.

The remaining random characteristics of the radiation environment-uproton
flow. spectrum. umtic atorn intensity-ere calculated in the process
of modelling from expressions of the fore

’mee
I [mar-a. (2)
I

where A is. as before. a random number. Y—the nagnitude of the random
characteristics, Yur-the upper limit of variation of the tendon charac-
teristic. f(Y)--the distribution density.

The event which consiete in a flare occurring against the background of a
magnetic storm is defined by the coordinate of the rando- ; falling into
the segment O...1. If g s 90! the flare occurs againet the nagnetic
etorn background; otherwise there in no perturbation.

In this case so - 0.31. ie the frequency of observation of flares againet
the backgrcund of magnetic stoma.

Fig. 1. kick of exceeding a
dose as a function of the

doae for orbital flighte: the
orbital inclination is 51'
(dashed lines) and 71' (solid
lines). The numbers 1, 2, 3,

6 correspond to flight duration
of 14, 91, 182. 36‘ daye.
Thickness of the alumina:
ahield l gm/cnz.

 

I II [[70 IN”

Dose (in red)

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The characteristics obtained in this way were used to calculate the
dose behind the shield from each flare in orbital flight:

'el‘n ~
u.(o.n..m...\‘)-t j j mmwwmmws. (3)

l. I‘.|I_X)

where tK is the initial molent of increase of the proton intensity.
tf1-'th0 duration of the flare. f(t,B)--the dependence of the proton

intensity on time and energy. 8¢°(t.X)--the cut-off energy as a function
of the current coordinates of the craft and of the intensity of geomagne-

tic field perturbation X, C(E.6)--the conversion factor fron the flux to

the dose behind the shield of thickness 6; i--coefficient of shielding
of the flux by the earth.

It was ease-ed in the calculations that the characteristic spectrue “ard-

ncsa so does not change during a flare and that the time dependence of
the intensity for proton energies above 30 Nev is of the form [2]

“1.5) -Al c“o"‘W~'.
r M/{'-*l'-<2-+:)1~»('a*:‘=)}.

00 is the integral flow of protons with the energy 30 Nev per flare

tn-the rise ties of the intensity, t¢-the decay tine. R - J32 + 18768-
the hardness-energy relation for the proton.

where

The cut-off hardness at each point of the spacecraft trajectory in the
absence of geomagnetic perturbations was deternined by interpolation of
table values from the work of Quenby and Hank [3], and the trajectory

coordinates free the foraulae for the motion of artificial earth satel-

lites [6]. It was assumed that for northern and southern geomagnetic
latitudes above 70' there is no cut-off.

The relation between the intensity of geomagnetic perturbations and the
cut-off hardness was obtained from Solomon's formula [5]:

P(z)-P.{i 4'?“ cos"9-i)}. (4)

where H is the earth's magnetic moment, P°--the cut-off hardness for

unperturbed magnetic field. Q--the geomagnetic latitude, r-the distance
from the center of the earth. -

81
me orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In accordance with the given procedure an algorithm has been worked out
and a program has been set up in Fortran for the YES-1030 computer. which
makes it possible to calculate the relation between the tissue dose and
the risk of exceeding it for various variants of orbital flight.

In the present work calculations have been made for flights on circular
orbits at 300 km and for 16, 91. 182, and 366 days. Flight variants
have been considered with orbital inclinations of 51', 65°. 71', 90° and
with aluminum shielding ranging in thickness between 1 and 10 gm/cmz.

At least 10‘ histories were investigated for each variant. Hith the risk
value of 0.01 the statistical error did not exceed 10-121. The rise time
of the proton intensity was assumed to be equal to 9 hours for all flares
and the decay time to 27 hours. These amounts conform to statistical
data taken from [2]. The earth's shielding coefficient was assumed

equal to 0.5.

As a characteristic of the radiation environment within the compartments
the local dose (dose of a tissue-equivalent point dosimeter) is taken.
Its use yields the upper estimate of the absorbed dose for objects of
finite dimensions (in particular for the model of man).

He will examine the influence of various orbital flight parameters on the
risk-dose relation. Fig. 1 presents the dependence of the risk on the
dose for flights on orbits inclined 51'. It is evident that the irradia-
tion risk grows as the orbital inclination and the flight duration
increases. Thus, for instance. the irradiation risk for a dose of 30 rad
in year-long flights on orbits inclined 51' and 71' behind 1 gale-:2
shield is 0.001 and 0.5 respectively.

With fixed values for the risk the irradiation dose also increases as the
orbital inclination and the flight duration increase. Pig. 2 presents
the dependence of the isorisk dose on the thickness of the aluminous
shield for inclinations of 51' and 71°. The irradiation risk is assumed
equal to 0.01. This amount of risk may be considered acceptable for
estimates of the radiation hazard in space flights [6].

It is evident from Fig. 2 that, with the same shield thickness and flight
duration, the dose is considerably smaller for the 51' inclination than
for 71'. which is explained by the effect of shielding of the particle
flow by the earth's magnetic field. In the first case, with a shield
thickness of l gm/cm2 and flight duration of 1 hour. the dose is 12 red.
This amount does not represent a serious danger for a human being.

In the second case the dose may be «v600 rad under analogous conditions.
In this case to lower the irradiation dose to the level of 50 rad, for
example, a shield thickness of 5 gm/cm2 is required. An analysis of the
results presented in Fig. 2 shows that with a risk of 0.01 and a fixed
shield thickness the dose increases with increasing flight duration

82
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

according to the law Ivy/f. which is in ngrcueont with the results of cal-
culut lone for flight in free outer space [7]. It is interesting to con-
puro the scale of doses and risks in orbital flights and in flights in

free outer space.

IIJJ

Dose (in rad)

 

 

a;
sums thickness (in gn/cnz)

Pig. 2. Dependence of the isorisk dose on the thickness of
aluninun shield for flights inclined Sl’ (dashed lines) and
71' (solid lines). The nuebers l. 2. 3, 4 correspond to
flight durations of 16, 91, 182. 366 days (risk--0.0l).

Pig. 3 presents the risk-dose curve for orbital flights (solid curves)
and flights in free outer space (dotted curves) of 1 year duration.

The sane figure shows, for conperison. the results obtained in papers
[7, 8],—corresponding to curves 6 and 7 respectively. The date of
[7. 8] have been converted by us free fluxes to doses. It was assuled
that in free space the proton spectra: (30 - 80 MW) is realised.

In comparing the curves for orbital flight end for flight in free space
(curves 1-1. and 5) it is evident that for the sane risks the dbses in
orbital flight are considerably lower than in free-space flights.

Thus, for a risk of 0.01 the dose in an orbital flight with 90' inclina-
tlon the dose is 28 red. while in free space it is ~l60 rad. This fact
is explained to a considerable extent by the shielding effect of the
geometrical field and of the earth itself. .

The substantial differences in the curves 5-7 are explained by- different
approaches in taking into account the lost powerful flares.

83
son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Boss (in red)

Pig. 3. Risk of excess dose for orbital flights (solid lines)
and flights in free outer space (dashed lines) of 366 days
duration. Shield thickness 10 gale-2; l. 2. 3. b-—curves for
flights in orbits inclined 51', 65', 71'. 90' respectively;
S-curve for flights in free space; 6, 7-curves for flights
in free space according to the papers [6. 8]

In paper [7] it was assumed that the nasimua proton flux is limited to the
quantity 1.2 x 1010 protons/cl2 (upper limit of expression (2)). In paper
[8] the aaxiaum flux was practically unliaited. In the present work we
have limited the maximum flow to the quantity 8 x 109 protons/cmz. This
amount was observed in the flats of 8-3-1972.

Conclusions
1. A procedure is proposed for estimating the relation between a dose
and the risk of exceeding it for protons of solar cosmic rays in near-
esrth space.

2. The procedure indicated may be utilized for estimation of the radia-
tion hazard in orbital space flights.

Received 7 February 1977

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Koloaenekiy, A. V.; Petrov, V. H.; 211', H. V.; and Yereakina, T. H.
KOSHICH. 183130., Vol 16. p 698. 1978.

2. Khaffner, Dzh. "Nuclear Radiation and Protection in Space" [in
Russian], Moscov, Atomizdat, 1971, p 34.

8%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
J.

“

50

6.

7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Quonby. J. J.; and Rank. 6. J. PBIL. MAG" Vol 7, No 81. p 1457.
1962.

Erika. K. "Space Flight" [11: mum]. Pizutgn. 1963.
Solo-on. A. I. J. mm. M!) GBOELBCTR., Vol 18, No 3, p 3‘3, 1966.

Dudkin. V. Ye.; Kovalev. Yo. Yo.; blowﬂy. A. V.; Snitcnnyy. 1.. N.;
and Sakovtch. V. A. KOSHICEBSXAYA BIOLOGIYA I Aumsmcansnu
mmrsnm. No lo, p 72. 1975.

Generozov, V. I..; Kolouukty, A. V.; and Sakovtch. V. A.
KOSHIClIESKAYA BIOLOGIYA I AVIAKOSHICHBSKAYA MEDITSINA. No 3. p 710.
1973.

Yucker. H. 3. "Solar Conic Band to Interplanetnry and Burch-
Orbital Spacc Travel.” PRDC. NAT. 8119. 0!! mm AND MADE RADIA-
non IN SPACE. NASA 111 1-2650. Huhmgton. n.c.. Jam 1972, p 3105.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl’otvo "mm". ”Koo-khaki” tulcdovuuya." 1979

12157

(280:

1870

85
ma omcm. use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

MINIMUM, PSYCHOWICAL PIANNIM 0F AUI'MTIC OONTROL 8Y8?”

Moscow OSNOVY lNZHBNBRNO—PSIKHOLOGICHESKOGO PROYBKTIROVANIYA
ASU TP (Foundations of Engineering and Psychological Planning of Automatic
Control Systems for Technological Processes) in Russian 1978 signed to press 15
Jim 78 pp 4-9. 204-308

(Annotation. foreword. introduction. bibliography. and table of contents from
book by A. !. Galaktionov, V. A. 'h-apeznikov. A. A. Voronov. A. G. Mamikonov.
O. l. Avon. and D. M. Berkovich. Energiya. 11.000 copies. 20?. pages]

[Text] in the book are presented the theoretical bases of
planning automatic control systems for technological pro-
cesses as a man-machine control system. Analysis is
performed on specifications. primary problems. and ap-
proaches of engineering and psychological planning. Study
results of the structure of mental activity of the tech-
nologist-operator are presented: approximate models of his
activity are constructed which make it possible to solve the
primary problems of construction of man-machine systems.
Methods. means of study. and evaluations of man-machine
systems are described with the aid of universal simulating
complexes. Promising methods and means of data display
are described.

lntendcd for planning engineers. operators. psychological
cnginccrs. experts in scientific organization of labor. as
well as students. graduates and instructors of the cor-

responding specializations.
Foreword

By dccision of the 25m CPSU Congress all sectors of the national economy are
faced with great and complex tasks to improve the process of control of
production and raise its quality and efficiency. Automatic control systems based
on modern scientific achievements in control theory. economic-mathematics
methods. and computer technology are a powerful means of clear enhancement
of the level of production contrr' and encompass both the sphere of
organizational control and the techno. .‘ical processes of production.

86
ran onIcnu. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It general pattern in the development of modern automatic control systems
( S) for technological processes (TP) is not merely an increased volume and

complication of automatic control functions. but also the expansion of system
scales: the tramition from automation of wit control to control of a group of
units up to and including a plant. combine. or sector. An harmonic combination
of work in designing systems of all classes is observed for all levels of the
production hierarchy. For higher classes of Ti’ ACS technological process
control problems come closer and closer to organizational production control
while supplementing one another. Their comprehensive solution should yield new
results in so-called ”integrated control systems" (74).

The primary complexity in planning TP ACS today is not associated so much with
hardware and software as it is with the so-called ergonomics of the uystem.
Ergonomics. targeted at organization of the optimum human operator interaction
with other system components. conceals within itself the virtually un

ruserves of enhanced efficiency and operating reliability of '1‘? ACS and the
objects it controls. Criteria of optimums implies the degree of compatibility of
the external and internal means of human operator activity. compatibility of

external conditions and psychophysiological states of the human body. and so
forth.

Only a partial view of ergonomics of 1‘P ACS is examined in the book-
psychological engineering planning (PEP).

The book begins with a brief acquaintance with 11’ ACS and general problems
of planning such systems. The material in Chapter 1 can be useful for those
psychologist engineers who are not too familiar with TP AC8. in addition. there
was another goal in mind-to permit the reader to compare the hitherto utilized
traditional methods of technical planning for T9 ACS with the evolving methods
of systems psychological engineering planning (PEP).

Chapter 1 contains a general discussion of our proposed approach to the
elaboration of approximate methods of 'l‘P ACS PEP.

Chapter 2 involves the study of internal means of human operator activity. The
results of years 0! research by the author on the structure of mental activity
of n technologist operator are cited in particular. The goal of this research is
to reveal the resources of construction of a theoretical model which is adequate
for the structure of mental activity and permitting solution of PBP problems. it
was found that idealized structures of mental activity which Operators try to

form during the self-teaching process may be adopted as such a model.

Chapter 3 is devoted to an elaboration of methods available to planners for
constructing theoretical models of activity on the basis of his available initial

data in early stages of systems design. A series of these methods is suggested
and specific examples show how they must be used.

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-Uit iii’l’iCiAl. USE! ONLY

The construction of theoretical models makes it possible to solve the first PEP
problems.

Chapter 4 contains a description of approximate methods of solution of the
prinmry problems of PEP. An attempt is made. using specific examples. to give
the material presented the form of Piil‘ methods.

Chapter 5. written in collaboration with D. i. Ageykin. Ye. K. Krug. doctors of
technical sciences and professors. and Yu. S. Legovich. engineer. describes a
universal simulating complex developed to study and plan man and machine
systems and the research performed in it.

Finally. Chapter 6 contains a description of several promising principles.
methods. and means of data display developed by the author or with his direct
participation. A prototype panel is described in particular (1‘sement-l AC8).

The authors is deeply grateful to the participants of some research and
developments described in the book. in psychological engineering experiments
studying the structure of operator activity participated Ye. F. Gorskiy. V. N.
Ynnnshkin. A. D. Sicd', and N. A. Bakhareva. engineers. Participants in writing
sections 3.3 and 3.4 were V. N. Shcherbakov and Ye. A. 'i‘rofimov. graduate
students. Work on creation of a universal simulator complex involved. in
addition to the authors indicated. B. A. Faleyev, A. V. Morozov, M. A. Putyato.
Ya. l. Orlov. leading designers. Ye. i-‘. Gorsltiy. N. A. Bakhareva. V. K. KOstin
and A. l. D'yachenko. engineers; the latter also participated in writing section
5.3. in the development described in Chapter 6 of the control panel ('i‘sement-
1 ACS) participants included the late Yu. 1‘. Knopov and D. l. Ageykin. authors
of the sporadic monitoring system; Ye. F. Gorskiy and N. A. Bakhareva.
engineers; and associates of VIASM. 'l‘NilSA. and the Sebryakovslt Cement Plant.
Professor 8. L. itskovich and engineer V. L. Voikov also gave useful advice on
the control panel.

introduction

Modern control systems for complex technological objects are by nature
automated man-machine systems (MMS) designed to solve problems of cen-
tralized monitoring and operative control of technological processes.

They contain two links of different nature which are closely associated by
unified functional goals: man (team of people) and the control system hardware.
including modern computers.

The overall functional efficiency and reliability of automatic control systems for
technologies. .1 occsses (1‘? ACS) and the objects they control is determined not
only by the operating efficiency and reliability of each system link, but chiefly
by the degree of compatibility of their combined operation. Most of these
systems have until now been built using traditional methods of technical
planning: planning only the technical portion of the control system. These
methods are very well developed and make it possible to build the TP AC8
hardware having the desired characteristics.

88
FOR orrtcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Clearly insufficient attention has been paid to questions connected with the
organization of activity of the human operator and its compatibility with the
operation of the systems hardwar . Most emergencies. catastrophes. and lost
time today occurs because of operator fault. or more precisely. due to the fault
of the planner who did not truly know how to organize operator activity and
match it with the operation of the control system hardware. This always causes
the system and control object to operator under conditions far removed from
optimum. Consequently. enterprises bear significant economic losses.

Attention should be id to the fact that reserves of the component of overall
efficiency which is inked with the perfection of technical means of ACS have

any sudden rise in overall efficiency and reliability of the man-machine system
via improvement of hardware in TP AC8. in contrast to this. reserves of
increased efficiency in the man-machine system (MMS) which can be obtained by
organizing effective interaction of the technical system link and the human
operator and interaction between individual operators conceal substantial
reserves within themselves. Even comparatively small. effective solutions in
this area can be much more effective than tremendous technical solutions.

The following may serve as an illustration. If some years ago the ratio of the
number of aviation emergencies connected with operator error was 60 percent
and with equipment breakdown was 40 percent. the latter data suggest that the
relationship had sharply changed in favor of equipment. At this time over 90
percent of emelgeneies occu- because of man. The reason for this is that
improvement of technical solutions proceeds more quickly than solutions to
questions of the human factor. ‘On one hand this raises technical reliability.
while on the other hand it increases the number of variable parameters and

consequently. means of data display. complicating the work of the human
operator.

Psychological engineering and ergonomic research are now undergoing rapid
devel0pment to solve the problem of elaboration of a theory and meaningful
methods for planning and designing MMS.

8. F. Lomov and V. P. Rubakhin. great Soviet experts in engineering psychology.
noted in (60) that the primary content of engineering psychology is the study and
planning of operator activity with subsequent optimization of informational
interaction of man and equipment in ergatie systems. in the future it is
necessary to construct a theory of planning and open up the controlling
principles forming the basis of informational interaction. '

A considerable number of studies have been devoted to particular planning issues
of MMS (43. 55, 57. 58. 6|, 83. 64. 73. 80). and some to general methodological
issues concerning the structure. tasks and principles of PEP. These studies are
mentioned at the appropriate points in this book.

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Elaboration of a PEP theory requires close interaction of various contiguous
scientific fields involved in the construction of control systems and the study of
human activity. General systems theory. cybcrnctlcs. operations research
theory. systems engineering. computer technology. mathematics. general psy-
chology. ergonomics. phsyiology. pedagogy. sociology. scientific organization of
labor. technical esthetics-this is an incomplete list of the scientific theories
from which engineering psychology should dig out information to solve its own

primary problem.

The importance and agency of work aimed at elaborating a special theory of
MMS design have been noted in studied many times by Academicians A. l. Berg
(8). V. A. Trapeznikov (8t. 82). and B. N. Petrov (87. 68). They moved that this
problem is a new step in the evolution of a general theory of control and is a
vital national economic problem.

The goal of this book is the author's atttcmpt at finding an approach to
approximate methods of 1‘? ACS PEP. The modern planner who knows methods
of traditional technical planning has not only recognized the need to use the
systems approach. but has also tried to apply them in his projects. But the lack
of accessible methods of solution retards the penetration of systems PEP into
practice. Some proposed approaches of engineering psychological analysis.
synthesis and evaluation based on construction of mathematical models of
activity frighten planners with the complexity of the PEP problem solving
procedure. the difficulty of analyzing initial data on the characteristics of
activity of the human operator under various conditions of work. and data on
characteristics of information flows. Planners can not understand the abstract
mathematical models of activity of the human operator suggested by some
authors. The first attempts at using such models required significant
expenditures of labor and time. and the reliability of the results was very low.

Approximate methods of PEP described in this book are free of the shortcomings
of the aforementioned approaches to MMS design. Their initial data are the data
familiar to the modern planner. obtained in early stages of planning. in the first
stage of development of the proposed methods. characteristics of activity of
man and information item were not utilized. When possible qualitative methods
of evaluation of synthesized versions of PEP problem solving are used:
experimental testing is siggested for their verification.

The structure of mental activity is given in the form of clear. directional.
ucyclicai graphs. .

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

a.

‘0

5‘

7.

8.

10.

ll.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Avtomatizirovunnyyc slstemy upravieniya tekhnologieheskimi protses-
ami (Automated technological process control systems]. Yu. 8. Val'-
denbcrg. ed.. Moscow. Statistika. 1974. 190 pp.

Ageykin. 0.1.. "Problems of engineering psychology as a planning dis-
cipline." in "Materialy W Vsesoyuznoy konferentsli po inzhenernoy psi-
lrhologll i ergonomike" [Papers of the Fourth Ail-Union Conference on
Engineering Psychology and Ergonomics]. issue 1. 1974. pp 7-9. 124.
Yaroslavskogo un-ta.

Agoykin. D.l.; Gelaktionov. A.l.; Fatkin. i..V. "Basie directions of re-
search in in engineering psychology." in "Pribory i sistemy upravie-
niyu” [Instruments and Systems of Control]. 1967. No. 10. pp 56-61.

Ageykin. D.l.; Galaktionov. A.i.; Kazarlnova, l.V. "Algorithms and
formalized model of operator activity in detection of complex events
in monitoring and control systems" in "Avtomety. Gibridnyye upravlya-
yushchiye mashiny" [Automatons Hybrid Control Machines]. Moscow
Nauka. 1972. pp 152-160.

Ageykin. D.l.; Galaktionov. AJ. Sakovich. V.N. "The luminous sym-
bol". Patent Certificate 228522 (USSR). Published in bulletin "Disco-
veries. inventions. industrial prototypes. Trademarks". 1973. No. 6.
p. 93.

Ageykin. D.l.; Galaktionov, A.i.; Sakovieh. V.N. '"Long line' type lu-
minous symbols" Patent Certificate 218655 (USSR). Published in bu-

lletin "Discoveries. inventions. industrial prototyptes. Trademarks".
1973. No. a. p. 37.

Ageykin. D.l.. "Presentation of information on operator control panels".
"Pribory i slstemy upravlenlya“. 1974 No 1. pp 17-19.

Agcykin. 0.1.; Knopov. Yu. ‘1'.; Kuzetsnova. N.N., ”Sporadic monitoring
system"."Pribory i sistemy upravleniya". 1970. No. 4. pp 8-9.

Ayzcrman. M.A.. "Man and group as control system elements". I'Avto-
mutikn i telemekhunika'IAutomation and Telemechanicsl. 1975. No. 5.
pp 83-96.

Andrianovn. V. Ye.. "Deyatel'nost' cheloveka v sistemakh upravleniya
(Ocherk roboty avindispetchera)" [Activity of man in control systems
(Outline of air controller world]. Leningrad. LGU. 1974. p. 136.

Akhutin. V. M.; Naftul'yev, A.l.. "Mathematical simulation of human
operator activity in developing ergatic systems" in "Chclovek i ob-
shchcstvo" [Man and Society]. issue XI. [.60. pp. 245-255.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
12'

I3.

I4.

'5.

18.

l7.

[9.

20.

21.

22.

23.

licrg. A.i.. "Kibcrnotika—nauka ob optimal'nom upravlenii" [Cybernetics
—scicnce of optimum control]. Moscow. Sovctskoye radio. 1964. 84 pp.

llohncvu. M.l.. "Engineering psychology and design". in “Voprosy tekh-
nichcskoy estctiki" [Questions of technical esthctics]. Moscow. iskus-
stvo. 1970. Issue 3. pp. 19-22.

llobncva. M.l.. "Engineering psychology as a planning discipline". "1‘th-
nichwkayn estetiku" [Technical Esthetics]. 1966. No. 10. pp 8-9.

Val'denberg. Yu. S. "Use of computers to control technological pro-
cesses". "izmereniya. kontrol'. avtomatizntslya" [Measurements. mo-
nitoring. automation]. 1974. issue 2 (Tlelli'l‘B). pp 77-80.

Val'dcnberg, Yu. S. "State of the problem of creating and incorporat-
ing TP ACS at modern level". "Pribory i sistemy upravlcniya" 1974.
No. 3. pp 3-5.

Val'kov. V.M.. "ASU TP v proizvodstve izdeliy elektronnoy tekhniki"
[TP ACS in the manufacture of items of electronic technology]. Mos-
cow. Sovctskoye radio. 1974. 72 pp.

Venda, V.F., Vavilov. V.A. "Problems of adequacy of laboratory and
theoretical models of operator activity for complex ACS" in ""Materialy
1V Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii po inzhenernoy psikhologii i ergonomike".
issue 1. 1974 pp 10-12. izd. Yaroslavskogo un-ta.

Vcndu, V.i-‘. "Artistic design of ACS operator panels". 'l‘ekhnicheskaya
cstetika. 1975. No. 3. pp 1-8.

Venda. V.P.. "lnzhenernaya psikhologiya i sintez sistem otobrazheniya
informatsii" [Engineering psychology and synthesis of data displays].
Moscow. Mashinostroyeniye. 1975. 396 pp.

Venda. V.F.. "Sredstva otobrzheniya informatsii. Ergonomicheskiye is-
slcdovaniya i khudozhestvennoye konstruirovaniye" [Data displays. Ergo-
nomic research and artistic design]. Moscow, Energiya. 1969. 330 pp.

Vilcnkin. S. Ya.; 'h-akhtcngcrts. ELAN "Matematicheskoye obespecheniye
uprnvlyayushchikh vychislite'nykh mashin" [Control computer software].
Moscow. Energiyn. 1972. 392 pp.

Volik. 8.0.. Gladkov. '1'.A.. "Mathematical models of human operator
working in closed control loop" (Review). "iribory i sistemy upravieniya"
1974. No. 2. pp. 18-19.

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R0001000‘0030-5
2-1.

27.

28.

29.

3i].

3].

32.

33.

l-‘UIi ”I’l-‘lt‘lAl. USE ONLY

\'tltl.\ull. w.. hammer. l).. "Sprnvm-hnik p0 inzhcncrnoy psikhologii dlyn
iimhenerov i xlnxiozhnikov-konstruktorov" liiamlixiok in engineering psy-(l
clmlogy t‘or eminecrs and constructive designers]. 'll'anslntion from litm-
lish. Ni. V. i-'. Vemin. Moscow. Mir. 1968. 5111 pp.

(:liliiktioniov. A.I.. "t'rtdstavleniye int‘ormatsii operatorn" [Presentation
of information to the operator]. Moscow. Energiya. 1969. 136 pp.

(inlaktionov. .-\.l.: Kazarinova. 1.V.. "Methods of presentation of infOr-
mation and operator work reliability". Izv. Lii’i‘i. 1968 70. pp. 90-92.

tialaktionuv. A.i.. "Electroluminescent displays". EIKA. 1964. issue 2.

(lalaktionov. A.l.. "Study of rate of information handling by human
operator in solving practical problems of technical diagnosis" in "Sis-
tema 'ehclovek-avtom‘at”. Moscow. Nauka. 1965. pp 128-142.

Unlaktionov. It.i.. "0a the question of quantitative evaluation of com-
plex structured events" in "Problemy inzhenernoy psikhologii" [Prob-
lems of engineering pscyhology]. Leningrad. LOU. 1965. pp 100-119.

"Awroach to realization of basic engineering-psychological principles
of planning man-machine systems". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya"
1974. No 1. pp 19-22. Authors: A. l. Galaktionov: Ye. F. (iorskiy:
It. I). Sled':. N. A. liakhareva.

"0n the multiple structured nature of the conceptual model of the
technologist operator" in "Materialy 1V Vsesoyuznoy koni'erentsii po
inzhenernoy psikhologii i ergonomike". Issue 1. 1974 pp 100-101.. lzd.
Yarootavskogo an-ta. Authors: A. l. Galaktionov: N. A. Bakhareva. Ye.
i-‘. (iorskiy: A. l). Sled'; V. N. Yanushkin.

(lipenreyter. Yu. 8. "(in the point of motion of the eyes in nonvisuai
activity and their study" in "Motornyyc komponenty zreniya" [Motor
components of vision]. Moscow. Nauka. 1975. pp 213-221.

(:uhinskiy. 11.1.. "Approaches. principles and methods of study of

the 'man-teehnology' system" in "Materialy 1V Vsesoyuznogo simpoziuma
po efi'cktivnosti i aadezhnosti sistem 'ehelovek-tekhnika'. Nauehnyy
scht po kompleksnoy probleme 'Kibernetika'. Leningrad. LOU. 1975
(preprint oi‘ rc-porl). pp 1-18.

Denisov. V.(l.. "Chelovek i mashina v sisteme upravleniya" [Man and
nmehinc in control system]. Moscow. Znaniye. 1973. 64 pp.

Ilenisov. V.(i.: Pavlov. V.V.; Sokol. V.V.. Ergonomics. State of the art.
tasks. problems" in "Ergaticheskiye dinamieheskiye sistemy upravle-
niyn" ll-lrgatic dynamic control systems]. Kiev. Naukova dumka. 1975.
pp 3-28.

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
36.

37.

38.

39.

4f].

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lluhroVskiy. V. Yn.; Slwheiirovitskiy. 1..P. "Problemy sistenmogo inzlie-
nerno-psikliologichcskogo proyektirovanlyu" [Problems of systems en-
gineering-psychological planning]. Moscow. Nauka. 1971. 122 pp.

Dubrovskiy. V.Ya.; Shchedrovitskiy. 1..P. "Problem of functional dis-
tribution in 'man-macliine' systems" in "lnzhenerno-pslkhologicheskoye
proyektirovaniye (sbornlk perevodov)" [Engineering-psychological plan-
ning (collection of translations”. 1970. Issue 1. pp 7-21 (MGU).

Il'yuchenko. A.l.; Galaktionov. A.l.. "Optical television method of
recording human eye movement". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya"
1976. No. 9. pp 8-9.

Ycrchkovskiy. it.(i.: Golnnt. Yu. A. "Study of effects of technologic
personnel in monitoring and control of crusher-flotation section of
concentration factory for construction of a centralized monitoring
and control system". liyulleten' institutn 'Tsvctmetinfornnatsiya. 1966.
No. 24. pp 7-8.

Yemcl'yunov. A.l.; Kupnik. 0.V.; "l’royektirovnniye avtomatizirovan-
nykli sistem upravleniya tekhnoiogicheskimi protscssami" [Planning auto-
mated technological process control systems]. 211' ed.. Moscow. Energiya.
1974. 500 pp.

Zarukovskiy. (i.M..: Zinehenko. V.P.. "Analysis

of operator activity" in "Ergonomika. Printsipy i rekomendatsii"
“Ergonomics. Principles and Recommendations]. issue 1. Moscow.
VNll‘l‘E. 1970. pp 5-12.

"chdeniye v crgonomiku" [Introduction to Ergonomics]. ed. by V. P.
Zinchenko. Moscow. Sovetskoyc radio. 1974. 352 pp. Authors: G. M.
Zarakovskiy: 1!. A. Korolev; V. l. Medvedev; P. Ya. Shlayen.

Zurakovskiy. O.M.. "l’sikhologicheskiy analiz trudovoy deyatel'nosti"
[Psychological analysis of labor activity]. Moscow. Nauka. 1966. 113 pp.

lekhnrov. V.N.; Pospclov. D.A.; Khazatskiy. V.Ye. "Sistemy upravle-
niyu. Zadaniye. Proyektirovaniye. Realizatsiya" [Control systems.
Assignment. Planning. Realization]. Moscow. Energiya. 1961. 310 pp.

Zinchenko. V.P.. "Visual perception and creativity. Microstructural
analysis of processes of perception and short-term memory". "Tekhni-
elicskuya estctika". 1975. No. 8. pp 1-5.

Zinchcnlto. V.P.; Vdovina. M.l.; Gordon. V.M. "Study of functional ,
structure of the process of solving combinatorial problems" in "Motor-
nnye komponenty zreniya". Moscow. Nuuka. 1975 pp 191-212.

9'0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
47.

48.

49.

50.

5|.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lvushkin. Yu. A.. "Matrix method of operational data display".
"i’ribory i sistcmy upravlcniya“ . 1970. No. 10. pp 85-90.

lvnshkin. Yu. A. "informational characteristics of display systems and

their possibility with psychophysiological indicators of operator activity".
"Pribory i sistcmy upravlcniya". I969. No. 4. pp 22-26.

"lnzhcncrnaya psikhologiya (sb. statey)" (Engineering psychology (col-
lcction of articles”. Translation from English edited by D. Yu. Panov
and V. l’. Zinchcnko. Moscow. Progress. 1964. 695 pp.

"lnvhcncrno-psikhologiclteskoyc proyektlrovaniyc" [Engineering psycholo-
gical planning]. [at edition. A. N. Leont'ycv. cd.. Moscow. M60. 1970.
225 pp.

"lnzhcncrno-psikhologichcsklyc trcbovaniyn k sistcmam upravleniya"
lEnginccring Psychological Requirements for Control Systems]. V. P.
Zinchcnito. editor. Moscow. VNIITE. 1987. 283 pp.

ttskovich. EL: 'h-akhtenbcrg. E.A.. "AI orithmy tscntraiizovmnogo
kontrolyu i upravleniya proizvodstvom" Algorithms of centralized

monitoring and control of production]. Moscow. Sovetskoye radio.
I967. 350 pp.

Itskovich. B.l.. "Kontrol' proizvodstva s pomoshch'yu vychislitel'nykh

mashin" [Monitoring production using computer]. Moscow. Energiya.
1975. 4l6 pp

Kotik. M.A.. ”Samoregulyatsiya i nadczhnost' chelovcka-opcratora“
[Self-regulation and reliability of the human operator]. Tallinn. Val-
gus. l974. 169 pp

Krytov. A.A. "Chelovck v avtomatizirovannyich sistemakh upravlenlya"
iMan in automated control systems). Leningrad. LOU. 1972. 192 pp

Levin. A.A.; Shcnbrot. I.M.. "Automated technological production con-
trol systems overseas". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya" 1973. No. 10.

pp 6~8

Icont'ycv. A.N.. "Problem of activity in psychology" "Voprosy filoso-
t‘ii". I972. No. 9. pp 95-108

Iomov. ILI~‘.. "Chclovek i tekhnika [Man and Technology). Moscow.
Sovctskoyc radio. 1966. 470 pp.

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
59.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

homov. 0.1%. "On the state and future of development of psychology
in the USSR". in "'i‘ezisy dokladov XX Mezhd. psikh. kongreasa" [Sum-
maries of Reports of the 20th International Psychology Congress]. Mos-
cow. Izd-vo MGU. I972. pp 4-18.

bomov. B.P. and Rubakhin. V.P. "Modern problems of engineering psy-
chology". "Priklndnyye voprosy inzhencrnoy psikhologli (Mezhvuzovskiy
tematicheskiy nnuchnyy shornik". 1974. 1st ed. pp 3-12 (Taganrog Pl .

Meyster. D; Rabido. Dzh. "lnzhenerno-psikhologlcheskaya otsenlta pri
razrabotke sistem uprnvleniya [Engineering psychology evaluation in
elaborating control systems] Translated from English. Moscow. Sovet-
skoye radio. 1970. 343 pp

Munipov. V.M.; Oshe. V.K. ”Standardization of ergonomic norms and
requirements" Trudy VNII'I‘E. 1975. 9th ed.. pp 3-48.

Nikoluyev. v.1. "infortnatsionnaya teoriya kontrolya i upravleniya"
[information theory of monitoring and control]. Leningrad. Sudostroy-
cniyc. 1973. 287 pp

Oshanim D.A.. "Role of operational image in detecting information
content of a signal". “Voprosy psikhologii". 1969. no. 4 pp 24-33

l’nnascnko. I.M..; Proskuryakova. N.G. "Experimental research on
operator of a complex technical unit". "Pribory i sistemy upravleniya"
1970. No. 1. pp 23-24

Panasenko. I.M.. Fatkin. LV. "Models of behavior and quantitative
evaluation of activity of a human operator of Centralized Monitor-
ing and Control System" ”Standarty i Kachestvo". 1966 No 7 pp 27-31

I’etrov. B.N.; Kochubiyevskiy. I.D.; Ulanov, 0.31. "Informational
aspects of technological process control“. "feklmieheskaya kibernetika"
1967. No. 4 pp 33-40

I’etrov. B.N.; Gubinskiy. A.l.: Ryl'skiy. 6.1. “Problems of effectiveness
and reliability of man-machine systems in the general theory of con-
trol". in "Materialy 1V Vscsoyuznogo simpoziuma po effektivnosti i na-
dczhnosti sistem 'chelovck-tekhnika'. Nauchnyy sovet po kompleksnoy
problemc 'Kibernctika'. Moscow-Leningrad. 1375, pp 5-6.

l’rangishvili. l.V. "Pour generations of computers". "Pribory i sistemy
upravlcniya” 1975. No. 9. pp 1-2

l’rotod'yakonov. M.M.; Tcder. R.R. ”Metodika ratsional'nogo planiro-
vaniya cksperimentov" [Methods of effective planning of experiments]
Moscow. Nauka. 1970 72 pp.

FOR OFPlClRi USE ONLY
71.

72.

73.

7‘.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

til.

82.

83.

FOR ()I’I’ICIAI. USI’. ONLY

"lnzhcncrno-paikhologiclicskoye proycktirovaniyc ASU" [Engineer-

ing Psychological Planning of ACS]. Kiev. Budivel'nyk. 1973 167 pp.
Authors: A. I. Prokhorov; 11. A. Smirnov; Ye. M. Khokhiov; A. 5. Lin-
kov; A. U. Mitin.

Pushkin. V.N.. "Operativnoyc myshtcniye v bol'shikh sistemakh" [0pc-
rotivc memory in large systems]. Moscow-Mningrad. Energiya. 1965.
375 pp.

Rubakhin. V.F.. "Psikhologicheskiye osnovy obrabotltl pervichnoy info-

rmutsii" [Psychological foundations of primary information processing].
Leningrad. nouka. 1974. 296 pp.

Rudnev. K.N. "Foundations of technical policies in technological pro-
cess and production AC8“. "Pribory i sistomy wravleniya" 1974. No. 1.
pp 1-2.

Smirnov. 8.1L. "Principles and structure of engineering psychological
plnnning". "Prikiadnyyc voprosy inzhencrno psilthologii (Mezhvuz. temat.

nuuchn). shornik)". 1974. lst ed. pp 54-61 Taganrog Radiotechnlcal In-
stitutc.

Sogomonyan. Ye. 8.. "Monitoring efficiency and search for faults in
functionally coupled systems". "Avtomatika i telemekhanlka" 1964. vol.
25. No. 6. pp 75-79.

Sukhodoi'skiy. G.V.. "Abstract model of activity of a specialist and
Its realization". Vestnilt LOU. 1972. No. 11. pp 92-95.

‘l‘emnikov. F. Ye.; Afonin. V.A..; Dmitriyev. v.1. 'feoreticheskiye
osnovy informatsionnoy tclthnilti" [Theoretical fouwlations of inform-
ation technology]. Moscow. Energiya. 1971 424 pp.

’l‘cmnikov. F.Yc; lvashitin. Yu. A. "On presentation of mass informa-
tion to operators in observation and control systems" in "Vychisiitel'-
nuyu tclthnilta dlya upravleniya proizvodstvom". V. V. Solodovniltov. ed..
Moscow. Mashinostroycniyc. 1969 pp 151-164.

'l‘ikhomirov. O.i<. "Struktura mysiitel'noy deyatel'nosti" [Structtre of
cognitive activity]. Moscow. 12d. M011. 1969 210 pp.

’i‘mpcznikov. V.A.. "Automatic control and its economic effectiveness"
"Naukn i Zhizhn'“. .1965 No 12. pp 13-16.

'l‘ropeznikov. V.A. "Man in the control system" l'Avtomatilu: i teleme-
khanika" 1972. No 2 pp 5-16.

Pokin. Yu. G. "Nadezhnost' pri ekspluatatsii tekhnichesitikh srcdstv"

[Reliability in the use of technical devices]. Moscow. Voyenizdat.
1970 124 pp.
97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

84. Kholl. A.D. (llull. ILD.) "Opyt metodologii dlyu sistemotckhniki“

[Experience gained in methods of systems engineering]. hanslation
from English. Moscow. Sovetskoyc radio. 1972 «8 pp.

85. (Ihupanis. A.. "On distribution of functions among people and machines“
in "lnzhenerno-psikhologichcskoye proyektirnvaniye" 1st ed. Moscow.
Ind-yo MGU. l970 pp Isa-no.

86. Chuchlco. 11.6.. "instrument panel without instruments". "Nauka i
Zhizlm'". 1975 No 8. pp 2-11.

87. Chachko. A.G.,: Iovenke. O.V. "Mathematical models of activity of
a human operator of a complex technological process". "lzmereniya.
Kontrol'. Avtomatizatsiya" 2975. 4th ed. ’l‘lelTEl Priborostroyeniya.
pp 71-75.

88. Shluyen. l’. Yn.. Voynenko. V. M. "Principles of systems approach
and sequence of consideration of ergonomic requirements at stages
of development of u mun-machine system" in "Problemy inzhenernoy
psikhologii i crgonomiki" 2nd ed.. Moscon. lzd. VNiI’l‘E. 1974 pp 127-130.

Contents

l’orcword 5

introduction 7
Chapter 1. Essence and problem of engineering psychological planning of

Ti’ A08 10

1.1. General data on '1‘? A08 10

1.2. Functions. composition and planning stages of 'l‘P ACS 14
a) 11’ ACS functions 14.

b) 'l‘l’ ACS components 15

c) ’i‘P ACS planning stages 17

0) Consideration of the human factor in '1? ACS design 20
1.3. Existing approaches and principles of planning TP AC8 as a

man-machine system 21
a) Systems approach in planning process 21
b) firief review of work on engineering psychological
planning 23
l.-l. Approximate methods of engineering psychological
planning 28
a) Structure of engineering psychological planning 28

b) Problems of engineering psychological planning 30
e) Composition of ergonomic problems at different

stages of TI’ ACS planning 32
Chapter 2. Study of internal means of activity of technologist operator
2.1. Questions of construction of conceptual activity model :2
2.2. Methods features of technologist-operator activity 31
98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.3.

2.4.
2.5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:1) Problems of Activity Display
b) Problem of bevel and Descriptive language of
Activity
c) Problem of Adequacy of Activity Conditions
d) Methods of Experimental Study of Activity Structue
Hypothetical Structues of Metnal Activity of an Actual
Technologist Operator
a) Operating units of activity. logical relations
6) Technological model of activity
e) Functional model of activity
d) Came and effect model of activity
e) Algorithmic and descriptive model of activity
Basic means of operator improvement of his own activity
structure

Analysis of Possibilities of Theoretical Construction of
Adequate Models for PEP

Chapter 3. Construction of Theoretical MOdels of Technologist

3.1.

3.2.

3.3.

3.4.

Operator Activity
lleuristlc method of construction of theoretical models
0) Initial data and requirements
b) Construction of technological model of activity
c) Construction of functional model of activity
d) Construction of came-effect model of activity
c) Construction of algorithmic model of activity
f) Construction of descriptive model of activity
Example of Construction of Theoretical
Models with aid of Heuristic Method of Engineering-Logic
Analysis of the Object
a) Description of object (section involved with slag
preparation in cement plant)
b) Subdivision of diagram of object into functional
technological complex (FTC) and determination of
basic events
c) Detection of possible situations and construction of
graphs of original causes for basic events of PTC
d) Choice of check points and conversion of original
cause graph into monitoring graph
c) Writing algorithms for monitoring basic events
f) Approximate estimate of real check graphs
g) Correcting the cheek graph
h) Writing control algorithms
i) Construction of algorithmic graph (algorithmic model
of activity)
j) Construction of descriptive models of activity (de-
scriptive graph)
Analytic Method of Construction of Theoretical Models
a) Construction of check graph
b) Construction of control graph
Examples of Construction of check and control
graphs using analytic methods

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

38

40
4]
43

M
44
45
51
55
5?

61
63

65
86
66
66
63
70
78
77

77
77

81
83

83
86
86
90
90

93
93
94
94
96

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 4. Approximate Methods of Solving Problems of Engineering

Psychological Planning of TP ACS 104
4.1. General assumptions 104
4.2. Collection and presentation of initial data for planning
'i‘P AC8 108
4.3. Functional and informational synthesis 110
a) Formulation of requirements for quality of problem
solving for monitoring and control 110
b) Choice of degree of automation of functions of
monitoring and control 112
e) Optimization of volume and form of operative informa-
tion retrieved for human operator 117
d) Repairing equipment. volume and
actuator types chosen by designers 119
0) Choice of devices for display and control organs 120
0 Choice of method of data coding 121
4.4. Choice of Principles and Methods of Data Display 122

a) On adequacy of external and internal means of activity 122
b) On hypothetical version of structural organization of

information of technologist operator 123
e) Practical realization of principles set forth in hypo-
thetical version 126

d) Qualitative methods of choice of data display methods 129
e) Examples of solution to some problems of fmctional

information synthesis 133
4.5. Others forms of Ergonomic Planning with Participation

of Psychologist Engineer 142

a) Social-psychological planning of operator activity 142

b) Psychophysiological planning of operator activity 143

c) Psychological pedagogical planning of operator activity 143
Chapter 5. Experimental Methods of Study and Planning of Man-Machine

Systems using Bench Simulators 145
5.l. Development and use of bench simulators in USSR
and abroad 145
5.2. Functions and requirements for universal simulating
complex (USC) to study and plan man-machine systems 148
a) Basic I’mctiom' and tasks of USC 148
b) Requirements for USC 149
c) Planning. training and conduct of experiments
on USC 150

5.3. Composition and structure of USC
A) Set of units and devices of model of operator work

place (OWP) 156

b) Set of units and devices of researcher work place 161

c) Computer portion of USC 166

d) Dialing and switching devices of USC 171
100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5A. Organization of studies on use
a) Basic concepts on methods of planning experiments
b) Methods supervision for purchase-planner
c) Experimental research assignment written for
pin-chase planner
d) Experimental research program for Engineering
Psychological Experiment on 1.50

c) Engineering psychology planning or research work
place of universal simulator complex

Chapter 6. Promising Principles. Methods and Means of Data
Display
6.1. Brief review of developments in data displays
6.2. Tsemcnt-l AC8 Control Panel
a) Generalized graphics panel
b) Control panel
6.3. Fiber Optics elements and displays

a) Graphics panels as data display method
b) Graphics panels as data display device
c) Fiber Optics devices

Bibliography
COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Energiya". 1976

8617
080: I870

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’FICIAI. USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

'uoc 621.396.6z621.318.3
mammanc omens m RADIOBLECI‘RONIC mums

Moscow WIDHAGIITNYYB US‘IROYSTVA RADIOELEKTMNNOY APPMTURY in Russian
1978 signed to press 20 Dec 77 pp 2,167

[Annotation and table of contents from book by Leonid Alekseyevich Kazakov,
lzdatel'stvo Sovetskoye Radio. 21,000 copies. 168 pages]

[Text] Under consideration here is a large class of electromagnetic

' devices used in radioelectronic apparatus and automation equipment:
electromagnetic drives and nechaniema, stoppers, switches, brakes, clamps,
locks and others as well as their actuator elements (electronagnets.
electromagnetic clutches). Their functions. structural features.
advantages and basic paraeetere are noted. end the design procedure is
outlined. Typal configurations of actuator elements are shown and
electromagnetic as well as structural pare-store of the latter given.
Outlined are also the basic principles of rational design and engineer-
ing methods of calculation.

This is essentially a handbook, copiously illustrated and containing
infatuation sought by many developers of radioelectronic apparatus and
automation equipeent. uhich should also be useful to students at higher
educational institutions vhere instrunant design and electrical engineer-
ing specialty subjects are taught.

Table of Contents: Page
Foreword 3

Chapter 1. Basic Information About Electra-aunetic Devices in

Radioelectronic Apparatus S

1.1. Definition, application and classification of electro-

magnetic devices 5
1.2. Basic technical require-ants imposed on electro-

nagnetic devices 8
1.3. Calculation-deeign-nanu‘acture procrdure for

electromagnetic devices 9

102

FOR OPPICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Electromagnetic Devices in deioelnctronic Apperetue
and Auto-etion Equip-sot. Configuration Eagles.
Beeic Perenetere. Sequence of Celculetione

2.1. Blectrongnetic drives

2.2. Blectronegnetic stepping devices. step notors end

linear eotore

Electroeegnetic devices in negnetic recording epperetue
Blectroeegnetic clutches

Blectroeegnetic comtetors. locke end etope
Blectroeegnetic devices in peripherel coeputer equip-sot

NNNN

.
QUO‘U
o a

Chapter 3. Actuetor Bleeente of Electroeegnetic Devices.
Bnqlee of Configuretione. Peroneters end

Cheruterietics
3.1. Generel inforeetion
3.2. Eagles of configuretione of electroengnetic eleeente.
Beeic pereeetere end cherecterietice
3.3. Design of elenente. ports end eubeeeeehlies
3.6. Blectroeegnetic elenentc with boosting
3.5. Fastening end joining of ele-ente

anepter 6. Principles of Blectronegnet Design end Celculetione
1. Generel infornetion
.2. Selecting the structurel type end the shepe of e stop
.3. Selecting the besic pereletere of en electroeegnet
lo Besic equations and reletione hetveen penneters for
ereored dc electrougnets
6.5. Engineering lethods of design
Conclusion
Beeic Conventionel Notation (for Cheptere 3 end 6)
Bibliography
Subject Index

mPYRICIIT: Izdetel'etvo "Sovetekoye Radio". 1978

2615
080: 1870

103
P01! OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBI. [CATIWS

UDC 539.216.22:566.28 ‘

POLYCRYS‘I'ALLDIB SEMICONDUCTOR FILES IN HICIDELBCTRONICS

Minsk Poummumssxns PM POLUPROVOWIKOV V WWII! in
Russian 1978 signed to press 11 Aug 78 pp 2, 361-363

[Annotation and table of contents tron book by Vladimir Hikhaylovich
Roleshko and Aleksandr Ada-ovich Kovalevskiy, lsdatel‘stvo ”Nauka i
Tekhnika," 2,600 copies. 3“ pages]

[Text] This is the first, and so far. the only survey of practical and
theoretical schisveasnts ends with polycrystalline film of silicon.

gemsniun. telluriu. seleniun and An 3" coqounds, their preparation
and application in aicroelectronics for seaiconductor integrated nicro-

circuits.

bats are presented on the preparation of polycrystalline film of semi-
conductor asterials, their buildup kinetics and structure as well as-

physicsl and chenicsl properties.

Physical aethods of stiaulsting the buildup of thin files are considered,
naasly with an electric field, laser radiation. electron bodardesnt,
ultraviolet or microwave radiation and ultra- or supersonic elastic
vibrations.

While the book is intended for scientists and engineers working in the
electronic industry, it can also be of use to graduate and undergraduate
students concerned with problem of thin-fil- physics or radio- and micro-

electronics . .

Table of Contents: Page
Foreword 3
Gnapter 1. Methods of Preparing Polycrystalline Piles of
Seeiconductor Materials and Their Buildup Kinetics 7
l. Vacuum-deposition nethods 10
2. Ion-pisses and plasma cheaical aethods 16
1.0!»

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oteuicel methods
Thermodynemice of chesicel reactions
Polycrystalline silicon films

Reduction of silicon tetrachloride with hydrogen
Reduction of silicon tetrsiodids

Reduction of silicon tetrsbrouide with hydrogen
Reduction of trichlorosilene with hydrogen
Decoqoeition of silicon iodides

Decomposition of orgsnosilicon coqounds
"Sandwich" nthod
Pyrolisis of nonosilsne

Polycrystelline germsnim films

Reduction of germsniun tetrachloride with hydrogen

Reduction of germanium tetrsiodide with hydrogen

Reduction of germsnium tetrebromide with hydrogen

Preparing germsniue films by the iodide dispropor-
tionntion nethod

Transfer of germaniun by water vapor

Trensfer of germanium by hydrogen iodide

Pyrolisie of nonogermene

Decoqosition of orgsnogsrmeniu coqounds

Polycrystalline seleniun end tsllurium films

Reduction end decoqosition reactions
DecoIposition of hydrides

Polycrystalline Ge‘te end GeSe fil-

Decompoeition end reduction of hydrides

Polycrystelline AHIBV-coqwund files

Deposition of polycrystslline files by the iodide
dieproportionstion process

Preparing films from chlorides and pure elenents

Deposition of AIIInV-co-pomd me. through
transfer h water vepor

Preparing AI IBV-conpound films through trensfer
by hydrogen chloride end hydrogen iodide

Deposition of films through iodide transfer in
the AIIIBV-Iz-liz syetes

”Sendwich" nethod

Decosposition of orgenomstels and hydrides

Additional factors influencing the buildup of poly-
cryetelline semiconductor files

Reactor design

Purity of component substences

Finish of the initisl surface and type of dielectric
Effect of external factors

105
FOR orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Physical Methods of Stinulsting the Thin-Film

1.

Chapter

1.

Buildup Processes

Interaction of acoustic and electromagnetic waves with
natter
Acoustic waves
One-phonon and nultiphonon ionization of crystal stone
Calculation of the electron wave functions
Displaceaent of an aton from an interstitial to
a nodal position by an acoustic wave
Have functions of atoms
Electromagnetic waves
One-photon processes
One-photon ionization of a crystal atom
Displacesent of an aton from an interstitial to
a nodal position by an electroaagnetic wave
Multiphoton processes
Accounting for the process tesperature
Effect of electromagnetic radiation on the course
of cheaicsl decomposition reaction
Effect of an electric field on the thin-fill buildup
process
Use of laser radiation for intensification of the thin-
film deposition process
Use of electron bombardment for stinulating thin-file
deposition
Buildup of thin fills under ultraviolet radiation
Stinnlsting the thin-film buildup process with nicro-
wave radiation
Activation and intensification of physicochenical
processes with elastic vibrations at ultra- or
supersonic frequencies

3. Structure and Properties of Polycrystalline
Semiconductor Films

Structure and properties of silicon files
Structure

Electrical properties

Mechanical properties

Chemical properties

Optical properties

IIpurity distribution in silicon files
Structure and properties of gernanius films
Structure

Electrical properties

Mechanical and chunical properties

106
ms orncm. uss onnx

95

99
100
100
102

106
10k
105
105
105

107
108
110

111
113
121

160
156

163

169

181

181
181
196
215
221
227
229
239
239
265
269
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Structure and propertiaa of polycryatelline AHIBV-
compound til-e

lo. Structure and propertiee of polycryatalline filae
bneed on eeleniu and telluriu

Chapter 6. Application of Polycryetellina Semiconductor Mine
in Microelectionice

Gatea in IDS integrated circuite

l-iln reeiatore. fill capacitora and llc-etructuree in
integrated circuita

leolation of active elevante in integrated circuite

Fabrication of aubaicron coaponenta for integrated
circuite

Pueible juqere for electrically progranable fined
nemriea

Devicea with charge coupling

Diffueion fro. polycryatalline ailicon

Fabrication of ective and paeeive eleaente in poly-
cryetailine eilicon

Svitching diodea baeed on norpboua aeniconductora

Diodea beeed on polycryetalliua aeleniu- and
telluriu til-a

bibliography
OOPYRIGII‘I‘: lzdatel'etvo “Neuki i 'i‘ekhnika" 1978

2‘15
CSO: 1870

107
m ontcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

comma MODS AND PROGRAM“: (NUMERICAL HBTRODS IN PROBLEHS 0P ELECTRO-
DYﬂAHlCS)

Moscow "CHISLI‘I‘EL‘W mom I PROGRAMIROVANIYB: cmsummz MB‘I‘ODY V
ZADAZHAKH ELMODIMHIKI in Russian Vol 28. 1978 signed to press 30 Jun 78
pp 2. 263-266

[Annotation and table of contents fron collecting of works of the “cocoa:
University Conputer Center. edited by v.1. Dnitriyev and LS. Il'inskiy,
ledstel'stvo Hoskovskogo Universitets. 2,160 copies. 266 pages]

[Text] The book. s collection of articles, deals with the application of
numerical nethods to problems of electrodynasics and is. in tens of the
subject matter. a continuation of earlier volunes (5, 10. l3. 16, 20. 26).
The first chapter covers new research in diffraction. the second chapter
touches on numerical lethods in the theory of antennas. the third chapter
contains naterisl on research in plans physics, and the fourth chapter
presents results of electrodynanic calculations in geophysics.

The issue is intended for a wide range of specialists in rsdiophysics, geo-
physics and plasna physics.

Contents Page

Chapter 1. Nulerical Hethods in Problems of Diffraction
VJ. Apel'tsin, Yu. A. Yerenin. A.8. Il'inskiy and A. c.
Sveshnilcov, ”Nu-erical Kethods of Analysing Nave Propaga-
tion at Resonance Frequencies Through a “edit. vith Vari-
able Paraleters" 3

LG. Sveshnikov and Yu. A. Yere-in. "Projection hethod of
Analyzing Exterior Problem of Diffraction Hith the
Scatterer Geo-etry “taken Into Account" 1‘

VJ. Apel'tsin. "Analysis of Axisy-etric Problem of Diffrac-

tion of Bleetrasagnetic Haves with No Different Polarisation
by Locally Nonhaogeneous Bodies" 25

108
Iron ornctu. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

V.V. Kravtsov. V.M. Plutonov and VJ. Priklonekiy. "Solution

of the Three-Dinensionel Problem of Diffraction by the Method

of Antenna Potentials: 56

A.S. Il'inskiy and “LN. Galishnikove. "Analysis of the Current

Distribution Over An Array of Circular Cylinders (ll-Polarisa-

tion)” 61

ms. Il'inskiy and Yu. V. Sheetopalov. ”Diffraction at a Slit in

an Ideally Conducting Plane Shield on the Boundary Between M

Media” 70

MM. Grachev, “Algorittse of the Solution of the Diffraction

Problem Involving s Radially Layered Cylinder" 90

Ye. V. Zekharov. "Integrodifferential Bquations in Problem

of Diffraction by Shields" 99

A.c. Sveshnikov and A.M. Bogolyubov. "Applications of the Method

of Finite Differences to Problens of Optical Waveguides" 106
.“hapter 2. Munerical Methods in Problem of Antenna-Feeder Devices

MG. Sveshnikov and MN. Bogolyubov. "Design of a Plane waveguide

Transformer by the Method of Finite Differences” 118

A.S. Il'inskiy. A.c. Sveshniltov and A.K. shatov. "ﬂuerical Method

of Designing Special-Purpose Axiey-etric Resonators" 136'

ILS. ll'inskiy and LP. Bererhnaya. "Anelysis of the Current Distri-
bution Over a Systee of Vibrators Arbitrarily Spaced and Excited
by a Plane Have" 162

as. Al'khovskiy. ”Numerical Algoritl- for Deter-ining the Prop-
ngntion Constants Relative to Electromagnetic Haves in Corrugated
waveguides um. Boundary Inpedance Conditions” 156

A.V. Chechkin. "Ihltiperasetric Method of Regularisation" 162
(LS. Il'inskiy end A.A. Vorontsov. "Method of Integral Equations

in the Proble- of Have Diffraction at an Oblique Boundary Between

“No Media in e Waveguide" 177
A.Ye. her» and LV. Konovel'yev. ”Application of Regularisa-

tion Methods to the Solution of Problem in the Synthesis of
Photoelectric Converters" 195

109
mu 017mm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A.Ye. Zverev and V.A. Chelnokov. "Application or Multiparsaetric
Regularization to the Solution of Probleaa in the Synthesis
of a Double-Bess: Capacitive Disp.’ ace-eat Transducer 202

Chapter 3. Numerical Methods in Problems of Plassa Phystds

8.1. Volkov and A.P. Pedotov. "Numerical Analysis of the One-Dissen-
sional Model of a Plasma Accelerator Mith Mall-Effect Current" 208

LG. Sveshnikov and v.1. Telegin. "Nueriesl Solution of the Vlasov
Equation for tons mum a Spatially Bounded Region" 216

Chapter 10. Numerical Methods in Problems of Geophysics

Ye.V. Zakharov. "A Method of Solving Boundary-Value Problems
of Electrodynamics for Monho-ogeneous Media Mith Axial

Sy-netry" 232

NJ. Mesneyanova. "Integral Equations of Axisylnetric Problens in
the Theory of Blectroaagnetic Caring" 239

Ye. V. 7.skharov. "Method of a Partially Inverted Operator in
Problems of Blectrousgnetic Corina" 265

lbs. Barsshkov and VJ. Dnitriyev. "Solvability of Reverse
Problems of Vertical Probing Relative to the Model of a Layered
Ionosphere 251

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Moskovskogo Universitets. 1978

2615
CSO: 1870

110
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

MAGNETIC IIYDRODYNAHICS

Moscow ZNANIYB, HAGNITNAYA GIDRODINAHIKA, SERIYA FIZIKA in Russian No 2,
Feb 79 pp 2-4. 6!:

lAnnotatlon. table of contents and introduction froa the book by Candidate
in the Engineering Sciences. Yu.A. Birzvslk]

[Text] This brochure is devoted to an inportant field of physics: the
ucienee of the notion of electrically conducting liquids and gases in a
ugnetic field, a new area of knowledge vhich opens up the prospects of
creating high power and high efficiency electrical power generators.

The brochure is intended for a wide circle of readers.

Table of Contents

Physical Aspects 5
General intonation S
Self-excitation and waves 7
The determination of the Issnetic Reynolds nulber 7
The striving of the velocity v to hecoue parallel to the
nagnetic field vector 3. The "freezing" of the us-
netic lines of force 8
The principles of a Hill) dynamo l3
llnu can something which is not there be ”frozen in"? 21
Alfen waves 23
The observations of mo usvas in sunspots 27
A I'm llords shout Plasan 28

Magnetohydrndynnnic Processes on the Sun and in Space near the Earth 36

From the Sky to the Earth: the l’roperties of Man Flows 37
Lealnnr Hill) flow - 37
HIID turhul me lol
Electrical vortex flows 46

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Applied Aspects 69
Man power engineering 49
The magnetic hydrodynamics of liquid metals 50
Pumping liquid metals 50
Hun technology 53
Magnetohydrodynaaic control 56
Electromagnetic rate-of-flow meters 57
HUD using fast neutron reactors SB
Hagnetizing liquids 59
A Somewhat More Rigorous Mathematical Treatment (instead of an
appendix) 60
Conclusion 62
Bibliography 62
introduction

Magnetic hydrodynamics, which was founded by the Swedish scientist Alien,
represents a new, rapidly developing field of physics.

It is known from electrodynamics that an electromotive force will appear in

a conductor if it moves in a magnetic field, intersecting the lines of force,
where this electromotive force leads to the appearance of electrical currents
‘under certain conditions(and practically almost always). In this case, it
makes no difference at all what kind of conductor this is: a frame of copper
wire, a massive conducting body, a conducting liquid or a gas (places) or
soaething else.

0n the other hand, it well known that a force acts oneconductor with a
current in a magnetic field, which causes the conductor to move if it is
not secured. And if the conducting mediua is liquid or gaseous. and its
particles can move relatively freely, then you cannot pin then down at all.
And then the laws of magnetic hydrodynamics begin to be felt.

it seems that everything is simple. In actual fact. the laws governing the
notion of the conducting medium in a magnetic field are neither so simple
not so obvious. Many ususpected effects and nontrivial explanations of
physical phenomena are encountered. These are discussed in this brochure
offered to the readers, which is written by one the leading specialists of
the Institute of Physics of the Latvian 38R Academy of Sciences in the
field of magnetic hydrodynamics, Yu.A. Birsvalk.

work was started in this direction at the institute of Physics more than
20 years ago, and over this tine. a large collective of specialists has
been brought together, who are working on the problems of magnetic

112
FOR OFFICIAL USZ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hydrodynamics. Regular, so-cslled "Riga" all-union conferences are held

in Riga on mnetic hydrodynamics; 1978 aarked 20 years since the tine
when the first such conference was held. They always attract the attention
of specialists of the entire nation. The all-union scientific and engin-
eering Journal, HASNITNAYA GIDRODINAHIKA, is published in Riga, the only
specialized journal on this subject in the world. It is republished in

English in the US. Pioneering work started in Rise in a number of directions
in magnetic hydrodynamics.

The author of this brochure was awarded the republic prize in 1970 for work-
ing out the theoretical principles of conduction HMD punps. As the executive
secretary of the editorial staff of the journal MAGNITNAYA GIDRODINAHIKA. he
is always in the asinstrea- of events. and for this reason, was able to
select fro. the extensive Iaterial that which is lost characteristic of the

developnent of leanetic hydrodynamics at the present tine and in addition,
is sufficiently accessible.

I hope that the reader will read through with interest the brochure offered
here.

Ya. Liyelpeter, correspond-
ing member of the Latvian
SSR Acadeny of Sciences

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Znsniye", 1979

8225
080:1870

113
ton OFFICIAL us: om

3‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VUBLICATIOﬂS

UDC 539.107.6
HIRE DETECTORS 0F ELEMENTARY PARIICLES

Moscow PROVOLOCHNYYE DETBKIORX ELEMENTARNYKR CHASTITS in Russian signed
to press 18 Jan 78 pp 2, 167-168

[Annotation and table of contents from the book by Yu.V. Zanevskiy.
Atomizdnt Publishers, Moscow, 1978, 168 pages, 2,530 copies]

[Text] Hire detectors - spark, proportional and drift chambers - are
widely used in experimental high energy physics and comprise the basis of
the contemporary electron physics experiment. In recent years. proportional
and drift chambers have also been intensively introduced into the related
fields of science and engineering: biology, crystallography. medicine, gamma
ray astronomy. etc.

The operational principles of wire chaabers are presented in the book in
systematic fashion, and their parameters are discussed. Electronic re-
cording equipment is analysed. The areas of application of the chambers
in high energy physics and related scientific fields are indicated.

The book is intended for specialists (engineers, physicists and experiment-
ers), engaged in questionu of particle detection. for students in the upper
level courses and graduate degree condidstes. specializing in the fields of
biology, biochemistry, crystallography and Iedicine.

Some lbl figures. 2 tables, and 268 bibliographic citations.

Table of Contents

Foreword

Chapter 1. Hire Spark Chambers

1.1. Functional principle

1.2. Chambers with ferrite rings

1.3. chambers with magnetostriction readout of inform-
ation (magnetostriction chambers)

VD OU‘U‘ N

nu
ma orncm. use om:
Chapter 2.

Chapter 1.

Chapter 4.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.4. Chambers with a static mcaory using magnetostriction
lines

1.5. Operation in magnetic fields

1.6. Gaseous mixtures

1.7. High voltage pulse supply equipment
1.8. Hultiple spark efficiency

1.9. Spatial resolution

1.10. Time resolution

1.11. Reset time

1.12. Structural design features

1.13. Specific features of the alignment

Proportional Chambers

2.1. Design and development

2.2. Functional principle

2.3. Problems of electrostatics

2.4. Gas amplification and the process of pulse formation

2.5. The gain proportionality limit

2.6. Cnseous mixtures

2.7. Efficiency

2.8. Time resolution

2.9. Spatial resolution

2.10. Dead time

2.11. Operation in magnetic fields

2.12. Low pressure chambers

2.13. Ionization measurements and the identification of
particles

2.14. Problems related to fabrication and alignment

2.15. Information readout

2.16. Areas of application

2.17. Hybrid chambers

Drift Chambers

3.1. Functional principle

3.2. The basic requirements placed on gaseous mixtures

3.3. Modifications of drift chambers

3.4. Spatial and time resolution. Drift chamber efficiency
. Drift chambers in a magnetic field

. Second coordinate readout

. The basic requirements placed on the electronics

. The "scintillation" drift chamber

UUUU
Q
GNOU‘

Installations Using Hire Chambers in high Energy Physics

4.1. Spectrometers for proton accelerators
4.2. Spectrometers for accelerators with storage rings

115
ton orprcraa ass ONLY

15
17
22
23
30
34
36
37
38
41

44

44
45
46
46
50
51
55
57

62
63
64

66
70
73
76
77

79

79
80
81
86
89
91
94
97

100

100
108
4.3.
4.5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Planned installations
Proportional chaabers in experiments with bubble
chambers

Chapter 5. Hire Chambers in Related Fields of Science and Applied
Research

5.1.
5.2.

5.3.
5.6.

5.5.
5.6.
5.7.
5.8.
5.9.

Bibliography

Areas of application

Structural design features of proportional chambers
and infatuation extraction

Methods of estiaating the resolution of installations
Proportional chambers in X-rey radiography and nuclear
Iedicine

Proportional chalbers in neutronogrsphy

Proportional chalbers in X-ray diffraction measure-ant
Radiography using protons and ions

The use of proportional chanbers in radiochronato-
sraphy

The prospects for the application of wire chasbers

in related fields of science and engineering

Index of Terms and Abbreviations Used

COPYRIGBT: Atonizdst, 1978

8225
680:1870

116
ton onrcm. use 0qu

116
119

123
123

126
125

127
136
141
1‘5
150
151
153

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATINS

MAGNETIC-HEM!” LOGIC UNITS “111! MULLED m 01’ MAINS

Hoscow WICHBSKIYE USTROYSTVA NA WITH“ SRBDAKB 8 UPRAVLYAYW
DVIZBENIYBH mm in Russian 1978 signed to press 28 Mar 78 pp 2, 159-160

[Annotation and table of contents tron book by MA. Boyarchsnkov. I”.
Vasol'yeva and Yu. D. Rotsntal'. Energiya. 5,000 copies, 160 pages]

[Text] This book exanines physical principles and problems of practical
realization of logic and switching devices with flat and cylindrical mag-
netic donains. Principal attention is focused on problem of stability of
the domain structure of sagnetic sedia, directional shifting and interaction
of domains. recording and reading of information in nagnetic nedia. The
authors formulate principal requirements on the parameters of domain-
containing naterials. They present circuit solutions for various logic

and switching devices employing flat and cylindrical nagnetic dosains. This
book is intended for scientific personnel and engineers working in theaarea
of development and utilization of new autonatic control and computer hard-
ware devices. as well as undergraduate and graduate students in the corre-
sponding areas of specialization.

Page
Preface 3
Chapter 1. Domain Structure of Perromagnetics 6
1-]. Magnetic Interactions and Areas of Spontaneous bhgnetita-
tion--Donains 6
1-2. Features of the Domain Structure of Thin Poly-
crystalline Magnetic Pills 10

1-3. Dmain Structure of Magnetouniaxial Honocrystalline Films 12

Chapter II. Principles of Controlled Appearance, Growth, Displace-
ment and Interaction of Plat Magnetic Domains (PHD) 13

2-1. General Principles of Construction of PHI) Devices 16

117
ton orncm. use ONLY
2-2a
2-3.
a)
8)

Chapter
3-1a

a)

b)

3-2 .

a)

b)
3-3.

Chapter
Io-l .
4-2o
6-2 .

Chapter

5-1 .
5-2.
5-3.

a)

b)
Chapter
6-1.

0)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Threshold Field of PM) Advance and Regions of Efficiency
Forms and Dimensions of PHI)

Optimal Form of Domains

Dimensions of Kinimum Stable Domains

II. PHD Logic Devices

Principles of Realization of Logic Functions

Elementary Dogic Functions

Triggers

Directional Synchronous Signal Transmission and Shift
Registers

zigzag Shift Registers

Straight Shift Registers

Realization of Random Combination Dogic Functions on the
Basis of Base Functions

Universal Homogeneous PHD Structures

Principal Demands on a Universal Homogeneous Structure
Cell

Principle of Construction of a Quadridirectionel Rib-Type
Homogeneous Structure Cell

Thin Hegnetic Film Homogeneous Structure Cell with PM!)
Rexadirectional Homogeneous Structures

IV. PHD Switching Devices

Zigzag Shift Register Decoders
Straight Shift Register Moders
Cambridge Hemories Selectors

V. Magnetic Unisxial Film for Cylindrical Magnetic
Domains

Static and Dynamic Properties of Cylindrical Magnetic
Domains (TsHD)

Modes of Controlling TsHD Rove-lent

Principal Requirements on Domain-Containing Materials
Epitaxial Ferrite-Garnet Films

Amorphous Films .

VI. TeHD Logic. Arithmetic and Counting Devices

Features of Structure of 'l‘sHD Domain Devices. Control
Circuits and Structural Elements
Coupling Elements

118
roe onrcm. use ORLY

Page

18
22
23
25

30

30
31
37

38
39
42

69
56

S7

59
60
66

67

68
72
76

80

80
87
92
95
98

99

99
102

\
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page
b) m0 Annihilators 103
c) ‘l‘sHD Dividers 106
d) "Dynesic Trap" 107
e) Junction Point Elesents 108
f) "Coepressor" 109
6-2. 'l'sHD Generators 110
6-3. Logic Blesents 113
6-6. Sole Problems of Synthesis of Domain Logic Devices 122
a) Logic Device for Realization of Sy-etricsl Boolean
Functions 126
6) Universal Hetrix bogic Device 129
6-5. Triggers and Counting Circuits 131
6-6. Tall) Aritl-etic Devices 133
6-7. Regions of Stable Operation of Tall!) ﬁle-onto and Devices 139
Chapter VII. Tam Switching Elements and Devices 160
7-1. Classification of. Switching Elements 160
7-2. Switches With Selective Control 161
7-3. TsHD Decoders 147
7-6. Switching Matrices 150
Bibliography 152

COPYRIGI‘I': Izdetel'atvo "Mergiya." 1978

3026
080: 1870

1-19
FOR onrcm. use own
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

CONTACTLESS LOGIC CIRCUIT TESTING AND SIMULATIGI

Moscow STENDOVAYA PROVBRKA I WIROVARIYB BBSKONTAKTNYKR IDGICIIBSKIKB
swam in Russian 1978 signed to press 9 lurch 78 pp 2, inside front cover

[Annotation and table of contents tron book by LV. Antik et al.. I:dste1'-
stvo Energiya. 14,000 topics. 80 pages]

[Text] This book contains a survey of methods and means of testing circuits
of logic elements.

The authors describe and provide technical data on simulators with series
Logika-‘l‘ logic elesents and with series K155 nicmircuits. The authors
examine nethods of bench testing logic circuits, lethods of constructing
tests and nodes of checking thee. Recomndstions are given on setting up
drill and training classes.

This book is intended for designers of industrial process progrs-ed and

logical control systems as well as students specializing in the correspond-
ing fields.

Contents

Page
Preface 3

Chapter 1. Methods and Means of Simulation end resting Circuits With

Logic Blenents I.
1. Functions and Areas of Esploynent of Logic Sinulators la
2. Types of Logic Sinulators 5

3. Automated Logical Circuit Modeling Systems for Designing
and Testing 7
Chapter II. Simulators With Logic Blaents 8
6. Logika-‘l' Series Components 8

.120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Page
5. Description and Specifications of n Sisuletor Uith
Logilta-T Series Conpononts 18
6. K155 Series Hicrocircuita 20
7. Realization of Principal Conbination and Teaporal Logic
Functions 32
8. Description and Specifications of a Silulator Hith K155
Series Hicrocircuits b7
9. hployeent of Logical Siaulatora for Study and Training. 50
Chapter III. Preparation of Test Progr-a and Constructing Tests
on the Basis of Tables of Malfunction Functions 56
10: Preparing Test Progress 5‘
ll. Constructing Tests Based on Tables of Malfunction Functions 58
Chapter IV. Constructing Tests by the Hethod of Significant Paths
and Hith,the Aid of a Logical Sisulator 70
12. Constructing Tests by the Hathod of Significant Paths 70
13. Constructing Tests by the Method of Significanta Paths
Hith Utilization of an Equivalent Jordan Porn 72
16. Construction and Verification of Tests on a Logical
Silulator 78
Bibliography inside back cover

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Energiya." 1978

3026
050: 1870

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUDLICATIWS

UOC 621.396.67
N89 BOOK on ANTENNA ENGINEERING AND TBQNOLOGY

Hoecow ANTENNY. 330mm STATBY (Antennee. Collection of Articlee) in
Rueeien 1978 eigned to preee 22 Feb 78 pp 2, 201

[Annotation end tehle of contente tron hook edited by A. A. Pietol'kore
end puhliehed hy the Scientific end Technicel Society of Radio Engineer-
ing. Electronice end Oo-unicetion ineni A. s. Popov. Irdetel'etvo
"Svyez'." 5.800 copiee. 20l pegee]

[Text] The unique deceneter-weve redio teleecope UTR-Z et the Acedeny
of Sciences of the Uhreinien 881! ie deecrihed. The deeign principlee
end the cherecterietice of ite entennee ere exenined, which ineure e
high directivity ee well en the poeeihility of reception iron verioue
directione end et verioue frequenciee with e high degree of noiee
i-unity end eeey control. Aleo deecrihed ie the deceneter-weve redio
interferouter ORAN-l. Severel erticlee deel with e veriety of problem
in entenne engineering euch u eetileting the reliehility of pheeed
entenne erreye. reredietion entennee. etriplinee with ferrite-dielectric
fillere. end erreye with «itching-type current control.

The collection of erticlee ie intended for ecientiete engeged in work
with entennee.

“rm. of Contents: Paco

Decanter-"eve Redio Teleecope UTR-Z (S. Ye. Breude. A. V. Hen'
end 1.. G. Sodin) 3

Deeign Principles end Cherecterietice of the 0111-2 Redio
Telescope Antennee (A. V. Hen'. L. G. Sodin, N. K. Sherykin.
Yu. H. lreude, P. A. Hel'yenevekiy. G. A. Inyutin end ll. Tu.
Goncherov) 15

Matching the Mdietore with the Pheeing Syeten in Broedhend
Arreye of the 011-2 ledio Teleecope (A. V. Hen' end P. A.
Nel‘yenovekiy) $8

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Noiae-llnune Broadband Antenna Anplifiara (A. V. Hen' and V. P.
llovkun)

Broadband Sta-ins and Matching Devicea for Antenna Arrays
(Va. )5. Brain and c. A. Inyntin)

Binary-Diecrota Delay Linea and Phaaa Shiftara for Electrically
Controllable Broadband Antennae (Yu. H. Bruk and G. A.
Inyutin)

Decanter-Have Radio lnterfaronatar mum-1 (A. L. Babeyko. V. P.
Bovkun. s. L. Brande. A. V. Han' and Yu. Yu. Sargi'yanko)

Eatiuting the Reliability of Phaaad Antenna Arraya (A. V.
Khokhlov and Ye. I. Solokhe)

Rcradiation Antennae Baaad on Conical Dielectric Structurea
(N. A. Bey and V. N. Nitrolthin)

Characteriatic ‘l'raneniaaion Matrix and Matching of Diaaipativa
Hultiport Networka (Yu. P. Voropayav and A. G. Oniahchuk)

Special Peeturea of Striplinea with Ferrite-Dielectric Pillar
(V. P. Prudakiy. V. l. Zeytaev and K. Ya. Vacil'yav)

No-Load Reactanca of an Any-etric Stripline (S. l. Bakharav)

Broadband Directional Couplera Baaed on Nonhonogeneona
Trananiaaion Linea (A. P. Gorbachev and A. B. Romanov)

Calculating the Paranetero of Quaai-Loaped Stnba (V. c. Oaipov)

Radiation Pattern of an Axiayuatric Antenna Array Hith
Switching-hoe Control of Current Amplitude (H. V. Indenbon
and V. S. Pilipov)

Correcting the Phase Brrora in Antennae by Acouatic Hethoda
(N. A. Ye‘aepkina, V. Ya. Petrun'kin, N. A. Bnkharin.
[. A. Vodovatov and S. A. Rogov)

COPYRIGH: Izdatel'atvo "Svyaz'", 1978

2615
680: 1870 BID

123

FOR OPPICIAI. US! ONLY