FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 10384

I2 March 1982

USSR Report

ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT
(FOUO 2/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHTNATION

\ OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT

(3000 2/ 82)

CONTENTS

WICALAND SPACE
Practical Aarodynanica of nel.icoptera..............................
MARINEAND sumummc
'Dock-Ship' Transfer Synten......................................I..
Unnamed Free Subterranean.......................................
mm
Deaign and 'i'cata of Thar-a1 Emission Fuel Blanenta.................
neutron Radiation of Spent Uranium-Thorium Mel....................

Regulating Energy Distribution of Reactor in Second Unit of
3.1m.h" Atmc Pm sutMOOIIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00.00.0000...

Organization of Fuel Utilization at Kola Atonic Power Station. ...._.
Methods for Calculating Gas Liberation and Batinating Danger of

Equation in Radiation-Chain]. Apparatus with Hater Coolant
or 31010810.]. shteldmtotoOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOO

Abatracta of Articlea in Collection 'RADIATIOII SAP!!! (1 “9......
nan-WW I

Power Engineering in Space.........................................

turbogcneratora Using Superconductivity............................

- a - [In - ossn - 212 so:

FOROFII'ICIALUSBONLY

17

21
30

37
39

66

PWO]
run UI'I'ILIAI. 08!. URL!

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY
Adoption 0f Typical System for Enterprise Hana;eeent................
Abstracts Pro- Machine Building Syaposiul..........................
Designing Syatuas for Autolntic mm; of mum. 1:m........
awn-m DEVICES, MICS AID mm
Heavy-Ion Accelerators.............................................
Collection of Papers on Charged Particle Accelerators, Part 1..
Collection of Papers on Charged Particle Accelerators. Part 2. .....

Robu.t mtwtim M mm Mtce.eeeeeaseseeaoaaa-aeeeeeeeaeeeee
FLUID HBCIIANICS

Numerical and Analytical liatluds for Solving Problans in -
hem“. of contim. “MOOOOOOOOOOOO...0.00.00.0'000000000'

Particulars of Shock live Structure for Undemter Explosions
of spu.1 curs."000000[9.00000000000000000000IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

MECHANICS 0P SOLIDS
Oscillations and Stability of Mechanical Systens...................
Load Capacity and Dynanic Properties of Mechanical 8yataaa....'.....
Dynamics of Radiating Gas..........................................

Kinatoatatics of Three-Dilenaional Naomi-a......................
TESTINGANDHAHRIALS

Radiational Danae to Rousing Steel of Hater-cooled Hater-
mer‘t“ Mctorﬁn....o....................oooo...n...........

Measuring Oscillators in Nuclear Blectronica.......................

0.108 Liquid Fuel. .t 10' Twature.aoeeeeaeeaaaeeeeeoeeeeoeeeeae

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

51
SS
63

70
79

87
91
95

104’.
111

"120

123

125
128
131
NAUTICAL A!!!) SPACE

unc 629.735.!» (07)
PRAGTICAL uncommon or aromas

hcscow PRAKTICHBKAYA AQCDDMHIKA MOLEPOV in Russian 1980 (slated to press
16 Oct 79) pp 2. 282-381}

Annotation and table of contents iron book "Practical Aerodynamics of
licoptere". by Vyecheslav Pedorcvich Roussevich and German Alekseyevich Sanoylov,
Voyeuizdat, 13,000.copies, 386 pages]

[Text] Annotation

The book considers the aerodynaaic characteristics, special featuros of helicopter
design. stability and controllability. as well n the answering em! piloting
properties. and special features of helicopter behavior and the teciuique of pilot-
ing for various nodes of flying and ﬂamers.

The book is intended for {lying personnel of VVS Military Aerial Forces]. PVO
[Antiaircraft Defense] and VIP [Military brine set]. It my be recoaaended to
students in military aviation schools and flying personnel of the Hinietry of Civil
Aviation.

TABLE 11' COUTBTI‘S

Page
Introduction 5
anter 1. Basic characteristics and special features of
helicopter aerodynamics 20
1.1. Aerodynaaic design of helicopters -
1.2. AerodyneIic characteristics of helicopter rotors 30
' Rotor propulsion and factors affecting it 31
Set-up angle (pitch) of rotor 32
Space factor of rotor 31»
Peripheral velocity 3?
Shape of vane and profile 1&0
Flying velocity Mb

MOMCIALUEONLY
1.3.

1.“.

Chapter
2.1.

202'

293s
2.1+.

ass.

2.6.
Chapter
3.1.

3.2.

Purpose of horizontal and vertical pivots
Flywheel notion of vanes

Reverse caaber of rotary cone of rotor
Stroke regulator '

Aerodynanic characteristics of basic parts of helicopter
Fuselage

Aerodynanic characteristics of the haulage
Hing

Aerodynanic characteristics of wing
Stabilizer

Aerodynamic characteristics of stabiliser
‘l‘silfin '

Aerodynaaic characteristics of tailfin
Tail rotor

Aerodynaaic characteristics of tail rotors
Onassis of helicopters
Helicopter control systels
Control characteristics

2. Power installations of helicopters

Purpose and arrange-ant of power installations
Engine operating nodes

Operational linitations of cm [Gas Turbine Engine]
and their causes

Basic operating characteristics of helicopter CI‘D
Throttling characteristics

High-altitude characteristics

Velocity characteristics

Effect of atsospheric conditions on the GT1) characteristics
Unstable engine operating nodes

Compressor stalling

eff-design operating nodes of free turbine

Joint operation of rotor and power installation

3. Stability and Controllability of the helicopter

General information

Schentization of helicopter notion in flight. equation
of notion

Easic concepts of stability and cootrollability
Longitudinal stability and controllability

Static characteristics of stability along the angle of
incidence

Special features of helicopter controllability along the
incidence angle (pitch)

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
Static characteristics of stability with change in
velocity of flight
Special features of longitudinal controllsbility with
change in velocity of flight
Stability of longitudinal notion of helicopter

3.3. Side stability and controllability
Static stebilit characteristic along slide angle
(path stability
Static stability characteristics along the bank angle
(transverse stability)
Stability of side notion
Special features of side controllability of helicopter

Special features of controllability when flying with
sliding

. Special features of balancing the helicopter

3 h
3.5. Use of automtic devices in helicopter control systole
Special features of piloting with an autontic pilot

Chapter 1‘. Helicopter flight nodes

15.1. Required and available propulsions and rotor powers
16.2. Vertical flight nodes
hovering
Conditions and special features of hovering
Vertical lift

Conditions and special features of vertical lift
Vertical descent

Conditions and special features of vertical descent

h.3. horizontal flight
Range of velocities and heights of helicopter flight
First and second nodes of sustained horizontal flight

Conditions and special features of a horizontal flight
In“. Ascent along a sloped trajectory

Conditions and special festm-es of ascent
lLS. Descent along. a sloped trajectory '

Conditions and special features of descent

Conditions and special features of RSNB [Mode of
Rotor Autorotation]

Chapter 5. Faneuvering and piloting of helicopter

5.1. maneuvering characteristics and operational linitations
6-forces and flight limitations in unnerved-ins
G-force range of single rotor helicopter
5.2.

5-3.

Sens

5. 5.

Chapter
6.1.

6.2.
6.3.

6.1;.

Chapter

70‘s
7-2.

Horizontal Inneuvsrs
Acceleration and deceleration of helicopter
Turning
Vertical uneuvers
Diving
Steep climb
Spatial aneuvers
Spiral
Stall turn
Steep clinb turn
Special features of maneuvering under maxim:- conditions
Spontaneous descent of helicopter
Spontaneous turning of helicopter
Helicopter ‘spin
Spontaneous increase in nornl s-force on helicopter
when answering
Spontaneous tilt of helicopter due to loss of
effectiveness in transverse control

6. Distance and duration of helicopter flight

Concepts and principles of calculating the distance and
duration of flight

Available fuel reserve _

Hourly and kiloseter fuel consunptions, distance of
horizontal flight

affect of basic operational factors on distance and
duration of flight

Effect of flight velocity

Effect of flight altitude

Effect of flying weight of helicopter

affect of wind

affect of rotor speed.

7. Take-off and landing of helicopter

Special features of noving the helicopter on the ground
and operational limitations

Special features of helicopter take-off and operational
limitations

.{elicopter take-off

Plane take-off
TAM 0? mm

7.3. Speclal featurea of helicopter landing and operational
limitations
Helicopter landing
Plano landing
Landing in the node in rotor autorotation lode
Special features of landing-with a aide wind

Supplement. Basic tactical-tabled data on helicopters

Bibliography
COPYRIGEH‘: Voymiulat . i980

2291
(so: 1861/109
. ..._ —~- we "as

WARD samunnnic

um 629.12.ooz.ze.oot.'zba 539.»
W-SEIP' mm 8181'?!

Hoscov 8mm MW' "nu-mm in Russian 1981 (dazed to press
29 Dec 80) pp 2-1}. 128-129

Annotation, forward. tsble of contents iron book"Dock-ship' Trenster Systel“.
y Viﬁsliy Antonovich Topchiy. Isdstel'etvc Woetmyeniye". 800 copies. 129
P5803

[Text] Annotsticn

Launching ships by using transfer (lsunching) docks is relsted to solving the prob-
les of launching serety. the strength of the ship. the dock and scvsble coupon-its
of the launching devices. ﬁloulstions of the strength of the trsnsfer dock-ship
systen differ ccnsidersbly tron those ads for rsising the ship to s fleeting

dock: launching free e sloped longitudinsl building slip etc.

The book gives the general chsrecteristics of dock-ship systes cclpcnents st e11
stages of launching. Thecreticsl buses ere givm for cslculsting the strengths of
the ccnponents of this systes (by the finite slant, kits and Kcrdyucv

sechode). Use of the finite shunt nethcd ‘ to solve the ststic indeterninecy
of the dock-ship transfer systes is illustrsted by msples.

The book is intended for design engineers and planners of shipbuilding enterprises.
end it say be useful to students of shipbuilding we end we depart-eats.

Phi-sword

Leunching sediun later displsceeent ships non building slips by fleeting repsir
docks or iron trsnster (launching) docks especislly nde for this purpose is widely
used in donestic end foreign shipbuilding. At present, dossstic design organise-
tions end shipbuilding enterprises hsve e csosidersbls enunt of experience in de-
signing end apex-sting lsunching conpleates Iith transfer docks which nkes it pos-
sible to schieve all the sdvsntsges of their use end to deterlins the best sethods
end facilities for safe humming.

Infestation on the indiosted experience in scientific~technicsl litereture. in
perticulsr. thet cbtsined in recent yesrs. cennct be considered sufficient. In a
number of fundssntel pspers. deveted to ship launching. specisl feetm-es of
launching coeplentes with trsnsfsr docks ere considered in the desist aspect. or

MWWONLY
lattioned only in general terns which my be due to the trend toward specific
topics in the papers, as well as the position occupied until rsoatly by the use
of transfer docks and a nulber of other Iethods for launching ships. In periodi-
cals devoted to launching ships. there is very little inforntion on problem and
aethods for insuring the strength of the ships. the transfer dock and other coa-
ponente of the couples with this type of launching. This paper presents lethods
for calculating the transfer dock-ship systea and gives a sunbea- of reoollendstione
on isplemting practical calculations on the strength of this systea's coapenents
with all of filling the above-sentioned blanks to a certain degree.

of the deck supports. presence end type of hydraulic systea of the ship-canying
train etc.). the essential changes in the process of launching,external forces and
the interaction conditions between the dock and ship predeternine the necessity of
considering several calculation arrange-ants of the transfer dock-ship systes which
leads to the necessity of using various aethods within one calculation; for mal-
ple. at the basis of which lie power lethods. reduction of the problel to calcula-
ting heels on an elastic bass and other aethods using sisilar parable-s (raising
the ship to a dock. launching fro- a longitudinal building slip etc.)for the
solution. This circulatancs. along with the necessity of mking a series of cal-
culations even within the linits of one launching period. detersined the selection
of the finite eleuent method, one of the lost perfect and miversal lethods for
calculating coaplex ship designs. as the basic sethod. devoid of the above-sen-
tioned inconvenience.

This paper Pl'ovidss a einisua aaount of data on this sethod needed; for practical
calculations of rod structures which represent the transfer dock-ship systea, and
recousndations are given for the preparation of initial data. decoding the calcu-
lation results according to prograas prepared for the "Hinsk- " computer.

ﬂaking approxiaste calculations of the transfer dock-ship systea ny be useful and
efficient at the initial stages of the launch at the launch couple! of the enter-
prise. hethods of these calculations presented in this book nke it possible to
obtain relatively silply and quickly the necessary data for the special features
of operation of the launching systea at various stages.

The author expresses his gratitude to staff workers of the ”Construction Mechanics
Depart-ant of the Kolsoaol'sk-on-slur'? Pelytechnioal Institute, V. D. Zhestksya

and N. A. Terenukhs. who ads a series of calculations. the results of which were
used in the book.

Table of contents

Page
Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Launching ships by transfer docks and problem of
insuring the strengths of the ship dock and lovable
colponents of the launching devices 5
1. Certain special features of launching ships by transfer docks 5
mapter 1 . (continued)

2.

General defer-tion characteristic of the transfer

dock-ship system Values and content of strength
calculations

Chapter 2. Merlination of interaction reactions in the

transfer dock-ship systea by the finite element
nethod (Fm

Basic m relationships as applied to the calculation of
transfer dock-ship syste-

calculation of the transfer dock-ship systea by “nit!
ale-en: nethod on the "Minsk-22" conputer. Preparation
of the initial data. Decoding results of calculations

certain features of checking colponent strength of the
transfer dock-ship systea
Maple of calculating the transfer dock-ship syste- by

' the finite element - nethod on the "Minsk-22" coaputsr

Chapter 3. Strength calculations when launching ship by ship-

7.
8.

carrying train equipped with hydraulic syste-

Features of using hydraulic systeu when launching by leans
of transfer docks. calculation schene
Eta-ple of calculating the transfer dock-ship systes when

using the group hydraulics of the ship-carrying train

Chapter 15. Approxirats calculation of the transfer dock-ship systes

9. Basic relationships of approximate Isthods for calculating
the transfer dock-ship syste-
10. calculation of dual support transfer dock-ship systea.
(has of transfer dock with three supports
11. Approximate calculation of single support transfer dock-ship
systen
Conclusion
Appendix
Bibliography

cm: Iadatel'stvc "Sudostroyeniye'. 1981

2291
(30:

1861/89
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

um 629.127.4-52
W FREE SMRSIBLES

Leningrad AMTICHBSKIYB PODVODNYYE APPARA‘I'! in Russian 1981 (signed to press
10 Feb 81) pp 5-6. 219-221

[Annotatiam authors' preface and table of contents from book "Unmanned Free Sub-
mersibles". by Mikhail Dmitriyevich Ageyev. Boris Anatol'yevich Kasatkin, Lev
Vladimirovich Kiselev. Yuriy Gennad'yevich Holokov, Vladimir Vasil'yevich Nikiforov
and Nikolay Ivanovich Rylov. Izdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye". 3100 copies. 224 pages]

[Text] An examination is nade of planning and design of free submersibles. no-
tion control in hydrophysical measurements in a water stratum. exploration of
bays and searching for sunken objects under conditions of complicated bottom re-
lief. The authors show the functional nakeup and structure of control systens,
nethods of navigation and makeup of navigational exploration equipment.

Information is given on the shipboard complex and narine equipment for data pro-
cessing. Develop-ant of the Sket unmanned free submersible is su-arised. and
an analysis is made of a nuaber of original problems that met be solved in de-
signing submersibles.

The book is intended for specialists engaged in developing free submersibles and
their systems.

Authors' Preface

The field of submersibles had its inception comparatively recently. and is cur-
rently going through a developmental stage. Submersibles that have been developed
in the past are quite diversified. Some of then have become widely known. and
developnent on them is continuing. In addition to vehicles for which. figurative.
ly speaking, "the principal source of information is the headlight". more and
more recognition is being given to unmanned submersibles. or underwater robots

as they are often called. This is no accident; manned suboersibles have nany
advantages that have been proved in practice. and present-day advances in tech-

. nology, especiany in electronics. as sell as the new research nethods' that they
have engendered. are a good basis for their further development.

Judging free the persistent but isolated reports of the survey information press.

such vehicles are being intensively developed and used outside the Soviet Union
in a wide range of underwater work.

WWWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among unmanned submersibles, an important part is played by self-contained. self-
propelled vehicles with programmed control that are automatic facilities for study-
ing the ocean.

M principal distinguishing features characterise unmanned submersibles: absence
of a connecting cable to the surface vessel. and small overall dimensions. In
themselves. these features are not yet advantages. but they can be turned into
advantages if the "brain" concentrated in the small space of the vehicle iv equip-

ped with such functions as would to some extent compensate for the absence of
a connecting cable.

During operation. the automatic submersible has limited capabilities for hmn
com-unications. and therefore it must carry a set of devices thet‘eneure normal
operation, accunlation of information. and self-preservation in extreme situa-
tions. This complex must include:

information-measurement devices (including navigational) that form a representation
of the ambient enviromnent and state of the vehicle;

a control system that perceives and processes information and trannits control
comands;

actuating devices that realize the commands of the control system;

facilities for at least intermittent human comeunication (input-output and col-tuni-
cation devices).

Hith respect to their properties, utnanned vehicles can be classified as under-
water information robots that comprise a separate class of submersible robotic
systems. This circumstance. which is substantiated from general procedural prin-
ciples in the book by V. s. Yastrebov et al.. "Podvodnyye roboty" [Underwater
Robots], Leningrad, Sudostroyeniye. 1977. is of great importance for consideration
of fundamental problems of designing both the autonomous systems and the vehicle
as a whole.

Experience in development of automatic vehicles is still rather sparse; many of
their capabilities are so far not being used to solve urgent problems of investi-
gatioa of the ocean. Automatic vehicles that belong to the first generation of
robots are functionally simple, their actions can be rigidly progrmed. However,
even such devices that are unperfected in many respects can be successfully used
in many underwater jobs. Recently the idea has been formulated and implemented

of changing to multipurpose vehicles with adaptive behavior, the control structure
and design confirming to unified requirements that ensure the most efficient oper-
ation when there is a change in the external conditions and internal state of

a vehicle. In our opinion, the time has come to generalize available knowledge
and experience in the development of unmanned free submersibles. That is the

idea behind this book.

The initial material for the book has mainly been results of research on the Skat
and Skat-geo vehicles done at the Institute of Automation and Control Processes
of the Far Eastern Science Center of the USSR Academy of Sciences, as well as
certain ideas aimed at further improvement of these vehicles.

10

POROFFIGALIISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Collectives of two laboratories at the Institute took part in developing the vehi-
cles: the laboratory of underwater vehicle systems. and the laboratory of navi-
gation and control systems. The authors thank workers at these laboratories,

as well as all who helped sake this book possible.

This is a multiplan book, since the problems involved in developing automatic
vehicles are also multiples. In addition. some of these problems are characterized
by unconventional formulation of goals and so far do not have final solutions.

This has obviously had its effect on the content of the book, and is responsible
for some of its shortcomings. The greatest claims may be brought against the

style of exposition of individual chapters, which are wirtten in "different lan-
guages" due to the very diverse nature in a physical sense of the problems that

are considered. For sample, the second chapter, which deals with general princi-
ples of constructing vehicle control systems. is written in the language of compu-
ter technology with its attendant terminology. The third to fifth chapters examine
problems on motion control and navigation. using mathematical methods of the theory
of regulation and random processes. The sixth chapter gives a rather detailed
description of the design of the Skat vehicle (this chapter is somewhat reminis-
cent of an engineering description).

The book does not reflect all aspects of development of manned submersibles.

but only those that have seemed to us to be the most important. and to which the
literature has given little attention. For exasple. no consideration has been
given at all to ensuring strength of hulls of deep-water vehicles, hydrodynamics.
power engineering, manufacturing technology and so on. For all these questions.
the reader can address himself to known works, in particular to the monograph
"Proyektirovaniye podvodnykh apparatov" [Design of Submersibles] by A. N. Daitriyev
(Leningrad, Sudostroyeniye. 1978), that has become a reference on the subject.

The authors thank the reviewers, Professor, Doctor of Technical Sciences V. S.

Yastrebov and Professor, Doctor of Technical Sciences 1. D. Ikonnikov, who made
some valuable consents on improving the manuscript. The authors are especially
grateful to Candidate of Technical Sciences G. x. Krylov. who did considerable

scientific editing of the work.

Contents page
Preface 3
Authors' Preface 5

Chapter 1: State of the Art and Outlook for Development of Unmanned Free

Suhmersibles 7
l. Designation-and types of unmanned free suhmersihles 7
2. Underwater jcbs handled by unmanned free submersibles ll
3. Some problems of designing on-board systems of unmanned free submersibles 18
Chapter 2: General Structure of Systems of Unmanned Free Submersibles 25
lo. Principle of design of unnamed free euhmereibles 25
5. Information relationship between systems 31
6. Organization of prograemed control no
Chapter 3: Motion Control of "manned Free Submersibles 51
7. Organization of vehicle motion 51
8. Reference program trajectories 55

11

“WNW?
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

9. Motion control in exploring anoneloue fields

10. Motion control close to the botton with coupler relief

Chapter lo: Dynamics of Underwater Vehicle

11. Equation of notion. Hydrodynanic characteristics

-12. Stabilization of notion velocity

13. Depth controllability

14. Stabilization and notion stability in the vertical plane

15. Course stabilization syste-

Chapter 5: Navigational Support of Operation of Underwater Vehicle

16. Methods of navigational support and vehicle makeup .'

17. Range-finding systems. Particulate of hydroacoustic navigation

18. Hethods of processing range-finder navigational intonation and
accuracy analysis

19. Signal reception fron pulsed hydroacouetic navigational system

20. Data processing and conplexing of autonomous and hydroecoustic
navigational eyetene

Chapter 6: The Skat Unmanned Free Submersible

21. Experience in developing and using the Skat vehicle

22. General characteristics of Shat-geo vehicle, makeup and deeignation
of its systene

23. Vehicle design and configuration

214. Construction and interaction of principal systena of the vehicle

Conclusion

References

COPYRIGHT: Irdatel'stvo "Sudostroyeniye". 1981

6610
C80: 1861/71

12

MWWONLY
NUCLEAR “m

UN621.039.9I8
mammwmmmm

Moscow PROYKTIROVANIYB I mama WON!“ m in Minn 1981
(signed to press 2 Dec 80) pp 2. “-5, 96

[Annotatiom introduction and table of contaits tron book "Design and Tests of
Thernl hission luel newts”. by Vladilir Ivanovioh Bashatyy. Vladisir
Aleksandrovich hyevskiy, Viktor Vesil'yevich Binyavskiy and Valeriy Geront'yevich
Petrovskiy. Atosisdat, 960 copies. 96 P880]

[Text] Annotation

The book considers engineering aspects of creating power generating channels (n)
of the basic unit of the thersoesission reactorgenerator. Basic attuntion is
given to the design and teohmlog of anuIacture of the at: and the loop channel.
optiaisation of geonetry and calculation of the I! and loop channels. reactor loop
installation. Iethode for carrying out all tests and investiation stages. the
analysis of test results and causes of characteristic changes and failm'ea.

The book is intended for engineers and staff personnel working in the area of
direct conversion of energy and nuclear power. It will be useful to instrmtors
and students of engineering-physical and power vus.

Two tables. Fifty-one illustrations. Bibliography contains 91 titles.
Introduction

The last several decades were characterised by intmsivo investigations and the
practical inpleamtation of new electric power comes based on direct (without
nachinee) conversion or thersel to electrical clergy.

Thor-ossiuion power installations have certain edmtages. especially if they are
used as independent. sources of electrical power higher than several kilowatts.
These advantages are sainly sisplioity o! nerg'y conversion and the possibility of
operating the power installation at high operating tesperatures and at the high
bottos tesperatm-e of the theraodynasic cycle. Ihioh is a necessary condition for
operating space power installations where expendable heat of the thermdynalio
cycle my be reaoved only by radiation [1].

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e -e- an. e ewe-nu any“ Movie.

Various types of theraoeeission power installations are being considered: solar
and isotopic (low power [2]), and high telperature superstructures added to the
usual electric power plants and AB which the it possible to increase plant effi-
ciency to 505 [1-3]. However. the advantages of thernoeeission conversion (T2?)
are denonstrated to the greatest degree when they are located directly in the
core ‘ the nuclear fission reactor. for which mrpose the TD are coabinsd
with the fuel slemts into a single theraoelission ﬂiel eleaent. In the uses.
such a thernoeaission fuel ale-ant is more frequmtly called an electrogenerating
channel (In) while single. series connected T3 are called electrogenerating
eleaents (m . A reactor .‘ core ease-bled .tron such but together with regu-
lating devices and a systea for seating the colpoeition of the interslectrode
Iediun and heat reeoval for-s a thernoeaission reactor-converter (reactor-generator)
in which not only heat is generated. but the entire cycle of converting the heat

is implemented. Practical steps on creating power installations of such a type
were initiated by and. under the direction of LI. Bondarenko. cullinated in

successful tests, in the 088R. of the “Tom." the first reactor-converter [16, 5]
in the world.

the basic problem in creating such an installation is the developmt of an effi-
cient and reliable E! [6]. Since it is ilpossible. under laboratory conditions.
to provide actual conditions for operating mltielenent E3, the nin stage of their

M reactor tests, in their turn. required solutions of a nuaber of additional
problem in connection with hking these tests. such as: developing a loop chan-
nel for my: tests [1, l+~6]. creating universal reactor loop installations with gas-
vacuun. thermal and electric system and. in a number of cases, also nodemising
the core of research reactors [7]. developing methods for mking prereaotor,
reactor and postreactor tests. as well as nethods for monitoring and diagnostics

Several monographs [8-10] as well as textbooks [2.1] and popular publications were
published in the USSR on problems related to theraoelission energy conversion.
However, all these papers were devoted to the basic study of the thernoenission
converter as a laboratory device and they, with the exception of papers [1.2].
practically do not touch on the engineering aspects of creating thernoeaiesion
power installations. There is no intonation in these papers on experiaental fin-
ishing-off of the n. including design. calculation and sethods for testing the

with this book, the authors are atteapting. even though partially. to lake up for
the existing deficiency.

16

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Basically. the book describes results obtained by the authors thelelvee; however.
published nterials of other authors. which could be expended upon iron the ease
positions. were utilised.

The lisited else of the book nde it isposeible to include a nusber of sections.

for example, on teckmical diagnostics. autonticn of the loop esperisent etc..
which will be systemtised in the book. "Principles of Engineering Magnetics of
Thar-conission Fuel moments.” The authors intend to write this book in the very
near future and it will be a logical continuation of this book.

Since the thersoesiesion sethod has recently becose a subject of broad investig-
tion, it still has no set tersinolosy in this area; however. in writing about this
Isterial . the authors attempted to follow recossendations in the handbook
"Thar-ossission conversion of berg" (Hoscow, 1971). prepared by the International
Cossunications Group on TIP.

All criticise with regard to the stated nterial. style of presentation and the
cited results will be gratemlly received by the authors.

The authors express their gratitude to Ye. )1. Strel'nitskaya for her help in
shaping the nnuscript.

Table of cantata

Page
Introduction 1*
Chapter 1. Special features in converting energy in therno-
esission ms and sultielesent sex 6
1.1. Basic characteristics of thersoesiseion ms 6
1.2. Cluracteristio features of n 12
Chapter 2. Designs and sanufacturing technology of thereo-
esiseion El and loop channels 15
2.1. Basic design-structural problem of a: development 15
2.2. Basia: features of m and n of various types 19
2.3. Design of loop channels 2"
2.1;. Manufacturing technology of thersoesission m and n 28
erupts: 3. Principles of calculating thersoesieeion loop channel 3:.
3.1. Dptisal geosetrical dissnsions of thermsission ale-ants 310
3.2. Calculation of current-voltage curves and thernl fields
of thersoesissicn m 37
3.3 Calculating current-voltage curves-of sultislesentlcx and profiling
m lengths in accordance with height of ﬂ 39
3.10. Therm calculation of the heat renewal systes.
thersoetat and other units of the loop channel '01.

15

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
Chapter

Table of Contents

b. Features of loop installations of research nuclear
reactors for testing therloelission fuel slenenta

15.1. Purpose and conpositicn of loop installation
15.2. Thermhydrsulic and gas vacuun systen of the loop
installation .
15.3._ Electrical circuit of loop installation
1M}. heaaurenent of basic technological chracteustice of
loop channel
anapter 5. Methodology and technique of akin; loop tests of.
theraoenisaicn fuel ale-ants
5.1. Basic stages of reactor tests of thernoenissicn loop
channels
5.2. Reactor tests and investigations of special prototypes
of loop channels
5.3. Vacuum preparation of n and loop channel
5.“. Loading loop channel into the reactor and unloading it
fron the reactor
5.5. Start-up of ER, change in power. planned stop
5.6. Methodology of taking investigations during reactor
tests of u
5.7. Features of skin; life taste of El
Chapter 6. Analysis of basic results of reactor tests of
thernoeniasion fuel ale-ante
6.1. General results of taste
6.2. Effect of cesiun vapor pressure on I! characteristics.
Transfer from diffusion node of operation to the
discharge node
6.3. Effect of collector teaperature on n characteristics
6.“. Effect of thernl power and enitter telperature on 3!
characteristics. m1 efficiency of n
6.5. Anonaloua current-voltage curves
6.6. Resource change in power characteristics and basic
changes and failures of m. n and loop channel designs
Bibliography

WRIGHT: Atonindat . 1981

2291

mo. 1861/86
”WWW?

UDC 621.039.51:621.039.667.9

NEUTRON RADIATION OP SPENT URANIUM-T30R10! FURL

”03cm AWAYA mmm in Russian Vol 51, No 2, Aug 81
(manuscript received 23 Jun 80) PP 125-126

[Article by II. 8. Shin-hem“

[Text] Omnidereble intereet he: recently been Inhibited in the thorn- fuel cy-
ole. The use of thorium in high-towereture and other power reactore ie attractive
primarily tron the viewpoint of longvtern emport of nucleer power engineering with
reletively inexpeneive tuel. Moreover, 0-233 ie eocuuleted in the fuel in thie
cue. which can he need along with 0-235 and lax-239 ee the tieeionehle mount
atter regeneration. We eetintee eleo indicate the procpecte or the thoriu
cycle [1].

One or the oneplioating Sectors \pon regeneration of epent uraniu-thorim ruel
end emaequent nee of the produced regenerate up be the high level of hard radi-
ation ceueed by eooumletion of 0-232 and ita decey producte [2]. true the view-
point ot predicting the expected radiation eituetion, it ie of intereet to else
have available data on the neutron redietion or this tueluite intenaity and ener-
gyepectrun. Sotaraeweknov, thereerenotyetenycorreepondingemrinentel
dete.

Yuld Of Neutron Radiation of Spent (M‘M)’M1 With ma.“ MID end
Different Cooling Tine After mloeding true the Reactor, 103 neutron/pkg U-‘l‘h

 

l. Duran). fire 2. twd: yeare
FOR OFFICIAL LS! ONLY

An attenpt was nade in this paper to obtain the required estimates by calculation
for the initial stage of the thoriun cycle when the accrued operating tins of the.
U-233 occurs in uranium-thorns: fuel. The results of quantitative analysis of
irradiated spherical fuel elenents of type Ava were used in this case [3]. .-'he
initial Til-232' 0-235 and (1-238 content in the fuel elenent was 81.9, 16.8 and

1.3 percent, respectively. The extent of fuel burnt; varied fro. 0.29 to 1.02
titan The 111-232. Pa-231, 0-232-236 and (1-238. tip-237, ”238-242, ”-241, Ale-243
and Ce-242 and (an-244 content was determined upon analysis.

The yield of neutron radiation and its mergy spectra were calculated similar to
how this was done in [4, 5] for spent Dog-fuel. Based on interpolation of the val-
ues of the individual nuclide content for four selected burmp value v (w - 0.3.
0.5, 0.8 and 1.0 percent fife), the partial yields of spontaneous fission neutrons
and neutrons of the (um-reaction in oxygen were determined. The values of the
total neutron yield Yn are given in the table. Curves that characterize the ratio
of contributions of the most inportant neutron emitters for (mrmzbfuel with
burnup of 0.5 and 1.0 fifa and variation of these contributions as the cooling af-
ter irradiation increases are presented in figure 1.

   

 

Imdnpkn 11-”

I 125.5070“! orrsottnupa
0 b (2)

Figure 1. Partial contributions of Individual Nuclidee to Neutron Yield of
Spent (mg-11102)-m1 with Burlap of 0.5 (a) and 1.0 fifa (13) and
Their Dependence on Cooling Tine After Irradiation. The initial
mass coaposition of the fuel was 81.9 percent Th-232' 16.8 percent
u-235 and 1.3 percent ”-238

Key:
1. Neutrons/s-kg u-ih 2. Md! years

An increase of Yn with burnup for freshly unloaded fuel (tvyd - 0) corresponds to
the function r" : w3‘3, which essentially coincides with the function found for
uranium fuel [4]. The exponent for cooled fuel is somewhat less and varies in the
range of 3.3-3.0 for cooling of 0-10 years.

with burnup up to 0.6 fife, the deter-pining factor is the contribution of Pu-238
and the neutron radiation of 0.444 begins to predominate gradually with high

 

.Batio of the total hunter of fissions in the fuel to the initial nuIber of fie-
sionable nuclei (editor's note).

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOFﬂCIALUSBONLY

bur-nap. The partial yields of individual nuclides for uraniIm-thoriue and uraniun
fuel at similar values of burnup differ very strongly. The total yield of neutrons
Yn also differs by approximately two orders. It is obvious that this is explained
by the different initial cowositicn of the fuel, primarily by different percentage
content of 0-235 and 0-238 in it. the fraction of 0-238 is approximately 97 per-
cent in the W!!! [water-nodereted, water-cooled power reactor) fuel and this value
is approximately one-half as much for AVE fuel. The contribution of reactors in
0-235 that lead to for-nation of Pu-238 is accordingly considerably greater in avn
fuel and the neutron radiation of (ht-244 begins to doeinate only with high burnup
and the relative ometribution of Pu-238 neutrons decreases. The thorium itself
and the nuclides fouled during its irradiation in a reactor do not produce signif-
icant neutron radiation. me partial neutron yields of 0-232 and 0-233 with burnup
of 0.8-1.0 fife do not exceed 1 percent of the total yield ‘13.. Accumulation of
nuclides of the 0-232 decay chain increases slightly—by 3-5 percent-with the
sane burnup Ya.

I.

HN~

20
II

OIII’JEII’IO
- f5.”(x,

Figure 2. Energy Spectr- of Neutron Radiation of Spent (002:1h02)°Puel With
Burnup of 0.5. (l). 1.0 (2) ad 1.0 (3) fits and - 2.35, 2.17
and 2.21 ”av. respectively. For curve 3. tvyd - 1 years

Key:
1. MeV

The initial content of 0-235 and 0-238 will determine the neutron radiation intens-
ity of spent uraniurthoriun fuel even in the case of a closed thoriua cycle.

Thus. according to our estimates one can expect that the neutron yield at t )3, - 0
will comprise approximately 9.4-103 neutrons/pkg of we: for fuel with init .1
ratio of 111-232: 0-233: 0-235: 0-238 - 92.4: 2.4: 4.7: 0.5 [6] and burnup of
approximately 1.0 fife for the eqilibriua cycle of the htgr reactor in which re-
generated uraniua and 0-235 oaks-up are used. the presence of 0-233 in the fuel
and the accuaulation of 0-232 with repeat utilization of uraniu- regenerate in the
reactor have essentially no effect on the neutron radiation intensity of the spent
M1.

Calculations showed that the energy spectra of neutrons also vary considerably with
an increase of burnup (Pigure 2). The energy spectrue of neutron radiation of 002-
11102 fuel varies appreciably even after it is unloaded free the reactor. The rela-
tive contribution of neutrons of (am-reactions increases over time and the hard-
ness of the apectru increases. we recall that the neutron spectrum of uranim
fuel of power reactors. on the contrary, softens as cooling tine increases [5).

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of uteniua end thorium cubidee in the thorium cycle instead of ureniu

and thorium oxides should not result in appreciable mietion of the level of neu-

tron radiation of the fuel since the yield of (cm-nectim on thick targets 0!

0C and 002 diffen by no none then 30-50 percent et 8“ - 5.0-6.5 Nev [7, 8].
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Protsonho, A. 3., awn m 23 mm, 100 1. 1978.

2. Yuma. 1.. II. .1: n1. AMYA macm, V01 45, No 1. 1978.

3. M201, 0. end A. mnteiro doe Sentoe, in. noceedinge of the Fourth Inter-
national 'i‘rensplutoniun ﬁlaments Winn, mutant-Rev York, 3.4!. mush-
ing Gummy, 1976.

4. mun-ma, N. 8., Amara mm. Vol 49, No 5. 1980.

5. Shir-enslave, 'N. 8., 10¢. cit.

6. aw, 1.. 0t .1. REVIEW 0? mom PHYSICS, Part 2, V01 50, No 1, 1978.
7. hidden, 8. and A. hulun, AWIB. V01 30, 1977.

8e ““3 De and A0 mm' Mutton Yield. Ital (NH-mam in til. Light
Elements. Report AIRS-R 9195, 1918.

COPYRIGEIT: Energoizdat, "Atomeya cnergiye". 1981

6521
C50: 8144/096

20

MWUSEONLY
,MOI’FICIALUSEONLY

UDC 621.039.50

REGULAIING MR6! DISTRIBUTIN 0F REACTOR IN. SECOND UNIT 01’ BM
ATMIC PWBR STATIC! MMYA

Hoocow WA ENERGIYA in Motion Vol 51, No 2. Aug 81
(aenuecript received 7 Jul 80) pp 91—95

[Article by O. L. Bochenkov, v. G. Dmayev, It. A. maneteov, I. A. Luk'yanete,
V. V. Mal'taev, P. ‘1'. Potapenko. V. N. Sarylov, 8. I. snitko. Ye. V. Pilipchuk and

A. G. Shaynklanl

[next] Operation ot ma reactors or the Beloyerekaya A38 inani I. v. Kurohatov
(3338) deeonetrated the eoonmio effectiveneee of nuclear amerheating of stea-
that has now achieved further develop-ant in the project of the ant-n [1). Equal-
ized energy dietrihution and optimum ratio o: outpute for production and euperheat-
ingofateeninthethereal halanoem-thenainteinedintheoorevhmoperating
power reactore of the given type. theretore, the experience or eolving theee prob-
lene with reepecttotheerieting reactoreotthennsiaaleo ueeiulvhenvorking
out effective control algorithee for the ant-n.

An algoritha for controlling the poeitione of the control rode (38) at eteady
power levels fortheum-ZOOreactorheamvheenpropoeedvhiohenaureetheheet
equalization of energy dietribution in the some or the aelected entire emotion
with a given eat of production restriction.

Poetulation of the problem. (merging of the NIB-200 includes 998 production chan-
nels (11:): 732 eveporative ohennele (IR) and 266 ewerheeting channels (PK) end
the letter are located in the center of the core, altemting’rova with the III. A
total of 78 control rode ie eleo located in the reactor core.

Controlling the operation or the reactor requiree that a atrictly epeoitic ratio

of output or the euperheating end evaporative circuite he provided (1 . NPR/NI: '-

- oonet) and that the energy dietribution Q(r) equal throughout the core radius be
Iaintained [2]. This ie achieved in practice by phyeioal profiling: by a corre-
eponding arrengeeentoithe'rxvith ditrerent mniuendnSenriohnentend aleo
by profiling the fuel hurmp through the reactor radiue. the core in conditionally
divided according to the arrangement or the or into {our ocnoentrioo acnee charac-
terized by given new veluee or the neutron mltiplication factor 1:2; to: phyaical
oalculatione.

mder operating oonditicne, it recharging and uranium hurnq: are selected ed that
the-eon valuee of M in each iaolated region oorreepond to the given veluee at

21

POI OFFICIAL USE‘MY
POI OFHCMI. USE ONLY

steady energy distribution per-1t: on. to use linearized oquations with aspect to
control rods calculated on the halo of physical calculation. uncover, the har-
monic: national provloualy wen occluded from the “19!:th faction.
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

working out the computer program which nade it possible to reduce the calc '.ating
time by approximately an order of magnitude when mud to [6] .

Let us select vectoss Q and 9° of the production chamel output of the core as
components 9; and Qi with actual and given energy distribution. 'no eliminate ex-
tras requirements on the capacity of the internal storage of the cowuter. by
analogy with (6] let us divide the core into p polycells with amber of production
channels ineachofthenllpandletusdetarsinethemeanoutputoftheproduction
channel for each polyoell at the actual and given energy distribution:

¢,=.ﬁ'_20,,‘0;=.w‘;.203, pal...” P. (1)

Variation of the deviation of mean output of the production channel of each polycell
froe its value at given energy distribution is written as a function of the control
vector on the k-th control step with regard to equation (1) in the for:

I ~,' ‘-
we):= .--"—o;+w‘;>3makeup», «2»
9-! 1-1
p==i. .... P.

where aij are the coefficients of the static matrix of the reactor model. 69 ) is
the reactivity introduced by the j-th control rod at the k-th control step 'n
is the nusber of control rods.

Thernophysical calculations and operating practice show that selection at maxim:
output of the AME-200 is essentially not affected by the lit for which the safety
factor to maximum output of the channel It” exceeds 1.3 [4]. nu. permits one to
take into account the heat engineering restrictions of type

d-‘ (1 + l-ﬁla‘l‘psn) (“no (3)

only for those lit in which the “has of K‘ 0"” satisfy the relation qm-l) .<_

i 1.3 + A. where 29"” - 1MP" , ‘naks is a constant inversely proportional to
the minimum permissible value of the safety factor at given level of heat engineer-
ing reliability of the reactor and A is a value established experimentally pro-
vided that x“ ) in en. xx not included in inequality (3) is not reduced to a value
less than 1.3 at the k-th control step.

The restrictions on the steam superheating temperature at the output free the pro-
duction channel can be written with regard to the linearity of the reactor aodel in
the form of the inequality:

71".”3'5.‘ g‘fﬁPWSC-un ‘ (4)

26

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where T‘k‘l) is the steam temperature at the output from the l-th superheating
channellat the end of the (k - l)-th control step, 51 is the proportionality con-
stant that relates the relative variation of output of the ldth P! to the 'ncrease
of steam teQerature at its output and Tax. is the maximal permissible steam tem-
perature at the output from the PK. since the radial energy distribution of the
man-200 is rather stable. to reduce the total umber of restrictions , inequality '
(4) can be taken into account only for those PR, the steam temperature at the out-
put from which exceeds the average superheated temperature throughout the reactor.

Raving supplemented inequalities (3) and (4) by relations of type
a‘,”<69§»<°”' “Sugo, 1-1. .... n (5)

(here got) and 80‘) are the lower and upper maximum values of reactivity introduced
by the 3-th contgol rod which are determined by control requirements) and

was; Wan“. ‘6’

where YO‘) is a constant that determines the overcospensation of automatic control
rods of total output and C is the error of maintaining the balance of reactivity

which is selected in the range of the error of the system for monitoring the posi-
tion of the control rods, we find the total number of restrictions of the problem

in the form of relations (3)-(6). Let us select the norn 'L. .33?“ pl A09”

that characterizes the mximum nodulus of the difference of the mean output of the
production channel of the polyoell for all polycells at the actual and given energy
distribution as the entire function of the problem of the optimum control of con-
trol rod positions. The initial problem then reduces to the form of linear pro-

graning problems by introduction of the nonnegative variable V -D-T...‘--P| 509”

and by supplementing the system of restrictions (3)-(6) by inequalities

-U<AO‘.”<1I. P-i. P. (7)

The linear programing problem, equivalent to the initial control problem, is form-
ulated as [8]:

Minimize y (8)
at restrictions (3)-(7) with lady) determined by relations (2).

Using the introduction of additional variables into relations (3)47), problen (8)
easily reduces the linear programing problems to canonical form and it is suffi-
cient to introduce a single artificial variable to find the first permissible basic
solution. In this case the matrix of coefficients of camnical form of problem (8)
contains approximately 90 percent of zero elements. This made it possible to ef-
fectively utilize the algorithm of the modified simlex method with multiplicative
representation of the reciprocal matrix which has considerable advantages compared

25

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

to the standard tom of. the simlsx method in the accuracy of the rats and capacity
or the required coaputer asaory [9]. Horeover, these advantages were detenained
by the weak filling (sparsity) of the initial aatrix or the coefficients of the
linear program-lug problem

The sparsity of the matrix of coefficients of problem (8) also per-nits one to at-
tectively utilize the miter manta-y by wing the comact tors of storage of the
initial matrix in which only its nonzero elemts are located in the internal stor-
age [10]. For cowerision let us point out that an internal storage capacity ap-
proximately equal to 800 kbytes would be required in the standard ﬂora of the sin-
plea method to locate only the initial silple: table or prohlea (8) in the comutar
mnory with total umber of relations (3)-(7) not exceeding 450. 'Ihis'capacity is
reduced to a value not exceeding 100 khytes in modified ion with compact storage.

Table 1. Initial Parameters for Calculating the Optim- llovaaents of Control lbds
without Regard (a) and With ﬂegard (b) to Restrictions (9)-(ll)

 

 

3 x 3 n '4 x 4 11:
Par-star : 1; a a
hunter.“ 1yce11s 124 124 69 69
m IAQPm , kw 153.3 153.5 145.9 145.9
umber of control rods 40 40 40 40
Mean output, kl .
for all TR 427.7 427.7 427.7 427.7
for T1! of quadrants 3 and 4 436.0 436.0 436.0 436.0
for T! of quadrants l and 2 419.6 419.6 419.6 419.6
Average steal temperature at
output, ‘C
for all PK 499.8 499.8 499.8 499.8
for PR of quadrants 3 and 4 501.6 501.6 . 501.6 501.6
for PR of quadrants 1 and 2 497.9 497.9 497.9 497.9
Nuaber of teaperature restric-
tions (inequality (4)) 132 124 132 139
Total manner of restrictions
in linear progra-ning prohlen 424 422 314 317

As an illustration the results of calculating the optinun covenants of control rods
for the practical state of the AMI-200 on 17 December 1979 are present“ below.

The calculations were made on a Yes—1022 computer with internal storage capacity of
256 kbytes using a special program developed in roam-Iv language that realises
the algorithm of the modified simian method with uultiplicative representation or
the reciprocal astrix and comact torn of input data storage.

The actual theml output or the reactor was 420 m. The nain parameters that
characterize the energy distribution and stean teaperature at the output of the

26

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POIOFFICIALUSEONLY

superheating channel and the total nulber of roetriotions for the solved equivalent
linear programing problems are presented in Table l. the reactor parceters found

as a result of optima acvensnts of the control rods for too dinensions of poly-
cells are prosented in ‘rable 2.

Table 2. Reactor Para-tars round as a Result of Moving Control tbds Calculated by
(ptiairation Proqru

 

3 x 3 '1': 4 x 4 n:
Parameter a g a b

m “619‘”, rw 117.9 120.3 104.5 110.3
Percent variation of
max IAgpml -23.2 -2l.6 -2a.4_ -24.4
Average of TR, kw

of quadrants 3 and 4 420.5 427.0 421.1 427.3
of quadrants l and 2 433.0 426.6 432.6 426.2
Average tenerature of

superheated steaa for PR, 'C

of quadrants 3 and 4 494.2 498.7 494.5 498.8
of quadrnts l and 2 506.8 501.2 505.9 501.3
ﬁne for calculating optima

nova-ants of control rods, min 29.6 39.5 24.3 23.5

It is obvious from Table 4 that realisation of optimal notions of control rods.
calculated when solving problem (8) with system of restrictions (3)-(7), reduces
the sexism wdulus of deviation of the mean output of the production channel by
are than 20 percent for all polyoells. However, the error of the mean output and
new teQerature of the stean for production channels located in quadrants l and 2
and 3 and 4 of the coro (see colt-n a in table 2) and related to different loops of
the production circuit is retained in this case. since equal or similar values of
production parusters sust be asintained in the loops, elinination of this error is
one of the significant conditions of Ala-200 operation. Therefore. additional con-
ditions out be introduced into the system of rostrictions of probles (8)

Nu

m. ‘ ' H
'1' - 8
«any? "—,.',-,zos--”+ m
"' 5-! .

n“ "u
+ 2 (Ni; 2 0:“ "au - £7"? 05.- ”on) apps so;
I

1-. ‘-.

"u N"

1 -
-~<n2w -— w.
"' hi

”to (10)

I 1 ".l
+‘§(W.‘.20‘h"¢u-y‘;2 09-1)”) 59$”(GQ:

i-l ,-.
27

MWUSSWLY
i-i
:- 1 u. . 1 11.. (11)
+2 (1,32: halt-EEEAIJM‘KH».
an: 1-1 5-1
. where "12' '34. 1014 end ['23 ere the timer of production channels in quedrente l
and 2. 3 end 4. 1 and 4 end 2 ad 3. respectively, or the core. 141: and £34 ere the
nuerotswerheetingchenneleinqnedrenteldeendaendeenchmdrgere

the error of reinteining lean output and teqereture of emerheeted etean.
respectively.

poeeibility of error in average ewerheeted eteee tewerature in the emerheeting
chennel located in quedrents 1 end 2 end 3 end 4, respectively. of the core.

The results or eolving prohlee (8) with eystee ot'reetriotione (”-0) end (9)-(ll)
tor :9 end can equel to 2.5 kit and 2.5'C, respectively. are preeented in calm h
of ‘l‘eble 2. true which it is ohviom that introduction of edditionel mtriotione

3 end 4 of the core. nu adventege or thie approach is that restrictions of type
(9)-(ll) per-it a eherp reduction of the required frequency of eolving the opti-

sentetion ot the reciprocal Istrix on the haeie of the coefficients of the initial
matrix of restrictions jointly with the met fore of storage in the counter
memory, provides acceptable celculeting tine. Let us note for Moon thet the

[6]. Introduction of edditionel restriction of type (9)-(ll) eliminates the
excitation of the first azimuth harronic when reelising optin- control ectione

and roducee the required, frequency or repeated eolution of the optiliretion
problem
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

9.

10.

mmmonm

DWI!
Baturov, B. B. 0t .1, AMY! mm, V01 M, NO 2, 1978.
Vikulov, V. 1. ct 01. 10c. cit” V01 30 No 2, 1971.
Potaponko, P. '1'. II: II, M“ maximum, lb 2, 1980.

Show. A. 6. 0t .1, 1mm M 8858. mm mm I WM:
“0 6. 1978.

911196qu. Yo. V. and P. ‘1'. mm, ”mummy. pmmvmoqo m-
pudolontyn ”amulet!” v yadornon mitten" toot-mum; the Spatm
33.29! mm Distribution in a Nuclear Meter], Put 1, Moscow, Izd-vo
m1. 1978.

le'ymov, 1. Ya. of. .1. AMA” mun. Vol M, No 4, 1978.
le'ymov, 1:. Ya. at :1, Inc. cit” V01 44, No 6. 1978.

Canon. ll., c. Canal! and 8. Panic. hoary of Opting! Control and authentic“
Plum-autos, New York, warm-nu]. nook my. 1970.

Landon, I... “maintain bol'shikh listen" [mutation of Large mull],
bacon. and“. 1975.

women. 3., "mm mac-r [untied Hattie“). noncov. m.
1977.

' OOPYRIGRI‘I Energoizdu, "Atomayn energiya", 1981

6521
C50:

SIM/096

29

MWWMY
“MUSEOMN

UDC 621.039.003:621.039.516.6:621.039.52.“

WIN 0? run. mmzwnm A? m MC m mos

Moscow HOWAYA WYA in Russian Vol 51, no 2, Aug 81
(nenuecript received 28 Key 80) pp 87-91

[Article by A. A. Hatveyev. Yo. I. Ignetenm, A. P. volhov end a. A. mfi-ov]

[Ml Run plenning to gencrete electric power in an energy cyste- coneicting of
e 638 [ﬂydroelectric power plant] end A38 [Attic powur pleat], it is difficult to
predict with e eufficimt eccurecy the influx of water into the reservoirs of the
hydroelectric power plant. Hence, it ie poeeible to eetinete the faction of en-

ABs with low merging factor. 'undermrning' of nuclear fuel or unjustifieble pm-
loagedopueticnofthefuelchergeintheutendedrmuodeinthemrmtu-
perature effects of reactivity.

The firetfuelchugeeofthefiretendeeocndunitcoftherolemwezeoperdted
with low load factor. Thie occurred due to usdemtineticn of the water situation
in the male power system (Morena-ted hydrological foreoute) end the priority
for the 638 in production of electric rower. 'lhe exaggerated hydrological forecut
in1976endtlureletedinuueifiedccneuwtioncfntermemeinreeervoiucf
theGasofthexolepwereyeteeledtothefectthettheeecnndmitmehutdcwn
for recharging with unselected reectivity merve (epprcxintely 15 effective daye)
and en ecute ohcrtege of electric output occurred during the Iain:- winter loede
of 1976-1977, which led to operation of the first unit in the Wed m node in
the output and teqereture effects of reactivity of 84 effective deye.

mmmmv
new. US! UNIV

An exchange of cycles of abundant- and low-water years is typical for fluctuations
of river flow over many years. The generation of the electric power of a cos also
fluctuates as a direct function of the water situation. An ass should be regarded
as a source of electric power that makes up the balance of energy generation in the
energy system under consideration. As shown by experience, the energy content of
the fuel charges of a reactor. equal to the design value (approximately 7.000 ef-
fective hours), is adequate when an BS is operating at a nominal power level dur-
ing low-water years, while it becomes necessary to depart from the planned recharg-
ing scheme and to reduce the energy content of fuel charges during abundant-water
years.

The energy content of fuel charges can be varied by enriching the make-up fuel and
by the nuber of recharged asselblies. The energy content of the charge should be
reduced only by reducing the amount of make-up fuel of the maxim- planned enrich-
ment, which is ecmomically disadvantageous with fixed projected nmer (approxi-
eately one-third. of the total nulber) of recharged fuel assemblies. men analyz-
ing two make-m schemes equivalent in burnup reactivity reserve, it was established
when using only fuel assublies with enrichment of 1.6 percent with respect to
0-235 in the first version and only assemblies with 3.6 percent enrictnent in the
second version that the expenditures on the first version will be 39 percent great-
er. We also note that the extent of fuel burnup increases when the meter of make-
up assublies is reduced.

The energy content of the fuel charge was corrected beforehand with the second fuel
charging of the second unit of the Kola ABS according to the known reliable hydro-
logical forecast for the Role energy system. ﬂake-up of the core was carried out
by reducing the nubar of fresh working assemblies (84 ccwared to 102) with 3.6
percent enrichment while retaining the planned recharging scheme of the fuel parts
of the 802 [reactor control system]. 1his made it possible to reduce fuel expen-
ditures by 17 percent and also to increase burnup of 18 working fuel assemblies
left in the reactor core for the second cycle and an additional 18 assemblies also
left for the third cycle.

the of the weys to inrove the engineering and economic indicators of the energy
blocks of A88 is related to accelerating the unit output of the reactor and energy
block as a whole. The rate of combustion of nuclear fuel is increased in this
case, i.e., the scheduled length of the fuel cycle is reduced. Therefore, the en-
ergy content of fuel charges lust be increased to retain the annual operating cy-
cle of a reactor between recharges with high load factor during the fuel cycle.

The simplest method of achieving this goal is to increase the nmber of make-up
assemblies. For example, an average of 127-132 assemblies instead of the planned
113-121 was recharged annually during four fuel cycles of the reactor of the fourth
unit of the hlovovoroneshskaya ABS to ensure the scheduled duration for one year.
similar deviations from the planned node occurred in other units. The disadvan-
tage of this method of increasing the energy content of the fuel charge of a reac-
tor consists in the fact that, by increasing only the hunter of recharged assem-
blies, one must consciously reduce the extent of bnmup of the mloaded fuel, i.e.,
a certain nuﬁer of underburned fuel assewlies least be unloaded along with the
maximum burned-up fuel.

31

FOR OFFICIAL [Bl ONLY
.90! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next step that increases the efficiency of fuel utilization is rejection of
culmination snake-up of a reactor. It is known that the Win-440 is node up mainly
by fuel ass-blies with 3.6 percent enrichment and partially with 2.4 parent en-
richnsnt. in increase the energy content of the charge. it is sore feasible to
use working assenblies of only 3.6 percent enrichesnt as the snake-up fuel and to
turn to the use of the fuel parts of suz with 3.6 percent «tricks-ant along with
the planned 2.4 percent enriciment.

An esperissntal lot of the fuel parts of an 8m with 3.6 percent enricluent was
aanufactured for the Kola A38. Operation of then was begun during the fifth fuel
cycle of the first unit. the reactor was ends up with working fuel assemblies hav-
ing only 3.6 percent enrichment. hperinsntal assedalies with 3.6 percent enrich-
sent (seven units) were used along with assasblies having 2.4 percent enrichment
(six units) as the make-up fuel parts of the 802. Because of this it was possible
to increase the average enrich-em of the asks-up fuel to 3.54 percent. ‘l'his made
it possible to operate the first unit at 107 percent output while retaining the
annual interval between recharges and extent of burnup of assemblies subject to un-
loading no lower than the planned burnup.

According to the plan, 114 assenblies are replaced during the odd recharging by
fresh fuel (average enrichment of the make-up fuel is 3.46 percent). «on. 121 as-
eeoblies are replaced during even recharging (average enrichnent of the sake-11p
fuel is 3.4 percent). fuel charges differing fro- the planned charges by the nun-
her and average enrichaent of the mks-up fuel (Table 1) had to be repeatedly fora-
ulsted during seven years of operation at the Kola as.

Table 1. Average mricheent and lumber of Hake-0p Fuel Assenblies in first and

Second Units.
umber of Average 31th of luster of Hake-tip
Recharging Make-up fuel, aunt Fuel Asseabliee
1 3.48 3.46 114 96
2 3.40 3.46 121 115
3 3.48' 3.48 114 114
4 3.54 3.44 121 97

 

.Pirst masher-“first unit, second number-“second unit.

Forming the next charge, one met see that the sake-up fuel enricl'snent is minus
(3.6 percem for the wan-«o at the current phase) while maintaining nonuniforn

coefficients of energy release through the radius of the reactor core within per-
missible limits.

The fundanental solution of the problem of developing fuel charges of high energy
content without an increase and even with a decrease of the nmaber of make-up fuel
assemblies compared to the planned value is conversion to sakeup of the wan-44o
with more highly enriched fuel. The use of this fuel permits an even greater in-
crease of the extent of burnup due to an increase of the core nultiplication fac-
tor and consequently a reduction of the comonent fuel cost of electric energy.

32

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OIOFFIGALUSEONLY

However, manufacture of these assemblies is related to an increase of expenditures
for uraniu- enrichnent. The optima fuel enriclnent of the WEI! is approxieately
5 percent [1].

The nain difficulty in using fuel of increased enrichment in the wan-«o is the
nechanical resistance of 002 pellets and fuel element jackets at the operating
parameters of the reactor and with achiev-ent of considerable burnww. An extent
of hurnup of approximately an avenge of 33,000 In x days/ton for unleaded fuel was
achievedinreactorsofthefirstandsecondmits'oftherolam. 'rhenaxilnn
extent of burnup of individual unloaded assemblies reached 37,000 ml'days/ton' and
this did not lead to disaption of the integrity of fuel el-ents above permissible
valmsandeveneoresotobreehdownoftlua. horelationshipofanykindweses-
tablished between the operating nodes of reactors and the amber of unsealed
assemblies.

It is suggested that additional fuel assemblies with 4.0 and 4.4 percent enriclaaent
beusedfortherR—«O. This selectionishasedonthefactthatthetechnicnae
of nanufacturing assemblies with 4.4 percent enrich-ant will be developed for the
WEI-1000. The core of the WEE-1000 is designed to achieve average extent of burn-
up of 40,000 m-day/ton with earieua average hurnup through the fuel eleeent up to
44,000 uw day/ton [1), which is 8.1 percent higher than the extent of hurnup
achieved at the Role ass. he use of uraniun of the same enrichment to manufacture
asselblies for the wan-«o and VVBR-lOOO should reduce their cost.

Themeofassenhlieswith4.0enrichnentintheVVBR-«Ocanberegardedasa
measure that peraits conversion to reactor asks-up from fuel with 3.6 percent en-
richmnt to fuel with 4.4 percent enrichment without a sharp increase of the non-
mifornity coefficients in the output of asseablies. An increase of fuel enrich-
Int to 4.4 percent leads to an increase of nonuniform energy release in the fuel
assembly. Profiling the properties of fuel elenents through the assedaly cross-
secticn. i.e.. locating fuel elements with 3.6 percent uraniu- enrichnsnt in the
peripheral row, leads to a decrease of the nonmifou-m coefficients of the assedaly
to pereissible value [1. 2].

Thus. different values of make-up fuel enridaeent (3.6. 4.0 and 4.4 percent) per
nits variation of the energy content of fuel charges and consequently permits an
increase of the duration of the reactor run within the required lieits. Safe op-
eration of charges using fuel of increased enrichlaent at accelerated levels of
reactor output should first be substantiated by calculation.

the reliability of the main equipeent of an A88 is one of the factors that deter-
nine the cost of electric energy. agtupeent failures caused by “ruining-in“ of it
are typical for the initial operating period of an ass. Installation and design
defects are deternined and eliminated by replaceeent or repair during this period.
All this has been confirmed by the Nance of operating the first unit of the
mole ass, on whose mite work was conducted on equipnent repair that required
shut-down of the unit. disconnection of the loops and shut-down of the turhogen-
eretors. since planned and preventive maintenance (PPR) at an ABS has tradition-
ally been ccebined with fuel recharging, the duration of recharges during the in-
itial operating period is rather significant and varies frce cycle to cycle

33

loaomaawsrmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Table 2). the length of repairs combined with recharging cannot always be guessed
beforehand. Consequently, nonmifornity of the energy content of the fuel charges
of reactors to the energy generation schedule for the forthcoming operating period

may occur with unforeseen extended repair. The presence of several energy units in
an ABS ensures freedon of economic maneuvering.

Table 2. LP and 01’ Coefficients for Pusl cycles and Duration of Recharges

 

 

First Unit Second Unit
umber of length of PPR and Length of PPR and
Fuel Unit g Fuel Roma, days 95 2 Fuel Roch—arg' ing, days 2
l 0.56 130 0.81 0.47 64 0.80
2 0.59 49 0.91 0.72 76 0.73
3 0.78 33 0.91 0.93 55 0.83
4 0.96 ms 0.67 0.94 45 0.88

The cost of electric energy, being an imortant indicator of the econcny of an A38,
is determined by the it. of the constant and fuel W. The constant coupon-
ent is inversely proportional to the aunt of electric energy produced by an ABS.
while the fuel ornament is slightly depenant on the snout of electric energy
generated. ‘i'he fraction of the constant couponent of cost for the Role ass is
equal to 50-55 percent. therefore, the cost of electric energy decreases when
those operating conditions are realized at which the mninal electric output of an
ass is utilized in the best manner.

If the reactor core corresponds in energy content to the required generation of
electric energy of an ABS during the current fuel cycle, i.e., unloading of the A38
is eliainated by the requires-ht of the energy system deternined by the desire to
achieve intrasysten optiaisation of expenditures for production of a' mit of elec-
tric energy, than the degree of utilization of nominal output will depend on the
length of current repairs of the main equipmnt of the energy unit: turbines,
pipelines. reactor end so on.

An operating regime with fluctuatiazs of output for the fuel cycle, especially dur-
ing the initial period of operation, is typical for ans. The length of operation
of the units of the Kola ABS at the nominal level of output oomrised 20-40 percent
of the length of the cycle during the first three fuel cycles. (mention of the
energy unit at output below noninal leads to a demane in the efficiency of the
unit, i.e., to an increase of the cost of electric energy [3].

is widely used abroad [4]. The load factor LP that shows the degree of utilisa-
tion of the noninal output of the energy unit is deternined as

LP a WWNWT.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWWONLY

where "btn is the anomt of electric energy generated by the unit into the energy
system during the considered period '1‘, mm is the noninal electric output of
the unit (net) and ‘1‘ is the length of the considered operating period of the unit

where rub is the scheduled operating tine of the unit at any level of output dur-
ing the considered period. To“ is the total length of reactor shutdown. including
that for PPR related to fuel recharging during the considered period and 'r - Tub *
+ to“ is the length of the considered operating period of the ABS.

Value l-O!'~-shovs the fraction for shutdown of the energy mit of the total length
of has operation. As can be seen tron Table 2, the load factor increases from cy-
cle to cycle and because of this the cost of electric energy decreases. A signif-

recherging close to one year. by accelerating the output of the has reactor and by
increasing the reliability of the min equpeent and producing the length of current

content are reactor lake-w with a reduced number of fuel assetlies of Ian-m
planned enrichment when the energy content of the charge is reduced and displace-
ment of assedalies with 2.4 percent enrichnent fron the make-up fuel by aseeablies
with 3.6 percent enrichmet while retaining the planned nusber of make-up

It is suggested that fuel enrichment be increased to 4.0 and 4.4 percent 0-235 to
form fuel charges of high energy content with mwer of make-Q assenblies below
the planned nusber. The results of nonitoring the integrity of fuel jackets at

The presence of several reactors in an ass ensures freedom of econonic maneuvering
and pereite one, by verying the energy content of fuel charges as a function of
the specific established situetion, to achieve intrastation optimisation of fuel
utilisation.

35

MOMMUSIONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. sidomko, v. A” 'prmay bemawoeti raboty mktom wan" [Pmbleu of
- Operationa1 Safety of Water-Moderated WWI“ Pore: Motors] . macaw,
“cheat, 1977.

2. Manila”, 3. Ya. et a1, 'nsplnatatsicumyye mm wdo-vodyanykh energe-
t1che¢ktkh mktomv" (Mating nudes of water-”rated, nut-Coded Pave:
Reactonl, Moscow Atonizdat. 1977.

3. Shinbov, a. N. et a1. 'Ma energetm ask“ [The Boone-1a of Power Eh-
qmeering 1n the 0883], lbw. Vyuhaya ahlnole. 1979.

4. Operating Experience with unclea: Pave: stations in new": States in 1973,
”.168. vm. 1974e

009mm: Burgoudat, "Atomaya energtya", 1981

6521
C80: 8144/096

36

MWLIISEONLY
UDO $1.16

MFG WHGGASLEMTIGWBTMIIGMGBNW DI
mum-almost. APPARATUS ms HATE! oooum 0R BIOLOGICAL SEWING "

momma APPARATOV 8 VODIW mm m 31mm name! in
Russian 1981 (signed to press 12 hr 81) pp 2-3. 50

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents fron book "Hethcds for Calculating
Gas Liberation and hunting anger of Ecplosio!| in Radiation-ensued Apparatus
with Water Coolant or 3.1019‘uce1' Shielding"... by Serge: Andreyevich Kabakchi
and Aleksey Konstantinovich Pikayev. hergoisdat. 700 copies. 51 pages]

[Text] Annotatim

In this book. nethods are considered for calculating liniting gas concentrations
formed at the rsdiolyeis of water in apparatus with water coolant ‘0: ~ ‘-
biological shielding for given doee rateitenpereture and geonetry of apparatus.
Hethods are developed for calculating the conposition of the gas mixture (mero-
gen. oxygen. inert gas. water vapor) and a qualitative estinte of the danger of
its explosion in free volunes of radiation-chancel apparatus of various design.
for various conditions of operation.

The book is intended for scientific workers. engineers and teolmologiste. working
in the area of nuclear power engineering and radiation-classical apparatus building.

Nine tables. Twenty illustrations. Bibliography contains 167 titles.

radiation-chancel apparatus (isotopic radiation sources, containers for trans-
porting spent fuel elesents in nuclear electric power plants etc.). This is be-
cause uater has good tharnophyeical properties and is cheap. lbuever. sater. along
with positive techological characteristics. also has a shortcoaing. In water.
located in the field of ionising radiation. there {or- an explosive nixture whose
explosion my lead to the destruction of the apparatus. The rotation of hydro-
gm poses the problea for engineers and teotznologiets of renoving it tron the
apparatus. or creating such conditions in the latter that the explosion of the
nirture is ispoesihle. 'In open types of apparatus. the problea of renoving the

hydrogen forssd is solved relatively sinply -- by organim an efficient system

37

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
of blowing the gas away from the surface of the water. The explosion safety

in such apparatus my be provided by suppressing the gas separation. or by a
special selection of apparatus paraleters that nke the explosion of the aixture
impossible. here. in any case. it is necessary to be able to calculate the liber-

ation of the radiation gas according to the apparatus para-stars (geosetry. aaount
of water. free voluas. power absorption in water).

This book describes the process of the liberation of radiation as in sealed con-
tainers of water, subjected to y and p radiations. Using the theory of radiation
dzeaistry and extensive experiaental nterial obtained by the author. the princi-
les of mgineering, aethods for calculating the cospositions of gas aixtures
hydrogen, oxygen. inert gas. water vapors) were developed in free values of
radiation-chemical apparatus filled with water and estinting the explosion danger
of this nixture for various operating conditions. Radiolysis of water in the
core of .' nuclear reactors is not discussed here since this probles requires
special consideration.

Table of Contmts

Page
Foreword 3
Chapter 1. General inforsation on radiolyeis of water and its
special features I;
1.1. Primary products of radiolysis of water and their outputs lb
1.2. Specifics of rsdiolysis of water at various conditions 8
1.3. Stationary state for radiolysis of water 10
1.15. Kinetic equation of hydrogen accumlation in an enclosed
systes 15
Chapter 2. Kass transfer in water-filled radiation-chenical
apparatus with a free volune 20
Chapter 3. Mathematical nodel of liberation of radiation
gas in apparatus 23
Chapter 1+. Calculation of coapositicn of gas aixture 36
Chapter 5. Quantitative estimte of explosion safety of gas
aixtures 38
Appendix M
1. Conventional designation M
2. Calculation of lisiting composition of gas nixture in
free volume of apparatus M
3. Estimte of gas safety of gas mixture 1+6
Bibliography 168

COPYRIGHT I Blergoi adat , 1981

2291

mo. 1861/90 as

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 621.039.58.001.5
ABSTRACTS OF MICLBS IN COLLECTION 'RADIA‘IIOR SAFETY 01’ A38'

Moscow TRUD! WI: RADIATSIG‘NAYA BEOPASIOST' AB in Russisn No 26. 1979 (signed
to press 27 Feb 80) pp int-11:8

[Abstracts from collection "deistion szsty of ABS". edited by V. N. Mironov, A. I.
Rylsrsnko end 8. G. Tsypins. USSR Ministry of Power end ﬂectriticstion. All-Union
Thersel mgineering Institute ineni P. 3. Dsershinskiy. 500 copies. 151 pages]

, _ unc 621.039.sa.ooi.5

RADIATICE COIDI‘PIG‘S IN BUILDINGS WAGE? T0 moron UNITS III AND IV 0! THE
NOVOVORCNBHSXAYA AB

[Abstract of mm. by Sedov, v. x.. Bersnov. n. A.. and Vlssenko. v. 11.. pp 3-9]

[Text An enslysie was rude of experimental dsts on the' dose rstc of I-redis-
tion on snunbsr of structml equip-silt conponuts of the first loop 0 units

III and IV of the Novovomneshsksys A3 in 1973-1977. This dsts indicated that
there use no sipificent incrssse in dose recs with incrssssd opsrst-

ins tum. Brpsrinsntsl dsts use obtained for the first tile on the distribution

of the .dose rste of y -rsdistion slang the height of the ionisstion chsnber
channel. hts is cited of the sessurssents of the rsdistion field in the region

of the upper resctor unit end in the building for servicing drives of the min cir-
culation pulps.

UDC 621.039.58.001.5
PASSAGE 05‘ FAST umms rmwca AXIALLY SYMMCAL MIA OF LME‘D DIWSICHS

Egbstrsct of srtiols by Kishevnikov. A. 11.. Khokhlov. V. 9.. Tsypin. 8. 6..
“1.81“. As Is. “d ”0’30. Is use pp 10-15]

. {Text} aperinentsl date is given on the spstisl-power distribution of fast
neutrons beyond the exislly synetricsl Iedie. of limited dimensions of polyethy-
lene, iron end lssd. A conpsrison use ads between it and the cslculstion results
using the Honts-Gsrlo method.

Bibliography contsins seven titles.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UN 621.039.58.001.5

CALGILATICN PR’x-MH FOR WWW AXIALLY SYWRICAL SHIELDING BY THE ura-
CARLO Pal-10D "

[Abg’grzlcﬁ of article by Blyskavka. A. A.. Solov'yev. H. A.. and Shinkevich. I. Yu..
PP '

[:ka A nodular prograa is described for using the Monte-Carlo sethod to calcu~
late on of scattered neutrons of point or plane distributed sources within or
outside of nonunifora axially synsetrical ahislding. Based on the library of
evaluated data, group interaction constants were calculated.

Bibliography contains five titles.

ch 621.039.58.001.5
smmmc cucuurzm nmrs camarsw name A mm warm '

[Abgérgi of article by Bolyatko, V. V.. Vyrekiy. 11. Yu.. and Stroasnov. A. A..
pp -

[Text] A coaparison is ads of mltigroup single dimensional ANISR and am pro-
m, based on the discrete ordinates aethod used widely abroad and in the USSR.
DLc-ZO neutron constant libraries based on BIN-3111 and Ammo-2r were used in
calculations in both cases.

Calculated data on reactor neutron distribution in the heterogeneous steel-graphite
conposition. characteristic for the top shielding of fast neutron reactors, was
coapared to the results of the basic experisent.

UDC 621.039.58.001.5

PWIBILITIB AND MIEICS IN USING Pumas Pm WTEG PASAGB OP RADIATIOI
THRCIIGH SUBSTANCE Cl! commas -

[Abstracﬁ of article by Brodkin. 3. 3.. Koabevnikov. A. 11.. and Darustalev, A. V..
pp 30-38

Erext] A description is given of a series of progress created or assimilated duro
ng the past five years for calculating the passage of neutrons and v-quanta in
medial PEAS-2J6. “d130, ANKm-l‘s. 80133-3 and ram. Considerations are given
concerning the degree of prograa readiness for broad and nest feasible utilisation.
The roles of the experinent and calculation in solving the problem of radiation
transfer in the substance are discussed.

Bibliograpny contains seven titles. .

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 621.039.538.7
LIGHT SIWTICR METHOD ma TRANSFE 01" ICNIZING RADIATIGI IN All ATTBC'UATNG FEED?!

[Abggrggi of article by hironov. V. 11.. Is'yurov. A. 3.. and'Kurakin. N. You
PP ‘

[Text] An installation is described and engineering solutions assuned in its cre-
ation are substantiated. The results of siaulating the transfer of ionising
radiation through protection barriers with their nonuniforaities included are con-
pared to known analytical solutions and conputer calculations. An maple is given
of using the considered lethod to solve the problea of organising biological pro-
tection for rod openings for cell hardware of nuclear electric power plants.

Bibliography contains 11 titles.

UDC 621.039.58.001.5

CALGJLATIQ! 0F INTERN. CHARAGI‘RISI‘ICS or y-RADIATICU Flam FROK VEUERIC
SMCE BY THE WHO!) 0! RADIAL ANALYSIS AND SQUMIAL OGLISIQIS

[Abstract of article by Luahnov. A. l” and Tsypin S. 6.. pp 50-56]

Text] A aethod is proposed for calculating the dose rate and density of energy

in: at points located outside the dispersing object with uniformly distributed
aonocnergetic ganna source. Bch volune elelsnt is considered as an isotropic
point source with a discrete spectrua consisting of an infinite series of average
Compton scattering energies. The power of each line is calculated according
to a certain law. The input of individual groups to the sought-for functional is
detarained by integrating over the volume of the source. A coaparison was ads
with calculations using the honte-Garlo aethod. The precision of the neth was
evaluated.

Bibliography contains five titles.
UDC 621.039.538.?

APPLYING RADIATION ANALYSIS METHOD TO THE OALGILATICN PRCBLBi (F DOSE RATE
OF y-RADIATIOI M31133 VMPEI‘RIC SOJRCB VH3 33318

[Abstract of article by Luzhnov. A. It, Regi-aade. h. F” and Tsypin. S. 6..
pp 57-62]

[Text A aethod is proposed that using radiation analysis ultes it possible to
calcu to the dose rate outside a voluaetric source with one shell. Its effi-
ciency is proved by coapariscn with the results of calculations nude by the

Monte-Carlo aethod. Boundaries of applicability and the precision of the proposed
nethod were evaluated. .

Bibliobraphy contains eight titles.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 621.039.58

MELT 0? RETRO! nux mam 0‘- THE RADIATIGI OPﬁATING LIFE 0 A23 REACI‘OR
30183103

Abstract of article by Bass. 1.. 2.. Gridnev. s. 2.. Lonkin. s. 3.. horosov. A. 6..
rev. A. 3.. Petrulevich. A. A., and Khulev. A. N.. pp 63-68]

[Text Values of integral dasities of fast neutron flux and the integral of dan-
ages the WEI-Mo housing Vere obtained by calculating in accordance with the
”Raduga" prograa.

Bibliography contains nine titles.

UM 621.039.58.001.5
USING THE MEMO!) OF “VINE m maniac OF MIMIZING RADIATION SEWING

Abstract of article by Dorofeyev. A. A.. mbinin. A. A.. Zhuravlev, V. 1..
mauko. Y“. ‘0' MM. I. 1.0 Utkin' Vs As. ”a wtov. In. Ge. Pp $-W]

[Text The aethod of ravines is described for probleas involving the search for
the ainua of the function of any variables in the presence of linear linitations.
The aethod is applied to solving the problea of ainiaising the full dosage on the
outer surface of the protection by varying thicheeses and acne coaposition for a
fixed use or diamsions of the protective coaposition for a fixed I” or dilen-
sions of the protective coaposition. Maples of solutions of probleaa are given.

Bibliography contains six titles.

UDC 621.039.58.001.5

PROGRAM FOR OPTIMIZHG "AMI“. WITH! PARAHBI'BS IN ACCWCE HITH pm-
‘I‘IAL CHARAQ‘EISTIQ or THE RADIATIOI FIE!) USING THE ”Tl-CARLO EKG

[Abstract of article by Barsov. P. A., and Sakovich, V. A.. pp 75-82]

..

[Tr . Optiaisation is proposed of the coaposition paranoters of the protection
as: at reactor radiations in accordance with differential spatial-power character.
ist-cs of the radiation fields siaulated by sons volumetric source. A conputer
program using the home-Carlo aethod was developed for this purpose.

An optimisation was carried out for coinciding the radial radiation field with the
preliainarily obtained radiation field.

Bibliography contains eight titles.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0130 621. 039.58. 001.5

“OW“ Pam FOR WTING THE 1 ~RADIATIOU DI A WK 31TH A "MEWS”
BY THE ROUTE-CARLO IMHOD

[Abstract of article by refinov. Is. I.. pp 82-91]

[rm] A m is described for calculating. by the Monte-Carlo method. the

Y-rediation ,tield tron an isotropic point source. located in an infinite aediua.
containing a truncated cone of arbitrary diaensions and Id. of n erial th other
physical properties. calculation indicated that by mining 2x10 - Zri histor-
ies. the progras nkes it possible to calculate with a satisfactory accuracy the
integral characteristics of the 7 ~rsdiation field up to distances between the
source and the detector equal to 10 to 15 free path lengths.

Bibliography contains eight titles.

UDC 621.039.538.?

MEIBICB 0F DEVECPING AND mmmc Pﬂm rm CALCUIA‘I‘UG PHXSIO-‘l‘mmu.
MCTQISTICS OP RADIATICN 33131.an M AB mama» mum

[AbstractJof article by Bychkov. Ya. A.. Grigor'yev. V. A” and Lavdanskiy. P. A..
PP 91-102

[Text] aperience accumulated in the process of developing coaputer engineering
prograsa for calculating and designing biological protection eainst y ~radiation
of active technological equipssnt was systeutised and a coaperison Id. of a nus-
ber of engineering prom-s. A brief description was given or the "KW”(T-B)
progran which coabinee the advantages of previously created pros-ans.

Bibliography contains 18 titles.

UDC 621.039.58.001.5
FACI'CBS m AGGIHMTUG 'y -RADIATIG€ 3m LAMINATED ulna-Lam BARRIERS

Abstract of article by Viks. Ye. A.. Dubinin. A. A.. Yeti-0v. Ye. 1.. Kurachenko.
“0 As; mtOV. De Veg “a M.y°Ve Is ‘us pp 103.110]

Text] Results are given of calculating econ-nation {actors iron a plane sono-
irectional source of gamma radiation with energies of 2 and 6 million
electron volts on the surf ace of s water-lead shield with a thickness of Iron
5 to 25 free path lengths. Calculations of accumulation factors were ads in
accordance with the Roz-5 progra- by the Honte-Garlo eethod and by approxinte
eethods. A refined formla recon-ended by D. 1.. trader and coworkers. as well as
Isthods based on homogenizing the shielding and using Kalos' for-ale, were con-
sidered.

Bibliography contains ten titles.

‘3

MOWUSEONLY
UDC 621.039.538.?
CALGJLATIG‘ ("I 7 QUARTA AWTIGI DCSAGB FACPORS m THO-LAYﬂ SHIELDS

[Abstract of article by Lusimow. A. 11.. Tagi-sade. h. L. and ‘l'sypin. 3. 6..
pp 110-119]

Eat] A sethod is proposed for calculating y-quanta accuaulation dosage {actors
two-layer shields. calculation results according to the obtained tor-uh
were compared with experiasntal data.

Bibliography contains four titles.

UDC 621.039.58.001.5

nonmcmac or rm: ammo mm; m «momma mp warmth! or
Y-QUANTA -

[Abstract of article by Petrov. a. Yen and Meyev. i. A., pp 120-127]

[Text] A modification of the MD aethod is proposed that takes into account the
trajectory of particles in sections with a voltage opposite that on the detector.
This modification makes it possible to calculate aore accurately the low mergy

part of the spectrua. (hiculations were ads of y ~radiation transfer in the
barrier geoaetry and coupared with other ssthods.

Bibliography contains ten titles.

we 621.039.51.001
use or mummy rams m mm AT, A-

[Abstract or article by Leann. s. 8.. Taratulov. V. 2.. and Kulikow. V. 1..
PP 127-136]

[Text] Sffective activating cross sections and parameters which deter-ins effec-
tive cross sections in the Vestcott aodel were calculated for a nuaber of activa-
tion detectors shielded by gadoliniua filters. The calculations were Id. up to
teaperatures corresponding to the noainal power of the am reactors.
Bibliography contains six titles.

one 621.039.56VJ

K60 @1101) WITH OVECOHPSISATICN Q! W-‘WO REAGI‘Q

[Abstract of article by Gridnsv. S. P.. Lelyukhin. A. 0.. Lonkin. S. 8.. Lunanova.
L. 14.. and Proselkov. V. N.. pp 136-1160]

Mo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Text] Gee tightneaa of fuel cladding ia nonitored (K60 nethod) by a loop tech-
nique with respect to delayed neutrons with overco‘penaation of the field of energy
release. Localization left lane than 251 of the leaky cladding undetected.

Iaterencea 3.
COPYRIGHT: Unknown

2291
080: [861/108

65

NROFFICIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nos-Imam m

lbacov mensnu mm in inssisn 1981 (signed to press b Jun 81)
pp 2. 150-151

[Annotation and table of contents of book "Power Engineering in Space” , by
Petr Grigor' yevich Polstsvhin. Indetel'stvo "Ranks”. 10, 700 copies. 152 psges]

[Text] A scientific hypothesis concerning possible ways of producing great
energy iron the region in outer space around the esrth is expounded in the book,
and the topic of generation of. s circular ionospheric current and utilisation of
its electric energy is mind. The enthor slso talks shout the internal
structtn-e of the earth, about the planet's stnosphsre end nsgnetic field, about

the cause of the earth's rotation, polsr drift. etc.
Intended for s broad circle of readers.

Responsible editor: Acadsnicisn A. Ye. Sheyndlin

Mrs

PIS.

Pros the editor 3
Foreword 5
Chspter 1. Solar planetary systen 11
The esrth's address in space 11

A grest discovery 15
Hypotheses on the origin of the solar syst- 16
Chapter 2. The sun 18
The chief energy source 18
Solar nsgnetisl 19

A self-controlled fusion resctor 20
Solar activity 26

The solar stnosphere 29
Solar radiation 30
Solar wind 31

‘6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040030-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. The earth
Prinary data
The earth's atnosphere
The ionosphere
An ilportant discovery
The earth—a large nagnet
The sun's effect on the earth
A circular ionospheric current
A terrestrial analogy
An ionospheric HID generator
An ionospheric HID generator cycle
An ionospheric capacitor—the earth
A conic particle accelerator
Hagnetiaed ionospheric plasna
An ionospheric trenstoraer—the earth
[that rotates the earth?
Polar drift
The earth's hydroeagnetic electric generator

Chapter 0. Secrets of nature
Magnetic atorns
Polar aurorae
Thunderstoraa
Destructive forces of nature
Suhduing the elpenta

Chapter 5. An electric power plant in space
Energy tron the ionosphere
The nein question
Difficulties of creation
Electrical connection with the ionosphere
"Switching on" in space
Insuring current continuity
Hovusnt of plans colunns
Electric tran-ission without losses
Conversion of space current
Output of a space electric power station

The geography of power engineering in epace
Chapter 6. Spheres of application of energy from space

Influencing weather

Soil heating

Desalination of the waters of the world oceans

Intensification of nanufacturing processes
Into space in an airplane

Conclusion I
Literature
.cmzour: Iadatel'stvo "Hanks", 1981

919‘
C80: 1861/98 1.7

FOIOFHCIALISEWLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040030-9
summon“

UDC 537.312.5236”.313.322-81
WW USING WWII!

Leningrad mm 8 Im'mvm WWI in Russian 1981
(signed to press 17 Aug 81) pp 2. 229-231

[Annotation and table of contents fro. book "rurhogenerators Using Superconduc-
tivity". by Igor' Alekseyevich Glebov. Yanush Bronislavavich Denilevich and
Valentin Nikolaerich Shakhtsrin. edited by A. A. m. All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Electric Machine Building. Isdatel'stvo mm",

1.000 copies, 232 pages] '

[Text] The book outlines prospects for developing turbogsnerators that use super-
conductivity. and describes their designs and the laterials used. An emination
is made of electronsgnetic and heat fields, principles of selecting s superconduc-
tive field winding. current lead-ins. electronagnetic and thermal shielding.

An investigation in ads of mechanical stresses and critical frequencies of rotor
speed. Conditions of operation in a power systen are analysed. Data are given
on thernodynanics and cooling of rotor with superconductive field winding.

Figures 96. tables 25, references 60.

Contents . . . page

Chapter 1: 0011.01! FOR USING mum V1138 ”WWI?! FIELD

WINDING 3
1.1. Outlook for developnsnt of turhogensretor construction 3
1.2. Advantages of turhogenerators with superconductive field winding lo
Chapter 2: CONSTRUCTION 01' WW“ 6
2.1. Design particulars 6
2.2. Lowpower experimental turbogensrstors 7
2.3. 20-11% turbogeneretors 11
2.6. nigh-power turbogenerators 1‘
Chapter 3: mms USED 15
3.1. Superconductive nateriels 15
3.2. Structural netals and alloys suitable for operation of rotor units at
low tenperatures 18
3.3. Nounstallic materials - 22
Chapter lo: EBCWGNBTIC FIELD 26
4.1. General cm“ 26
4.2. Calculation of field for constant and finite shield permeability 26
4.3. Calculation of field with consideration of nonlinear characteristics 29
48

”WNW?
60‘.
‘05s

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Study of pilot model of superconductive field winding
Influence that magnetization of superconductive field winding has on
magnetic field distribution and permeaters of cryoturbogenerator

Chapter 5: 831.3071“! 0? WWW FIELD "INDING

5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
5.6.

5.5.
5.6.

5.7.
5.8.

General contents

Principal dimensions of generator and superconductive field winding

Admissible current in superconductive field winding

Hininum number end maximum admissible dineter of superconducting
strands in busher

Pernissible rates of feed of superconductive winding and extraction of
stored energy

Limiting amplitudes of alternating magnetic fields in zone of super-
conductive winding

Investigation of connections of coils of field winding

Losses in superconducting vire

Chapter 6: CURRENT LEADS TO SUPDICORDUCTIVB FIELD mm

6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
6.4.
6.5.
6.6.

General cot-eats

Calculation of current lead-in

Optinizing current lead-ins

Overload capacity of current lead-ins

Design of current lead-ins of [TO-20 turbogsnerator and connection
Results of experimental research

Chapter 7: THERMAL BRIDGES AND THEIR CALCUIATION

7.1.
7.2.
7.3.
70‘.

Design of thermal bridges

Thermal calculation of bridge unit

Hydrodynamic calculation of bridge unit

Experimental study of thermal bridge unit on pilot model

Chapter 8: nmrmmrnc SHIELD 01" W

8.1.
8.2.
8.3.
80“

Chapter 9:

9.1.
9.2.
9.3.

Particulars of implementation

Blectronagnetic field and losses in rotor shells
Electromagnetic field in toothed shield

Study of rotor shielding on model

Radial mechanical forces
Mechanical stresses in rotor shells
Critical rotational frequencies of rotor

Chapter 10: LOSSES AND HEATING 0? ma WINDING
10.1. Design particulars of stator winding core

10.2.

10.3.

Additional losses in stator winding
heating of stator winding core

Chapter 11: WING 01" 3W0“. OSCILIATIONS

11.1.
11.2.

Calculating daning of electromechanical oscillations
Blectrodynanic model of turbogenerator with superconductive field
winding

11.3. Regulating excitation
Chapter 12: MSIMVPIOCBSSSS IN mum um! SWOXDUCTIVE

12.1.
12.2.
12.3.
12.4.

FIELD WINDING
General co-ents .
Sudden short circuits
Gradual short circuits
Disconnecting short circuit

69

MOFHCIALIJSENY

MECHANICAL 57338838 AND CRITICAL ROTATIONAL FREQUENCIES 0F ROTOR

37

61
53
53
53
56

57
58
59

63
77
77
77
82
8h
87
88
92
92
93
99
101
106
106
106
112
115
l 1 (
119
124
126
136
136
135
1103
150
150

157
160

167
167
167
169
169
WUIIMQGLIALIENEONLY

12.5. Electromechanical oscillations and induction behavior

12.6. Load dumping

Chapter 13: ROTOR DYNAMICS IN TURBOGBNERAIOR WITH SUPERCONDUCTIVB FIELD
HINDING

13.1. Thermodynamic diagram of rotor

13.2. Calculating state of rotor cooling

13.3. Selection of cryogenic facility

13. 6. Thermal teata of model cryoturbogenerator rotor

Chapter 16: TESTS OF 20-!“ EXPERIMENTAL-INDUSTRIAL TURBOGBNERAIOR Rita
SUPERCONDUCIIVE rIth HINDING

16.1. General comments

16.2. Studies of rotor components

16.3. Rotor teats

16.6. Investigation of stator

16.5. Tests of assembled generator

16.6. Some conclusions

Conclusion

References

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Nauka". 1981

6610 .
cso: 1661/131-11

50

FOR 0F11C1Al.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

Moscow Wm TIPOVOY 331'” mm mm in Russian 1981
(signed to press 7 by 81) PP 2- 346‘”. 350‘351

[Annotatiom conclusion and table of contents m. book. "Adoption of Typical Sys-
ten by Enterprise heegenent". by Viktor Mikhaylovich Factual. Aleksey Ivanovich
Seaenov and Aleksandr Lamevich hrgolin. 0883 Acedew of Soiuces. central
Boone-1c Hathemtical Institute. Isdatel'etvo 'Nauka". 3100 cepies, 352

paces]
[Text] Annotation

This paper is devoted to solving a couples of problem originating when adopting
a typical magenent system The book reveals the difficulties originating in the
process of applying typical design solutions to a nodel. algorithaic and program
levels. and analyses the factors that affect the forntion of a typical Ianagenent
lode . '

The book is intmded for a wide circle of developers of autonted senageaent sys-
tea at enterprises [ABUP . production associations and design institutes involved
in transferring an auton ed systen for enterprise anageaent to third gmeration
coaputers.

Conclusion

In conclusion. it is necessary to discuss again one of the lost important problem
of typicalising design solutions. This is the 11:0th of the advisability of
adopting a typical mageaent systea which. on the algorithlic or aodel level. dif-
fers fro- the Ianageaent systes already in use at a give: enterprise.

First of all. it is necessary to analyse what is meant by the unegenent syste-
"already in use." hirly frequently it is a magelent lethod traditionally con-
poaed at the enterprise and oriented toward nonautonatic data accessing. In
spite of the fact that such a eethod.as a rule. cannot withstand any oomrison
with autonstion. nevertheless any changes in preselzt lethods are very painful to
accept by Image-ant apparatus. -

It is precisely in this situation that met frequaitly a decision is adopted that
the typical antented Ianagenent systea is ”not suitable." This is natural.since

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_ . ..-..-..- save. we’ve

a typical systes. designed by qualified specialists. oriented in principle toward
autontic data processing and satisfying all principles of ASU [Autontic Control
Systes] design, will hardly be similar to the systea emisitng at the enterprise.

Thus. before adopting a solution on uhether the typical systes is adequate for the
conditions of a given-enterprise, it is necessary to analyse the existing usage—
aent Iethod fro- the position of autolating it. The typical autonted magesent
system must be cospered to an automated systes. existing or planned.

Let us assume that we are asking the comparison at the'aodel level. If we have a
typical A80. designed for production. ccu'esponding to the type of our enterprise
(according to the typicalinstion method described in anpter 3), than differences
should not be very sigificant. Actually. the type of production also deter-mes
the anagenent Iodel. Differences my be due to:

a) use of optiaising sodels instead of calculated ones;
b) degree of detail in data furnished for usage-mt;

c) traditionally cosposed special features of the organisational structure of
management.

The first of the indicated causes cannot be called an obstacle to the adoption of
a typical A30. In spite of the fact that the adoption of optimisation mdels for
enterprise managelent is ispleaented for a nusber of reasons fairly slowly. the
necessity of optimisation calculations does not give rise to any doubts. There-
fore, if optimisation aodele are used in typical system. they not be adopted
where they confers to production conditions.

The second cause is more serious. If sufficiently'dstailed data is not available to
the enterprise. necessary for solving usageaent probleas in a typical ‘80. this
sakes the direct adoption of the system isposeible. A question arises: is this
data needed at the given enterprise or can it be aceomdatei by the rough data
systes already created? As a rule, the probles is solved as follows: the enter-
prise needs a finer systes but. for a nuaber of reasons. its creation is delayed;

therefore. the enterprise proposes the adoption of a rougher manageaent system.
In such a case. the adoption of a finer typical systes gives additional stimulus
to the creation of a sore detailed data system.

The reverse situation need not be considered: i.e., a Version in which an enter-
prise has date sore detailed than used in a typical ASU is ertreaely improbable.

Finally. the third reason, as a rule. serves as a basic obstacle to the adoption of
a typical system. It is considered that if documentation produced by a typical
system in its fore and content differs free that traditionally accepted at the
enterprise, this reduces Ienageaent efficiency. Such an opinion. even if it is
only partly true, should not be considered the decisive one in investigating the
question of adopting a typical sanagesent system. In fact. it will necessary to

put huge expenditures for desigzing. prograaing and adopting an individual systes
on the other side of the scales.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Therefore, it appears that there is sense in nking some changes in the docuaent
turnover in the existing nnagesent system in order to free the enterprise iron
these expenditures. hpecially since these changes my be found to be telporsry:

as a rule, a typical aanagalent system allows for the possibility of comparatively
easy changes. In particular, the system described in this book has a nodular struc-

ture in which almost any procedure may be cinnged without changing the data base
and other procedures.

Thus. the following conclusion may be drawn from the above-stated. The best
strategy in creating an ASU on the basis of a third gmeration computer is to

adopt, as soon as possible. a typical system with a consequently slower individual-
isation. In this case. if the enterprise alreau has a developed A80 on the basis
of a second generation computer, this approach will mks possible a continuity of
changeover fro. one cosputer generation to another. If. however. a new A81! is being
created at an enterprise, such an approach will seen a considerable reduction in
the time needed for design developnent and adoption. In this case, the effect of
typicalisation will be demonstrated as being due to a reduction in expenditures

for desiaz. as well as to putting the A80 into operation sore quickly.

Table of Contmts

P380
Introduction 3
chapter 1. mta software of a typical autouted management system 9
1. Method for descring data objects 9
2. Ihta base - 18
3. Typical file composition 39
Chapter 2. Functional subsystem of a typical 4801’ 77
1. ”Stock control" subsystea 7?
2. Inter-shop planning 102
3. Intrashop planning . 121
Chapter 3. Typicalisation of design solutions in BU MO
1. Typicalisation of production control models 1’60
2. Typicalisation of design solutions 155
3. Applicability limits of a typical control system 161}
Chapter 16. Implementation of the basic data base 178
1. Data base structure 178
2. Composition of packet program and their functional
characteristics 198
3. uder of generating and operating SUB!) [Structure of
Control Data Base] 205
0. Preparation of prinry documentation 211
53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 5. Emotional application packets for controlling

i.
2.

u.

tnaic production

Probloa could: ”control of Technical Preparation for
l’roduotion"

Packet of application prom-n of ”Continl of Production
Parts”

Packct of application program of 'Gontz'ol of Production
of Inter-canto Part8"

Packet of application m- oi‘ "control of Working
Poaitiona"

Gupta: 6. Other functional application packets

1.

Packet of application program of "Operational Paramount
Planning" _

Packet of application program of “htorial Goat Acoomtins“
Packet of application program of ”Labor and Wages
Accounting"

Packet of application program of "Operational control 0:
Sales

Packet of application program of "Personnel”

Conclusion

Bibliom
COPYRIGll‘s Iadatel'atvo "ﬂanks”. 1981

2291

(30:

1861/85
more ROI! M03133 WING 8mm

lie; Pam momentum in Russian no 13. 1981 (519.4 to press 5 hr 81)
PP s 1 " 1

Annotation and abstracts iron 'hchine Building Problem.“ synosius edited by - .
. R. Podgornyy. Ukrainian SSR Aoadm of Sciences. Institute of hehine Building
Problens. Izdstel'stvo ”Raukova dunk". 1000 copies. 112 pages]

[Text] Annotation

The results of the sylposiul on the investigation of structural conponents under
the effect of dynasic forces. as well as of hydraulic power equipsent on the e-
conoaic indicators of hydroelectric power plants. Questions were considered of
reproducing oscillation and a vibration control system solutions for ultilayer
plate and shell optiaisation problem are cited: and the problea of using hydrogen
in power nehines was covered.

The synposijn is intwded for specialists involved in questions on the dynaaics
sndstrength of Inchines and structural parts, as well as in studying operating
processes in power nohine building.

000 621.011 621163

Duane COMICIBIT nnmnm run A DRIVE 11m A manna was
("Abstract of article by Yew-enkin. v. 1.. and ms. 1:. I. pp 3.7]
[Text A relationship between the soaent values on sections of the clutch char-

stic curve and the urine value of the sonsnt in the systel obtained
to optisise the paranoters or the planetary clutch characteristic curve. The
installation of such a clutch in the aschanisa for aoving an overhead crane re-
duced the dynaaio coefficient of the systea.

Three illustrations. Bibliography containsz titles.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
one 621.771.5313
mvmrmrm or 9mm macs: m A uurvmx. mm or A ammo um.
[Abstract of ertilce by Pukhel'ekeye. A. 3.. pp 7-11]

[Text] Andyticel empreeeione were obtained for eleetic force nonente in the
eheft or in the univereel Joint. Their fore nkee it poeeible to eetiute the

effect of the perenetere of the lechenien (eeeeee. rigiditiee end enguler up in

the hinge) on the dynenic force. The effect of chengee in the rigidity of the
cheft end the universe]. Jointe end the reletionehipe between wee end veluee

of enguler eepe in the hingee on the dyneeic forcee in the universal Joint con-
ponente were inveetigeted on en electronic Iodel. An enelyticel eolution end e
solution on en electronic nodel were coepered which indiceted thet the enelyticel
eolution lay he need with e feir decree of eccurecy when celculeting end deeign-

in; univereel Jointe.
Three illuetretione. Two teblee. Bibliosrephy conteine 5 titlee.

unc 539.3
DIRIVATIQIS OP (SOMATIOJ W163 or i IOTATDIG (RTBOTROPIG camel. sum.
[Abetrect of mm. by Vorob‘yev. Yu. 3.. endDetietov. s. 1., 111112-17]
[Text] kpreeeione were obteined {or the potentiel end kinetic energiee. ee well
no of the work of the centrifual end coriolie torcee. end oecilletion equetione
under neturel boundery conditions for en 8. T. Tinoehenko type of orthotropic
conicel ehell roteting eround ite exie. In certein perticuler ceeee. the obtained
expreeeione coincide with well-known reletionehipe.
Four illuetretione. Bibliography conteine 8 titlee.

one 620.178.5.05o52
METHODCLGBICAL PROBLDB 0? 11.01?ch coma. SYSTBB BY VIBRATIOI TETING

[Abetrect of erticleby Koehcheyev. A. A” pp 18-20]

[Text] Problem releted to plotting control eyeteee by vibretion testing ere
iecueeed. An approach is proposed for for-ins the vihretion proceeeee on the
beeie of e criterion for echieving the teet goel that ueee the node equivelence

concept. 'Jeye ere pointed out for the poeeible utilisation of nthemticel
nodele end experinentel dete.

It wee ehown that to reiee the efficiency of the eyeten. it ie edvieeble to in.
troduce e loop to regulate the dyneeic propertiee of the vihretion teet etend
thet replecee e part of the teeted etructure.

V Biblioa-ephy conteine 1b titlee.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UN 620.178.5.05.-52
CW“ ALGCRITHH m m‘rmm VIBRATIW m STANN
[Abstract of article by Gvordev. A. IL. pp 20-22]

[Text] For plotting a systes to control vibrations of an elastic stmture. it is
proposed to utilise coordinate conversion that reduces a lsthentioal sodel of the
controlled object to a totality of unconnected or weakly connected differential
equations of the second order. The controlled values in this case becose the
nin coordinates of the vibrating structure which is ideally close to sethods for
analysing the vibration loading of the structures.

Bibliography contains 4 titles.

900 620.1786
muons FOR ”ABATE“: W m W1C“. 15"ch m women“; VIBRATICNS
[Abstract of article by moyevoy. A. V.. and Kossodel'yanshya. G. 8.. pp 22-29]

(gran; Increasing the precision of vibration reproduction is related to elieina-
ing he mtual effect between the reproduced vibrations or to the separation be-
tween tho vibrations (sovelente).

Two eethods are proposed for separating vibrations reproduced by an elastically
suspended “table~product" system separation by regulating the paraneters of the
systea suspension and separation by regulating the disturbing forces.

Requiresente are fort-slated for the proposed sethods and conditions are cited for

separating the vibrations in the general case. The proposed lethode for separating
vibrations are desonstrated on the exasple of a three-coordinate vibration test
stand.

Three illustrations. Bibliography contains 2 titles.

UDC 52-”).50 620.173.5

HATMTIGAL hams CF RANDOM PHONE 11! Pumas SW‘I’UG OPRATIGAL
VDkATICNS

{Abstract of article by Koshcheyev, A. A.. and Dudsreva. V. 1., pp 29-33]

(Text; Certain probless are considered of using angular sodulation (frequency and
phase for the purpose of resoving undesirable periodicity and localizing the

apectrus for a signal. formed on the basis of a pseudorandoe sodel. representing
the sun of harnonic coeponents with a randos phase.

An asysptotic estinte of the spectral density is substantiated whose use is con-
veniant for an arbitrary frequency change law. especially in cases where thepre-
cise calculation of spectral characteristics is difficult.

(he illustration. (he table. Bibliography contains 3 titles.
57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“Dc 539-3

mama DIWIGATICU 0P "MINER mmcrmu 3m FLﬂING SHAPE OF
VIBRATIQIS OP MUNICH. m rm PARAmIC EQUATICI

Abstract of article by Galah. P. 1.. Xoval'chuk. P. 8.. Hendelutsa. V. 14., and
elalov. A. 1., pp 33-38.]

[Text] An experiaental investigation was nde of the interaction between the
shapes of the vibrations of snooth cylindrical fiber glass shells what they are
«cited kinentically. (bees of interaction between conjugated (correeponding

to the sane wave peraneters) and nonconjucated (with different wave para-etere)
shapes are considered.

Six illustrations. the table. Bibliography contains 10 titles.

one 532.516
3mm! amonmuc mom: or ammo (rm: or hours)
[Abstract of article by Petroeyen. 1.. 0.. pp 38-102]

[Text] The theory of nonents of liquid (theory of structural liquid) is used to

design a theory of an elelentary hydrodynanic analogy of rolling. Analytical
expressions were obtained for the calculated characteristics at toil and poly-er
fill. The aicrostructure effect is delonstrated in curves.

Five illustrations. Bibliography contains 9 titles.

UDC 62-526.001
rowan MIB Boa munch mamas SWTCRS
[Abstract of article by Kcehcheyev. A. A. pp #3456]

[Text] Problem are discussed which are related to the selection or basic paran-
eters for rando- procese sinulators that provide for novenents of a tested object
near the real ones. A I‘ethod for detersining simlator require-sate is described
on the basis of the proximity criterion of process correlation functions. A
method is proposed for tor-ins the least favorable randoa process which nkes it
possible to obtain the upper «um. ot the actor power.

(he illustration. Bibliography contains 5 titles.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UN 5183": 007
AMIVE mum ma AUTOMTIc SERGE Pm ROOTS 0]" 3163mm: 0! crmron
[Abstract of article by Strel'nikova. Xe. A.. and Shelul’ko. G. A.. pp “6-50]
[Text] Problem of separating and ﬁling aore precise the real roots of equations
are coabined on the basis of a single approach -- adaptive control of the search
process. This eade it possible to design an sutoasted procedure for solving the

equation on the section. The nethod is free of derivatives. Its effectiveness

is deaonstrated by solving test maples and problem on natural vibrations of a
plate on an elastic base.

Two tables. Bibliography contains 10 titles.

UDC 677.72.001
roams CABLE 1.00 on DWI G III: momma MACHINE
[Abstract of article by Listopad. I. A.. pp 50-53]
[Text] 01 the basis of a theoretical investigation. a differential equation
using liaiting conditions is reduced to a for-Ala. This foraula sites it possible
to investiate the strength and durability of a cable when it is for-ed on a
hoisting urchins drua for various geosetrical paraaeters. as well as to solve. a
nusber of probleas related to increasing the efficiency of steel cables in a
drua hoist.
Three illustrations. Bibliography contains 7 titles.

UDO 539.3: 5354: 62-50

mmmc 1'18 WRIGHT CF mumrm PLATE AND sums IN THE 9833303 0? PULSE
MOB

[Abstract of article by Shupikov. A. 31.. pp 545-59]
[Text] The probles is considered of desiging aultilayer plates and shells of

aininl weight with liaitations llposed on stresses originating due to the action
of pulse forces. ‘

The vibrations are described by equations of a refined theory of aultilayer
plates and shells with a rigid filler. The problea of optiaisation has solved by
a hybrid basic research aethod.

Results are given of an investigation of the effect of the conposition and curva-
ture of the cylindrical panel on the value of the Iiniaua weight.

Two illustrations. Bibliography contains 1? titles.

59

FOROFI'ICIALUSEONLY
smaa-nrmszmu mm LOGALIZATICII or mama or nmnmmmms mamas '
[Abatract of mm. by Shelud'ko. a. 4., and Rehevekaya. I. I... pp 60-65]

[Text] A hybrid aothod of eingle-dileneional research in deecribed for the ex-
troaua of nondifferentieble end piecewiee-continuoue functione on a eection baeed

on the aethod of quadratic interpolatione and a plotted procedure for localizing
the internal point (type of Fibonacci aethod). Thin paper deecribeo the reeulte

obtained in ainiaieinc teet functione‘ of a broad olaee. Effectiveneee ie deion-
atrated in the cane of a nondifferentiable function on a eection with a fairly
high reliability of the reeearch proceoe.

the table. Bibliography containe.9 titlee.

UDC 681.3“: 536.21

DMHICATIG OF THEMSICAL BAMBI“. CHAMGI‘QISTIQ BY SCENIC T113 WIVES“.
THEM CWGI‘IVITY ram

[Abetract of article by hteevityy. Tu. 11.. Grabchenho, A. 1., Luehpenko. 3. F.
and Rueanov, V. V.. pp 66-72] '

[Text] A lethod ie deacribed for determining the theraophyeioal uterial charac-
terietice by aeane of analog and hybrid calculatione. The roeulte are given of

the calculation of epecific heat and the relationehip betueen the heat conductivi-
ty coefficient of polycrystalline aeterial and the temperature.

Four illuetratione. Bibliography oontaine is titlee.
one 621.2u.oo1.5

QUASI-THREB DIWSIGAL P3031.“ CF GALWLATING now m A ammo HACKER TAKING
INTO AOCWNT THE FREE NUHBE 0P PURE TRIM VANE

[Abstract] of article by Zhukovekiy. a. 1., Kamhkov. L. n... and Topaeh, c. 1..
pp 73-79

[Text] A aethod ie propoeed for eolving direct and inveree quani-three-diaenelon-
a1 problem baeed on the ooaplex aolution of three tvo~dineneional problem. Un-

like other papers. in eolving the problea of averaged axially-eyeletrical flow.
surface 32. which repreoente the analog of the eurface of the vane for the axially-

eyaaetrical aodel of notion of the liquid.ie not introduced. auntiona were
obtained which tie in directly the goo-ctr: of the real vane with the averaged
flow paranotere. Thie aakee it poaeible to eolve the quani-three-diaeneional
problea in a more eubetantiated Inner.

{he illuetration. Bibliography containe 13 titlee.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DWSI‘IGATIG‘S (F mat-mama PARA’MBS C SIPULAT- AND NATURAL HYDRAULIC
TURBDIB - .

[Abetract of article by Zabolotekiy. Yu. A. and (.bukhov. Ye. V” PP 79-81]

EText] Deecribed are principlee for preparing a nthentical nodel to deterIine
he power-econoaic paranetere of GB equip-ant. and the reeulte of the inveetiga-
tione by eeene of the developed algoritha.

menu» Bibliography containe 6 titlee.

.unc 621.311.21.ooz.5

m 0? Immune mm 3101?”? 0‘ EGOHIO INDIGATCW Ol' WMRIC ram
PLANTS

[Abstract of article by Zabolotakiy. !u. A., and mukhov. Ye. V.. pp 82-88]

[ToxtjA developed nunerical algoritha for selecting More 'or G3 hydraulic
power equip-eat for the “Minsk-22" and Yes 1020 colputere, as well no the reeulte
of the inveetiatione nade are deecribed.

Six illustrations. Bibliography contains 3 titlee.
UDC 621.188

WT“)! 0! am On. turbine installation] (EWING HIT)! A WY VARIABLE
GAS P358083 am T213 T083133

[Abstract of article by Herelyeko'v, V. A.. and Vitkovekaya. ‘1‘. 3.. pp 88-93]

[Text Phteriale of a verifying thernl calculation of an experieental cm are
deecr bed. Two vereione or calculatione were nde according to the well-known
method on the aeounption of fuel burning at P a conet, and a nethod developed in
the Dhah of. the Ukrainian 333 Acadeay of Scincee eaeuaing Pa var which takes

into account regular changee in the static preeeure of the telperature and gae
conoulption.

Ae a” reoult of the work done. when regular gas paraleter puleatione ahead of the
turbine are present. and the preeeure ie Ieaaured by rapid-response aenaor. thernl
calculations assuring f: var have advantages over the known once -- it takes it
poaeible to utilise Ibro fully the energy of the pulsating flow: it deterainee
changee in the turbine power and the effective power of the installation during
the action of large and 3311 values of the gas paraaetere and. with ite help.
detecte the relationship between the actual irregularity of rotation and the ef-
fective power. aa well an the ueeful load and changee in the energy of the rotary
naaee of the rotor. The power per second coincidee well with the Ieaeurelent.

Bibliography containe 5 titlee.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um 621.103
warms comm. mm m rrs mummms

[Abatract of article by 8kvorchesk'iy. Ye. Au pp 93-97]

Eran] An analysis is ads of the power characteristics and operating speed of
urbine controlling drives which convert the energy or the hot and cold oospreseed
gas into the force developed at the actuator rod. A asthod is described for de-

signing turbine controlling drives, and their advantages are deaonstrated as con-e
pared to neuaatic and hydraulic drives. -

Two illustrations. bibliography contains 6 titles.

one 621.168.“: 662.769.21

TOXIC AID CARGDUWBIC MOB FROM (71'!) [GB turbine ulna] MUST (383 AND
HAYS T0 WCB THE!

[Abstract of article by Varshavskiy. I. I... Kanilo. r. 3.. Khesina. A. Ya.'.
Saimov, G. A.'. and website. V. P.. pp 98-102]

[Text] An analysis is given of the problea of reducing environaentel pollution by
toxic and carcinogenic cosponents of exhaust gases froa engines of transport facil-
ities. Coaperative data is cited on carcinogenic substances in exhaust gases of
piston and gas turbine engines. Hays are considered for reducing the toxicity

of cm exhaust gases by activating the fuel-air airture in the coabustion chaaber
by hydrogen additives. Results are given of erperiaentel investigations of a gas

turbine mgine when operating on diesel fuel with hydrogen additives.
Four illustrations. (he table. Bibliography contains 5 titles.

UDC 661.96i.i

PARAMETER AND OPENING COIDHIQIS 01" mm REACTIVE msnmrmts
[Abstract of article by Troshen'kin. 3. A.. and Dolgikh. r. m. pp 102-1-6]

Text] The basic peraaeters and operating conditions of hydrogen reactive instal-

tions are described. A relationship is established between the quantity of
water supplied to the reactive installations and the teaperetures in the instal-
lotions. The effect of the sise ot the particles used on the reaction speed was
investigated.
the illustration. Bibliography contains 12 titles.
CC‘PYRIGRIH Indetel'etvo f'uaukova dudta". 1981

2291
080: 1861/110

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.7.077
DBSIGING SYSTEMS FOR WWII: WLING 0? mutant ITEMS

macaw WWW! $181334 AMTICHBSKOOO WMMA mm
mum in Russian 1981 (signed to press 10 Apr 81) pp 2-4., 269-211

[Annotatiom foreword and table of contents tron book "Designing System for
Autonatic Handling of Miniature It‘s”. by Anatoliy Andreyevich Ivanov,
Irdatel'etvo ”Hashinostroyeniye". 7,700 copies, 272 pages]

[text] The basic processes for handling objects of different types using
original systeas constructed on the principles of conhined (contact and contact-
tree) force effect on parts and itus are mined in the book. The systh
provide an increase by a factor of 10-15 in labor productivity. The author
presents the scat efficient mineerin; design for group contact-free control
and precision conbination of cuponents using various sensor units having a
sensitivity of a fraction of a aicroeeter, etc.

The book is intended for engineering end technical workers engaged in over all
auto-tion in instruent building and whine building.

Pm!!!

this book is a logical continuation and develop-ant of topics exanined for the
first tile in the author's aonograph "Auto-tion of the Ass-bly of ainiature
andlliicroniniaturc Itas" (Roscoe, Ind-yo ”Hashimstroyeniye", 1981). At the
sue tine, it poses as its prinary task the solution of an independent problu,
the creation of bases for designing systh for auto-atic handling of itens.
taking into consideration requir-ents of nicrosiniaturication and principles

of the conbined (contact and contact-free) force effect on the article. Presently,
only isolated papers have dealt with this probln‘in the 0883 and elsewhere. and
no caplete resolution is available. Systens for handling rigid, durable it-s
with relatively lane size and night are described in lost papers. however,
practice shove that aicroniniaturisation iaposes restrictions-on aanufacturins
processes and autonetion min-ant that preclude equivalent use of conventional
teclmiques that have been tried in other branches of industry.

63

MOMUSEMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A wide gaaut of aethods and equipnent for automated handling of stall items is
mined in the hook, taking into consideration recent developnents by Soviet
and non-Soviet science and engineering. It is at the sane tine based on basic
tenets of works by Soviet scientists on the principles of automation of produc-
tion processes and theories of autonated machinery.

The aaterial for the book is assenbled so that a specific type of handling
system is examined in each of its main chapters (mechanical, vibronechanical,
pneumatic, nagnatic and electrical), which are classified according to the
feature of the predoainant force effect on the item during its displacement,
orientation, combination and location. Mechanical systens are considered for

handling couple: itens of irregular gen-etric shape with different lat-bars and
locations of flexible elements.

The nest efficient vibroeechanical systens with parallel operating arrangement
are emined for couple: multiconponent itus with varied surface layer strength.
Pneuutic systems are presented for brittle and low-rigidity items with particu-
larly clean surfaces characterized by relatively low asterial density and developed
bearing surfaces or a considerable flow surface. Magnetic handling systens are
exasined as applicable to a vast group of ferromagnetic itsas of diverse types
without considering the skin-effect, and consequently, forces of an electro-
dynanic nature associated with the use of d.c. and low-frequency a.c. fields.
Systeas for handling itas made fro: dielectrics and conductors with low strength
characteristics are representative of systh using an electrical field.
Further-ore, problsns of its: electrification by friction, the influence of
static electricity on handling processes and quality characteristics of the
itens. as well as nethods for local neutralization of electristatic charges are
examined.

Systeas for precision positioning which have various sensing units to recognize
the object being handled are treated in a separate chapter.

We request that consents and suggestions concerning the book be sent to the
following address: 107076, Hoscow, 3-76, Stronynshiy per., d. 4, lad-yo
'hshinostroyeniye" .

comms
vase
Foreword 3
Introduction 5
Chapter 1. General characteristics of automatic handling processes
and systems 9
1. Spatial handling of objects during automatic nachining and
assuably of ituas .. 9
2. Modern methods and equipnent for automatic handling of
null items 12
3. Technical requirements for handling systems in the
production of miniature and microniniature items 16
lo. Structure of a handling systen with series and parallel
operating arranganent 20
64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter

2. Mechanical systas

Orientation of itens with axial arrangeaent of fleeible
coaponents

Orientation of itqas with flexible conponents arranged on
the sane side

Clalping and delivery of itus with defor'ned flexible
coaponents

Pundanental nethods for straightening flexible coQonenta
Straightening flexible conponents taking into consideration
how they are fixed into the body of the iten

Design of a straightening device

Secondary orientation and piling of its-s with flexible
conponents

Magazine feed for auto-atic nanufacturing machinery

3. Vibronechanical systens

General characteristics of a probability process for
putting itas into cassettes and assenhling itas in
systens with parallel operating arrangaent

Effect of various stinulating factors on increasing the
probability that the part will fall into the cassette

housing
Optima nodes for putting itens into cassettes, taking

into consideration the effect of special process
stimlators

Group assenbly and insertion into cassettes for flat itens
Group asuenbly and insertion into cassettes for rod-type
itens

Productivity of systens of group assably and insertion
into cassettes with probabilistic process

Chapter 6. Pneuutic systens

l.

2.

12.

Horizontal displacenent of iteaa on air cushion with
braking by airflow from the opposite direction
Displaceaent of itens on an air cushion upwards at an
angle to the horizontal

Displacement of its-s in a closed pnel-atic transporter
Disconnecting and connecting transport currents

Piling and iten-by-iten delivery of iteas fron a pneunatic
jet transporter-piler

Design of pneu-atic fluidic transporters

Active fluidic orientation of itm with respect to linear
coordinate

Active fluidic orientation of itas with respect to
angular coordinate

Sorzing itens using the Bernoulli effect

Sorting itens using vacuua and fluidic clanping

The equilibrium and stable position of an ite- in a
fluidic clanp

Putting flat and rod-type itens into cassettes

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 5. Magnetic system

1.
2.

3.
lo.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

Orientation of items in a uniforn magnetic field

Active orientation of rod-type items in a non-uniform
nagnetic field

Active orientation of flat itas in a non-uniform
magnetic field

Displacement of item in a caplem magnetic field
representing superposition of direct and alternating fields
Displac-ent of items in a complen magnetic field
representing superposition of direct and pulsed fields
Displacaent of items in the non-uniform magnetic field of
an say-etric system, taking into consideration the
siqlified characteristics of the field of the perturbing
solenoid _
Displacement of itm in various media while retaining
orientation in the magnetic field

Displacement of items at any angle to the horizontal and
under conditions of weightlessneas

Equilibrium and steady state of has suspended in the
magnetic field of an accmmslator

Interaction of items in a magnetic accumulator

Clamping and delivery of items from a magnetic accu-llator
Assembly and insertion of items into cassettes in a
magnetic field

Calculation of the fundamental parameters of magnetic
systems

Chapter 6. Handling systh using an electric field

1.

2.
3.
4.
5s

6.

Charging of itens by friction during transfer in channels
of automatic systems

Adhesion of items to various materials

Methods of local neutralization of static charges
Orientation of items in a uniform electric field
Ita-by-item delivery and insertion of items into
cassettes in a non-uniform electric field

Aspects of the calculation and design of inductors and
high-voltage electric field sources

Chapter 7. Precision positioning systm

1.

2.
3.
lo.
5.

6.
7.

Parts registration with respect to linear and angular
coordinates during automatic precision assembly of
miniature itas

Mechanical positioning systh with stepping electric
motors

Positioning systems with piezoceranic high-frequency
oscillation transducers

Positioning systems with aerostatic supports and a linear
electric motor

Manipulators of positioning systems
Pneumatic sensor cyst-s
Tactile, ultrasound and photoelectric sensor systaas

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8. Sensor syuas bssod on srtificisl vision

9. Aspects of controlling positioning syst-s
10. Autonotion of ssssnbly using industrial robots

11. Antonstic soctions snd trsnstsr lines bsssd on industrial
robots
Conclusion
References

MIGHT: lsdstsl'stvo ”Hsshinostroysniys", 1981

9196
(:80: 1861/ 107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

axon-mac! DIVERS, orncs AID rm

HEAVY- IOU mmmm

Moscow TIMI”!!! m: in Russian 198) (signed to press 17 Jan 80)
pp 168-169

[Table of contents fron book "transactions of Radio Ingineering Institute. 088R
Acade of Sciences. lo 36: Heavy-Ion Accelerators". edited by
V. K. sloka. Radinteklnicheskiy institut All 888R. 250 copies. 169 pages]

[Text] Contents page
A. P. Pedotov. s. A. Lukshin. "Possible halo of filtered 3‘ been in linac" 3

s. V. Dvortsov. L. G. Luise, "Setting anplitudee and phases of accelerating
fields in nultiresonator charged particle accelerator" 7

A. I. Kvasha. ”Accounting for the influence of higher nodes of oscillations
on transfer function of resonator as object of control in accelerating
field stabilisation systu" 17

L. G. Louise. N. N. Sveshnikova. "Operational features of rf relativistic
electron bean generators when used for supply to intense proton
accelerators" 26

G. I. Vstskikh. 8. V. Bidnyy. B. A. Hirochnik, "Investigation of syn. for
regulating natural frequency of resonator on stand of second pert of
neson factory accelerator of Nuclear Research Institute" 34

G. I. Betskikh. I. I. Rondarsv, V. M. Galkin. V. V. Yelyen. V. s. Kabamov.
A. I. Kvasha. A. A. Kus'nen. V. V. Kushin. L. G. Louise. 3. P. Hurin,
V. H. Piroshenko. S. V. Plotnikov. R. I. Polyakov. P. A. Iedotov. "Basic
systems of 16 Kev/nucleon heavy-ion injector linac" 66

V. V. Rushin. 8. V. Plotnikov. "Particulars of focusing heavy ions in linac" 61

R. I. Rondarev. A. P. Durkin. "Particle dynanics in second pert of heavy-ion
injector for synchrotron at Institute of theoretical and Experimental

Physics" 72
Yo. K. Gel'fand. A. Ya. Serov. R. S. Sychev. "Radiation loads on proton

accelerator conponents for linear losses of particles with energy fron
20 Nev to 1 rev" 78

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ye. K. Gel'fand. 3. s. Sycbev. "Distribution of absorbed energy of 2-600 Hav

protons in water with consideration of energy loss fluctuations" 85

Ye. K. Gel'fand. B. s. Sychev, "Tablea for calculating ahielding fro-

v.

A.

A.

L.

L.

V.

secondary hadrone that ariea upon inelastic interactiona of protons

with energy tron 50 Kev to 1 rev" 98
D. Zynain. I. L. Korenev. I. s. Hirer. L. A. Roginakiy. "Drift deflection

of electron beans" 110
I. Dzargach. V. A. Krasnopol'akiy. 8. V. Oaipova. "So-e problems of charged
particle notion in rf potential walla" 116
I. Dzergach, "Oscillation in cavity resonators of biconical type” 126

c. Lonize, N. N. Sveehnikova. "Self-field or charged particle bunch with
transient and Cherenkov radiation in resonator” 133

G. Louise. N. l. Sveshukova. "Freezing of field during transient radia-
tion" 165

V. P'yankov. A. P. Pedotov, V. B. Khvoetov. "Analysis of distribution of
hen lanes in neon-generator linaca" 151

COMIC“: MDIOTEKHNICHBSKIY INSTI‘l'U'l' All 8881 (km 8883). 1979

6610
080: 1861/126

69

MOFFICIALUSBQNLY
MWMONLY

COLLECTIO“ OP PAPERS 0N CHARGED PABJICLB ACCBLBEAIORS. PART 1

Dubna TIDE! SBD'HOGO VSBSOYUZNOGO SOVBSHCIANIIA P0 USKOIITILYAM ZAIIIZIBINYKB
CBASTITS in Russian Vol 1, 1981 (signed to press 19 May 81) pp 2-12

[Annotation. editor's preface. data on organizational conmittee and table of con-
tents fron book “Proceedings of Seventh All-Union Convention on Charged Particle
Accelerators. Dubna. 16-16 October 1980. Vol 1". edited by T. Ya. Zhabitshaye.

V. H. Zhabitskiy. B. V. Ivaahkevich and Ye. L. Sanenove. 0b"yedinennyy institut
yadernykh issledovaniy. 800 copies]

[Text] Taking part in the work of the convention were more than 600 Soviet and
non-Soviet specialists. The proceedings of the convention include reports on
new large accelerator projects. heavy ion accelerators. colliding beans, dynanics

of charged particle beams, and also various systems and components of acceler-
ators. Trends in accelerator development are reflected.

Editor's preface

The scope of the Seventh All-Union Convention on Charged Particle Accelerators
held in October 1980 at Dubna covers a wide range of topics in the physics of ac-

celerated beams of charged particles. as well as problems in developing and using
accelerators. '

The papers delivered at the convention and published in "Proceedings of the Seventh
All-Union Convention” deal with accelerators for fundamental and applied research.
for the national economy and medicine. Accelerators of protons, electrons. heavy
ions and positrona are currently being developed and used in acceleration centers.
Facilities with colliding proton-antiproton beams are close to completion. These
papers deal with nearly all types of accelerators-fron enormous proton synchro-

trons for fundamental research to electron accelerators of modest size for the
national econcny and medicine.

The asterial presented in the published papers gives a fairly couplets reflection
of the state of this rapidly growing area of science and engineering involving
charged particle accelerators. Scientists. engineers and students will be able

to find much that is interesting and useful in the materials of the Seventh All-
Union Convention.

A. A. Vasil'yev

70

INDI1OIIICIA1.IIIIIH1LY
”WINONLY

Contents 988‘
Bd1tor'. PrefauiocOOOOIOOOCOOOOCIO0.0000IIOOOOOOC0.0'OOOOCOOOCIOOOO'OOIOOCU

Introductory neaaage by A. A. Vasil'yev. chairnan of the organizational
cmitt‘e of cm conwntim000I.0.00.0.0.no....00.0000000DOOOOIOOOOOOOOOO

Heeaage of greeting by Academician Venedikt Petrovich Dehelepov. eecretary
of Nuclear Physica Department. USSR Academy of Sciencea..................

Heaaage of greeting by Ivan Georgiyevich Hororav. chairman of USSR State
Cuttee on the use of “a“ ”rut...IDIOOOOOOOOOIOOOOO0.0.0.0.000...

Neaaage of greeting by Acadenician Nikolay Nikolayevich Dogolyubov. director
of Joint Institute for Nuclear Reeearch..................................

Heaaage of greeting by Deputy Chairman N. G. Delichenko of the hecutive
Co-Iittee of mono Municipal Council of People'a Deputies................

Seaeion A-l: cmm arms In W OF awn-m MW”

"Problena of High-Energy Physica and Accelerator Develop-ant"

Va Io lunarWeeeaeooeeeeeeeaeeeooaeaeoeeeeooeoeoeeeeeeoeeeaeeoonooeoeeeeeee 3

"Accelerator-Accuauletor Couple: of the Inatitute of High-Energy Phyaice
(State of Reaearch)"
A. I. Ageyev. V. I. Dalbekov. V. I. Gridaeov. Yu. P. Dnitrevekiy. A. 1’.
Dunaytaev, V. V. Kmarov. 0. V. Kuroayev. V. N. Lebedev. A. A. Logunov,
K. P. Myrnikov. A. A. Naunov. V. G. Rogorinekiy. 1.. D. Solov‘yev, N. N.
Taraknnov. Yu. S. Fedotov. D. K. Shenbel', V. A. Yarba, A. D. Antenov.
S. N. Vaail'yev. V. A. Glukhikh. 0. A. Gum. 1.. B. Dinaburg. D. G.
Karaaev'. H. N. Koeyakin. I. P. Nalyehev. I. A. Houlevakiy. N. V. Morin.
N. A. Honoazon. V. I. Peregud. V. A. ‘ritov. A. A. Vaail'yev. G. P. .
Voronteov, A. H. Wul'khandanyan. Ye. L. Nakeyev. 1'. Z. Shiryaycv. A. I.
Vagin. v. v. Yelyan. A. A. Kuz'nin. v. P. Delyakov. I. z. Butkevich. n. u.
arguab, V. D. Kmlﬂo. I. H. mtkwtin. Ne v. r11mOOOOOOOOODDOOODOOOO l3

"Acceleratore for Induatry and hdicine, and Outlook for Their Develop-
nent During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan"
Y“. ?. vakhmhin’ v. A. cl‘khm. H. P. sv‘n'm...‘OOO'OODDOOOOOOOOOIDOOOOO 23

"The Pernilab Antiproton-Proton Collider and Source" _
D‘vid B. elmOOOOCOO.ICOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOO0..O...O.O.O.OOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO. 32

Session A-Z: mum-mu mm

”0-400 Ioochronoue Wclotron and Outlook for Heavy-Ion Accelerator Develop-
ment in Nuclear Reaction Laboratory of Joint Institute for Nuclear

. Rceearch"

G. N. Plerov. Yu. l‘a. Oganeeyan. V. V. Boltuahkin. G. G. Gul'bekyan, A. I.

Ivanenko. D. A. Klenin. s. I. Koalov. I. V. Koleaov. V. D. Kutner. A. ll.

Horduyev. I. 'l'a. Oganeayen. V. N. Pokrovakiy. K. I. Sanin. Yu. Sure. V. A.

chumyeveeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaoeaaaoeee0beOoeeeeeeeee'eeoeoeeeeoeeeoeoeaeaoeeee 59

71

POI OFFICIAL “ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

”Recent Develop-eat of the Blectron Dela Ion Source"
3. “cur, 3. mm. H. n.hMOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOO'DOIIODDODDDOOOOOOOOIDOD... 66

”llactron-Den Source of Multiply Charged Iona"
V. G. Abdul'nanov. V. 1.. Auslander. Yu. H. Kolokol'nikov, H. D. blown”... 75

"Peaeibility of Heavy Ion Acceleration on Yerevan Blectron Synchrotron"
A. A. 'Veeil'yev. A. To. Aletuni. B. I. Laziyev. Kh. A. si-onyan. Yu. Te.
Wu“, :0 T.‘ oun”an.....'CCCOOOOOOOOOQOOOIO0.00.0000...0.0.0.0000... 78

"Develop-ant of Ion Source With Cathode Sputtering of Barking Subetance for
cyclotron in Nuclear Reaearch Laboratory of Joint Inetitute for Nuclear
Research”

Y“. Pa Tr."y‘kwp S. La 3080”].0V. Ve 3o ‘umrg Ae 8a P.mlk. Ga “8

solav'yw.oeeoeoooeoeeeeeeeeoeoeoeeeeoeooeeeeeeeoeeeeeeoee‘eooeeoeeeeeoeeeooe 81

"Conetruction of Poet-Stripping Section of me 11111 Dam-Ion Linac"

V. V. Arm'yev, YUe Go httodnyy. Va Ae m. Io I. mmr.nkog Re I.
Danchuk. A. P. D'yachanko. Yu. V. Kae'yanov. H. 8. Leenykh. A. V. Pipe.

Ya. I. Revutekiy. D. I. Rudyak, G. H. Skoronnyy. 0. A. Pedorov. II. A. Khizhnyak.

V. Po ”I'Dueeoeeeeeeeaeeeeoeeoeeaeeoeeeeeoeeeeoeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeoeoeee 85

"Ring Cyclotron Acceleration of Heavy lone to Energy of 1-2 GeV/Rucleon"
L. A. saruqanOOOOOIOO00.0.0.0...OO..00...OIOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00000000000.00 88

"Dean Stomga for Increaaing Heavy-Ion Synchrotron Inteneity"
H. G. Nagayenko. Ye. H. Reehetnikova. Yu. P. Sovergin, I. A. Shuhaylo....... 91

"Laser Source of Multiply Charged Iona"
0. A. Bykovakiy, Yu. P. Rozyrev. A. S. ‘l'aybin, K. I. xozlovakiy. D. Yu.

sharkoVeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeooeeeeeeeoeeelo'eeeeeeet 95

"Characteristics of Laeer Ion Source for Cyclotrone"
0. D. Anan'in, Yu. A. Dykovokiy. V. P. Gueev. Yu. P. Kozyrev. V. D. Peklenk'ov.
A. s. P‘N. 10v. “1"”...OOO0000.00.00.00I.0'OO...OOOOOOOOQOOOOIOOOOOII 98

'Tlpdating 73-cn Cyclotron at Hoecow Engineering Physics Institute"
L. A. Sarkiayan. I. D. Koahevoy. V. A. Kalita. V. s. Nikolayev, V. P.
zaykov, B. "0 PM, L. I. vinogradwaOOOOOOOOO...COOOOOOOOOOOIOIOIIOO...b5. 103

Session A-3: SUPERCONDUCTING ACCELERATORS

"Problem of Cooling Superconductive Magnets of the UN! [Accelerator-
Accunulator] Facility Under Conditione of Radiative Eating"

Ya. G. Vinokur. I. P. Vishnev. I. D. Lebadeva. 1.. N. Hagalinakaya. O. A.

Sadov, I. A. Piletov, A. l. Aseyev. Yu. P. Dnitravakiy. V. I. Hoakvitin.

K. P. uyznuw. V. v. sytnu. A. N. swcheVOODOOOOOODODAODAOODOOOOOAOOCOCO 109

"Cryogenic Support Satan of UN! Facility"

1. K. Dutkevich. I. M. Crisorenko. Yu. I. Dukhanin. A. P. In'kov, V. D.
Kovalenko. A. A. Konov. I. H. Horkovkin. A. I. Ageyev. K. P. Myrnikov.

72

Mommusromv
MWWONLY

. V. S. Serdyuk. A. N. Shasichev. V. N. Vasil'yev. 1.. D. Dinahurg. V. U.
Kalinin, N. A. Monoszon. I. A. Hosalevskiy. V. A. Titov. V. A. Belushkin,
A. G. ul'dw1ch.0.0000000000000000.0.000.000.000000.0.0...OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOO 1‘5

"Developing Radiation-Resistant Pulse Hagnets With 5 '1‘ Field"
v. u. “rm. Ge 1. sn'"’tr°Veeeeeeaseeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 121

"ﬂeasuring Critical Current of ur-so Superconductive Specimens with Pulsed
Irradiation by High-mergy Particles"

P. G. Vasil'yev. N. H. Vladimirova. V. I. Vollwv. I. N. Goncharov. L. N.

Zaytsev, B. D. Zel'dich. V. I. Ivanov, Ye. D. Kleehchenko. V. D. Khvoetov... 125

"Horking Characteristics of Blectric Insulation Couponsnts in Superconduct-
ing Magnets for High-Energy Physics Accelerators and Devices"
N. G. Anishchenko. V. Ya. Volkov. R. Khaller. Yu. A. Shiehov................ 129

"Measuring Coefficient of Ion-Stimulated Desorption on UN! Pecility Vacuum
Chamber Model at Temperature of 300 and 77 K"
Y“. 2h. “11““. v. G. mo:1n.uy. v. L. UnwWOCIOOOOIOOOOOOOOOO...00....I [33

"Radiation Resting of Superconducting Magnets in our Facility"
“0 A. “810v. “0 Vs "om.OOOCO0.0.00.00.00.00.0.0...OOIOOOOOOCIOOOOOIOOOOC 137

"Investigation of One-Meter Models of Superconducting Magnets with 5 1' Field"
V. I. Dalbekov, R. A. Dulatov, 1.. H. Vasil'yev. K. P. Gertsev. V. I. Gridasov,
V. I. Deuyanchuk. Yu. P. Dnitrevskiy. V. V. Yelistratov. D. V. Kar'nin, K. P.
My:nn°v. A. I. Nadia, v. v. sytnik. no “e r.r'.mw.tOOO'OOOOOOOOOOCOOOO. 1‘2

"Optimizing Para-eters of Read Sections in Superconductive Dipole Winding"
“O I. mu“, 8. Ye. sycbv.k1y’ Vs A. TitWOOOOO90....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO. 1‘7

"Calculating Mechanical Stresses and Strains in Superconducting Magnets of
01K Facility"
A. G. Daykovskiy. V. R. Darin. Yu. I. Portugelov. V. V. Sytnik.............. 150

"Facility with 8.4 Tesla Magnet for Research at Dalian Tuperaturea on
Accelerator Deans" ‘
I. “O Mcmrov’ v. a. mobinOOOOOOOIO...IOOCOOIOOOOOOOO'OOIOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOO 155

Session A-lo: PARTICLE NOS 1!! ACCELERATORS AND W118

"Major Results of Research on Prototype of Collective-Field Accelerator at
Joint Institute for Nuclear Research"
v.0 PO sarmtm.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOO00.000.00.00...CIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO 161

"Electron-Dean Dynanics in Linac. of VRPP-lo Positron Source"
III. M. Karliner. A. V. Rozhenyakin. P. D. Lysyanakiy. 0. A. leshevenko, G. N.
Ostreyko. R. A. Salinov, B. H. Pnel'. V. P. Yakovlev. G. I. Yasnov......... 169

"Longitudinal Particle )btion With Pulse Loading by Current of Superhigh-
Rnergy Proton Synchrotron Accelerating Systen"
0. A. Bal'dner. s. V. Ivanov. B. S. Kasunov. I. I. Sulygin. D. K. Shedel'u 173

73

summon“
MWMONLY

”Electron Acceleration in Homogeneous Circular Iriaed Waveguide with Con-
sideration of Current Loading"

10 8e shchdrmoeoeeeeeoseoeeeaeeeeeaeeeeeseesoreeeeeseeeetooeeaeeoeeeeeeeee

"Studying Dynamics of nigh-Luminosity Benn in Electron Linnea"
Va A. Poly.m. I. s. smdrm000.0000000.00O.0.0.0.00000505.00.000.00.000.

"Modeling Acceleration Process in nigh-Current Split-Anode !!:l.crotron"f
:0 A. klwmtuv, A. I. “rev. v. c. KurWOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO'OOO0.000000.00

"Stabilizing Instability of Compensated Proton Bean by Greeting Plaﬂ on
Acceleration Track"
Go 1. DM’ Va Ye. chwriy‘nWOOOOC0O..00....OI.OOOOOOOOOOO'COOOOOOOOO'O...

"Ion-Optical Properties of Acceleration Tubes with Elical Field"
A. “sh. BO ‘01:“. D'. “b00000...OOIOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOCOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

"Transverse Coherent Bean Instability Characteristics on Plateau of

386 Oereted Magnetic Field in Accelerator et Institute of High-Energy
Physics"

Yu. H. Ado. V. L. Brut, K. P. Gertsev. 0. P. Lebedev. V. K. Hokhov.

Yes Po “WMeseeeeeeeeeeeeaosaeeeeeee.so...secesseeeaoooebeteseaesoseesee

"Dynamics of Positron Bean With Converter Target During After-Acceleration
in Traveling-Have Electron Linac" '
L. z. Dzhilawan. A. I. nrQVOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOIODOQOCOOOOC000.00.000.0_

"Longitudinal Microwave lean Instabilities in Proton Synchrotron at
Institute of High-Energy Physics"

Go Go Guroveeeeeeeeeevseeeeoooeeeesssseaoeaeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeceaoeeeeseeeesee

"Self-Consistent Theory of Intense Been Acceleration in Bundling Sections"
"0 I. Ayutakiy. L. A. “hank-0......IOOOOOOOOCOOIOCOCQOOCOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

"Self-Consistent Interaction of Extended Ion Bunches With Hultisap Resonator"
G. “I vyalov’ Yu. V. MRMV0.0......OOOOOOIDOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOODOOOODOOOII

"rrsnsverse Oscillations of Intense Been in Accumulator"
Ye. V. Bulyak. V. I. Kunrilko. V. V. Markov. H. I. Hocheslmikov.............

Session 3-1: Cournnac BEAMS

"Proton-Antiproton Colliding Peas in UN! Project"

1‘. A. Vsevolozhskays. 3. I. Grishanov. Ya. 8. Derbenev. N. S. Dikanskiy.

I. N. Neehkov. V. V. Parkhonchuk, D. V. Peetrikov. G. I. Sil'vestrov. A. ll.
Skrinskiy. V. I. Balbekov, G. G. Gurov. A. I. Drozhdin. K. P. mnikov.

Y“. s. Pedotov, v. A. Y‘rbaiﬁii0....0.0.0....0000......OOOOOOOOOOOIOOIOOIQI.

"State of Research on VEPP-ZM Electron-Positron Accuulator"

I. B. Vassar-an. P. H. Ivenov. G. Ya. Xereraehvili. I. A. loop. A. P.
Lyeenko. Ye. A. Perevedenteev. A. A. Polunin, A. N. Shrinekiy. V. P.
Turk“. Y“. H. SMtWWOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO000.099.900.000.0000000000000000000000

74

mmmmir

177

182

185

189

1910

205

209

213

217

220

226

229

2’02
I708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"VEPP-lo: Startup and First Experiments"

V. V. Anashin. E. A. Baklakov. V. N. Borovikov, s. E. Vssserusn. N. A.
Vinokurov. B. I. Grishanov. A. A. Zholents. E. I. Zinin. A. s. Kalinin.

H. N. Ksrliner, V. A. Eiselev, G. A. Kornyukhin. N. A. lumetsov. G. N.
Kulipanov. E. A. Kupsr, 1.. N. Kurdadze, A. A. Livshits. Yu. G. lhtvsysv.
A. s. Nedvedko. N. A. Hezentsev. 0. A. Nezhevenko, s. A. Nikitin. A. P.
Onuchin. G. N. Ostreyko. 3. z. Persov. V. V. Petrov. V. N. Petrov. V. F.
Pindyurin. V. P. Prikhod'ko. I. Ya. Protopopov. Yu. A. Pupkov. A. F. Serov.
V. A. Sidorov. A. N. Skrinskiy, G. I. Sil'vestrov. A. E. Tesnykh, E. N.
Irakhtenbsrg. G. N. Maykin. Yu. N. Ul'yanov. I. A. Shekhtsan. Yu. I.
Bydel'"n. Go I. YamOVOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0.0..0......009.90.000.009.90.00.09.00. 2‘6

"Absolute Particle Energy Calibration in MP4 Accululator With Respect to
Measured Polarized Electron Spin Preceseion Frequency"

N. A. Vinokurov. N. N. Yegorychev, A. A. Zholente, V. A. Kisslev. G. N.

Kulipanov, I... N. Kurdsdze. N. A. Hezentsev, 8. I. Nishnev. s. A. Nikitin.

V. V. Petrov, 1. Ya. Protopopov. Ye. L. Saldin. V. A. Sidorov, A. N. Skrinekiy.

A. B. Tmykh. Go “a myth. Y“. Ms Shltmv. Y“. Is Bydel'mseeseesssese 25°

"Compensating for Linear Coupling of Betstron Oscillations and Vertical
Energy Dispersion in VEPP-lo Accusulstor"
A. A. Zholents, S. A. Nikitin, V. V. Petrov, I. Ya. Protopopov. G. M.

Tmaykmsssesseoosssoeeooeesososseeseeesssssso.ssoenseessssseseseessssseeeoo 25‘

"Electron Cooling of Proton-Antiproton Colliding Deans"
Ya. s. mtbemv’ A. “. skrm‘uyOOOQUOOOOOOOOOOC0.0.00.0..0....00........... 259

"Electron-Bean Space Charge Conpensation in Facilities for Electron Cooling"
N. s. Dikanskiy. V. I. Kudelaynen. V. V. Parkhonchuk. D. V. Pestrikov....... 266

"Intensifying Electron Cooling by Internal Instability of Electron Beam"
Y‘s s. “runeVOI.O...000......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0....000.000.0000.... 269

"Bean Accunulator-Expander on LIB-2000 Electron Linac at Khar'kov Physica-
technical Institute. URSSR Acadsny of Sciences"

Ye. V. Bulyak. V. Yu. Gonchsr. Yu. N. Grigor'yev, I. 8. Cult. Ye. V. Yeresenko.

Ye. V. lnopin. I. I. Kobe, V. V. Kondratenko. S. G. Kononsnko. V. I. Kurilko.

A. S. Hamishvili. N. I. Nocheslmikov. L. E. Nyskushko. L. V. Esprintssv.

A. Ye. TolstOYIOOOCOOOO00....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOUOO...O0.000CCOOOCOCOIOCOICOOOCOO 276

"Stochastic Blurring of Longitudinal Phase Density With Prolonged Retention
of Proton Bunches"
G. c. mtov. v0 v0 ‘otincsooOCCOOOIOUOOIOII...OJ..0...OOOVOOOOVOOCOO'OOOOOOO 279

"Sane Possibilities of Increasing Nazism Current Density in Colliding
Facilities" .
I. B. Vassemn, F. N. Israylev. I. A. loop. A. N. Shrinskiy. G. N.

rmymoossssssooososssssssoesseooesoeoosessssssoosssssossesoeoeessseooeees 2“

"Influence of Different Mes of Nodulations on Position of Eandosness
Threshold in Collider Effects"

1- B. VOBOOmII. Fe M. Izrql.Vssoseessessssssaesssssssssesseseseessoo'ssoes 288

75

summon“
MWWMY

"Analysis of Colliding Effects in Honoenergetic Experiments With Large
Vertical Dispersion"
A. A. ZhOICBt.’ F. “I Izraylev’ A. B. kahOOQOOOOCOOOOOODO‘OIOOOOOOOOOOOO 293

"Latest Results and State of Research on Optical Klystron Installed on

VEPP-3 Electron Accumulator"
“a A. Vinokurov. Pa D. vobl”. Go A. mmhm. Ge N. “119“. Va No
Litvwb. “O A. mgmtuv. A. u. sum.u’00000000000000O'COOCOOOOOOOCOOO. 298

"VLEPP Conversion Syeten for Getting Polarized Benn"
v. Ye. Bal‘m’ A. A. mMyIuWO'OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOO.QOOOOOOCOCOOOOOOO ”2

"Plan of loSO-keV Electron Accmlator in Specialised Synchrotron Radiation
Source"

V. V. Anaehin. E. A. Baklakov. V. G. Veshcherevich. E. I. Gorniker. B. A.

cudkov. A. V. Yevstigneyev. E. I. linin. E. I. Znhhov. A. 8. minin. V. A.

Kiaelev. I. A. loop. V. E. Korehuganov. G. E. tulipanov. 6. Ya. lurkin.

Yu. G. Hatveyev. A. S. Hedvadko. A. A. Horozov. V. I. “11th. A. D. Oreshkav.

V. H. Petrov. S. P. Petrov. A. P. Serov. I. K. Sedlyarov. A. II. Skrinsltiy.

B. “I nuhtenMIS. 1‘. ”O shcusolevootOQ...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOI.OUOOOOOOOOODDOOO ”6

Session 3-2: MAGNET SYSTEMS AND EBCTRIC POHBR SUPPLIES

”Trends in Power Supply Developnent for Charged Particle Accelerators"
St N. vasu'yev. 0. A. we“, V! D. FedorwdOO0...00....OOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOIOOO 315

"Prohlene of Forming Magnet cycles in Annular Electronagnets of m Facility"
8. N. Vanil'yev. 0. A. Guaev. G. I. Gusav. V. M. lot-an. Yu. V. labedev.
I. v. "Olin, Va "0 nothm’ A. A. mm. v. n. r.d°r°v00'000000000000.00... 327

"Particulars of Shaping Dipole Magnet Pield in First Stage of III! Facility"
u. I. Doynikov. v. s. Knshikhin. A. v. Popov. Yu. I. Puzynovich. c. n.
Sensonov. A. G. Daykovskiy. Yu. I. Portugalov............................... 331

"Results of Updating System for Regulating and Smoothing Magnetic Field
Pulsations in Proton Synchrotron of the Institute of Theoretical and
Experimental Physics"

0. A. Gueev. G. I. Gueev. V. M. loft-an. V. N. Eozhkov....................... 336

"Stabilizing Average Bean Energy in VEPP-ZM Accuulator when Doing Precision
Experiments"

8. A. Eeklekov, I. E. Vaseernan. V. P. Vereneyenko. H. H. Karliner. 6. Ya.

Keeeraehvili. S. P. Petrov. N. G. Potepov. Yu. A. Pupkov. Yu. H. Shetunov... 338

"Magnet Supply Systen on 3-5 Proton-Ion Synchrotron"
V. Le Auslenderp So Va ‘u'ntng R. "a up“. Va Pa rail”. An A. MIR”... 3‘!

"Electronagnet Supply System on Synchrotron at “re-ck Polytechnicel Institute"
L. D. Butakov, V. K. Dubich. G. P. Kiryukhina. N. A. Lashuk, Z. Sh.

PaokhutdmOVaooeaaea...Oeeaaeeaeaeaoaaooeeeeosesesoeaoaaaoaaoaoooooaosoneseeus

76

MWWWLY
mommmouu

”ﬂuericsl Hodeling of Quasi-Steady Kagnetic Iiclds With Consideration of
Saturation of Ferromagnetic hterial"
no I. mim. v. S. n.hmm00.0000000.000.000.000...OOOOOOOOUOOOOOOOOQO. 3‘8

"Using Direct Integral nethod to Ccnpute Stationary Hepatic Pields in
Systems with Iron"
V. A. Dzyuba. u. H. Karliner. P. a. Lysyanskiy. I. ll. Imel'................ 352

"Calculations of m—Dimsionel Magnetic Fields of Superconductive Dipoles and
”Quadrupoles by Reflected Current lhthod"
I. A. sula’". I. P. ‘udmOOCOOOOOOO0.0.0.0.009001000000Q000'..VOOOGOOOOOOO 356

"Producing Highly Banogeneous Yields in Swerconducting Hecate of Window
Frane' me"

V. Se A1107”. "a As voywodin’ Y“. A9 Grummo. As De KOVOIOORO. Vs 10

Low”. 1. A. sml‘ycv’ I. P. YudmOOOO0'.0.00.0.0...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 36o

"Pwer Supply Sources for Magnetic Field Correction Circuits in Accelerator
of the Institute of High-Burg Physics"
8. A. Belov, H. II. Corokhov. V. V. Zharenov. A. A. Kardash. V. A. Hedvedev.
V. I. Perebeynos. s. A. Ryethskikh. V. V. Splyukhin. V. G. 8hirokov......... 364

Organizational Conittee of Seventh All-Union Convention on Charged Particle
Accelerators

A. A. Vasil'yev doctor of technical sciences.

(chsimn) USSR State Co-aittee on Use of Ato-ic Energy. Hoecov
Yu. N. Deniaov doctor of technical sciences,

(deputy chairman) Joint Institute for Nuclear Research. Dubna

V. A. Berechnoy candidate of physical and lathe-stical sciences.

Science Council of 0883 Academy of Sciences on Problems,
doctor of technical sciences.
Joint Institute for Nuclear Research. Dubna

doctor of technical sciences.

Institute of Nuclear Research. USSR Acadely of Sciences.
Rosco»

doctor of physical and lathe-stical sciences.

Institute of Physical Problems. USSR Academy of Sciences.
hoecow

USSR State Col-ittee on Use of Atonic Energy. Moscow
Joint Institute for Nuclear Research. Dubna

doctor of physical and mathematical sciences.
Physics Institute ineni P. l. stedev. USSR Acaday of
Sciences. Moscow

candidate of physical and nethenatical sciences.
Co—ittee on Nuclear Physics Affiliated With tbe'PresidiuI
of USSR Acade-y of Sciences

doctor of technical sciences.

Physicotechnical Institute. UkSSR Acadeny of Sciences.
Khar'kov

doctor of technical sciences.
Yerevan Physics Institute

doctor of physical and lathenatical sciences.
Institute of nigh-Energy Physics. Serpukhov

associate member. USSR Adacsuy of Sciences,
Institute of High-Energy Physics. Serpukhov
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COLLECTICN 0P PAPERS (N GEARS. PARTICLE ACCELERANRS. PART 2

Dubna IRUDY sm'mco VSBSOYUZNOGO SOVESECEANIYA P0 UMH’ELYAM ZARYAZHBNNYKH
CHASTITS in Russian Vol 2, 1981 (signed to press 2 Jun 81) pp 3-11

[Editor's preface and table of contents from book "Proceedings of Seventh All-
Union Convention on Charged Particle Accelerators. Dubna. 14-16 October 1980.

Vol 2". edited by ‘1'. Ya. Zhabitskaya. V. K. Zhabi'tskiy. 8. V. Ivashkevich and

Ye. L. Semenova. 0b"yedinennyy institut yadernykh issledovaniy. 800 copies]

[Text] Editor' s preface

The scope of the Seventh All-Union Convention on Charged Particle Accelerators
held in October 1980 at Dubna covers a wide range of topics in the physics of ac-

celerated beans of charged particles. as well as problems in developing and using
accelerators.

The papers delivered at the convention and published in "Proceedings of the Seventh
All-Union Convention" deal with accelerators for fundamental and applied research.
for the national economy and medicine. Accelerators of protons. electrons. heavy
ions and positrons are currently being developed and used in acceleration centers.
Facilities with colliding proton-antiproton beams are close to completion. These
papers deal with nearly all types of accelerators-4mm enormous proton synchro-

trons for fundamental research to electron accelerators of nodest size for the
national economy and medicine.

The material presented in the published papers gives a fairly complete reflection
of the state of this rapidly growing area of science and engineering involving
charged particle accelerators. Scientists. engineers and students will be able

to find much that is interesting and useful in the naterials of the Seventh All-
Union Convention.

A. A. Vasil'yev
Contents page
Session 8-3: ELECMIC ACCEERAIOR SYSTBHS

"Optinun Selection of RF System Parameters in Superhigh-Bnergy Proton Accelerators
and Accmulators" .
Vs As Betezhnoy, A. As v.8u‘yev. V. A. Kutochkin. V. Io no“.yWs e e s s e e e o s o 3

79

.momauusssmv
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Developing Accelerating System of UN! Facility"

3. R. Shenbel'. B. N. Butryakov. E. A. Dudkovskiy, V. V. Yehinov. V. V.
Katalev, I. A. Kvaehonkin. B. V. Korzov. V. G. Kudryavtsev. S. A. Kuznetsov.
P. P. Stepanov. I. I. Sulygin, G. D. 'l'ikhonov. N. A. Kharechkin, I. H.
Shslashov. 0. A. Val'dner. E. s. Hesunov, S. V. Ivanov.......................

"Optimizing Dimensions of Accelerating Resonator in UN! Facility"
A. G. Abranov, A. G. Daykovskiy, V. V. Katalev. Yu. I. Protugalov. I. I.
sulygin’ B. K. SWI'OICOIO0....O...000......0000.00000'OIOCOOIOUOOOOOOOIO

"Construction of Past Synchronization Devices for Bleetrophysical Facilities"
A. R. Vaganov. V. s. Vasil'yev. V. I. Gordin. N. H. Snirnov.................

"Accelerating System of 3-5 Ion synchrotron"

I. I. Averbukh, V. L. Auelender. H. M. Karliner, V. P. Cherepanov. V. G.
Cmskidov’ A. A. smynsezmhtIIIODIOOOOOOIOUOIODOOC0.0000IOOOOOOOUOOOOQOI...

"Nmrical Modeling of RP Accelerating Structures"
V. V. Paranonov. 0. V. Serdyuk. A. P. Solodukhin, A. G. Daykovekiy, Yu. I.
Portugalov, A. I. Pedoseyev. H. M. Karliner. P. B. Lyeyanskiy, D. 14. Panel',

V. Po VEROVIGVessoosoeeoeeoeeseeeeeosoeeseosooeeoeeoeeeeeseeeooeeseeoooooees

"Methods of Stabilizing RP Fields in Proton Linac Injector to Proton
Synchrotron Booster at Institute of High-Energy Physics"

In Go ml'taeVooeeooesoesseeoeooooeeeeeeoeosooe-oeesooeooseoleeoeseeeeoooeoo

"Stabilization System in Pilot Model of Silund-Z High-Current Linac"
E. H. Gley‘man, G. V. Dolbilov. N. I. Lebedevdl. V. Pilyar, A. P. Sulbayev,

V. V. Taraaoveoeeooe-seeoeeeseeeesseeeeeeeeeoesessoseeooeeeosoeeeeeeoeseeoee

"Accelerating System of Hultibean Ion Accelerator"
N. M. Gavrilov. R. K. Gavrilova, Ye. V. Gronov. I. B. Nikitin. 8. S.
Stepanov, A. V. Shal'nov. V. V. Kushin. S. V. Plotnikov. P. A. Pedotov......

"Superconductive Irised Waveguide"
Yu. P. Vakhrushin. 0. V. Volchkov. A. P. Klinov, A. A. Ronkov. A. K. Orlov.
V. L. Smirnov, B. A. Sokolov. Ye. K. Sorokin. I. A. Ghikatash...............

Session 8-10: CYCLIC AND LINEAR INTENSB ACCELERATORS

"State of Research on Construction of High-Current Phasotron ("P" Facility)
at Joint Institute for Nuclear Research"
V. P. Dzhelepov, V. P. Dnitriyevskiy. L. H. Onishchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

"Numerical Hodeling of Dean Capture for Phasotron With Spatial Variation of
Magnetic Field"

S. B. Vorontsov. V. P. Dnitriyevskiy........................................

"System for Recording Tine Characteristics of Cyclotron Ion Beam"
A. A. Arzusanov. A. H. Voronin. M. S. Gor'kovets............................

so
mommussouur

ll

15

19

22

26

36

37

1.0

47

59

62
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

"Hide-Band RP Sum. of Cyclotron With Autmtic Tuning to Horking
Frequency"

A. A. Glazov. V. A. Kochkin, H. H. Senenov.................................. 66

"State of Research on IsochronOus Cyclotron of Institute of Nuclear Physics,
Czechoslovak Acadeny of Sciences"
V. Beyshovets. H. Chigak. a. Krzhivanek, Z. Treybal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70

"Current Status of 1 CeV Proton Synchrocyclotron in Gatchina”
N. K. Abrosi-ov. S. P. hitriyev. V. A. Yeliseyev, A. V. Kulikov. Yu. ‘1'.
Hironov. G. P. Hikheyev, G. A. Ryabov. N. N. Chernov........................ 75

"How Peal Parameters Are Influenced by Acceleration and Discharge Conditions
in Synchrotron with Phase Selection"
V. A. Belyakov. A. K. Vaganov, V. S. Vasil'yev. V. I. Gordin. R. N.
Litunwskiy’ o. A. “my.yev000000000090000..........I...C...‘.............O. 80

"Axial Injection System of Kiev ZAO-cn Isochronoua cyclotron"
A. F. Limv, A. Ye. val'kOVOOOOCOOOOOC...OOOOOIOO'0.0.00.0000000...I'OCOOCCO 8‘

"investigation of Conditions of Forming Proton Been in Ion Source of Meson
Factory Accelerator of Nuclear Research Institute, USSR Acadeny of
Sciences"

8. K. Yesin. V. P. Yakushev. 0. '1‘. Prolov, V. P. Polulyakh. Ye. I. Gerasinov.

G. V. T8"1d.....o.........o.......oooo.oooo..............o.....o........... 90

"Computational Parameters of Accelerating-Focusing Channel in RP Injector
for Heson Factory Linac at Nuclear Research Institute. USSR Academy of
Sciences"

A. V. Vaeyuchenko. G. N. Vyalov. S. K. Yesin, P. N. Ostroulaov. A. s. Paahen'kov.
Yu. V. michv. A. c. cmr.1nooo0.9.0.....0.0.0IOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0000000IOOIQO 95

Session 3-5: PROBLEMS OF EFFICIENT USE OF ACCELERAMS IN PHYSICS
EXPERIMENTS

"Positron Ben Transport Staten With Large Phase Volne" ‘
V. P. Klyuyev. A. V. Korhnyakin. G. I. Yasnov.............................. 101

"Sane Possibilities of Foraing Neutrino Beans on Accelerators With Energy
of Several ‘l'eV"
'1'. A. Vsevolozhskaya, G. I. Sil'vestrov..................................... 105

”Resonator Haters of nigh-Energy Accelerator Bean Parameters"
A. A. Glazkov. A. I. Glatov. L. K. Alekseyev................................ 110

"Cryogenic Scurce and Ionizer for Generating Polarized Deuteron Be-"
A. A. Beluahkina. A. I. Valevich. G. I. Gay. V. P. Yershov. L. S. Kotova.
Yu. K. Pilipenko. V. V. Snelyanakiy. A. Sulik. V. V. Pinuslkin. C. P.

TBVineVO....-.u.oo.....ooooo.o..o..on...o.o.........oo..........o......... ll“

"Intense Lou-Energy Secondary Particle Bean Channel on Proton Synchrotron
at Institute of. High-Energy Physics"

01 ?

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. I. Kotov. R. A. Rzayev. V. P. Sakharov. L. H. Darkov. H. s. Zolotarev.
P. K. Lebedev' V. s- okhapkin. Va Po s..kht1neeeeeeseeeeesseeeeseceeeveeeeee 118

"Superconductive Quantu- Interference Sensor of Charged Particle Bean Current"
K. F. Gert‘ev. “0 SI m’eVOOOOOOOOIIOO....00....0.0000COOOOO'COOCOUOOOOOO 121

"Monitor of Phase Distribution in Proton Bean on Resonant Linac"
A. H. rron'.AO v. P.0hchm00000000-OOOOOOto...0.9.000...00......000009... 125

"Measuring Charged Particle Bean Para-stars With Respect to Undulator Radiation"
D. ?e Alferw. Y“. A. Ba’lukw...to..0...COOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOODOOOO.D000... I”

"Diagnosing Injected and Circulating Deans by Pickup-Electrodes in VBPP-b
Accumulator"

A. H. Batrakov, A. s. Ralinin. 1. Ya. Protopopov, A. D._Khil'chenko......... 136

"Observing Righ-Rnergy Proton Deans by Synchrotron Radiation in Non-Unifor-
Mapetic Pielda"

Ra c01.8°neeseeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeseseeeeseeeeeeeeeeee 1‘1

"Reconstructing Electronic Systems of Proton Synchrotron at Institute of
Theoretical and Experimental Physics"
V. S. Gruzdev. Yu. M. Zlatov. A. P. Zotov, 1.. I. Lebedev, A. R. Titov....... 1107

Session 3-6: RADIATION PROBLEMS on ACCELERATORS

"Radiation Problems on Superconductive High-Intensity nigh-Energy Proton
Accelerators"

V.N. LebedGVeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeesseoeeeeeenosoeoeeeeeeseesesalseseeeeeeeeeeee

"Neutron Energy Distribution Behind Two-Meter Concrete Shielding with
Incidence of a 660-HeV Proton Dean"
V. Ye. Aleynikov. V. P. Baublevskiy. H. H. Kouochkov, V. V. Grechko......... 159

"Calculation of Spectral-Angular Proton Flux Distributions in Shielding"
V. Ye. Aleynikov, L. G. Beskrovnaya. A. R. Krylov........................... 163

"Calculation of Radiation Shielding of Meson Factory Experimental Couple:
at Nuclear Research Institute, USSR Acadauy of Sciences"
H. V. Kazarnovskiy. Yu. M. Nikolayev. s. V. Serezhnikov.............-........ 168

"Energy Release Pron High-Energy Proton Bean in Extended Targets"
1. Se Bay.mv, Se L. Kuchinin.OOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOO0O0.....0..."'.....‘.....9.I 172

"Optimizing Thickness of Rydrogsn-Containing Absorber in Heterogeneous

Side Shields of High-Energy Accelerators"
Ye. A. Delogorlov. G. I. Dritvich. G. I. Krupnyy. V. P. Kryuchkov. V. N.
Lebedev. V. S. Lukanin. N. V. Hokhov. V. N. Peleshko. Ya. N. Rastsvetalov... 180

"Characteristics of Drensstrahlung Dean and Field of Scattered Detstron
Radiation"
B. H. Y.k°v1.v. TO N. v..1n...l.'...00’00.0090...OIO..0....................0 185

82

MOH'ICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Solution for Problen of Transport of Electrons Generated by Accelerator in
Three-Dimensional Space of Absorber"

V. Vs vmsr‘dWOssseeesesseseessessosoosesoseseeeeoeeeeeeeeseoeeeeeoeeseeee

"Influence of Dean Porosity on Radiation Da-age of High-Current Accelerator
Targets"
N. A. Goluuv’ BO ‘0 ‘optelov.OI.OOOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOIC0.000.000...0.0.00.0...

"Nonograns for Estilating Permissible Energy Release in Superconductive
Magnet Hindings of Accelerators"

Is. No zaytuv...o.o.o.uu......o......................-............o.ooo.oo

Session C-l: ACCELERATORS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH

"Using Accelerators for Solving National Economic Problens"

c. No ’lerovesoooeoe0000000000000...secseseeseeeaaeaeaseeeooeoeeoooeoeoceoee

"Cyclotrons for Applied Purposes"
V. A. Glukhikh. Yu. P. Vakhrushin. H. P. Borogushin. I. P. Halyshev. A. V.

sterOVesseseeaeeseesseeseesosssessesoeseoesoseseeooeeeoeeaeoseeveeessoeess

"Autonated Target Devices for Radioisotope Production on the Rue Cyclotron"
P. V. Eogdanov. V. V. Ivanov. B. G. Karaeev. N. P. Kosenkov. I. P. Malyshev.
V. N. Hoshkin. V. A. Shanay, N. N. Krasnov, N. A. Ronyakhin. A. A. Pononarev.
I. M. shcbrb‘tykhto.0.0.0.0..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...OOOCOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

"Outlook for Using Charged Particles in Oncology"

A. I. mdemnseDosesassessesesoseeeooeeeoeeoseaeeoeesoeeeeeoessseseeoeeeoee

"nigh-Voltage Electron Accelerators for Radiation Processes"
E. I. Al'bertinskiy. 0. A. Voynalovich, V. A. Glukhikh. A. s. Ivenov.
a. P. svm'm. "I r. Fedotw.OO..OOOOOOOCCOOOOOIOO0.0000000DOOQOOOOOOUQOOOOO

"Selecting Reliability Indices of High-Voltage Accelerators for Industrial
Application"
E. I. Al'bertinskiy, H. P. Svin'in. Yu. S. Studennikov. S. G. Tsepakin......

"Research on Increasing Induction Linac Poser for Extensive Industrial Use"
A. I. Anatskiy. Yu. P. Vskhrushin. V. K. Gagsn-‘rorn, 0. A. Gusev. S. N.
zm.tk°v. v. a. Bml'OOCOOOIO...C.0..0.0.0.0....OCOCQOOOCOCOQQCCUCU.UCCCCCC

"Aurora-III High-Voltage Electron Accelerator"
D. I. Al'bertinskiy. D. s. Val‘tnan. I. P. Zotov. A. s. Ivanov. V. I.
Nikishkin. I. V. Druzgal'skiy. H. P. Svin'in. V. A. Suslov. H. ‘1'. Pedotov...

“Electron-5' nigh-Voltage Electron Accelerator"

V. V. Akulov. B. I. Al'bertinsltiy, Ye. I. Geresinov. A. K. Yevseyev. A. s.
Iva”. B. K. Nuuorov’ “O P. sun'in. “O T. PmtOVOOOOOOUCOOOOIOIOOOOOOOa
"Using Betatron Vith Extracted 2-6 rev Electron Dean for Radiation Therapy"

N. V. Eelyayev. '1'. 1.. Eslyayeva. Yu. D. Zrelov. V. L. Chekhlov. V. A.
Lisin. 2. D. Kit-anyuk. V. A. NoVikov. Ye. 1's. Choinzonov...................

83

mmmeﬂu

189

194

197

203
206
211
215

220

_ 226

227

21)

233

238
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Snell-Size b-MeV Betatron for Plav Detection"
D. A. Boyko. G. I. Burov. A. A. Hynka. V. s. Pushin, V. V. Romanov. A. A.
Pilnmov' V. L- cumlov. G. L. chﬁhlov’ H. “I sht.yn......0.00.00.0000... 2‘2

"Developnent and Investigation of Snell-Sized Sealed-Off Accelerator Tubes for
Laser-Driven Neutron Generator"

D. P. Deepalov. Yu. A. Bykovskiy, K. I. Konlovskiy. Yu. P..Kozyrev. A. 2.

"int“. R. Po Pleshama. Yea Va Ry.bov. A. Ge Tahiti, A. Yee swmeeeseee 2‘5

"Analysis of Particle Dynuice in Linac for Electron Nicroscopy”

Ae Ks orloveeeeeeeeeeeeere-sees.0000000000000...oeeeeoeoeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeee 2‘8

"Improving Blectric Strength of. nigh-Voltage Accelerator Support Calm"
K. A. R‘zvykh. Va A. WW...00.000.000.00.00.0.0.0....000.00.0.0000...... 252

"Projected Paraneters of Multipurpose Cyclotron"
I. P. Nalyshev. M. F. Borogushin. A. V. Stepanov............................ 255

Session C-2: AUTOMATED ACORN“ 0mm. SYSTM

"Automated Systen for Control and Honitoring of UN! Facility”

V. N. Alferov. Yu. 3. Bushnin. A. I. Vagin. V. P. Gerasinov. 0. 8. Gorchakov.

A. H. Grishin. A. P. Dunaytaev. V. V. Yelyan. V. A. Zassnko. A. A. Ivanov.

V. G. Ivkin. V. V. Kmarov. V. A. Krendelev. A. P. Luk'yantsev, A. A.

"Sty“.hin) 10 Va mzm, In Se mutW. V. Y‘e Sapel'nikov. Ya. No smw,

V. I. ‘rerekhov. N. N. Trofinov. A. N. Chernobrovtsev. Yu. S. Chernous'ko.

V. I. Chugreyev. V. A. Yarba................................................ 261

"Monitoring and Controlling Parameters of Slow Dean Extraction Prom Synchro-
phaaotron on-Line With Yes-1010 and Yes-10103 Conputsrs"
V. I. Volkov, L. G. Yefinov, I. D. Issinskiy, I. P. Kolpskov. I. l. Kulikov 268

Multichannel Automated Systen for Measuring Inhoaogeneity Index of Hegnetic
Field in Synchrophasotron on-Line With Yes-1010 Computer"

H. A. Voyevodin, V. I. Volkov. L. P. Zinov'yev. A. D. Kovalenko. N. A. Korukov.

I. I. Kulikov. Yu. Io Rm”. Sh. Z. s‘yfulm, Yue 1e Tubalrov..u.nuu 272

"Method for Optinalizing Control of Dean Paraneters in Charged Particle Accel-
erators" '
N. D. Vasil'yev. A. V. Kuznetsov. I. V. Morin. V. A. Shelekhov.............. 276

"Selecting Primary Converters of Dean Parameters for Infomtion-Heasurenent
and Control Systems of Charged Particle Accelerators"

V. Me Rybmeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeseeseee 278

"System for Automated Data Gathering and Processing on Yerevan Synchrotron"
B. D. Ayrspetyan. M. S. Kordonskiy. V. I. Halynslriy. L. O. Topoyan.
A. R. TmnyanOOOOO0......CO...000.00.00.00...0.0000000000000000000000000.00 282

"Principles of Designing Measurenent Channels in Data Gathering Systens for
Automated Charged Particle Accelerator Control Systems"
V. A. Arsen'yev. I. H. Bondarenko. V. P. Gerasinov, V. P. Grachev.

86

FORWUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. I. Davydkin, N. G. Doroshko. I. V. ﬂozin. 1.. V. Ol'khovikov. S. S. nepin.
0. S. Saksaganskaya, V. A. Skoserev. N. N. Snirnov, V. B. Turkin.

Vs Vs yedorkWsesoosseesosesosseessees-seessososee-assess.sssesssssssssossss

”Precision Measurement Stand on-Line With Yes-1010 Conputer for Deter-ining
Magnetic Characteristics of Dipoles and Lenses by Ear-onic Analysis"

H. A. Voyevodin, V. I. Volkov. L. P. Zinov'yev. A. D. Kovalenko. N. A.

KorukOV. Is Is Kulikov. 8h. 20 s‘yf‘nmp Y“. 10 Tubukw..u.un.........

"Interactive System for Calculating Charged Particle Bean Transport Channels
Based on Yes-1010 Couputer and GD-71 Display Station"
3. v. vasuismn' v. I. vol-kw, I. I. “InWOIOOOOOOOIO0.0COOOOCOCOOOCOOCOO

"Systens for Controlling Accelerator-Accumlator Facilities of the Institute
of Nuclear Physics. Siberian Depart-eat. USSR Academy of Sciences with Use
of Hinicomputsrs"

A. N. Batrakov, V. H. Borovikov. Yu. I. Goluhenko. B. A. Gudkov. B. I.

Yeliner, N. H. Karliner. V. V. Kargal'tsev. A. D. Klinenko. B. A. Kuper,

A. V. Ledenev. V. I. Nifontov. A. D. Oreshkov. G. S. Piskunov, V. S.

Poteryayev, A. V. Proskurin. V. V. Repkov. A. N. Selivanov. S. V.

Tar‘rysmin’ “a PO uvarWOOOOO0.0.0.0....0...0.0.0.0000000000000000000000000

"Automated Honitoring and Control System on Proton Synchrotron at Institute
of Theoretical and Experimental Physics"

N. N. Alekseyev, B. N. Bobchenko, N. A. Veaelov. 1.. L. Gol'din. V. P.

Zavodov. I.. A. Nulyukin. K. K. Onosovskiy. A. S. Ryabtsev...................

"Intelligent Automated System for Designing Charged Particle Accelerators"
G. P. Aver'ysnov, V. A. Volodin. L. I. Kuzin. N. N. Pavlov..................

"Blektronika-1OOI Computer on-Line With 86-2.!» Electrostatic Accelerator"
V. I. Nukhanetshin. V. A. Bonanov. Yu. 9.. Chelyy, V. P. Yakuehev............

"water for Automated Monitoring and Control of Separated-Particle Channel"
V. N. Alferov. N. s. Bryukhanov, A. H. Vishnevskaya. N. A. Gelyayev, A. A.
Gusak. V. I. Denidova. V. S. Kuznetsov, A. P. Luk'ysntsev. A. N. Noybenko,
K. I. Omnov. B. V. Prosin. Yu. A. Ronanov. V. Ye. Solov'yev. Yu. S.
KhodyrGV’ v. D. Y‘kuaGVOOOOOOQOIOOOOOOOOOOOOQIOOOVODQOOOOO'COOOOOOOOIOOOOOO

"Autonated' Systen of Heavy-Ion mchrotron in IIK‘I‘I Project"

II P. Kolp‘kWes-eeeeeoeoooeeassessstoososoooessesossssssssoon-sesseeeeseoss

"Developnent of Control Systems at the Nuclear Physics Institute"

Vs Is “1fthOOOOoseeeseooesssseesosooooossssosvoosssssosassasssssssseessss

Session 0-3: NEH ACCELERA‘IORS

"VLEPP (Status of Research)"

286

290

294

298

”2

”6

309

313

317

318

V. V. Anashin. Yu. G. Buburov. V. Ye. Balakin. 0. N. Brezhnev. S. D. Vassernan.
‘1'. A. Vsevolorhskeya, B. I. Grishanov. V. N. Dolgushin. H. N. Zakhyatkin, B. V.

Ivsnov. I. V. Kazarezov. A. S. Kalinin. V. V. largal'tsev. M. N. Karliner.

85
”WWW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ye. N. Kokin. I. A. loop. 6. s. Kraynov, G. I. Kuzneteov. N. A. Kunetsov.

D. Ye. Kuklin. V. P. Kutaenko. A. ll. Lukin, A. S. Hedvedko. A. A. Hikhaylichanko.
A. V. Novokhatekiy. H. A. Oleynikov. V. N. Oeipov. Ye. A. Perevedentsev. V. P.
Prikhod'ko. Yu. I. Senenov. V. A. Sidorov. G. I. sil'vestrov. A. N. Skrinakiy.
V. P. Snirnov. N. A. Solyak. N. G. ﬂuvin. Yu. Ya. Chibukov, V. V. Shirokov.

c. I. Yamov. B. I. Y‘.treb..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOIOOOOOOOIIOOO0.00... 331

"Km Status and Future"
TI Nubikm...‘..0..'OOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCC.0...0.0.0000000000000IUOOOOIOCO 3‘0

"Increasing Inteneity of Accelerator with Booster at Institute of High-Energy
Physics (Status of Research) "
Y“. “0 Mo, 3. A. “y.:' A. A. u‘m. v. A. T.p1yak°v00.000000000990009OI... 35‘

"The Heavy Ion Puelon Progran at Argonne"
R- L. ﬁtting RD mold. a. Bur“. JO ".t.m0000000OOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOO..00.... 362

"State of Research on Constructing Heeon Factory at Nuclear Research Institute.
and Planned Research Progrn"

V. H. Isob‘utheeeeeseeeeeooeeeeeeooaeeeeeeseteeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeo 367

Concluding Message by Comrade A. A. Vaail'yev. Chairnan of Organizational
Co-ittee of Seventh All-Union Convention on Charged Particle Accelerators 377

List of Participante at Seventh All-Union Convention on Charged Particle
Accelerator'OIOOOOO'I0.9.0.0....OOIIOOIOOOOOQO0.000.000.00000000000000...... 382

COPYRIGHT: 1981 0b"yedinennyy institut yaderuykh Iasledovaniy'bubns

6610
CSO: 1861/126-A

86
FOR OFFICIAL [BB ONLY
MWWONLY

006 621.396
ROBUST DENIM All) WING DEVICES

Leningrad ROWE norm-310mm DSTROYSTVA in Russian 1981 (signed to press
13 Jan 81) pp 2-5. 180-182

[Annotation. introduction and table of contents fron book "Robust Detection and
Ranging Devices". by Anatoliy Arkad'yevich Ovodenko. lsdatel'stvo Leningrsdskogo
universitete, 1399 copies. 183 pages]

[Text] The nonograph is devoted to the problea of developing proaising detection
and ranging devices for tracking noving objects that are capable of operation

in an a priori unknown and statistically variable interference environent. An
investigation is nade of new designs and research nethods. as well as results

of nethenatical modeling of invariant filters of tracking detection and ranging
devices with specific emples of implementation.

The book is intended for scientific workers. graduate students and upperclassnen
in engineering colleges specialising in electronic devices of control systeas.

Figures 37. tables 5. references 83.
Introduction

Recent years have seen intense developnent of statistical synthesis and analysis
of electronic devices in control systens in the direction of working out nethods
for overcoming a priori uncertainty for the purpose of obtaining structures that
are resistant to changes in the statistical and energy characteristics of input
factors.

We classes of problaes are distinguished in statistical synthesis of sensing
ele-ents of control systees: with paranetric and with nonparuaetric uncertainty.
In problees with pernetric a priori uncertainty. the f-ily of likelihood ratios
(plausibility functionals) is paranstric. vhile in the case of nonpernetric un-
certainty. the likelihood ratio is nonparametric. i. e. the fore of the distribu-
tion functions for the interference and' for the signal-interference aixture is
unknown.

There are several aethods of overconing a priori uncertainty: nethods of the
theory of statistical solutions. the adaptive approach. use of special principles
of asyaptotic optinality. and netth of nonparanetric statistics.

87

mammal“
of applicability of this principle are bounded by an exponential family of dis-
tributiona (normal additive interference). In the case of reception of independent

steady-state interference and for any finite sanple spaces-~aign. rank and sign-
rank algorithns (Ref. 26. 28. 59]. But the retention of a constant level of false
alarms for arbitrary sample size when using nonparametric algorithms involves
rigid requirenents of independence of observations and steady-state interference.
Besides. the selection of a given nonparanetric algorithm is frequently heuristic
rather than being based on definite test of optinality. An acknowledged universal
neans of overcoming a priori uncertainty in the adaptive approach. which has been

Asymptotically optimum algorithms have been worked out in detail for detecting
signals against a background of interference [Ref. 26. 59]. and these have their

Recently in the Soviet Union (Ref. 32. 39. 61. $9. 67] and elsewhere (Ref. 56.
74, 75. 76] researchers have begun to give earnest attention to developing and

filters with analog and digital output signal. These filters have the property

To study systems for controlling moving objects with different sensing elenents.
including robust ones. it is important to have plausible multidimensional mathe-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sections are devoted to developing mathematical models of detection and ranging
signals reflected from large objects. and signals reflected from the surface of
the sea. shaping filters are synthesized for reproducing fluctuations of upli-
tudes and durations of detection and ranging signals. Results obtained in the
monograph are applicable not only to the investigation of detecting and tracking
signals from objects. but for solving other problems as well associated with robust
isolation of useful inforIation in the case of a priori uncertainty of the charac-
teristics of interfering actions.

Contents page
Introduction 3

Section 1: USING NBUS‘I' DEVICES FOR ISOLAIING DETECTION AND RANGING SIGNALS
IN THE CASE OF A PRIORI UNKNOWN STATISTICAL All!) ENERGY CHARACTE-

ISTICS OP INTERFERENCE FACTORS 6
1.1. Robust algorithms for constructing detection and rnaging
devices of control systems 6
1.2. A priori uncertainty in detection and ranging devices 8
1.3. Synthesis of one-channel robust detection and ranging
devices 12

1.6. Analysis of robust detection and ranging sensitive elements 14
Section 2: SURVEY OF KNOWN ALGORITHMS. STRUCTURES FOR ISOLATING AND PROCESS-
ING USRFUL SIGNALS THAT ARE ROBUST NITU RESPECT TO VARYING STATISTI-

CAL AND ENERGY CHARACTERISTICS OF INTRRPRRRNCR 22
2.1. Constructing optisua and quasioptimum algorithms for isolat-

ing useful signals against a background of interference 22
2.2. Informational signal isolating algorithms that are robust

to a change in the form of interference distribution 27
2.3. Self-adapting algoritims for isolating detection and

ranging signals 35

Section 3: DESIGN OF ROBUST DETECTION AND RANGINC STRUCTURES IN “ran CASE OF
ACTION OF UNSTRADY ACTIVE INTERFERENCE WITH A PRIORI UNIOIOHN
STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS
3.1. A priori uncertainty of information in synthesis of robust

structures for isolating useful signals 41
3.2. Formulating problu of synthesizing robust filters 43
3.3. Major types of robust filters 53
3.6. Pearson robust filter 56
3.5. David robust filter 61
3.6. Rolmosorov robust filter 65
3.7. Sherman robust filter 72
3.8. Kinball robust filter 71.
3.9. Niees robust filter 80
3.10. Robust coapression filter 82
Section 4: MATHEMATICAL mDRLS OP SIGNALS REFLECTRD TRON LARGE OBJECTS FOR
ANALYZING ROBUST DETECTION AND RANGING DEVICES 86
6.1. Probability density functions of amplitudes and durations
of detection and ranging signals reflected from objects 86

6.2. Bivariate probability density functions and correlation
functions of amplitudes and durations of detection and

ranging signals reflected from objects 89

89

summon“
Section 5:

6.3.
‘0‘.

6.5.
4.6.
6.7.
6.8.

NIOFF‘ICIALUSEONLY

Multidimensional mathematical model of fluctuations of
amplitudes and durations

Conditional probability density functions of amplitudes“
durations. algoritl-s for digital computer simulation of
detection and ranging signal fluctuations

Markov mathematical model of object. algorithms for digital
computer simulation

Approximating parameters of univariate probability density

-functions of amplitudes and durations

Approximating correlation functions of amplitudes and
durations of detection and ranging signals

Synthesis of shaping filters for reproducing fluctuations
of amplitudes and durations of reflected pulses

MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF DETECTION AND RANGING SIGNALS REFLECTED

FROM THE SURFACE 0? THE SEA

5.1.

5.2.

5.3.
5.6.

Appendices
References

COPYRIGHT:

6610
680:

1861/128

Probability density function of envelope. bivsriate proba-
bility density functions and space-time correlation func-

tions of detection and ranging signal reflected from the
surface of the sea

Multidimensional mathematical model of fluctuations of
detection and ranging signals reflected from the sea.
Conditional probability density functions. modeling algo-
rithms

Approximating parameters of probability density function
of signal envelope reflected from surface of sea

Synthesis of shaping filters for reproducing fluctuation
of detection and ranging signal reflected from the surface
of the sea

Izdatel'stvo Leningredskogo universiteta, 1981

90

FOR1OFFKJA1.USBGMHLY

99
108
112
116
123
129

129

132

1&0

169
157
173
roamusaonur

FLUID assumes

006 533

MEAL AND ANALYTICAL ms ms 801.va PROBLDB IN MECHANICS 0P mums
MIDI!!!

Wsrdlovsk 031m I ARALITICHESKIYE mom “MINA ZADACI! m1
SPLOSM 811m in Russian 1981 (signed to press 24 Her 81) pp 2. 126-128

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from collection 'Wuerical and Analytical
Hethods for Solving Problems in hchanics of Continuous Hedim", edited by

A. I. Sidorov and Yu. 1!. londyurin. Ural Science Center. USSR Academy of Sciences.
1000 copies. 128 pages]

[Text] The collection deals with investigation of new exact solutions of equations
of hydrodynamics and gas dynaaics. develop-ant of new approaches to solution of
problems of the kinetic thaory of gas motion. and obtaining solutions to sons
specific problems. New analytical and nulerical nethods are given for studying
solutions of linear and nonlinear differential and integral equations in the me-
chanics of a continuous nediu. Exact solutions of equations of gas dyuaaics

and the dynamics of viscous fluid are considered. Some specific problems of gas
dynamics are solved. as esnination is nade of computational procedures of the
Monte Carlo type for calculating the equation of state and functionals of the
solution of Boltsnann's kinetic equation. and regularising algorithms are con-
structed for solving unsteady integral equations of special structure encountered
in processing data of x-ray structural analysis.

The collection brings together sore original studies on analytical and mmerical

methods of the nechanics of a continuous msdiu and is of interest to specialists
in this area.

DDC $18:517.948+667.017:535.33

CONSTRUCTING mums ALMITIHS FOR DETERMINING STRUCTURE OF muons SOLIDS
BY X-RAY SPECTRAL STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS

[Abstract of article by Ageyev. A. l... Bebanov. Yu. A.. Vasin. V. V. and Yershov.
II. V.)

[Text] The paper outlines physical principles of a nethod for studying infor-
aation on the structure of anorphous solids based on x-ray absorption spectra.
An integral equation is derived that relates the acught function of radial dis-
tribution of atoms g(r) to an experimentally determined function K(k). lsgular

91

MWMMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

algoritlns for approximate solution of integral equations of the first kind are
studied. A model problem corresponding to crystalline copper is solved by the
proposed computational procedure. and results of a numerical experiment are dis-
cussed. Pigure 1, references 21.

UDC 517.911

REPRESENTATIO!‘ OF SOME SOLUTIMS FOR ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION OF TYPE
taft, u, u') u"+b(t, u, u')-O IN NEIGHBCRKOOD OP POINT t-O

[Abstract of article by Vershinin. s. v.]

[Text] Conditions are found for coefficients a and b of an ordinary differential
equation of form ta(t, u. u')u"+b(t. u. u') -0 which when satisfied at point
t-O make the solution of the Cauchy problem (u(0) <0. U'(0) <~) representable

by a functional Hellin series in the vicinity of point t-IO. The author proves
local convergence of the Hellin series in the neighborhood of the point tI-O when
coefficients a and b are polynomials. The constructed solutions are illustrated
by examples from gas dynamics. References 7.

UDC 533.6.011

CLASS OF EXACT 801.111st 01’ GASDYNAHIC EQUATIONS Pm THREE-DWSIONAL UNSTBADY
FLWS 0F IDEAL GAS WITH VARIABLE MOW

[Abstract of article by Zubov. Ye. N.)

[Text] It is established that a flow of double-wave type with nonlinear level
nanifolds exists for spatial unsteady flows of ideal gas with variable entropy.

A class of exact solutions of this type is constructed that contains two arbitrary
functions. one of which depends on one variable. while the other depends on two
variables. It is shown that in flows described by these solutions. a transition
may be made free subsonic to supersonic velocities. References 8.

UDC 533.7

NEW MODIFICATIONS 0P METROPOLIS METHOD FOR CALCULATING PARAMETERS IR EQUATION
OF STATE

[Abstract of article by Kondyurin, Yu. N.]

[Text] No new classes of estimates of a Monte Carlo method metropolis method)
are suggested for problems of calculating the parameters of the equation of state
of matter.

Estimates of the first class are suitable for computing the parameters of state
of a substance in the case of non-ergodicity of a Markov chain of the conventional
Metropolis method. Construction of estimates of this class is based on represent-
ing the sought quantity as a linear functional of the solution of a linear Pred-
holm's integral equation of the second kind with substochastic kernel. Conditions
are determined that guarantee finiteness of dispersion of an estimate of this

type .

92

momaxtvseomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second class of proposed estimates is associated with steady-state distribu-
tion of a diffusion process that is continuous with respect to time. A system
of stochastic differential equations that defines the given diffusion process

is obtained on the basis of transient density of a Markov chain of the con-
ventional Metropolis method. References 10.

UDC 533.7
NB" APPROACHES m SOLUIION OF HYDRODYNAHICS PROBLDIS BY ms CARLO METHOD
[Abstract of article by Kondyurin. Yu. 11.]

[Text] An examination is made of new approaches to Monte Carol solution of
problem of the kinetic theory of gas dynamics. It is shown that in the usual
asstnnptions for the kinetic theory there is a relation of the known statistical
Metropolis method. This enables demonstration of a simple numerical Monte Carlo
procedure for solving the Boltzmann equation. References 12.

UDC 518
GWIC METHOD OF CONSTRUCTING THREE-DIMENSIONAL DIMCB GRIDS
[Abstract of article by Koshkina. T. N. and Sidorov. A. P.]

[Text] An algorithm is proposed for autosatic construction of regular curvilinear
difference grids for three-dimensional regions of star type. The algoritln is
based on the idea of nonuniform stretching of a reference Itexaindron in which

a regular uniform grid is constructed. The principal elementary cells of par-
tition are nonintersecting dodecahedra. The algorithm is realized on a computer
for three-dimensional regions bounded by pieces of second-order surfaces. An
exasple of mnerical calculation is given. References 7.

DIX: 533.6.011
CLASS 01’ SOLUTIONS OF GASDYNAHIC BQUATIQIS AND NATURAL CONVECTION EQUATIONS

[Abstract of article by Sidorov. A. P.]

[Text] New classes of solutions are found for equations of gas dynamics and natu-
ral convection of an incompressible viscous fluid for the general unsteady three-
dimensional case where the components of the velocity vector depend on some of

the spatial corrdinates. Systems of equations are derived that describe these
classes of solutions, and new exact solutions of gaadynamic equations are found.
An example is given of an exact solution that is a triple nonconical vortex wave
with rectilinear generatrices for an arbitrary adiabatic exponent y in the equation
of state. The exact axisymetric solution of Navier-Stokes equations is examined.
Figures 3. references 11. '

93

FOIOI‘HCIALISIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 532.591
INVESTIGATION 0!? SERIES USED FOR 801.va son: MSSONIC now "031.3148
[Abstract of article by Titov. S. 8.]
[Text] An estimate fron below is found for the radius of convergence of s loga-
rithnic‘ series for solution of an sxisy—stric Ker-men equation. the nmsricel
recursion for its coefficients is given, and it is shown that the redius of its
convergence is inversely proportional to the thickness of s body in the flow.
References 3.

COPYRIGHT: Ms AN SSSR. 1981.

6610
CSO: [861/131

90

POIOFI'IGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 53b.222.2
PARTICULARS OF M “A" mail!!! FOR Immune WINS OP SPIRAL cums

Novosibirsk 2mm. mm mm I rmzcazsror 1’1an in Russian lo 5,
Sep-Oct 80 (nanuscript received lo Apr 80) pp 51-59 -

[Article by V. K. Kedrinskiy, Novosibirsk]

Next] For many years. explosive sources of sound have attracted
the interest of researchers as the nsin couponent of various
kinds of sonar devices used for producing directional quasitonal
emissions (bursts) of large duration and acoustic power. The
range of these sources is rather broad. and includes spark dis-
charge generators (Ref. 1]. condensed liquid explosives (Ref. 2].
solid explosives lief. 3-5], gas explosive nixtures Ref. 6-8]
and effects of shock save generation by collpasing cavities

[Ref. 9. 10]. Integrated energy parasters of sons explosive
sources of smmd in Inter are conpared in Ref. 11. and the spec-
tral characteristics are studied experinentally in Ref. 12-16.

Naturally. explosive scurcee have adequate power. and their
radiation can he registered at considerable distances. However.
this quality is not enough for an extensive class of prohl-as

in geophysical research. acoustic navigation. and also scientific
studies of processes of shock wave propagation in the ocean.
Prohlens ccne up such as the directionality and relatively long
duration of the signal. which generally speaking are not easily
realized in explosive sources as these are nainly "point" sources.
An important prohlen is the tonal "coloring” of the signal for
protection fron reverberation interference. Therefore it is

no wonder that sons solutions that have been found are based

on known concepts of classical acoustics of directional radiation
of specially distributed sources. These include the line depth
charge with preferred propagation of a shock me in the direc-
tion perpendicular to its axis (Ref. 5]; a vertical chain of
concentrated charges initiated with a certain frequency (Ref. 3]
giving a predeterained sequeme of shock waves. 1. e. in sons way
solving the prohl- of duration and "coloring" of the radiated
burst at the expense of directionality. A cuaulstive effect

is used to set up directional radiation as a result of exploding
a charge at the base of a specially shaped cons lm. lo].

95

FOIOFFICIALISEONLY
FINICNHHC]AI.USE¢MVLY

Recent years have seen an upsurge of interest in sources of

the helical type formed fron a high-explosive line charge.
Radiation of such sources has a number of advantages: direc-
tionality both in the vicinity of the axis (typical ring source.
thanks to high detonation rate (Ref. 17]). and in the plane
perpendicular to the axis (a certain model of a linear source

in the case of a long helix). duration (Ref. 18] and easily
controllable frequency of shock wave sequence for the sane total
length of the line charge [Ref. 19]. The particulars of wave
field formation with underwater explosion of such charges is

of definite interest. here we will take up some of the principal
results of studies of these sources done at the Institute of
lydrodynanics. Siberian Department. USSR Academy of Sciences.

Ring Charge. The basis of the investigated type of charge is a ring element of
detonation line initiated from one end. The rate of detonation of standard
detonation lines is approximately five times the compressional acoustic wave propa-
gation rate in liquid. which is a good basis for using the instantaneous explosion

model in preliminary estimates. In particular. explosion of a ring wire can be
used for this purpose. ‘

Experiments of this kind were done on a high-voltage facility with capacitor bank
enabling energy accumulation up to several megajoules with allocation of the re-
quired part of this energy to a ring about 5 cm in dis-eter (nichrome. d- 0.15 mm).
Explosion of such a ring in liquid enabled tracking of the principal effects of
wave field formation. A typical record of this process is shown in Fig. 1 [photos
not reproduced]. Here it can be clearly seen that the shock wave front has the
shape of a toroidal surface; focusing and reflection of the wave takes place in
the vicinity of the axis of the ring. and is recorded as a compression wave by

a pressure sensor. The photographic record shows that interaction of the re-
flected wave with the explosive cavity inside the ring results in propagation

of a converging rarefaction wave. behind which intense bubble cavitation occurs.
It can he assumed that with some correction for displacement of wave focusing,

a similar pattern will occur in the case of explosion of a ring with finite deto-
nation rate.

Formation of the wave structure of radiation upon explosion of a turn of deto-
nation line was studied for charges with dianeters of 0.65. 1.65 and 3 mm. range

of ring radii of a- 3-30 cm. and distances from the charge of 0.5-5 I. Typical
photographic records of the process of wave generation and pulsation of the toroi-
dal cavity upon explosion are shown in Pig. Za-c [photos not reproduced]. It

can be seen (Fig. 2a) that three waves are radiated into the space. the order

of their succession depending on the location of the point of registration rela-
tive to the initiation section. In all cases the first to arrive is shock wave 1
from the section of the ring closest to the sensor. This is followed by wave

2 or 3 (see Fig. 2). Wave 2 is excited behind the front of wave 1 by the terminal
section of the ring when the detonation wavefront completes its first circuit.

This instant corresponds to the start of a new revolution of the detonation front
around the circle. Have 3 arises as a result of focusing of wave 1 in the internal
region of the ring. Let us note that the time interval between the last two frames
in Fig. 2a is 6 tines longer than the preceding ones.‘

96

FOI‘0FFN]A1.USE(NHLY
The photograph of Pig. 2b shows a continuous scan of the development of the wave
process inside the ring. the ring plane being parallel to the window. The slit
cut off two diametrically opposite sections of the ring: the section furthest
fro. the initiation point can be seen on the upper part of the photograph as a
thin dark line. while the near section serges with the lower boundary of the franc.
The position of the charge relative to the slit was such that the focusing point
was on the slit. since otherwise we could not have eliainated the possibility

of recording the phase velocity of the converging waves. resulting in a sudden
strong increase in the velocity of the front. In fact. as can be seen from the

photograph. ”pure" acoustics occurs for the used types and parameters of explo-
sives. '

The motion picture of pulsations of the explosive cavity (Fig. 2c. disaster of
ring 30.5 on. diameter of explosive charge d.-0.65 .. file transport speed

1500 francs/second. detonation rate 0- 7.7 h/s) shows that the cavity retains
the shape of a torus. at least throughout the first pulsation. According to the
data of this fila record. the maxim- dilension of the cross section of the cavity
with products of detonation at the instant of cessation is ~120110. It can be

seen that. just as in the case with exploding wire, the ring region cavitates
strongly.

Pressure measurenents showed considerable dependence of wave structure on position
of the registration point in the zone close to the charge. A transition was ob-
served from clear separation of the wave into the three above-untioned types

to gradual degeneration into a single wave. The nature of change in parameters

of the wave field was also distinguishable. Pig. 3 shows changes of iaximl sapli-
tudes of the first wave (taken relative to hydrostatic pressure p.- 1015 Pa) as a
function of relative distance along the axis for different radii of the charge
rings a- 30. 20 and 10 c- (curves 1-3 respectively).

         

m
M “’7‘. a s 7 to 2 :r/a,

Pig. 3 Fig. 6

All three curves have the suns power-law behavior p1,.-A(r)'1'2’. the coefficient
A depending on the weight of the charge. 1. s. it is determined by the radii of
the charge no and the ring a for fixed density p. and type of explosive. ‘i'he
aIplitude of the first wave on the axis of the ring is approximately

Pl... 2 1.32 .10'(R./¢)e.n 1,... norms.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rum urn! Ilu. US: ONLY

0n the basis of this relation it is interesting to note that the asplitude of
wave 1 will be higher for a ring with smaller a at the sac value of ﬁll...

Experimental data on the distribution of p1,. in the ring plane are shown in Fig. lo
(l-oa- 30 cm. Z—a- 10 cm). It was found that the pressure on the front of the
shock wave from the charge of greater radius a falls more rapidly with distance
(power of ~l.65) than for wall rings (power of ~l.lS). This result suggested
that in the ring plane at distances r-r/a>l. the nature of pressure distribution
is analogous to the case of concentrated charges with weight equal to that of

the explosive in the ring. An experimental check verified this assuption:
satisfactory coincidence with data for equivalent concentrated charges is observed
in the ring plane from distances r 3 19. along the generatrix of a cylindrical
surface with radius a from distances rs 30-40. Measurements of maximal amplitudes
of the second waves showed that they may reach appreciable magnitudes. and some-
times may exceed the amplitude of the first wave. but they decrease more rapidly
with distance in the ring plane than along the axis. This effect may be deter-
mined both by focusing of waves in the region of the axis and by wave attenuation

as a consequence of interaction of reflected waves with the explosive cavity in
the ring plane.

Toroidal Cavity Dynnics and Radiation. As noted above. despite the complexity
of the wave structure of the field in the near region of a ring charge and the
finiteness of the detonation rate, evaluations of different kinds can be made

in the analysis of the process within the framework of model formulations. For
example. using the experimental fact that the explosive cavity keeps the shape
of a regular torus during the first period. we can study its dynamics in a one-

dimensional formulation. and apply the results to analysis of the structure of
the wave field in the point scurce approximation.

The equation of pulsations of such a cavity within the framework of an ideal in-
compressible and imponderable fluid is readily derived [Ref. 20]. To do so, we

find the potential “on 8. v. t) in region 9(t) bounded by a closed smooth toroidal
surface o(t) so that when t>0,

9(1): Aq’ - 0. (p -o0 (a ->0. B ->0).
C(av p! ?' l) = 0. CH‘VW; _ OI
0(1): ¢.+(l/2)(W)’+P/9. - 1249..

P - Pa (VJV)"~

when t-O. p-po, (1-0... 6-0, 0(0) is the surface of the torus. Here ((o. B.

y. t) -0 is the equation of the boundary of region 9(t) in the orthogonal toroidal
coordinate system a, B. y; y. is the adiabatic exponent of the detonation products;
V is the volume of gas bounded by surface o(t); p, is pressure at infinity.

In the axisyuetric case the solution for potential ¢ takes the form

«4- n (2 eh (I — 2 cos Ml" lAth (ch 0:) +
+ HOV—u: (Ch ¢)I(C sin Vﬂ -'r- D cos Vﬂ).

Assuming that o(t) is always a coordinate surface. we can get an expression on
the basis of the Cauchy-Lagrange integral for pressure at an arbitrary point in

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
space. and an equation of pulsations that is written in the polar coordinate sys-
ten in the form

(1) «[0.» sunﬁsh it)- _;_ 5.] _' Mumm-‘p...

where p. is the density of the fluid. 9. is the cross sectional radius of the gas
cavity. and a is the radius of the ring.

within the framework of the acoustic approximation an equation is derived in Ref.
20 for pulsation of a toroidal cavity in a conpreasible fluid

(In 8a/R)l(i-2..1R/c. In 8e/R)RR + (l —uR/c. In 8s/R)R’I—
- R’IZ - a + aRu/r..

where m- ldp/p. and is detersined on the well of the cavity. Calculation showed
that the principal energy characteristics of pulsation-«ins of expansion tit and

maximal radius of the cavity v-sgree satisfactorily with data of an experinent
done for different detonation ines reeds of m with detonation rate 'f7 .7 tile.

(2)

Analysis of the results of experinental studies done over a wide range of ring
radii a yielded an analytical expression for the naxinun value of the relative
radius of an expanding toroidal cavity with detonation products

7?. ex uni—(2'13) ln"8sIR.).

This implies that if a increases without linit. a, asynptotically approaches the
value 3.! 1‘1 for a cylindrical cavity.

Experiments and calculations have shown the period of pulsation of a toroidal
cavity has a peculiarity: it increases continuously, although slowly. with in-
creasing (Z. and the period of pulsation of a cylindrical cavity is not asynptotic
in this case. An expression for the period of pulsation of a toroidal cavity
can he found on the basis of the traditional approach to prohlens of this kind--
analysis of collapse of an enpty cavity in an ideal inconpreseihle fluid. In
this case. of course, the initial radius mat be taken as the mini- radius ll,
of the explosive cavity. let us replace ln Ball in equation (1) with In Seiko/R
on the basis of the well known fact that during collapse or a cavity its initial
radius over a considerable portion of a half-period varies but little. and disregard
the tern R’IZ in (1). Then. setting po-O. we get the equation

This enables us to get a solution for Mt) in explicit fo'ca

 

n .'. Vnw: - P-Wp. ln-(8¢}R.R.).

Pros this we can easily deternine the tine of collapse, and in virtue of sy-etry
of the process and expansion of the cavity with detonation products

(3) t. =- M. V «W» n ' ".7" ..
99

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
run urrluau. use UNLY

It was found that the tins of collapse deternined on the basis of (3) coincides
with the results of experinent and calculation by equation (2) except for a con-
stant 0.023.. Thus the final expression for the first period of pulsation of
an explosive cavity of a ring charge can be defined as

Taﬂom(ﬂ.}’m+20)-

Let us use the nodel of a ring source to evaluate the structure and par-asters
of the pressure field. seaming that the source is "switched on" instantaneously
or is approximated by a set of point sources that are "switched on" sequentially
with the detonation rate. It is assured that ties variation of source power at
each point of the ring is identical. and is determined by solving equation (2).
Nmerical estinstes of wave structure are made with consideration of delay by
the velocity of propagation of detonation n and by the velocity of the acoustic

wave c.. In accordance with the given formulation. we can define the acoustic

pressure as a

P - 9% j ‘—75(‘ .11) as

where I - 1/9 + r' + a‘ — 2dr cos n; z. r, e are cylindrical coordinates; t - (1/6. — aux/D)
is delay tine; angle a is reckoned from the line connecting the center of the
ring to the point of initiation; s is the cross sectional area of the toroidal

cavity. The calculation can be considerably simplified if the "peak" approxima-
tion is used [P.ef. 22].

 

Pig. 5

Fig. 5 shows the result of calculation of the wave structure at a point lying

at a distance r- 2a in the ring plane on the line joining the center of the ring
to the initiation point. The calculation was done for Ito-0.15 cm. a- 15 cu.

D- 7.7 Ion/s. Conditional relative pressure P- lotp/ap(0) is plotted along the
vertical, where p(0) is the initial pressure in the detonation products after
decay. Tine n is taken relative to constant 6.-2.7Ro/co. Curve 1 corresponds

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to an instantaneous blast in which only two waves are generated: a shock wave
and a compression wave that is reflected from the axis of the ring; in curve 2
the detonation rate is finite. Here three waves arise. in complete accord with
the experiment. The first and second are shock waves from the initial and final
sections of the ring respectively. and the third is the compression wave that

is reflected after focusing. Curve 3 describes the initial unsteady profile of
the wave for the case of continuous revolution of the detonation wave aromd a
ring of radius a.

Have Structure Upon Explosion of Helical Charges. The experimental and theoretical
data given above imply that continuous revolution of the detonation front around

a circle must lead to radiation of a periodic sequence of shock waves into the
surrounding space. This is proved by the experimental photographic record shown
in Fig. 6a-c [photos not reproduced].

Fig. 6a. b demonstrate the formation of a sequence of three shock waves radiated
into liquid upon underwater explosion of three-dimensional helical and flat spiral
charges. The period of succession of waves 1.. such a burst is exactly equal to
the time required for the detonation front to travel the length of one turn. It
is quite apparent that depending on the detonation rate and a linear dinension

of the spiral (helix) (pitch. diameter). two situations can occur by the instant
that the detonation front reaches the beginning of the next turn. First: the
coordinate of the shock wavefront reckoned from the preceding turn is much greater
than the pitch of the spiral (helix). Then explosion of the next turn will occur
in a region far from the shock wavefront. and thus at fixed parameters of the
spiral (helix) the radiation will be determined by a sequence of shock waves of
nearly identical amplitude for a spiral (helix) that is uniform in size. Second:
the shock wavefront velocity and axial component of the detonation rate coincide
(Fig. 6a). In this case. pressure oecillogrm show wave amplification, and the
overall nature of the radiation changes: no longer is there a sequence of waves.
but rather a long wave that is nplitude-modulated with the frequency of rotation
of the detonation front aromd the annular elements of the charge. Of course,
these frequencies may be different if the charge contains annular elements with
different linear dimensions.

Fig. 6b. c and Fig. 7 [photos not reproduced] clearly show the process of formation
of a burst of shock waves upon underwater explosion of charges in the form of

a flat spiral of detonation line. The continuous scan (Fig. 6c) shows interaction
of waves in the inner region of a spiral of five turns initiated free the outside.
Upon explosion of such a charge we can expect preferential radiation of a burst

in the direction of the axis of syuetry or close to it. The pressure oscillogram
shown in Pig. 7 was recorded by a sensor placed 20 m from a flat spiral with cut-
side radius of 1 a and on its geometric axis. The length of the scale section
reproduced on l'ig. 7 corresponds to 400 us. Charge initiation free the outside
section leads to a converging detonation front and to complicated interaction

of the radiated waves that apparently results in periodic amplitude nodulation.
The latter develops against a background of the naturally expected amplitude modu-
lation in virtue of the variability of radii of the conventional annular elements
of the flat spiral.

This analysis enables fairly simple evaluation-of the parameters of a burst from
an explosion of charges of complex shape with annular or near-annular elements.

101

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
I'UK Ul'l'ltlAI. USE UNLY

The burst consists of a sequence of shock waves whose amplitudes are determined
from the data of concentrated charges with equivalent weight of explosive material
fro- each turn. The frequency of succession of shock waves in the burst is de-
termined by the length of a turn and the detonation rate. while the length of

the entire burst is determined by the total length of the detonation line in the
charge. The latter fact is quite interesting since it is only charges of this
type that enable practical comparison of the duration of a radiated wave burst
and the tine for the detonation front to travel the length of the entire charge.

The author thanks V. H. Yemk. V. ‘1'. lusakov and 8. "I. Stebnovsltiy for assisting
with the experiments.

REFERENCES

1. "right. H. A.. Tobey. J. P.. "Acoustic Generator of the Spark Discharge Me".
JASA. Vol 45, No l. 1969.

2. Saith. N. D., Roevar. II. 1... "Liquid Seismic Explosive and Hethod of Using".
JASA. Vol 44. No 4. 1968.

3. "Hethod and Device for Echo Ranging". U. 8. Patent No 35147108. 26 May 70.

lo. Filler. H. P. J.. "Directional Explosive Echo Ranging Device". U. 5. Patent
No 3521712. filed 18 May 62, published 28 Jul 70.

S. Johnson. R. 11.. Axelson. c. A.. "Deep Depth Line Charge". U. 8. Patent ho
3276366, filed 28 Dec 66. published 6 Oct 66.

6. Lyuboshits. V. 11.. "Have Field of Directional Explosive". IZVES‘HYA AKADMI
NAUK 8888: mm ZHIDKOSTI I Gm. 110 l. 1968.

7. Kilner, L. 6.. "Underwater Gas Explosion Sciatic Have Generator". JASA. Vol 45.
No 2. 1969.

8. Haksakov. A. A.. Roy. N. A.. "Behavior of Detonating Gas Blast With High
Initial Voluetric Energy Density". AKUSTICHESKIY ZUURNAL. Vol 25. No 2, 1979.

9. Brand. 11. 8.. "Shock Have Generated by Cavity Collapse", J. FLUID HECE..
Vol 2, Part l. 1965.

10. Urick, R. J.. "Inplosions es Sources of Underwater Sound". JASA. Vol 35. No 12.
1963.

ll. Balashkan. K. 1.. "Comparison of Acoustic Efficiency of Sone Sources of Ex-
plosive Sound in Water". mm AKADBIII NAUK 8883. Vol 196, No 6. 1970.

12. Christian. E. A.. "Source Levels for Deep Underwater Explosions". JASA,
Vol 62, No 4, 1967.

13. Kibblewhite, A. 0.. Denhaa. R. 9.. "Heasureuents of Acoustic Energy Prom Under-
water Exploaions". JASA. Vol 68. No 1 (Part 2). 1970.

14. Turner. R. 6.. Scringer, J. A., "On the Depth Variation in the Energy Spectra
of Underwater Explosive Charges". JASA. Vol (.8. No 3 (Part 2). 1970.

102
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IS.

l6.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Parkis. B. 3.. Harley. R. D.. "Hessursnsnt of Spectra Levels for Shallow
Explosive Sources”. JASA. Vol 69. No l (Psrt l). 1971.

Buck. 3. lb. "Relstive Hessursnents of Pulse Cuponsnt Source Energies of
the US]! Explosive Sound Signal 11361 Detonsted st 60 Feet". JASA. Vol 55.
No l. 1976.

Seiffert. 14.. "Method of Producing Directional Blast Wave by Using Blssting
Charges". West German Patent No 2561582. publication No 12. 1977.

Noddin. 6.. "Sonic Pulse Generator". 3m. Vol 36. No 6. 19610.

Lavrent'yev. B. V.. Kuzysn. 0. 1.. "Veryvy v sore" [Explosions in the Sea].
Leningrad. Sudostroyeniye. 1977.

Kerdinskiy. V. K” "Totoidnl Gss Bubble Pullntion in Liquid" in: "910ka
sploshnoy sredy" [Dyn-Iics of Continuous Ibdiul]. No 16. Novosibirsk. published

by Institute of Hydrodynnics. Siberian Department. 0883 Academy of Sciences.
1976.

Kedrinskiy. V. K.. "One-Dinensionsl Pulsstion of 'roroidsl Gas Cavity in
Canprusible Liquid". 23mm. NW WEI I TWICE!” PIZIKI.
No 3. 1977.

Cole. Ros "Podvodnyye vzryvy" [Underwater Explosions]. Moscow. Izdstel'stvo
inostrsnnoy literatury. 1950.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo "Ranks". "Zhurnsl prikladnoy nekhsniki i tskhnichsskoy

fiziki" 1 980
6610
C80: 8064 [0576

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”MUSEONLY

MECHANICS 0? 801.108

unc 539.3:53l.011
OSCELAIIONS AND STABILITY 01' MECHANICAL svs'rms

Leningrad ROLEBAM‘YA I US'I'OYCIIIVOST' MICE“!!! 8181‘!!! in Russian 1981
(signed to press 16 Feb 82) pp 2. 267-269. 272-279

[Annotation and abstracts of articles from collection "Oscillations and Stability
of Mechanical Syatems". edited by Professor 1!. 1|. Polyekhov. Iadatel'stvo
Leningradskogo universitete. 1099 copies. 280 pages]

[Text] The collection contains articles dealing with the theory of oscillations
and stability of motion. and automatic control. theory. An examination is made
of linear and nonlinear oscillations and stability of mechanical and electrome-
chanical systems. and problees of rotational notion of artificial satellites.

An investigation is made of elastic oscillations and stability of shells, plates.
rods and certain other problems of applied mechanics.

The collection is intended for scientists. mechanics and engineers of various
categories. It may also be of use to upperclassmen in the mathematics and me-
chanics departments of universities.

UDC 531.011
DYNAMICS EQUATIONS AS NECESSARY consumes 0? 14111111111123!) GAUSS consrmm'
[Abstract of article by Polyakhov. 11. IL. Zegzhda. S. A. and Yushkov. H. 9.]

[Text] A system of differential equations of notion of a mechanical system made
up of n material points is written as a vector equation by introducing an imaging
point. In examining constrained notion of this systen. the acceleration vector

of the imaging point is represented in the form of two mutually perpendicular
vectors. One of these is completely defined by equations of noholononic con-
straints (which may be nonlinear as well). while the other vector does not enter
at all into the equations obtained from the equations of constraints by differen-
tiation. It is shown that Nevton's fundamental lav written for such a vector

can be treated as a necessary condition of Gauss minimun constraint. References 3.

[Inc 534.153
INTERACTIM OP MECHANICAL OSCILLATOR SYSTM WITH MURAL m 800308
[Abstract of article by Yefanov. N. 11.. L'vovich. A. Yu. and Sidoruk. R. A.]

[Text] Differential equations are derived that describe processes of interaction
of a mechanical system and an induction motor for cases of elastic and inertial

104
cosmonauts!
FOROFHCIALIBEONLY

excitation of mechanical oscillations. Dependences are found for quantities
that characterize steady-state conditions. and their stability is studied.

UN 53l.55:521.l

STRAIGHT EQUILIBRIUM POSITIWS. mm STABILITY AND 0&2“st 0P SATELLITBS
WITH mosmrc SWING

[Abstract of article by Kusnetsov. L. I. and Chikova. 1!. v.)

[Text] An investigation is made of oscillations of a satellite with electrostatic
shielding around equilibrium positions. It is shown that straight (unbiased)

- equilibrium positions exist in an orbital coordinate system and criteria are de-
rived for the stability of oscillations around these positions. Figures 3, table 1,
references 6.

UDC [Not given]
ROTATIONAL WHO" 01’ BODY IN cm GRAVITY FIELD Pam-mm DY W FORCES
[Abstract of article by Chikova. N. v.]

[Text] An examination is made of perturbed motion of a gravitationally stabilized
body around a center of mass due to the action of Lorentz forces caused by motion
of a charged spherical surface in a geomagnetic field. The integral of equations
of motion is obtained for the case of an equatorial orbit with satisfaction of

a certain condition on displacement of the center of a shielding sphere relative
to the center of mass of the body. The stability of the equilibrium position

is studied. References 8.

UDC 53l.55:$21.l

SPECIAL CASES OF MOTION OF “WATICALLY SHIELDED BODY RELATIVE 1'0 cm
0? M88

[Abstract cf article by Lyalthovka. G. v.]

[Text] An examination is made of the Joint influence of gravitational moments

and moments of Lorentz forces on motion of a body in a circular equatorial orbit.
It is assumed that the kinetic energy of rotation of the body is much greater

than the work of perturbing forces, and that the center of the electrostatic shield
coincides with the center of mass or is displaced along the principal central

axis 2'. Equations in osculating elements were averaged with respect to rapid
rotation. Figure 1. references b.

on: 621.312
CONTROLLING START OF INDWTION ms
[Abstract of article by Pasynkov. V. Ye.]

[Text] A mathematical model is constructed that describes starting of a three-
phsse induction motor from a line of unlimited power. The optimum control problem
is formulated on the basis of this model. References 3.

10:

”ammonia!
FOIOFFICIAIJISEONLY

UDC 536.0:621.3O
APPLICATION 01' MIC muons TO THEORY OF ELECTRIC MACHINES
[Abstract of article by Rodyukov, P. P.]
[Text] A general method of reducing equations of electric machines to a fort:
containing a linilaun nunber of palrneters] is considered on the basis of the
cowaratively si-ple ex-ple of a two-phase induction sotor. References 6.

BBC 531.8
M108 0? soup RITE CONTROLLING CONSTRAINTS
[Abstract of article by Trifonenko. 3. v.]
[Text] A theoretical analysis is made of a six-degree rocker stand. The stand
is a solid body fastened to six rods that can change length. Pomles are obtained
for calculating the change in these lengths, and also the forces in the rods that
ensure predetermined notion of a platform. An sample of calculation is given.
Figure 1, tables 3. references 2.
1106 62-50-

BQOILIBRID‘H OP momma VEHICLE nuance 1mm]!
[Abstract of article by Tertychnyy. V. Yu. and Pol-in. V. 3.]
[Text] An examination is ends of conditions of retention of quasistatic and dynas-
ic stability of a legged vehicle and constraints on controlling torques. A regu-
lator is synthesized that ensures stabilization of the vehicle in the vicinity
of progra-ed notion and that guarantees notion stability. References 6.

WC 62b.07:536.1

DAHPING SBLP-OSCILLATIORS IN DEEP DRILLING
[Abstract of article by Kuznetsov, T. I.. Makerov. n. G. 'and Nestsev. B. A.]

[Text] The authors obtain the conditions to be inposed on paraseters that give
rise to self-oscillations during deep drilling of holes. A method is proposed
for damping such oscillations. Figures 2, references 5.

UDC 620.01.054-629.ll9.004

USING PRACTICAL WWII: ANALYSIS IS STUDYING MOTION 0? E0103 VEHICLE 0N BRAKE
STAND

[At street of article by Yushkov, H. P.]

[Text] A method of successive approximations is used to study inertia of a wheel
in the investigation of sotor vehicle notion on a two-drua stand for checking

106

MWWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

brakes. Fundnental ideas of refined practical harmonic analysis are used for
repeated analytical approximation of curves. Convenient formulas are preserted
for calculating the Fourier coefficients of the approximating function, the graph
of this function being a set of third-order parabolic curves drawn through every
four sequentially located points of the curve. Figure 1, references 3.

one 517.9531“!
USING PHASE FUNCTIONS TO srumt OSCILLATIONS 0F SYSTHS WITH PERIODIC PARAMETERS
[Abstract of article by Hironov, M. V.]

[Text] The problem of determining boundaries of zones of stability and the general
solution of the Hill equation is solved by a method of phase functions that is

a modification of the method of variation of arbitrary constants. The given prob-
lem is reduced to integration of a first-order nonlinear differential equation

for the phase function on an interval equal to the period of the variable coef-
ficient of the Hill equation. In the case where pulsation of the variable coef-
ficient is not too great. simple computational formlas are derived for construct-
ing the boundaries of zones of instability and determining the general solution

in these zones. the of these formulas requires calculation of only a few integrals.
Figure 1, references 7.

UDC 539.3

ASYHPTOTIC BEHAVIOR OF SOLUTIONS FOR W8 0? THIN PLATE SENDING HITH-DISCON-'
TINUOUS LOADS

[Abstract of article by Nazarov, s. A. and Sansnov. B. 10.]

[Text] An examination is made of the problem of bending of a thin plate with
smooth bomdary contour under the action of loads that undergo a discontinuity
of the first kind on the smooth contour without going beyond the boundary of the
plate. Complete asymptotic expansions are constructed for the solution of this
problem. References 7.

D'DC 534.121.l

USING VARIATIWAL mos AND THE NET-POINT 11mm 1'0 SOLVE mm DYNAMIC
PROBLEMS OF “STICKY THEORY

[Abstract of article by Dmitriyeva, 211. 11.. Horosov, N. P.. Nikiforova. Te. V.
and Semenov, N. 11.]

[Text] The authors consider the boundary value problen of oscillation of a rigidly
clamped spherical shallow shell under sy-atric loading. The problem is solved by
two nethods: a variational method and the net-point method. In solving the non-
linear system of equations by the Bubnov-Galerkin variational method, a local
approximation is selected with subsequent numerical realization of the resultant
approximation of the system by the Rungs-Kutta method. In solving the problem

by the net-point method. an explicit difference schema is used with seven-point

107

mammary
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

template (r1. t ). Comparison of results showed that the computer program for

the net-point mgthod is much simpler and shorter than the program for the Eubnov-
Galerkin method. At the same time. the program for the variational method has
greater universality and makes it comparatively easy to calculate the action of

the load for long time intervals. while the rigid condition for selection of the
.step in the solution by the net-point method in the given case increases the number
of time layers of the grid. References 3. '

UDC 5310.121
DETERMINING SHAPE OF BENT FLEXIBLE CIRCULAR FREE PLATE
[Abstract of article by Voloshinova. ‘l’. V. and Yershov, B. A.]
[Text] An exact solution is found for an inhomogeneous biharmonic equation of

the bent surface of a plate that approximately satisfies boundary conditions.
References ’0.

UDC 539.3531“!
AXISYHHETRIC RESPONSE OF VISCOELASTOPLASTIC SHELL 0? REVOLUTION 1'0 IMPACT LOAD
[Abstract of article by Kovalev, A. EL]

[Text] An examination is made of the axisynetric response of a viscoelasto-
plastic shell of revolution to an impact load applied to an end face. The prob-
lem is solved for not very thin shells in the geometrically linear formulation.
The main thrust is on studying discontinuous stress waves. An algoritlm of the
method of characteristics is constructed that retains the discontinuities on all
characteristics. References 4 .

UDC 539.3:534J

FREE AXISYHMETRIC OSCILLATIONS OF CWJUGATE SHELLS 0P REVOLUTION: COHPARISON
OF ASYMPTUI'IC AND NUMERICAL RESULTS

[Abstract of article by Pilipporv, s. 3.]
[Text] Frequencies and modes of free oscillations of conjugate shells of revolu-
tion are determined by an orthogonal sweep method. Results are compared with
data of asymptotic analysis of the given problem. Figures 5. tables 2, references
5.

UDC 539.3:536.l

cmnsn revues mm case or “131mm oscnunons or 2330.393111-
sam. or mownon um um rasmmc consumes

[Abstract of article by Ulitin. M. 1.]
[Text] A generalized Fourier integral is constructed for a system of eigenfunc-

tions of the zero-moment problem of axisymetric oscillations of a thin shell
of revolution for different versions of boundary conditions. References 7.

108

POROFHCIALLBEONLY
los‘omcm. USE ONLY

UDC 539.3:534J
OSCILLATIONS 0F HEATING SHELLS 0F REVOLUTION

[Abstract of article by Snirnov. A. 1..)

[Text] The author considers the problen of free and forced oscillations of to-
tating thin shells of revolution. The Ostrogradskiy-Eanilton principle is used
in deriving the equations of oscillations. A condition of orthogonality of nornal
nodes of oscillations is derived and used in satisfying the initial conditions.
Figure 1. references lo.

000 539.3:536J
“mono m FOR “11813001136 AND 801.va mam EQUATIONS 01' THIN SHELLS
[Abstract of article by Kvasnikov. 3. IL]

[Text] The author proposes a nethod that is applicable to fairly general equa-

tions for constructing truncated equations in the case of variable coefficients.
Figures 6. references 18.

UDC 539.3:535J

MUM! OF AXISWIC Low. MMTIOIS 0P 83A?! (I! STABILITY OF CYLINDRICAL
SHELL UNDER AXIAL COMPRESSION

[Abstract of article by Bauer. 8. it]

[Text] The paper gives numerical results that characterize stability of a cylin-
drical shell that is compressible along the axis with a local axisy-stric dent.
To deternine the dependence of the critical load on the amplitude of the dent.

a nethod of iterations is used that is applied to the integral equation of the
problen derived by Fourier transformation. Figures lo. references 5.

unc 539.3:536.l
NORMAL AND CRITICAL DDIENSIWS 0F SHELLS 01’ EVOLUTION HIﬂ_NBGATIVB CURVATURB
[Abstract of article by Petrov, H. 3.]

[Text] A variational nethod preceded by asyuptotic analysis is used to determine
critical loads for a number of boundary conditions on shells of revolution of
negative curvature. these loads being less than the critical levels calculated
for nor-a1 dinensions. A numerical exasple is given. Figure 1. references 7.

use 539.3:536J

INFLUENCE TEA! AXISYHHBTRIC SHAPE IRREGULARI‘IIBS m was VICINITY HAVE 0]! 3mm-
CAI’ION ram 0? MIMIC WEBER!!! IN 8mm 0? mow-non

[Abstract of article by 'reterin. 1. Yu.]

[Text] An ex-ination is ends of sensitivity of shells of revolution of non-
negative gsussian curvature to an sxisy-stric inperfection of shape situated
near an edge. Derived asynptotic fornulas enable estination of the influence
of additional subcritical strain generated by edge dressing and initial bending
on the upper critical load. References 6.

109

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unc 539.3:534J
INITIAL TRANSCRITICAL DQOEIBRIUH 0! mm SHELLS 01' marten mm THISTING
[Abstract of article by 'retsrin. 1. Yu. and Tovstik, P. Ye.)

[Text] The authors consider the problen of stability of initial transcritical
equilibriun of thin elastic shells of revolution with twisting. The study covers
strictly convex shells. shells of negative gaussian curvature. and cylindrical
. shells. An energy method is used in codainetion with asynptotic analysis with
respect to the nuﬂaer n of waves along a parallel (3)1). Figures 2. references 5.

not 539.3:534.l

ASYHP‘I‘O‘IIC ANALYSIS OF FREE “MIMIC OSCILLATIONS IN srsrm CMISING
CYLINMICAL SHELL AND ELASTIC mum

[Abstract of article by Bergnan. R. M. and Letifov. P. 5.]

[Text] An investigation is nade of the influence that an isotropic elastic nediu
has on frequencies and nodes of oscillations of a circular cylindrical shell.

Two types of contact conditions between shell and medium are considered: rigid
engage-em and a contact that allows slipping but not separation between the shell
and the nediun. In either case it is seemed that the stiffness of the elastic
nedim is much less than that of the shell naterial. and the inertia of the elastic
nediu must be considered in deternining frequencies. It is shown that the say-p-
totic order of the eininun frequency of the shell with fixed wave formation in

the longitudinal direction can be reduced in conparison with the order of the
corresponding frequency of oscillations of a shell that is not coupled with the
medium. References 6.

COPYRIGHT: ltdatel'stvo Leningrsdskogo universiteta. 1981

“[0
080: 1861/129

110

MOWIBEONLY
FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

UN 625.2.w1:536
LMD CAPACITY AND me me 0? WC“ SYSTDB

Kiev wmsr' I DINAHICHBSKIYB WWA mmcansrns 313m: WI!
mucmrn mum in Russian 1981 (signed to press 31 Aug 81) pp 205-216

[Abstracts of articles from collection ”Load Capacity and Dynamic Properties of
Dynanic Systens", edited by V. F. Uahkalov. Institute of Technical Hechenics.
M89. Acadany of Sciences. Isdatel'stvo "Naukeva dds". 600 copies, 216 pages]-

!ch 625.2.001:534.1

FORCED mama OSCILLA‘HOIS 0? W8 RODS um COﬂSIDBRATIOII 0P noncr-
TUDINAL FORCE

[Abstract of article by loneshenko. 0. l. and Iispetys. V. Ye.]

[Text] The authors consider forced transverse oscillations of colpressed rods
with peruseters that vary arbitrarily lengthwise. and concentrated inclusions..
It is seemed that inelastic resistance conforms to a special Voigt hypothesis.
The nathod of generalized coordinates is used. Figure 1, references lo.

000 536.1

sum-cameras OF Aim AS APPLIED 1'0 SOLVING mm! 01‘ mrmmn.
was 0? W8 ROD SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by ﬂat-snkosm Ye.)

[rest] An investigation is ends of analytical relations for finding normal nodes
of elastically coupled parallel rods with distributed para-sters that are piece-
wise constant functions. For forced oscillations. the solution is found in the
fore of an expansion with respect to actual nodes. Figure 1. references 3.

000 625.2.001
WING OIDER 0? mm sums
[Abstract of article by Dlugsch. L. A. and Tatsrinova. v. A.]

[Text] A nethod is proposed for reducing the order of a systen of differential
equations of notion written in haailtonisn fora. References 2.

111

mammal“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UN 517.915“
REDUCING ORDER 01’ DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIOR SYSTEMS

[Abstract of article by Sil'berman. I. A.]

[Text] A method is proposed for approximating a high-order linear differential
equation system by a ”simplified" system that does not require solution of the
complete problem of eigenvalues of the matrix of coefficients of linearized
equations. Table 1. references 3.

unc 625.2.601:534.om.2

SIMPLIFYING COHPUTATIONAI. scam: FOR IDDBLING THREE-DIMENSIONAL VERATIONS 0P
RAILROAD PASSENGER CARS

[Abstract of article by Hashchenko. I. A. and Hokryy. 1'. 1L]

[Text] A method is considered for simplifying a complete system of equations

of spatial vibrations of a railway carriage in vertical planes (longitudinal and
transverse). Based on the exnple of carriage calculation. the feasibility of
the simplifications is demonstrated and an estimate is made of the error intro-
duced. Figure 1, references 6 titles.

we $31.3l/.35:629.6:51-7

APPLICATION AND 8MIFICATION 0P WTICAL KODKLS 1'03 cunmnmn MIDI 0P
RAEHAY CABRIAGBS .

[Abstract of article by dechenko. N. A. and Zinchsnko. V. 1.]
[Text] An algorith is proposed for simplifying mathematical models in studying
steady states and motion stability of railway carriages moving along track sec-

tions of constant curvature. and the region of applicability is defined for these
and previously used models. References 3.

we 625.2.001:625.032
CREE? FORCES AND LATERAL OSCILLATIONS Ol’ RAILWAY CARRIAGBS
[Abstract of article by Demin. Yu. V. and Ratnikova. 0. H.]
[Text] An exaaination is made of the feasibility of using a linear model of the
forces of interaction of wheels and rails in studying forced oscillations of com-
plex mechanical systems represented by railway carriages. It is shown that the

: dynamic characteristics of rolling stock depend appreciably on the model used
for creep forces. Figure 1. table It references 6.

112

“MINOR!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l'JC S31.3:629.6.001

INFLUENCE OF ELASTICALLY DISSIPATIVB SUSPENSION ms 01] WHO“ STABILITY OF
MIGHT CAR

[Abstract of article by Radchenko, N. A.]

[Text] An investigation is nade of steady states and stability of freight car
action with TaNII-Khz trucks. The author denonstrates the feasibility of using
non-ja-ing dry-friction dupers and reducing transverse stiffness of elastic
coeponents of the spring suspension. Tables 2. references 3.

000 518:517.9l/9b
NUMERICAL METHOD 01’ SOLVING RIGOROUS SYSTEMS 0F DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS

[Abstract of article by Zil'bernsn. I. A.]

[Text] The author considers a rigorously stable nethod for nulsericel integration
of systens of ordinary differential equations that does not require determination
of derivatives on'prscading steps. A deoonstrstion is given of the efficiency

of the method for large dinensionality of differential equation systees. Figures 2.
references 6.

we 625.2.001+656.2.50:681.332.518.S
MATHEMATICAL MODELING OF TRAIN MOTION OVER LONG M SECTION As HILTIHASS SYSTm
[Abstract of article by llokhin. Ye. 2.. Hasleyeva, L. 6.]
[Text] The authors deaonstrate stability of nusrical solution of a system of
differential equations of train notion on a large integration interval. Results

of calculation are given for longitudinal dynuic forces in a train of elevated

weight as it loves over a track section 35 I:- long. Figures 2. tables 2. refer-
ances 8.

out 629.4.0.5-531.391
SHOCK HAVE FORMATIW IN NONLINEAR W8 mm mm PROPAGATING msrmmcs
[Abstract of article by Hanashkin. 1.. A.. Knyshenko. V. s.1
[Text] An estilate is made of the influence that the rate of increase and the
velocity of propagation of an external force have on shock wave forlation in a

systen of solid bodies connected into a chain by coupliant Joinings with rigid
characteristics. ﬁgures 2. references 7.

113

mammal!“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 534.11

nmmmc FORCES IN ONE-DIMENSIONAL SYSTEMS 0P SOLIDS m LIQUID IN PRESENCE
OF PROPAGATING DISTURBANCB

[Abstract of article by bogonaz. G. 1.]

[Text] An examination is lads of longitudinal oscillations of a eysten of solids
with cavities containing sloshing liquid connected by elastic bonds. An investi-
gation is nade of the influence that pereneters of the cysts. and the perturbing
load have on the nagnitude of longitudinal forces. Figures 2, references 5.

UDC 629.b.028.001.57.532

MENTION. WELD“: OP UNSI‘BADY MIG! roe TRAINS BQ‘UIPPBD wrm M1310 AB-
SORBING mums COUPLING DBVICBS

[Abstract of article by Khachwuridse. N. M” and Krivovyazyuk, Yu. P.]

[Text] An eminetion is nade of a nathenatical nodal of a train with cars
equipped with mlticbanber hydrogas absorbing devices for the purpose of studying
unsteady nodes of notion. Pigu're 1. references 3.

one 629.2/7.015.027.001.57

CALCULATING COEFFICIBII 0! FORCES 01' INELASTIC REISSTANCB 0? mm SHOCK
ABSORBER

[Abstract of article by Nanashkin. L. A.. ﬂatner. b. s. and Bsranovskiy, A. 2.]

[Text] The calculation is done with respect to the predeternined force charac-
teristic of the shock absorber with consideration of coupreasibility of the fluid.
the pliability of the structure being protected. and connection of deformable
components in series with the hydraulic shock absorber. References 6.

UN 622.023

INVESTIGATION 0? OWNER TRAIN MOTION ALMG sum SBCTIWS 0F LOMITUDINAL m
PROFILE

[Abstract of article by Krivenkova. 1.. Yu.. Nauenko. N. Ye., Radzikhovskaye.
T. Yu. and Sualovich, B. 2.]

[Text] An investigation is nade of the influence that the location of pusher
and braking devices as well as variation of trective force have on the maxi-um

forces in the intertruck connections of the train for unsteady nodes of notion.
Figures 5. table 1. references 5.

116

mammsomx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 625.265.6z53lo.012

INVESTIGATIW 0? mm PWBSSES m m TRAINS WITH CONSIDERATIOII Q? RESTRIC-
le OP LIQUID OSHM‘IIWS

[Abstract of article by logo-at. G. 1.]

[Text] It is shown that selection of different laws of variation of oscillator
paraneters when eodeling processes of interaction between liquid and the upper
part of tank cars has little effect on laxilun forces in the connections between
care. Figures 6. references 5. -

unc 626.072.33.001.24

m1) 0? DETERMINING STRESSBS IN STRUCTURAL CWOIBNTS m LOADING BY FALLING
HEIGHT

[Abstract of article by Barbas. I. G..and Popkovich. A. v.]

[Text] An approxiaate nethod is proposed that is based on replacing the impact
force obtained free solution of the problem of transverse elastic iapact with

an equivalent static load. Results of calculations are coepared with experinent.
Figures 2. table 1, references 6.

UDC 621.01 :53! .66

BQUIVALD'CB 0F SGT-Tm LOADS um Om PGHS 0? mm DEPENDENCE
[Abstract of article by Grigor'yev. Ye. 1'. and Higur. V. v.]

[Text] An investigation is node of the equivalence of short-tern loads of six
different forms. The test object is described by a linear differential equation.
1V0 criteria of equivalence are examined. Figures lo. references 8.

WC 636.1:625.2

UNSTIADY um OSCILLATIONS O? MECHANICAL SYSTB‘ “PM MICK AIM A TRACK WITH
WSSBS

[Abstract of article by Reanikov. 1.. lb]

[Test] An algoritha is developed for deternining correlational nonenta of dis-
plac-ents. velocities and accelerations of a mltieaas syste- that eovee with
variable velocity along a track vith unsteady rando- unevnnesaea. Figures 4.
references 7.

. UDC 531/53bx62+501.1
COHPARING STATISTICAL LINEARIZATIOI' COEFFICIMS M FRICTIWAL DAMPER

[Abstract of article by Boyarintseva. 1.. P.)

[Text] The author considers two versions of eatheeatical description of a fric-
tion deeper when the input action is a steady-state randoe signal. or the am

115

”WWW?
FOROFHCIALUSEOMY

of such a signal with a sine wave. A conparison is nade between coefficients
of statistical. and jointly statistical-harmonic linearisation. References 3.

Um 625.032.10

USING SPECTRAL DENSITIBS 0P VEHICAI. ACCELERATIOIIS OP JW'RNAI. BOXES IN PROBLEMS
OK ESTIMATING PERMATIONS A

[Abstract of article by Ushkalov. V. 3., Red‘ko. s. 1'. and Leont'yeva, N. 11.]

[Text] The authors consider determination of consistent estimates of spectral
characteristics of vertical accelerations of journal bones and make recousndations
on using then as characteristics or‘ perturbations is studying vertical oscilla-
tions of transport carriages. Figures 2. references 8.

one 536.1:625.2

USING STATISTICAL LINEARIZATIG IN STUDYING INSTEAD? RAM OSCILLA‘IIONS 0F
MULTIPLE-MASS SYSTMS .

[Abstract of article by Rernikov. 1.. H.)

[Text] An algoritl- is described for calculating nathanatical expectations and
correlation nonents of coordinates of a systen with elastically dissipative non-
linear constraints in the presence of unsteady randon perturbations. Figures 3,
references 2.

BBC 625.2 .001:625.032.632

ACCOUNTING roe TORSION“. STIFFNESS 0? THE 301‘! IR STUDYING SPATIAL OSCILLATIWS
0F RAILWAY CARRIAGE

[Abstract of article by Korotenko. M. I... Denovich. V. 0.. Malysheve. 1. Tu. and
Tatarinova. v. A.]

[Text] In natural and forced oscillations of a carriage. an investigation is

made of the influence that torsional stiffness of the body has on amplitude of

displacensnts and wavelength of oscillations. Figures It. table 1. references 3.
unc 625.2.001:53Io.l

OSCILLAI'IGIS OF RODS WITH VARIARLB CROSS SRCTIOR CONSIDERING RUIATIMAI. INBRTIA
AND SHEAR STRAIN

[Abstract of article by Repetya, v. Ye.]

[Text] The author considers natural oscillations of a rod with arbitrary parsn-
eters that are variable with respect to spatial coordinate and with concentrated
inclusions, considering rotational inertia and shear strain. References 3.

116

MWWMY
MWUSEONLY

UDC 534.1
ESTIMATING SIGNIFICANCE 0? PW 080M018

[Abstract of article by Grigor'yev, Ye. T.. Konstantinov. K. 6., Honatko. N. V”
Oleaskaya. N. 8.. Fetrushevskiy. V. A. and Sokolov. V. A.]

[Text] It is duonatrated on the basis of experinental data that the dynamic
characteristics of real objects mat be determined with consideration of the

possibility of oscillations on frequencies that are fractional and nultiple with
respect to the excitation frequency. Figures 3. tables 2.
0

"DC 539.3:53’0.l

SFLINB-CQWERSIQ‘ 0P ARM IN DYNAMICS OF CYLINIBICAL SHELLS um DISCONTINWS
FARMERS .

[Abstract of article by Brynn. A. A.)

[Text] An examination is Isde of the feasibility of applying spline-conversion
of an argment to investigation of oscillations of cylindrical shells in which
the paraneters vary along the generatrix. Frequencies of free oscillations of
a shell of piecewise variable thickness are determined. Figures 2. references 5.

UDC 532.59
USING Pmrrr um METHOD 1'0 CALCULATE DYNAMICS OF SOLIDS Hm LIQUID

[Abstract of article by Zakora, 1.. v.]

[Text] The author considers application of the finite ale-ant nethod to studying
the dynanics of solids that contain a liquid. Figures 2. tables 2. references 6.

UN: 533.0l:626.5
AERODYNAHIC WISTICS 0F mum GUYBD armors

[Abstract of article by Katakevich. H. 1.]

[Text] The paper describes the results of experinental wind-tunnel studies of
nodels of a stiffness bean in nodern guyed bridges. It is shown how the angle

of attack of the wind flow influences aerodynanic characteristics. Figures 3.
references lo.

UDC 62-60

WING STIFFNBSSBS AND WING PARAMETERS OPYWICAL ”81'“
[Abstract of article by Red'ko. 8. F.)

[Text] The author considers a method of using experinental data to determine

stiffnesses and duping paraneters of nechenical systems based on analyzing indi-
vidual subsystem ratinr than the systen as a uhola. Figures 2. references 6.

117

mmmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 62-50. 519.27

DETERMINING NATURAL FREQUENCIES AND “”136 COEFFICIENTS PKG! ANALYSIS 0? ms
OSCILLATIONS

[Abstract of article by Kovalcv. 1. Ye., Krasnikov. A. V.,and Tu?(y)ev. V. 1.]

[Text] Two netth are given for counter analysis of free oscillations of s struc-
tural cowonent 'to determine its natural frequencies and duping coefficients.
References 6.

9

one 531.410.001.57
mm DWI“! 0? “10710“ COEFFICIENT
[Abstract of article by Knyshenko. Yu. V.. Logachev. P. P.]

[Text] The paper describes an experimental facility and nethod for determining
the coefficient of friction. Il’he coefficients of friction are deth for
felt-steel and felt-alminun couples. An investigation is ads of the influence
of changing the sliding rate and'the load on the contact area. Figures 3. refer-
ences 2 Russian.

UDC 620.178.53:539.63
TEMPERATURE FIELD OF comm-r UNDER CYCLIC LOADING
[Abstract of article by Veselovskiy. v. 3. and Voytsekhovskiy, N. 1.]

[Text] Based on the nethod of sequential intervals a solution is found'for the
nonlinear problen of heat conduction for a cyclically loaded cylindrical part.
It is shown that accomting for nonlinesrity considerably improves accuracy of
dateraining the temperature field. Figures 4. table 1. references 9.

UDC 533.01:626.S
AZRODYNAHIC STABILITY OF PRIMIC STRWS
[Abstract of article by Kazakevich. H. 1.]

[Text] An investigation is made of conditions of aerodynnic stability of pris-
natic coeponents of rectangular cross section such as those used for bridge pylons.
Methods and results of wind-tunnel tests are given. Figures 6. references 3.

. UDC 621.6b3-656/621.51
STUDYING PROCESSES 0F CONTAINR DWELERATION IN WSW]?! LINE
[Abstract of article by Shuts. G. A” Zel'dina, B. A. and Degtyarneko. V. 1.]

[Text] An investigation is made of the influence of gasdynanic wave processes
on deceleration of a container in an inclined braking section. It is shown that
wave processes should be considered at positive angles of inclination and high
braking rates. Figures 2. references '6.

118

mommamr
MOMISIONIX

UN 539.3

EQUIVALENCB 0F MORAL mums 0? mm snncm DESIQI mm
[Abetract of article by Volkove. I. H. and Min. A. L]

[Tut] An examination in nude of the relation between none typical. problene of
optima design of str'ncturel elmnte. Conditions are found under which problens
of different forenletion are equivalent. Figure 1, references 6.

COPYRIQT: Izdetel'etvo "Neukove duke". 1981

6610
080: 1861/130

119

”WWW?
MWWONLY

DYNAMICS 01’ RADIATING GAS

noscow mums IuUCﬂAYUSRCHBGO can in Russian 1981 (signed to press 9 Jun 81)
pp 3-10. 95

[Introduction and abstracts of articles from collection "Dyn-ics of Radiating

Gas". edited by Yu. D. Stuyglevskiy. Couputing Center. USSR Acadsuy of Sciences.
370 copies. 95 pages]

[Text] Introduction

The introduction to the second nu‘nber of this collection (1976) had the subtitle
"systsn of Methods for Calculating Steady-State Axisy-etric Flows of Radiating
Gas", and the introduction to the third nuber (1980) had the subtitle "Sons
Nonstationary Problens of Dynanics of Radiating Gas." In 1971-1975. the people
working at the Computing Center of the USSR Academy of Sciences were mainly de-
veloping nunerical nethods. and in 1975-1980 they were neinly using these nethods
to solve problems. This is what detenined the content of the collections.

The collection offered herewith includes articles that can he swan-ed only under
the title of the collection itself. They deal with calculating the optical prop-
erties of gases. methods of the dynanics of a radiating and scattering gas. and
solution of two problems with axial sy-etry. Due to inco-pleteness of publica-
tions. A. A. Charakhch'yan us forced. in his words. to turn to the technology
'of colputing the absorption coefficient. and to carry out the conputations with
his own hands. V. I. Cryn'. after publishing his own results. to conpensste for
the linited scope of the journal article presents an extended text of the paper
and supple-eats it with the method of couputing the notion of a gas with radiation.
as well as with Thomson and Conpton scattering. V. I. Zubov, V. H. Krivtsov.

I. N. Nan-ova et al. continue the study of interaction of laser enission with

an aluninun vessel and its radiating vapor. Their article gives results in the
case of use of a neodyniua laser. Ye. V. Shil'nilwv uses the idea of focusing
laser radiation in air. and carries out the calculation of this effect. Thus
the nuber of sxisyletric problens of dynamics of spectrally radiating and ab-
sorbing gas that have been solved at the Computing Center of the USSR Acadsuy

of Sciences has been brought to five.

It was noted in the introduction to the third collection that a test of the .nonsnt
method .of calculating transfer of spectral radiation under severe conditions where
tenperaturs ranges from thousands to tens of nillions of degrees yields

120

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inadmissible errors even in integrated characteristics such as electron temperature
in calculating the behavior of a laser target. In this collection. V. I. Gryn'
offers a multigroup moment method which. although it requires a greater value

of computations. shows errors with testing on the same problem of 12 for thermo-
dynamic quantities and for the energy luminesced by the target. Thus there has
been progress in this area as well.

The methods presented in these collections have been efficacious in solving quite
complicated problems. At the same time. the complex geometric characteristics

of the phenomenon being studied raise new questions associated with computational
grids. In the four problems with axial synetry whose solution was publist

in the second and third collections. it was possible to use s single grid to solve
each problem as a whole. In this collection. Ye. V. Shil'nikov solves the problem
of movement of air under the action of laser emission focused by a parabolic mir-
ror. Use of a unified grid in this case leads to supersaturation of the compu-
tational algoritln with nonstationary elements. The author uses three different
grids for equations of gas dynamics and equations of transfer of the laser and
normal radiation. The fields of the functions have to be interpolated with tran-
sition from one grid to another in the iteration procedure of the calculation.

Ye. V. Shil'nikov carries out these interpolations in such a way that laws of
conservation of mass. momentum and energy are not violated. This measure among
other things ensures success of the work. The most complicated phenomenon of
dynamics of a radiating gas is reproduced in detail.

The first, and forced. test of carrying out calculations on different grids has
been crowned with success, although even here the realization of the algorithm
of coqautations requires incredible efforts.

17 December 1980 Yu. D. Shmyglevskiy

UDC 533.1:535

[Abstract of article by Charakhch'yan. A. A.]
[Text] The paper describes technology for computing the absorption coefficient
based on the work of Argo and Hobner. The Fermi-Dirac statistic is used. The
technology is realized on the 33514-6 computer, and gives the coefficient of absorp-
tion of high-temperature mixtures with nuclear charge not exceeding 30.

We 533.6.0ll.6:535.l
SCHEMES 1'03 CALCULATING RADIATION TRANSFER
[Abstract of article by Gryn'. V. 1.]
[Text] The author constructs and studies homogeneous difference schemes for the

equation of unsteady transport of spectral radiation in a moving gas that is scat-
tering with respect to angles. A numerical scheme is proposed for calculating

121

mmmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radiation transport with Caapton scattering. The paper gives the results of cal-
culations that illustrate the accuracy of the nunericel schemes.

UDC 533.6.011.6:535.1
INTERACTION OP mmnm LASER RADIATION um ALUMINUM VESSEL AND ITS VAPOR

[Abstract of article by Zubov. V. 1.. Krivteov. V. )4” lemon. 1.. X. and
Shnyglevskiy. Yu. 1).]

[Text] An examination is nade of the process of heating of the flat bottoa of

a tapered vessel. vaporization. heating and lament of the vapor. and heating

and vaporization of the aide wall as a result of radiation of the vapor. In acne
versions the intensity of laser radiation is constant, while in others it increases

from zero to a marina. and then decreases. The authors discuss the particulars
of the process. Detailed illustrations are given.

000 533.6.011.6:535.l
INVESTIGATION 01' GAS MOTION UNDER m A0110“ 0? FOCUSBD LASER RADIATIM

[Abstract of article by Shil'nikov, Ye. V.)

[Text] A solution is found for the axisy-netric unsteady problee of air notion
under the action of a laser pulse. The air is taken as apectrally eniasive.
non-scattering. inviscid and thermally nonconductive. Laser radiation is focused
by a parabolic Iirror. The equation of gas dynamics is integrated by S. K.
Godunov'e aethod. The angular distribution of radiation intensity is accounted
for by the aethod of discrete ordinates. and the frequency dependence is taken
into consideration by a nultigroup nonent method.

COPYRIGHT: Vychislitel'nyy teentr Akadanii nauk 8883. 1981

76610
cso: 1861/127

122

MWWMY
mmussomv

unc 531/536
KINETOSTATICS 0P m-DDMSIONAL W198

Moscow KINETOSTATIIA PROSMS‘NMM mum in Russian 1981 (signed to
press 9 Apr 81) pp 2. 101-102

[Annotation and table of contents frols book "Kinetostatics of Three-Dinensional
Mechanism”, second revised and enlarged edition. by llikolay Grigor'yevich

Bruyevich and Bella Ovseyevna Harder, Institute of Machine Science ineni A. A.
Blagonravov, 088R Acadusy of Sciences. Irdatel'stvo "lisuka", 1300 copies, 104

pages]

[Text] The book presents theoretical nethode and practical techniques for muter
solution of problems of kinetostatics of three-dinensional nechanisns.

While basically retaining the ideas developed in the first edition. sajor re-
visions have been nade (with consideration of extensive use of present-day colputer
facilities) in the nethods of analyzing nechanisns. Methods of solution are algo-

ritbnised,progrsns of calculation are developed for specific tbree-di-enaional
nechanisss.

The sonograph say be a useful handbook for engineers. designers. graduate students
and scientists specialising in the area of three-dinensional necbanisns.

Figures 18. references 59.

Contents page
Preface 3
Chapter 1: Introduction

1.1. Necessary scientific and procedural infatuation 6
1.2. Principal notation 6

1.3. Problens of vector algebra that are used in kinetostatics of three-

dinensional nechanisns 7
Chapter 2: Pornation of Three-Dinensional Mechanisns
2.1. Spatial dyad. Formation of nscbanisns without passive constraints 12
2.2. bastion of mhanisns with passive constraints 15
Chapter 3: Kinmtics of Spatial Uscbanisss For-ed by lornal Dyads
3.1. Equations of kinenstics of the dyad. General nsthod of solution 15
3.2. Hinge dyad . 20
3.3. Screw dyad 25

123

”WISE“?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.6. Dyed of any pairs of fifth class
3.5. Dyed with any kinematic pairs
3.6. Examples

Chapter 6: Kinenatice of Three-Dimensional Mechanisms With Passive Constraints

6.1. Kinsmtic conditions of existence of inconplete dyad
6.2. Kine-atic conditions of existence of nechanien with passive constraints

6.3. Sons nechanisas with pairs of fifth class that have passive constraints
6.6. Spherical nechanien _

6.5. Bennett aechanisn

6.6. Six-link three-dimensional hinged nechanisa

6.7. Quadric-crank nechanisn with translational pairs
Chapter 5: Forces of Inertia of Three-Dinensional Mechanism
5.1. Forces of inertia of the link

5.2. Replacing aaasea of the link by assess of individual points

5.3. Co-ente on dynamic substitution of less of a link that undergoes two-
dineneional lotion

Chapter 6: Statics of Three-Dimensional Mechanisls roused by nor-a1 Dyade
6.1. Reactions of hinenatic pairs

6.2. Equations of statics of dyad. General method of solution

6.3. Hinged dyad

6.6. Screw dyad

6.5. Dyed with rotational and translational pairs

6.6. Kernel dyad with kineuatic pairs of any class

6.7. Statics of a crank

6.8. Application of principle of possible dieplscenents in statics of three-
dineneional nechanises

6.9. Bxa-ples

Appendices

Appendix 1. Program of Vector Algebra Problems Used in Solving Problens of
Kinetostatics

Appendix 2. Program: of Examples of Calculating Specific Mechanism
leferencesi

Subject Index

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hanks". 1981

6610
CSO: 1861/72

MWWONLY

27
28
28

33
35
37
62

68
53

56
58

62

63
66
67
70
72
73
76

76
78

85
87
98
100
mmmm

um 621.039.531
WIN-AL MG! '10 MG mm. 3 Wow tam-mam was

”360)! ”mm Pom BTW MO? cho-VODYANYKB RBAKTOROV in
Russian 1981 (simod to proso 2? m 81) PP 2-4

[Annotation and toblo o: cootmto i‘rol book "mama m to Housing Stool
of Iotor-Ooolod. Votor-Kodorstod Reactors“. by litany likoloyovioh Aloksoyonko.
Aliz- Mlovioh Alyov. Igor' Vooil'yovioh 00min and Mini:- Alohondrovich
Nikohyov. horaoiodot. 1250 copies. 192 wool

[Text] Annototioa

Investigation rooults oro corrohtod and onslysod for o nulbor of ooimtific and
mooring prohloas rolstod to tho officimoy of housing: of utor-ooolod. tutor
Iodorotod pom rosotoro [WE of nuoloor oloctric pouor pinto. A oolplox of
roguirolmts in oxpootod of -_ orislo of WI! housing. tho principloo of thoir
ooloction. oo roll no tho proportios in' tho mu: usod ind praising Istoriols.
Tho basic part of tho book 'is dovotod to tho hobvior of tho homing ntoriolo and
noutmn rodiotioa conditions. in psrticulor, whoa in oontoot with tho roootor
coolant. Tho booio ohnco oochsnisl is doooribod by noutron rotiistion in tho
mil. ductility and touglmso of tho stool ond m1 of tho Iold'sd Joints,
dopooding upon tho thornl trootlmt. structuro, ollom. notm and quality of
tho alloying ololuto on! o nulhor of oth'or futon. Morntioo io aim on tho
opocifios of tho hohvior of hydro“ ond irxuiiotod ntoriolo.

This book io intndod for workoro and moon involvod in prohlolo of casting

nuclosr pouor inotollotiono. so won on instructors. mounts otudutto ond otodonto
of oorrospooding opooioltioo.in m.

ﬂoaty-noun tohloo. linoty-four illustration. Bibliomphy oontoino 321 titlos.

12:

MWISFONLY
Introduction

(Raptor

1.1.
1.2.

1e3e
Chapter
2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

2.0.

2.5.

206'

Chapter

Bole
3.2.

1. Housing uterials of water-cooled. inter-”dusted
reactors

Operating conditions of m housings and require-ante
iapoeed on then
Rousing aaterials of doaeetic reactors
1.2.1. Basic aetal
1.2.2. Welding nterials
housing nterials oi' reactors abroad

2. Erect of neutron radiation on' strength. plasticity
and viscosity of housing nterials
General concepts on radiation dance to steel
2.1.1. Change in strength and plasticity
2.1.2. (Range in tenperature brittleness
2.1.3. . Mistion effect on the operation of
viscous deetmction
2.1.1}. Properties at repeated static loading
Basic patterns of changes in steel properties by neutron
radiation
2.2.1. ﬂeet of radiation tenperature
2. 2. 2. Rfect of neutron flu density
2. 2.3. Effect of stresses when irradiated
2. 2.“. Restoration of properties what annealed
Role of structure and thernl treat-ant of steel
2.3.1. Effect of autuieation node and conditions of
‘ subsequaxt cooling
2.3.2. Effect of tapering node
2.3.3. Preliainsry aging
Effect of cheaical coaposition
2.“.1. Effect of ilpuritiee
2.5.2. Effect of alloying eleaents
mum-1000 housing aaterials
2.5.1. Basic aetal
2.5.2. Welded Joint natal
nonparieon of radiational brittleness of housing
production steels

3. Mistion dange aechanisas
Gold brittleness of body-centered cubic ' setals.

Role of neutron radiation"
Mechanic-s controlling radiation hardming
3.2.1. Radiation defects responsible for int

hazdming
3.2.2. 321001. of interstitial inpuritics

3.2.3. West of substitution elements

3.2.16. Effect of coherent preoipitatim
3.3 Moot of adaixtu'ss on the surface warn

3.3.1. Intermix: sensation

3.3.2. Intraorystal seaegation

Chapter h. hdrogen brittleness of housing nterial undar
radiation
15.1. marogen absorption in reactor housing

15.1.1. somes of hydrogn entering the housing
nterial

“.i.2. Absorption and separation of hydrogu by
irradiated steel

#.l.3. Evaluation of hydrogen accumlatia: in the
housing nterial

4.2. Effect of neutron radiation and hydrogen on aechanical
properties for brief tmeion

“.3. Effect of neutron radiation and hydrogm on cold
brittleness. properties for static fissure and
extraoentral tmsion

10.“. Restoration of nroperties by annealing steel with
absorbed hydrogen

“.5. Low-cycle steel fatigue after neutron radiation and
hydrogen absorption

10.6. Retarded destruction of radiated steel under actim of
hydrogm

mapter 5. Questions or operational reliability of reactor

housing. malustion of resistance to brittle
destruction

5.1. ariterion for retarding brittle destruction
5.2. criterion for initiating brittle destruction
5.3. Radiation service life of housings

Bibi-10mm!
Alphabetical subject index
mum. hergoiadat. 1981

R91
(80: 1861/8“
_ mac 621.37.
msunnc 03mm Ill warm W

Home! mm”: MTG! V 1mm m in m 1%1 (eigled to
preee 2'6 Nov 80) pp 2. 255-256

Annotation end table of contente tron book Wing (hoilletore in nuclear
eotrmice“. by Yevgmiy Alekeeyevich Heleehko and Aleksandr Alehendrovioh litin,
Atonisdat. 1600 oopiee. 256 peace]

[Text] Annotation

The book ooneiderre pulee oeoillntore intended to Ionitor peruetore of recording
electronic apparatus for experimtel physics and basic Iethode of each mitoring.
Special attention 1e devoted to letnode for tor-in; puleee of preoiee nplitnde

and eetbode for reproducing given tine internle. Hethode ere ooneidered for pulee
eequencee- with various pulse dietribution love in tile. and Iethode for peeking and

ehortening pulses. on well as progre- control of neemring perenetere of oeoilla-
tore and their use in eutonetio Ionitoring eyetele.

The book ie intended for e. wide mdionce of eoientifio-toohniccl workers concerned
with pulse leaeurenente.

Ninety-eight illuetretione. 31an oontcine 284 titles.
Teble of Contente

he.
Foreword 3
chapter-1. Honitoring elplitude perchetere of epeotronetric
epperetue 5
1.1. Introduction 5
1.2. alibretion of epeotroneter end ite unite 6
1.2.1. Heeeurenent of integral and noiee cherecterietioe 6

1.2.2. Heeeu-enent of differential ohmoterietioe .17
1.3. Erect o! deetebilieing teotore on newt character-Mice 21
1.3.1. Additioncl errors due to tile and change. in

teapereture 21

128

MOWIISEONLY
1.3.2. Hsasureasnt of load and overload characteristics
1.3.3. Stabilisation of asplituda spectre-stews

certain particular cases of using am [expansion mimosa]
Universal and specialised 0131's

2.‘ listhods for foraing stable and precise aaplitude
pulses

Sources of stable voltages

Keying circuits using relays
2.2.1. harem oontactors

2.2.2. Foraing aaplitude pulses on n [Pilot relay]
cm with electronic switches

2.3.1. 611A on electronic tubes

2.3.2. Bilple diode and transistor switches

2.3.3. Colpaasated transistor switches

2.3. 5. Field effect transistor shapers

Linear changing voltage oscillators (an)

2 1. Hethcds for designing an

2. .2. Using synetrical sawtooth voltage

3. Basic aethcds for Icnitoring to obtain tile data

Gena-a1 reaarka

Coincidence circuits

Tile analysers

Shepars and aaplifiers
Traneaission and delay lines
Radiation detectors

‘0. hater pulse oscillators

Periodic sequential pulse oscillators

Pulse autoosoillators with a higher stability of tracking
frequency

Pulse series oscillators

Bandoa and pseudorandoa pulse sequuoe oscillators

5. Obtaining steep gradients and shaping pulses according
to lngth

hethods for obtaining steep voltage gradients
Gupta: 6. Tin. intorvnl some:

6.1. hanuiulon nnd dolly lino:
6.2. Intuvnl neuron with analog typo noon-ulster:

6.3. Intmnl non-on using 81’...ny omtlns oscillators
6.15. akllhntlon tutu-vol names for tho opootronotm

Chapter 7; human; oscillators in “touted system

7.1. hog-anon control of oscillator mutant
7.2. Auto-tic altering of olootrmlo-ptwoloo oppontuo

Bibliography
mum. Atodadnt, 1981

2291
we: 1861/87
osmc LIQUID FUELS A! W 1mm

ﬂoscov mm mm! TOPLIV PR! RI“. mm in Russian 1:9“!I
(signed to press 11 Nov 80) pp 2-6

[Annotation and table of contents fro. book ”Using Liquid Fuels at Low 'r-pera-
tures". Third Revised and Enlarged Edition. by Boris Abranovich Englin.
Izdatel'stvo "Khiniya". 33“) copies. 208 pages],

[Text] The book presents the operational properties of liquid fuels (flight.
sutoeotive. diesel. heating. gas turbine. engine. boiler) at lov te-peratnres.
dbscribes the changes undergone by fuel under these conditions. points out the
steps necessary for elisinsting all conplioations that arise vhsn liquid fuels
are used under lov tenperature conditions.

The book is intended for petroleum refinery engineers. engineering and technical
workers in automotive. air. railway and later transportation. as well as workers
in the power industry involved with the operation of— nachines and poser plants

at low taperstures (under vintarconditionsh in the far north. at high altitudes
and so on). Figures 87. tables 67. referencee.228.

Contents page
Preface 5
Chapter 1: mummmmmmmormwwmn
was A: In! mamas 7
Influence of fuel viscosity on: operation of engine fuel supply syst- 7
Viscosity characteristic of various classes of‘hydrocsrbons 16
Viscosity characteristic of various fuels 22
Dov-tenorsture properties of fuels due to precipitation of solid Ivdro-
carbons 27
Hydrocarbons that precipitate fron fuels-as tapersture is reduced 29
Behavior of paraffin hydrocarbons in fuels. 36
Relationship between content and nakeup of' nor-a1 paraffin hydrocarbons
in co-ercial fuels and lon-tewerstnre properties of fuels ‘3
Cross-linking and viscosity anonaly of fuels _5¢-
Imroving lov-teaperstnre properties of fuels _ 67
131

MWMWLY
rust vernal“. 03!. on“

Chapter 2: men THAT HATER DISSOLVED m FUELS us 011 mm PROPERTIES

Cameo of ice crystal forsation in fuel. crystal shape and size

Solubility of water in hydrocarbons and fuels

Influence of atnospheric conditions on content of vater dissolved in
hydrocarbon and fuels

Physical state of water dissolved in fuel

Rate of change of content of water dissolved in fuel

Transition of water dissolved in fuel to liquid state

Transition of water droplets precipitated from fuel to ice crystals

Prost formation on walls of aircraft containers and tanks

Iomtion of ice crystals in fuel during varnup

Formation of ice crystals during storage and use of fuels

Behavior of ice crystals in fuel

Steps to prevent its crystal forestion in fuel

Chapter 3: 31m AND OPERATION 01' 21810! menus A'r LOR mums
Ice formation in engine carburetors

Influence of gasoline volatility on startup and operation of sutonotive
engines

Using starter fluids to start diesel engines

References

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo ’Ihiniys". 1980

6610
050: 1861/1100 ' - m -

132

POBOFHCIALUSEONLY

110
110
113

116
121
123
127
135
139
161
1103
150
152
168
168

172
182

107