l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10146
30 November 1981

China Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 20/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10146
30 November 1981

CHINA REPORT
POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 20/81)

Coureurs

PEOPLE'S RBPIBLIC 01’ mm
MILITARY ARI) PWLIC SECURITY

Gomndera Study Positional Defense Operetionn
(not! Yuchm; JEFANGJIN “0’ 12 Jm.m)ooooooooooooonoooooooooo 1

Guangzhou lbita Intove Training Karin]:
(ﬂu Shibin, Gun Gangbao; .113me MO, 12 Jun 80)........... 2

Fuzhou Air Force lhit Conducts Air Defense Training
("‘1 Zuyou; ~118me 3A0. 12 Jill w)ooooooooooooaoooooooooooooo ‘

Fleet Hake: Firat Voyage on Pacific
(Loo Tonganng. et 451.; JIBFANW 8A0, 12 Jun so)............... 6

(Io-bet Examples Compiled to Serve on Training Aide
(mpmwm 3A0. 26 sep ”)...-oooooooooooooooaooooooooooooooooo 9

Mind Codmt Cases, by ﬂu menxuan, Lin Guitong
Inland Defence Examples. by Cni Jihua. Mg Guozhong

FLA Unite Device New lbthode, Carry Out Training Reform
(.118?me BM, 26, 20 sep m)o.000009000.0.000000000000005... n

Attacks on Parachute Troopo. by dung Ming. Tao llua
Gunnery Training, by Yao Youahi. bung Zuni
Telegraphic Communication. Training, by Sm Yongku

Role of Tanks in Coordinated Assault Diseased
(Fang Liangqing; JIBFANGLIUN MO, 26 Sep 80).................... 14

Military Training Conference of All Services Held
(ﬂueng Cupping. Huang lungeheng; JIBFANGJUN 8A0. lo mc 80)..... 16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Raising navel of Military Bducadon. mining Emphaaiud
(lawm; “ﬁrm ”A. a me ”)000000OCOOIOOOODOOOOOOOOOOO

Improved Training at Sea of Naval Cadm Depot-tad
("”8 ”cf“; nzrmm Mo. 6 he ”)000000COIOOOOOOOOOOOOO...

Begin-arm Holds Calbinad Ar- Tactical Training Exercise
(Hang Hungarian. Zhong nah-1; JIBPANGJIN 3A0, 6 Dec ao).........

Garrison Regiment Bold: Coastal Defense Training But-cine
(lions Yan. mans Zhougqun; JIEPANGJIII MO, 6 Dec a))...........

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18

22

24

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

communes sum Posn'mm. harms: openness
Beijing JIEFANGJUN 3A0 in Chinese 12 Jun 80 p 1

[Article by atou Yuchun [0719 3768 2501;]: "Excerising Positional Defense Tactics at
Predetermined Battle Zones. Cos-lenders Above the Regimental Level of the Beijing
Garrison Comander Gather for Training and aphasia Study of Codained Command"]

[Text] One day during the first 10 days of May on a certain ancient battlefield in
the north of our motherland, a team of con-sanders was seen carrying drawing boards
in hand and binoculars over their shoulders, crossing mountains and peaks, surveying
the topography, happily studying taint tactics. 1111s was the training class of
comanders above the regimental level of the Beijing Garrison Conand studying pro-
blem of comsnding contined military forces in positional defense.

At this training session. everyone first learned the cowat guidelines of the com-
bined military forces, the basic theory and knowledge about the various am of the
services and the basic knowledge of organising coordinated combat of codained troops,
and studied the characteristics of enemy coinat. All comrades participating in the
training cowleted operations on maps, wrote four combat books, carried out a sand
table exercise. To suit the training to the needs of any future war against aggres-
sion, the students were sent to the predetermined battle zones to carry out exercises
and study the problems of organizing commands in coordinated combat of combined troops
in the fields. Practice proved that through actual field exercises, they could
become familiar with the battlefields of future codaet of their own troops and the
possible conbet deployment of our troops and enemy troops, and they had a profile in
their minds. At the sane time, they further deepened the theory they had learned,
improved their ability to organize actual cot-ands. For example, during indoor
operations, many people stationed soldiers on top of mountain peaks whenever they

saw mountains on the map. and the higher the nountaine the more soldiers deployed.
After field exercises, they said that such deployment did not coincide with the
principles of establishing defenses at key places. In a future war against aggression,
the strategic value of high mountains my not be always important. Under definite
conditions. the inconspicuous hilltops or valleys and rivers through mountains do have

important strategic values .

9296
C50: 6005/2107

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

GUANGZHOU UNITS IMPROVE TRAINING MATERIALS
Beijing JIBPANGJUN 8A0 in Chinese 12 Jun 80 p 2

[Article by special reporters Hu Shibin [0702 0013 2630] and Guo Gangbso [6753 0362
6283]: "Absorb Combat Experience, Reforn Tactical Training. Guangzhou Units Compile
and Write 'Con'bat Textbook for the Units Below the Squad'")

[Text] The Guangzhou units followed the liberation of the "gun"-reforming market-n-
ship training by reforming tactical training and cospiled and wrote the "Cosbat Text-
book for the Units Below the Squad." 'lhe book was distributed to the cowanies for
testing before the new year's training began. After 2 nonths of practice, the cadres
and soldiers of the units testing the book generally praised the nathod.

The Guangzhou unit followed the teaching materials and educational schedules of the
1950's in past tactical training. For over 20 years, although some supplenents were
added, they did not go beyond the original text. Its visible shortcomings are as
follows: The content of some subjects was incomplete. Sons rules were abstract.
'Ihere were no methods of examination and there were no concrete standards for grading.
The standards were flexible. Especially as weapons and equipnent developed, and as
the codaat opponent changed, sons of the contents became unsuitable to the needs of
actual battle. After the experience of the war of self defense and retaliation against
Vietnam, it has been proven that continuing such teaching naterials in troop training
will not suit combat needs and thus reforming tactical training has become the strong
campaign of a broad numbers of cadres and soldiers.

The contend headquarters of the Guangzhou units began last July to organize forces

to revise the original tactical teaching materials. they reorganized the original

16 subjects of the original teaching eaterial into 35 lessons. Sons onesided pro-
posals in the original teaching material were revised to becone more accurate and
corprehensive in scope. Materials needed in real war but not included in the original
text were bravely added. Parts of the original teaching naterials that only had con-
tent but did not have concrete training nethods were further supplemented and made
perfect. For example past teaching eaterial unilaterally enphasized firepower in
single soldier cowat which utilized topography and surface features. thus any
soldiers utilized topography and surface features on the battlefield and exposed

half of their bodies to the enemy. causing unnecessary casualties. Now this has been
changed in accordance with the actual situation on the battlefield. such as the dis-
tance and whether there is a firing mission, to determine under what conditions should
concealing the body be the main action and under what conditions should developing

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘.’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the firepower be the main action. In addition, training of units below the squad
in tactics, camouflage. single soldier charging of the enemy's position, now all
have concrete content and demands.

In order for the basic level cadres and soldiers to learn and remember the new ma-
terials and to teach themselves, some of the original tactical theories and guidelines
of tactical commands have been included in some figurative and lively, pithy formulas
in rhyme. For example. on the battlefield, how can the soldier become versatile and
active? In the past. this involved a lot of material and the soldier could not
remember. Now, they have generalized this as "five observations and one action"
(observe the situation of the enemy, observe the landforms, observe commands, observe
the maneuvers of the neighboring troops, observe the weather, and according to these
"five observations," carry out correct maneuvers in time), the "eight aspects"
(observations, concealment, movement, firepower, liaison, cease movements, agitation,
battlefield rescue).

During the course of writing this teaching material. the material was circulated among

the troops many times broadly to seek the opinions of the cadres and soldiers. At
.present, the teaching material is still being tested in continued practice.

9296
C80: 4005/2107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe<orrunat.usr:o~tx

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

FUZROU AIR FORCE UNIT CONDUCTS AIR DEFENSE TRAINIHG

Beijing JlEFANC-JUN MO in Chinese 12 Jun 80 p 2

[Article by Wu Zuyou [0702 5371 0147]: "Carry Out Tactical Training Aimed at the
Characteristics of the Airports, a Certain Airfield Explores Ways To "Hide, Strike.
Supply" Under Conditions of Air Raids and Under Attack by Parachute Troops (and When

Airplanes Are Landing)"]

[Text] A certain airfield of the air force of the Fuzhou units has explored ways to
'hide, strike, supply" the airfield under air raid conditions and under attack by
parachute troops (and when airplanes are landing) according to the characteristics
of the tasks of the airfield. On 26 April, the air force of the Fuzhou units held

a field meeting to popularize their experience.

The airfield is the base of combat of the air force (ground soldiers), and it is also
the major target of air raids and parachute (airplane) landings. They set up many
situations of air attack and parachute (airplane) landings according to the demands
of real war to let the troops carry out training of "bids, strike, supply" under
complex situations. During the training. they first organized the troops to study
the tactical thoughts and principles suited to the characteristics of the airfield.
For example, some logistical units in past antieirdrop training carried out infantry
motorization and encirclement to destroy the attacking enemy. Through learning and
study, they understood that they should not act like infantry soldiers and leave their
barracks to carry out motorized encirclement and destruction of the enemy, because
they had multiple duties of assuring the supply at the airfield and assuring that the
air force units could take off and perform aerial combat. They should follov the
principle mainly of protecting the facilities and equipment and destroying the live
forces of the enemy as their secondary task, thus everyone's tactical thoughts vere

unified.

After the tactical thoughts were clarified, training of troops had more purpose.

Many logistical units combined their own specialty to train evacuation. concealment,
camouflage and defense of personnel. vehicles and equipment and such tactical tech-
niques of closing and opening the airfield. advance reinforcements in echelon forma-
tion, and various rescue operations. A certain unit was responsible for attacking
landing enemy planes. Originally they used heavy obstacles to close the airfield.

Now they followed the tactical thoughts of “closing the airfield must benefit reopening
the airfield" and changed their past vays and drew up four plans to prevent enemy
planes from landing while benefiting our planes in takeoff for aerial combat at any
time. The training thus coincided more with the demands of actual var.

6

FOR 0F11C1AI.USEINNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To improve the ability of the airfield to counter the sudden attack by the eneuy,
this airfield also paid attention to the characteristics of the airfield and built
fortifications that protected personnel and facilities well. They organized person-
nel and facilities well. They organized personnel to survey the airfield and they
built preventive and protective fortifications at key positions, facilities for air-
planes, personnel and vehicles against attack by atomic and chemical weapons. and
they carried out suitable training ained at specific aspects.

9296
080: 4005/2107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

FLEET MAKES FIRST VOYAGE T0 PACITIC
Beijing JIEFANGJUN 3A0 in Chinese 12 Jun 80 pp 1-2

[Article by reporters Luo Thngsong [5012 0681 2646], He Delai [0149 1795 0171], Wang
Henjie [3769 2h29 2638], Yang Xuequan [2799 1331 3123]: "First Voyage of the Chinese

Fleet on the Pacific"!

[Text] In the first spring of the 1980's, the hot winds of the equator blew upon

the l August nilitary flag, schools of flying fish jumped out of the water and watched
the strange guests. This was the first voyage of a Chinese naval fleet on the rip-
pling southern Pacific. This was a profoundly significant affair in our nation's

naval history.

For over 1 month, this strong fleet escorted the ship carrying rocket~testing and
ocean-measuring equipment, crossed ocean channels and sailed the deep seas, broke

the waves and traveled over 8,000 nautical miles. 0n the ocean surface, the fleet
sailed in fan-shaped formation, a defensive posture against sub-arines, to open the
navigational route for the surveying ship, and sometimes formed a solid defense line
to protect the surveying ship. 0n the battleship, the glorious guided missile laun-
cher stood proudly; day and night the radar and sonar closely monitored the sky and
the underwater; they patrolled the seas; they guarded the surveying ship and they
searched, and faithfully carried out their duties. The helicopter from the battleship

flew above the Pacific and a large refueling and supply ship supplied the battleships
on their course. This young fleet and all officers and men underwent the test of

deep sea navigation and "safely sailed from port and victoriously returned." They
wrote a glorious page of history for the Navy of new China.

0n the command tower of the fleet's flag ship were 2 old soldiers of the Red Army
who were over 60 years old. They held binoculars in their hands and frequently
checked the maps and watched the direction of navigation and gave orders. They were
the commanding officers of this fleet. These two gray-haired old soldiers who had
struggled through several decades still had the fighting spirit. Before sailing,
they repeatedly requested that during their remaining years higher authorities con-
tribute more to building a strong navy with modern capabilities. They conpoaed posse
to tell of their anbitions: "Sailing on the ocean and across the sea in the whirling
dance of the east wind, those who do not cross the equator are not heroes, reaching
for the moon and catching soft-shelled turtles to show one's fete, with out hearts
and blood we nurture the young pine." 0n the battleship, they acted like they used to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the battlefield, they devised strategies within their co-and post, analysed the
ocean situation, determined the course. "hen the winds were strong and the waves
were high, they went into the engine room and visited the sailors working under high
temperatures. 0n the day the on-board rocket was successfully fired, they stood
happily on the deck and sang together with the sailors. They expressed the confidence
of the older generation in the sure victory of our party's endeavors.

The glory of the motherland and the rise to propserity of the Chinese nationality
have kindled an everlasting flame in the hearts of the old soldiers. Similarly,

they also encourage many young sailors to move forward. Some sailors only joined

the navy several months ago. When they heard they would participate in the glorious
oceangoing mission which had never been done before, they competed for the comdssion.
After joining the fleet, each person was like a glaring rivet, firmly carrying out
his duty. A young engine squad co-Iander of ship 132, Dai Jinkun [2071 6855 0981}
profoundly understood that the engine was the heart of the battlefield. If the engine
malfunctions, the battleship will lose its costat capability. After the fleet sailed,
he gave'up his air conditioned quarters and moved into the engine room with a high
temperature of over 60 degrees centigrade. The noise in the engine room pierced the
ears and the smell of fuel was nauseating. lie guarded the main engine day and night
and when he grew very tired he leaned against the tool box and took a nap but he
ordered his subordinates to wake him up as soon as the engine malfunctioned. He re-
lied on his fiery enthusiasm for the four modernisations and his high sense of respon-
sibility to lead the entire squad in careful maintenance and kept the main engine
operating normally.

The fleet was able to sail Victoriously according to plan because each battleship and
each department was manned by unselfish and fearless sailors at their posts. The
leader of the main engine shift of battleship 108, Yang Laihai [2799 6351 1326], was
a representative of these heroic sailors. Every time he went on night shift, he
always carefully inspected the various tubes and pipes in the hot engine room and
inspected hundreds and thousands of machinery components and never neglected any
abnormal situations. One time, when he was inspecting the dirty oil cupboard, he dis-
covered that there was a drop of oil on the floor that usually was wiped clean.
lmnediately, many hypothetical cases came into the mind of Yang Laihai. he was
determined to find the origin of this drop of oil. He held a flashlight and crawled
into the bottom of the engine room, passing steam pipes of over 90 degrees centigrade.
The stifling hot air almost made him faint, and sweat soaked his clothes. One minute
passed, 2 minutes passed, 1/2 hour passed. lie half knelt on the floor, followed the
traces, and finally discovered that this drop of oil came from a puncture at the
bottom of the oil tank. He quickly reported the discovery and took tinely measures
and thus avoided a possible incident.

For over 1 month, a song was frequently heard on board the oceangoing battleships:
"You are the helmman, grasping the direction of navigation. The glorious Chinese
Communist Party, you are the core, you are the direction...." This song encouraged
the officers and men to overcome all difficulties and hardships and to advance
through the waves. Battleship 108 was the newest ship in the fleet on this long
voyage. The five members of the party couittee of the ship came from four units.
They were united under one heart and one effort, they mtually respected each other
and acted with one heart and mind. During the voyage, a battleship encountered a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the 9th day of the fleet's voyage, the satellite guided navigational instruments
of ship 506 suddenly malfunctioned. "Let me do it!" "I'll do it!" old party meter
and captain x1e Xinfu [6200 2450 4395] and aw party member and satellite navigation
team leader ﬂu Jianan [5170 6015 1364] led in clilbing up the masthead 38 meters
high. Hind rushed passed the ear, waves rolled underneath, the ship swayed and the
men felt dizzy, and there was the danger of falling off at any time. But they were
fearless and they struggled for more than 1/2 hour, cleared the trouble, and made
sure the ship traveled in the correct course. ”here there is difficulty, where there
is danger, there will be party members and party cadres. The political cadres on
board were active in every corner. They transmitted the voice of the party Central
Committee to each cadre and sailors. "hen sailors became sick, they sent water and
meals. When the sailors were busy, they took the lead in going on night shift duty
and guarding the engines and when they were praised and rewarded, they stayed behind.

It was in relying on this glorious tradition that the fleet eliminated the obstacles
of nature during the 10,000 nautical mile voyage in the Pacific and won victory after
victory.

The success of our nation's young fleet'e first voyage over the Pacific encouraged
our will and added military glory. Victory greatly encouraged the people who march
toward the four modernizations. Victory was the result of long-term struggles of many
people. On the day of this fleet's return voyage, a special burial at sea ceremony
was performed over the Pacific. It was held in honor of a past naval comnder.

The old comander exerted all his efforts and worked his whole life to develop the

our own nation and to the Pacific and bury them there. Today, his will has been
fulfilled. At the mount of the burial at see, an old conradc of his held a red cloth
which wrapped his ashes and walked down the ramp and placed the ashes into the bottom-
less sea. Hany comrades standing on the deck felt a surge through their hearts

like the waves on the ocean surface. People silently pledged: Do not worry! old
comander. today's victory, we know, is only a beginning! The development and
strengthening of the navy for the people will be pursued continuously with untiring
efforts and struggle!

The engine is roaring, the white ripples trailing the ships are extending and the
ships are traveling toward new victory and a bright future.

9296
(ISO; 4005/ 2107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

C(MBAT EXAMPLES WWII-ED TO SERVE AS TRAINING AIDS

Typical Coebat Cases
Beijing JIBPARGJUN mo in Chinese 26 Sep 80 p 1

[Article by ﬂu Zhenxuan [0126 2182 6513] and Liu Guitong [0491 2710 2717]: "To
Provide Teaching Materials With hages for Tactical Training, A Certain Armed
Force Compiles Typical Combat Cases To Distribute to the Units")

[Text] Since the time a certain armed force launched overall tactical training,
in the offices of the organs at each level and at company and on the desks of some
military connenders and staff officers, there has been a yellow book vith words
and pictures entitled «Selected Coabat Cases in the Sine-Vietnamese Border Var of
Self-Defense and Retaliation.»

This «selection of combat cases» was coapiled and written by this unit to improve
the tactical level of the unit and the art of co-and by the cot-antlers at each
level, and to mobilize the organs and the units to smarira the experience and

the lessons in real war. The 75 coebet cases in the book included over 20 types

of combatnnight combat, defense, «bush, search and suppress, encounter fighting
and surprise attack, pursuit and destroy, Outflanking and surrounding, attacking
the enemy in caves, setting up floating bridges under enemy fire. and logistical
support. These combat cases included coordinated combat by the infantry, artillery,
tanks, comunicetions and engineer troops, and also included combat by the infantry

squad, infantry unit, and the individual soldier, and they included victories and
defeats.

Island Defense kanples
Beijing JIBPAMJUN MO in Chinese 26 Sep 80 p 1

[Article by Cai Jihua [5591 49109 5678] and Zhang Guozhong [1728 0968 1813]:
"Deputy Commander Hao Dezheng [7456 1795 3791] of a Certain Garrison Command
District Studies Nearly 100 Island Combat Cases"]

[Text] Deputy comander Mao Derheng [7656 1795 3791] of a certain garrison comnd
district at the Yellow Sea outpost started out from the actual situation in train-
ing units and from the task of the units to defend islands and conscientiously
studied nearly 100 island cotter cases in recent and modern war history, and he
wrote over 30 articles on military science. They have served to promte reform

in the training of the units.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ject in training. He conscientiously studied the cosbat cases of American troops
attacking Luzon Island, the Marshall Islands and Okinawa Islands during the war of
the Pacific, and American troops landing at Inchon during the Korean War. He also
analyzed the key points of the landing at Normandy by joint American and British
forces. And from these, he understood that island defense units must think about

Battle of Normandy» . In studying the combat case of the American forces attack-
ing Quehuang [phonetic] Island in the war of the Pacific, he emphasized the
weapons and equipment of the main opponent in the battle and realized that with
the current equipment of Our armed forces, we must develop our advantages, minimize

nand district.

9296
050: 6005/2110

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

PLA UNITS DEVISB RB“ muons. CARRY OUT mums REFORM

Attacks on Parachute Troops

Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAD in Guineas 26 Sep 80 p 2

[Article by Chang Ming [7022 21.91:] and Tao Bus [3567 5678]: "Engineer Platoon of
a Certain Regiment Explores 10 hethods Using Convenient mes of Equipment for
Directional Demolition and for Attacks on Parachute Troops"]

[Text] The engineer platoon of a certain reginent of the Beijing units, starting
out froe presently available equipment, has daringly node innovations, bravely
carried out practice. and has preliminarily found 10 convenient types of equipment
for directional demolition and attacking of parachute troops. They have already

been popularized by the any and the division.

At the beginning of April. the engineer platoon received a training task tron the
higher authorities asking the platoon to solve the difficult problen of direc.
tional demolition and attacking of parachute troops using convenient equipment
within a short time. Although the coerades of the engineer platoon had not dealt
with this topic before, they dared to practice and use the principles of direc-
tional demolition and black powder explosives as the launching explosive to shoot
ground demolition equipsent into the air for exploding in the air. The first ex-
perinents produced less than satisfactory results, and they conscientiously found
the cause in failure. The course of the experth involved asthmatics and know-
ledge of physics, and the comrades of the engineer platoon collectively studied
the subjects: they studied hard to gain knowledge of asthmatics and mechanics;
they read related books «Demolition» and «People's Engineers»; they calculated
the demolition data on the angle of the hole dug, the size of the hole and the
amount of explosive used. After 2 months and 120 live emotion exercises, they
finally found eethods to utilize 10 types of convenient equipment for directional
demolition against parachute troops. These projectiles are siqle to operate, the
gathering of saterials is easy, and the nobility is strong. Using these methods, the
cost is low, the area of wounding and killing is large; they can coordinate better
with infantry, artillery and other modern weapons for combat against an airborne
enemy; and they can attack the enemy in a flexible and while manner. Thus. the
engineer platoon has devised new nethods to attack parachute troops with presently

available equipment .

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gunnery Training
Beijing JIEPANWUN M0 in Chinese 20 Sep 80 p 2

[Article by Yao Youzhi [1202 2589 1807] and Meng Zmei [1322 6371 4168]: "Regi-
mental Col-sander Ge Reforms the Training Method of the 85th Artillery Company,
Guides Scientific Training of the 9th Company Making Everyone a Gunner"]

[Text] Regimental comander Ge Luxin [5516 1462 9515] of the artillery regiment
of a certain division of the Beijing units has guided the 9th Company in reforming
training by specifically taking :Into consideration the characteristics and
opponents in future war. Now, everyone in the 9th Company has become a skillful
gunner and 17 master marksmen have emerged. Three times, each person served as
pointer and participated in live ammunition firing from moving tanks, and they
all received superior scores; the percentage of first hits averaged as high as
91.2 percent.

The 85 mm cannon is an effective antitank weapon among the current equipment of the
infantry division. But, of the personnel of the current 85th Artillery (bmpany,
the proportion of gunners is very small. There were only six pointers that could
perform the key function of firing; the others were co-Ianding and other support-
ive personnel. In battle, lacking a pointer is like lacking a gun. To solve
this problem, regimental comander Ge began on the basis of the need for direct
aiming and direct firing in antitank warfare, and after approval by higher authori-
ties, he concentrated on the general training of pointers and reform of the
current training method.

Popularizing the training of pointers is more difficult for a company with a
majority of various specialized personnel. Regimental commander Ge joined the
cadres and soldiers to study each problem concerning the time for specialized
training and the method of papularizing the training of pointers, and he also
mobilized the masses to contribute ideas and schnaes and established three concrete
measures. The first measure was to shorten the training stage under the battaliOn
group according to the annual training task and increase basic training, assuring
that each category of specialized training time we not changed and that the men
had sufficient time to learn cannon operation. The second was to organize com-
rades who had learned well into seven categories of specialized small training
groups; all training courses began at the same time and the subjects were changed
at definite intervals so that during regular class hours no one was left. with any
free time and the cannOns were being used all the time. The third was to ration-
ally arrange the subjects of mi. litary, political and cultural training so that
cannon training continued throughout the day.

On this basis, regimental commander Ge patiently taught, helped and led the men to
undertake repeated and precise training aimed specifically at the key point—the
difficulty of using the 85 mm cannon to hit the tank on the first shot. He set up
1.5 points near the battalion grounds as a target network and explored with the
company and summarized the "four step method" of training, using a variety of
methods of range finding. 1n the training, he also bravely changed the old method
of first teaching theory and then operations, first teaching in the drilling field
and then in the field, first training in small fields and later in the actual
battlefields. At the beginning, he organically combined basic training with

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FF"JAI.USE1)NLY

applied training, utilized the favorable conditions of the camp being hear the
highway, and every day, from morning to night, he insisted on utilizing the cars,
tractors, and horse carts travelling on the highway to carry out simulation train-
ing. This reform improved effectiveness, brought out the key point and solved a
big problem in antitank training.

Telegraphic Communications Training
Beijing JIBPANGJUN 3A0 in Chinese 26 Sep 80 p 2

[Article by Sun Yongku [1327 3057 1655]: "Examine the Drilling; A Certain Division
Examines the Communications Training Team and Promotes Training Reform")

[Text] At the end of August, the radio communications training team of a certain
division of the Shenyang units utilized the soft telegraph key transmitters used
after reforming training to carry out inspection and examination of message trans-
mission before the year end. Seventy percent of the new recruits reached the
level of skill required for graduation 2 months ahead of time. The welcome results
of this examination eliminated everyons's "fear that after the reform in training,
one would not be able to pass the yearend exam."

For many years, training of new recruits in radio communications continued to use
hard wooden telegraph keys to conduct communications training. Thus,,the new re-
cruits who returned to the assigned company could not adapt to the need of suddenly
using soft telegraph keys, and some new recruits twisted or broke their hands and
could not operate the machines for a long time, and some were even eliminated and
assigned to other duties. This year, at the beginning of training, the leadership
of the communications training team widely sought the opinions of the student re-
cruits and other sectors and decided to change the-past training method; they
emphasized training using the soft telegraph keys as the main subject and the hard
wooden telegraph keys as a supplementary subject. But some comrades worried that
because of such a change, the students would not pass the yearend examination.
Before this inspection and examination, some comrades advocated that continuing ..
to use the wooden telegraph keys for the examination was safer. The leadership of
the communications unit, the communications battalion and the communications train-
ing team, however, believed that the purpose of reform is to improve the quality
of training, that the exams would test the reformed drills and that whatever was
the subject of the drill would be examined.

The results of such exams were good and satisfactory. Because this year, 107

hours were used to train students in sending single-character messages using the
hard wooden telegraph keys, the students had acquired a definite foundation; then
they changed in time to applied training using soft telegraph keys to send low data
messages; thus 96 percent of the new recruits grasped the fundamental skills well.
At the same time, through examination, they also discovered several problems that
needed to be urgently corrected and solved. For example, measures were taken to pro-
vide supplementary training aimed at the problems of individual students who used
too much force in sending messages, who sent dots and dashes out of proportion, and
who had problems with overly short intervals between groups of telegraphic codes.
After the examination, team leader Hang Zhenqien [3769 2182 6692] said with a pro-
found realization: "If the reformed training and the examination were carried

out separately, that would not be favorable to the reform and the true achievements
could not he evaluated."

13
9296

C50: 6005/2110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIVV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

ROLE OF TANKS IN COORDINATE!) ASSAULT DISCUSSED

Beijing JIBFANGJ'UN M0 in Chinese 26 Sep 80 p 3

[Article by Pang Liangqing [2655 5328 3237]: "Bow Is the Power of the Tank
Developed in an Aesault?"]

[Text] How can the advantages of the powers of surprise attack-p mobility and the
defensive and protective power of the tank he developed to the maxi-1n in coordin-i
ated assault maneuvers of the infantry and tank units to attack and occupy enemy
positions in one strike? I will give some of my personal views on the combined
combat exercises of recent years.

1. The distance between the tanks and infrantrylen in leading an assault must be
appropriately shortened. when launching an assault over a topography that
facilitates the tanks spreading out and going into the combat formation, the
infantry squads and platoons with tank attachments or with tank support generally
use tanks to lead the infantrymen to carry out the assault. At this time, the speed
of assault by the tanks and the speed of assault by the infantrynen are very dif-
ferent. For example, calculated on the basis of an actual assault distance of 300
meters by our attacking squad or platoon, the tank requires only 1 minute and 30
seconds to reach the forward position of the enemy, while the infantry requires 3
minutes. During this time, the actual distance between the tanks and the infantry-
aen is about 200 meters. Thus, the tanks are completely separated from the support
of the infantry, and the infantrymen have also completely lost the cover provided
by the tanks. To solve this conflict, in peacetime tactical exercises. the charg-
ing speed of the tanks is generally slow. If this method is used in real battles,
it may increase the opportunity for destruction of our tanks by the enemy's anti-
tank firearms, and the infantry will suffer greater losses because of the destruc-
tion of the tanks. Therefore, I believe that the distance between the tanks and
the infantry in leading an assault should be appropriately shortened, and the

tanks should pass the infantry formation and lead the assault when the infantry is
closer to the forward position of the enemy. The key here is under what conditions
the tanks should pass the infantry formation. I envisage two cases: One case is
when the starting position of the assault by the infantry squad or platoon is

close to the forward position of the enemy, or less than 200 meters; the tanks can
pass the infantry line at the same time as the infantry launches the assault and
travel at maximal charging speed to lead the infantry in their assault. The other
case is as follows: when the starting position of the assault by the infantry squad
or platoon is farther away from the forward position of the enemy, and even when
the infantry is on a favorable landform about 1000 meters away at the outer edge of

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the enemy's obstacles, the infantry can launch the assault first, and the tanks

can follow behind at maximum charging speed to carry out the assault. After passing
through the opening in the enemy's defenses, the tanks can pass the infantry's
assault formation and lead the infantry in the assault. In this way, the tanks can
maneuver without reducing their charging speed; their power of surprise attack and
their mobility can be fully developed. Their defensive and protective power can be
fully utilized in a short-distance assault upon the enemy by the infantry.

2. The interval between the tanks and the infantry leading the tanks in the ad-
vance must be appropriately increased. During peacetime, in some tactical exercises
when the infantry leads the tanks in the advance, the speed of advance of the tanks
is slow, basically consistent with the speed of advance of the infantry. This way
similarly increases the opportunity for the enemy's antitank firearms to destroy
our tanks and reduces the ability for surprise attack and mobility of the tanks.
when the infantry leads the tanks in advance, I believe that when the infantry
launches an assault and advances over 200 meters in front, the tanks can follow the
path indicated by the infantry and carry out the assault with the maximum charging
speed. In this way, it is possible for the infantry and the tanks to charge into
the enemy position at the same time and destroy the enemy in coordination.

3. The firepower of the tanks supporting an infantry assault must be timely and
mobile. When tanks use their firepower to support an assault by the infantry,
ordinarily they remain behind the combat foremtion of the infantry-mad fire over
their heads. So that the scattering distance, the radius of scattering of the
shell fragments and the lowest trajectory of the shells fired by the cannons of

the tanks are not lower than the height of the human body, and because errors in
range estimation by the gunner in the tanks all determine the safety range of fir-
ing the tank's cannons over the heads of the infantrymen, generally the infantry-en
are required to be more than 300 meters away from the target of the tanks' cannons.
This means that when the distance of the infantry‘s assault against the forward
position of the enemy is about 200 meters, the firepower of the tanks for surprise
attack is limited. At this time, the firepower of our artillery has already ex-
tended into the depth of the enemy position and the infantry is in the assault
maneuver, while the enemy is occupying the forward holdout position and the firing
points are continuing to fire, and this may allow frontal and flank firepower
against our infantry formation. This is the most exciting and fierce moment.

The assaulting infantry squads and platoons require the support of firepower at this
moment, but the superior firepower at this time is limited by the distance for
safety, and the accompanying cannons are extremely limited. Therefore, only the
firepower of the tanks can be used as supplementary firepower. when the infantry's
assault reaches a location 300 meters away from the forward position of the enemy,
the tanks can fire overhead to support the infantry in launching its assault. "hen
the infantry assault reaches 200 meters in front of the forward position of the
enemy, the tanks sh0u1d mobilize their firepower in accordance with the enemy
situation and topography or at their original position to fire at flank firing
points or the shallow depth firing points of the enemy that threaten our infantry's
assault formation, or the tanks can rapidly mobilize toward the flank or the two
flanks of our infantry's assault formation to occupy a firing position and to fire
intermittently to cover the assault by the infantry. They key here is for the com-
mander of our combined force to carry out "the two combinations" well: one is to
skillfully combine the mobile firepower of our firing positions and the tanks' fire-

power and the other is to skillfully combine the overhead firing by the tanks and
intermittent fi.‘ inf. .

9296 15
(:50: 4005/2110

FOR 0FFNJA1.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

MILITARY TRAINING CONFERENCE OF ALL SERVICES HELD
Beijing JIEFANCJUN 8A0 in Chinese 4 Dec 80 p 1

[Article by Huang Cuoping [7806 0948 1627] and Huang Kangsheng [7806 2123 3932]:
"All-Military Training Conference Successfully Concluded; the Conference Analyzed
This Year's Educational and Training Trend, Planned Next Year's Military Training.
Political Education and Cultural Education Tasks in Accordance with the Plans and
Strategic Guidelines Concerning the Buildup of Troops Issued by the Central Mili-
tary Commission")

[Text] The first all-military training conference since the crushing of the
"gang of four" was held at one of the Wuhan units from 9 to 21 November. The
conference analyzed this year's educational and training trends, and planned next
year's military training, political and cultural education tasks in accordance
with the plans and strategic guidelines for the buildup of troops issued by the
Military Commission of the Central Committee.

The conference was divided into two stages. During the first stage, the dele-
gates watched a certain division conduct a research-type exercise in coordinated
combat and listened to the experience of trial training in coordinated combat by
that division. After the exercise, a ceremony to review the troops was conducted,
and Deputy Chief of the General Staff, Zhang Zhen [1728 7201]. reviewed the troops
participating in the exercise. During the second stage of the conference, the
education and training for the next year were studied and planned in a key way.
The delegates enthusiastically discussed the opinions expressed by the headquar-
ters concerning strengthening military training. political education, and read-
justing scientific and cultural education of the troops in 1981; linked the ac-
tual situation of the troops regarding these topics; and offered some constructive
opinions. During the conference, the leading comrades of the three headquarters
spoke, and the deputy chief of the general staff presented the concluding remarks
at the conference.

The delegates to the conference conscientiously analysed the trend in education
and training in 1980. They expressed the view that, since the beginning of this
year, the party committee at each level and the leading military and political
comrades had all grasped training vigorously; the political organs at each level
had strengthened political ideological work in training; the logistics department
had actively developed its function to ensure supplies; the personnel, time, con-
tent, and quality of training of troops had all been handled better than in past

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWCJALIJSE(MVLY

years; and the number of troops participating in the whole military training this
year was the highest in the past 10 years or more. The troops participating in
the training broadly strengthened basic training in technical tactics and special-
ization, and they also began to emphasize training in coordinated combat involving
all the services and arms of the military. More chiefs and commanding organs par-
ticipated in the exercise this year than in past years, more emphasis was placed

on cadre training. From the headquarters to the troops, each level used many
forms of training to train cadres; the number of basic-level cadres of the army

instructor teams trained in rotation this year was 2.4 times that of last year.
Each armed force broadly launched education in a revolutionary outlook on life

and education in the party's economic policy in farm villages; visible results
were achieved, and the political awareness of the broad number of officers and men
was improved.

0n the basis of summarizing the education and training this year, the conference
studied the tasks of education and training for 1981. The conference delegates
expressed the view that next year will be a very significant year in the political
life of the party and the nation. Our political ideological work is facing a very
difficult task. We must follow the trend closely, strengthen forecasting, carry
out education in the party's line. principles, and policies well. The conference
delegates said that next year the entire military establishment must conscien-
tiously implement the military commission's strategic guidelines and the guiding
ideology in combat and continuously strengthen and improve military training in
accordance with the demands of the plans for the buildup of the military troops.
Training of troops and training of cadres must both include a study of the key
points of coordinated combat of the various services and arms of the military
forces at the beginning of a war. The specific aims of training must be strenth-
ened to study the enemy troops profoundly. Training must be suited to the local-
ity and to the tasks; the troops must be given definite autonomy; the enthusiasm
of the leaders at each level and the broad number of officers and men must be
fully developed. Thinking must be continuously liberated to undertake training
reforms. Night-time training must be strengthened, and methods to counter the
various types of night vision instruments of the enemy must be developed. Polit-
ical ideological work in training must be conscientiously carried out well so
that the troops will always maintain a high morale in training.

While studying military training, comrades at the conference emphasized the dis-
cussion of problems in training is coordinated combat involving the various ser-
vices and arms of the military forces. It was agreed that doing a good job of
training in coordinated combat of a combined armed force and developing the power
of the whole force constitute major subjects regarding a future war against ag-
gression by our armed forces using inferior equipment to defeat an enemy with
superior equipment. Many delegates mentioned that the current organization. con-
tent. method, system, and training safeguards in the training of our armed forces
in many aspects cannot adapt. or cannot completely adapt, to the demands of coor-
dinated combat under modern conditions. The conference emphasized that next year
we must continue to grasp the key points of cadre training, and especially the
training of middle and high-level cadres and officers. Through such efforts as
centralized training in battle. battle exercises, and academic research, their
ability to organize and command the various services and arms of the military
forces in coordinated combat can be improved.

9296
C50: 4005/2103
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

RAISING LEVEL OF MILITARY EDUCATION. TRAINING EMPEASIZED
Beijing JIEFANGJUN BAD in Chinese 4 Dec 80 p 1
(Editorial: "Improve the Level of Training and Education of Our Armed Forces"]

[Text] The entire armed forces training conference has successfully concluded.
The conference analyzed the trend of education and training of the entire armed
forces in accordance with the demands of the buildup and planning of the armed
forces and the strategic guidelines of the Military Commission of the Central
Committee, and studied the educational and training tasks of the troops for next
year. It will serve actively to further strengthen the education and training of
our armed forces, improve the overall combat capabilities of the troops, and has-
ten the building of a modernized revolutionary armed force.

Since the Third Plenum of the llth Party Congress, as the emphasis of work of the
whole party has shifted, and especially after undergoing the war of self-defense
and retaliation against Vietnam, recognition of the importance of education and
training has been widely improved throughout the ranks of the entire armed forces,
and leadership in education and training has been strengthened. There has been
improvement in the education of the troops in line with the actual situation and
with the line, principles, and policies established since the Third Plenum of the
party; in education in a revolutionary outlook on life and in consciously and
thoroughly implementing the party's line. principles, and policies; and in con-
sciously serving as a soldier and going to war to protect the motherland and to
protect the four modernizations. The specific aim of military training has been
strengthened: the training of cadres, and especially the training of middle and
higher echelon cadres. to organize and command combined forces in coordinated com-
bat has begun to receive emphasis; and the tactical techniques of the troops and
specialized training have been made more concrete. In the general view, the mil-
itary and political caliber of the units and the level of specialized techniques
have improved. the achievements in education and training of the entire armed
forces have been outstanding, and the trends are good. But we should be aware
that the education and training of our armed forces are still quite a distance
from the demands of the trends and the tasks, the demands of modern warfare, the
demands of building a modernized revolutionary armed force. To hasten the steps
of building a modernized revolutionary armed force, prepare well for a war against
aggression, complete the heavy burden of protecting the motherland and protecting
the four modernizations bestowed upon us by the party and the people. we face the
urgent task of further improving the level of education and training of our armed
forces.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MHLY ~

Since 1975, when the Central Military Commission proposed elevating education and
training to a strategic position, the understanding of the importance of educa-
tion and training of the entire armed forces has gradually improved. Practice
during these years has proved that, if education and training are truly placed in
a strategic position, the level of education and training in our armed forces will
improve on a large scale. Placing education and training truly in a strategic
position is not an ordinary campaign nor an empty campaign; it requires that we
concretely do actual work in many aspects. For example, the party committee at
each level must regard education and training as constant work and as an urgent
task to prepare for war. It requires conscientiously implementing the strategic
guidelines and the guiding ideology in training established by the Central Mili-
tary Commission to carry out military training well by starting out from real war.
It requires linking theory with the actual situation in launching ideological and
political work; it requires improving the awareness of implementing the party's
line. principles, and policies; it requires remaining politically consistent with
the party from beginning to end. It involves implementation of personnel. time,
content. and quality so that training tests can be successfully accomplished. It
requires actively accomplishing well the various kinds of assurance in training

so that the troops will maintain a high fighting spirit. good health, assure qual-
ity and quantity to complete training tasks. etc. Only with a unified understand-
ing of the question of placing training in its proper position can we consciously
implement the task of education and training and improve the level of education

and training.

Improving the level of education and training of our armed forces requires that
the education and training be better adapted to the demands of modern warfare.

In future warfare, what we will face is an enemy possessing highly modernized
equipment. To win over superior equipment with poor equipment under modern con-
ditions. our armed forces face a series of new situations and new problems. Our
training work, whether in the training system. content, methods, and system and
training safeguards and many other aspects, still cannot adapt. or completely
adapt, to the demands of modern warfare. There are many aspects of political

work that need reform. too. Therefore, the situation presents a problem to us.
Education and training must progress through reform. they must be improved through
reform; reform is the necessary road to improving education and training. when we
talk about reform, we must carry out the work of doing away with the old and es-
tablishing the new in the realm of education and training. We must inherit the
good, abandon the bad, and we must explore and develop new things. Comrade Mao
Zedong once said that one must look at characteristics and development; things
that never change do not exist. Outstanding and effective reforms are the result
of liberating thought and daring exploration. Only by strengthening the urgency
of reform in thought, by carrying out reforms enthusiastically in practice, by
actively experimenting, by respecting the creative spirit of the masses, can the
education and training of our armed forces achieve progress in long strides. Con-
versely, if we are satisfied with the present situation, if we do not think about
reform during peacetime, education and training can only remain at a low level;
then during time of war, a greater cost will have to be paid. Every comrade should
become a practitioner and a promoter of educational and training reforms.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Recently, Vice Chairman Deng Ziaoping emphasized that training should pay atten-
tion to combined training, and that combat training of a combined armed force
must be grasped. Strengthening training in coordinated combat by a combined
armed force is an objective demand of swdern warfare and an important link in the
modernization of troops. Since the war of self-defense and retaliation against
Vietnam, training in this regard has begun to be emphasized. But continued im-
provement of the level of coordinated combat is still an outstanding problem that
must be especially emphasized in our training. Some commanders, including high-
ranking commanders, still frequently think only about one arm of the services to
varying degrees. This way of thinking is harmful to the development of our armed
forces and the improvement of combat strength. An important rule in modern war-
fare is to develop the whole power of every arm of the forces, to coordinate them
closely so as to develop the advantages and avoid the shortcomings in order to win
victory. Anyone who violates this rule will be punished in the battlefield. He
should firmly establish the idea of coordinated combat by combined troops and im-
plement this idea in combat and training. In accordance with the present situa-
tion of our navy, air force, and special troops. and with the technical equipment,
instruments, and facilities which are still definitely limited, we must insist on
starting out from the actual situation, arranging them scientifically, placing
them under unified planning. and concretely carrying out the work of training in
coordinated combat well. After grasping this link, the training and the combat
strength of our armed forces will be visibly improved.

The education and training we are talking about generally refers to military train-
ing (including logistics training), political and cultural education. and the nut-
curing of the style of work and discipline and similar subjects in many aspects.
To further improve the level of education and training, we should give the troops
overall training in many aspects in military science, politics, culture, style of
work, and discipline. The combat strength of the troops is the comprehensive man-
ifestation of many factors. To enable our cadres and soldiers to possess a very
high military caliber without strict training is impossible. At the same time,
there must be a high degree of political awareness; in particular, our armed
forces must support the party's line. principles, and policies firmly at all

times and develop patriotism and revolutionary heroism on this foundation; only

in this way can enthusiasm and awareness in military training and fighting be
strengthened. Also. there must be definite scientific and cultural knowledge;
otherwise modern weapons and equipment cannot be skillfully handled. Fighting
requires a superior combat style and strict organization and discipline. Loose
and spiritless troops will not have any combat strength. Therefore, the various
aspects of education and training are mutually dependent and mutually complemen-
tary. Neglecting any aspect will weaken the combat strength of the troops and
affect the Overall buildup of a modernized revolutionary armed force.

Establishing a correct ideological cine is very important to improving the level
of education and training of our armed forces. Starting out from the actual sit-
uation, linking theory with the actual situation, and seeking truth from facts

are the fundamental points of our party's ideological line. Only by insisting on
this ideological line will our guidance in education and training have the right
to speak and take the initiative. Because the situation of each unit is differ-
ent, because the area where troops are stationed and the tasks are different, they

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

require that we skillfully analyze the concrete situation, skillfully combine the
spirit of the directives of the higher authorities with the actual situation of
our own unit. In work guidance. we must not control too tightly, we must develop
the flexibility of the leadership and the agencies at each level; in planning. we
must not calculate everything nor exercise "arbitrary uniformity"; we must fully
develop the enthusiasm and the creativity of the cadres, the agencies, and the
broad masses at each level. To improve education and training, we must utilise
the scientific attitude of seeking truth from facts and working practically. We
must form the good habit of not talking emptily, doing more real work, not seek-
ing fame, emphasizing real results. effectively solving the various problems that
emerge in education and training in a timely way. and promoting the continued
broad and profound development of education and training of troops.

Following the conference of military schools and academics, the conference on
training of the entire armed forces was held. These two conferences are concrete
steps to further implement the decision of the Central Military Commission con-
cerning strengthening education and training. we must conscientiously implement
the spirit of ‘hese two meetings, concretely grasp and implement it well. It can
be seen that. next year. as our party, nation. and armed forces themselves are
about to carry out certain major reforms, many new situations and new problems
will undoubtedly emerge, and the education and training of the entire armed forces
will face very difficult tasks. He must not relax education in the situation and
the tasks for one moment. He must insist on the four principles, continue to lib—
erate thinking. and unify the ideology and action of the entire armed forces under
the party's line, principles. and policies. If the officers and members of the
entire armed forces can develop their own wisdom and intellect at their own posts,
then next year the education and training of our armed forces will surely be ele-

vated to a new level.

9296
CSO: h005/2108

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HlLlTARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

lHPROVED TRAINING AT SEA OF NAVAL CADRES REPORTED

Beijing JIEFANGJUN 3A0 in Chinese 6 Dec 80 p 1

[Article by Wang Dengfu [3769 4098 1381]: "Hiddle and High-Level Cadres of the
Navy Go Out to Sea to Strengthen Training and Guidance, Solve Difficult Problems

in Training, hasten Progress. and Improve Quality of Training")

{Text} This year, the progress and the quality of training of the naval fleet
units were good. One reason was that the middle and high-level leading cadres

led the units in going to sea to strengthen guidance in training. According to
statistics revealed on 15 November by the naval training departments. this year
over 80 percent of the leading cadres above division level in the navy led their
fleet in going to sea to undertake training; the number of days at sea increased

45.8 percent over last year.

This year, the leading cadres above division level in the navy changed their past
situation of "commanding" more but "going to battle" less. They went out of their
offices, boarded the battleships, and went to sea to command training on the front
line. Several main leading comrades of the North Sea Fleet led their fleet in for-
mation on a long training voyage of #2 days. The number of leading cadres above
division level of the South Sea Fleet who went to sea this year was twice that of

last year.

The leading cadres lived and worked together with the officers and men at sea;
they emphasised discovering and solving problems in training in time. They con-
scientiously explored the questions of coordinated attack by the fleet and air-
planes. countering electronic jamming of communications between the arms of the
services of the fleet. and maintaining supplies during navigation of the seas with
the officers and men at sea. while the formation organised by the South Sea Fleet
carried out training in long-voyage refueling while following at sea, Deputy Com-
mander Wei Ningsen [7614 7686 2773] of a certain base boarded a rubber raft, went
to an escort vessel to conduct analysis and study with the officers and men. and
solved the difficulties so that refueling at sea was successfully accomplished.
During the course of training in formation and attack at sea by a certain brigade
of the speedboat detachment. because the speedboat commander did not maintain the
method of flexibility when the formation turned to attack, some speedboats turned
to the wrong position and the opportunity to attack was missed. Detachment Com-
mander Zheng, who went to sea with the speedboats, joined the cadres of the bri-
gade and the commander of the speedhoats to develop three flexible plans, and the

speedboat commander quickly grasped many flexible methods.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The leading cadres led the fleet in going to sea and stimulated the enthusiasm of
the troops for carrying out training at sea. This year, each unit generally went
to sea for training early, stayed a long tine, and the ships went to sea many
times. The leadership of the north Sea Fleet led the fleet in fornation to con-
duct coordinated training. and wherever the formation vent, the enthusiasn of
training of the troops at the destination was stimlated. This year, nost of the
units of the navy fleets progressed in training subjects more quickly than in past
years by a month or so; the units of three fleets that were quizzed in training
scored well in more than 80 percent of the subjects.

9296
CSO: 4005/2108

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

REGIMENT HOLDS COMBINED ARMS TACTICAL TRAINING EXERCISE
Beijing JIEPANGJUN 3A0 in Chinese 6 Dec 80 p 2

[Article by Hang Hongshan [2769 3163 1472] and Zhong Lishan [6965 2621 1‘72]:
"The Various Arms of the Service can be Combined Nell Only if Special Troops are
not Specialized; a Certain Armored Regiment Solves the Problem of Coordination
Among the Infantry, Artillery, and Tank Units in Combined Tactical Training"]

[Text] 0n 6 November. on the battlefield of a live ammunition exercise of a cer-
tain armored regiment of the Huhan units, as the infantry called out, the artil-
lery and tanks fired accurately to open the way for the infantry to advance and
to destroy the enemy's srtillery.... After the exercise ended, the infantrymen
said happily that, if the special troops do not engage in "specialization", then
the various arms of the service can be combined well and the war can be won.

The problem of "specialization" of special troops was proposed after the infantry-
men of this regiment encountered two "mishaps." One occurred when the "red army"
infantrymen utilized trees and bushes to cover their movement toward the depth of
the position of the "blue army"; the four tanks attached to the infantry abandoned
the infantrymen and drove into the position of the "blue army" early to seek live
firing positions for the next training subject of "resisting the enemy's counter-
attack" and independently sought their own firing conditions. The second "mis-
hap" happened when the infantry was blocked as it advanced toward the depth of

the position in the attack. Although the commander continued to call our for ar-
tillery support, the artillery "omitted" to follow the infantrymen as they ad-
vanced and shifted their position because the artillery had difficulty towing the
guns; thus, the infantry had to fight independently in charging the mountain
stronghold. In the face of these problems, regimental commander Li Yuzhen [2621
3768 6297] and the director of the exercise. deputy reghsentsl commander Zhang
Heicai [1728 4850 2088], led the cadres of the attached tanks and artillery squads
to analyze the cause stage-by-stsgs on the exercise field. The equipment of spe-
cial troops has special functions; but, in the exercise, these functions were not
performed outstandingly, so coordination was not good, mainly because there was
the ideological problem of "being specialised". In this way, even if the forms
"were combined", in actuality, they could not be "assimilated”. Thus, they helped
the squads of the special troops improve understanding, and they carried out
stage-by-stsge exercises to overcome the problems of each. The 85-mm cannon sub-
ordinate to the regiment is the direct firing antitank artillery used to support
the infantry. In past exercises. because the artillery was heavy and difficult

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to move about. movement was difficult; frequently "reporting via telephone, the
artillery sat beside the command post and, while the infantry charged the mountain
stronghold. the artillery went to sleep.“ In this exercise, they supported the
infantry to open up a breakthrough point, company commander Du Shanahong [2629
0810 1813] contended the tow truck to overcome road blocks and to follow the in-
fantry. the artillery was towed manually to open up a new firing position, and

the combat of the infantry in the depth of the position was given support in time.
The four tanks led by armored platoon commander Song Venxisng [1365 2‘29 #382]

had always relie
striking at the target; he

coordinated maneuvers with the infantry. Later, he led the tank operators and

the infantrymen to study together and changed the previous maneuvers. Sometimes
the tanks would lead the infantrymen forward. sometimes they would use their fire-

power to support the charge by infantrymen; the infantry and the tanks coordinated
their maneuvers and destroyed their respective target. in live ammunition exercises. ,

9296
C80: b005/2108

25
FOR 0FF1CIAI.USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY AND PUBLIC SECURITY

GARRISON REGIHENT HOLDS COASTAL DEFENSE TRAINING EXEBBISE
Beijing JIEPANGJUN 3A0 in Chinese 6 Dec 80 p 2

[Article by liong Tan [3575 3508] and Zheng Zongqun [6774 1350 5028]: "A Certain
Garrison Regiment Pinpoints the Characteristics of Island warfare, Launches Po-
tential Training of Troops, Learns the Skills of Defense"]

[Text] A certain garrison command regiment of the Fuzhou units carried out a live
ammunition exercise in coastal defense while carrying out combat missions at the
coastal positions, and examined the results of the positional training of troops
according to the characteristics of defensive combat by the whole regiment through-
out the year. The squads participating in training all scored above the good
grade level.

The past defensive tactical training of this regiment was mostly conducted outside
its‘positions. Later, the leadership of the regiment discovered during several
examinations and inspections of the training quality that, although such training
satisfied the demands of the higher authorities in time, progress, and subject
matter and the achievements in training were high, because the training was not
conducted at the positions where the regiment was to carry out its defensive com-
bat tasks, peacetime training and wartime needs were not linked. The regiment
corrected this way of doing things; it gave up the pursuit of superficial scores
in training troops at the positions where they would carry out defensive combat
duties. They first conducted trial training in the fifth company; technical and
tactical training was conducted with a fixed number of personnel, fixed positions,
fixed artillery, and a fixed number of infantry weapons utilizing surface features
and topography in a flexible and versatile manner according to the different com-
bat plans for manpower and firearms equipment and according to the combat missions
of each squad, platoon, company, and the attached joint defense militia. Efforts
were exerted to train where the battle would be fought. This regiment also ruled
that soldiers must be examined at the place where they were trained, they must be
examined in the subjects they were drilled in, and "arbitrary uniformity" must not
be practiced.

To enliven training at the position, they actively invited each company to think
of complex and varying enemy situations in order to study multiple means of de-
fense. For example, in defending against amphibious tanks, the troops carried out
exercises in fighting an enemy attacking the beschheads, and studied how to fight
an enemy who has landed and how to develop the function of the various antitank
firearms according to the positions. The cadres and soldiers also revised and
supplemented the combat plans by pinpointing the problems that were exposed in
training so that the combat plans would be closer to the demands of real war.

9296 END
CSO: (0005/2108 26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY