APPROVID FOR NIL-ADI: 2007102100: CIA-RDPOS-00000R000100030032-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00850R000100030032-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS [/8329

12 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 8/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030032-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion aark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriete in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical n1tes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items~are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIHATIOH
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MONICIAL USE ONLY.
L Reg-nu No.

      
  
      
   
   
   
   
   

Jns L/8329

NOLIOGIA'NIC DAYA
“It?

at c-a .\ Ilr

  

- & lctipncu'a Acton-on No.
‘ '

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR HILITARY AFFAIRS. (9000 8/79)

      
  

  

O. Perla-in; Ouaa-nnnoo Near cad Adan"
Joint Publication Incarch Service
1000 North Glob. M

Arlington. Virginia 22201

I}. Spa-noun Ouuiauioo Nan. a“ “Am.

An above

IO. Aberran-

 
      
   
   
  
  
  
   

The report contains information on the Soviet military and civil defence

eatablishmcnte. leaderahip, doctrine, policy, planning. political affaira.
organization, and equip-eat.

. Kry Iam and can Analytic.

USSR

Military Organizations
Hilitary Facilities
Military Personnel

Vb. Hruulnn/Opcmhndrd Tom

   
     
   

In. . «nan I via/1......” 15C

  

II. Audi-ﬂay Nauru-I

FOR ()I'FICIM. USE ONLY. Linitcd “Mar of
Copies Available From JPRS

t (m tun DI "NJ. 0 n!

nus you an ar terracotta mm“ '“”""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 8
12 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(moo 9/79)

CONTENTS

(Io-ante on 0.8. Actions in the Middle East
(5. Krekhnalov; ZARUBBZBNOYB VOYENNOYB OBOZRENIYB, Nov 78).. .

Consents on U.S.- Noncouisaioned Officers in Europe
(A. chekuleyev; ZARUBEZKNOYB VOYBNNOYE OBOZRENIYB. Nov 78)...

Connents on Offensive Operations on a 0.8. Any Corps
(A. Ryzhkov: ZARUBBZHNOYE VOW OBOZRENIYB. Nov 78)......

Contents on Tank Development in Hestern Countries
(Yu. Iraynyuk: mustzmmn VOYENNOYE OBOZRBNIYE. Nov 78)....

Development of Field Artillery All-unition in Heat
(V. Vorontsov. V. Vyacheslov; ZARUBWOYB VOYWE
OBOZWYE' M 78)eeooeaaseeeeeaeeeoeeeeseeeeeesesseleeesoee

Co-ente on Role of Hanan Factor in Aircraft Accidents
(0. Oblipov. K. Vladinirov; mama VOYINNOYE
030283111“. Nov 78).

Oo-ents on NATO Air Force Exercise Held in June 1978
(V. Kondret'yev; ZARUBBZRROYB VOYWYB ODOZRENIYB,

NOV 78)seeeeeeeeeeeeaseeeeeeeeeeeeaaaesesseeeeeeeeeeeesaesses

Consents on Developnent of New U.S. Unmanned Aircraft
(I. Aleksandrov; ZARUBBZMOYB VOYENNOYB OBOMIYE. Nov 78)..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CW3 on U. S. ACTIOMS IN 1113 MIDDLE EAST

Moscow ZARUBEZIINOYB VOYBNNOYE OIOZRENIYB in Russian Mo 11. Nov 78
signed to press 3 Oct 78 pp 3-10

[Article by Maj Gen Tank ‘l'rpa 8. Krekhaelov: "The Middle East —
Center of Tensions")

[Text] The Middle East is a vast region with a population of more than
130 nillion. It includes 13 Arab states. Turkey. Cyprus, and Israel,
and lies at the intersection of three continents: Europe. Asia. and
Africa. In the Pentagon assesssent. the Middle East is an important
strategic region. the southern core of NATO and the "gateway" to
Africa. The shortest sea and air routes between Europe and Asia pass
through it. The Middle East is right next to the borders of the coun-
tries of the socialist counnity. The politics and military plans of
the United States attach great importance to the oil riches of the
Middle East. According to official Anerican figures, this region has
more than 70 percent (excluding the socialist countries) of explored
reserves of ”black gold."

The book "Vneshnyaya Politilta i Matsional'naya Bezopesnost' SShA" [The
Foreign Policy and National Security of the United States of Aneria].
which revealed the objectives of the J. Carter administration in the
foreign policy area. emphasizes: "One of the strategic problems of
paramount isportance facing those who create U. S. policy is keeping
the Middle East and the Mediterranean as a region in which American
power can be effectively deployed." As this work points out. the U. S.
objective in this region is not just to insure access to a strategic
raw naterial (petroleun). but also to "prevent the spread of any foreign
influence there.“

After Horld War II. of course. the Arab countries of the Middle East
broke the chains of colonialism through stubborn national liberation
struggle and acquired independence. The adoption of the path of pro-
gressive transfornations by several Arab countries and the conversion
of the Middle East into one of the leading centers of the national

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

liberation movement. which operated on the whole as a factor opposed

to imperialism, gave rise in the United States to an intention to stop
the development of such unfavorable, from the standpoint of the American
leaders. trends at any coat.

The United States relies primarily on Israel. which Hashington would
like to use to settle with the progressive regimes of this region. and
on the Arab conservative governments. reactionary circles. and
bourgeoise who are tied to isperialist monopolies by common interests.

All these military-strategic. political. and economic considerations
have caused constant U. S. "attention" to the Middle East. which has
been a dangerous center of tension for 30 years now.

The Palestinian war of 1968-1969, the Anglo-Pranco-Israeli aggression
against Egypt in 1956. the landing of U. S. marines in Lebanon in mid-
1958. the Israeli aggression against Egypt, Jordan. and Syria in June
1967. the Arab-Israeli war of 1973. the attempt by Turkish forces on
the northern part of the island of Cyprus to overthrow the government
and occupy the island in July 1975. the armed struggle in Lebanon. and
border clashes between various states - this is by no means a full
list of the military conflicts which have brought grief and tears to
the peoples of the Middle East. The problem of Arab-Israeli relations
has been and remains the fundamental factor in these events.

"There is no war in the Middle East now. But there is no peace there
either. let alone tranquility. And who dares to say that the flames of
war will not flare up again? This danger will continue as long as the
Israeli armies remain on occupied lands. It will continue as long as
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians. driven from their land. are de-
prived of their legal rights and live in desperate circumstances and
the Arab people of Palestine are deprived of the possibility of estab-
lishing their own national state. Stable peace in the Middle East

also demands that the security of all states of this region. their
right to independent existence and development. be guaranteed. Cer-
tainly it is clear that those who. pursuing egotistical ends. turn a
Middle Eastern settlement into an object of political gains. who use
separate partial agreements to set back the time of true solutions

and sometimes to question them in general. are taking on a grave re-
sponsibility." This is the concise analysis given by General Secretary
of the CPSU Central Committee Comrade L. l. Brezhnev of the situation
In the Middle East and its explosive nature in the Accountability Report
of the Central Committee to the 25th party congress.

It is common knowledge that soon after the Arab-Israeli war of 1973
when the Geneva Conference began to meet, favorable conditions were
established for a peaceful settlement of this conflict. But the United
States preferred Kissinger's "shuttle diplomacy," which aimed at pre-
paring partial, separate agreements. Upon coming to power. the present
American administration criticized the technique of "shuttle diplomacy"
in words and announced that it would be necessary to coordinate actions

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the USSR to resolve the whole set of issues making up the Arab-
Israeli problem.

A Joint Soviet-American statement on the Middle East was adopted on

I October 1977. It stated: "The Soviet and American sides believe that
ell concrete issues of the settlement should be decided within the frame-
work of an all-encompassing settlement of the Middle Eastern problem:
among these concrete issues are such key matters as withdrawal of Israeli
troops from territory occupied during the 1967 conflict. the Palestinian
question, which includes guaranteeing the legal rights of the Palestinian
people, ending the state of war and establishing normal peaceful rela-
tions based on mutual recognition of the principles of sovereignty
territorial integrity. and political independence."

The statement went on to say that the USSR and the United States. as
co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference. would work together to see that
the conference reopened by no later than December 1977 for the purpose
of resolving all these issues. Just a few days later. however. after
Carter met with Dayan in New York. Hashington. under pressure from
militaristic circles and the Zionist lobby. in reality rejected the
Geneva Conference and inspired and supported separate Egyptian-Israeli
negotiations. which once again led the process of Middle Eastern settle-
ment into a blind alley and created a threat to the cause of peace.

In late November 1977 Egyptian President Sadat came forward with a
"peace initiative" and. making a pilgrimage to Jerusalem which was occu-
pied by the Isrselis. held talks there with Israeli Prime Minister
Begin. Israeli ruling circles. who had been striving for separate ne-
gotiations for a long time. willingly accepted a bilateral meeting with
Sadat. As for the Egyptian president himself. he has done everything
possible in recent years to achieve a political reorientation of his
country.

In traveling to Jerusalem Sadat hoped that Egypt anc .he other Arab
states would prove their reliability to Washington from the point of
view of American interests in the Middle East so that the United States
would take the side of the Arabs. force Israel to renounce its aggres-
sive policy. and secure a just and all-embracing settlement of the
Middle Eastern conflict. In Washington. however. the very idea of put-
ting pressure on the aggressor was rejected. U. S. reliance on Israel
remains unchanged.

Sodat's decision to take the humiliating path of separate negotiations
with Israel was met with exaltation by the bourgeois Heat but led to
a deep split in the Arab world. Syria. Algeria. Iraq, Libya, the
People's Democratic lepublic of Yemen. and the Palestine Liberation
Organization resolutely condemned the capitulationist policy of the
Egyptian president at a sue-it meeting in Tripoli on 1 December 1977.
In response Egypt broke diplomatic relations with these five countries.
Cairo's capituletionist line furthered the polarization of forces in

the Arab world and offered an opportunity for reactionariee to raise
their heads and furiously attack progressive movements.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sadat's "sacred nisaion of peace" led to a whole series of meetings
between Egyptian and Israeli leaders during which the pointlessness

and danger to the Arabs of separate diplonacy became clear. In Tel Aviv
Cairo's gesture of "historical reconciliation“ was interpreted as evi-
dence of Egypt's weakness. It was no accident that this move encour-
aged the traditional rigidity and uncomprosising attitude of the Israeli
leadership in its view of the Middle Eastern conflict.

As a result of the "Sadat mission." Israeli Prime Minister Begin an-
nounced that resolution No 252 of the U. N. Security Council supposedly
did not apply to the West Bank of the River Jordan and the Gaza Strip
and therefore Israel did not intend to withdraw its troops fro. these
territories. Tel Aviv announced loudly that it did not recognize the
right of the Palestinians to establish their own state and peruit
refugees to return to these regions. Of course. the "Palestinian
autonomy" declared in this announcement was nothing but a form of
Israeli annexation of Arab lands seized in the 1967 war.

The meetings and talks between Egypt and Israel which have taken place
this year have not contributed anything new to solving the Middle
Eastern problem, despite concessions by Sadat. who is trying to get at
least the appearance of an agree-ant with Israel. The three-party
neeting of the Egyptian and Israeli ministers of foreign affairs and
the U. s. Secretary of State held at Anerican initiative on 18-19 July
1978 in the Medieval Leeds Castle near London did not produce any real
results either.

After these talks the foreign press reported that Israel had proposed
to establish limited autonouy for the Arab population on the West Bank
of the River Jordan while maintaining for five years Israeli rule with
its silitary settleeents and garrisons. After five years there would
be a referendu- which would determine the further fate of this region.
These Israeli conditions are not only intended to -einforce its hold
on seized Arab territories. but also strike a blow against the Arab
people of Palestine and their struggle for the right to independent
existence.

Meanwhile the situation of the Palestinian Arabs who were driven fro-
their native land is becoming more and nere unbearable. It is esti-
nated that just $00,000 of them reoain in Israel itself. within the

1949 boundaries. while 760.000 live in the West Bank of the River Jordan
region occupied by Isra.l in 1967. 630,000 in the Gaza Strip. up to
900,000 in Jordan. about $00,000 in Lebanon. and 250,000 in Kuwait.

If we consider that the Palestinian problem is pivotal in the whole
Middle Eastern crisis. the degree to which Egypt betrayed common Arab
interests becones obvious.

Recent events in Lebanon are also associated with an attempt to strike
a blow against the forces of the Palestine Resistance Movement.

Let us recall that Lebanon. with a population of 3 million, instituted
a systen of confessionelisn. representation in the highest governmental

6
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bodies according to the religious principle. in 1963. which was when it
declared its independence. In this system the Christian coanunities.
especially the Mnronlte which is the most influential. were given cer-
tain advantages. In particular. six Christians were elected for every
five Muslims in the Parliament. which has 99 deputies. The president
of the republic is always a Christian. the prime minister s Sunni
Muslim. and the chairman of Parliament a Shiite Muslim. Hhen this
system was instituted it was believed that this political structure cor-
responded to the size of the particular religious communities. "ith
the passage of time the number of Muslims has increased. but the es-
tablished proportions of representation in governmental bodies have

not been altered. Moreover. the christian community became the most
prosperous part of the population. controlling the economy. trade.
finance. and the armed forces.

The confessional contradictions. which are closely intertwined with
social class contradictions. created a favorable situation for sub-
versive activity in Lebanon by imperialist and Israeli agents working
through internal reactionaries.

Organizations of the Palestine Resistance Movement are active in
Lebanon. This fact has been used by Israel numerous times as a pre-
text for repeated attacks on Lebanon.

The Lebanese crisis which occurred in 1975 was a result of the un-
settled nature of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the conspiracy among
imperialism. Zionism. and reaction. Armed clashes with the Pales-
tinians, begun on 13 April 1975 by the right-wing Christian Party
Catsib. which protects the interests of the bourgeoisie and feudal
lords. engulfed all of Lebanon and split the country into two opposing
camps: on the one hand were the right-wing Christian forces supported
by top army leaders. while on the other were the National Patriotic
Forces and detachments of the Palestine Resistance Movement. The
foreign press has reported that more than 63.000 ‘eople were killed.
more than 217,000 wounded. and 170.000 suffered other losses from
military actions during the 19-month civil war in Lebanon. Many
cities and villages were destroyed and 30 percent of the country's
industrial enterprises were closed down. The loss inflicted by the
war is estimated at 7.5 billion Lebanese pounds. Armed struggle
stopped for the most part after "inter-Arab security forces" were
brought into Lebanon in conformity with decisions made at summit ton-
ferences of the Arab countries in Riyadh and Cairo in October 1976.
The bulk of the troops. 20,000 out of a total of 30.000. in the
country were Syrian.

In August 1977 a three-party Lebanese-Syrisn-Pslestinian meeting in
Shtor reached agreement on a program to implement by stages the still
unfulfilled points of the 1969 Cairo agreement regulating the presence
of Palestine Resistance Movement formations in Lebanon. It was con-
templated that subunits of the Palestine Resistance Movement would be
withdrawn 15 kilometers away from the Lebanese-Israeli border and

the Lebanese Army. which was being rebuilt. would be assigned to patrol

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and guard the border. This turn of events plainly did not suit Israel.
On 15 March 1978 Israeli tank and mechanized units invaded Lebanon
along the entire length of the Lebanese-Israeli border and occupied
Lebanese territory up to the Litani River. More than 1,300 Lebanese
and Palestinians died as the result of the sggressor'a actions. On

19 March 1978 the U. N. Security Council adopted a resolution calling
on Israel to inediately atop military actions against Lebanon and
withdraw its troops from all Lebanese territory. The U. N. force sent
by the Security Council to keep peace in Lebanon included b.000 nen
from troop contingents of Nepal. Norway. France. and Iran.

Israel was forced to withdraw its troops from Southern Lebanon in the
middle of June. but it took steps to split Lebanon and create a
"buffer" zone controlled by the right-wing Christians along Israeli
borders. That was why the Israelis turned over key positions in
Southern Lebanon not to the extraordinary u. N. forces but to right-
wing Christian detachments who refused to acknowledge the authority
of the Lebanese Government. We are speaking of a strip of Lebanese
territory about 10 kilometers wide which the Israeli leaders have de-
clared to be a "security belt" which they do not intend to let out of
their control under any circumstances. A conference of the foreign
affairs ministers of Lebanon, Syria. Kuwait. Saudi Arabia. the United
Arab Emirates. Qatar. and Sudan. held in mid-October 1978 in the
Lebanese city of beit-al-Din. adopted a declaration conteaplating
strengthening the authority of the central government in Lebanon. dia-
arming all illegal formations and factions. restoring the country' a
national army. and prosecuting persons who cooperate with Israeli

forces .

The events in Lebanon show what can result from complicity with an
aggressor. It was indeed.comprehensive U. 5. support and American
military aid that helped whet Tel Aviv's appetite for aggression. It
is public knowledge that while the United States s‘located about 10.10
billion dollars to Israel in the period between 1 June 1975 and

1 October 1977. for the next fiscal year Tel Aviv asked Washington to
raise aid to 2.3 billion dollars and to guarantee delivery of the
latest American weapons. In the opinion of foreign military spe-
cialists. in the present situation the Israelis with their "jam-packed
military warehouses and growing military industry can wage and win a
war against the Arabs without counting on American air delivery of
desperately needed sI-unition and weapons. as was the case in 1973."
In the time that has passed since 1973. Americans say. Israel has
modernized its armed forces to a much greater degree than any Arab
states. with American aid Israel has built its own guided missile.
the new Herkava tank. fast patrol boats, and several models of rifles.

The London journal MIDDLE EAST. analyzing the condition of the Israeli
Armed Forces. reported in September of last year that Israel could
mobilize 500,000 persons in case of war. The Israeli Armed Forces now
have about 600 fighting planes. almost 3.000 tanks. and more than 3,000
araored personnel carriers. Measures carried out since the Arab-
Israeli War of 1973 make it possible today tc. completely mobilize

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Israeli forces in 68 hours and units on the borders can be mobilized
in 36 hours.

It is not accidental that the United States openly declares that Israel
remains the chief outpost of American imperialist policy in the Middle
East. and recently in Africa too. The United States is trying to bring
Israel and the Arab and African reactionaries closer together in order
to direct them both against the national liberation movement and pro-
gressive forces both in the Middle East and on the African continent.

Recent events in Africa show that Arab reactionaries are already in-
volved there in suppressing the national liberation movement. Gener-
ous financial support from the oil millionaires of the Arabian
Peninsula, deliveries of weapons to the Somali aggressors, and finally.
sending troop contingenta to Zaire were all preplanned operations whose
objective was to draw the Arab countries into a snare set out by the
inerialiats.

The purveyor of American policy in the Middle East, alongside Israel.
is Saudi Arabia. The ruling circles of this oil-rich country (petroleum
extraction in 1977 was 1053 million tons) are directly dependent on the
support of imperialist forces. to whom they have many ties. Saudi
Arabia received roughly 60 billion dollars from oil sales in 1977. It
cannot "digest" such amounts and is investing it abroad. The ruling
circles of Saudi Arabia have become closely tied up with American
monopoly capitalists. Saudi Arabia spends billions of dollars in the
Rest for weapons and technical military equipment. In 1976 expendi-
tures for weapons reached 7 billion dollars. The Americans are also
drawing the United Aral. Emirates into the arms race. Because Saudi
Arabia does not have its own regular military cadres to handle the
highly cowlex types of military equipment. it is forced to maintain
several thousand foreign military advisors ant. specialists, most of
them Americans.

Alongside the build-up of the Saudi Arabian mili ary arsenal. which
Vestern experts consider to far exceed the country's national defense
needs. the direct American military presence in the Persian Gulf re-
gion is growing. According to reports in the foreign press, the
United States has received the right to make active use of military
bases in Bahrein and on hasira Island in Oman.

The preservation of a regime friendly to Hashington in Saudi Arabia
and control over the receipt of petroleum are one of the foundations
of American strategy in the Middle East. Saudi Arabia and the United
States are bound by a bilateral agreement whose military articles re-
main secret.

It is coupon knowledge that the reactionary Arab regimes. with U. 8.
support, are trying to create tension in the southern part of the
Arabian Peninsula. The President of the Yemen Arab Republic sl-
Ghashmi was killed as a result of the provocation and with direct

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

participation by the reactionary regimes. The attempt at a coup d'stat
in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen made by Salim Rubay'i Ali
on 26 June 1978 pursued the same goal. The purpose of the conspiracy
was to provoke fratricidal war between the Yemen Arab Repub‘ic and the
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and eliminate progressive trans-
formations that have been carried out in democratic Yemen.

After the failure of the conspiracy an extraordinary session of the
Council of the Arab League was called in Cairo under pressure. from
Saudi Arabia and Egypt. Algeria, Iraq. Libya, the People's Democratic
Republic of Yemen, Syria, and the Palestine Liberation Organization re-
fused to take part and the Republic of Djibouti was not represented.

The session passed an incompetent resolution: to freeze all political
and diplomatic relations between Arab League medaers and the People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen and to stop cultural and economic relations
with it and the granting of technical aid.

According to reports in the Arab press, the imperialist propaganda
against Democratic Yemen is a preplanned action. Reactionary Arab
states have not renounced their aggressive designs in relation to South
Yemen. The reactionaries are especially alarmed by formation of the
ruling Yemen Socialist Party. which has proclaimed a program of pro-
gressive socioeconomic transformations in the People's Democratic
Republic of Yemen.

Thus. the situation in the Middle East continues tense. Washington and
Tel Aviv, coordinating their actions, are trying to distract the Arab
countries from their primary objective, the struggle to remove the con-
sequences of Israeli aggression. Taking advantage of the hopeless situ-
ation of Sadat. who is following a policy that betrays the interests of
the Arab peoples. the United States now intends to establish itself
openly in this region. This was precisely the goal of the three-party
meeting of Egyptian President Sadat, Israeli Prime Minister Begin. and
U. 8. President Carter held on 6-17 Septedier 1978 at u'amp DavidI near
Hashington. The protracted talks concluded with adoption of two docu-
ments: "Pramork for conclusion of a Peace 1* eaty Between Egypt and
Israel" and "Framework of Peace in the Middle East."

From the first document it is clear that although Israel does promise
to withdraw its occupation forces from the Sinai Peninsula by stages
after conclusion of a peace treaty, even then Egypt will not receive
the right to full sovereignity over the Sinai.

The problem of the occupied Palestinian territories and other Arab re-
gions is the basis of the second document. Israel refused to agree
to grant sovereignity to the West Bank of the River Jordan and the Gaza
trip, thus blocking the opportunity to establish a separate Palestinian
'State. Prime Minister Begin said bluntly that Israel intends to keep
its military presence in these regions during the five-year transi-
tional period stipulated in the Camp David documents. he said further
that Israel will never give the Golan Heights back to Syria and that
Jerusalem will be the capital of Israel "as long as the Jewish people
exist."

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The negotiations in Camp David are a deal made behind the backs of the
Arab peoples and mainly suit the interests of Israel, American imperi-
alism, and Arab reactionaries. The separate deal did not resolve a
single basic problem of the Middle Eastern settlement; on the contrary,
it made a settlement even more difficult to achieve. The intention is
perfectly obvious: split the Arabs, pit one against another, and im-
pose settlement conditions suitable to the aggressor on the countries
individually.

No matter what ”framework" the separate deal may be clothed 10. it
covers up the capitulation of one side and secures the fruits of ag-
gression for the other, for Israel; such a deal can only make the situ-
ation in the Middle East even more explosive. This is a new anti-
Arab deal between Israel and Egypt. worked out with the active partici-
pation of Hashington.

It is no accident that this separate deal made at Canp David aroused
determined protest in the Arab world. The members of the Front of
Resistance and Counteraction to the Capitulationist Policy of Sadat
(Syria, Algeria, Libya. Democratic Yemen. and the leaders of the PLO)
adopted a decision to break diplomatic relations with Egypt and impose
an economic boycott on it. In addition, they will try to get the
headquarters of the Arab League moved away from Cairo.

As for the Soviet Union. it has always been and remains an advocate of
an effective, all-encompassing settlement in the Middle East, a settle-
ment which would meet the true and longvrun interests of all the coun-
tries and peoples of this region. As General Secretary of the CPSU
Central Committee, Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme

Soviet Comrade L. l. Brezhnev emphasized in his talk in Baku, "Long
years of experience prove irrefutably that there is only one way to
truly resolve the Middle Eastern conflict. Th!a is complete libera-
tion of all Arab lands occupied by Israel in 1937, complete and unam-
biguous respect for the legal rights of the Arab ptu;l; of Palestine,
including the right to establish their own independent state, and in-
suring reliably guaranteed security for all countries of the region,
including. of course. Israel. Such an all-embracing settlement is pos-
sible only with the participation of all interested countries. includ-
ing the Palestine Liberation Organization. And the sooner this settle-
ment is achieved, the sooner the Middle East will cease to be a center
of tensions."

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye". I978

ll.l76
C50: 1801

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMMENTS 0" U. S. NONCOHHISSIONED OFFICERS IN EUROPE

Moscow ZARUBBZRNOYE VOYBNNOYE OBOZRENTYB in Russian No 11, Nov 78
signed to press 3 Oct 78 pp 15-20

[Article by Haj A. Chekulayev: "The Noncommieaioned Officer Contingent
of American Forces in Europe"]

[Text] The constructive and consistent policy of the Soviet Union
aimed at successful implementation of the program worked out by the
25th CPSU Congress to continue the struggle for international peace
and security. against the arms race, for consolidation of detente.

and for international cooperation is finding support among hundreds of
millions of people on all continents. However, the ruling circles of
the imperialist countries, above all the United States. are continuing
to take steps whose purpoue is to increase tension in Europe and build
up military potential in this part of the world.

Among these steps is the constant increase in the number of American

troops in Europe and supplying them with the latent types of weapons

and combat equipment. The Pentagon devotes specie. a~tcntion here to
personnel matters. and one issue is enlarging the role of NCO's.

After the end of the war in Vietnam and the transition in the U. S.
Armed Forces to voluntary enlistment the American command stepped up
its work on the selection. training. and indoctrination of uco's.

In the American Army today NCO's and specialists are the largest con-
tingent of personnel. The combat readiness of the armed forces as a
whole depends to a definite degree on their level of training and
practical skills. According to figures in the American press. NCO's
constituted 56.9 percent of all military personnel in 1973. 60.2 in
1974, 60.‘ in 1975. 61.7 in 1976. and were planned to be 62 percent
in 1977. The Pentagon leadership believes that sergeants play an
important part in unifying small subunits. training personnel. main-
taining strict discipline. and insuring close checks on the political
attitudes and behavior of'subordinates.

The entire system established in the U. 8. Armed Forces for recruit-
ment, service. and the training and retraining of NCO's aims at

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPUICIAL USE ONLY

careful. thorough selection of this category of American servicemen.
However. in the opinion of military leaders, this process is even more
important among Aeerican forces in Europe. Therefore. they are staffed
primarily with “00's and technical specialists who have a high level of
silitary and specialized training and have been educated at schools for
sergeants in the United States.

At these schools training is offered in virtually all the ‘80 basic mil-
itary occupational specialties of the U. 8. Army. The length of study
is 10-6 weeks depending on the future specialty.

“60's for American forces stationed on the European continent are
trained at the school for sergeants of the U. 8. ground forces in
Europe (Bad-T312. West Germany) where up to 370 service-en are trained
each year. The course of training is figured to last five weeks (249
training hours). Candidates with good references from their ianndiste
commanders go before a special coemission which pays special attention
to their political "reliability" and devotion to the systen existing
in the United States. This cos-iasion decides if they will be sent

to a school.

The systea of training is organized so that future NCO's specialize in
the field they have chosen and acquire the necessary practical skills
in training and indoctrinating subordinates. For this purpose they
learn to organize and conduct training periods with soldiers in the
particular discipline, to form correct mutual relations with subordi-
nates. and to exert proper influence on them.

Military counterintelligence. FBI agents, the military police. and
other organisations participate in checking the political "reliability"
of “60's being sent to serve in Europe.

The established procedures for proaotion and rece‘ving ranks also pro-
mote careful and thorough selection of sergeants. To receive the rank
of "corporal." the first NCO rank. privates first class must go through
a corresponding course of training, pass a test in the specialty. and
demonstrate their ability to perform service duties established by

U. 8. Army annuals and regulations in practice. During the taking of
essainstions the loyalty of sergeant candidates with respect to the
existing order and their political convictions are checked.

A distinctive feature of American military personnel in Europe is the
trend observed in recent years toward an increase in the number of
higher NCO's with a reduction in the nuaber of corporals. According
to figures in the foreign press. servicemen with the rank of "sergeant"
and "staff sergeant" constitute approxiastely 75 percent of the "00's
in U. 8. ground forces in Europe.

The American coamand tries to strengthen its NCO element. develop their
interest in the service. and increase the authority of sergeants by
every means. 0n 6 July 1966 the position of command sergeant major was

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Pentagon has taken certain steps in recent years to increase the
effectiveness of sergeant training. Specifically. the syllabi at the
school in Bad T61: and at retraining courses have been revised and

new short courses organized for various categories of NCO‘s and spe'
cislists. The new syllabi put special emphasis on mastering leadership
techniques and the ability to solve moral and emotional problems.

In late 1976 the headquarters of U. S. ground forces in Europe approved
a new four-week retraining program for sergeants at schools in the di-
visions. In the first week the servicemen study how to lead a squad or
platoon. The second and third weeks are devoted to field training
periods. and the last week is allocated for political training periods
and the study of military administration. equipment, the tactics of
small subunits and other subjects.

Once a year the NCO personnel of U. 8. Armed Forces in Europe are
tested in their military occupational specialty. This involves an oral
exam and a written exam. An evaluation of "high." "normal," or "low"
is given on the basis of the results of the two tests. This score is
considered in determining the serviceman's pay and considering him for
promotion. Persons with the rank of staff sergeant or higher are re-
quired to pass examinations in a related military occupational spe-
cialty; these examinations are given once every two years. For command
sergeant majors these examinations were abolished on 1 January 1976.

Ideological indoctrination occupies a central place in the system of
training for NCO's, as it does for all American military personnel in
Europe. The command of U. 8. ground forces in Europe attaches great
importance to increasing the effectiveness of the sergeants' ideological
influence on enlisted men. The American military press has observed
many times that in current conditions sergeants must take more respon.
sibility than before for the morale of their subcrdinates; they must

have the same leadership effectiveness and propsga {a activism as of—
ficers do.

The enormous progress made by the Soviet Union and the other socialist
countries in peaceful building and the spread of communist ideas among
the working people of the world force the American command to employ
considerable resources for propagandizing anticommunism and anti-
Sovietism and instilling hatred of the USSR and the other socialist
countries in the hope of neutralizing the infiltration of progressive
ideas into the barracks. The core of anticommunist propaganda among
"60's is the myth of the "communist peril" which supposedly threatens
the Western world and the "desire of «unwise to eliminate the capi-
tslist system by force."

One of the lines of ideological indoctrination of sergeants is instill-
ing them with devotion to the capitalist system existing in the United
States. All personnel are required to maintain loyalty to the prin-
ciples of American "democracy"and to the military oath and to obey
officers. However. sergeants are expected to show not only personal
devotion and carry out all orders without question. but also teach
these qualities to their subordinates.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

introduced in the headquarters of the branches of the armed forces by
decision of the lentagon. At the same time the position of command
sergeant major was introduced for armed forces comands, armies. corps.
divisions. brigades. and battalions and for training centers and schools
involved with training and retraining military cadres.

The ”Manual for Sergeant" states,"‘l‘he col-land sergeant major is the
senior sergeant in the battalion, brigade. division, and other higher
instances. lie monitors performance of duties by the first sergeants of
subordinate units and subunits."

The co-Iand sergeant major holds meetings for "(20's on questions of com-
bat training. rules of behavior. discipline. hygieneI and work pro-
cedures. he gives the commander recouendations on questions of ap-
pointments. promotions. allocation of leaves, imposing punishment. and
announcing cousndations for enlisted men and Nm's. The co-and ser-
geant major participates in inspections of subordinate units and sub-
units. explains the instructions of the co-sander on whose behalf he
works, and gives appropriate orders.

At the beginning of 1973 a school was opened at Port bliss. Texas to
train comand sergeant majors. It is the only school in the U. 8.
Armed Forces to which sergeants from all the regional U. S. cos-ands.
including American forces in Europe. are sent. This is the top school
in the system for training NOO's. The American press calls it the
"war college for sergeants."

The system of selecting and training coal-and sergeant mjors is ex-
pected to preclude the admission of democratically minded people,
people who work in progressive organizations, those suspected of dis-
loyalty to the social system existing in the United States. and people
who have expressed dissatisfaction with the aruy way of life.

American propaganda tries to present the cot-and sergeant major as the
"connecting link between the «sender and the enlisted man" or the
"demozratizing factor in the army" and calls the cos-and sergeant
majors themselves "full-fledged representatives of the col-son soldiers"
and "defenders" of their interests. In reality. the co-and uses them
to exercise influence on the canon soldiers and keeps them obedient

by creating nothing but the appearance of ”democratization" of the

army.

A far-flung network. of retraining courses, assemblies, and various
special training periods is used extensively in the U. 8. Armed Forces
to improve the professional training of “60‘s. Each year about 6,000
sergeants are retrained at lad T31: and up to 3,000 go through re-
training courses for "60's in divisions. In 6-5 weeks they polish
their conned skills. familiarize themselves with new weapons and com-

bat equipment. and study forms of ideological indoctrination of subor-
dinates.

13
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The foundation of this aspect of indoctrination is exalting the il-
luaory "advantages" of what is called the "American way of life" and
"American denocracy." which U. S. serviceeen are supposed to defend.

The ideological indoctrination apparatus of American forces in Europe.
relying on sergeants and using their direct contacts with personnel.
ieplant a spirit of eilitarisn in servicenen. It is founded on propa-
ganda for war against the Soviet Union and the other countries of the
socialist coamunity.

The thesis of "Atlantic solidarity" occupies a significant place in
ailitaristic propaganda. The soo's of American forces in Europe par-
ticipate in activities of the so-called "partnership prograa" which de-
termines the content and fora of cooperation with different categories
of service-en in the NATO arnies and actively fosters the organization
and conduct of joint exercises. firing. sporting events. and the like.

The information department of U. 8. ground forces in Europe has de-
veloped and is following a special program that obligates all service-
een to study the language‘of the country in which they are serving.

For sergeants. specifically those with the rank of staff sergeant and
lower. a language training course lasting 60 hours has been instituted
and they nust take it within 30 days of arrival in Europe. Thirty hours
are allocated exclusively for the language prograa and 10 hours are used
for familiarization with the culture and history of the host country.
Sergeants let class and higher study in a 60-hour program that envisions
only language study.

Propaganda for the traditions of the U. S. Araed Forces occupies a sig-
nificant place in the ideological indoctrination of sergeants. It be-
caae particularly broad in scope during celebration of the 200th anni-
versary of the arly and 200th anniversary of the formation of the United
States. Sergeants who are veterans of Horld Us: 1I and the were in
Korea and Vietnam are widely honored. Servicenen who took part in com-
bat in Vietnam exercise a considerable influence on the political atti-
tudes and morale of all enlisted and NCO personnel. According to the
testimony of the foreign press. about half of the sergeants in the
ground forces comasnd and 60 percent of the U. S. Air Porce sergeants
in Europe have coebat experience gained in fighting against the
people's patriotic forces of South Vietnam.

Religious propaganda also plays an important role in moral-psychological
training. The American counsnd in Europe considers "obedience to God"
an important aural stimulus and tries to use the fact that most ser-
geants are prisoners of the narcotic of religion. According to a sur-
vey conducted by the newspaper ARMY TIMES. 87.1 percent of the sergeants
are believers (out of 1.900 service-en surveyed). Hora than 17 percent
of those surveyed attend church activities regularly.

Haas information aedia are used vigorously in ideological indoctrination
of uco's. Propaganda for the work of the most experienced sergeants in
training subordinates and raising their professional skill level occupies

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a significant place in the radio and television broadcasts of American
forces in Europe.

So-cnlled sergeants "days" and "weeks" are held regularly in American
units and suhunltn stationed on the European continent. and 1976 was
proclaimed the "year of the sergeant" in U. 8. ground forces in Europe.
During such events Nco's are given the right to coanand platoons. com—
panies. and battalions. The temporary transfer of power in the sub-
units to them is purely superficial, because the corresponding offi-
cers are on the spot and exercise actual leadership. Nonetheless. the
American command gives such activities broad publicity. These things
are done for several purposes: for one. to raise the prestige and
authority of «co'o; for two. to develop in them certain skills in lead-
ing subunits; and for three. to instill American servicemen with the
idea of supposed "democracy" in the army.

The appointment of sergeants to officer positions is done for the same
reason. Thus, officer positions as chiefs of NCO retraining schools,
chiefs of rifle training grounds. officer responsible for the safety
of practice firing. and others are transferred to sergeants.

The transition to voluntary recruitment. the system of moral and ma-
terial incentive. and extended periods of service in the army helped
to shape the political and class self-consciousness of sergeants and
in large degree make them active spokesmen for the political goals of
iaperialism's military preparations.

Of course. not all sergeants accept anticommunist dogmas and stereo-
types on faith. Some of them are beginning to understand that in the
situation of a campaign for detente there is no need whatsoever for
American troops to be present in Europe with the supposed mission of
"defending Hestern civilization against aggre:sion from the East." Some
NCO'e are influenced by the peace-loving policy of the USSR and its
0111¢8.aimed at eliminating military confrontation .nd development of
mutually advantageous relations vith capitalist states based on prin-
ciples of peaceful co-existence influences a certain number of NCO's.

The American forces in Europe also have class and racial contradic-
tions caused primarily by the very structure of the U. S. Armed
Forces. The officers of the American Army in Europe differ from the
sergeants by social origin. education. and service opportunities and
therefore take a haughty and negligent attitude toward them. Some of
the sergeants are expressing discontent with the fact that the offi-
cers assign some of their functional duties to NCO's, do not vent

to go into the problems that concern their subordinates. ”Discipline
among the troops could be much better if theofficers came down off
their pedestals and tried to understand how personnel live." remarked
the newspaper STARS AKD STRIPES.

The existence of nationality and racial contradictions resulted from
the policy followed by the American command in relation to Black ser-
geants and representatives of other ethnic groups. The position of

15
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Block soldiers, who make up four percent of allﬂcu's in U. s. ground
forces in Europe is made more difficult by the fact that not just Nhitc
officers and sergeants. but also subordinates. are causal with them.

The moral fiber of this category of servicemen is also shown by the
steady rise in alcoholism and drug addiction. According to official
figures for the medical commission of the U. 8. ground forces in
Europe which is studying the prevention of alcoholism in formations and
units, 36 percent of NCO's (the group from staff sergeant to command
sergeant major) used strong alcoholic beverages excessively.

It is observed in the Western press that a significant share of the crime
committed by American sergeants is committed by the drug addicts and
alcoholics. A whole range of steps, beginning with prevention and end-

ing with harsh disciplinary measures. is being taken to reduce the spread
of drug addiction and alcoholism among NCO's; the military police. spe-
cially trained agents. and paid informers participate in this program.
however, the battle against drug addiction and alcoholism is made more
difficult by the fact that many sergeants who went through the war in
Vietnam used drugs and alcohol together with their subordinates and en-

gaged in the sale and distribution of narcotics among American service-
men.

The deviant political views and attitudes of sergeants. the existence
of class and racial contradictions in this service category. crimes.

and amoral behavior definitely diminish their political-moral level.
However. the U. s. Army command estimates that on the whole these phe-
nomena do not have a decisive effect on the fighting effectiveness of
American forces in Europe. This is owing to careful selection. more
intensive training and ideological indoctrination of "00's. and material
incentives for work; this ultimately makes sergeants a reliable support

for the American command in performing the military-political missions
of U. s. imperialism.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye". 1978

11.176
CSO: 1801

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

COMMENTS ON OFFENSIVE OPERATIONS ON A U. S. ARMY CORPS

Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYB VOYENNOYE OBOZRERIYE in Russian No 11. Nov 78
signed to press 3 Oct 78 pp 21-27

[Article by Col A. Ryahhov. candidate of military sciences. decent:
“The H. 8. Army Corps on the Offensive")

[Text] There are still influential forces in the United States and
the other imperialist countries who have not renounced their criminal
plens to unleash nuclear warfare. They are to blame for the fact that
the arms race is continuing, that military budgets increase each year.
the production of weapons and military equipment is expanding, and
troop combat training is being steadily improved.

within the overall system of preparation of the armed forces for a
future war against the USSR and the other socialist countries the
leadership of the U. 5. Army devotes great attention to the organiza-
tion and conduct of offensive actions. American military specialists
consider the offensive one of the primary types of engagement or oper-
ation. The essential feature of the offensive is 'QIIably hitting the
enemy with all types of weapons. including nuclear weapons. and swiftly
moving formations and units to the depth of the enemy deployment in
order to capture or wipe out man. weapons. and equipment and to take
vitally important enemy regions and objects.

As the foreign military press observes. the U. 8. Army corps. the
highest tactical formation in a theater of action, plays a significant
role in the operations of ground forces and may form the basis of a
coalition group of armies.

The army corps has significant fire and striking power. Because it
combines the primary arms of troops. it has its own essential means
of combat and logistic support, which makes it possible for the corps
to fight not only within a group of armies but also in an independent
operational sector or cut off from the main forces.

The role of the army corps in an offensive operation is determined by
its designation and place in the operational structure of the coalition

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

group of armies. Thus, when operating in the first echelon in the axis
of the main thrust. it may play an important part in achieving the ob-
jeetive of the offensive operation of a group of armies. This is ex-
plained by the fact that at the beginning of a war. for example. this
group will usually go over to the offensive in a single-echelon forma-
tion. holding several divisions in reserve. During the course of the
offensive operations these divisions are to be made subordinate to the
army corps operating in the main axis and. after receiving fresh forma-
tions and units. are capable of performing missions to the full depth
of the offensive operation of a group of armies. In the sector of the
subsidiary strike the army corps performs a mission in support of the
actions of the main grouping of forces.

In the offensive. foreign military specialists believe. the army corps
will usually be given decisive objectives: smash an opposed grouping,
seize territory or key terrain sectors. deprive the enemy of essential
resources. demoralize the defending troops and reduce their will to
continue resistance. and distract the enemy's attention from other re-
gions of combat actions. Offensive actions may also be carried out for
limited objectives such as pinning down enemy reserves. thwarting an
enemy offensive, breaking out of encirclement. and releasing friendly
troops from encirclement.

According to the views of the U. S. command. the success of the units
and formations of a corps in an offensive engagement will depend

largely on meeting the following conditions: concentration of the neces-
sary men and equipment at the decisive point at the decisive moment; in-
suring reliable command and control in the interests of focusing fire
efforts and maneuvering in the important sectors; takir and keeping

the initiative through the combined efforts of all arms of troops in
order to achieve maximum effectiveness of friendly weapons and reduce
the effectiveness of enemy fire weapons. In an offensive where nuclear
weapons are not used. 0. S. Army manuals recommen. creating a superi-
ority of at least 6:1 over the defenders in the breakthrough sectors

and delivering the main thrust at the most vulnerable points in the
enemy's system of defense. The main factors that make possible the

necessary superiority over the enemy are surprise, striking power. and
speed of actions.

Foreign experts do not consider it necessary to create a significant
superiority over defenders in men and equipment if nuclear weapons are
used in the offensive. In some cases it is even possible to go over to
the offensive with an even ratio of forces. It is recommended that tac-
tical superiority over the enemy in the main sector be achieved by

skillful use of nuclear weapons against the enemy's most important tar-
gets.

The foreign press attaches great importance to the surprise factor. It
is assumed that an enemy who is caught unprepared or completely taken
by surprise cannot offer proper resistance, even if he has superior
forces. It is recommended, therefore, that small forces make maximum

18
FOR OfPIClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of the surprise factor to create superiority over the enemy. and
that this be done by the measures to confuse him and by taking advantage of
the high mobility of friendly troops.

The combat composition of the corps is not fixed and depends on its role
and place in the operational structure of the group of armies. the com-
bat missions facing then, terrain conditions. and the position and
nature of actions of the enemy. The corps may include from two (in a

subsidiary axis) to six different types of divisions as well as support
and rear service units and subunits.

At the beginning of the war an army corps may go over to the offensive
with those resources that it has at the start of combat actions.

The combat missions and scope of operation of the army corps depend on
many factors, above all on the mission of the group of armies. the

designation and composition of the corps. the nature of actions by the
enemy. and terrain conditions.

Foreign military specialists believe that an army corps operating in
the sector of the main thrust may be given an attack zone 60-80 kilom-
eters wide; in a subsidiary axis the width may be 120 kilometers and
more (see illustration below). The depth of the ismsdiate objective
is 35-40 kilometers and the final objective is 100-150 kilometers deep
with a total duration of 34 days for the operation. The rate of ad-

vance where nuclear weapons are not used can be 50-50 kilometers a
day.

when the army corps has 5-6 divisions it can wage combat actions on a
broader front (up to 130 kilometers) and perform missions at depths of as
much as 250 kilometers. These are approximate values. It is believed
that corps missions should be given in general terms so that co-Ianders
will have maximum flexibility and freedom of actio... In the opinion

of American experts. specific attack objectives should be avoided be-

cause this leads to restricting initiative and deprives corps couanders
and staffs of freedom of action.

It is recouended that the battle formation of the army corps on the
offensive be constructed with due regard for the possibility of effi-
ciently using the results of nuclear and conventional strikes, broad
maneuvering in the interests of concentrating forces for the break-
through. and rapid dispersal of forces to defend against weapons of
mass destruction. A strong first echelon is envisioned to inflict a
blow at the very beginning of the offensive. Specialists recs-end
that an assault group (the main thrust). auxiliary thrust groupings

(up to two). and a reserve (second echelon) be formed among the troops
of the corps.

The elements of the corps battle formation are the first echelon, the
combined arms reserve (second echelon). an airborne (air mobile) as-
sault group. cover troops. groupings of corps field and antiaircraft

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Construction of the Battle Foreation and Missions of the U. 5. Army
Corps on the Offensive (variation)

-

 

 

Key: a) First Objective;
b) Final Objective:
c) Objective;
«1) Rear Subunits;

e) Areor (tank) Division - Second Echelon;
f) Lancecuided Missiles;

1) [Russian abbreviation represents "brigam" x-ith appropriate
number);

.1) Armor (tank) Division;

k) Hecbanized Division; ‘ I

1) Armored Cavalry Regiment.

artillery. and special reserves (fire weapons. antitank. engineer. and
chemical).

the first echelon in the axis of the main thrust. The priesry objective
of the first echelon will be to break through the tactical zone of en-
eey defense and accoqlish the corpe' firct objectiv : after this. in

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formations that have suffered large losses. ward off counterettacks and
counterstrikcs. and accomplish the final objective in cooperation with
first-echelon foraations.

The armored cavalry reginent nay operate independently in an auxiliary
axis. carry on reconnaissance. or cover open flanks and gaps in the
battle formation. When the offensive is carried out without direct

contact with the enemy it is contemplated that the regiaent will be
used as corps cover troops.

"hen the corps battle formation is constructed in one echelon. the
srnored cavalry regiment and detached brigade. if there is one in the
corps, may be assigned to the coabined erma reserve. The reserve for-

mations and units of the army corps are usually located 25-50 kiloa-
etars from the forward edge.

The airborne (air mobile) assault party used in the zone of attack of
the army corps nay be up to a brigade in strength. Its subunits are
usually allocated from the second-echelon (reserve) formations and
units. The prinary objective of the asrault party is to wipe out
nuclear weapons and control posts and take advantageous lines and re-
gions in enemy territory and hold then until friendly troops approach
fron the front. Before the beginning of the landing operation the as-
sault subunits are located behind the second-echelon divisions.

The grouping of corps field artillery usually includes Lance guided
nissile battalions and some of the field artillery subunits left at
the disposal of the corps,conander. During the period of preparatory
fire and general support of the offensive of the first-echelon forma-
tions in the priaary sector the corps comnder may bring in division
artillery or the artillery of other units located in the second eche-
lon (reserve) of the corps.

The antiaircraft artillery grouping includes Hawk antiaircraft guided
missiles in addition to regular corps weapons. The colaasnder deter-
mines the most inportant targets and order of covering then in the
corps zone of operations and direct fire control is carried out ac-
cording to a uniform system in the air defense zone. The chief ob-
jects to be covered are nuclear weapons. the formations of the assault
grouping and reserve. and com-and and control posts.

The antitank reserve of the army corps is designed to reinforce the
antitank capabilities of first-echelon formation and repulse counter-
attacks and counterstrikes independently during the offensive. It is.
composed primarily of fire support helicopter subunits.

The engineer reserve of the corps perform jobs to strengthen the first-
echelon formations. clean up after nuclear weapons, cover open flanks,
and the like. It may consist of sapper, pontoon-bridge, and other
engineer subunits.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The corps chemical reserve is used to lay down camouflage and toxic
smokes and clean up after nuclear attacks. It usually includes smoke
subunits ..nd antichemicel defense and special treatment subunits.

All the special reserves are located behind the battle formations of
the corps' first-echelon formations in the sectors of their probable
use.

The nuclear weapons remaining at the disposal of the comander after
distribution among the formations are an important reserve of the army
corps. The comrander may use this reserve to influence the course of
battle by allocating nuclear a-unition to the first-echelon formations
and reserve.

According to the views of the U. 5. Army command. offensive actions by
formations of the ground forces are composed of the following stages:
approach, attack proper (breakthrough). development of the success, and
pursuit.

The approach is carried out for the attacker to come into direct contact
with the enemy or to re-establish direct contact. One of the require-
ments for the approach is concealed forward movement. The approach to
the enemy should be carried out in such a way that the first fighting
engagement with the enemy is made by small forces. especially when the
enemy's system of defense has not yet been clearly identified. During
the approach, therefore. the formations of the corps advance by echelon
in march and approach march formation. maintaining reconnaissance.
cover. and security forces in front.

It is believed that such actions will be most typical at the beginning
of a war and when attacking from the march. In this case, the armored
cavalry regiment may operate as the cover force for the army corps.

It is given the following missions: carry on act). 1! reconnaissance.
cross the security tone. break through to the forward ed. e of the main
(first) zone of defense, and support the advance and deployment of the
main forces of the corps. The combat actions of cover troops will he
supported by the fire of field artillery allocated from the main forces
of the corps and put directly at their disposal and strikes by support
aviation and fire support helicopters.

The attack proper (breakthrough) includes concentration of men and
equipment in the chosen sectors. suppression of the defender's fire
weapons (preparatory fire and support of the attack). delivering the
strike. and suppression-destruction of the enemy. U. 5. military spe-
cialists envision two methods of going over to the attack: from the
march and from a position of direct contact with the enemy.

In the first case troops advance- from the depth directly to the start-
ing line for the attack and move into the engagement either fros the
march or from assembly regiOns occupied for a short time beforehand
and located 60-80 kilometers from the front line. They leave these

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regions and move to the starting lines for the offensive. Entering
combat from the march is most characteristic for the initial period

of a war when attacking the any is a natural continuation of the ap-
proach. Attacking on the move from assembly regions is more character-
istic when combat actions are already underway. It will be done most
often undtr conditions of nuclear warfare and when the enemy has has-
tily switched to defense and is inferior to the attacker in fighting
effectiveness. combat readiness. and mobility.

The offensive from a position of direct contact is the procedure where
the line occupied by the troops is the starting place for the offen-
sive. This procedure is usually used when the army corps is on defense

and when attacking a prepared enemy defense. usually with the use of
conventional weapons only.

A key condition for success in the engagement is considered to be con-
centration of the essential men and equipment in the chosen sectors in
order to achieve the necessary superiority over the defenders. In com-
bat using conventional weapons it is recommended that this superiority
be created in a narrow sector of the front where the enemy defense is
rtst weakly organized. It is envisioned that 60-80 percent of all the
men and equipment of the corps will be concentrated in the chosen
breakthrough sectors (8-12 kilometers long); this will. of course.
weaken the grouping in other sectors.

The foreign press emphasizes that organizing such maneuvering demands
great skill. intelligent risk-taking, secrecy, and operational stility
from commanders and staff in order to achieve maximum surprise in
going over to the offensive. It is recosnended that all possible
steps be taken to deprive the enemy of the possibility of carrying on
reconnaissance. to confuse the enemy and limit his capabilities for
troop control by extensive use of radio electronic means. and to use
the terrain and camouflage skillfully.

Foreign military specialists believe that before divisions go over to
the offensive there will be preparatory fire using all forces or only
conventional weapons for the purpose of not only suppressing the
enemy's defending troops but also to carry out maneuvers at this time
with corps forces in order to create the assault grouping. in the
chosen axes (breakthrough sectors). In nuclear warfare the prepara-
tory fire may last 20-30 minutes: in cosbat where nuclear weapons are
not used it may be even longer.

Sixty percent and more of all corps artillery is concentrated in the
sector of primary efforts when preparatory fire is carried on for an
offensive without using nuclear weapons.

Hassed bombing and ground-attack strikes by tactical aviation against
targets not destroyed by field artillery. especially in the sector
where the main efforts are concentrated, is an essential part of
preparatory fire. Foreign specialists consider that these attacks may
take place to a depth of 100 kilometers and more.

23

FOR OFFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Upon conclusion of preparatory fire the first-echelon formations of the
army corps go over to the offensive. concentrating their primary efforts
in the narrow breakthrough sectors. The corps commander influences the
course of action with the fire of field artillery. supporting aviation.
reserves. and other resources. Airborne (air mobile) landings and steps
to repulse enemy counterattacke and counterstrikes are also visioned
to maintain a high rate of attack.

As the foreign press emphasises. if the first-echelon troops suffer sig-
nifican: losses during the breakthrough and the rate of the offensive
slows down. it is recommended that they be replaced by fresh forces to
deepen the wedge and develop the success. It is envisioned that the
second echelon will be introduced into the engagement after accomplish-
ment of the first objective; its primary purpose will be to develop

the success of the offensive. Under cover of supporting tactical and
army aviation. with fire support. and coordinating actions with air-
borne assault groups it advances swiftly into the depth, not slowing
down to wipe out surrounded enemy troops and attempting to encircle
major centers of resistance. Foreign military specialists consider
that commanders should not spread out forces being used to develop the
success. but rather should keep them compact to maintain a high rate of
advance. The formations and units participating in the breakthrough
follow behind the forces that are developing the success. They broaden
and reinforce the captured region. wipe out enemy forces remaining in
the rear. and suppress pockets of enemy resistance.

when the attacking troops encounter strongly fortified lines or objects
in the depth of the defense. it is recommended that they go around
them; but when this is not possible they attack them after powerful
strikes by artillery and tactical and army aviation. In the opinion of
foreign specialists. while developing the success counterstrikes by
operational reserves (depending on their composition) may be repulsed
with nuclear weapons and strikes by troops on the wave or part of the
forces may be used in position to maintain a high rate of advance.

The u. 8. Army command considers pursuit the final phase of an offen-
sive. Its primary purpose is to complete the rout of enemy forces.
The pursuit usually begins when the defender is no longer able to hold
his positions and tries to withdraw from the engagement. Pursuit is
carried out on a broad front by sectors. with frontal and parallel
pursuit organised in each of them.

After the first-echelon formations reach the line of the final objec-
tive the troops of the corps dig in in the captured regions (regard-
less of the kind of new combat mission they may receive).

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye”. 1978

11.176
C50: 1801
26

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?lClAL USE ONLY

COMMENTS ON TANK DEVELOPMENT IN NESTBRN COUNTRIES

Moscow ZARUBBZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRBNIYB in Russian No 11. Nov 78
signed to press 3 Oct 78 pp 27—3‘

[Article by Col-Engr (Ros) Yu. Kraynyuk: "whys in Hhich Tanks Are
Being Developed in the Capitalist Countries"]

[Textl The silitary leaders of the leading capitalist countries attach
great importance to further quantitative and qualitative growth of
armored tank forces. assigning then a special place in their aggres-
sive preparations. In their assessment of the role of tanks in the
system of arsed forces of the NATO countries, foreign military spe-
cialists continue to consider then the Iain striking force of ground
forces in future were using both conventional and nuclear weapons.

Virtually all the capitalist countries engaged in the developsent and
production of tanks are now carrying on research aiaed at isproving

the conbat performance of new. existing. and even obsolete tanks.

This research is being carried out in conformity with plans for tech-
nical re-equipping of the capitalist srsies which 's expected to replace
most of the tank fleets of ground forces in the 1980's with usdcrnised
and new tanks that are better suited to the requiresents of waging
modern cosbst. Horeover. since the early 1970‘s research has been done
on designing so-called "fourth-generation" tanks. They should be ex-
pected to appear in roughly 1990-2000.

Judging by reports in the foreign press. certain lines of study have
developed in the process of work by the capitalist countries to undern-
ize existing tanks and build prosising new ones. These develop-ents
involve a further increase in fire power. saneuverability. protective
features. and operating reliability as well as a reduction in the cost
of developing and purchasing tanks.

The increase in firepower during aodernization and developsent of new
tanks is acconplished by iaproving the prissry weapon and asnunition.
using integrated fire control systeas, and isproving the capabilities
for target detection by the crew under day and night conditions. The
choice by foreign specialists of the type of pri-ary tank weapon is a

25
FOR OFVIClkL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fundamental issue in increasing firepower. The technical rivalry among
cannon. missile-cannon. and missile weapons that lasted abroad for more
than 10 years ended with the triumph of the cannon weapon. which has a
number of significant advantages: adequate fire effectiveness at ranges
of 1.500-2.500 esters. universality. reliability. simplicity of ser-
vicing. and relatively low cost.

The missile-cannon weapon first built in the United States (a lSZ-ailli-
mstsr gun-launcher that fired Shillelagh antitank missiles and conven-
tional shells) and developed somewhat later in France and Japan did not
receive wide distribution: further use of it is not contemplated. It
proved complex in design. unreliable in operation. and very expensive.
even though it is superior to the cannon in probability of a hit at
great distances (3. 000 asters and more). But because tanks will. in

the opinion of foreign specialists. seldom fire at such ranges in the
European and other military theaters. this advantage loses its impor-
tance. The American H6082 and M551 Sheridan tanks. equipped with mis-

sile-cannon weaponu. were manufactured in small numbers (560 and l. 660
respect ively).

At the same time. the question of the type (rifled or smooth-bore) and
caliber of the cannon remains open. At the present time lOS-millimeter
rifled cannons are mounted on the primary tanks of most capitalist coun-
tries. and only the English Chieftan hes a lZO-nillimeter gun. However.
just recently a lZO-millimeter smooth-bore cannon was developed in Heat
Germany for the Leopard-2 tank. which is to be launched in series pro-
duction at the end of 1979. Final development of a similar cannon for
modernized and future tanks is also underway in France. Many foreign
specialists believe that the lZO-millimeter smooth-bore cannon can
significantly increase tank firepower.

After lengthy comparative tests of the American IDS-millimeter rifled
cannon. the Heat German lZO-millimeter smooth-bore cannon. and the
English 120-millimeter rifled cannon. in early 1978 the U. 5. military
leadership adopted a decision to use :na wast German lZmeillimeter
smooth-bore cannon on the new XHl tank in place of the lOS-millimetc'
rifled gun beginning in the mid-1980's. The cannon will be manufac-
tured in the United States on license. Only Great Britain of the lead-
ing capitalist countries intends to continue using a lZO-millimeter
rifled weapon on its modernized and new tanks.

Further refinement of the 105 and 120 millimeter rifled and 120-
smooth bore cannons and ammunition for them is envisioned by: im-
provements in the technology for machining the internal surface of
the barrels. more efficient composition: increasing muzzle velocities
of the shells; using high-calorie powders and new. more stable mater-
ials for armor-piercing cores: increasing the ratio of the length of
the core to its diameter. An important step in this direction is the
development in the United States and Great Britain of fin-stabilized
subcaliber shells with elongated cores for the 105 and 120 millimeter
rifled cannons of the H60Al and Chieftan tanks. Fixed rounds with
these subcaliber shells and partially combustible cartridge cases

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

are being built In Hunt Germany and Prnncc for the lZO-millimeter
smooth-bore cannons of the Leopard-ll tnnk (under development) and
the modernised aux-32. These shells have higher muzzle velocity.
better armor-piercing capability. and greater affective firing range
than conventional armor-piercing shells. This has made it possible

to increase the firepower of tanks without increasing the caliber of
the cannon.

Integrated fire control systems have come to he used extensively for
more effective tank fire. These systems have laser sight-range-
finders. electronic ballistic computers. weapon stabilizers on two
planes. and sophisticated optical and infrared sights and observation
devices. The control elements of the gunner's fire control system are
duplicated at the tank commander's position. The use of such fire con-
trol systems makes it possible to increase the probability of hitting
the target on the first round from a fixed position and on the move

and to reduce the time required to prepare and fire. These systems

are being supplied not only for tanks under development such as the

XHl and Leopard-2. but also for modernised tanks (the American H60A3.
the French Aha-32. the west German Leopard-l Ah. the British Chieftan
Mk3 and Mk5. and the Swiss P268A2). No automatic loading mechanism

is envisioned for the XHl and Leopard-2 tank cannons. Of all the prin-
cipal combat tanks existing today. only sved.n'. STRV-103B turretless
tank has an automated cannon loading process.

In the opinion of NATO military specialists. an improvement in the ac-
curacy of fire from a tank on the move will be achieved by highly pre-
cise stabilization and automatic correction of the cannon position. in
other words. maintaining the direction to the target regardless of
movement in the horizontal and vertical planes while traveling. The
western press reports that the possibility of stabilizing the weapons
of armored vehicles in three guidance planes :1 being studied in Heat
Germany.

One of the important ways to increase the firepower of future tanks
now being developed abroad is devising guided aissile shells. Thev
are launched through the barrel of the cannon and have a semiactive
guidance system in the final leg of the trajectory with laser illumi-
nation of the target. This kind of shell is considered a supple-
mentary means of firing at long range (3,000 meters and more) where
guided missiles have unquestioned advantages over conventional shells.
Work is also underway in the United States and other western coun-
tries to build a shell with a self-guiding head.

In recent years a trend has been observed for tanks to have an effec-
tive weapon against helicopters in addition to the cannon. To ac-
complish this various NATO countries are developing special guided
missiles and 20 and 30 millimeter automatic cannons which are capable
of firing at both ground aerial targets.

According to calculations by foreign military specialists. raising
the probability of a hit to 50 percent and more at long range when

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOJ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

firing on the sove is possible only by firing two rounds or sore. They
believe that the only way to solve this problen is to mount two cannons
on the tank or have an automatic cannon with a high rate of fire. It
Is considered that a small. light 60-90 nillimeter automatic cannon can
provide the necessary firepower for future tanks while reducing their
weight and dimensions. increasing nobility and survival capability on
the field of battle. and with a reduction in the coat of purchase and
operation. This new line of experimental development of tank cannons
has gone furthest in the United States.

The nobility and cross-country capability of tanks are viewed today in
the "as! as the chief factors that insure a high rate of speed in con-

bat operations and a significant improve-ant in survival capability on
the field of battle.

ﬂhen modernizing existing tanks and developing new ones foreign spev
cialists try above all to increase their traveling speed. especially
average speed on terrain. traveling range. cross-country capability.
engine pick up. turning ratio. acceleration characteristics, braking
effectiveness. and snoothness of ride. The nobility and cross-
country capability of tanks is being increased by installing more
powerful engines and iuproving transmissions and drive trains.

It is widely known that current tanks of the so-called "second gener-
ation" built in the early 1960's (the U. s. H60Al. the Rest German
Leopard-l. the British Chieftan Mk2, the French AMI-30. the Swedish
STRV-IOJ. and the Swiss Ps68) develop eaxinum speeds of 00-60 kilom-
eters an hour and average speeds of 15-36. Their specific capacities
are 13-22 horsepower per ton. These parameters are significantly
higher on the third-generation tanks now being developed (the American
XHl and Heat Ger-an Leopard-2): maxi-us speeds are 70-75 kiloeeters
an hour. average speeds are 55-50 kilometers an hour. specific ca-
pacity is about 30 horsepower a ton. Despite their great weight (50-
52 tons). they have better engine pick up than earlier tanks. The
program of tank modernization in the United States. France. and

Great Britain includes work to increase the nobility of existing tanks
by installing more powerful engines (up to 1,200 horsepower). im-
proved transmissions. and better drive train suspensions.

0n future fourth-generation tanks foreign specialists plan to increase
average speeds to 55 kilometers an hour and more and specific capacity
to 40 horsepower per ton. Engine pick up will also be greater.

The basic tanks of the capitalist countries today use four or two
stroke diesel and multifuel liquid and air cooled engines of 700-830
horsepower. The four-stroke multifuel liquid-cooled engines with
turbo supercharging that are being developed in Heat Germany. Prance.
and Great Britain are considered promising for the near future. These
engines have up to 1.500 horsepower and in the future may be enlarged
to 1.800 horsepower.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A trend toward the use of gas turbine engines on tanks has been ob-
served in recent years. The first foreign tank with such an engine.

a 1.500-horsepower engine. is the XHl American tank being developed

by the Chrysler Company. work is also underway in West Germany to
build gas turbine engines for future tanks. It is believed that

these engines can become the basic power plants for fourth-generation
tanks. However. a numberofproblema must be solved before they can

be installed in tanks. These problems relate to eliminating short-
comings such as the high specific expenditure of fuel and high air ex-
penditure. which creates difficulties when tanks cross water obstacles
along the bottom.

Hark is being carried on in the Hestern countries to design new trans-
missions in order to make it possible to use more powerful engines

and insure high engine pick up and turning capability in future tanks.
In the opinion of foreign specialists. the most sophisticated trans-
missions today are the X-llOO hydromechanical transmission of the
American XMl tank and the "sun-354 Renck transmission on the Heat
German Leopard-2. They hays integrated hydrodynamic gears with an
interlocking clutch. s four-stage automatic gearbox. and s differen-
tial turning mechanism with hydraulic control linkages that provide
stepless change in the thrust force on the tracks.

higher speeds when traveling on broken terrain and acceptable shock
absorber characteristics have now been attained by improving the drive
train suspension. The main type of suspension on a majority of modern
tanks to the present time has been torsion-bar suspension. A more ef-
ficient tubular-core suspension with vein-type hydraulic shock ab-
sorbers has been developed for the new American XHl tank. however,
from the point of view of insuring automatic change in shock ab-
sorber characteristics depending on road conditions. foreign experts
consider the hydropneumatic (sir-oil) suspension first installed in
the Swedish STRV-lOSB tank and later on the Japarese 76 tank to be
most acceptable. It is expected that this suspension will also be
used on future foreign tanks.

To improve the operating reliability of tanks abroad serious atten-
tion is being given to solving the following problems: simplifying
repair and maintenance of the primary assemblies and aggregates. re-
ducing time required to install and remo\e parts. insuring standard-
ization and mutual replaceebility of assemblies. and using automatic

equipment to test the technical condition of the primary systems and
aggregates.

The protective characteristics of tanks have a significant influence
on their fighting effectiveness and survival capability under enemy
fire. In the opinion of foreign specialists. the protective features
of the primary tanks in the capitalist countries do not meet current
requirements for waging combat operations where ground forces have
large numbers of new antitank weapons.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tn recent years two lines of solution have been pursued for the problem
of tank protection: intensifying what is known as passive defense and
creating a system of active defense.

Passive tank defense is intensified by thickening the frontal armor of
the body and turret. using armor of different thickness along the length
and height of the tank. employing angles of 75 degrees and more inclina-
tion for the armor sheet. reducing tanks silhouettes. and introducing

stronger materials and improved techniques for manufacturing and proc-
essing armored parts.

The use of combined types of armor developed in recent years is con-
sidered a more effective method of intensifying passive defense.

Great Britain has made the greatest advances in improving passive tank
defense. In 1976 the British developed a new armored technique that
is called the "Chobham" method. with this method a special armor is
used consisting of an external (thicker) steel sheet and an internal
sheet between which are ceramic elements that overlap one another and
are enclosed in a shell of armored aluminum alloy or plastic. Foreign
military specialists believe that this type of armor provides a higher
level of protection than conventional armor against various types of
antitank weapons. including fin-stabilized subcsliber and hollow-
charge shells and antitank guided missiles. The "Chobhsm" armor
method is 10 percent more expensive than the conventional method. and
the cost of a tank with such armor is 1-2 percent higher. This tech-
nique was first used in modernising the English Chieftan (Sheer Iron)
tanks. The armor protection on Best German Leopard-2 tanks. American
XHl tanks. and the modernized French ANN-32 has been done in a similar
fashion.

Side screens (false sides) that increase protection against hollow-
chsrge shells have been used extensively in recet.~ years. They are
now installed on most modernized tanks and are envisioned for use on
all tanks under development.

The level of protection in tanks is also being improved abroad by intro-
ducing new design concepts that permit arrangement of the primary ss-
nemblies and aggregates in the forward part of the machine with the ex-
plosive components in less vulnerable places. For example. the fuel
and ammunition in XHI and Leopard-2 tanks are placed in compartments
that are separated off from the battle compartment. The use of new
automatic firefighting equipment on these tanks makes it possible to
extinguish a fire in the tank in one second. The foreign press re-
ports that taking these steps makes it possible to improve the pro-
tective features of new tanks 2-2.5 times compared to existing tanks.

Projects to devise active protection of future tanks are in the ini-
tial stages. Active protection should provide detection and neutral-
ization of artillery shells and antitank guided missiles. including
missiles launched from helicopters, that are flying toward the tanks.

30
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Plans call for solving this problem by laying down smoke screens and
creating interference that obstructs the operation of the missile
control system. camoufleging tanks against visual and radar detection.
and screening off sources of tank heat radiation to reduce the range of
heat detection.

The English device for laying smoke screens to camouflage combat ve-
hicles has now become widespread. Tanks being modernized have this
equipment and tanks under development as well as certain other combat
vehicles in various Hestern countries will have it. The device is a
multibarrel launcher that is usually mounted on the tank turret. Its
ammunition package includes 56-80 millimeter grenades loaded with red
phosphorus. The device can create a dense smoke screen in two seconds:
the screen will last about three minutes. The standard ammunition
package for almost all foreign tanks includes smoke shells that can
put down a blinding curtain at the firing range of the tank cannon.

The United States and other NATO countries are developing launchers
to fire smoke missiles uith remote fuses that will make it possible

in five seconds to create a camouflaging smoke screen l80 meters long
and 120 meters high.

Research is also being conducted on the blinding action of combined
manmede clouds against optical instruments. These clouds are produced
on the basis of rocket fuel and are a mixture of oil smoke and colored
smoke. New coloring components are being sought to produce smokes
that match the color of the terrain background. The United States. in
particular. has already developed colored smoke for desert and vege-
tation backgrounds.

To reduce the effectiveness of missiles that are guided to sources of
heat radiation. the United States and other countries are carrying
out projects to reduce the temperature of the exh:-st gases of tank
engines by specially designed exhaust pipes and louvers.

In the opinion of western military specialists. the main directions
of uork being done in foreign tank building to modernize existing
tanks and develop future tanks should result in an improvement of
tank survival capability on the field of battle.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye", 1978
11.176

CSO: 1801

31
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IBVBIDm OP PIBID MILLS” mxum IN “381‘

Moscow summon: vommov: osozmua in Russian No ll, Nov 78 signed to
press 3 Oct 70 pp 35-40

[Article by Eng-Lt Col (Ros) V. Vorontsov and Eng-Haj V. Vyacheslov. candi-
date of technical sciences: “The isprovenent of Field Artillery Anunition")

[Text] hm leaders of the nain capitalist nations attach prise isportance to
tho iuprovelssnt of field artillery weapons. Foreign military experts feel
that artillery's role is continuously growing in the contouporary situation.
We fact accounts for the large scope of research and experissntal design
work being parforsed abroad, especially in the United States, the PRC, Great
Britain, France, Italy and Sweden to perfect existing artillery systens and
develop new ones.

Foreign experts are attespting to give artillery systoss great fire power

by isproving both the guns themselves and their mition. According to

the foreign press, recent studies have shoum that all .of the basic fire power
factors in artillery system can be inroved considerably: the firing rano:
can be increased significantly, accuracy ilprovec and the effect of the mu-
nition on the target heightened by perfecting the shells.

Increasing the Piring Range

The firing range of an artillery weapon is a function of the shell velocity.
the angle of departure and the degree of air resistance. The shell velocity.
in turn. depends on its initial (souls) velocity v0 at the mount it loaves
the barrel, and can be expressed with the for-alas

 

v = 2I'Xe .
° 0
where F is the average powder gas pressure in the bore:

Xe is the distance. the shell travels inside the barrel:
9 is the lateral shall load (weight-to-caliber ratio).

32
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M analysis of the formula shows that male velocity and correspondingly.
the firing range. can be increased by increasing P or Xe, as well as by
reducing 9.

me first two nethods of increasing muzzle velocity are used most extensively
abroad. Specifically, they were used in the mined States for \pdating the
155s. and 203.2)“ self-propelled howitzers (H109, H110) . me barrels were
lengthened and new propellant charges were developed. me latter had a

longer cosbustion period with practically the same maximal gas pressure in

the bore. In this manner. the muzzle velocity of an U109 howitzer shell was
increased free 563 to 684 male, which raised the maxim firing range by over 20
percent. free 14.6 to 18 he.

The third method has long been used in the manufacture of sub-caliber shells,
which are smaller in diameter than the caliber of the barrel. such shells
are extensively used abroad in anti-tank and tank artilleq system. sma-
caliber shells for field artillery. however. are still in the developsent
stage. Iigure l [drawings not reproduced] shows a 155:.) sub-caliber howitzer
shell under development in the no. It has a detachable base disc and a
guiding flange. Stability in flight is provided by control fine.

In experimental 155m sue-caliber howitzer shell has been developed in the
United States. It has small centralizing ribs and a plastic driving band,
which separates as me shall exits the barrel. A range of 35 he was reached
when those shells were fired from 1551!: "198 (0.5.) and W10 (mm) haditzers.

whereas the maxi-us firing range for these weapons using conventional shells
is 24 km.

he noted above, the firing range of artillery weapons can be increased by re-
ducing the force of air resistance on the shell. The development of shells
with an iuproved aerodynamic shape has been based on this principle.

An Hz frag-entation shell with an iuproved aerodyna‘ic shape ha beed adopted
by the military in France for use in the 1553: can our propelled howitzer.

It has a longer ogive and a longer overall length than the conventional shell
and has a short wall. The lowering of the drag coefficient made it possible

to increase firing range by approximately 16 percent over that of the conven-
tional shell (23.2 cospared with 20 ha).

ha 0.5. Space Research Coorporation has developed the lSSsn rm shell with

an ieproved aerodyna-ic shape (Pig. 2). It ha been lengthened and has prac-
tically no wall. and special ribs located at a rigidly defined angle to the

shell axis serve as the positioning band. 11., ”.11 shape and the ribs

ensure mininal drag and shell stability, both in the barrel and in flight.
The geometric dimensions of the bars are the following (the dimensions for
the conventional H107 shell are given in parentheses for purposes of coweri-

son): overall length—5.6 (4.4) cal.) ogive length-4.4 (3.7) calubaes
length-d": (0.7; cal.s weight in both cases-«3.5 kg.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The table below contains comparative firing range data for the 155» N107
and rm shells fired from various field artillery weapons.

Cooperative firing Range Data for were and 11107 Shells
- u) (2) "43).". Imaggwawhm
‘ ‘ tun mass ass-a rangers.
. um I ran

 

 

 

(6) meme mos mu on us us
rum-u moss: mp0 sec 11.0 no.7
rm mes rum us an 20.4

Key:
1. ‘Iype of weapon 4. Maximum firing
2. Charge range
3. hassle velocity 5. howitzer

lsproving a shell's aerodynanic shape therefore sakes it possible to ilprove
its firing range by 10-20 percent. American experts also note that its frag-
eentation and blast effects are approxinately 30 percent greater than those
of a conventional shell.

A considerable anomt of air resistance to the shell (around 30-40 percent)
results fron so-called "base insuction'uthe effect of rarifaction of the air
behind the base as a result of air burbling off its rile. In order to reduce
the degree of rarifaction, steps are being taken to isprove the shape of the
base section. erts at the Bofore comany in Sweden have significantly
neutralized “base insuction" (by 50-70 percent) by placing a slow-burinng
pyrotedlnic memo in a recess in the base of the shell.

me use of shells via; a recess 5?: the base section make. it possible, by
increasing the cavity voluar, to elploy stronger propellant: charges without
altering the propellant density. 'ihis. in turn. increases the shell's muzzle
velocity and. correspondingly. the firing range.

NATO military experts feel that one of the Iain Inthods of increasing the fir-
ing range of standard guns and mortars. while preserving their present weight.
diuensions and barrel life, lies in the use of rocket-assisted projectiles
(A18).

Such a projectile has a relatively light-veiwt rocket engine in the base
section, which is activated after the shell has exited the barrel. The pro-
pellant effect of gases fro. the burning fuel increases the speed by approxi-

sately 15 percent over the male velocity. Firing range is increased by
25-30 percent as a result.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POI. [expansion mumown] powder (with no solvents) and cospounding materials
are used as the rocket fuel. POI. powder consists of nitrocellulose and nitro-
glycerine in a ratio of 60:40. They create a specific thrust of up to 200
kg/kg. The combining saterials may include. for exasple. 70\ perchlorate of
amniun, lO\ filler natal and 20\ polyurethane. Svch fuel provides a speci-
fic thrust of up to 260 kg/kqo and it.‘ coﬂaustion rate is 10-30 sun/s. The

rocket engine in rocket-assisted projectiles now in use function for 2 to 4
seconds.

Rocket-assisted projectiles have a meter of shortcomings, the following
being noted daroadc reduced effectiveness due to the reduction in the quan-
tity of explosives (the filling coefficient for rocket-assisted HR fragmen-
tation shells of more than 100m is 5-10 percent, while that of conventional
shells is 10-25 percent): an alsost 1.5- to 2-fold increase in scattering
due to the instdaility of the rocket engine's functioning; a reduced storage

life for the charged a-mition (down to approximately 10 years) due to
alteration of the rocket fuel properties.

Despite the above disadvantages, rocket-assisted projectiles and none: bodas
have become fairly widespread. At the present tins they are part of the
battle scale of ammition for 155m and 203.2m howitzers and for 81m and
120‘ mortars in the armies of the main NATO nations. Their use with the
H198 (0.5.). MllOAl (0.5.). P1170 (NATO) and cor (French) howitzers has made
it possible to increase their firing range to 30 he. The use of rocket-
assisted mortar boﬂs (Am) in 120.: mortars has increased their firing range
by 55-80 percent. The euploynsnt of 1201-: rocket-assisted mortar boats in
the light H60 mortar (trends). for exasple, has increased its firing range by
alsost 80 percent, from 3.6 to 6.55 ha. The use of 1203s rocket-assisted
mortar bosbs with a rifled mortar produced by the French hotchkiss-Brandt

company has increased its firing range to 12.8 kn. coepared with 8.3 km for
a oawenticnal mortar both.

The development of liquid-fueled rocket engines wi‘h greater stability under
various conditions is one of the iQortant fields 0. ouslopment of rocket-
assisted assaunition. The smrluntal (Dikorap) rocket-assisted howitzer
shell with a liquid-fueled rocket engine is one emle.

Inproving Firing Accuracy

It has becoee especially isportant to improve the firing accuracy of artillery
weapons in the 1970's. work in this field is taking two Iain directions:

reducing error in the preparation of initial firing data (which is practically
not connected with problens of perfecting aleunition) and reducing dispersim
of the shot. Steps are being taken to achieve this, which focus on reducing

the influence of external factors on the shell flight and on inroving slammi-
tion manufacturing precision.

The develop-ant of guided artillery shells is a new area of focus for substan-
tially inproving the firing accuracy of field artillery. The development of
sud! as-mition was first begun in the United States. The nartin-Marietta
cospany is presently developing the lSSsse 304712 Copperhead hollow-charge

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
)Oll OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

shell with a semi-active. laser-type homing head. A laser emission receiver
is mounted in the nose section, and the both! contains electronic equipment
which generates cosmands for controlling the planes of the tail section.

The body has stab’.2ising wings. Vhidl creat additional lift. The-shell is
0.85 cal long and. weighs 61.23 kg. It is almost twice as long as the con-
ventional M107 HI fragmentation shell of the same caliber (4.4 cal. 43.5 kg).l

During tests conducted in 1976 in the mited States, the foreign press re-
portodkargets were illuminated by luer target indicators on the ground, on
armored personnel carriers, helicopters and unmanned aircraft. A total of
L2 firings were conducted, four of which were msuccessful due to malfunc-
tions of equipment. The tests were conducted both during the day and at
niglt. against moving and stationary take. Eadt successful firing resulted
in a direct hit, and the shells struck no more than 0.75 m from the point
of aim pr°vided by the laser target indicator.

It is planned to adopt the Copperhead for use by the military and to produce
the first series of 3,000 in 1979. The 0.8. Defense Departunt plans to pur-

chase 100.000 of the missiles, providing the cost per item does not exceed
$3,564 at the 1975 rate of exchange.

Guided artillery a-unition is also being developed in other NATO nations.
The PRO. for examle, is develong the 120m Bussarde mortar bomb. which
is guided during the terminal phase of its trajectory.

Increasing the Effect of unmition on the Target

Foreign experts consider intensification of the effect of anunition on'the
target to be an iwortant element of the fire power of artillery weapms.

Certain steps have recently been taken in NM!) to increase the explosive and
fragmentation effect of ammmition. They include. first of all: the use of
more powerful explosiveswexplosives consisting of 60. m and 40 hencgen.
for example; increasing the explosive filler capacit. by reducing the thick-
ness of the missile walls, which will be manufactured of better-quality steel:

insuring the prescribed fragmentation of the missile upon explosion by sub-
jecting the body to special treatment.

According to foreign press reports. the work performed in these areas has
made it possible to almost double the volume of destruction of personnel and
limtly armred equipment with as fragmentation anmition. The explosive
effect of the French 813‘ fragmentation mortar bow (Pig. 3), manufactured
of steel with improved tespering, has alledgedly been increased by 2.5-fold
over that of the conventional mortar bod) by increasing the filler capacity.

In order to insure the prescribed degree of fragmentation, the bodies of
mortar bosbs are serrated (this is acceptable in the case of mortar bosbs

1. For a more detailed discussion of this subject. see ZARIBEZHNOYB
VOYENNOYB osozmnm, No. 6, 1975, pp 105-106; No. 12, 1976. pp
llB-ll9.-3ditors

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
because the forces affecting then are considerably lower than those affect-
ing artillery shells). The French 120m PEPA rocket-assisted mortar bomb
(Pig. 4). for example. has grooves in the body to insure that the explosion
of the bash results in large fragments intended for destroying lightly ar-
mored equipment.

Amunition with prefabricated arrow-shaped (Pig. 5) and round destructive
elements have been developed to achieve a greater fragmentation effect.
Because of their good aerodynamic shape, the arrow-shaped elements have a
dispersion range of up to 500 a when the shell explodes. Serious wounds
result when they strike poorly protected areas of the body.

nigh-precision proximity fuses are being developed to insure that the shell
explodes at the optimal height. The use of such fuses together with prefab-
ricated destructive elements can. in the opinion of foreign exports, increase

the range of destruction from frequents J- to 5-fold, depending on the
terrain.

In recent years the NATO nations have stepped up the development of cassette-
type shells designed for destroying personnel and equipment over large areas.
an Hall as for remote mining of the terrain. The United States has developed

‘55:!“ artillery assuunitionuthe N449“. M692, H731 and H483“ shells (Fig. 6)“
for this purpose.

The ”449“ includes eleeents of the M4383 shell. which contain prefabricated
fragments in the form of snail balls. when they strike the ground the ele-
ments explode and the balls. dispersing at great speed, injure personnel

within a radios of up to 7 In. The H692 and H731 shells are used for remote
mining of the terrain. Each of the shells contains 36 anti-personnel bound-
ing nines, each of which includes the 3443M element containing the balls.

The mean shell with a percmsinn fuse contains 88 38am holiw-daarge ele-

ments designed for destroying armored targets. :imilar cassette-type shells
have been developed for the 203.2su howitzers.

The continued ilprovenent of nuclear artillery shells has been given an

extremely inportant place in plans for building up the field artillery fire
power of armies of the NATO nations.

The developmnt of a second generation of field artillery nuclear shells has
been cotrpieted in the United States. Judging from foreign press reports, the
troops are already receiving then. They differ from their predecessors stably
in that the ballistic diaracteristics are those of conventional n2 fragmenta-
tion shells and it is possible to regulate the force of the explosion within

a range between several tenths of a kiloton and tens or even hundreds of kilo-
£003.

Development of the 203.2ass nuclear artillery shells with increased penetrating
radiation (neutron boabs) is practically mister-1.3 Pentagon leaders are

 

2. For more details on this subject see ZARUBBZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE,
No. lo. 197'], pp 37-39; No. 9. 1978. pp 28-31.-Bditors

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

prepared to en the troope with neutron ertiiiery munition within the nut
tuture. Theee plane. which conetitute e danger to en unkind. ere oppoeed
by the poiiw of peace conducted by the Soviet Union and en the other each!-
in: netione, eieed et belting the em race and imienentinq the principlee
of peecetui coexistence.

mum. 'Zerubeehneye vayennoye cheereniye“. i970

1169
GO! 1801

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'FICIAL USE ONLY

Mon non; 0? HUMAN PACER 18 mm mum's

Moscow ”W01: VOYENNOYE oeozmne in Russian No ll. Nov 78. signed
to press 3 Oct 18 pp 43-50

[Article by Eng-Capt lat Rank 0. Oblipov and Haj K. Vladimirov, candidate
of medical sciences: "me hole or the “man factor in Flight Accidents“)

l‘l‘oxtl nilitariatic groups or the United States and other nations of the
agraseive mo bloc are continuing to build \1. their arsed forces by creat-
ing new types and designs of weapons and coabat equipment. weapons models.
including those in the air forces. are becoming increasingly coqlex. Even
though they are extra-sly couples, however, and have a high degree of auto-
nation. they are still controlled by nan.

Until recently. it was believed abroad that Ian has unlimited capabilities
and that aviatim'a lighting efficiency could be iaproved by increasing the
coaplexity of aviation equipment. 'l'his attitude has resulted in a situation
at the oonteworary stage of aviation development, in which further int-ove-
sent of the tactical and technical characteristics of planes and helicopters
can frequently not be justitied using the cost-etficlena] ratio as the cri-
terion. This is due to real linitations of the pilot's ability to access

the large quantity of incoeing intonation and to make and carry out deci-
sions within me limited time available.

The iaportance of creative action on the part of the pilot during a {light
hu increased sharply as the aircraft. the airborne equipment and the condi-
tions or their oosbat slployunt have grown more coqlex. u. out sake opti-
mal decisions in a rapidly changing situation and in changing unending:
and with a drastic reduction in the about of the available for perfoning
the Iission. These circu-stanoes produce great rental and physical stress
approaching the limits of Ian's capabilities. as a result of which the pilot
is not in a condition to use the aircraft with full effectiveness. the for-
eirgn press reports that ooabat aircraft are even now being used at an effi-
ciency level 25-30 percent below their rated perfornace. Further-ore, the
anomt of ties required to master their operation has increased 3. to 5-fold.
and develop-ant and operating costs have increased. The significance of

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

pilot error has grown simultaneously. resulting in an increase in the nusber
of accidents: 36') flight accidents occurred did 239 aircraft were lost in the
limited States in 1915 alone (see table).

bosses of 0.5. Military Aircraft in 1975

 

_ u.-. . ..-—...-_u- e --.e-...«.a~~..aa

 

    
 
  

auansvoa

"and unvo-

‘nm “hr” ”x..."‘°v’~"f." (km-a. (Emmy

 

 
 
   
  

(6) Cysouyvsue snares . .

INC names uwtuyw
(”gunmen . . . . . .

(muse.......

ll? 0.73 303.5
10 0.” an A

Key:
l. Branch of armed forces 6. Gromd forces
2. Ntﬂaer of flight accidents 7. Navy (including marines)
3. timer of aircraft lost 8. Air force
4. Accident index 9. Total
5. choaic loss. millions

of dollars

let us point out that in the United States any incident in aviation is listed
as an accident if it involves any sort of damage to an aircraft on the ground
or in the air. whether or not it results in a fatality or injury to personnel
(the death of even a single crew usher within a period of 30 days following
the accident is considered a fatality). Any sort of dasage to an aircraft

in flight or during a take-off or lending is listed as a flight accident.

If an aircraft was destroyed or daeaged sign-nificantly and if persli died
(or were nailed) as a result of an accident, it is classified as a serious
one. Hinor accidents are those whid-l result in insignificant danage to air-
craft and in light womds or other injury to personnel.

Judging by reports in the military press, errors by personnel and equipment
failures are the main causes of flight accidents in the U. 8. Air Force.
Adverse environnsntal factors, occupational hazards. breakdowns of interacr
tion within the "pilot-aircraft” system and deterioration of health during

the performance of nissions, as well u inadequate training, are the aain
causes of pilot errors. ‘lhe fighting efficiency of the pilot, as the control-
ling 018-91“- in tht "pilot-aircraft“ system, which is determined by the

effect of these factors, is referred to in the foreign press as the human
factor. Foreign experts estilate that this factor is responsible for more

0 The accident index is the nmer of accidents per 10,000 hours of flith
tine. It is greater in the naval air force and the ground forces than in the
Air Pores. foreign silitary experts attribute this to increased caplexity
of operating deck-launched aircraft and to the nusive and intensive involve-
Isnt of Any helicopters in various lissions.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

than 55 percent of all flight accidents. Between 1965 and 1970. up to

70 percent of the aborted missions, emergency situations and accidents in
the 0.5. Air Force occurred for the above reasons. 'lhey acoomted for an
especially high percentage in the fighter aviation (80 percent). which is
explained by the fact that the operation of fighter aircraft is more inten-
sive and cosplex than that of aircraft in the other branches of aviation.

Quality improvement constitutes the main trend in the development of the
modern air forces. Military aviation equipment and arnament systems are
designed and built in general so that, while commising from the viewpoint
of interaction within the ”pilot-aircraft' system, the greatest possible
results are obtained from their operation. The science which studies the
dynamics and "interrelationship' between elements comprising this system is
called ergonomics' in the west turopean countries and engineering psychology

in the United States. Its main purpose is that of simplifying interaction
with the above system.

figure 1 contains a diagram for considering the human factor when creating
a 'pilot-aircraft' system (from the ergonomic point of view). It shoes the
basic determining factors, which are briefly discussed below.

13

 

Figure 1. Consideration of Rum Pactor in. the Creation
of an Optimal ”Pilot-Aircraft“ system
Key:

1. Human resources 8. Life-support system
2. Professional selection of candi- 9. State of pilot's health

dates for flight careers 10. Equipment for monitoring state
3. Professional training of pilot's health
4. Pilot ll. Interaction within “pilot
5. Occupational hazards aircraft“ system
6. Personal protective. survival, 12. Consideration of pilot's emotion-

life-savim equipment al and physical qualities for
7. Influence of environsent creating an aircraft

13. Optimal system

 

' Ergonomics is the scientific discipline which studies man's functional
abilities in the work process and reveals possibilities and mechanisms for
creating optimal conditions for highly productive work.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Professional Selection and Training of Flight Personnel

The professional selection of candidates itself ensures that the pilots will
be dale to perfor- prolcnged flights in nodern aircrafe without significant
departure from required standara.

Other nations are atteepting to cowile a systea of tests to be used in
selecting future pilots—for measuring their menory capacity and deternining
their wility to process infor-ation rapidly and accurately and their ability
to budget their tine end to make optioal decisions. This would help to
detenine how well a candidate's abilities measure up to presentdey require-
nnts. It is felt that the testing of an individual's attention skills end
reaction speed should be spproadied with the attitude that those individuals
are lost suited to flight work who make the fewest errors in their work per
unit of time. end not those who perform ﬂue greatest amount of work.

At the 0.5. Air Force Center for the Study of human Resources at Brooks Air
Force Base in the state of max». constant attention is given over to the
development of a systen for the psychiatric selection of flight personnel,
using electronic oosputers. This system will nake it possible to evaluate
the individual's personal qualities and to reveal psychic disorders which
light lead to fliwt accidents. The study places ispcrtance on learning the
candidate's heredity. his chilcmood experiences and his motives for selecting
a career in flight work. The contenders of air suaunits are instructed to be
constantly aware of the internal stisulae determining a pilot's behavior and
to know certain intioate details about his personal life.

The pilot training system determines the level of the pilots“ skill and their
daility to operate aircraft properly in various situations. At this stage

a pilot oust "becone close,“ so to speak, with the aircraft and its equip-
nent. The more thorough this process is, the fewer will be the factors which
could give rise to flight accidents. me American experts are therefore con-
stantly perfecting the training system. deternining and eliminating its inade-
guacies. A special Air Force omission found the following main dsfficiencies
in the training of fi¢iter pilots at the beginning of the 370's, for exesple:

«the instructor was not able to evaluate a cadet's behavior and actions. even
when flying in the sense aircraft:

--the cadet received only sporadic evaluations of exercises perforned during
solo flights. and these were not reinforced with graphic illustrations:

--the trainee was not given the opportunity to evaluate his actions objectively
(free a detached position):

—instnnent flight experience was accmulated very slowly, because the airmen
were poor at senorising the readings:

“exercises for developing skills in the mint eoploysnnt of the aircraft
were sinified. specifically. existing targets did not possess great maneuver-
ability and did not fully sinulate the actions taken by an eneuy.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A new training system was developed in the Air Force. based on the counission's
conclmions and recommendations. under which a multifaceted, objective eval-
nation is provided for all the cadet's actions during a flight by observing
him simultaneously from six points (four or five of which contain automatic
television cameras). The cadet and the instructor receive needed information
instantaneously free the rapid feedback. In addition. there are special
mathematical programs for owning the cadet's pilotage with that of the
“ideal“ pilot by means of an onboard digital electronic cosputer. 'Ihis com-
puter is used to determine the duration and focus of each cadet‘s training.
depending on his individual success. Such programs make it possible to eval-

uate an airman's actions even when there are no fixed criteria for this or
when such criteria are contradictory.

In foreign nations, increased emphasis is being placed on the use of flight
simulators for training flight personnel. Such training occupies a simificant
portion of the training time and developes the pilot's skills in spacial
orientation, proper distribution and evaluation of the instrument readings.

and his prepardness to make an emergency exit fron the aircraft. The train-
ees go through the different elessnu of cosbat missions in them.

According to foreign reports. the adoption of flight simulators in the cosbat
mite made it possible to reduce the nusber of flights in the Air Force and
Navy by 1,750,000 in 1975 alone, and it is planned to cut the nether of train-
ing flights performed in aircraft almost in half by the mid 1980's. This will
also save a considerable amount of money (it costs $1,437 to operate a 8-52
for 1 hour, and 890 to operate a 5-52 flight simulator for the same period).

The Effects of Environ-ental Factors and Occupational hazards (noise, vibra-
tions, infrared and swersonic esdssions. and so fourth)

Breakdowns in interaction within the “pilot—aircraft" system frequently re-
sult free fatigue during long flights under difficult conditions and from
failure to athere to the established regimen of “it sleep and diet during
long cross-comtry flights.

Sven slight vibrations or a heiﬁltened noise level in the cockpit has a con-
siderable influence on the crew's psychophysiological state. Foreign expert:

maintain that the noise level on modern aircraft exceech the established
limits.

The pilot's ability to fmction depends greatly on the reliable operation of
the life-swport systems. In the summertime. the teaperature in the cookpits
sometimes rises above 50%;, and falls to ~209c at great altitudes on many

aircraft flying at low altitudes. As a rule. the concentration of oil vapors

and aerosols in cockpits exceeds the maxim permissible level many times
over.

Adverse environmental factors and flight conditions are counteracted in various
ways abroad: cabin pressurization is improved, pressurized helmets are used,
special training drills are conducted for the airmen. anti-g suits are in-
pmved, the crews land at intermediate airfields during long cross-country
flights, and so forth. I. 3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The State of health of Flight Persomel

Poreign nilitary experts have estimated that 40 percent of the flight acci-
dents occurring due to the hunan factor are a result of drastic loss of
efficiency on the part of the pilot. This occurs when latent illnesses,

Iainly cardiocascular and emotional, manifest the-selves in the presence of
overloads.

An average of six accidents due to cardiovascular or cerebrovascular deseases
occur each year in 0.8. aviation. 'lhese have been responsible for 4 percent of
the aircraft disasters in the 0.5. military aviation in the past 10 years.

'lhey are most frequently manifested in the forts of myocardial infarcts or
irregular functioning of the heart. Serious forms of these deseases are not
necessary for flight accidents to occur.

The American press indicates that this group of deseases among air-en is con-
stantly growing in proportion. due to the high degree of “wear and tear“ on
the pilot because of the sxbstantial level of psychophysiological stress,
prolonged flights and extensive flight duty. Dispite this fact, however.
the trend continues abroad to lengthen the pilot's service term, because a
great deal of experience is required to operate modern aircraft.

A large portion of the accidents are caused by latent ferns of epilepsY. which
manifest theseelves under the great stress experienced in the performce of
missions, taking the form of loss of conciousness. disturbance of special
orientation. motor inadequacies. incorrect appraisal of the situation and of
aircraft speed and altitude, and incorrect reaction to reports and cot-sands.
Couputer tonography is being successfully used for revealing latent forms of
epilepsy. It is based on the registration and analysis of the tissue's ﬂsorp-
tion of a narrow beast of x-raye directed through the cerebral cortex tangent
to the surface.at points 1 degree apart. Sections of the cerebral cortex
separated by 2-3 as are analyzed with electronic oosputers to detect the epi-
leptic nidus. 1he fact has been established that Ltdividuals with a low alpha
index on the encephalogran display a high level of neurosis and anxiety.

Methodological techniques are being developed in the PM; for detecting sucro-
sysptoats of incipient deseases of the heart and brain, which nay manifest
themelves at critical nonents during a flight.

Judging from foreign press reports. sore than 30 percent of the flight per-
sonnel discharged front the air forces of the two nations are relieved due to
psychic disorders, which are closely linked by cause-and-effect to the nature
of their flight work. 'l‘hese deseases are listed as occupational. mey are
nest frequently unifested in the for- of a state of anxiety for airmen below
the age of 35 years. This state is especially clearly manifested in flights
at altitudes above 12.000 meters without visible reference points. when the
natural horizon disappears and it seems to the pilot that he is in a state of
suspension, “nobility and unstable equilibrium. Pilots over the age of 40
frequently fear the occurrence of a nyocarlial infarct or the appearance of
a nalignant tmr. They begin to fear certificatim tests and medical
exaninations.

66

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A loss of flight motivation has presently become widespread among personnel
of foreign armies. manifested in a lack of desire to fly in pilots. It is
somtims difficult to determine whether the pilot actually does not want
to fly (although he is capable of doing so) or is refusing to fly because
of an illness. The problem is cospliceted when the pilot gives only poor
health a the reason and does not indicate the real reason for refusing to
fly. In the opinion of medical experts in the French Air Force, sudt be-
havior should be regarded as a grave indication of psydtic instability.

In order to monitor an airmen's state of health. continuously and objectively,
and to see that he perform the safety measures at the right time, devices

are being developed for continuously registering the body's basic vital signs
(body tesperature, electrocardiogram. electroencephalogram, and others). A
pilot's seat is being perfected in Norway. for exasple, with sensors for

the continuous registration of an electrocardiogram without attaching electrodes
to the body.

The Effort to Achieve Optimal Interaction Within the "Pilot-Aircraft' System

‘lhe nature of the pilot‘s actions prior to an accident and his conduct in the
oursrgency situation itself depend on his ability to cosprehend incoming infor-
mation in order to take the proper steps. This capability is detenined by
the pilot‘s psychophysiological prepardness to react proqtly and correctly to
unexpected changes in the situation. The level of this prepardness is very
unstable, depending primarily on the experience. professional training and
health of the airman.

American experts seems that 60 percent of all flight accidents due to the
human factor result from the fact that the pilot'sskills are not always up

to the demands made while flying aircraft with high performance specifications,
at critical somsnts in a flight. mis is most frequently caused by the excess-
ive mnber of objects requiring attention at the pilot's position, including
infatuation display equipnent and control elements (Pig. 2 [figures 2.3 and 4
not reproduosdl). The pilot's focm is dispersed bra-«3e of this, and there
is not enough ties to process the incoeing information and to carry our deci-
sions. At the same time, there is frequently a lack of intonation, aggra-
vated by poor display clarity. during the most difficult phases of a flight
(flying at low altitude. coubat slployment. and the instrument landing). In
addition, there is a lad: of display equipmnt for indicating malfmctions in
the performance of certain types of equip-ant or even entire aircraft systems.
In certain years. the mother of accidents occurring because of this during

landings in the 0.5. M: Force accounted for up to 70 percent of the total num-
ber. Corbined flight control and signal system are presently being developed

with this in mind. The output of total information and a reduction in the
quantity of equipment required for displaying it will. in the opinion of for-
eign experts, simlify the pilot‘s work significantly (Fig. 3).

The pilot's work is seriously hindered by deficiencies in the cockpit design
and the imractical arrangement of control elements. especially when ejecting
from the aircraft. the ejection levers on certain types of aircraft, for

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oxamle. take it difficult to pull the control stick during landings. when
starting up the engine a pilot say eject hiuelf onto the landing area by
accidentally pulling loops attached to the levers. Foreign experts note the
following shortcomings: great differences between the cockpit equipment of
aircraft in the sane class, the nonstandard arrangesent of control elenents
and certain other factors contributing to the incidence of seemency situa-
tions (Pig. 4) .

Optimal congruity of crew and aircraft is being achieved by providing eiruen
with specific training end by imroving the desim of equipnont and control
elements. by automating control processes, and so forth. The experts find
practical solutions to problem not simly by applying accmulated experience
in the operation of aircraft equipeent, but also by monitoring the aireen's
condition and behavior during a flight. One proeising eethod of eonitoring
the- lies in the interpretation of signals depicting the state of the air-
Ian‘s central nervous syste- at each given mount. Registration of the bio-
electric potentials occurring in the cerebral cortex is the most iQortent
element. It is already possible to interpret with 90 percent reliability,
five types of eanifestations of activity in the huen cerebral cortex, which
stakes it possible to assess the individual's readiness to perforn a mission,
his level of attention to incoming inforleation. and hie difficulty in deal-
ing with conplicated flight situations and reacting to unexpected events.

Modern methods for analyzing the pilot's speech from the vibrations pro-
duced when pronouncing vowels make it possible to assess his sectional state
and his degree of concentration and to detect fatigue and stress during a
flight.

Judging fron foreign press reports. we therefore find that the continuing
development of aviation equipment and weapons and the considerdele meter
of flight accidents caused by the human factor during their operation are
forcing the emerts to seek effective ways to coordinas the capabilities of
lean and eechine. It is believed that this alone will lake it possible not

only to reduce the nunber of accidents and disasters, but also to make more
efficient use of the aircraft.

umGH‘r: ”Zamberhnoye voyennoys obosreniye". 1978

11499
030: lOOl

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comes 0! NATO AIR NR5 SEEISE HELD IN m 1978

Metal ZARUBEWOYE VOYBNNOYB 0302mm: in Russian No ll. Nov 78 signed to
press 3 Oct 78 pp 50-53

[Article by Col v. Kondrat'yev: “The "tactical Weapons ﬂeet-78' Exercise”)

[Text] axercises conducted jointly with other brandtee of the arsed forces
or independently occupy an irportant place in the contest training of tacti-
cal mite and ammits of the agreosive NAN bloc. Methods of conducting
air comat operations, using both conventional and nuclear weapons. are per-
fected in these exercises. and the battle readiness of the units and sub-
unite and the level of the crews' prepardnees to perforn various cosbat nie-
aione are tested. the am couand constantly increases the cowlexity of
these exercises and atteapta to make the: as bud; like actual coabat situa-
tions as possible.

The regular coupetitive air exercise conducted by the joint mm air forces
in the Central surepean 'ND [theater of military operations] between 5 and 14
June 1978, ”Tactical Weapons ﬂeet-7B,“ was a typical examle of this. Par-
ticipating in the exercise were air force crews from the United States. Great
Britain, the m, Belgium. Canada and the Netherlan.'---nesbers of the 2d and
4th (mum [joint air strike comb). Flights were carried out from sev-
eral air bases, one of the stain bases being wildenrat in the PRC (Pig. 1
(photos not reproduced” . The exercise was conducted in order to test the
caliber of interaction among air subunits of the various nations in military
operations in the Central European theater of military operations and to
further inrove the tactical training of the crews.

According to reports in the foreign press, such exercises have been con-
ducted on a regular basis since 1962, but this year's exercise differed sig-
nificantly fro- all previous ones. In the first place, it was conbined with
the regular "Royal Pluh" cowetitive air reconnaissance exercise (15 such
exercises have been conducted since 1956). In the second place, a more
comlex tactical situation was created. The participating crews overcame
powerful conteraction by agreaeive “enemy' forces and air defense facilities.
electronic ﬁning equipsent was eaployed on a considerably more extensive

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basis. The flights were perforeed not over standard routes but along routes
unfamiliar to the crews, a large part of which passed through areas saturated

with air defense equipment, in direct proxiaity to the national borders of
Iaiaers of the socialist comalth.

The exercise was conducted in two stages. During the first stage, which lasted
from 5 to 8 date and we called the 'tactical" stage, fighter-boaters carried
out hypothetical and actual attacks on ground targets. The crews were assigned
their aissione not more than 3 home prior to the designated time for the
attack. ram: Phantoe fighters of the British Air Force, free wildenrat Air
force Base in the PEG. P-104 fighters from the Belgian Air Force (relocated
froa Belgiul to Bruggen Air Force Base for the duration of the enercise) and
r-us fighters of the 0.5. Air Force. from Bittburg Air Force Basemere desig-
nated to intercept the attack forces.

Hypothetical strikes were carried out against airfields at Hopsten and
Laarbruch. According to the ngazine FLIGiT the attack force. consisting of
16 aircraft (4 P-loe's. 8 P-d‘e and 4 Jaguars) froa the air forces of the PM:
and Great Britain were to carry out a strike against the air base at Laarbruch
with the objective of “closing it down for at least 3 hours.“

Taking into account aerial reconnaissance information, which indicated that
a large nusber of "enemy“ aircraft had gathered at the air base and that most
of then were in exposed parking areas in fairly dense groups, as well as the
availwility of personnel and equip-ant for the aiseion. the comander of the
attack force decided to carry out the attack in a "£119“: colum" forution

(with four aircraft in each flight) . the flights flying with intervals of
around 5 kiloseters.

The 9-104 fighter-bodaers. carrying a payload of his boat clusteis each, were
to be the first to strike. They were charged with the aission of destroying
exposed “enemy“ aircraft. They were to be followed by a flight of P-d'e
carrying nine aerial boobs each, which were to strike at semi-exposed defense
installations and at all tax-ling aircraft. in order to prevent their take-off.
The reesining flight of 4 P-d's, also carrying nine aerial boobs each. were
to be the third to strike. part of their mission being to augnent the efforts
of the first two flights. And finally. the flight of Jaguar fighter-bombers
would strike in fourth place (rig. 2). Their main mission was to "nine" the
air base in order to prevent the “enemy” from clearing up the danage caused
by the first three flights. It was therefore planned to eount four 1,000-
pound delayed-action boobs on the Jaguar aircraft--2 with a delay of 30 Iain”
l with a 1-hour delay and l with a delay of 5 hours.

Hhen he assigned the aission to the flight of Jaguars. the cosmander of the
20th Tactical Fighter Squadron of the British air forces in the ma ordered
it to proceed to the target at low altitude in “card“ formation. The first

two aircraft would fly in a paired formation, foraing the “aircraft front,"
separated by a distance of up to two thirds of the forecasted horizontal

Visibility. but by no more than 4,000 yards (around 3,650 meters). The

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

second pair was to fly in the sane formation. following the first by 15
seconds. This formation would. in his opinion. provide the greatest con-
cealnent during the approach to the target and reduce the likelihood of the
aircraft being destroyed by eir-to-air guided niseiles. In case the force
were attacked by "enemy" fighters using aircraft cannon, the crews were in-
structed to evade then on a vertical plane. Por passing through the zone
covered by ground-to-air guided missiles. it was suggested that the pilots
regroup into a tight formation so that the flight would appear as a single
target on radar screens of the 'enemy's' air defense system. It was also
upla'ined that they should separate for the strike against the assigned tar-
gets upon entering the zone covered by gromd-to-air guided aissiles or at
aininun distance from the target and to release the boobs from a pitch-up
at a 30s angle, from an altitude of at least 500 teeters. The cosnander
concluded by suing up his instructions in the following manner: “Fly at
low altitude and at high speed, taking advantage of natural features for
conceslnent.‘

The fighter-bother crews had practiced boubing, laundting missiles and
firing the guns at the Bleenborn firing gromd in Belgium and the Sennelager
ground in the PRC, from altitudes of 150 esters or more and at speeds of
around 865 kilometers per hour. The foreign press noted that in actual cou-
bat the aircraft would strike from extremely low altitudes and at greater
speeds: 40-50 esters and 920-950 per hour, respectively.

In the second stage of the exercise, which lasted fron 8 to 14 June and was
called the 'cometition' stage. each crew performed up to five sorteos. The
flights were carried out both in the daytime and at night. An error of

320 seconds in time and loo meters in distance was accepted as the daytime
standard for precision in approaching the targets. Practice beatings, ais-
sile launchings and cannon firing had been perforaed st ranges at Northorn
in the no and at Vliehors on the Dutch island of vlieland. Target approach
accuracy and the accuracy with which the weapons were used were considered
when totalling up the points.

The reconnaissance aircraft were to fly along assigned S-kiloneter sections
of the route and to locate stationary targets therein. Various real targets
(tanks, guns and other coabat equipment provided for the exercise by the
stbunits of ground and air forces of the NAN bloc's joint armed forces) were
placed along these sections of the route. It was permitted to pass over such

a section of the route only once during a flight and at a speed at least that
indicated in the mission.

The foreign press pointed out that the “Tactical weapons Heet‘n" eolpetitive
enercise deeonstrated that the flight and tactical skill of crews in the 2d
and dth joint tactical air cos-ands had isproved aarkedly. Sous um military
experts, however, noted that the state of its air forces still does not meas-
ure up to the demands made of then. and called won the sewer-nations of

that egressive bloc to continue the eras race and to build up the fighting
capability of their forces.

comm: ”Zambezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye". 1978

was ’09
cso: 1301 FOR onrcru use omx
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cums OI WPMT OP NEH 0.3. WWO AIRCRAIT

Moscow more VOYBNIOYB osozmm in Rmsian No 11. Nov 78 aimed to
press 3 Oct 78 pp 59-62

[Article by Lt Col 1. Aleksandrov: “m Development of a New nigh-Altitude.
(hi-armed Aircraft']

' [Excerpts] ”any of our readers have inquired about the

' developsant of a high-altitude, unmanned, long-range
aircraft mdervay in the United States. The following
article is published in response to their requests.

A large effort has been underway in the United States in recent years to
develop unaannad aircraft for various purposes, which, according to Aaerican
military experts will be able to assuae sons of the functions performed by
piloted aircraft. (no such program, code-named 'Comass Cope," calls for
the development of a lulu-purpose, high-altitude, unmanned aircraft capable
of remaining in the air for lengthy periods (more than 24 hours). 111a for-
eign press reports that «4* aircraft will be dale to perform a master of
ailitary fmctions. both in peacetime and in time of var. They include,
aamg others: the performance of serial reconnaissa'rre, surveilancs over
seas and oceans. relaying transaissions for various commications systeas.
and taking air sasples at high altitudes ' the at-csphere.

The Alerican ailitaiy ooaaaand's aggressive plans provide for the possibility

of using manned aircraft created under the 'Cospass Cope" program in place
of nanned reconnaissance planes, which are now making regular flights along

the borders of nations in the socialist couonvealth, engaging in electronic
reconnaissance activities.

The mrican aircraft comanies of Boeing and Il'eledyne Ryan. which developed
the Yon-94a and You-983 experimental manned aircraft under a contract with
the 0.3. Air Force, have participated in am program on a oospetitive basis.

The foreign press reports that after carefully analyzing the results of
tests conducted in August 1976, the 0.8. Air Force decided to continue with
the developuent of an unnamed aircraft based on the experimtal model

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

produced by the Boeing coepany. In this stage, which will take 52 months.

it is planned to develop and produce three of the prototype planes (designated
the You-xx) and to conduct flight tests with then, during which it is planned
to teat the plane‘s ability to take off and land autoutically on a rmway and
to appraise its capability for perforating certain nilitary functions. In

the opinion of foreign experts. the design of the prototype planes will differ
to a linin- degree from the experimntal nodels. the Iain change involving
the installation of a lore powerful engine in connection with plans for in-
eroasing me weight of the payload to 500-900 kilogram. It is planned to
odd eide-acanning radar equipment and equipeent for pinpointing the locations
of radiating daject: on the gromd to the payload.

Total cost of the progran for developmnt of the Yon-xx unmanned aircraft
will he approxinatoly 77.2 eillion dollare. The 0.5. Air Force coauand has

plans for the purchase of around 100 such aircraft, 60 of which will be for
operational use. the remaining 40 being used to replace lost aircraft and
for other purposes.

Sane foreign military experte consider the min purpoee of the new, high-
eltitude. unmanned aircraft to be that of performing photographic. radar

and electronic reconnaissance. They also believe. however. that it has poe-
aibilitiee for performing other nieeiona, including the ﬂaming of electronic
equipment. the relaying of radio signals in comicatione ayeteme, and pos-
aibly. also delivering strikes against ground targeta.

00”!!!me “Zarwezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye", 1978

11499
GO: 1N1

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY