FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10567
7 June 1982

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforsation was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. Tines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGi‘I‘ LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lt

7 June 1!

USSR REPORT
NXLITARY AFFAIRS
(r000 6/82)

Coureurs

STRATEGIC ROCKET FORCB

Book Excerpts: Rockets and Rocket Forces
(mm, 1979) .0...OOOOOOOCQIOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

CIVIL IEFENSB

Book Excerpts: Text on Civil Defense Medical Services
(acumen: POSOBIYE P0 HEDITSINSKOY SLUZHBE
Gmmsxo! m, 1981) OOOCOCOOOOOOO£OOOOO000......

- a - [III - USSR -
FIN!(Iﬂﬂ(JAl.USIZ(M§LY

STRATEGIC ROCKET FORCES

BOOK EXCERPTS: ROCKETS AND ROCKET FORCES

Moscow RAKBTCHIKI in Russian 1979 (signed to press 13 Feb 79) pp 5. 130. 135, 133.
7-9. 116-123

[Annotation. table of contents. introduction. and part of Chapter 6 from book
"Rocke;eers". by H. c. Grigor'yev. G. N. Astapenko. I. P. Terekhov, and A. I.
Yarovskiy. Izdatel'stvo DOSAAF. 100,000 copies. 135 pages plus 66 pages of illustra-
tions]

[Text] This is a book about rockets and rocketeers. It tells about the creative
searches of our scientists, designers. engineers. and workers-the creators of
rocket equipment. and about its further development and improvement. The authors
write about the establishment of the rocket troops and show the selfless service of
the nen--the masters of mighty contemporary equipment.

The book is intended for a broad range of readers.

Contents Page

Introduction........no...nu....oo....o-o.....o...-..u.....n...o............ 7

Chapter 1. At the Sources of an Exploit...................................... 10
chapter 2. In the mac of uttlee.O...QOI.0.IOO0...0OOOOCOOOOOOOIOOIIOIODOI. “3
chapter 3. mltiatase. mlliat1COOIOOOOO0.0.0.0....0000...OIICOOOOOOCOIOOIOOO 82
Chapter A. The shield and Sword of the Fatherland............................ 91
Chapter 5. The Planet Earth "as Bntrusted to Them............................ 12a

Introduction

Our contemporary rocket equipment--that remarkable creation of the mind and hands
of tnlanted Soviet scientists. designers. engineers. and workers-shows with all
convincingness how mighty and strong is the economic. scientific-technical. and de-
fense potential of the socialist state which was created in accordance with the
brilliant plans and under the leadership of the Leninist party and how great is the

creative energy of our people.

A great number of books of various types have been written about the birth and de-
velopment of Soviet rocket technology. the ways and methods for its practical use.
its creators, and testers--people of a true exploit-and many brilliant snd.impres-
sive motion picture films. documentary and artistic. have been made. Andruwertheless.

ETHICHWHC1A1.1EHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the interest of our youth and its striving for knowledge about this most complex
equipment of modern times which has such great scientific and practical significance
is continuously growing.

The conquest of space began with the assistance of rockets and rocket system. And
our country began the space age.

This book also discusses rocket equipment, and more precisely, rocket weapons. It
tells about combat rockets. about the difficult labor and intense creative searches
of their creators. about the Soviet rocket troops and the difficult path of develop-
ment and continuous strengthening which they have covered. and about the rocketeers
--soldiers and military leaders who are giving all their strength and their intelli-
gence to serving the socialist motherland.

Combat rockets. which have received an extremely broad reputation in our time. are
called the weapon of the age. And this is correct. Absorbing many of the latest
scientific discoveries, outstanding achievements in the development of equipment.
industrial production, and military affairs. they are now the most powerful and most
improved means of armed conflict which. in considerable nearure. caused the very
nature and special features of combat operations.

It is well known that contemporary rocket weapons are now represented in all the
services of our Armed Forces. and comprise one of the most important components of
their high combat night. But among the combat rockets of various classes and which
differ in their nature there are special-purpose rocket weapons which have been al-
lotted an exceptionally important role in the system of ensuring the country's de—
fensive capability and in the matter of defending the achievements of socialism
against imperialist aggression. These are strategic rockets. And they have a pre-
cise name--our fatherland's shield and sword.

The Soviet people and their armed forces insert a clear and specific meaning in such
a capacious concept. The rockets are intended for defeating strike against the ag-
gressor. This book tells primarily about strategic rockets. about the Strategic
Rocket Troops [SRT]. and about the valiant deeds of the rocketeers who, like inde-
fatigable sentinels, are always in combat readiness.

Heirs to the unfading combat glory and remarkable traditions of the older generations
of Soviet servicemen, the strategic rocketeers are boundlessly proud of the fact

that the people, who are engaged in the implementation of the grandiose plans for
communist construction, entrusted powerful contemporary weapons to them. And this
pride and profound consciousness of their responsibility for the cause of defending
their country multiply their spiritual and moral strength and their striving to re-
al ize the historic decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress and to justify with pride

the high confidence of the party and the people.

When we speak of contemporary rockets, we often also recall those pioneers who laid
the foundation for these weapons. Back in the last century, military figures and
engineers. among whom General A. D. Zasyadko is especially known. stepped forth as
designers of combat rockets which found employment in the military operations of the
Russian Army. The work which they began was continued by Generals P. P. Kovalevskiy
and A. A. Shil'der. In [827, Russian Army Captain V. H. Vnukov assumed couuand of
a "rocket company" which was formed and consisted of 18 launcher mounts.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further development of combat rockets and the tactics for their employment was con-
nected with the name of General K. I. Konstantinov. The rockets which he developed
were successfully used in the course of the Crimean War of 1853-1856. However, the
conditions of that time and the extremely low level of scientific development and
production did not permit the creators of new weapons to obtain optimum results.
Rockets. which had only just begun their combat history, were forgotten. Classical
weapons--artillery-gained the upper hand.

The development of modern rocket technology is greatly obligated to the works of our
brilliant countryman. K. E. Tsiolkqukiy, the founder of the scientific theory of
rocket propulsion. In developing the first models of Soviet rockets Soviet scien-
tists and designers were guided namely by his advanced ideas. They leaned on the ef-
fective support of the party and the state in their indefatigable searches and in the
solution of practical problems in the creation of rockets. Scientific-design or-
ganizations which further the combination of efforts of enthusiasts for new equip-
ment and ensuring the attainment of practical results in rocket-building were created
in our country considerably earlier than in the West. Back in the 1930's we had or-
ganized such a genuinely scientific center as the Rocket Scientific-Research In-
stitute which permitted the purposeful conduct of large-scale research and design
work. It was namely within the walls of the Rocket Scientific-Research Institute
and on its ranges that. by the efforts of our rocketeers, the first models of new
rockets were created and tested which later found wide employment in the battles of
the Great Patriotic War.

In the postwar period rocket technology took a giant step forward. It orbited our
country into space and permitted a multifold strengthening of our defensive night.

In working on the book, the authors used the works of scientists and designers--
creaters of rocket equipment. military historians. writers, and journalists and
materials from the periodical press, archive documents. and recollections of service-
men who have mastered rocket weapons. It is hoped that this book will serve the
cause of military—patriotic indoctrination of our youth and the training of youths
for honorable military service.

At the Lsunch--‘1'he Strategic Rocket Forces [Chapter 4, excerpts]

The creation of the Strategic Rocket Forces as an independent service of the Armed
Forces was announced at the fourth session of the USSR Supreme Soviet in January

1960 .

The separation of the Rocket Forces as an independent service of the Armed Forces
meant that it was necessary to solve quickly the most difficult problems: to de-
velop the bases for the combat employment of the troops and their control,

to select areas for emplacement and construct launch positions for the rocket cos-
pluxes, to create a network of educational institutions for the rocketeers, and so

forth.

The composition of the Rocket Forces included newly formed units armed with stra-
tegic ballistic missiles and military educational institutions.

3
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE(NNLY

Thecommand sent the best Guards units which had combat experience and were capable of
mastering new weapons to the Rocket Forces. The Guards Red Banner large unit was
also among them. The combat path of this large unit began in the years of the Civil
Her in the Transcsucasus where its personnel distinguished themselves in the struggle
with nationalistic bandits.

The large unit went into battle against the German-fascist troops in September 1941
at Poltava. The large unit was converted to a Guards large unit in the fall of l94r
for bravery displayed in battles with the enemy. After the Battle of Stalingrad a
new order appeared on the large unit's Guards banner.

Cn 6 July 19b3, the artillery batteries of the large unit engaged fascist tanks on

the Kursk Bulge. Nineteen enemy tanks rushed at the gun of the chief of artillery
section, Master Sergeant Vlasov. nine of which were destroyed including five "Tigers."
The next day. more than 20 enemy .anks moved on the position of the artillery-en; 8
enemy tanks, of them 3 "Tigers," were transformed into heaps of netal. The fighters
of the section died one after the other. Left alone at the gun. Guards Master Ser-
geant Vlasov knocked out one more enemy tank before he rushed with a bottle of com.
bustible mixture against the last "Tiger" which was moving on him. Guards Master
Sergeant Vlasov died a hero’s death.

In the summer of 1966. the personnel of the Guards large unit ended their crusade on
the banks of the Baltic Sea.

The heirs to the soldierly glory of the Guards Red Banner large unit received new,
contemporary weapons. mastered them to perfection. and went on combat duty.

The officers. sergeants. and soldiers of the rocket unit which was formed on the

base of the famous large unit became masters of rocketry. They won first place in
the competition between rocket units. 40 percent of the rocketeers of the unit became
experts of combat and political training, many of them passed the examinations for
the title of first- and second-class specialist and mastered allied specialties, and
half the men are rated sportsmen. The Komsomol Central Committee awarded the unit's
Konsomol organization the challenge Red Banner and Certificate of Honor.

"Let our fathers and mothers; brothers and sisters, wives and fiancées work and
live in peace! We are ready to defend the interests of our motherland at any time.
Let the aggressors know--formidable rockets are in reliable hands! Ho rocketeer
will hesitate if it is necessary to punish the aggressor wherever he may be." said
Guards Private First Class Dorozh when receiving the banner. Subsequently, the
rocketeers of the Guards unit again won the Challenge Red Banner of the Komsomol
Central Col-lit tee.

The combat path of the troop unit which began another rocket formation is also rich
with soldierly exploits. Five men of this unit were awarded the title of Hero of
the Soviet Union. 23 were awarded the Order of Lenin, and 220--the Order of the Red
Banner. The rocketeers received the glorious traditions of the frontline fighters
as a bacon and are continuing them with their deeds.

Pour two-time Heroes of the Soviet Union. 56 Heroes of the Soviet Union, three men
who were awarded Orders of Glory of all three classes, 4 Heroes of Socialist Labor,
and thousands of generals, officers. and extended-service servicemen who were award-
ed orders and medals of the Soviet Union for valor and bravery came to the Rocket
Forces.

h
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HHLY
INNRiOFFICIAl.UBI3€HULY

During the years of the formation of the Soviet Air Forces the cell resounded
throughout the country: "Youth, to the sirplanel"--and the people sent their sons
off to aviation. Another call sounded: "Youth. to the fleet"-—and troop trains
with recruit seamen raced across the country. The Rocket Troops were formed without
the thunder of brass bands and without calls. They joined them on the call of their
hearts, and not in accordance with the call-ups of the rayon military commissariats.
Servicemen enriched with combat experience went. Pathfinders went. It was clear

to all of them--yesterday's officer candidates and veterans: difficult work awaited
them. but work on which the peace of the people depends.

The leaders of the Communist Party and the Soviet government followed the course of
the organization of the Strategic Rocket Troops with great attention. They visited
the rocket units. helped the rocketeers to solve difficult problems on the spot, met
with the officers and soldiers, became acquainted with their life and combat train-
ing, and listened to their suggestions on improving the equipment and raising the
combat readiness of the Rocket Troops. Marshals of the Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov.
R. Ya. Malinovskiy. A. A. Grechko. M. V. Zakharov. and I. Rh. Bagramyan, Chief
Marshal of Artillery N. N. Voronov. and Army General A. A. Yepishev were occupied
with problems in the formation of the rocket uni” . the construction of rocket com-
plexes and housing areas,andthearrangenentsnd living conditions of the rocketeers.

Hero of the Soviet Union and Chief Marshal of Artillery M. I. Redelin was appointed
first commander of the Strategic Rocket Troops. Me was an outstanding military
leader who had gone through battles of the Great Patriotic War as a commander of an
artillery antitank brigade of the reserve of the Supreme High Command and artillery
commander of an army and then a front. -

General Nedelin displayed organizational and military talent in the offensive opera-
tiona of the Soviet troops to liberate from the fascists the northern portion of the
Donbas. the cities of Dnepropetrovsk. Nikolayev. and Odessa. in the Yassko-Kishinev
operation, in the crossing of the Danube, and in the Budapest,Be1grade. and Vienna
operations. He profoundly understood the difficult art of controlling a tremendous
number of artillery troops. His broad horizon and wealth of combat experience per-
mitted him to solve the problems of reequipping the Soviet Army with new nuclear
missiles which were just as difficult successfully in the postwar period. As chief
of staff of the artillery of the Soviet Army, chief of the Main Artillery Directorate.
cosmmnder of artillery of the Soviet Army and Deputy Soviet Minister of Defense,

and then as commander of the Rocket Troops, Nedelin did much for the development and
improvement of rocket weapons and the Strategic Rocket Troops. The marshal con-
stantly visited the rocket ranges. rocket units. and design offices, studied the
state of affairs concerning the development and employment of new weapons. and
helped people in every way in their difficult work.

In October 1960 Marshal of the Soviet Union K. S. Moskalenko was appointed commander
of the Strategic Rocket Troops. He began the Great Patriotic War as commander of
the 1st Antitank Artillery Brigade on the Southwestern Front. The artillerymen com-
manded by Brigade Commander Mbskalenko destroyed more than 200 tanks in border bat-
tles. During the war years. General K. S. Moskalenko successively commanded a rifle
corps. a horse and mechanized group. a cavalry corps, and tank and combined-arms
armies. For ability and bravery displayed, General Moskalenko was awarded the title
of Hero of the Soviet Union and Hero of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, and he
was decorated with many coabat orders and medals.

5
son omen. use ONLY
MOWUSEONLY

After conclusion of the war. K. S. Moskalenko was engaged in strengthening the Air
Defense Forces and. from 1953. was co-ander of the mscow Military District. In
1955 he was awarded the rank of Marshal of the Soviet Union.

hon 1960 through 1962 x. s. Moskalenko was the cos-ander of the Strategic Rocket
Forces. he constantly visited the rocket garrisons and delved deeply into the or-
ganisation of the training and life of the rocketeers. During one of his trips the
cousnder set out directly iron the airfield to the barracks of the post. Entering
the very first premises. he was interested in where the people were. The unit con-
sander reported that he ordered forning up the personnel on the parade ground.

"th did you do it? A guard of honor‘I'.’ the co-ander asked.

"No. Comrade Marle of the Soviet Union." the unit omnder replied. "I have served
in the army for many years but I net and talked with a marshal for the first tine.
All our officers and nan would also like to meet the narshal...."

Since nothing could be said against this. the couander hurried to the parade ground.
He ordered the flanks of the formation to close and then had a thorough talk with the
rocketeers and told than about the international and domestic situation in the coun-
try and about the missions assigned to the Strategic Rocket Troops. Then the con-
mander inspected the launch positions and the post and was interested in the life
and living conditions of the nen. Be dropped in at the soldiers' ness. tried the
first and second courses. and thanked the cook for the tastily prepared dinner.
Constant contact with the rocketeers. knowledge of their training and living con-
ditiona--this was one of the bases of his activity for the co-Iander of the Rocket
Troops.

In April 1962. Marshal of the Soviet Union 8. s. Biryuzov was appointed co-Iander of
the Strategic Rocket Troops. he began the war as the counsnder of a rifle division
r.nd skillfully directed the conbat operations of the personnel. He was wounded five
tines during the first year of the war. but he invariably returned to formation.

In the last period of the war. General Biryuzov, in the post of chief of staff of
the 3d Ukrainian Front, participated in the liberation of the northeast part of
Yugoslavia and its capital. Belgrade. from the fascist troops. and then he commanded
the troops of the 37th Army. In the postwar period 8. s. Biryuzov was Deputy Chair-
man of the Allied Control Cosmission for Bulgaria and chief advisor to the Bulgarian
People's Any. Working in the posts of col-ander of the Air Defense Forces. com-
mander of- the Strategic Rocket Troops, and chief of the General Staff--Pirst Deputy
Soviet Minister of Defense, S. S. Diryusov gave all his strength and knowledge to
strengthening the combat night of the Soviet Arned Forces.

In 1955. by the Ukase of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet S. S. Diryuzov
was awarded the rank of Marshal of the Soviet Union. In 1957 he was awarded the
title of Hero of the Soviet Union. - The con-sander of the Strategic Rocket Troops did
much for the further developnent of the new service of the Arned Forces. He frequently
visited the troops and the construction of the launch positions. talked thoroughly
with commanders and soldiers. and delved into all questions of the preparation and
organization of combat duty and the training and indoctrination of the troops'
personnel.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFNJAI.US£‘0NLY

0n 5 Harch [963 one of the celebrated military leaders, twice hero of the Soviet
Union N. I. Krylov. was appointed commander of the Rocket Troops.

Nikolay Krylov voluntarily joined the Red Army in 1919 as a 16-year-old lad and,
from that time. linked his life with the Soviet Armed Forces. During the years of
the Civil "at N. I. Krylov fought against the Hhite Guards bands in the Northern
Caucasus and in the Transcaucasus and participated in the liberation of the Far East
from the interventionists.

The talent and organizing abilities of N. I. Krylov were disclosed especially bril-
liantly during the Great Patriotic Her. He led the troops which fought heroically

against the fascist hordes in the defense of Odessa and Sevastopol' and in the Battle
of Stalingrad.

"i had the occasion to endure 180 fiery days and nights with Nikolay lvanovich in Stalingrad.
lwillneverforgetthefiercebattles on the narrow patch of the Volga bank. Atthemost
critical moments of the combat situation, he always displayed exceptional self-
control and composure. He was always seen where it was more dangerous. where honor
gave rise to honor and glory-to glory. He was a person of great personal bravery
and courage, a commander with a firm will and unlimited faith in victory. Bis

faith was transmitted to his subordinates and they. no matter how difficult it was.

stood to the death," Marshal of the Soviet union V. I. Chuykov recalls of his chief
of staff.

During the war. for courage and heroism which were displayed General Krylov was
twice awarded the title of hero of the Soviet Union and was decorated with many or-
ders and medals.

In the postwar period. N. I. Krylov co-aanded the troops of a number of military
districts. giving.a11 his knowledge and experience to raising the combat readiness
of the Soviet Armed Forces. In April 1962. N. I. Krylov was awarded the rank of
Marshal of the Soviet Union. In 1963 he was appointed comaander of the Strategic
Rocket Troops. In this important post, N. I. Krylov showed hinself to be an out-
standing military figure. He did much to raise the combat readiness of the rocket
units and for the improvement of combat duty. and he often visited the troops and
ranges during missile tests.

The commander was attentive to the organization of the training and indoctrination
of the troop personnel, was concerned that combat duty at the strategic rockets was
performed by excellently trained soldiers. sergeants, and officers, and that the
rocketeers had good training simulators and training aids. and he did much so that
all conditions were created for the rocketeer soldiers for successful combat ser-
vice and good rest. N. l. Krylov was known to the Soviet reader as the author of a
number of books and articles on questions of the combat activity and traditions

of the Soviet Armed Forces.

In April I972 Army General V. F. Tolubko was appointed head of the Strategic Rocket
Troops.

He volunteered for the ranks of the army as a 17-year old youth. In the prewar
period he completed tank school and then the academy of armored and mechanized
troops.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the period of the Great Patriotic War. he was a chief of staff and then commander
of a tank brigade and chief of the operations branch of a corps headquarters. He
took an active part in the battles with the German-fascist aggressors on the Lenin-
grad. Kalinin, and other fronts as well as in the Yasako-Kiahinev, Budapest. and
Belgrade operations.

After conclusion of the war V. F. Tolubko worked in various command and staff posts
and completed the General Staff Military Academy. In 1960 he was appointed first
deputy cot-sander of Rocket Troops. From 1968. he cot-ended the troops of the
Siberian and then the Far East Military Districts. V. P. Tolubko has been a member
of the CPSU since 1939. He was elected a delegate to the 21st. 22d, 23d, thh. and
25th CPSU Congresses and a deputy of the RSPSR Supreme Soviet, 5th. 6th. and 7th
convocations.- In 1971, V. F. Tolubko was elected deputy of the USSR Supreme Soviet,
and at the 25th Party Congress was elected a member of the CPSU Central Committee.

The CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers adopted neasuras to
provide the Rocket Troops with the latest combat and training equipment and to im-
prove the life and living conditions of the personnel. Comfortable houses. dormi-
tories. barracks. messes. polyclinics, Officers' houses and soldiers‘ clubs. coffee
shops, and sports complexes were constructed for the rocketeers.

Today's rocket garrison is no longer a tent or dugout cantonnent of the first racketeer-
settlers. It is a military post with personal service shops, stores, coffee shops,
with gymnasiums. swimming pools, and a stadium. Hail. telegraph. automatic tele-
phone exchanges. and a television center are very important for rocketeers who live
far from big cities. Today. the posts of the rocketeers contain everything to work
and rest fruitfully.

The organization of the Rocket Troops and rocket weapons was improved. The first

rocket units were armed with ground-launched rocket complexes. The installation of
-such a rocket complex was cumbersome and required considerable manual labor. and a

large combat section was needed to service it.

Silo launchers were created to increase the invulnerability of the rocket complexes
and strengthen the combat readiness of the Rocket Troops. Contemporary silos have
autonatic control and protection which ensures the increased protection of the
rockets in then even with an enemy nuclear attack.

"...Let us drop below the ground," says a rocketeer. "Hhat strikes one between the
eyes here? First of all-—an absence of people. I recall the past rocket complex.
It happened that at the moment of the alarm several services resembled a swarming
anthill. And sweat, it happened, poured into the eyes of the rocketeers and salt
came through on the service shirts. Now everything has been transformed: the sub-
units were amazingly shrunken; today's specialist copes calmly with the duties of
five or six past organizational units, in which regard he does not feel overloads in
so doing. He is unspeakably strengthened by automatic equipment, electronics, and
all types of cybernetic devices. The equipment becomes ever more wiser and fan-
tastically capacious. It is one more impression left by an acquaintance with to-

day’s underground bastions.

6
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR‘0FIIC1AI.[EHE(”QLY

"Reduced in‘volume and weight. at the same time the new instruments strike one with
the compactness of the parts' arrange-ant. He rightly were dumbfounded by the small
horseshoes seated on the emtrenities of a flea. And here in front of us were ele-
ments of a computer the size of an ant's larva. And they were created not for
adornment and not for a museum display, but for work: sons to be able to "split" a
second into fractions of many thousandths when deter-ining the time; to concentrate
a colossal avalanche of infatuation in an electronic "memory"; to finely adjust
various rocket assemblies if necessary and refine its course. .

"Hereisa box with a silvery coating--a child can lift it without difficulty. At
one time. 'at the dawn of rocket youthﬂ the contents of such a box occupied an en-
tire room.

'tlectronics unspeakably eased the service of the rocketeers and sharply reduced the
tables of organization. "here 10 men formerly worked is now controlled by one. And
that is why there is an absence of people at the launch position. Electronics has
successfully implemented the order of the times: it appeared in the units and sub-
units in sports uniform, with a soldierly smart appearance, and appeared not in order
to pose and be wondered at, but to work!"

The rocketeers and military construction personnel did important work in the con-
struction of the launching positions. Expeditions consisting of experienced
rocketeer officers, designers. surveyors, and other specialists were appointed to
select the places for the emplacement of the rocket complexes. The military rocket-
eers in the expeditions worked on the drilling rigs. laid roads through impassable
forests and across swamps. worked in the steppes and deserts under the scorching sun
and in frigid snowstorms, and prepared the base for their units.

"We lived in tents, prepared our food ourselves. cut clearings for the range poles.
and dragged handbsrrows with concrete. In so doing, I do not recall that anyone
refused to work because of sickness although it was rather simple to become sick
under such conditions. 0n the contrary, it was necessary to remove from the
vehicles which were taking off for work people who were sick and were ashamed to show
their weakness in front of their comrades." This is how an officer who worked on

one of the expeditions recalls those days.

The periods for surveying work at the sites of the future rocket gsrrisous were ex-
tremely compressed. The expeditions worked day and night. In uninhabitable places
-in the burning steppe or in a meadow jam-ed with dense forest; the men of the con-
struction units soon settled down at pegs which stuck out singly where the first
scouts recently disembarked fron helicopters. And the reconnaissance groups even
left this camp-they took off farther. And again they covered hundreds of kilo-
meters, searching for “coins" for the construction of rocket installations.

The participants of the reconnaissance groups ended the surveying work quickly. The
construction of the rocket installations was begun exactly at the planned times. A
great number of Soviet institutions and industrial enterprises took part in the de-
signing. construction. and assembly of the rocket complexes--it can be said that the
entire country constructed the rocket complexes.

9
IKHRCIHHCJAI.USE1M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The questions of putting the rocket complexes into operation were at the center of
attention of the Hinister of Defense and the comnder of the Rocket Troops. 0n
assignment from the CPS" Central Committee. member of the Presidium and Secretary
of the CPSU Central Comittee, L. I. Brezhnev, occupied himself with the problens in
the construction of the rocket complexes and equipping the Soviet Army with the
newest weapons. He often visited the ranges and rocket units and he was constantly
interested in the course of th'e working out of the rocket complexes and the organi-
zation of their series production. In June 1961. 1.. l. Brezhnev was awarded the
title of Hero of Socialist Labor for outstanding services in the development of
missile technology and cosmonautics.

The strained international situation dictated the accelerated rates for the creation
of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Troops and the construction of the complexes. De-
spite the scattering of the military construction sites on the tremendous territory
of the country and the absence of experience in such complex defense construction.
the rocket complexes were put into operation exactly in the established times. The
commander of one of the military construction units, officer N. V. Kolbasin, tells of
how work was begun at installations of the rocket troops by the military builders.

"The first echelon with people and equipment arrived at the work site on a frosty
January night. They unloaded on a railroad branch line of a timber management
facility, on an unimproved sector. The site for the builders had been selected in
a forest. They began to erect a tent cantonment.

"The day began with digging out the equith and materials and clearing the roads
which had become buried with snow during the night. The motor vehicles moved in
columns accompanied by prime movers and snow scrapers. Food was prepared for all at
small mobile field kitchens. All builders underwent acclimatization in tents.
Sectional—panel barracks were assembled quickly. They went out to work before
breakfast and after dinner. The men of Sergeant Kudin worked better than the others.

"Gradually, life became routine: the settlement was illuminated from mobile power
plants. The radio center acquired the gift of speech, connecting the unit with the
world. And work proceeded more gaily. The motor vehicle company commanded by the
competent and willful officer communist Tyapyshev supported round-the-clock work
at the construction site. All subunits worked conscientiously.

"Spring arrived and new difficulties appeared. The roads were washed away. rivers
raged around the settlement. and the high water overflowed. Construction materials
and equipment were now transported by tractors. The delivery of fresh produce
stopped for a while. It was necessary to change to canned goods. But the rate of
work increased.

"Socialist competition which was widely initiated in the country found an ardent re-
sponse among the military builders, too. Subunits competed with one another, and
the unit-with the adjacent unit. It was difficult to distinguish the best subunits
and brigades. The honored title of shock worker of cosmmnist labor was awarded for
the first time in the unit to the machine and motor vehicle operators. Comrades
2verev, Suleymanov, Isbasarov, Hkrtchan. Kudan. Zhuk. and Shul'titskiy."

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FKMR()FFWCJAI.lﬂSEI(NWLV

In order to get to know their "defensive line"-the rocket complex-better. the
rocketeers took an active part in its erection: in building structures. in assemb—
ly and debugging work. and they introduced many suggestions on the rational equip-
ping of the complex.

During the time when the rocket complexes were being constructed and put into opera-
tion. coammnders and political officers of units and subunits. staffofficers.and all
officers passed through a genuine school for organisers of production and made a deep
study of the equipment. Amazing structures concealed from outside observation were
constructed by the joint efforts of the builders and the rocketeera.

Here is how a veteran of the rocket troops described the contemporary rocket complex.

“...Hc rode out to the cantonment surrounded by a forest where the readiness signal
had just sounded. But the cantonment was immersed in the night darkness and not

even a small light could be seen anywhere. No voices were heard. Only the leaves.
of the young trees on the lanes rustled in the wind. But right bere-the front posi-
tion where the security of the Soviet people is guarded, the front position of their

peace; the rocketeers are serving for this. And the command 'Action' just sounded
here."

"Thepath suddenly runs down in steps. The staircase comes up against a door. We
enter a room which is brightly flooded with light.

"Your pass!" the guard demands.

"We pass the control point and enter the forest. Our path. looping between trees and
bushes,invariably goes farther and farther. In the forest, the silence is thicker
than in the cantonment. Night birds scream from time to time.

"Thepath stops suddenly. and again steps downward. The turn of a lever-a heavy
hatch opens, Another hatch, another. And each one is battened down tightly behind

08.

"Nodescend on an elevator. Ahead--a light corridor. The silence was left above.
Here we have deafening and powerful sounds. A dynamic loudspeaker carries the words
of commands. The screens of oscillographs flicker and display boards of various
colors light up. People in blue coveralls move near the control consoles and knife
switches--everything is as in a fantasy film. But work is under_way here. This is
also the cause which they serve here.

"Here they are all young. At the remote-control console is the commander; he is not

much older than his subordinates. Great experience and an excellent knowledge of
his business are divined in his movements and the words of his commands. Somehow.
the word "veteran" does not square with his age. But he is actually a veteran of
the rocket troops and began his service at the first rocket complexes. Then-the.
military academy, practice on the ranges.... And it is not surprising that the men
operate so calmly and clearly. Stopwatches tick off.the seconds. Receiving re-
ports, the commander reports the readiness of the rocket for launching over special
communications.

11
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(HﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"'Conductthe launch exactly at the established time!’ the command follows.

"Thesecondsrace along. Now there, above.the mounds overgrown with brush trembled
and crawled to the sides. In the place where yellowed leaves had just whispered
the orifice of the silo shaft opened.

'ﬁherocketstands deep in the shaft. It looks at the sky. But it only appears to
do this. The rocket's "electronic brain remembers" the target coordinates....

"Hercit is. a contemporary weapon, our reliable shield and punishing sword! How
much indestructible power and strict beauty is in it! How many strained days and
nights did scientists and engineers labor over the implementation of its plans, how
many workers' hands cast. turned. and polished each part in it, how much strength
did thousands of people give to it! One can say much about rockets, but only here.
looking at how they are aimed at the sky, do you understand forever the meaning of
the short and sharp word--rocket.

"Hedidnot hear the increasing roar of the powerful engines.‘

"The missnmawas accomplished. The moon is rising above the forest. And nothing re-
calls that there. beneath the ground, rocketeers are working and indefatigably stand
guard over the motherland."

After the completion of construction and putting the rocket complexes into operation,
the main content of the rocketeers' service became training, the mastery of new weapons,
and their maintenance in constant combat readiness. In this connection. the urgent ne-
cessity arose to create a contemporary training base and training and drilling equipe
ment. The special features of the training process had to be considered. First,

the rocket is a flight vehicle which is employed once; its launching with a training
or combat target can be conducted only once. Second, drills prior to launching such
as, for example, are conducted by riflemen. artillerymen. or tankers on the rifle
range, artillery range. or tank driving grounds cannot be conducted at a combat
rocket complex. At the same time, it is not sufficient for the rocketeer to study
the equipment of the complex. It order to perform his duties successfully. each
member of a combat section must drill systematically in order to make his actions
automatic during the preparation and launching of the rocket.

Now each rocket unit has classrooms and laboratories which are equipped for the
training and drilling of personnel in all rocket specialties. Using models and
training aids. they can understand the most complex circuits of varied equipment.

At first, special design offices were created in the rocket units on the voluntary
service principle which usually had their own designers. training-production shops,
and a material and technical support group. Knowledgeable and technically trained
officers, sergeants. and soldiers comprised the membership of their own design of-
fice. They began their activity with the study of rocket weapons. For this pur-

pose. they travelled to scientific research institutions and design offices at the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enterprises where they became acquainted with the construction of the missiles, in-
struments. assemblies. and systems; then they prepared textbooks and methodological
aids for the rocketeers and introduced suggestions for the creation and improvement
of the training and drilling equipment. In the training-production shops the spe-
cialists transformed the schemes of the designers into models and aids. Materials,

instruments, and parts for the construction of the models were delivered by the
material and technical support group.

The public design offices became a school of technical creativity for many rocketeers
and played a large role in the creation and improvement of the training base.

Later. in the 1960's. classrooms were set up in the rocket units and simulators were
created which permit the employment of contemporary methods of programmed instruction.

Training buildings were converted into unique "electronic ranges." Individual and
group simulators were placed in them which do not differ from combat control consoles
and assemblies not only in appearance, but also in operating conditions. 0n them,
the rocketeers began to acquire the necessary practice for work with live rockets.

It is difficult for a person who has visited the rocketeers to believe that he is in
the training classroom of a rocket unit rather than in the training laboratory of
a technical higher educational institution.

Meanwhile. the rocketeers study not only in the classrooms and on the simulators.
Lessons and exercises and practical rocket launchings are conducted under extremely
difficult conditions.

initially. training positions were set up in the rocket units for training purposes.

Now training rocket complexes exist which are virtually indistinguishable from combat
ones.

The skill of the rocketeer is checked many times before he goes on a responsible
watch--combat duty. But for him, the main examination for maturity is participation
in n rocket launching. '

The crews travel out to a rocket range where their ability is comprehensively tested.
The high quality of the live rocket launchings as an indicator of the combat readi-
ness of the rocket troops was reported to the 22d CPSU Congress in October 1961: "In
the Rocket Troops practical live rocket launchings provided convincing results: of
all medium range rocket launchings more than 90 percent were accomplished with a
grade of 'excellent' and 'good.’ And as regards intercontinental rockets. they ac-
complish all their missions only with grades of 'excellent' and 'good'." said the
Soviet Minister of Defense.

"An excellent rocket launching. It is not only military skill. It is a combat
spirit. ideological tempering and patriotism of the hearts which have been fused to-
gether. Even a robot is able to push a button. But we are not robots. we are Soviet
xnldicrs. the entire planet has been entrusted to us." said the commander of one of
ihv rocket units at a meeting devoted to the return of the rocketeers from the

rnn;-.

13
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

here is how one of the officers describes a check of the rocketeers' skill on the
range.

"...It was difficult. Andit was not a matter of the blizzard which broke out inoppor-
tunely. And not the strictness of the check of knowledge-awe were accustomed to this.
Prior to the launch itself two instruments suddenly proved to be defective. 'Maybe
everything has been intentionally readjusted.‘ Major Prokhorov, commander of the
subunit being checked, thought with alarm. ’Let them show what they can do. they

say. '

"Onlylaterdid Prokhorov learn that the malfunctions had in fact been inserted in
the plan for the check.

"The rocket rose gigantically in the silo. The people operated quickly. Quickly. but
calmly and not blindly.

"'Ifound it!’ shouted Private Vasiliy Pozneteov. Almost simultaneously Major
Prokhorov also found another 'failure.‘ A record short time was spent on its cor-
rection. The qualifications of Kuliyev. who helped the commander,werealso felt
here.

"'80rcerer,'utteredthe general who followed the preparations of the rocket for
launching, in a rather muffled manner without concealing satisfaction. He glanced
. at his watch: everything proceeded according to the standard.

"Endingthecontrol check. Major Prokhorov glanced at his watch and pressed the but-
ton with the white letters 'Launch.’ A white flame accompanied by a terrible roar
burst from the nozzles. The flame expanded, becoming crimson. It already approached
a giant hurricane. The commander had a great desire to look out of the reinforced
concrete bunker now and to feast his eyes on the fiery trail created by human hands
which was cutting the sky, but he could not...."

The excellent ability of each member of a rocket crew still does not convert the
subunit into a single, smooth organism capable of accomplishing a combat mission ex-
actly at the designated time.

The smoothness of actions of rocket subunits is worked out on combined special tac-
tical lessons and tactical exercises.

Exercises often showed the high skill and smoothness in the actions of the rocket-
eers when accomplishing missions.

The constant good working order of all the complex mechanisms of the strategic
rockets is maintained by technical checks of the rocket complex with the placement

of the strategic rockets on combat duty as well as by the conduct of prescribed main-
tenance.

To ensure the constant readiness of strategic rockets. a system for their maintenance
was worked out. Its basis was formed with the creation of the ballistic rockets and
it developed during the construction and assembly of strategic rocket complexes.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Improvement of the rocket-weapon maintenance system proceeded along the line of re-
ducing the number of people servicing the rocket. The main thing in maintenance to-
day is the prescribed system for the technical servicing of the strateg'c rockets.
Such a system ensures the long-term faultless operation of all assemblies of the
rocket complex under any conditions.

"He now have the best machines in the inventory.... It is clear that the construc-
tion of such apparatuses is complex and their systems require periodic thorough
checking. Only the attentive and qualified servicing of the rockets and technical
launch systems can ensure a high degree of combat readiness and reliability for a
long time which are required of the contemporary rocket complex. Such periodic ser-
viclng of the combat equipment is conducted during periodic technical servicing.

"Periodic technical servicing is now considered as the final and general preparation
of all rocket armament for its combat duty. In other words, combat readiness is
forged on periodic technical servicing. Therefore. the great significance which its
conduct on a high engineering and technical level as well as organizational level
acquires is clear." This is how one of the military leaders evaluates the signifi-
cance of prescribed maintenance work.

"The concept of 'combat readiness' is not new," wrote Marshal of the Soviet Union
N. I. Krylov. "It was born, perhaps. together with armed conflict itself. But at
each stage of development of military affairs the concept of 'readiness for battle'
changed substantially. and was supplenented. defining the necessary complex of pre-
parations to rebuff possible attack."

For the Strategic Rocket Troops readiness for battle is a concept which is absolutely
new in its content.

First. our readiness for battle is the readiness of all rocket units to accomplish
their assigned missions on order of the Supreme high Command under any conditions and
circumstances. The unprecedented power of nuclear weapons and the virtually un-
limited range for destroying targets expand the boundaries of the sphere of combat
influence on the enemy on any continents. Therefore, if we speak of the readiness

of our service of the Armed Forces for battle. it is the readiness to repel aggres-
sion with the employment of the most powerful means of destruction.

Second. the readiness of the rocket troops for combat operations today can be called
absolute with complete justification.

The combat readiness of the rocket troops finds expression in combat duty. In the
Armed Forces today there is no service more important and responsible than the per-
formance of combat duty by the strategic rocketeers. Each of them is ready at any
second to accomplish his duties upon receipt of the order. And not one of them can
take over on combat duty without having demonstrated firm knowledge and skillful
actions on lessons and without having studied the order for operations with the
rocket and the physical essence of the processes which occur in the rocket when ac-
complishing any operation.

15
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For all rocketeers. going on combat duty is an event of tremendous importance.
Crews which know the weapons entrusted to them to perfection are permitted to go on
combat duty.

Pernission to perform combat duty at the rockets-this is the passing of the state
examination by the personnel and the peak of the rocketeers' labor in mastering the

weapon.

The day of going on combat duty is a festive day for the rocketeers. When going on
combat duty, a solesm ceremony is performed.

The men stand in a clear formation. The unit's sacred object-its Battle Standard--
burns with red calico. Moire ribbons hang down along the staff. The fighting men
of the older generation fought against the hated enemy beneath this Standard which
was scorched on the battlefields of the Great Patriotic War. The motherland evalu-
ated their soldierly exploit highly. Years passed. Now serving under this Standard
are those whom the fatherland has entrusted with protecting the peaceful labor of

the Soviet people-the rocketeers.

At these moments you look at the concentrated faces of the rocketeers who have re-
ceived from the hands of their older brothers and fathers the combat baton of ex-
ploits and who heard the combat orders for the attack under this Standard. and you
experience a feeling of the greatest pride and joy for the tremendous confidence
rendered in each of us.

There is nothing comparable with the solemn elation in the ceremony of the rocketeers
who are taking over on combat duty. Before beginning the accomplishment of a combat
mission, they hear the order. Its embossed words soundliketheamndateof the mother-
land:

"He take over on combat duty to ensure the security of our motherland-the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics."

From this moment. occupying their work sites at the consoles, the rocketeers will ac-
conplish the duties defined for them day and night. The will, thoughts, and actions
of each of them will be directed to seeing that at any instant the combat equipment
on his sector as well as with the comrade who is sitting alongside and in the entire
subunit is in a high state of readiness. Only people who are boundlessly devoted

to the socialist motherland, are ideologically steadfast. and morally and physically
tempered are capable of being in such a state of self-collection. And our soldiers.
sergeants, and officers are just this type.

The special responsibility of the rocketeers to the people follows from the very
purpose of the rocket troops which have been placed on the front line of the father-
land's defense high combat readiness is the law of life for them. All their
strained service is subordinate to this. A thirst for knowledge, creativity and
initiative. the striving to accomplish the assigned mission irreproachably--thia is
what characterizes the rocketeers.

...Hassive steel doors swung open noislessly and, passing us through. were closed
just as silently. The sounds of the land were left behind.’ A soft dull light is

16
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB(HVLY
POI 0W“. USE ONLY

emitted by ceiling fixtures. A labyrinth of passages—zigzags. turns. A new door.
A anal] roon is before us. Ahead we see a control console: a figured table. stands
with signaling and control. A rocketeer rises and reports: everything is in order!

Everything is in. order .

He does not take his eyes fro- the signal stands. Here a dull-white display board
lit up in the center. Numbers flash brilliantly one after another. It is an

order which passed through to the rocket. A short time passes and the rocket is
ready for launch. And after another short time green display 'boards flash alongside
white readiness display boards—launch! This means that at a certain distance from here

a massive lid is moving away on the surface of the Earth, and a rocket soars upward
from the silo launcher and lays on s conbat course.

It is going to the target. And then they report over the loudspeaker conunications:
"Rocket launch accomplished! "

And this is how it will be if the aggressor tries to attack our motherland.

The Soviet strategic rocketeers are standing on combat duty so that quiet dawns arise
above the fields. so that children can build whinsical castles of sand, and so that

moist stars look into the night windows of the houses.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo DOSAAP SSSR. 1979

6367
C80: 1801/167

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CIVIL DEFENSE

300K EXCERPTS: TEXT (N CIVIL DEFENSE MEDICAL SERVICES

Moscow UCHBBMOYB POSOBIYB P0 MEDI‘I‘SINSKOY SLUZHBB CBAZHDANSKOY 030m in
Russian I981 (signed to press 6 Jul 81) pp 2-6. 134-135

lAnnotation, table of contents and foreword from book "Text on Civil Defense
Medical Services", by group of authors, edited by P. N. Safronov. 2d ed..
revised and supplemented. admitted by Main Administration of Educational Insti-
tutions of USSR Ministry of Health for all faculties as a text for students of
medical institutes, lzdatel'stvo 'Meditsina". 100,000 copies. 136 pages]

lhcerpts] The second edition of the "Uchebnoye posobiye po meditsinskoy
sluzhbe grazhdanskoy oborony" (the first edition cane out in 1973) examines
the arrangement of medical support of the population in various stricken
areas. and it covers the work of the Civil Defense Medical Service in pro-
viding for medical sorting and s two-stage systen for treating the stricken
and ill with their further evacuation to their destination.

It sets forth the organizational structure and tasks of the primary mobile
formations of the Civil Defense Medical Service (MSGO)-first aid detachments.

The text is written in conformity with the program approved by the USSR
Ministry of Health and is intended for students of medical institutes.

The text has two figures. two tables and eighteen diagrams.

The reviewer was Candidate of Medical Sciences V. I. Latyshev. instructor of
the Civil Defense course of the 2d m1 [Moscow Medical Institute] imeni N. l.
Pirogov. '

Table of Contents
Poreword................................................................... 3

chapter 1. Organizational Structure of Civil Defense Medical Service

(MSCO). MSGOFormationsand Establishments................... ..... 5
l. MSCOMissions 6
2. M860 Organizational Structure. 8

3. MSCO Formations and Bstablishnents..................................... 12

18
FOR OFl-‘IGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter II . Medical-Tact ical Characteristics of Stricken Areas. . . . . . . . . . .
l . Med ical-Tactical Characteristics of a Center of Nuclear Destruction. . .
2. Characteristics of the Trace of a Radioactive Cloud. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Medical-Tactical Characteristics of a Center of Chemical Damage. . . . . . .
a. Medical-Tactical Characteristics of a Center of Bacteriological Damage
Chapter Ill . Medical Support of the Population in Conducting Civil
Defense Measures........................................................
l . Medical Support in Conducting CD Meamres under Peacetime Conditions. .

2. Medical Support in Mapping up the Aftermath of Natural Disasters and
Major Production Accidents............................................

3. Medical Support with the Threat of Enemy Attack.......................
Medical Support of Dispersal of Horkers and Employees and Population

HWICIIHI‘JOTL.........occ.o.............o...n.o..........o....o......-.

gvacuaunsMedicalBstablishments......................................
10. Medical Support in Performing Rescue and Urgent Emergency Restoration
Hark in Stricken Areas...
Chapter IV. Treatment and Evacuation Support of the Population in Mapping
up the Aftermath of Enemy Attack.
l. Tito-Stage System of Treatment-Evacuation Support of Victims...........
2. Kinds and Scope of Medical Assistance.................................
3. Medical Sorting..
10. Medical Evacuation....................................................
Chapter V. Work of MSGO Formations in Performing Rescue Operations in a

Stricken Area ..... ......................................................

Organization of MSGO Organizations' Work in Mapping up Center of Ruclear

Destruction................u......o.......n....‘......-................

I. Rescue and Urgent Emergency Restoration Work..........................
2. Organization of the Hark of Medical Teams
3. Organization of the Work of 01’?! [First Aid Detach-ents]...............

Organizational theHork of 0PM Subunits................................

Organization of the Hark of MSGO Pamtians in Mapping up a Center of

(:lN'miCul Damage....n.o.on...................o...............o.........

I. Organization of the work of Medical Teams.
2. Organization of the Work of 0PM.......................................

ih-rnnizatimurthc Work of 0PM Subunits................................

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l8
19
29
33

lol
lol

42
105

106
51

52

56
58
59
60
63

68

68
68
73
77
82

88
88
90
90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter VI. Organization of Specialized Medical Assistance to Victims in
th“ Suburban Areasoooaoaaoooaoaoooaoooooaooooooaoooooooasosaoaaaaooaoaa

I. The Hospital Pacility................................................
2. Sorting-Evacuation Hospitals and Head Hospitals......................
Organizatianofthe Hork of a Sorting-Evacuation Hospital and Head

Hospital....-......c......w.....oou.o...-.................o-....o...

3. Profiled Hospitals...................................................

Chapter VII. Sanitary-Hygienic and Anti-Bpideaic Support of the
Population and Victims under Conditions of the Use of Mass Destruction

Heapons................................................................

I. Importance of Sanitary-Hygienic and Anti-Epidemic Measures in
Stricken Areas ......

2. Sanitary-Hygienic Measures..
3. Anti-Epidemic Measures...............................................

lo . Features of Sanitary-Hygienic and Anti-Epidemic Support of the
Population during Dispersal and Evacuation...........................

S. MSGO Measures in Mopping up _a Center of Bacteriological Damage.
6. Procedure for Employing MSGO Formations in Mapping up a Center of
Bacteriolosj-Cal Damage..'.........uu......................u...u lose
Chapter VIII. Supply of MSGO Formations and Establishments with Medical,
Medical-Administrative and Special Property. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. Organization of Medical Supply.......................................

2 . Medical Supply of MSGO Formations and Establishments and Support of
the Population with Medical Protective Gear. . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .

3. Procedure for Supply of MSGO Formations and Establishments with
Medical and Medical-Administrative Property. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter IX. CD Plan of a Health Facility and Plan for Medical Support of
(II) Measures of a National Economic Installation. .. ............... . . .

I. Purpose of CD Plan of a Health Facility and Basic Requirements
Placed Thereon..

2. Procedure for Development, Approval and Adjustment of Health
FacilityCD Plan.....................................................

3. Structure of Health Facility CD Plan.
lo. Plan for Medical Support of CD Measures of a National Economic

Installation.........................................................

20
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

95
95
99

100
105

110

111
112
1119

115
116

121

123
123

126

127

I28

128

129
130

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreword

The Con-unist Party and Soviet government constantly devote great attention to
strengthening our Motherland'a defenses and improving civil defense.

USSR Civil Defense is a component of the systen of statewide defense measures
carried out in peace and wartime for protection of the population and the
national economy against enemy lass destruction weapons and other means of
attack, and for conducting rescue and urgent emergency restoration work in
stricken areas and in areas of natural disasters.

The primary task in training students of Iedical institutes in civil defense
is their preparation for practical work as part of mobile foraationa.
therapeutic-prophylactic establishments and services of MSGO.

As before. the second. revised and supplemented edition of the "Uchebnoye
posobiye po neditsinskoy sluzbe grarhdanskoy oborony" devotes nain attention
to a presentation of the organization of medical support to the population
under conditions of enemy use of mass destruction weapons.

The text presents the directions in the work of the Civil Defense Medical
Service. the essence of the two-stage system of therapeutic-evacuation support
to the stricken and ill, questions of sorting. and kinds and scope of medical
assistance in evacuation stages.

The text takes account of new statutes on organization of the Civil Defense
Medical Service.

The text was written in conformity with the progran for civil defense training
of students of higher educational institutions approved by the USSR Minister
of Higher and secondary Specialized Education and the Chief of USSR Civil
Defense and Deputy Minister of Defense of USSR. It reflects matters of civil
defense training of students of medical institutes.

The program general course is not covered in this text since it is set forth
in appropriate civil defense textbooks.

Participating in the writing of the second edition of the text on MSGO were
instructors of the military chair of the lat Leningrad Order of Labor Red
Banner Medical Institute imeni Academician I. P. Pavlov.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Meditsina". 1981

6904
080: [801/177 END

21
FI”!(MWWCJALIJSEIJNLY