FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10122

18 November 1981

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 11/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 11/81)

CONTENTS
MILITARY-POLITICAL ISSUES

Book Reviews Costs of Pursuing Arms Race
(Yu. Ye. Vlas'yevich; BKONOHICBBSKOYB BRZMYA MILITARIZM'K.

198°)eeeeoe-eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeoeeeeeee

AI R DEFENSE FORCES

Book Excerpts: Air Defense Forces in Wartime
(P. I. Gtekhnev. et 81.} VOYSKA PVO STRANY V VBIJKOY
WWY VOYNB, 1981)................................

CIVI L DEFENSE

Book Excerpts: Civil Defense Hedical Service
(P. P. Babinskiy, N. I. Glebova ORGANIZATSIYA I TAKTIKA
MBDITS'NSKOY SLUZEBY GWKOY 090m. 1980)...........

MILITARY SCROOIS AND ACADDJIES

Book Excerpts: History of the home Military Acedeny
(VOYENNAYA MADEIYA HEN! H. V. PRUNZB, 1900) ...............

-a- [III-USSR-4]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HI LITARY-POLITICAL ISSUES

BOOK REVIEWS COSTS OF PURSUING ARMS RACE

Hoscou EKOXOMICHESKOYE BREHYA MILITARIZHA in Russian 1980(signed to press 18 Jul 80)
pp 1-2. 183-4

[Table of contents and annotation of book by Yu. Ye. Vlas'yevich]
[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: EKONCHICHESKOYE ERMA HILITARIZMA (The Econalic Burden of Militarisn)
Publisher: Hysl'
Place and year of publication: Moscow. 1980

Signed to Press Date: 18 July 1980
Number of Copies Published: 12,000
Number of Pages: 184

Brief Description:

This book examines the costs of the two world wars in the 20th century and the

present arms race. It studies the causes of the increasing costs of wars. the sources
and methods for covering then. The policies of imperialists, who make a profit from
were and the arms race, are disclosed. The active role of the CPSU and the Soviet
state in the struggle for relaxing international tension is shown. A critique is
given of the views of bourgeois sociologists on the arna race.

Table of Contents

Intrwuction I...O....0...‘..."............C........I.....O...............'O 3
Chapter 1. Military-Economic Costs in Light of Harxist-Leninist Theory ..... 7
l. The economic costs of were as an expression of the
interdependence of war and economics ............................... 7
2. Military-economic costs and the interests of different classes ..... 20
3. A critique of anti-Marxist conceptions of militaryéeconomic costs .. 26
1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. Economic Costs of the First and Second World Wars ..............

1 Human losses ....... ... ......
2. Material and financial expenditures ..............
3. Material deStruction ...............................................
4. Indirect costs of war ..............................................
5. Sources and methods of covering costs of the world wars ............

Chapter 3. Economic Costs of the Present Arms Race .........................
1. Social-political causes for the growth of military costs after
World War II ..... ........ﬂ.................. ..... ..................
2. The influence of the scientific-technical revolution on the
volume and structure of military expenditures ......................
3. Measures, dynamics and structure of expenditures for military

goals ..............................................................
4. Sources for covering costs of the arms race ....... .................
Chapter 4. It Is Possible to Reduce the Burden of the Arms Race ............

l. The economic expediency of disarmament .............................
2. Factors that work against military-economic waste ..................

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel‘stvo "Mysl", 1980

CSO: 1807/152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BOOK EXCERPTS: AIR DEFENSE FORCES IN HARTIHE
Moscow VOYSKA PVO SI'RANY V VELIKOY OTHERESTVEINNOY VOYNE 19151-1915 - mun meow
(National Air Defense Forces in the Great Patriotic Her 1941-1916 - A Brief Chronicle)
in Russian 1981 signed to press 16 Sep 80 pp 1-9, 166-171. 263-267. 372-375
[Annotation , table 01‘ contents. excerpts tron three chapters. conclusion from book by
P.I. Grekhnev. N.Ya. Komarov(in clurge of the group of authors). V.L. Hennov. LN.
Mikhsylenko and F.P. Tkachev, VOyenizdat. h0.000 copies. 375 pages]
[Text] This book reveals the heroic path covered by the National Air Defense Forces
in the last war. It gives a day—by-day account of the combat activities of the for-
mations and units and cites brilliant examples of the valor and herois- demonstrated
in the fighting by the defenders of our homeland's air borders.
'Ihe book was written for the general reader.

Contents Page
Authors. IntmmtionIOIOOOOOCIOOOIOOIOIIOOOOOIIOIOI.OOIItIOOOOOOIIODIDOO0.... 3
National Air Defense Forces During the First Period of the Har................ 5
National Air mfense Forces Mm the mom Peri“ “ the "us-000000.000... 166

National Air Defense Forces timing the mm Period of the Har................ 263

conclusionoeeoeueeeeeeIeooeoeeeeoeoeeeeeooeeeeeeeooooeeeeleeeoeeeeeeeleeeeeeeo 372

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AUPHQiS' INTRODUCTION

More than 30 years has gone by since the end of World Far II. an extremely important
part of which was the Soviet Union's Great Patriotic Her. The remembrance of the
great feat performed by the Soviet people and their Arm-d Forces in the mortal engage-
ment with the aggressive fascist bloc is sacredly presented in the grateful memory of

. however. The Soviet Union and its army bore the brunt of Uorld Var II. the
bloodiest war in history. The Soviet-German front was the main. the crucial front of
the war, and it was there tint the main forces of fascist Germany and its allies were
utterly defeated.

The great feat performed by the Soviet people and their Armed Forces in 'u'orld Har II
was a result of thousandsof battles and engagements on land. in the air and at sea.
and in the rear of the fascist German forces. This feat was brought about by millions
of people. Our memory of then is sacred. "...‘ie think with pride and reverence."
General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee L.I. Brezhnev has stated, "about the
people whose unprecedented heroism determined the outcome of the great battle waged
against fascism."1

The victory gained by the Soviet Armed Forces over the armies of the fascist bloc was
achieved by the sweat and blood of fightingmen of all the services and branches of
troopsninfantrymen. tankmen. artillerymen, pilots and sailors. The National Air De-
fense Forces--that service of the Armed Forces primrily reaponsible for the reliable
functioning and the security of the fighting nation's rear area--also contributed their
bit. a considerable one, to the accomplishment of that victory.

The authors of this book have used informtion from archives and periodicals to show
the reader how the nation's air defense grew and gained strength. day after day. under
the Communist Party's leadership. and to tell about the mass heorism demonstrated by
the pilots, antiaircraft gunners, fightingmen in the VNOdZair warning] service and
searchlight Operators. about their courage and valor in the crucial engagements with
the German fascist invaders. The authors have focused entirely upon the struggle waged
by the National Air Defense Forces against fascist Germany's air forces and lave not
dealt with wartime operations against militaristic Japan. Although Operational air
defense formations were created in the Far East Theater. they were not required to en-
gage in active fighting.

The authors express their gratitude to officers and employees of the Main Staff, Na-
tional Air Defense Forces. and the Central Archives of the Ministry of Defense for
placing the needed materials at their disposal and also for their valuable suggestions
and advice on the contents of the book.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
v- ‘\

. .-..:.u. AIR aim-s55 mass mam; rz-u: user may or nu: muzz June 19:51-16 Novem-
ber 19oz)

The ilational Air Defense Forces made a worthy contribution to the setback in the
German fascist com-lami's plans to totally defeat the Soviet Army in the very begin-

ning of the war with joint strikes by ground forces and aircraft and to gain a victory
over the USSR as early as the fall of 19114.

Beginning with the military reform(192‘+/ 1925) the htional Air Defense Forces grew in
size under the Communist Party's leadership. their organizatioml structure and tech-
nical equipment were improved. and their relative size and their role in the Armed

Forces grew. They deve10ped especially rapidly during the years immediately preced-
ing the .Iraat Patriotic War.

During the first period of the war the National Air Defense Forces were set up for
the defense of individual facilities. The defense was based on two min elements:
the creation of cover for important administrative-political and industrial targetS. -
as well as railway lines within reach of a likely enemy's aircraft. and the crucial
concentration of personnel and equipment to defend the nation's more important facil-

ities with an all-round defense. In other words. the nation's air defenses consisted
of a number of centers of defense.

The nation's largest administrative-political and industrial centers--Hoscow. Lenirgrad
and 3aku--had the most powerful air defense systems. A full 142.15 percent of all the
medium-caliber antiaircraft batteries and up to 50 percent of the fighter regiments

were concentrated there to defend them. Adeqtately powerful groupings of Air Defense
Forces were also created in the Transcaucasus and the Far East.

Fascist Germany's treacherous attack upon the Soviet Union began with massive strikes
by German Fascist aircraft against air-fields, large cities and railway Junctions to a
depth of up to 500 kilometers. At the same time the enemy was mkirg extensive use

of its aircraft in support of army groups on the main axes. The ways and methods by
which the Hiterlite air forces--the Luftwaffe--were used were not original or new:
They had been employed by the Hehrmacht in the war against Poland and other Heston!
European nations and were known to the Soviet command. The troops and rear facilities
were not reliably covered from the air. however, because of a shortage of personnel
and equipment and the imperfect organisation of the air defense system.

The distribution of personnel and equipment among the air defense zones actually re-
sulted in a scattering of these forces, which in the final analysis produced a weak-
enirg of our air defense on the min operational axes. During the summer/fall cam-
paign of 19141. however, steps were taken to use the air defense men and equipment-
By the end of July. for example. a grouping consistim of 585 fighters, more than
1.000 nedlum- and small-caliber antiaircraft guns, 336 antiaimraft machine guns and

618 ant‘iaircmt‘t searchlights had been created to provide a reliable air defense for
Moscow.

In the summer and fall of 19M the air defense forces performed their most intensive
operations to cover the nation's largest centers--Hoscow and leningrad. Dozens of
fornations and units(up to 700 fighters and 1.800 antiairmft guns of various sys-

tens) helped to repel massive enemy air raids. their efforts being coordinated by a
single command responsible for air defense.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAL USE ONLY

The State Defense Committee passed the decree ”0n the Reinforcenent and Strergthenim
of Air Defense of the Soviet Union's Territory“ on 9 November 19M. In accordance with
this decree responsibility for the air defense of important facilities was assigned to
the newly appointed commander of National Air Defense Forces--the deputy people's con-
nissar of defense. Prior to this the National Air Defense Forces were under the min
Directorate of Air Defense Forces, the chief of which until July 19M was Colonel Gen-
eral of Artillery N.N. Voronov. All formtions and units covering administrative and
political centers. industrial , railway and other vitally important facilities in the
Soviet Union were under the COM of the newly appointed comnder of National Air
Defense Forces( the only exception were Leningrad's air defense forces. which temporar-
ily retrained under the front commenter). The air defense zones in the European part

of the Soviet Union were disbanded and used to create corps, division and brigade air
defense areas, which were essentially tactical fox-nations. Fighter corps and divisions

tionally and then totally under the commander of National Air Defense Forces, and lo-
cally--under the commnders of corps and division air defense areas.

promptly and with flexibility, and to extensively mneuver air defense men and equip-
ment. Interaction among the main air defense forces--the fighter aviation and the anti-
aircraft artillery--inproved sharply.

stages and trains en route. enlisting ground facilities and fighter aircraft to perform
the missions involved. Defense mneuverability was achieved by using mobile antiair-
craft groups and air defense armored trains.

In addition to defendirg large centers and industrial areas. as well as lines of com-
munication for the fronts, the antiaircraft artillery of the National Air Defense
Forces. by order of Headquarters. Supreme High Command, was also frequently called
upon to perform missions for the ground forces. This was necessitated primarily by
the inadequate quantity of antitank artillery. In November/December of 19b1, when
eneny trOOps were near Moscow, three antiaircraft artillery groups were detailed out
of the forces manning the Iioscow Air Defense Zone. which Operated as part of the Hest-

An antiaircmft artillery grouping was set up in advance at the Stalingrad Air Defense
Post, designed to provide both air and antitank defense. The correctness of this de-
cision was confirmed by the entire subsequent cOurse of events.

In the sitmtion of inadequate air support for operations by the ground forces and
the fronts' small air forces, the air defense fighter aviation was used in zany cases

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to perform front aviation missions. By decision of Headquarters. for example, many
air units of the 6th Air Defense Fighter Corps were enlisted for the conduct of front
operations in the fall and winter of 19u1/a2 near Moscow. As a result of the partici-
pation by an air corps of the air defense forces in the air operations our aviation
gained air superiority for the first time durirg the uar and retained it until the
ﬂzst phase of the counter-offensive was cOmpleted.

Our defense of facilities immediately adjacent to the frontline revealed the need for
more extensive and thorough coordination of combat operations of the Air Defense Forces
with those of the combined-arms armies and fronts(fleets) and with troop air defense.
The most lengthy interaction between the Natioml Air Defense Forces and the air de-
fense of the troops and naval forces took place during the heroic defense of Leningrad.
The air defense of the city on the Neva was an integral part of the overall system of
its defense by all services of the Armed Forces and branches of trOOps.

intercept the air enemy by means of radar. Views on the organization of the combat
formations of fighters for aerial combat were reconsidered. The pair of fighters be-
came the main element in the combat formation. In the air battle special attention
began to be attached to the surprise and the determinedness of an attack and to mutual
support by the fighters in a battle.

ing antiaircraft artillery fire by means of fire control radar at night and in adverse
weather conditions. Procedures were worked out for firing at diving aircraft and at
aircraft in a "circular" formation. Personnel of the VNOS units and subunits mastered

lines ol.‘ conmnication by the German fascist Luftwaffe and inflicted great damage up-
on the enemy. The enemy lost b.652 aircraft in 19u1/a2. A total of 2.617 of these
were destroyed by fighter aircraft and 2.035 were destroyed by antiaircraft artillery,
antiaircraft machine guns. VNOS and barrage balloon subunits. 'Ihe National Air Defense
Forces also destroyed a considerable number of enemy tanks. All of this helped con-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

I‘ne Operations of the Kational Air Defense E‘orces were assessed primarily not by the
number of enemy aircraft shot down but by the number of cities and population centers
saved from destruction and by the effectiveness with which the uninterrupted function-
ing of front lines or communication and the nation's rear area was ensured.

Like the other sections 0:" this chronicle, the first section cites only the most typi-
cal coa‘eat developments and the most important events out of the life and the combat
work of the ﬁational Air Defense FOrces. Described on a daily basis they provide an
adequately conpleie picture of the enormous organizational work performed by the Com-
munist Party to route the Rehnacht, the rims heroism. courage and stanim demon-
strated by the nation's air defense fighters.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070037-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE NATIONAL AIR DEFENSE FORCES MIMI THE SEXIOND PERIOD OF THE "UNI? November 19142-
December 1903)

Ihe second period of the Great Patriotic 'Jar went down in history as the period dur-
ing which the turning point was achieved in the military Operations. 'Ihe Soviet Union

itself dealt the decisive defeat to the Gemn fascist army. This showed the entire
world the great power and vital force of the Soviet society and the chiet state sys-

combat crews in the fighter aviation increased 1.6-fold, medium-caliber antiaircraft

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (”SLY

effOrts of the German fascist air forces focused upon providing direct suppert for
combat operations by the ground forces. The most active operations by the enemy avia-
tion during the first half or 1913 were bombing attacks against railway lines of the
Bryensk. Central, Voronezh and Southern fronts, lines of communication for blockaded
Leningrad and the Kirovsk Railway. In June of 19143 fascist Germany’s air forces for
the first time dining the war carried on: a number of large raids against targets in
the nation's interior. Tne Soviet air forces gained air supremacy at the beginning of
the fighting near Kursk and the expansion of offensive operations by Soviet farces in
the summer of 19153. however, and maintained it until the end of the war.

Changes in the nature of the Germn fascist aviation's operations made it necessary
to redistribute the efforts of the National Air Defense Forces. The quantity of air
defense personnel and equipment detailed to defend lines of communication near the
front was increased sharpl . The defense of the nation's vitally important facilities
and areas was stepped up at the same tine. Air defense was set up for facilities in

liberated territory, for which purpose new air defense formations were created. The
depth of the nation's air defense was increased to 1,000-1. 500 kilometers.

By decision of the State Defense Committee the Hestern and Eastern Air Defense Fronts

blockaded Leningrad and its lines of communication; the Humane]: Air Defense Area dur-
ing the defense of the Port of Murnansk and the Kirovsk Railway; the Voronezh-
Borisoglebsk, Rost0v, Ryazhsk-Tambov. Khar'kov, Donbass, Bologoye and other air defense
areas. which were defending lines of communication at the front: and the Gor’ldy,

Saratov-Balashov and Rybinsk-Yaroslavl' air defense areas duritg the defense of
Gor'kiy. Saratov and Yaroslavl'.

The air blockade of an encircled 330,000-mn enemy grouping near Stalingrad was ac-
complished by formations of the air armies and antiaircraft artillery of the fronts
interacting closely with the National Air Defense Forces. Troops of the Stalingrad

borders by enemy aircraft during the war. A total of 136 raids were flown against
Ieningrad, mainly at night. Only 253 aircraft reached the city.5

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mix the breakthrough of the Leningrad blockade five air regiments were detailed
out of seven air defense fighter corps to cover trooys of the 67th Army. Our fighters
paralyzed the enemy's bomber aviation. hiring the period of offensive fighting corps
pilots flew more than 364 combat missions, staged in 10k air battles. shot down more
than 50 fascist aircraft and put 16 others out of action. During the time they pro-
vided support for the operations of the ground forces the antiaircraft gunners de-
stroyed 30 aircraft. 1+ batteries, 9 machine 6guns, 8 earth-and-timber enplacenents and
as my as 300 enemy soldiers and officers.

Troops of the Iadoga Division Air Defense Area provided air defense for lines of com-
munication over Lake Ladoga, which carried the min flow of freight for Leningrad and
the Leningrad F‘ront. covered the Tiklwin-Iake IadOga min rail line and, following the
breakthrough of the Ieningrad blockade. also the newly built railway linking
S'nlisselourg with the Hga-Volkhovstroy rail line.

Troops of the Murmansk Division(Corps as of October 1918) Air Defense Ares provided
air defense for Murmansk and the Kirovsk Railway.

An intense struggle for air superiority was launched on the Kuban' in the spring of
1910. TrOOps of the Rostov Division Air Defense Area and the 105th Air Defense Fighter
Division played an important role in that struggle. These formations provided air de-
fense for lines of communication for the Southern and North Qucssus fronts and for
industrial installations in the North Caucasus. Troops of the Rostov Division Air Den
fense Area and units of the 105th Fighter Division conducted especially fierce battles
to defend the Bataysk and Roctov railway junctions in :‘hrch/Nay of 1910. The fighter
aviation acquired extensive experience in conducting group aerial battles.

Forces of 'the Ryazhsk-I‘anbov. Voronezh-Borisoglebsk, Imar'kov and Tula division air
defense areas. together with four air defense fighter divisions under their opera-

than 2,000 aircraft.
sive by the German fascist troops and to route their assault groupings depended to
a significant degree upon a reliable air defense for our rail lines. Headquarters.
Supreme High Com-and, assigned this task to the National Air Defense Forces. Four
air defense formations and four air defense fighter divisions, interacting with air
armies and the antiaircraft artillery of the fronts. ensured the uninterrupted func-
tioning of lines of communication for the fronts and inflicted large losses upon the

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in June of 1910 the German fascist aviation undertook massive raids against the
Sovie: Union's industrial cities of Gor'kiy, Saratov and Yaroslavl‘. The enemy
carried out seven :nassive nighttime raids against Gor'idy between 4 and 22 June,
with 645 bombers taking part. The raids were repelled by units of the Gcr'kiy Corps
Air Defense Area. and the 14% Air Defense Fighter Division. The antiaircraft artil-
lery and fighter units per'ormed under great pressure to repel the raids. ’Ihey de-
strOyed 11+ enemy aircraft.

The enemy carried out nine night raids against Saratov between 12 and 2? June 1910.
with up to !$20 bombers takirg part. Units of the Saratov-Balashov Division Air De-
fense Area and the 11mm Air Defense Fighter Division. which were deployed there,
operated successfully. The smoke-screening of the enemy's intended targets was high-
ly effective. During the last night strike not one of the aerial bombs dr0pped by the
enemy hit the target. since the crews of the enemy aircraft could not detect them.9

Units of the Rybinsk-Yaroslavl' Division Air Defense Area and the 11+7th Air Defense
Fighter Division performed smoothly and in an organized must to repel two massive
raids against Yaroslavl' . as well as diversionary strikes against the stations at
Rybinsk, Konstantinovsk. Ivanovo. Komsomol'sk and Uglich. Only 32 of 110 enemy air-
craft taking part in the raids against Yaroslavl' reached their targets.

hiring the second period of the war the National Air Defense Forces were successful
on the whole in combatting the German fascist aviation and covered the enemy's tar-
gets in the rear. During 19“} they destroyed 1,615 eneuu/ aircraft.10

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NATIONAL AIR IEFBNSE FORCES mm: m: mmn PERIOD OF ms HAR(January mummy 1945)

hiring the third period of the war the National Air Defense Forces conducted combat
operations in a situation in which the Soviet air forces had total superiority over
the enemy aviation. The German fascist aviation was becoming constantly less active.
The combat capacity of the National Air Defense Forces was increasing, however. and
they were constantly at a high level of combat readiness. The nature of the enemy
aviation's Operations and its tactics were altered considerably, along with the drop
in its activity. Its main efforts focused upon supporting the enemy's ground forces.
delivering air strikes against attacking trOOps of the Soviet Army and destroying in-
stallations and lines of communication along the front. The enemy attempted to rake
up for its shortage of forces by maneuveriru air formations and units to the more im-
portant sectors of the Soviet-German front. The enemy sometimes managed to concen-
trate large air groupings there. and the massing of air defense men and equipment
was required to combat them.

Nor was there any relaxation of the danger of strikes against individual, vitally im-
portant targets in the nation's rear. which could involve heavy bombers(He-17?. Vii-200
Kondors) carrying a heavy bomb load and with a radius of Operation exceeding 1,000
kilometers. There was also the danger that the enemy would use a new weapon--the V-1
cruise missile. For example, the German fascist commnd intended to mks strikes
against Leningrad with these unmanned missiles launched from positions in Estonia.

The main mission of the National Air Defense Forces continued to be that of protecting
large centers against air attacks. The air defense system for Moscow, Leningrad. Baku
and Gor'kiy was further improved. Double or triple the 1941 level of air defense means
was detailed to defend such liberated cities as Riga, Vilnius, Minsk, L'vov, Kiev and
Odessa. More than 50 percent of the fighters and medium-caliber antiaircraft guns and
around 70 percent of the antiaircraft searchlights were concen rated for the defense
of the nation's most important political and economic centers. 1

Air defense of the fronts' rail and water lines of communication continued to be an
important task of the National Air Defense Forces. The need to cover them reliably
considerably increased the range of tasks of the National Air Defense Forces. They
frequently covered lines of communication in the immediate rear and a number of crossings
had to be covered at the forward edge(crossi s over the Kerch' Strait. the Dnepr,

the Vistula. the Oder and other bodies of watezs. In addition, formations of the Na—
tional Air Defense Forces covered airfields of the front and long-range aviation, trains
and river vessels on route and coastal, sea lines of communication, helped implement
the air blockade of encircled groupings(near Korsun'-Shevchenkovs!d.y, Budapest, Breslau
and elsewhere) and battled sabotage detachments and bands operating in the rear and air-
borne landing groups. At crucial points in the battle the air defense fighter aviation
was enlisted to perform the missions of front air forces on the main axes, and the
antiaircraft artillery of the National Air Defense Forces--field artillery missions.

As the Soviet Army advanced rapidly to the west the depth of the territory defended
by the National Air Defense Forces increased greatly. The two front air defense field
forces(Hestern and Eastern) were replaced by four air defense fronts-~the Northern.
Central, Southern and Transcaucasus fronts--in 19% to provide for more flexible con~
trol of the National Air Defense Forces and closer interaction between them and the
forces of the fronts.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFII'E-H ('SH (“JLY

airing the 191:; winter cunmign the Soviet Amy carried out devastating strikes against
German fascist forces near Senitttrad and Novgorod, in the Right-Bank Ukraine and the
Crimea. Bring the cammian the National Air Defense Forces primarily fought the one-
my's aviation, which was attenpting to disrupt rail transport operations along the
front. The most intense battles against the air enemy during that period were those
fought. by forces of the Leningrad Air Defense Army and the Kiev, L'vov and North
Caucasus air defense area-s. Troops of the Leningrad Air Defense Army took a direct
par: in +3“? offensive 'nv forces c." the Leningrad I-‘ront. The air defense fighter avia-
tion provided air out: For the combat orders of our rifle formations and made bombing
attacks upon enemy ground forces. Part of the antiaircraft artillery was drawn upon
to provide artillery support for the offensive by the leningrad F'ront's #an Army.

Between January and April of 19%, when Slviet forces launched their grand offensive
in the southwest, 12 became especially important to provide air defense for the rail
lines of corn-unication of the Ukrainian fronts, against which the enemy tad concen-
trated 2:3; :0 56 percent of its combat airc:a.ft(1,200—1,h50 planes).12 Regarding the
disruption of communications for those fronts as one of its aviation's main tasks, the
German fascist command arranged for more than #50 bombing raids against railway in-
etallations.

The Soviet command concentrated around 50 percent of all the personnel and equipment
of the National Air Defense Forces to cover lines of communication in the southwest.
Forces of the Kiev, Kursk. Khar'kov. Doniass. L'vov and Odessa air defense areas of
the Western Air Defense Front provided air defense for the rail lines of communication.
Upon encountering the powerful air defense the enemy altered its tactics and switched
to air strikes against trains on route. This tactic was countered by providing direct
cover :‘or trains on route by air defense groups created in advance( 1-2 snail-caliber
guns and 3-1: antiaircraf': nachine guns per train).

Antiaircraft armored trains were 2.3315118»: a large role in the covering of important
rail facilities in liberated territory. We were most successful when we were able to
achieve the element of surprise in the use of antiaircraft fire from armored trains.

The creation of a solid radar detection and vectoring field for the fighter aviation
over vast areas was a typicai feature or" the air defense for lines of communication
of the Ukrainian fronts. The skilful application of camouflage procedures contributed
to the successful defense of crossings on tho Dnepr, which were highly impartant to
the development of the offensive by forces of the 13t and 2nd Ukrainian Fronts in the
Right-Bank Ukraine. For example. the enemy's lead bombers would mark the routes to
targets with flares to guide their assault groups of aircraft to them. In reopocnse
to this air defense fighters began to drop flares along routes to false targets. The
use of camouflage smoke bambs frequently forced the enemy to halt, bombings of cross-
ings. The crossings camouflaged with smoke were not damaged. The National Air De~

to Berlin. The role of the National Air Defense Forces in covering lines of communi-
cation for the fronts and important areas and facilities in the liberated territory
became even greater in this campaign. During preparations for and the conduct of the
Belorussian Operation forces of the Northern and Southern Air Defense Fronts

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
reliably covered all railway Junctions and bridges and almost all railway stations.
even the small ones. to a depth of 150-200 kilometers from the frontline. Mobile
air defense groups continued to be used to protect trains en route.

The concentration of bodies of National Air Defense Forces to protect facilities along
the front made it possible to use the air defense means of the ground forces to cover
formations in the first echelon. which was important to the successful development of
operations.

The most intensive combat operations durim the summer/fall campaign were conducted

by formations of the National Air Defense Forces covering targets in the zones of the
Baltic fronts(the 2nd Air Defense Corps) and the Belorussian fronts(the 0th Air Defense
Corps and the 815t Air Defense Division) and troops of the Leningrad Air Defense Am.
Forward air defense units continued to be maneuvered to provide timely and rapid de-
fense of important targets behind the advancing troops in liberated territory. There
was extensive maneuvering from the nation's interior of units and even formations of
air defense forces relieved of defending targets which had become inaccessible to the
enemy’s aviation. Air defense personnel and equipment were frequently maneuvered a-
mong the air defense fronts.

During the second half of 1944 the Soviet 5.1er High Commnd took a number of deter-
mined steps to reinforce the air defense for groups of forces and installations near
the front in the theaters of military Operations and to cover important economic areas
in Poland, Hungary and Romania. Five corps of National Air Defense Forces were rede—
ployed outside the nation.

In the final campaign Soviet forces conducted a number of offensive operations. con-
cludim with the Berlin and Prague operations. Formations of the let operational eche-
lon of National Air Defense Forces played an important role in those Operations, their
main efforts continuing to focus upon providiru reliable cover for lines of communica-
tion near the front. 'lhey also covered crossims on the Oder. the Vistula and the
My and areas of concentration of large groups of enemy forces. and defended a num-
ber of important industrial areas outside the Soviet Union-~Ploesti. Dombrau. Silesia
and others.

In the Berlin Operation the availability of extensive air defense personnel and equip-
ment trade it possible to plan interaction between the National Air Defense Forces and
air defense units of the 1st Ukrainian and the let and 3rd Belorussian fronts not only
for specific installations but for entire areas of operation as well. Air defense per-
sonnel and equipment of the fronts covered. the advancing tr00ps. while formations of
National Air Defense Forces covered rear facilities of the fronts, lines of comics-
tion and crossirgs over bodies of water.

During the third period of the war the National Air Defense Forces successfully per-
formed their combat missions. They destroyed 1,045 aircraft. 618 of which were shot
down by fighters and a2? by antiaircraft artillery.”

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LS? (ET-Ci."

:GIiCL‘JSIGN

the combat action 3:“ the National Air Defense Forces during the war was of great
rperational and strategic importance and was an integral part of the Overall efforts
:1" the Soviet Army and .‘iavy to route the ﬁreman fascist invaders. They essentially
aperated as a separate ems-eh of the Armed Forces. That extremely important princi-
ple of military 7. : at victory is achieved the-mesh the joint efforts of all services
of the armed Forces and 1-i'anches of troops received practical confirmation. The Con-
munist Party Central CD:-':.ll1i.L§:‘;. the 33.31:; inferno Committee and Headquarters, Supreme
'iigh Carma, were the min organizers. «:1 air defense for the Soviet State throughout
the entire war.

The rain mission of the national Air Defense Forces throughout the war consisted in
protecting large administrative—politicel and industrial areas against air strikes.

it least half of al‘. the air defense personnel and equipment was involved in this mis-
sion. The air defense of troops and lines of comunication was an important task.
Protecting the rear of the operating frontst'supply bases, airfields. front crossings
and so forth) was one of the tasks of the .‘tioral Air Defense Forces. Along with per
forming these nain tasks the National Air Defense Forces also had to combat enemy tanks
and infantry, to take part in the blockading of encircled enemy groupings and the pens-
tration of defensive zones. to cover naval convoys, to escort bombers and cover air-
borne landing Operations.

Fascist Germany's aircraft had a. relatively smil radius of operation. It had few
lam-range. bombers and no strategic aircraft a: all. As our territory was liberated
the relatively small radius of Operation of the German fascist aviation permitted us
to relieve entire air defense formations from: the defense of targets which had become
inaccessible to the enemy's aircraft and to redeploy them behind the advancing forces
of the fronts. This sort of Operational use of the National Air Defense Forces was
warranted at the time.

airing the war years enemy aircraft are known to have made 301+.15? flights in areas
iefended by the National Air L‘ef‘ense Forces. me National Air Defense Forces destroyed
7,313 aircraft. This included 3,930 aircraft sho‘. down by fighters in air battles and
238 destroyed at airfields, 2,654 destroyed by antiaircmf‘t artillery and ‘#91 aircraft
iestroyed by antiaircraft machine guns. armored trains. barrage talloons and other air
iefense means. a This was a significant contribution to the struggle for strategic air
supremacy. In addition they destroyed a considerable quantity of tanks and infantry.
Lrtillery and mortar batteries. The main result of the combat Operations of the Na-
;ional Air Defense Forces, how-ever, lay in the fact that they saved mny cities, cen-
:ers of pepulation, industrial enterprises and rail lines of communication from de-
struction from the air. The enemy did not succeed with its air strikes in disrupting
;he functioning of the nation's rear or the supplying of the front with everythim
:ecessary to conduct the war.

'he combat activities of :he National Air Defense Forces frequently took on the na-
ure or air defense Operations, csyecially during the strategic defense conducted by
he Soviet Army and in the strategic offensive. This occurred in the battles of
loscow and Leningrad in 19M. the battles of Voronezh and Stalirgrad in 1912. during
he repelling of enemy air strikes against Gor'kiy and Saratw in 19113 and the de-
ense of lines of communication at the Kursk staging area. A new area of Saviet mili-
ary art--the Operational art of the National Air Defense Forces--came into being and
nderwent dcvelomnent.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Defense Forces: the combat employment of air defense formations and field forces ac-
cording to a single Operational plan; the creation of all-round defense of the nation's
large centers. economic areas and individual facilities, the preservation of which was
vitally important to the state; the extensive mneuveriru of air defense formtions;
centralized troop control; and close interaction with operational field forces of other
services of the Armed Forces.

The continuous quantitative and qualitative growth of the National Air Defense Forces
provided the mterial foundation for the creation and development of their operational
art. Thanks to the concern of the Communist Party and the Soviet Government and the
selfless labor of the Soviet peeple the National Air Defense Forces received every-
thing necessary to successfully combat the fascist aviation. The level of their arma-
ment and the numerical strength of the National Air Defense Forces almost doubled dur-
ing the war years.

Determined implementation of the principle of centralization in the combat employment
of the National Air Defense Forces and the creation of a separate organizational struc-
ture were of exceptional importance to the deve10pment of tactical and Operational prin-
ciples underlying their cOmbat employment. This also accounted for the fact that the
National Air Defense Forces essentially became a separate branch of the Armed Forces.
They had strictly defined missions and a strictly defined combat composition and cen-
tralized control from tap to bottom. Such combat traditions as a high level of com-

bat readiness . skill in the conduct of combat, speed of action and creativity in the
search for unfailing ways to perform the combat mission were born and became solidly
established.

By the end of the war the National Air Defense Forces had four fronts. six armies(in-
cludixg one air army). 19 corps(including four air corps). #2 divisions(including 21;
air divisions) and five separate air defense brigades. Their armament consisted of
around 3,200 fighters. 9,800 medium-caliber antiaircraft guns and more than 8.900
stall-caliber guns. 8.100 antiaircraft machine guns. 5,1400 antiaircraft searchlights.
1,uoo ‘iaegrrage balloons. 230 radar detection stations and 360 fire control radar sta-
tions.

Political organs, party and Komsomol organizations always played a large role in the
life and the coznbat activities of the National Air Defense Forces. Party-political
work has been conducted in a flexible and purposive tanner, using diverse forms and
methods. and this has helped to make it highly effective.

Since the end of the Great Patriotic War the aerial weapons of likely enemies have
undergone significant quantitative changes. The National Air Defense Forces have
undergone constant development and now differ greatly from what they were during the
war. The modern National Air Defense Forces are qualitatively new forces. Ground-
to-air guided missiles and missile-carrying fighter-interceptors have become their
min weapon. Various automatic control systems and redioelectroric equipment are
extensively used.

The National Air Defense Forces are always in a state of combat readiness and are
reliably guarding the air borders of the Soviet socialist state.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL (SSE ONLY

FOUPNUPES

1. L.I. Brezhnev. "Velikaya pobeda aovetskogo moda'IThe Soviet People's Great Vic-
tory]. Moscow, 1965, p 4?.

2. "Na strazhe neba stolitsy"[cuard1ng the Skies Over the Capital], Moscow, 1968.
PP w! 90.

3. "Voyska. protivovozdusrmoy oboronystmny"[The Natioml Air Defense Forces], Moscow

u. Ib1d.. p 196.

5. Ibid.. p 206.

6. Ibid.. pp 208-210.

7. Ibid., p 232.

8. Ibid.. p 2&6.

9. Ibid., p 2u8.

10. Ibid.. p 253.

11. Ibid., p 258.

12. Ibid., p 260.

13. VOTENNO-ISI‘ORICHESICIY ZHURNAL, No 10, 1972. p 28.
11;. Ibid.. No 10, 1972, p 29.
15. Ibid., No a, 1975, p #8.
COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981

111699
cso: 1801/339

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BOOK EXCERPTS: CIVIL DEFENSE MEDICAL SERVICE

Kiev ORGANIZATSIYA I TAKTIKA MEDITSINSKOY SLUZHBY GRAZHDANSKOY OBORONY in Russian
(signed to press 16 Jul 80) pp 1, 2, 68-69, 3-4, 67

[Title page information, annotation, table of contents, excerpts from Chapter 1--
"Tasks of Civil Defense", and List of Literature from book "Organization and Tactics

of Civil Defense Medical Service", by P. P. Babinskiy and N. I. Glebov,Izdatel'stvo
oh"yedineniye "Vishcha shkola", 15,000 copies, 72 pages]

[Text] This textbook presents the principles for the organization of civil defense
and its medical service in accordance with the program for training nurses of the
reserve.

It is intended for female students in higher educational institutions of the
humanities and teachers of the Civil Defense departments. It can be used in training
nurses in questions on the organization and tactics of M500 [Civil Defense Medical
Service].

CONTENTS Page
Chapter 1. Principles of USSR Civil Defense ....................... ......... 3

1. Civil Defense Tasks .......................................... ........... 3

2. Organizational Structure of Civil Defense .................-. ............ 4

3. Organizational Structure of Civil Defense of a City ..................... 7

4. Organization of Civil Defense at Installations of the National Economy .. 9

5. Basic Principles for Protecting the Population and Facilities of the

National Economy ...................................................... 11

Chapter II. Principles for the Organization of Civil Defense Medical Service
and its Tasks ......................................................... 14

Basic Principles in the Organization of MSGO ............................ 14
. Leadership of MSGO ...................................................... 15
Basic Tasks of MSGO ..................................................... 17
Organization of Medical Support ............. ..... ....................... 18
Types of Medical Assistance ............................................. 23
. Sanitary and Hygiene and Anti-Epidemic Measures conducted in Centers of

Mass Contamination .................................................... 23

OUI§UNH
. . . e

19

INJR¢OIWHC1Al.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOI:0$FKJA[.USEIDNLN

Page
Chapter 111. First Aid and its Organization ............................ 26

Significance of First Aid ........................................... 26
. Formation of Civil Defense Medical Service, Rendering First Aid ..... 27
Actions of Voluntary Aid Detachments in a Nuclear Stricken Area ..... 33
Acti.ons of Voluntary Aid Detachments in Centers of Chemical Contam-
ination ................ ............... .......................... 37
Actions of Voluntary Aid Detachments in Centers of Bacteriological
Contamination ..................................................... 39

buNn—n

U!

Chapter IV. Emergency Physician's Aid and its Organization ............. 41

1. Volume of Emergency Physician's Aid in Various Stricken (Contamina-
tion)Areas ..... ...... ............................................ 41
2. Work of OPM [First Aid Detachment] in Nuclear Stricken Area ....... .. 44
3. Work of 0?“ in Center of Chemical Contamination ..................... 49
4. Work of OPM in Center of Bacteriological Contamination .............. 51
5 work of Nurses in Sections of 0PM .......... ............ ............. 52

Chapter 5. Specialized Medical Aid and its Organization ....... ....... .. 56

1. Organization of Specialized Medical Aid ............................. S6
2. Duties of Nurses in Medical Institutions ............... ......... .... 65

List of Literature ...................................................... 67
chapter I. Principles of USSR Civil Defense
1. Civil Defense Tasks

Under conditions of the ceaseless aras race in the imperialist states, the Communist
Party and the Soviet state are manifesting tireless concern for strengthening our
country's defensive might and improving civil defense.

The main task of civil defense is protection of the population from all contemporary
means of destruction. The accomplishment of this mission is attained by the shel-
tering of the population in protective structures, its dispersal and evacuation

from the cities and providing individual and medical protective equipment, and
training the population in methods of protection against weapons of mass destruc~
tion.

Civil Defense, which was created on the base of local air defense in 1961, is a
component part of the system of State defensive measures which are accomplished in
peacetime and wartime to protect the population and the national economy against
weapons of mass destruction and other enemy means of attack and to conduct rescue
and emergency reconstruction work (SNAVR) in stricken areas and in zones of cata-
strophic flooding. In peacetime, Civil Defense forces are used in the conduct of
rescue work in areas of natural disasters and with big production emergencies and
catastrophes.

20

FOI(NTKJALI£EZONLN
All state organs, public and cooperative organizations, enterprises, institutions,
kolkhozes, and sovkhozes are required to accomplish civil defense measures.

The basic tasks of Civil Defense are:

protection of the population against weapons of mass destruction and other
enemy means of attack;

improving the operating stability of facilities and branches of the national
economy under wartime conditions;

prctection of agricultural animals, plants,food, food raw naterials,water sources
and water-supply systems against radioactive. chemical, and bacteriological con-
tamination and the conduct of measures to eliminate the aftereffects of contamina-
tion;

conduct of SNAVR and rendering assistance to the victimized population in strick-
en areas and in areas of national disasters;

creation, training, and maintenance of civil defense forces in constant combat
readiness;

universal mandatory instruction of the population in methods of defense against
weapons of mass destruction and other enemy means of attack and in actions to elim-
inate the aftereffects of enemy attack;

creation and maintenance in readiness of Civil Defense command posts, equipment
and systems for warning and communication, observation, and monitoring radioactive,
chemical, and bacteriological contamination;

warning the population of the danger of contamination and catastrophic flooding;

preparation and conduct of blackout of facilities of the national economy and
populated places.

List of Literature

1. Altunin, A. T., "0 teorii grazhdanskoy oborony" [0n the Theory of Civil Defense],
Moscow, Krasnaya Zvezda Press, 1976.

2. Altunin. A. T., "Formirovaniya grszhdanskoy oborony v bor'be so stikhiynymi
bedstviyami" [Civil Defense Formations in the Struggle Against Natural Dis-
asters], Moscow, Stroyizdat, 1978.

3. Gogolev, M. 1., "Organizatsiya raboty sanitarnykh druzhin v ochagakh porazheniyd'
[Organization of the Work of Voluntary Aid Detachments in Stricken Areas].
Moscow. Meditsina Publishing House, 1975.

4. Gorelov. L. I. and Dubrovin, V. 1., "Meditsinskaya pomoshch' i zaahchita

naseleniya v ochagakh massogo porazheniya" [Medical Aid and Protection of the
Population in Areas of Mass Destruction], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1974.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chorov, P. T., Shlyakhov, I. A., and Alabin, N. I., "Crazhdanskaya oborona"
[Civil Defense], Moscow, Vysshaya Shkola Press, 1977.

Krotkov, F. G., editor, "Meditsinskaya sluzhba grazhdanskoy oborony" [Civil
Defense Medical Service], Moscow, Meditsina Publishing House, 1975

Polyakov, v. A. and Khromov, 8. M., "Khirurgicheskaya pomoshch' na etapakh
evakuatsii meditsinskoy sluzhby grazhdanskoy oborony" [Surgical Assistance at
Stages of Evacuation of Civil Defense Medical Service], Moscow, Meditsina
Publishing House, 1969.

Kaz'min, A. 1., editor, "Rukovodstvo po travmatologii dlya meditsinakoy
sluzhby grazhianskoy oborony" [Manual on Traumatology for Civil Defense Medical
Service], Moscow, Meditsina Publishing House, 1978.

Coiikov, S. N.. editor, "Rukovodstvo po toksikologii ottavlyayushchikh
veshchestv" [Manual on the Toxicology of Toxic Agents], Moscow, Meditsina
Publishing House, 1970.

Rybasov, A. V., "Organizatsiya meditainskoy sluzhby grazhdanskoy oborony"
[Organization of Civil Defense Medical Service], Moscow, Meditsina Publishing
House. 1970.

Zakharov, F. 0., editor, "Uchebnik dlyn podgotovki sanitarnykh druzhin i
sanitarnykh postov [Textbook for Training Voluntary Aid Detachments and
Aid Stations], Moscow, Meditsina Publishing Mouse, 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'skoye ob'yedineniye "Vishcha shkola", 1980.

636i
650:

[801/282

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BOOK EXCERPTS: HISTORY OF THE FRUNZB MILITARY ACADEMY

Moscow VOYENNAYA AKADEMIYA lMENI M. V. FRUNZB in Russian 1980 (signed to press 26
Feb 79) pp 1, 2, 5, 6, 262, 280

[Title page, information on authors and editors, annotation, table of contents, au-
thors' introduction and concluding comments from book "The M. V. Frunze Military
Academy", Voyenisdat, 50,000 copies, 280 pages]

[Text] The M. V. Frunze Military Academy

A History of the Military Academy (Order of Lenin, Order of the October Revolution,
Order of the Red Banner, Order of Suvorov)

Signed to press: 26 Feb 79
Copies: 50,000
Pages: 280

Military Publishing House of the USSR Ministry of Defense, Order of the Red Banner
of Labor, Moscow, 1980

Board of Editors: T. v. Bel'skiy, P. V. Mel'nikov, I. M. Ovcharenko, A. I. Radzi-
yevskiy, V. G. Resnichenko, A. A, Sidorenko

Authors: I. M. Ovcharenko (chief), N. S. Golovko, I. L. Gnedoy, V. Ye. Yerofeyev,

P. A. anumennyy, D. A. Ivanov, P. V. Ivanov, N. G. Ivanygta, V. A. Rarnoukhov, S. V.
Lipitskiy, I. S. Lyutov, P. s. Matronov, Ye. P. Mozzhukhin, N. A. Rakhmanin, B. V.
Panov, F. D. Sverdlov, K. I. Tikhoobrazov, A. P. Shurygin

Illustrations selected by D. F. Lavrov

The M. V. Frunze Military Academy is the first Soviet institute of higher military
education and training, and a center of military and scientific thought. It has
trained tens of thousands of highly qualified commanders, and has produced Marshals
of the Soviet Union, chief marshals, and marshals of branches of service.

This is the book's second edition. It relates the history of the academy, its role
in the preparation of military personnel, and in the development of military and
scientific thought. It describes how the professorial and instructor staff and the
students participated in front line combat during the civil war and Great Patriotic
Var.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This edition has been supplemented with new material, in particular. with respect to
the role of V. I. Lenin in founding the academy, and on its development during the
post-war period. The book is intended for a wide circle of readers.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1980

Table of Contents

Authors' Introduction ...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Chapter I--The Civil War and Military Intervention (1918-1920). . . . . . . . 7
1Bornthroughrevolution........................ -
2.Thetimeofformation......................... 23
3. Hithabookandarifle................. ....... 313
la Beginningthcfieryyears....................... 105
Chapter II--'l'he Years of Peaceful Socialist Construction (1921-1941). . . . . 52
l. The transition from war to peace. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -
2. Military reform and the academy . . . . . . . . . . . ....... 69
3. Technical reconstruction of the Red Army and the acadeay. . . . . . . . 84
lo.Onthceveofwar...........................105
Chapter III--The Great Patriotic War Years (1941—1965) . . - . . - ~ - - 118
l.lnitialperiodoftheuar.......................
2. The year of the radical turning point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lhl
3.Theconcludingperiod......................... 1510

Chapter IV--The Post-War Acadeny (1955-1953). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166

1. Newconditions, neumissions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -
2. Officer personnel learn from the generalized experience of the var. . . 172

Chapter V--The Years of Energetic Scientific and Technical Progress (1954-1970) 191

l.Anewstage.............................. -
2.1nstepvithtime. ..... .. 208

Chapter VI--0n the True Path (1971-1978) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
1. Towards efficiency and quality in training techniques and procedures. .
2. The scope of military and scientific research . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
3. The development of party and political work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269

InPlaceofConclusion ....... ..................... 262

Chronological Listing of the Most Significant Events in the Academy's History 263
Authors' Introduction

This book relates the history of the first Soviet institute of higher military edu-
cation and training-the M. V. Frunze Military Academy: Order of Lenin, Order of the
October Revolution, Order of the Red Banner, Order of Suvorov. For 60 years now the
academy has been preparing highly qualified military personnel of command and staff
profile for the Soviet armed forces.

The birth and entire activity of the academy are inherently related to the titanic
struggle of the Communist Party in creating and strengthening the Soviet state and
its army. The academy was established at the personal direction of V. I. Lenin and
his close comrades-in-arms, to include the distinguished statesman, Ya. M. Sverdlov.
and the famous military worker of the party, N. I. Podvoyskiy. In the beginning it
was called the General Staff Academy of the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army. It was
redesignated in 1921 as the Military Academy of the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army,
and since 1925 has been known as the Military Academy of the Horkers' and Peasants'
Red Army imeni M. V. Prunae.

Over the period of its existence the academy has trained hundreds of thousands of
officers--ideologically hardened and dedicated to the Soviet people, possessing mil-
itary knowledge and skills on the level of the latest achievements in military sci-
ence. Students of the academy have taken part in fierce battles for the freedom and
independence of the Soviet Republic over the years of intervention and the civil war.
They fought with the Japanese militarists in the Lake Khasan region and on the Khal-
khin-Gol River, with White Finns on the Karelian Isthmus, led units [chast' and so-
yedineniye] and formations [ob"yedineniye] into battles and skirmishes against the
German fascist invaders and Japanese militarists during the Great Patriotic Hat.

Former students of the academy include such military leaders as Marshals of the Sov-
iet Union I. Kh. Bagramyan, P. F. Batitskiy, S. S. Biryuzov, S. M. Budennyy, L. A.
Govorov, F. I. Golikov, A. A. Crechko, A. I. Yerenenko, G. K. Zhukov, M. V. Zakharov,
I. S. Konev, P. K. Koshevoy, G. I. Kulik, V. G. Kulikov, R. Ya. Malinovskiy, K. A.
Meretskov, K. K. Rokossovskiy, V. D. Sokolovskiy, S. K. Timoshenko, F. I. Tolbukhin,
and V. I. Chuykov.

Approximately 700 academy alumni have been granted the title Hero of the Soviet
Union for their able troop leadership on the fields of battle, for the courage and
heroism they exhibited in defending the Motherland.

In the post-war period, the academy has graduated new contingents of officers who
hold responsible posts in today's central and peripheral leadership structure, who
comand units [soycdineniye, chast'].

The academy has always been and remains one of the centers of deveIOpment for Soviet
military science.

This edition has been supplemented with new material and documentation. The organi-

zational role played by V. I. Lenin in establishing the academy has been more fully
presented. His meetings with graduates and instructors of the academy are described

in greater detail, and more light is shed on the academy's most recent period of ac-
tivity.

In writing this book, the authors have used works published at the academy, documents
from the archives, and the memoirs of former students and instructors.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Place of Conclusion

The H. V. Frunze Military Academy has traversed a great path. Behind it are 60 years
of creative striving, the heroic accomplishment and selfless labor of the professor-
ial and instructor staff, of students, workers and other employees of the academy.
Established by the Communist Party at the initiative and personal direction of V. l.
Lenin, the academy has trained thousands of highly qualified, ideologically hardened
officer cadre, who have devoted their entire being to the Motherland. Regardless of
adversity or the complexity of tasks they had to face, no matter what difficulties
they had to encounter, personnel of the academy have always been, and remain rallied
around the CPSU Central Committee and the Soviet government. The academy bears with
honor and merit the title of first Soviet academy for cannanders.

During the years of peaceful socialist construction, the academy made a significant
contribution to working out a number of major issues of military science and the

military art, and to aceomplishing many practical tasks associated with building the
USSR's armed forces.

The Great Patriotic War was a severe test for the Soviet Union as to the correctness
of the basic directions, forms and methods of training command personnel for our
ground forces. Through heroic activity and capable troop leadership on the fields
of battle against a brutal enemy, academy graduates showed the superiority of the
Soviet military over the war theories of Hitler's generals, over their adventuristic
strategy and tactics. Courage, a readiness for self-sacrifice and loyalty to their
military obligation--among many other outstanding moral, combat qualities--were
demonstrated by our Red Army commanders in the struggle against fascism. Among
these commanders are a great number of academy alumni.

The post-war years presented academy personnel with important missions that had to

be fulfilled. This involved first of all the rebuilding of the entire training
process in conformity with new military requirements. This meant increased attention
devoted to matters of moral, political and psychological hardening of personnel.
Finally. it involved concern and attention paid to further development of military
science and the military art. The academy managed every one of these tasks, and con-
tinues to manage them successfully.

The strength of our army and navy lies in the sage leadership of the Communist Party
and in its Leninist Central Coumﬁttee. This is what comprises the base of the acad-
emy's successful operation.

The sacred duty of every general and officer of the academy, of every worker and
employee, is to be an active conveyer of Communist Party policy from this time for-
ward, and to follow all aspects of its directives.

History of the academy continues.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, I980

9768
cso: 1801/308 END

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY