APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-OOBBOROOOI00010020-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010020-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8213
11 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

’FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010020-7
NOTE

JPRS publicatiwr contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, pv-rlnriieals and books, but .113: from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. ibterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrn<in3 and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. axw material enclosed in brackets
II are - :imlirJ by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
ur ihxcerptl in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is giVen. the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

tniamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion .nrk and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source. ‘

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

: .' :ii' ..-‘.k'$ :‘XL‘ REGULATIOSS GOVERNING OHSERSEIIP 0?
IX’ ”L“€ REPEODCCSD NEREIS RﬁQUIRE THAT DISSEHISATION
9': ““3119“ ION 5E RESTRICTED F0? OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
.I
w “mu/ma _m

'mmsu'rious on ussa MILITARY AFFAIRS. (F000 2/79)

 

Joint Publications Ioooorch Sorvico
1000 North Globe Rood
Arlington. Virginia 22201
n. spam... mm. s... .u m...
A. above

IS. Suppkumuy Noun

‘- Abﬁluﬂl

 
 
 

The report contains information on the Soviet military and civil defcnao

establishments, leadership, doctrine, policy, planning. polirical affairs.
organization. and equipnent.

 

. my Vet“ o - aroma: MA 1.5.. Io. - “noun

USSR

Hilitnry Organizations
Military Facil i t ics
Military Personnel

m. 'J'Nl‘tfl\ ION-4‘04“ Tom!

m. i "M“ run/rue, 15C
II. AvanlJbihiy Statute-m

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Linited Number of
Copies Available Fron JPRS

 

- om. In "5- n nuv. Id!» '10‘009-0‘ MON-"l

TNB FORM IMY IE REPRODUCID
FOR OFPIEIAL use ONLY

JPRS LA
11 Jenn:

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(rouo 2/79)

Comm /

History of Military Topogrephers Sketched
(3. Ye. ayzovz am I W, Jul 78) .........

Zhitomir Redioelectronie Air Defense School
(Nikohy Yakovlevich Coleman W
mm mm mmo W, 1977)

Book Discusses Methodology of Military-Scientific Cognition
(I. Is. Shaw-av, M. I. Calida; momma mm»-
mm mm, 19") .0.I.IOOOOOOOIOO0000000009....

Book Describes Amy Operetim in Greet Patriotic Re:
(A. I. Redziyenuy; W omen, 1977) .........
POI OHICIAL USE ONLY

one: 623.71
1118ka OF MILITARY TOPOGW sum
Hosea! GBODBZIYA I KARMWIYA in Russian No 7. Jul 1978 pp 1-6
[Article by I. Ye. byeov: "clorioue Peth of Hilitery topogrephors“l

[Text] This country's geodetic co-nmity extensively
ceiebreted the 60th enniversery of the Soviet Arly
niiitery Topogrephic Service (HTS).

During the years which heve pessed since its estehiish-
lent the ms. successfully performing its tesks in the
eree of topogrephic-geodetic support of the USSR Arned
forces. hes nede en enornous contribution towerd certo-
grsphic study of the territory of our ho-elend.

Lt Gen ‘rech Trpe a. Ye. Byeov. chief of Mrs. discusses
in this erticle the gloriom roed treveied by our eilitery
topogrephers.

The Militery Topogrephic Service ceiebreted its 60th enniversery on 8 Hey
1978. Its (oration end develop-set ere inseperebly linked with the history
of estehlishlent of the Soviet Artsy, in the renlts of which the hiiitery
Topogrephic Service hes treveied e greet roed end et e11 steges of which hes
honorebly perforeed its assigned tults, hes Iede end is continuing to neke

e worthy contribution towerd the ceuse of strengthening the defense cepebiii-
ty of our honeiend.

In the spen of six decedes generetions of nilitery geodesiste, topogrephers
end certogrephers heve cone end gone. Bech contributed its own glorious
peges to the fighting end lebor chronicle of the Militery Topographic Ser-
vice end to the ceuse of improving the thoroughness of topogrephic-geodetic
coverege of our country's territory.

we offer vern greetings end congretuletions to en veterens of the unitary
Topogrephic Service. vho heve nede e greet personei contribution to its
deuiopunt end topogrephic-geodetic support services for the niiitery, e11
nilitery personnel, vorkers end engineer-technicien personnel. who through
their deiiy exeqiery lebor ere doing their pert towerd increesing the cadet
reediness of the Soviet Any.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The memory of those military geodeaiets. topographers and cartographers

who gave their lives fighting for the freedom and indemndencs of our home-
land will remain forever in the hearts of our people. Their courage.
steadfastness and unswerving will to carry out their military duty under
any and all conditions constitute a vivid expression of their total dedica-
tion to the socialist homeland and the cause of the Communist Party.

The revolutionary fighting end labor traditions of the military topographers
were born during the Civil Her years. Under the extremely difficult condi-
tions of that time. military topographers not only performed tasks pertain-
ing to topographic support for Red Army combat operations but also
frequently fought the enemies of the Soviet Republic with weapon in hand.

A high degree of courage and valor was displayed by the personnel enrolled
in the first Petrograd Military Topography Course in defending the cradle
of the Revolution against the white Guardiste and interventionieta. as well
as in putting down the counterrevolutionary mutiny at Kronshtadt. We are
proud of the fact that maps produced at that time by military topographers
and cartographers were extensively utilized by the founder of the Communist
Party and our state. V. I. Lenin. who directed the defense of the young
Soviet Republic. Many maps and atlases produced by the Military Topographer
Corps are preserved in the V. I. Lenin office and quarters museum in the
Kremlin.

Up to the spring of 1919 the Military Topographic Service was the sole or-
ganization in the Soviet Republic performing topographic-geodetic and
cartographic services. On 15 March 1919 V. I. Lenin signed a decree order-
ing establishment of the Higher Geodetic Administration (VGU, now the USSR
Council of Ministers Main Administration of Geodesy and Cartography). which
signaled the beginning of organisation of a civilian topographic-geodetic
and cartographic service in this country.

After the Civil War cm to mad. during the years of peacetime construction
and particularly during the first five-year plans, the Military Topographic
Service underwent development and improvement together with all Soviet Army
arms and services. 0f great importance in its further development and
mobilization of personnel for successful accomplishment of assigned tasks
was the military topographers congress held in April 1924. In those years
military geodesists and topographers performed important tasks connected
with elevation measurement on the Trans-Siberian Mainline and linking the
levels of the Baltic Sea and Pacific Ocean, as well as topographic surveys
in border areas, in the site areas of the Kursk Magnetic Anomaly and the
Dneproges construction project, and participated in high-mountain ex-
peditions of the USSR Acadeay of Sciences and in establishing together with
enterprises of the Main Administration of Geodesy and Cartography an

astro-geodetic network over a considerable portion of the territory of the
USSR.

Considerable work was performed to improve the equipment and organizational
structure of MTS units; motorized topographic detachments, geodetic units

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE O¥LY
FOR OPPlCIAL USB ONLY

and a scientific research institute were established. Training of officer
cadres was improved. In 1925. at the initiative of the Military Topographic
Administration and the Main Administration of Geodesy and Cartography. an
official periodical was established for Soviet geodeeiats and topographers -
the journal 630032187. the finest traditions of which are being continued
today by the journal GEODBZIYA l KARTOGRAFIYA. From 1926 through 1932 mili-
tary engineer-geodesiats received training at the Moscow Institute of
Geodesy, Photographic Aerial Survey and Cartography Bngineers. and beginning
in 1932 - at the Military Engineering Academy imeni V. V. Kuybyshev.

By lOAl the Military progrephic Service together with the Main Administra-
tion of Geodesy and Cartography hed accoaplished the important work of

producing topographic maps of the border areas of the USSR. They were un-
able, however. to complete large-scale surveys covering the entire country.

and it was necessary to produce maps of a number of areas during the harsh
years of the Great Patriotic War.

The Great Patriotic Her was the greatest test for the Soviet state and its
Armed Forces and for the entire Soviet people. The road to victory was
trying and difficult. in battles of unprecedented scale and intensity
against the aggressive bloc of fascist states. our people and their fight-
ing men. under the direction of the Communist Party, gained a world-his-
toric victory.

The Military Topographic Service, which provided topographic-geodetic date
and cartographic materials in support of Soviet Army combat operations,
also passed with flying colors the severe test of the war, particularly in
the initial period. During the years of the Great Patriotic Her HTS units,
jointly with the enterprises of the Main Administration of Geodesy and
Cartography, surveyed and ground-reconnoitered an area in excess of 5 mil-
lion square kilometers, produced tens of thousands of original topographic
and special maps, and printed approximately 900 million copies of maps for
the military. Military geodesists and topographers, working jointly with
the artillery topographic service. daterained approximately 200,000 fun-
damental geodetic points. working jointly with the Air Force aerial photo-
topographic service. more than half a million aerial photographs were
photointerpreted. For purposes of troop control, the topographic services
of the fronts prepared a large number of reconnaissance. relief and coded
maps, river and lake maps. as well as many other special maps and graphic
combat documents. Throughout the entire war HTS officers performed a great
deal of work in the area of troop topographic training.

we have a great deal of respect for all military geodesists, topographers
and cartographers, workers and employees. all those who born on their
shoulders the brunt of the labor involved in topographic-geodetic support
of Soviet Army combat operations, those who by their selfless service

to the party and Our socialist homeland made a concrete contribution to the
common cause of victory over the bittereet enemy of mankind - German
fascism. we should mention in particular the personnel of the topographic

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL!
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

services of the fronts, which were headed by the most experienced officers
and general officers of the MTS: A. M. Agalakov, A. N. Ardayev. 8. P.
Bogankov. V. A. Vasil'yev. I. G. Dorofeyev. L. L. lvanov. I. I. Martynov.
A. B. Migunov, M. S. Mondrue. S. S. Nikonenko. Yu. M. Orletskiy. A. M.
Serdobintsav. V. G. Stepanov. P. Ye. Sokolov, V. Ya. Tereshchenko. K. M.
Kharin. and others, as well as the personnel of the General Staff Military
Topographic Administration. headed by Lt Gen Tech Trps M. K. Kudryavtsev.
The Communist Party and Soviet Government highly esteemed the military and
labor accomplishments of the personnel of the Military Topographic Service
during the Great Patriotic War - 23 units were decorated. and thousands
of officers. noncommissioned officers and enlisted personnel received
decorations and medals.

The wealth of experience acquired by the Military Topographic Service in
the Great Patriotic Her is being extensively utilised in peacetime for
further development and improvement of topographic-geodetic support ser-
vices for the Soviet Army. 0n the basis of a critical analysis of this ex-
perience. the requisite practical conclusions have been drawn. directed
toward prompt and uninterrupted supply of topographic-geodetic date and
cartographic materials to the troops and staffs.

In the postwar years the Military Topographic Service has taken part in
producing. jointly with the Main Administration of Geodesy and Cartography.
s 1:100.000 scale map of the USSR and particularly its northeastern regions.
end in projects to establish an astro-geodetic network for the Soviet Union.
with the scientifically-substantisted layout and program of execution of
which handled by eminent Soviet geodeaiat, Correeponding Member of the
Academy of Sciences USSR Professor P. M. Krasovskiy. This network. unique
in scale and accuracy. serves as a fine foundation for the conduct of all
subsequent topographic-geodetic and cartographic work and for solving basic
scientific problems of geodesy.

Geodesists and topographers are called pioneers, and this is clearly
justified. Performing tasks assigned by the homeland. they are among the
first to reach the cloud-towering heights. to cross the taigs and the
burning sands of the deserts. And it is not surprising that many geographic
features have been named in honor of geodesuma and topographers. In 1952

a large team of military topographers was awarded the USSR State Prize for
producing topographic maps of high-mountain areas in the Pamirs. They in-
clude V. M. Vasilevskiy. M. Ya. Gameleyev. A. I. Kozlovskiy. Ye. M.
Kanovelov. V. G. Kustov, A. I. Maharov. A. K. Maharov. A. P. Makovekiy.

A. S. Mel'nikov. D. P. Svetovidov. A. I. Simenyuk, and V. M. Grushnikov.

In 1967 the scientific council of the USSR Geographic Society awarded mili-
tary topographers M. Ya. Gameleyev. A. K. Koshksrov and P. M. Rapaeov the
P. P. Semenov Grand Gold Medal for discovery. survey and determination of
the height of Victory Peak.

A major contribution toward solving many practical and theoretical problems
during this period was made by officers and general officers M. K. Kudryevteev.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. S. Nikolayev, I. A. Kutuzov. P. Ya. Gerasinov. Yu. V. Sargovskiy. V. G.
Stspanov. I. I. Msrt'yanov. D. A. Popov, s. G. Afenas'yev.N. N. Mineyev.
V. c. Dmitriyevskiy, M. R. Kurosh and others, as well as the following
eminent scientists: Honored Scientists and Engineers 6. V. Romenovskiy,

A. N. Lohanov, A. V. Masayev. Doctors of Technical Sciences N. A. Urmayev.
N. P. strov. P. A. caydayev. B. A. Litvinov, P. P. Lyseako. N. If.
Makerov. V. P. Moroaov. and many others.

In connection with the rapid advance of the scientific and technological
revolution. furnishing of modern weapons and cowat equipment to the army
and navy, as well as qualitative changes in the composition of the

Armed Porces, new and higher demands are being rude on topographic-geodetic
support of troops and contact readiness of the Military Topographic Service,
and it is becoming necessary to revise and refine previous views and to
find a different solution to many problems. The tasks of the Military
Topographic Service have changed substantially and become more complex.

and it now plays a greater role and has greater responsibility in matters
of coaprehensive and full support of troops and staffs with topograhic-
geodetic date and cartographic materials. Totally new kinds of geodetic.
photograuetric and cartographic equipment are being developed. and ad-
vanced methods and procsses of performing spacial jobs are being developed
and adopted. A significant contribution toward this has been made by State
Prize winners 3. G. Afanas'yev. V. l. Korablev, N. N. Mineyev. 1. Ya.
Pleshaltov, A. A. Khoman'ko, G. A. Uetinov, the officers and general officers
of the Military Topographic Administration and Military Engineering Academy
imeni V. V. Kuybyshev, chiefs of the topographic services. contenders and
officers of topographic units.

Modes of troop support are tested and iwroved. possibilities of shortening
the time required to obtain and process topographic-geodetic data are
sought, and. training of MTS units for operation in a couple: situation is
improved in the course of cousnd-staff, tactical special tactical exercises.

The Military Topogrshic Service today possesses everything requisite for suc-
cessfully eccoqalishing its assigned missions. MTS units and establishments
contain well-trained cadres who are dedicated to the Communist Party and
socialist homeland. More than 902 of officer personnel are Communists and
Komsomol members. while more than 601 possess higher military and special-
ized education. A major contribution toward training cadre officers

of the Military Topograhic Service is being made by the Leningrad Higher
Military Topographic Col-sand School and the Military Engineering Academy
imeni V. V. Kuybyshev. Graduates of the Moscow and Novosibirsk Geodesy.
Aerial Photographic Survey and Cartography Engineer institutes are doing a
fine job in FITS units and at M'l'S enterprises.

The Military Topographic Service is accomplishing many practical and sci-
entific tasks pertaining to establishing and updating geodetic networks.
producing topographic maps, developing new instruments and modern processes
in close contact with the Main Administration of Geodesy and Cartography
and its scientific research and production subdivisions.

5
roe orncm. use only
FOR OFFICIAL US‘a’. ONLY

Implementing the resolutions of the 25th crsu Congress, the personnel of the
Military Topographic Service are working very hard and with a high degree
of responsibility in 1978. A special role in accomplishing all tasks is
played by party-political work and the efforts of party. Kononol and trade
union organizations in mobilizing the personnel of ms units for successful.
high-quality and efficient accomplishment of the coder end political
training program, special projects, and indoctrination of personnel in a
spirit of deep ideological conviction. Soviet patriotism end proletarian
internationalism. as well as constant readiness to defend the interests of
our socialist homeland.

Military topographere are celebrating their 60th anniversary with new auc-
ceases in combat training and in accomplishing assigned tasks end socialist
pledges.

The high praise for the military labor of the defenders of the homeland con-
tained in the CPSU Central Comittee message of greetings in connection

with the 60th anniversary of the USSR Armed Forces end in speeches by Leonid
ll'ich Brezhnev during his trip to Siberia end the Far East and at the 18th
Komsomol Congress have generated a new upsurge in political and labor ac-
tiveness by military personnel, civilian workers and employees of HTS units.
For a number of years now 16 enterprises have maintained their title of
Coaasuniet labor collectives, while 5 units have been awarded the title of
Excellent Labor Organisation and Production Enterprise. Horthy examples of

e Conuniat attitude toward labor are shown by senior technician-cartographers
A. I. Bogetova, who had met her own personal five-year plan target by the
60th anniversary of the USSR Armed Forces. Ye. I. Ushenina, V. A. Shepovalova,
S. A. Struchalin and many others, who have completed four annual targets
each. Excellent. stable performance in training and labor has been shown by
the units under the canned of N. N. Voronkov, G. P. Shepovalov, B. K.
Shurpitskiy, B. s. Gavrilov, G. 1.. Lyakhin, A. 6. Pavlovskiy, and others.

In connection with the 60th anniversary of the USSR Armed Forces. a large
nuaiber of Military Topographic Service officers and warrant officers have
been awarded decorations and medals. One of the best .‘fl‘s units was awarded
the Order of the Red Banner of Labor. These decorations attest to recogni-
tion of the contribution made by the personnel of the Military Topographic
Service toward increasing the cosbat readiness of this country's Armed
Forces. At the sane time they oblige us to work even better, tirelessly im-
proving tne quality and efficiency of all our work, not resting on our
leurels but concentrating attention on new tasks and unresolved problem.
"Strengthening and improvement of the army and navy," states USSR Minister
of Defense Mar 50 D. F. Ustinov, meter of the CPSU Central Coalittee
Politburo, "is a complex, all-encompassing. innovative process, in which
there can be no place for stagnation. That which was new yesterday today

becones a routine achievenent. Herein lies the essence of the dialectic of
military affairs."

6
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Connunist Party and Soviet Government are doing everything necessary to
preserve peace and the security of peoples. The entire world is aware of
the beneficent influence of the peace-seeking foreign policy of the Leninist
party and the vigorous activities toward this end by CPS!) Central Comttee
General Secretary r‘onrade L. I. Brezhnev. Chairmen of the Presidium of the
USSR Supress Soviet. There still exist in the world. however, forces of
reaction end aggression, forces which are vigorously in operation, opposing
detente end dissrnanent. These forces are naintaining focal points of
tension. are inciting eilitery cornflicts, and are escalating the arms race.
Under these conditions the CPSU Central Couittee and Soviet Government are

devoting constant attention toward strengthening this country's defense
capability and a level of Mind Forces codmt readiness guaranteeing an in-
nediate rebuff to any aggressor. It is the duty of nilitery topographers
pronptly and fully to provide the troops with topographic-geodetic data and
cartographic materials. to work persistently to inprove the scans and
methods of acconplishing the tasks assigned the Military Topographic Ser-
vice at the present stage. and to improve organization and discipline.

P‘or 60 years the Military Topographic Service has honorably carried out its
duty to the homeland, successfully accomplishing its assigned tasks. Mili-
tary topographiers. indoctrinated in a spirit of total dedication to the
Comunist Party and the Soviet homeland. are asking and will continue to
make a worthy contribution to the cause of increasing the cosbat night of
the USSR arsed Forces and strengthening the defense capability of our social-
ist state.

COPYRIGRT: Isdetel'stvo "Nedra". "Geodeziya i kartografiya", 1978

3025
cso: 8144/0195

7
Iron OFFICIAL US}: can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZHI‘IOHIR RADIOELBC‘IRONIC AIR DEFENSE SCHOOL

Moscow ZRI'IOHIRSKOYE KRASNOZNAMENNOYE nmu LENINSKOGO motion
in Russian 1977 signed to press 1 Apr 77 pp 1-1;. 230-232

[Annotatiom table of contents. author's introduction. and conclusion
of book by Nikoley Yekovlevich Golovsnov]

[Excerpts] Title Puget

Title! ZHIWIRSKOYE XRASNOZNAMENNOYE m1 LENINSKNO
Konsouou (the Zhitomir Red Dunner [deioelectronic
Air Defense School] imeni leninist Romsomol)

Publisher! Voyenisdst

Place and yesr of pablicstion' Moscow, 1977

Signed to Press betel 1 April 1977
Number of Copies i’ublished' 30,000
Number of Pagest 232

Annotationz

The book conteins 1 discussion of the history of one of the country's
oldest military schools--the Zhitomir Higher Command Red Banner Air
Defense School imeni leninist Komsomol, the grsdustes who have performed
glorious fests in defense of the motherland. The mthor places greet
attention on illuminating the work of the tesching staff and of the
school's party and Komsonol orgsnizstions in the education and indoctri-
nstion of officer cadres.

The book is intended for s broad circle of readers. especially for youths
who dream of becoming officers in the National Air Defense Forces.

Table of Contents

tht's Introduction 0.0.0....000OOOOOOUOOOOOOOOO.I...‘OOIO..IO0.00IO' 3

e

8
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OWICIM. 088 031.?

Chapter 1. Commdoro-ontltlrcrtft trtlllorymn ....................o.u... '-
The Red Anny le‘tl t“ GWQIIOoo-onouOn0.0000000000000000”... s
Moreov-Potrosrad-Sevutopol‘ ooonoooooooooooouoorotooho-otonoOooooO ‘2
man [Horltcrt' tad Poumto‘ Red Army] Antltlrcuft Artlllory School . 22
VOIUI‘COOI‘I onoontnuotanotDonc“noDutoo-00.000.000.000.not”... ’8
Sevastopol’ Anthlrcnft AN’JIOK‘V 30ml.00000000000000”...”on...o ‘1

0n the CV. of VOrObbbotococoaoooooooooooottotoooooootooooootooooboovoo ’07

Chapter 20 DurLls the ”Or. 0‘ HOV." “.:.OOOIOOOOOOOOOIOOOIIO'OUIO'OODOO '-
In defonﬂo 0f SoVucopol’ oucouoOouonuonoouooquouoonoonouO 53
”9.9 ”it’ll“ tho country. h:r°v.k‘uf‘ on...oooooooo0000.30.00.000000O 58
In the £1r0t b.:CI°9 o.0.9000000000000000...030000000000...000.00....0 63
DOfQJIC Of the 6.91“!» .00I0000000.0000000000000000...0.000.000.0000.. ‘6
TM crldle 0‘ m “VOIUt‘on i. anlollblﬂ IOIOOOOOOOOOOOOO60000.0...0 ’0
DQandCII Of 0"... ooooooooo90oo...ooooooooooo000000000000000000000.0 72
m luscndm 365th 'It:.ry oooooooosooooonooooooonooouoaooooooooonooo 7b
Defending r.i1r°.d junction. ocoooooo00000.0000000000000000.0000...o 79
The battles it vommlh ooooooooo.ooooooooooooooooootooooooooooooooooo 30
At Stalingrad coo-coononoooooonaooooootoouotooouaoooooo.nocooooouoI 82
The emailer of th‘ "You": ou‘rd‘” 0.00000000000000030000000000000... as
The cxporlenco 0f 1”.r"£nt° the trﬁlnm WCIS 0.0000000000000000... 9].
The Battery haul SUZA [chutopol' Antlalrcuft Artillery School]

at cm front O...0.0.0....DI.0I00......0000......OOOOQOOO0.0000...... 10$

Yuay OOOOOOIIIIOOOOOObDOOCDIO0000000.000000000.00000000000000.0000... 109
Liberation of the Baltic m. 03.00000900000000000000obooooooooooaoooo 113

The .CM‘» £8 CVINM m Order 0‘ 3“ M ”Mr tooooonoooooooooouoo 118
On cm 3.311“ at. ocoo-oooooooooooootaoooooooooooooooooooooooo0.0.00. 122

CMPCGI 3o “RCIth peaceful .kt..000000000000000000000000000000000.0000... --
m {tut W‘:W“ ’0‘" 00000000000390.0009...oooooooooooooooooogo... 123
“.miICt‘on of n." ewiMCOOtoooooocoono.0...ooooooooooooocoooooooo 136
“ilitﬁry muttm'tionoooottoooootootooooooooooooooo0.000000000000000 1’03
Ties to troop unit. ooooooo.0.000000009000000...00000000000000.0000... 168

Chapter ’0. TWO ‘0 trlditiDMooootuooooooooooonotcoon...too-00.000.000.000 --
Dated UN" 3 no" conflwrttlon COOOODOOOOOOOOQOOOOOQOI00.000.000.000.. 152
cmn‘SCC in th. forefront v0.000.000...OIOOOOOOOOOOO0.000.000.0000.I 156
The C3130 "hich m Ber“ 0.0oouootnoooooouoooooconoooooooooonoooooooa 171
For quantity and mastery in smrt. coo.00...cooooOooooOooooOooooloooo° 176
Thy 82m in ”('01 fuhion in twp Uﬂ£t8 cocoonoooooocoooocoocoooooo 179

chlptct 5. To new Might! 0.00000000000000000000.00ooooooooooooouooooooco.
To the ram of the him‘t ooooootootoo000.000ooooo-oooo-oc'oooooooI 184
Imnl mntntst KNOW]. 0.040000000009000....000oouoocooooo...oooovcoc ‘93
Ideologic‘l tmmcim .0...................0.......I.........'."... 195
The SCMOI'C 50th mtwrsary 000000000000000000000000000000010000...I 201
The year of the Denial“: jobilcc .oaoouoo-ocooctououoootooooooooooooo 20"
Created by tho "opl."c° d.f.nd "lltbly 00.000UOOOUOOOOOCOOIOOOOOOOC 210
They were the ftt‘t a...contoooooooooooOOcoo00.00.00ouavacoooooococvoo 215
To new Misha .C‘...O..U.‘0'.................O...............'..'... 220

Conclusion 000.000.00.00.00AOQOOO0.000.000.90000000000000000000000...o 23°

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Author‘s introduction

[Text] This book is the tale of the Zhitomir Higher Conand Red Banner
nadioelectronic Air Defense School imeni leninist Komsomol end its glorious
put which finds its roots in the years of the Civil tier. of the school's
activities during the struggle to build socialism in the U3”. of the
historic deeds of its graduates during the years of severe tests. of the
post-war devolousent of one of the Soviet Amy's oldest forges of officer
cadres.

ArchiVel documents. memoirs. and materials from school students over many
years served as the basis for this book. The names of many previously
unknown heroes and meritorious graduates of the school were discovered in
the process and numerous documents and photographs were collected.

A Combat Glory Museum has been set up at the school. When he visited the
school in 1970. l6!) 1. i. Yahnbovskiy. USSR first deputy minister of defense.
wrote the following in the visitor's register! ”. . .the valuable materials
collected in the school's Combat Glory Museum. construction of e masoriel to
the graduates who fell in battle for the motherland. and the earth soaked
with the blood of the troops from the hero-cities that has been laid here
with love. give witness to the fact that the school sacredly reveres the
memory of the heroic deeds of its graduates."

Army Gen 3. h. Shtemenko. who graduated from the school in 1930. wrote!

“with great satisfaction. emotion. end Joy several years ego I visited my

old school where I began my military path almost 50 years ago. It was then
celled the Sevastopol' Antiaircreft Artillery School. Much water hes flowed
over the dam since that time! neither the equinent nor the people are the
sue. everything has changed just as our motherland has changed unrecognisebly
during these years. It is a joy and pleasure to recognize and see progress
everywhere. including the growth and improvement of the school. It now trains
first-class commders with an engineer's education who know the complex
equipment to perfection. equipnent about which we were unable to even dream.“

with no pretense of having fully depicted the glorious history and combat
traditions of the school. the author strived to trace the more important

events in the chronicles of its military affairs from its day of birth until
the "0.00:0

The author expresses sincere appreciation to Maj Gen Arty Ye. Ye. Poluektov.
chief of the school. Cols V. F. Burlachenko and F. V. Il'in. chiefs of the
political section. Col H. H. Shashunov. former secretary of the school party
collittee, Engr-Col P. A. Zyukanov. and Col 5. P. Nabokov. deputy chiefs of
the school. . . H. Plitenchuk, to the veterans of the school. and to its
graduates who provided assistance in the collection of materials linked with
the activities of the Zhitemir Red Banner School.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL "8|! ONLY

Conclusion

The Zhito-ir Red banner School has trained officer cadres for the Arned
Forces for approxinately 60 years. It has covered a glorious combat path
during this tine. free its walls sale a large pleisde of eilitary couanders
who eade a significant contribution to the developent of military affairs.
especially in the developent and combat enployaent of antiaircraft artillery
and of the sec troops.

Thomands of the school's students continue to serve in troop units and
many have become generals. And. regardless of vhsre a graduate of the
school serves. regardless of the post he occupies. he always with great
vareth and sincerity recalls his old school. which provided him the creden-
tiala for the long and difficult Iilitary life. which indoctrinsted in his:
love for the motherland and for the turbulent but honorable and interesting
military profession.

From day to day. from year to year. the school's collective lives and labors.
Coming in to replace the graduates are new youths ﬁho have dedicated their
life to the difficult and responsible profession of officer.

Great and responsible Iaissions face the school at the contemporary stage.
These eissions have been stipulated by the general policy of our Comnist
Party and the decisions of the 25th CPS!) Congress.

being continually concerned about inproving the defensive capability of the
Soviet state. the party is guided by the behests of the great Lenin. his
words "any revolution is only worth something if it is able to defend itself”

have bees-e the true progru of crsu activities in the field of Iilitary
organizational development.

And even it today our army possesses new more ilproved equinent than it did

so plus years ago. even if the tactics for conducting battle have unrecognizably
changed. the spirit of the glorious veterans. their patriotism courage. and
military ability, their unforgettable deeds and feats perforued for the glory
for the beloved motherland, for the glory of the Colbat Banner of the units
[chast'] where the school's students serve live eternally in the hearts of
their young heirs--the students and officers of the Zhitoeir Red banner. uho

are prepared at any moment to cone to the defense of the great conquests of
“tours

COPYRIGRT' Voyenizdet, 1977

7869
(2803 1801

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BOOK 018608838 BMWLOOY OP MILITARY-SCIENTIFIC 0068an

Noecov WNW!“ muwmoo POZNMIYA in Rueelen 1977 pp 1. 2.
‘29-‘32. 3-7. 8. 87. 128-129. 203-206. 310-311; 1025-428

[Book edited by Amy Gen 1. Ye. Shevrov. Col H. l. Celkin]
[Bxcerpte] ‘l'itle Peso:

Title: HINDOLOGIYA mam-momma POMIYA (The Methodology of
Hilitery-Scientific Cognition)

Authore: Arny Cenerel l. Ye. Shevrov. Colonel H. l. Coelkin. et el.

Publieher: Voyennoye iedetel'etvo Hinieteretve Ohorony 888R

Plece end yeer of mlicetion: Hoecov. 1.977

Signed to Preee Dete: 19 Key 1977
"other of Copiee Publiehed: 18.000
Nueber of Peace: 632

lnforeetion on Authors:

A group of euthore of the Cenerel Stefﬁ Acedery of the Areed Porcee USSR ineni
It. Ye. Voroehilov: Protector end Arty Generel l. Ye. Shevrov; honored
Scientiet of the RSPSR end Doctor of Hilitery Sciencee. Profeeeor. Mejor
Generel l. l. Anureyev; Doctor of Kilitery Sciencee. Profeeeor. ﬂejor Generel
N. 1. Rent; Cendidete of Philoeophicel Sciences. Docent. Colonel V. K. Abreeov;
Doctor of Militery Sciences. Profeeeor. Colonel I. II. Vorob'yev; Doctor of
Philoeophicel Sciencee. Profeeeor. Colonel 14. I. Gelkin; Doctor of Phlloeo-
phicel Sciences. Docent. Colonel V. '1'. Login; Profueor. Colonel V. I. Mororov;
Cendidete of Mllitery Sciencee. Senior Scientific Fellow. Colonel I. V.

Ryholovekiy; Cendidete of Philoeophicel Sciencee. Docent. Colonel &. V.
Spirov.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annotstion

The book discloses special features in the eeploynent of Herxist-Leninist
eethodology in eilitary-ecientific cognition which are detersined by the
specific nature of ear and the conditions for its reflection in eilitary
knowledge. The central place in the book is occupied by an enslysis of the
charscterietic features in the study of eaterial and spiritual aspects of
var. thelogicalfunctionsofthe laws end cetagories of dislectics in military-
scientific cognition. the essence of eilitary practice and its role in is-
proving military theory. and other isportsnt questions. The book also con-
tains recoslendstions to increase the effectiveness of silitary-scientific
studies. A criticise of the eethodologicsl bases for bourgeois military
concepts is provided.

The work is intended for officers. generals. and edsirels of the Areed Forces

and for all readers who era interested in the eethodology of scientific cog-
nition.

TAILS OF CONTENTS
Page

Introductiﬂi eeeeseaasesesseeeoeseseeesseseeeeeeseseeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeo 3

SECTION I. TﬂE ESSENCE 0? THE METHODOLOGY 0? MILITARY-SCIENTIFIC
cocnttton 000......

Chapter I. Herzisn-LeninisI--The Methodological Poundetion of
"11tt.ry-sc‘.n“ftc comit‘oﬂ OOOOOOOOCOOOCOIOOOOOOI 9

l. The concept of the ssthodology of silitary-scientific

cognition essesaesseseessessssessesseseseseoeeseesseesesess -
2. Objectivity and party spirit in military-scientific

cognittoﬂ OIOOOIOOsJDOOOOOOOOOOOOI0.0.00.00.00.000000000000 1°
3. Herxist-Leninist philosophy--the theoretical basis for

methods of silitary-scientific cognition .................. 21
A. Criticism of the eethodologicsl bases of bourgeois

.1113.” ‘heory 0.000000000000000..OOOOCOOIOOOOIOOOOOOOOOCO 3°

Chspter It. The Content and Special Features of Hilitery-Scientific
cosn‘tEOH 0..to.'0O...bl...0...00....OIbDOOIOOOOOIOOIOOODOO ‘3

l. The essence and basic trends in silitsry-scientific
cosntt‘on .0.00000000IJOOOOOOOIODOOIO0.0.0.0000000000000000
2. The special features of nor as an object of cognition and
conditions for its reflection in nilitary-scientific
kno'1.d.. .IOOOOOOOOOOOQOOIOOOOIOOIOOOOOOCOIIOOO0.0.00.0... $1
3. The level and basic feeturee of the contesporery stage of
military-scientific knowledge and their effect on the
process of silitary-scientific cognition .................. 58

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F’OR OPRICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 11!. The Crestive Nature of Hilitsry-Scientiiic Cognition ....

l. Hethodological bases of unitary-scientific creativity . . . . . . .
2. The creative nature of the unitary-scientific research
Proc.” 000'OIOOOOOOOOOOOOC00000000000OAOCCCOOOOOOOOIOOOAOOODO

3. The couander's creativity in e codast situation and vsys of

”1‘108 t: I0.000IOOOIOOOOUQOCOCOOOOOOOOOOOCOOCOOOOUOOOODOOOOO

SECTION 11. 1'33 M810 PROM.“ 0P PHILOSOPHY MID HILI‘I‘ARY-SCIMHIC
0001111101!

Chapter N. The heterialistic Approach to en Understanding of War
‘0‘ it. 3.801.: LIV. eeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeaeese

l. The struggle of natarialisn and ideelisn in the davelopnent
of “11“” thouﬂ‘ .0C.It...II.to...00.0000000000000000000COU
2. The nsterialiatic approach to the study of var ...............

Chsptor V. The Dialectica of the Cognition of Meterisl end Spiritual
Factor. in w.r .00...00.0.00.0D.JOOOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOCO'

l. Heteriel and spiritual factors in uer and their relationship..

2. A Interislistic approach to en understsnding of the relation-
ship between an end technology in var .......................

3. The effect of material and spiritual fsctors of war on the
ions and netth for the conduct oi nilitary operations .....

SECTION 111. m DIALICTICAI. PATH or "mum-SCIENTIFIC comm-1m
Chapter VI. ﬂilitsry Practice and its Role in minty-Scientific

conttim eeeeeeeeeeeeseeseeeeeoeeeoeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeoe

l. The content of nilitary practice. its special futures and

b..1c tm. eeeeeaeaeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeoeesooloees

2. The role of nilitary prectice in nolding the thinking of
«new! personnel and their codiat skill .....................

3. Military practice so a goal end the basis of nilitary-
scientific cognition end davelopnent of Soviet nilitary

ICIOTICO eeeeaeeeeeeaeoooeseseeseseeessoeeeeeeeseeeeaeeaeaeesae

Chepter VII. The Sensual and Logical Aupecta of Military Scientific
W‘t‘oﬂ 00.00....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO...0.000.000.0000

l. Sensual cognition and its form. Special features of sensual
cognition in e coﬁat situation ..............................
2. Logical cognition and its form. The co-snder's thinking in s

cm: O‘COOC100 Deeoeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeaeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeseeeee

1%
son orncm. use 0st

68

7A

79

101

108

112
119

130

137

162

15‘

161
Chapter
1 .

3.
SWIM

Chepter

1.

2.
3.

Chapter

1.
2.
3.

Chapter

1.
2.

202 OFFICIAL 082 ONLY

Vitta Tmth tn n211‘.”’sc2.ﬂ:1“c “wit‘on' e e a e e e e e o o e o a a a e e e 0

Objective truth of eilitary-ecientific knowledge-«he eoet
ieportent condition for auoceu in practicel eilitery

let‘vity eeeeoaoaeeeoeooeeoooeoeoeeeeeioeaeoeeaaeoooeeeeeeoeaeee

Special ieeturee oi the relationehip of the relative end the

ehaolute in objectively true eilitary knowledge” ............. ..
military practice--the criterion of truth in eilitary knowledge.

W. m WNIMICM. FUNCTION OF DIALBCTICS IN “num-
SCIMIPIC COGNITION

1X. Dielectice ae Logic and the Theory of Military-Scientific

co.““t°n 00.0.00.0.0.0.660...0.000000IOOOOOIOOOOOIICC...

The unity of dialectica. logic. end the theory of cognition

and ite uniteetatien in nilitery-ecientific cognition .........
The conpreheneiveneee of exeeination of eilitary proceesce .....
Cognition of eilitary proceeeee in their change and developeent.

X. The Hethodological Function of the Deeic Lam of Dielec tice
in mltt.”.sct.n“ftc com‘t‘m DOOOCOQOOOOQOIDIOOOOOIO

The diecloeure o! contredictione . their development , and

Iethode oi reeolution in the very eeeence of eilitery proceeeee.
The unity of ouentitetive and qualitative enelyeee in eilitery-
‘ctﬁtt‘tc contt1m OOOOOOOOOOOI0.00000000000000.0000.00.00.00.
Dialectical negetion in eilitary-ecientific cognition.
continuity in the developeent of eilitery theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Xl. Categoriee of Dielecticel Haterieliee ee Reference Pointe
0! mltt.w-sc1.ﬂt£1‘c mutt!“ IOOOOOOOIOCOOOOOOOOIOO.

“at”: m ‘0'. .000...0.0.00.0...IOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOO600.00.00.00
m. “01. ”d th. "rt 0.0000000006000000.0IOOCIOOOOQOOOOOOOQOOO
3..“c. ”d phnmm JO...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO..OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
“HCYCI. ."c1.1. maiv‘dul OOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOO0.00.00.600.00...
am.“ .ffCCt 0.000.I0.00IOOOIOOOIOOOOOOOIOOOO0.000.000.0000.
"CC”.‘ty .nd chmc. 0.00.00.00.00...I.O...0.0000000000060000...
Poeeihility and reality ........................................

XII. The Ileletienehip of Penal and Dialect icel logic. in
m!!‘.t"s¢1.nt1‘tc “nt‘ton aeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeaeea

For-e1 logic end ite reletionehip with dielecticel logic . . . . . . .
The love of logical thinking and their role in eilitary-
.c1.n‘t“c Contt£m O...00.0.0.0...l0......OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIGO

15
m ontcm use 01m

179

166
190

205
212
219

229

262
256

269

272
277

281
286

290
296

297

301
FOR OWICIAL 088 ONLY

SWIG! V. FOR“! AND mm: 01' 15mm 0? unnm-sctmmc

Clapter XIII. Porno oi Developnent of Military-Scientific Knovledge.

1.
2.

3.
‘0

Logical Sequence of the Reeeerch Proceee .............

Definition and iorauletion of a nilitary-ecientific prohlee ...
Diecovery oi facte oi nilitery reality, their explanation and
"n.r.li'.t‘°n OOUODOIOOOCOOOO00.0000000IOOOOOOOICOIIOOIIOOOOOO
Formulation end euhetentiation o! a ailitary-acientific

hypoth..1. OIOO..0...‘9'D.O.I.0.0.0.0000.0000003003030000000000

The conetruction of nilitary theory and deterlinotion of vaye
for ite practical realisation .................................

Chapter XIV. Buloyaent of General Scientific nethode in Military

3....fch 5..0.00.0..COOOIOOOOOOIOODIOOOIOO00.0.0000...

m."‘t1m .nd.mr1~nt OOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOCOOOOIOOICOOOOOOOIOO
Analy.£. .nd lyn‘ﬂCI‘. IOI...O00000000.00.000000000000000IOO‘IO
Comparison and generalisation, accent iron the ebetract to

tM- concnt. toI.0.0.0.0I.I.000.000I...OIOIDODOOOIOOOOIIOOIOOOI
llietorical end logicel aethode in ailitery~ecientific cognition
Th. "cm of .m“ .‘t‘ut.’ O000.0.0000.00000000000000.0000.
”‘0” ‘9’".ch 1n .tud‘“ 0.5000...I...OOOOOIOOIIOOOOIOIOOCI.

Chapter XV. Hatheaatical Hethode in hilitary-Scientitic Study .........

1.

Hoot important fields for the e-ployaent of nethelaticel

u‘hod. in “1“.” .££.tr. .00.00....00.00....OIOOCOOIOOOIIOOO
Employ-ant of probability theory in Iilitary affeire ..........
Employ-eat of queueing theory in nilitery affaire .............
Employment of natheuaticel progrening in nilitery attaire ....
hploylaent of game theory in unitary affeire .................

WP!!! XVI. s”c1.1 ”tho“ of Militlry-Sciﬂltlfk‘. stud, e e r e e e e e e e e e e

1.
2.
3.

‘e

Troop and experimentel tacticel exercieea .....................
Md.mt “.rc‘“. 000.000..OI000.000IOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOO
‘rhe aolution oi tecticel quickie problem, the conduct of

{1.1d :tip. (t.c°ﬂu1..nc.) O0.00.00...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODIO
m‘. “d ‘roop :..‘. .00.0.00.0.0DOC00OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOIIOOCOOI.

melatoﬂ eeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoaeeeeeeeeeeaeee

16
ran ontcm. use cm:

312

317
323
329

337

361
346
352
338
362
372
375
38‘
390
396

398

(.06

416
619

425
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“MOTION

A cherecterietic feeture of the conteqorery ere ie the unprecedentedly evift
developnent of ecience end ite increeeing influence on ell eepecte of the
uteriel end epirituel life of eociety. The role of ecience ie eepecielly
growing under eocielien. lte accelerated developnent ie one of the chief
fectore in the eucceeeful eccoepliehnent of teeke for co-uniet conetruction.
"...'!'he ecientific end technical revolution finde the direction which neete
the intereete of nen end eociety only mder the conditione of eocielien."
etreeeee L. 1. Brezhnev in the eu-ery report of the Centrel Committee CPSU
to the 25th Petty Congreee. ”In turn. the finel teelte of the eociel revolu-
tion--the building of e commiet eociety—cen be eccoqliehed only on the
beeie of the eccelereted development of ecience end technology."

Scientific end technicel progreee ie eleo exerting decieive influence on ell
fielde of nilitery effeire. on ell coeponent eleeente of nilitery ert-

etretegy. operetionel ert. end tectice. on eilitery orgenizetionel develop-
nent end neeeuree conducted in the Arned Porcee to neintein their high level
of cadet reedineee, end on the nethode for treining end indoctrineting the

troope .

In etrengthening the nilitery eight of our notherlend, the Commie: Petty

ie conetently guided by V. I. Lenin'e inetructione to the effect that e nodetn
any cennot be built uithout ecience end thet it ie inpoeeible to control
troope end ettein victory in nodern vet without relience on nilitery-ecientific
hnovledge. The euperiority of Soviet nilitery ecience end nilitery ert vee

one of the soot inportent conditione for the victory of the Soviet Arned Porcee
over feecien in the Greet Petriotic Her of 1961-1965.

The contenporery period of nilitery orgenizetionel developnent ie cherecterieed
by the heretofore unprecedented inteneity of renewing the nuns of ver, the
eppeerence of quelitetively new typee of veepone end equipment. end eeerchee

for thoee forte end nethode of etretegic, operationel, end tecticel ectione
which no any of the world ever enployed. New nethede for the conduct of nili-
tery operetione end nee: veye to inprove the orgenieetionel etructure of the
Ari-ed Forcee. nethode for their conbet treining. end to increase conbet rudineee

 

. ”Heteriely XXV e"yerde 088" [Heteriele of the 25th CPS" Congreee]. Noecov.
1976. p. ‘7.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sust be found and substantiated theoretically before becoming the property of
military practice. All this led to a sharp increase in the role of military
science which has become a most isportant factor in the combat might of the
armed forces. while scientific control of the troops is the decisive condi-
tion for the attainment of victory.

The process of the continuous convergence of scientific and practical activity
by military personnel is non occurring. The making of decisions for a battle
or operation. the organisation of the cooperation of the troops and their sup-
port. isprovenent of the forms and methods for field, air. and sea training
of the personnel. and their ideological indoctrination and psychological
training are more and sore assuming the nature of scientific activity and re-
quiring the application of research methods with necessary reliance on the
latest achieve-onus of science. Timely today as never before are the words
of V. I. Lenin to the effect that "for us science has not renained a dead
letter or a stylish phrase... so that science actually became part of our

flesh and blood and was fully and genuinely transformed into a component
element of our way of life."*

Pointing to the substantial changes in the nature of practical activity under
the influence of scientific and technical progress. L. I. Brezhnev noted in
the summary report of the Central Committee CPS" to the 25th Party Congress:
"The revolution in science and technology requires basic changes in the style
and sethods of administrative activity. a decisive struggle against sluggish-
ness and routiniss. genuine respect for science. and the ability and desire
to consult and take it into consideration."** This instruction also pertains
cospletely to military sctivity. ﬂithout considering the achievements of
contenporsry military science, success of all types of practice in the cosbat
and political training of the Arned Porces' personnel is now isposaible.

The increase in the role of military science and intensification of its in~
fluence on all aspects of the practical activity of generals and officers are
now occurring simultaneously with an acceleration in the rates of its develop-
ment. the change in the content of silitary-scientific knowledge itself. and
complication of the process of military-scientific cognition. Under these
conditions, the question of increasing the effectiveness of military science
arises with all urgency. It is called upon to provide the greatest results
with the least expenditure of material resources and time and to solve the
urgent problems of military affairs effectively.

A mandatory condition for the effectiveness of military science. obtaining
results from military-scientific studies, and their rapid introduction into
the practice of military organizational development is the further elaboration
of the methodology for military-scientific cognition and, on this basis, the
improve-en: of general and special sethods for the solution of theoretical and
practical problens of military organizational development.

.Lenin. V. 1.. “Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy" [Complete works). Vol 65. p 391.

 

.*"Haterialy XXV s"yezdl KPSS." P ‘3-

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

war is a special object of cognition. Also specific are the conditions under
which the development of military theory occurs and practical decisions are
made. The content of contemporary nilitary science also has a substantial
influence on the process of military-scientific cognition and the research
methods which are employed. Because of this,military-scientific cognition.
theoretical as well as practical. is a specific form of scientific cognition
which differs substantially from other types of cognitive activity. There-
fore. the employment of the general propositions of Marxist-Leninist method-

ology in the development of military-scientific knowledge has its own peculiar-
ities which are reflected in the content of the [methodology of military-
scientific cognition/ [in boldface].

The effectiveness of military science is determined not only by the depth of
elaboration of the methodology for military-scientific cognition, but also
by the degree of its assinilation by military personnel. The letter is
especially important since now not only are academies end scientific research
institutions taking part in military-scientific studies, but also military
districts. all operational and troop staffs, political organs. and virtually
all generals and officers regardless of the posts which they occupy.

Knowledge of the methodology of military-scientific cognition and the general
and special research methods is now another decisive factor for the success-
ful practical activity of all commanders. staff officers. and political organs
in controlling the troops in battle. organising combat and political training
in the units and subunits. and improving their combat readiness.

The Central Committee CPS" is constantly directing the leading scientific and
military personnel toward the mastery of haraist-Leninist methodology for the
study of the phenomena of war. toward the creative solution of urgent problems

in military affairs. and toward the improvement of the Armed Forces' combat
capabilities.

The book which is offered to the reader discloses the special features in
employing Hermiet-Leninist methodology in the process of military-scientific
cognition both in the development of military theory (theoretical military
cognition) as well as in the commander's estimate of the combat situation.
adoption of the decision for combat. organization of cooperation and combat
support. and the maintenance of constant high combat readiness of subunits.
units. and large units QPPnCticﬂl “111‘“?! cognition).

The central place in the work is occupied by an analysis of the characteristic
features in the study of the material and spiritual factors of war; the dis-
closure of the essence of military practice and its role in improving military
theory. the relationship of the sensual and logical aspects of cognition. and
empirical and theoretical knowledge; the disclosure of the logical function of
the laws and categories of dialectics in military-scientific cognition and

the content of the forms and methods for development of military-scientific
knowledge; and criticism of the methodological bases of bourgeois military
theories. Special attention was devoted to questions of the coelnnder's

19
ton orrrcm. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

creativity in a combat situation as the most important condition for the
attainment of success in combat. The book contains specific recommendations
for increasing the effectiveness of military-scientific studies and the solu-
tion of practical tasks by commanders. political organs. and staffs in the
process of the conbet and political training of the troops and their control
in a battle and operation.

In writing the monograph, the authors relied on the classical works of Marxism-
Leninism. the guidance documents of the CPSU. end the instructions of the
Soviet Minister of Defense on combat and political training and military-
ecientific work in the Armed forces. They utilized the experience of scien-
tific studies which has been accumulated aaong the troops and in the military
educational institutions. Use was also made of published works such as, for
example, "Marksism-leninism o voyne i armii" [Marxism-Leninism on Her and the
Arlyl(fiveoditions).'Metodologicheskiyeproblemy voyennoy teorii i praktiki"
[Methodological Problems of Military Theory and Practice] (two editions),
"Pilosofakoya naalediye V. l. Lenina i problemy sovrelennoy voyny" [The Philo-
sophical Heritage of V. I. Lenin and Problems of Contemporary Her),
‘1iarksistsko-leninskaya metodologiye voyennoy istorii" [Marxist-Leninist
Methodology of Military History]. and others in which questions on this sub-
jact are examined to one degree or another.

The book is intended for generals, admirals. and officers of the Armed Forces.
students and cadets of military-educational institutions. and for all readers
who are interested in the methodology of scientific cognition.

The group of authors expresses its sincere gratitude for valuable advice and
assistance to Honored Scientist of the RSPSR, Doctor of Philosophical Sciences.
and Professor 1. D. Andreyev, Colonel General A. G. Shurupov, Admiral A. T.
chabanenko. Lieutenant General I. s. Shiyan. Lieutenant General V. P. Mernov,
Doctor of Philosophical Sciences. Professor, Major General S. A. Tyushkevich.
and Doctor of Philosophical Sciences, Colonel V. A. Zubarev.

SECTION I. THE ESSENCE OF THE METHODOLOGY OP MILITARY-SCIENTIFIC COGNITION

The Marxist-Leninist methodology of scientific cognition equips military per-
sonnel with an understanding of the essence. principles, and methods of
cognitive activity and provides a scientifically substantiated approach to
the study and solution of problems in military theory and practice. Its
employment opens up the moat expedient ways for military-scientific study

and an analysis and evaluation of military events which have taken place.

It helps to consider the effect of various factors on the course of combat
operations and to disclose the reasons for victories and defeats in war.

The complex and dynamic nature of the development of contemporary military
affairs does not tolerate a stereotyped, mechanical approach to the solution
of theoretical and practical problems. Scientific methodology teaches us to
see all phenomena in their development and continuous change and in an in-
sepsrsbl- connection with specific conditions. It discloses the essence of

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

creative thinking of military personnel. the capabilities and ways for scion-A
tific foresight of military events, and the relationship between the creative
thought of people and coeputer technology which is used in military affairs.

The role of Marxist-Leniniat methodology in the correct evaluation of bourgeois
military science and disclosing its socio-political essence and reactionary
role is great. To know: the probable enemy means knowing not only hie weapons.
equipment. presumed methods for the initiation end conduct of war. strategy.
and tactics. but also the methodological bases for the cognition end practical
activity of hie military personnel.

SECTION II. THE BASIC P3031.“ 0? P1111080?!” AND HENRY-SCIENTIFIC OOGNITION

The basic problem of philosophy as an ideology and methodology of cognition

is the problem of the relation of consciousness to being and of thought to
matter. Its first aspect consists of determining which is primary-ache spirit
or nature. matter or consciousness. Haterialietic philosophy recognizes matter
and being as primary and. as secondary, consciousness as the result of the
influence of the objectively existing external world on a subject. Idealism
accepts as primary the ides and consciousness. considering them as the only
reliable reality.

Following this. a materialistic solution of a basic problem of philosophy by
Herxism-beniniem is the initial methodological precondition for explaining
the eateriel bases for the outbreak of war, the methods for its conduct, the
objective nature of the regular laws for their development, and the disclosure
of the relationship of material and spiritual as well as objective and sub-
Jective factors in the development of military theory, in the accomplishment
of practical tasks of the combat and political training of the troops, and in
making a decision in the course of combat operations.

The experience of military organisational deveIOpment shows that realization
of the methodological function for a materialistic solution of a basic problem
in philosophy in military-scientific cognition is a task which is not only
important but extremely complex. This is explained by the fact that in the
processes of war the material and spiritual factors do not exist in isolation.
in pure form. but are combined with each other in the most varied manner.
Furthermore. the ties between then in military activity are extremely flexible
and have neny levels and aspects and they may be manifested differently de-
pending on the specific circumstances. At the same time, only the consistent
development of materialism in military-scientific cognition gives military
personnel the capability not to permit subjectivism in the solution of
theoretical and practical problems, in dirty-ting the training of the troops.
and in controlling them in battle.

2].
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

\

SECTION III. m DIALBCTICAL PM!!! 01“ MILITARY-8613111316 COGNITION

The path to truth is complex and unique in its specific manifestation. The
development of military theory and the improvement of cognitive capabilities
of con-lander: and staff officers are also occurring in their special ways.
Although many reasons. conditions. and circumstances lie at the basis of
these processes, the main one is military practice. Practical military
activity comprises the basis and main goal of military-scientific cognition,
steps forth as the criterion of truth in scientific knowledge, and serves as
a true index of its effectiveness. Therefore. it is necessary to begin the
dialectical path of military-scientific cognition with a disclosure of the
content of military practice and an explanation of its special features and
the effect of various types on the development of military science. the im-
provement of military personnel‘s cognitive capabilities, and the molding of
methods for troop control in peacetime and in battle.

The reflection of the real processes of war and the preparation of the country
and the Armed Forces for it is the dialectical unity of sensual and rational
cognition. 0n the basis of live contemplation, the conander obtains data

on the external phenomena of battle, the colbat situation. and the actions of
the troops. Abstract thought provides the opportunity to disclose the essence
of these heterogeneous processes and to establish the regular laws which form
their basis. To make practical decisions. it is necessary to have knowledge
of the regular laws of battle as well as of specific data on the situation
which has actually developed in the course of it and the condition of friendly
and enemy subunits. The special features of combat situations and the con-
ditions in which the development of military theory occurs determine certain
specific features of sensual cognition and abstract thought of military
personnel.

The imediate goal of military-scientific cognition consists of obtaining
objectively true knowledge which is necessary for the success of practical
military activity. Truth itself is the dialectical unity of the absolute and
the relative. The specific nature of military science as knowledge about
future war. just as knowledge of a comoat situation, determines a certain
complexity in obtaining the objective truth and the special features of the
relationship between relative and absolute elements in it.

The dialectical path of military-scientific cognition reflects not only the
general regular laws of the cognitive process, but also the specific nature
of their manifestation in the development of military knowledge. It is
inherent to the cognitive activity of military personnel at all stages of the
development of military affairs.

Under contemporary conditions. this process has become considerably more com-
plicated and acquired new, specific features. The significance of theoretical
thinking of military personnel has increased and the receipt of empirical
material which predetermines the development of military-scientific knowledge
has become more difficult. The revolution in military affairs caused the
necessity for the development of fundamentally new theoretical views and

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concepts, the truth of which it ie difficult to check on the heels of peace-
tine military practice. All this required a further iaproveaent in the criteria
of truth in military theory. The explanation of the special features in the
dialectica of developaent of aonteaporery military-scientific knowledge ie a
necessary condition for increaaing the effectiveness of ailitary-ecientific
studies and the adoption of well-grounded decisions in the course of practical
ailitary activity.

SECTION IV. 1'!!! METHODOLOGICAL FUNCTION OF DIALBC'I'ICS IN HILﬂARY-SCIMIPIO
COONITION

Dialectical uteriaiisa is the teaching about the general tie and intercendi-
tionelity of the phenoeena of reality; the neat coaplete and profound teaching
of developaent which is devoid of of bias: teaching about the relativity of
huean knowledge which gives us the reflection of perpetually developing aettert
and the science of the universal laws of the amount and develop-ant of nature.
human society. and thought. Neither a coneietent materialistic understanding
of nature and society. nor logic as a teaching about thought which greepe ob-
jective truth. nor a scientific theory of cognition ere poeeible without
dialectics. F. Engels called dialectice our best tool of labor. Under new
material conditions. V. l. Lenin characterized it as the "living soul“ of
rxiua.

Dielectice haa universal, general significance. but its concrete unifeatation
depends on the specific nature of one or another field of objective reality.

In pointing out the characteristic futures of the dialectica and logic of
"Capital" by K. Marx. V. l. Lenin stressed that "the dialectica of a bourgeois
society ia only a special case of dialectice for Ham". when P. zngela wrote
his notes on the dialectice of nature. he had in aind not the special dialectice
of nature but naaely the specific feature of the dialectice of develop-ant of
natural processes. The special feeturee in the aenifestation of dialectica in
one field or another of objective reality aleo determine the specific nature

of its employ-eat in the process of cognition.

The specific features of war also determine a nutter of peculiarities which
characterize the dialectice of its ties and relations. functioning. and de-
velopacnt. Ve can speak coapletely about the dialectica of war as a special
case of dialectics. ‘lhis epecific nature of the dialectics of war also caueee
the special features of its cognition in a theoretical plane as well as in

the course of accoaplishing practical taalta.

Dialectical analysis of the processes of war always played an iaportant role
in the develop-cat of unitary-scientific knowledge but it is eepecially
necesuary new when old theories are collapsing under the influence of scien-
tific and technical progress. a decisive reevaluation of iteas of iaportance
is taking place. and a requirement for aeerches for new unitary-theoretical
concepts is felt with special acutenees in ailitary art. The aucceaaful

 

.Lenin. V. 1.. "Polnoye sobraniye eochineniy.‘ Vol 29. p 318.

23
see omcm. use oxur
FOR OI’PICIAI. USE ONLY

accomplishment of these tasks is impossible without the nestsry of dialectical
materialiss by military personnel and their ability to employ it in the «coop-
lishment of theoretical and practical. tasks.

‘lhe nnstery of dialectical materialism by military personnel and development

of the ability to employ it in the course of cognitive and practical military
activity is a single. inseparably interconnected process. To think dialectical-
ly means thinking in accordance with the laws of objective reality. Such'think-
ing can he developed in the process of cognition and practi" by the trial and
error method. The purpose of the conscious mastery of dialectics here also
consists of reducing this path and forning the logic of the thinking process

which permits avoiding errors in the accomplishment of theoretical and prac-
tical tasks.

The accomplishment of this task is eepociably necessary at military affeirs'
contemporary stage of dovelopnent. This is determined by the increase in
the interconnection of all aspects of war. the expansion of its interaction
with all forms of society's life. and the rapid qualitative changes which are
occurring in the developeent of the material and technical means of war.
Under these conditions. only scientific dialectical thought provides the op-
portunity to become oriented in a situation quickly. to perceive what is new
in good tins. to discover trends in development. to foresee the course of
forthcoeing events. and to introduce the achievements of military science
effectively into the practice of training the Armed Porces.

SECTION V. toms AND mos 0? 03mm 0? unnam-scxmxnc mecca

Science moves in a constant contradiction between an inexhaustible wealth of
properties. ties. and relations of the object which it studies and the degree
of their reproduction in the system of theoretical knowledge. At the contem-

porary stage of society's development. military science is one of the most
mobile sciences. This feature is caused not only by the extreme variety of

ties end relations of the military reality reflected in it. but also by the
rapid rates of its development in connection with the dynamic reproduction
of the material and technical means of war.

The development and improvement of military-scientific knowledge and military
theory are accomplished in the course of scientific research activity of
military personnel. The increase in the role of military science and military-
theoretical knowledge with necessity requires an increase in the effectiveness
of scientific investigations and the most rapid introduction of their results
into the practice of the Armed forces.

As regards its content. at the contemporary stage of development of military
affairs military-scientific study is one of the most complex types of creative
activity. Handatory conditions for its success are a scientific world outlook.
Marxist-uninist methodology. creative ability. intuition. dialectical flexi-
bility in the thinking of military personnel. and their profound knowledge of
military science and the prospects for the development of military affairs.

at
roe ortxcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

‘l‘he devalopeent of science is a creative process. its enrichment with new
knowledge which never arises suddenly or. what is more. in coepleted fore.
'l‘he receipt of new knovledga is not a sieultaneoua act. It is a couples
process which has a certain logical sequence corresponding to the progressive
nature of the develop-ant in the force of scientific knowledge. In turn.
each of then also has its own logic of develop-ant. The logic of scientific
investigation is a logical sequence of research activity. the observance of
which should ensure the most effective solution of a scientific problem.

The forms for the establish-ant of new knowledge are: scientific problee.
scientific fact. hypothesis. and theory. ‘l'heir creative development and en-
richsent also detareine the logical sequence of the process for military-
sciantific study: definition and formulation of the unitary-scientific prob-
len; discovery of the facts of military reality. their explanation and gener-
alisation; foreulation and substantiation of a military-scientific hypothesis;
construction of a military theory and detenination of ways for its practical

realization. The observance of this sequence attaches harsony and purposeful-
nose to research activity.

Research activity requires the employaent of not only the general dialectical-
materialistic method. but also special general-scientific methods to obtain
and accumulate empirical material. its theoretical generalization. and the use
of special oethods which are deter-ined by the specific nature of eilitary
science's development.

Military personnel's knuledge of the logical sequence of research activity
and the eastery of methods of scientific investigation are one of the most
important prerequisites for the successful davelopeent of military science.

CONCLUSION

A considerable coeplicetion of the process of unitary-scientific cognition

and the develop-cut and improvement of military theory is presently taking
place. Military theory as the basis of possible colbat activity can fulfill
its predestination if it reflects correctly the objective regular laws of war
and discloses the trends in the develop-eat of military affairs. Objective
knowledge of military processes in the course of ailitary operations is also

a nest inportant prerequisite for the conander's adoption of option- decisions.

The acceleration of rates of development of military-scientific knowledge, the
increase in the significance of the solution of basic and applied problems of
military science. and the specific nature of the correlation between uilitary
theory and practice with necessity require not only further improve-en: of the
traditional eethoda of military-scientific research, but alao the development
of new ones whose eaploynent would provide the opportunity to achieve the
greatest results with the least expenditures of teen. cquipnent, and tine.
Success in the accomplish-cot of this task depends greatly on the methodologi-
cal arsenal of the military personnel.

25
son orvxcm. use oxu
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

Analysis of the asthodology of nilitary-acientific cognition and its signi-
ficance in the developaent of Iilitary scientific knowledge shows the neces-
sity for a further elaboration of aethodological probleaa in ailitary science
on the basis of the conteaporary achievesents of Hsrxiat-Leninist philosophy
and the level of unitary-scientific knowledge with consideration of the
specific nature of their inprovasent.

The study conducted by the authors provided the opportunity not only to set
forth the content of the bases of nethodology for unitary-scientific cogni-
tion. but also to disclose thone problens the solution of which will con-
tribute to an increase in the effectiveness of the cognitive activity of
generals and officers.

The problsns which were put forward by the investigators in the course of
solving various scientific tasks are not sonething external in relation to
the work which they acconpliahed. The value of an investieativa work is da-
ternined not only by the problens which are solved in it. but also by the
degree to which it directs scientific investigation toward the solution of
new problems. the party teaches us constantly to see unresolved problens end
to concentrate our attention on their disclosure and elaboration.

The increase in the significance of research activity by nilitary personnel
and its continuous coaplication require a coaprehensive analysis of the
process of military-scientific research in its coaplete fornnfron the defini-
tion of the scientific problen to the introduction of the results of its solu-
tion into the practice of the troops' conbat training and the increase in
their conbat readiness.

Great experience in scientific research work has now been eccmletad. There-
fore. an urgent necessity exists for its generalization and propagation. The
successful accoeplishaent of this task will be furthered by the elaboration
of special aathodological problems in scientific research which reflect the
special features of the contemporary stage of unitary-scientific knowledge.

The conversion of ailitary science into a basic science signifies that one of
the nost isportant directions in unitary-scientific study is the analysis of
the basic laws of war, disclosure of their aechanisa for operation. and the
revealing of the ferns for their manifestation in various types of contenporary
were. Vor this. there is a require-ant for the thorough working out of such
nethodological problens as the correlation of the objective laws of war and
the laws of military science. the essence of the nechanis- for the operation
of a law. the effect of the require-ents of the objective laws of war on the
practical activity of the Arled Forces. and so forth.

The conbination of the basic and applied levels of knowledge in the content

of military science engenders a nunber of new nethodological problens such as
establishing the difference in the cathode for obtaining the- and the direction
of theoretical knowledge's influence on applied eleborstions.

26
FOR orrxcm. use osu
POR OPPICIAL US! ONLY -

The increase in the significance of foresight in the developsent of area-ants
and the sethods of waging war is causing the necessity for e further isprove-
cent in the sethods for forecasting. the disclosure of the correlation of
quentitetive and qualitative analysis in the forecasting process. and the
establishesnt of cepabilities to forecast the future.

The degree of effectiveness of silitary-scisntific studies depends greatly
on the creative cspsbilities of the research personnel. Consequently, the
clarification of the secheniss for creative scientific activity and ways for
the solding of the creative thought of generals and officers is one of the
nest isportant ssthodological probless requiring solution.

The control of troops in battle requires that cossanders and stsff officers
have specific cognitive capabilities. This circuestance detereines the neces-
sity for the working out of two inseparably interconnected sethodological
problees: the thinking logic of the con-ander in the course of asking an
estieete of the situation end saking n decision: and the psychology of the
thinking process in a dangerous end suddenly changing situation.

The elaboration of e nethodelogy of silitsry-seientiflc cognition soy hsve e
substantial effect on increasing tho effectiveness of reseerch ectivity only
in the case where uilitary personnel are mastering it. It should be said
that considersble work has been eceosplished in this direction. especially
recently. More works on various probless in the logic end sethodology of
eilitery-scientific cognition have begun to be published on the psges of our
nilitary press.

It would be desirable to devote lore attention to this question. This pertains
especially to the necessity for publishing works on increasing the effective-
ness of eilitary science and the results of uilitary-scientific studies. end

to the broad exchange of work experience in this direction. The study of the
logic and nethodolegy of scientific cognition end the Isthods for the sccoup-
lishsent of research task: lust becose a cosponent part of higher Iilitsry
education.

The isproveeent of the systee for training and indoctrinating lilitsry personnel
is now being accomplished in the direction of strengthening the research and
creative eleeent and excluding the solding of etereetyped. unoriginal thinking.
Training is not only end not so ouch the neuorizing of ready knowledge ss it

is on independent apprnsch to the essi-ilation of the material being studied.
Training is. first of ell. the Iolding of creative thought on the besis of
knowledge which hes been obtained. To teach scans to give kncwledge end to
develop the trainees ability for its ieproveesnt as well as to shape the
investigstor's skills.

The socialist nature of our systee end the Arsed forces. the leading role of
the CPSU. a disleeticel-Isterislistic world outlook, and s scientific

27
FOR OFFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL 0!! ONLY

uthodology no crating all nocuury precondition. for the uuccouful
«co-9mm: of nuke tn unitary-scientific cognition and for Lacun-
1ns the “(acumen of unitary science u 0011 as ch. quality of unitary-
cctcnuuc uudlu.

COPYRIM: Voyontulu . 1977

6367
680: 1801

28
m orncm. us: oxu
M OFFICIAL I’ll ONLY

300K "80!!!” am 0"“?st 11‘ GREAT rAnwnc VA]!

Moscow Amsxm OWN“ in main 1977, pp 1. 2. 235. 233-236. 3-3. 252
[look edited by Any Gen A. l. desiyevskiy]

[Bxcerptsl Title Pegs:

ll'itle: mm OPBIIA‘I'SII (Any Operetiens. Pueplss iron the

leperience of the Great Petriotic Her)
Author: Arny Generel A. I. ludtiyevekiy. editor

Publisher: Voyennoye isdstel'stvo Ministerstve 0horony 988!
Plece end yesr of publicstion: Moscov 1977

Signed to Press nets: 22 August 1977
hunter of Copies Published: 20.000
Nader of Psges: 25$

lnfonetion on Authors:

Authors: Lieutensnt Genersl 0. It. Slepsnkov: Colonels: V. V. Chervonoheh.
0. I. Gerbut. I. A. Kiselev, N. N. Losinov. Ye. A. lt‘yutgin. V. I. Levykh.
Yu. V. Uswich. H. c. Cushchin. 2. Ye. M. I. l. Pivovsr. V. 0. Antipin.
A. H. Seesaw. P. 0. Sverdlov, Ye. A. lrynshilth. R. H. Portuul'skiy. I. P.
Prolov. Ye. P. Hilenin, A. H. Supmenlto. V. s. Kirilenko [deemed]. P. P.
Lopetin. 0. V. Luuin. A. A. lonenov. V. P. "trebrov. V. I. Sterostin. V. I.
Chernousov; Csptsin lst Rsnk V. I. Pchslkin; Lieutensnt Colonels: P. P.
Ivenov, V. l. Ahstorov. A. A. Popov. II. N. lo-nichev.

Annotstion

The book presents the nest instructive examples which disclose the coﬁet
conposition. operstionel fonstion. selection of the direction for the min
effort. eaploylent of the coﬁet ens. support of colbet operstions. end
other ilportsnt questions concerning offensive operstions of «dined-ens
enies.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFPIOIAL 088 ONLY

Bee-pies of defensive operations are used to examine their duration. sathods
for essuaing the defensive. structure of the defense. organisation of anti-
tenk defense. asneuver. and other elesents of the preparation and conduct of
operations.

The book is intended for offioers end generals as well as for students end
cadets in higher nilitary educational institutions.

TIBLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Pomona......... 3
Chapter 1.
OFFERSIVB OPBiAIION ................................................ 6

1. Codaat coaposition of the combined-eras srsy ..............
2. Scope of eray offensive operations ........................
3. Bork sethods of the ersv coaaander end staff when asking
the decision for an operation end assigning nissions to
th. troop. 0.000600I...0.00.00.60.0000IOOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOIO 11
6. Selection of the direction for the ssin effort and the
”.1318 of m “a "at”: 0.00.00.00.00...0000000000.... 16
S. Organisation of cooperation and control ................... 23
6. Operational foraation of the eray ......................... 30
7. Planning the eeployesnt of the coahet eras and aviation
in th. offmtv. 0..00.00.6000...00060.DOIOOOIOOOOOIOOOOOD. 33
8. Preparation of the departure area for the attack and the
procedure for its occupation by the troops as
9. Breakthrough of the eneay's prepared defense .............. 69
10. cal-itaent end coabat of the second echelons end the army
”btl. stow. U.t0.0.0.0.00000.00D.OODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO. 61
11. Repelling eneay counterettacke ............................ 71
12. Conpletion of the eneay's destruction by the 13th Arly in
the course of the Chernigovsko-Pripyet' operation of 26
MIMI ‘ 3° SOPOOIOOI’ 19‘: OseesooeIsaoossesseesaeseessoeee 79
13. “It.“‘t of th. mm eeeeeeoeeeeaee oeeeeesesaeeeeeeeeeseeo O3
1‘. m.t‘n‘ ”usmt .00.0..00.0.0...OOOOOOOCOJOOIDOOOIOOOOO. 89
15. Assault crossing of water obstacles ....................... 93
16. Forward detach-ants in offensive operations ............... 98
17. aaployaant of airborne assaults ........................... 103
18. Sea assault landing operations ............................ 105
19. Coahst operations at night ................................ 111
20. The capture of large cities ............................... 116
210 Att‘ck in ‘h. ”m‘.m 000.......0000OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 122
22. Attack along a seacoast ................................... 13S
23. lhploylent of stoke. Sole prohleas in operationel
camouflage and conceal-en: ................................ 139

0‘.

. 30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chepter 2

m OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

”mam 0PM?!“ 888008080800080.0008...80.8COOOCOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIIIO

2‘.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.

32.
33.

3d.

35o
36.

37.
38.
39.
£0.

Chepter 3

Colbet conpoeition of the my end indicetore of e defeneive

0”“8200 eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeee

Aeeulption of the defenee by the codined-erle erly .........
Structure of the erny'e deienee .............................
orm‘.“1m o! th. “C‘tm d.‘.”. OOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOO
Hueing of non end equipnent on direction of expected eneey

hiove in erny defeneive operetione ..........................
Fighting the eneuy on the epproechen to the defenee .........
Conduct of the counterpreperetion ...........................
Strike o! eneey troope in front of the forverd edge oi the

battl. .r“ [m] 88000000800.08080.000000...80000000000000.
Fighting for the uin (firet) defeneive tone ................
heneuver of nen end equip-eat in the tecticei depth of the

(102.11.. eeoeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

Shifting the nein effort to e new direction in the oouree

0‘ .n o”:.t1°n 8.888.080.008.0000...OOOOOOOOOOOIQOOOOOOOOOOO
10.036231“. com:.r.:t.cu 0.080.00.0.00IOOOOOOUOOOOOCOOOIOOOOO
Any colhet operetione in encircleuent end on hreeking out

0‘ .nc‘rclm: 0800.00.08.00...'OOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOIOOOOO
Defenee of e lerge city .....................................
m‘.n.. of v.t.r ob.c.c1“ OOOOOOOOOICOOOIOOOOOOI.OOOOOIOOOO.
9.th in th. ”m‘.m. 000.800.000.888.0IIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
Defenee in the Poler Region .................................

Rmmm OF Poms eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeleeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

61.

42.
‘3.
‘6.

Redoploynent of the 28th Any tron the Breet region to the
Horienpol' region ...........................................
Redeploynent of the 56th Army in prepering the Berlin operetion
Redoploynentof the28thAruy in the Zegen eree ...............
Redeploynent of the 8th Aruy of the Leningred front from
Orenienbeul to Leningrad ....................................

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

156

136
159
166
170

173
176
178

181
184

188

193
197

204
213
221
224
228

236
240
2“
267
I01! OPIIcIM. “8! ONLY

POEM”

The exploit of the Soviet people in the Greet Petriotic Her ie i-ortel. It
livoe end will live forever in the greteful neeory of the peoplee vho were
eeved iron the brown plesue of feeciel.

The Soviet people, who loet eore then 20 nillion livee of their citieene in
the etrugglo euinet feeciee. know whet ver ie end the innueereble dieeetere
vhich it Mine to people. Nor cen our people forget thet eiter the end of
world Her ll the iiree of ver repeatedly hleeed in Aeie, in Airice. in the
Neer Beet. end in Letin Aeerice. The perty end the Soviet governlent con-
etently reneeber thie end ere eteedily implementing the heheete of V. I.
Lenin concerning the etrengthening oi the coebet eight of our eotherlend‘e
Areed torcee. ”Ito one ehould heve eny doubt." the Generel Secretery o! the
Centrel Couittee CPS", Conrede L. I. Brezhnev. pointed out er the 25th
Congress of the CPSU. ”thet our perty will do everything eo thet henceforth.
too. the alorioue Arned Porcee of the Soviet Union will heve ell the neceeeery
eeene tor the eccmlieheent of their ieportent eieeion-to be the enerdien
oi the Soviet people‘e peeceful lehor end the hnlwerlt oi nnivereel peece."

In the yeere of world War II, the erniee of the werring etetee received

coneiderehle experience in the conduct of operetione. ceepeigne. end the ver
ee e whole. Bepecielly greet experience wee eccmleted in the yeere of the
Greet Patriotic Her by the Soviet Armed Porcee which conducted their open-
tione under the eoet veried conditione. Heny of the operetione which were

conducted hecene clneeice of nilitery ert end. deepite the tect thet eore
then 30 yeere heve peeeed eince the end of the wer end eilitery ert hee arched
fer forwerd. the experience of world "er I! even now ie one of the noet il-
portent eourcee for elehoretin; contenporery nilitery theory end for treinins
Iilitery pereonnel. Thie experience euet he need: one euet loern to delve
into the depth of the phenoeene which occur in eilitery effeire end eehe hold-
er nee oi the conclueione of ecience in hie ectivity. In order to eqloy the
experience of the Greet Petriotic Her in the eccolplieheent oi precticel teehe
now. it ie neceeeery to eeke en eepecinlly ettentive end cereful eelection

r——_-—
Brezhnev. . . ”Orchet ‘l'eentrel'nogo Koeitete ms i ocherednyye eedechi

ertii v ohleeti vnutrenn i vneehn litiki” Re rt of he Centrel Coe-
Plitcoe CPS!) and the lenedgte Tesla 3‘5 Re Perry in the Piels of Doneetic

end Foreign Policy]. Moscow, Politiedet. 1976, p 100.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of what has not lost specific value for the nilitery art of our time and
persits us to extract lessons for the future.

Our victory is natural because the actions of the Arned Forces under the
leadership of the party vars supported by the entire oconosic night of the
Soviet etsta. It was a victory of the Soviet econo-ic systee as a whole and
the var scone-y in particular. The Soviet systee provided the best foras for

organising the econosy not only for the eccoeplishnent of national econoeic
tasks in peecetiee, hut elso for the utilisation of all the econoeic capa-

bilities of the country in the period of var. Overcoeing the colossal diffi-
culties of the var years. the Soviet econon supplied the front with every-
thing necessary for victory-weapons end emnition. food and uniform.

During the years of the 0rest Patriotic liar. Soviet industry produced 137,000
airplanes. 106.000 tanks end self-propelled artillery norms. and 688.000 guns

«sore of these types of vespoas end count equip-ant then was produced in
fascist 0erseny.*

The Soviet scone-y not only node up the code: losses in equipment and weapons.
but it alto steadily increased the rates of output of silitery production. It

ves priaarily this which ensured the success in the operations of the Soviet
Amy in the years of the Greet Patriotic Her.

In our tine. when the constant efforts of the Conunist Party end the Soviet
state are directed toward the strengthening of poaco, toward curbing the ares
race. and toward strengthening positions of socialists end of ell forces which
are stepping forth for the freedoe of peoples and social progress end for

the mutually advantageous collaboration of all states. we should not forget.

as use pointed out by seaber of the Politburo of the Central Couittee CPSU

and Minister of Defense of the USSR, Marshal of the Soviet Union 0. P. Ustinov.
in hie congratulations to the Military Academy ineni H. V. Prunes in comection
with the graduation of its students. that the reactionary circles of the
capitalist countries are trying to discredit the policy of peaceful coexistence,
are continuing the arms race. end are interfering in the internal affairs of
other peoples. This obliges the socialist countries to keep their arued

forces in constant combat readiness.

The goal of the work. "Arseyskiye operatsii,” is to show by means of specific
examples what is most instructive in the organization and conduct of any
operations in the lest war.

The first chapter of the vork presents exasples fro. the offemive operations
of the arsies which operated in the direction of front sain efforts. As a
rule. these sales had a considerably greater reinforcement by artillery and
especially by tank and nechanised large units. The preparation of offensive
operations discloses the content. procedure. and work netth of only co-snders

.See: "lstoriye Ko-unisticheskoy portii Sovatskogo Soyuee" [history of the
Coo-twist Party of the Soviet Union]. Vol 5. hook I. p 6“.

33
roe omcm. use om'
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

and their staffs and the chiefs of the cosbet ores and special troops in the
setter of organizing the cooperation of the cosbat arse. The art of organis-
ing control and cooperation is shown prisarily in its rigid centralisation

which is cosbined with the initiative and creativity of subordinate couanders
and staffs. concrete definition of sissions, their persistent accosplishsant.

and bringing the direct-leadership of the army commander (cousndar) and
chiefs at all echelons as well as their staffs closer to the troops.

‘lhe second chapter sets forth in detail the defense of our troops under various
conditions against superior enesy tank and sotoritad infantry forces. Its
basis was the fire of artillery and tanks in codinstion with engineer obstac-
lee, the stubborn retention of occupied positions. and the broad saneuver of
son and equipsent to threatened directions. Bnasy tanks were the sost dan-
gerous targets on the battlefield. The difficulty in combating thas. self-
propolled artillery. infantry cosbat vehicles. arsored personnel carriers.

and other arsored targets is increasing isseasurebly under contesporary con-
ditions. Combating enesy arsored objects will be difficult and strained and
will be one of the nest isportant sissions of the troops in a battle and opera-
tion. All large units and units of the Soviet Arsy sust be ready for it.

The third chapter is devoted to the redeploysont of troops.

Concluding Paragraph

By now, decodes are separating us fros that historic day of 8 May 1963 when.
in the Berlin suburb of Karlshorst. representatives of the Carson high cos-
sand signed the act of unconditional surrender of fascist Ger-sny's arsed
forces. During this tise. trasendous socio-political and econosic shifts
occurred in the world which changed the disposition of forces in the interna-
tional arena in s fundasentsl ssnner. Postwar scientific and technical pro-
gress changed the face of the arsed forces of the world's ssin states. the
changes in the scans for the conduct of war entailed just as considerable
changes in the organisation of arsed forces and in the sethods and forss for
the conduct of arsed conflict. At the sass tine, contesporsry silitery art
cannot develop without considering the experience of the last war. The con-
tesporery propositions of Soviet silitery science in the field of the arsed
forces' organizationsl developsent. the develop-ant of silitsry theory. and
the training and indoctrination of the troops depend to a considerable degree
on the richest historic experience. The conbat experience which was acquired
by the Soviet Arsed Forces in world Her I! is the inestiseble wealth of our
people. Its profound study will contribute to the developsent of the silitary
horizon of the Soviet Arsy's officers and generals.

COPYRIGHT: Voyanisdat. 1977

6367
080: 1801 m

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY