FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

JPRS L/10485

29 Apﬁl1982

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 5 / 8 2)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language

sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]

or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was

processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

comma? LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNBRSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FUR UI'I'ILIAI. Ubl'. URL!

Jpns L/l
29 April

USSR REPORT
MILITARY AFFAIRS

@000 5/82)

CONTENTS

MILITARY SCIENCE, THEORY, STRATEXIY

Development of Fighter Aviation Tactics
(AW IM‘IM’ 1%1)O..0000.000000UOOOOCOOOOOOI.

GROUND FORCES

Book kcerpts: Artillery Sergeant' s Handbook
(SPRAVOCHNIK SHZHAHTA ARTILLKRH, 1981) .. .............

- a - _ [III - ussa -‘
DEVEIOPHENT 0F FIGHTER AVIATION TACTICS

Moscow ATAKUYUT ISTREBITELI in Russian 1981 (signed to press 3 Jul 81) pp 1-2 190-
191, 3-1;, 5-7, 8; 25-28; 119; 73-75; 96-97, 109; 110-111, 126-127; 128-129, I”:
lbs-11:6, 167-168; 169, 185-189

[Annotation, table of contents, foreword, introduction and excerpts from chapters
1-9 as indicated from the book "Fighter Planes Attack", by A. B. Krasnov, Voyeu-
izdet, 20,000 copies, 191 pages]

I

[Excerpts] This book provides an overview of the development of fighter aviation
tactics during Horld Her II and the post-war period in terms of an assessment of
foreign military resources. Included is an examination of particular aspects of
the work of aircraft commanders in planning for aerial combat as well as control-
ling it from the ground and in the air.

The book is intended for flight and command personnel of the air force. It might
also be recommended for unit commanders and staff officers of other branches of
the armed forces as an aid in organizing combat operations utilizing air support,
and also for students and cadets at military academies.

Contents
Foreword 3
Introduction 5
Chapter 1. Tactics and Combat Missions 8
1. Providing air support for ground forces --
2. Safeguarding other airborne operations 18
Chapter 2. Tactics and Technology 25
l. The background of technological capabilities --
2. Tactical and technological paradoxes 38
3. Areas of tactical and technological interaction h3
Chapter 3. Countertactics h?
1. Tactics of assault aircraft during PVO[air defense] penetration --
2. Looking into the future 63
1

INJRTOFIHCIAI.IISEICMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 1:. The Ability to Foresee 73
1. When unexpected conditions are encountered --
2. Combat simulation--a creative process 85
3. Preparation for group aerial combat 89
Chapter 5. Complete Utilisation of Weaponry Capabilities 96
1. The commander, planning and weaponry --
2. The pilot, aerial combat and weaponry 101
3. New conditions--new requirements 105
Chapter 6. The Importance of Minutes and Seconds to a Commander 110
1. In the airfield control tower ---
2. In aerial combat 117
3. Again, new conditions and new requirements 12h
Chapter 7. The Element of Surprise--the Mother of Victory 128
1. First to make visual contact ---
2. The tactical aspect of surprise 129
3. The means to achieving the element of surprise 133
h. Testing vulnerability to surprise 139
Chapter 8. suum Control of Aerial Combat ms
1. The use of modern weaponry--a collective skill ---
2. The commander's creative skills and automation 151
3. The commander's place--in the control tower or in the air? 161
Chapter 9. Achieving Victory in Combat 169
l. A sense of the new and the burden of habit -—-
2. The right to take risks and initiatives in combat 171
3. Difficult in training--easy in combat 178
h. Procedural contrasts 181
5. Fighter aviation tactics--the scientific breakthrough 185
Foreword

Thanks largely to the tireless efforts of the Communist Party and the Soviet people,
Soviet fighter aviation has been equipped with modern supersonic jet aircraft. In
the hands of ideologically hardened and socialistically dedicated flyers, they are

a formidable weapon in combat against any airborne adversary. 0f the many factors
which enter into the combat effectiveness of a fighter pilot, one of the most im-

portant is his tactical skill. Actually, this is so because the decisive role in
the achievement of victory in combat belongs to tactics.

Professor A. B. Krasnov, doctor of military science, a veteran of the Great Patri-
otic War, and a former pilot himself, recounts in his book the course of develop-
ment of fighter aviation tactics.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tics used in battle against a powerful adversary, he makes use of parallels and
contrasts, he uncovers the unimng element which, in the final accounting, makes
possible his transition from incomplete analyses to broad generalizations and su-
perbly compelling conclusions. And, most important of all, he ivites the reader
to think. The author does not offer hastily conceived responses to complex tactic-
al problems, he thinks along with the reader-making him a participant in searches
for optimal solutions and concentrating his attention on as-yet unsolved problems.

These nine chapters are, in their own way, nine self-contained problems in tactics.

The first three chapters of the book are an original outline of the development of
fighter aviation tactics since World War II. The rich, thoughtfully selected, and
extensive factual material from the history of domestic and foreign aviation traces
changes in fighter missions, orders of battle and tactical measures in terms of the
development of aviation technology, and shows how the art of aerial combat has im-
proved. The author successfully correlates experience gained from the past to the
reality of modern conditions, thereby providing a deeper understanding of the de-
gree of consistency underlying the development of tactics.

In succeeding chapters, the author examines means for improving the tactical skill
of fighter pilots. With great lucidity, the author discourses on the origins of
foresight on the part of a comander, alternate planning for aerial combat, the art
of the use of weaponry, the intelligent use of time factors, the element of sur-
prise, and on other integral components of tactical skill. A major role is assigned
to the business of controlling fighter combat from the ground and in the air.

should prove useful for flyer, unit comander, and staff officer, as well as for the
youth who wishes to lmow more about aviation. It is highly instructive, thought-
provoking, analytical, and makes independent conclusions. In this, its value is

Marshal of Aviation, I. Pstygo

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction

A large group of bombers under fighter escort was heading for its assault objective.
It had been detected by ground spotting posts only upon its approach to a base of
enemy fighters, which were quickly dispatched to intercept it. Gaining altitude
rapidly, the fighters banked into the sun, then swooped onto the enemy. From the
airfield below, one could readily observe part of them engage the bomber escort,
while the rest attacked the bombers. The air battle had begtm...

This particular scene could be observed quite frequently at the beginning of the
Second World War. The air speed of homers of that era did not exceed 300 km/hr.
They advanced on their objectives in massive groups employing close-order flight
formations, preferably at great altitudes, where their detection and recognition
from the ground were difficult. In addition to tight flight fonnations(reduced
vulnerability to fighters), bombers employed defensive armament and evasive man-
euvers to repulse fighter attacks. Combat was carried out with mutual visual con-
tact between tha aircraft of opposing sides. At night, fighters were able to at-
tack only those aircraft which could be illuminated by searchlights from the ground.

The nature of aerial combat has changed appreciably since that time. Today, fight-
ers operate at great distances from their bases, in difficult weather conditions,
and at any time of the day; at times, they open fire and destroy an enemy without
even making visual contact with him. The control of aerial combat requires the use
of ultramodern electronic equipment. Of course, as in the past, the fighter pilot
must hone his flying skills to the point of perfection in order to repel an enemy.
However, finely honed flying skills are merely the basis for aerial combat. In the
modern era, tactical preparation plays an ever larger role in any attack.

Fighter attacks in modern warfare are extremelyr swift. A fighter pilot is alloted
mere seconds prior to entering the thick of battle. In these seconds, he must e-
valuate the situation and decide how best to proceed in combat. This involves
judgements about how to make a stealthy approach and achieve an advantage in posi-
tion for the start of an engagement, about the type of attack to employ, how to
forestall possible target maneuvers, as well as other, no less complex, tactical
problems. It is precisely for the sake of these seconds separating the pilot from
the moment at which the enemy is detected to the point of opening fire that essen-
tially all of his professional training is conducted. Each unsuccessful attack is
not only a waste of the efforts of all who participated in this training, as well as
a needless expenditure of strength and nerve by the pilot himself, but, more import-
antly, a threat that the enemy will be able to strike with impunity at fighter-
protected objectives.

This is the reason for assigning a major role to tactical preparation in the train-
ing of combat pilots, since it allows for the collective use of all knowledge and
skills obtained in the study of many different disciplines. Of course, an in-depth
mastery of tactics was not essential in the past, but its significance has now in-
creased. This fact serves to explain more than the rapid development of aviation
technology. Today, the success of any combat encounter depends in great measure on
the ability of commanders and all pilots to foresee the development of events, to
make full use of the capabilities of their weapons, and on skillful combat control.

1;
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
The science of fighter aviation tactics has developed at an especially rapid pace
in recent years. Many rigidly fixed ideas about methods of achieving victory in
air warfare are changing, and it is sometimes not easy, in comparing new develop-
ments with firmly established concepts based on past experience, to discover the

cause-and-effect relationships existing between tactics and aviation technology,
or to reconsider the usefulness of well-established tactical measures in light of

a change in aviation tactics by the other side, when neither the sum total of ex-
perience nor common sense consideration provides a clue as to how to proceed, what
to do or what not to do in order to avoid dangers and carry out the combat mission.
Such situations have occurred more than once in the history of tactics.

How has the deveopment of tactics proceeded in the past, and how is it continuing
in the present? How are problems and difficulties which arise in the course of
that development being overcome? Why did its former significance become obsolete
and lost? These questions, which are the subjects of systematic discussion in the
foreign military press, the author has attempted to answer in this book. To en-
sure that these answers are as fully comprehensive as necessary, the book addresses
a wide range of factors affecting the development of foreign fighter aviation tac-
tics, but primarily, aviation technology, aerial combatant tactics and ground PVO.
Under the influence of these and numerous other logically interconnected and con-.
stantly changing factors, new tactical measures are being developed and tactical
requirements with regard to technology are being formulated.

This book is not a duplication of previous textbooks or procedural manuals, nor is
it a code of regulations and recommendations for the science of tactics. The author
seeks to motivate the reader to ponder and reflect, to assist him in a re-evaluation
of "older" concepts in tactics, to instill the desire to search for new ideas and
arrive at independent conclusions. But, the search for answers to the problems of
tactics, like any other search, leads to understanding. For this reason, the reader
will not always find in this book unambiguous evaluations, while certain other
problems of tactics are analyzed from divergent, sometimes conflicting, points of
View.

Chapter 1. Tactics and Combat Missions

The scope of fighter aviation combat missions is broad and multifarious. Behind
each of these missions stands its own organization, its own complex of combat oper-
ations and tactical procedures.

The development of tactics employed in the execution of the most important of the
standard missions, beginning with the era of the Great Patriotic War, is examined
in the pages that follow.

Chapter 2. Tactics and Technology

1. The background of technological capabilities

In the brilliant azure of the sky spins the carousel of aerial combat. The com-
batants can see each other quite clearly, they can even distinguish heads in hel-

mets and eyes. They are struggling to extract everything they can from the tech-
nology at their command. Tracer fire flashes over the cockpits. A new group of

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aircraft enters the combat zone. Its leader dips his wings twice--this is the sig-
nal, "Attack after me"... This is the way aerial combat engagements were conducted
at the beginning of the last war. -

Today, the skies belong to missile-launching fighter-interceptors. These word com-
binations have become comaonplace for us. Pilots take off at supersonic speeds for
a predesignated target area, locate an enemy within a range of many tens of kilo-
meters and, using target tracks displayed on a radar screen to plot tactical man-
euvers, attack invisible enemy aircraft. Guided missiles destroy an anew in any
weather conditions and at any time of day. Aerial combat tactics have changed be-
yond recognition.

The developmental processes of aviation technology are ever ongoing. The replace-
ment of obsolescent aircraft, which not long before had seemed to be the height of
technological perfection, ushers in new aircraft, with even greater combat capabil-
ities. But changes in technoler necessarily lead to changes in fighter aviation
tactics. Initially, these changes may be piecemeal, barely noticeable, but they
accumulate gradually and over time supplant entrenched tactical procedures, as was
the case, for example, in the era of piston-driven aircraft. 0n the other hand,
they may take the form of a rather abrupt qualitative change. A quantum leap of
this sort occurred in the transition of fighter aviation to jet aircraft.

During the Great Patriotic Har, and even in the years preceding it, modifications
in fighter aviation tactics due to technological influences arrived relatively
slowly. Along with speed, the rate of climb and service ceiling of aircraft in-
creased, as did the power of air weaponry, but in the achievement of am substan-
tive distinctions between one technological prototype and another, years elapsed.
Thus, every five to six years, flight speed increased by an average of 100 km and
ceiling by 1000 m. For example, the I-3 fighter, which was put in service by the
Soviet Air Force in 1928, had a maximum speed of 278 km/hr and ceiling of 7200 m,
while its modification, the I-15, put in service in 1931;, possessed figures of

367 Ian/hr and 9000 m, respectively. Five years later, the I-16 fighter(fig. 5.1)
featured a speed of 1:60-1:90 Ion/hr and a ceiling of almost 10,000 m. The "Iakovlev'
and "Lavochkin" fighters(figs. 5.3 and 5.1:) n-om the era of the Great Patriotic War
operated at speeds of approximately 600 km/hr and ceilings of up to 11,000 m .

By the same token, the transition to new tactical procedures similarly took place
over the course of rather long intervals of time.

For almost 25 years, the aerial combat tactics employed by fighters had been based
on horizontal maneuvers. Only after the introduction of aircraft capable of speeds
of 500 km/hr and better, did fighters progress to combat in the vertical planes.
The transition from machine guns to canon entailed an increase in the fire power

of fighter aircraft and made possible an extension of the overall range of weaponry,
but fighter pilots, as they had before, sought to use their weapons from minimal
ranges, where the likelihood of destroying targets was greatest. Fighters contin-
ued to operate in tight combat formations, subdivisions and units, maintaining vis-
ual contact with each other and energetically maneuvering in combat. In the post-
war years, while the fighter aviation arsemzal retained a good many piston—driven

__.______
* Soviet Aircraft, Moscow, DOSAAF, 1971;

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
aircraft with speeds already reaching the vicinity of 600 km/hr, tactical measures
were for the most part outmoded. Any further increases in the speed of piston-
driven aircraft became practically impossible due to the limitations imposed by
engine weight and scale.

Only with the appearance of jet aircraft(figs. 5.5-5.8), did fighter aviation tac-
tics uniergo significant changes. The flight speed of fighter aircraft immediately
increased by 350-h00 km/hr and climb rates nearly doubled, while ceilings rose.

The history of fighter aviation had never before seen such a dramatic increase in
the capabilities of aviation technology. But scientific and technological progress
continued to bring forth ever newer advances in military technology. Foreign mili-
tary experts rank the development of supersonic fighters, radar predictors and air-
to-air guided missiles among the most important of all advances affecting the stat-
us of fighter aviation tactics in the 1950's. It is their collective opinion that
this resulted in many theoretical tactical concepts losing their importance, while
others required substantial reworking*.

Chapter 3. Countertactics

In the military sector, one witnesses the constant application of one of the funda-
mental laws of Harxist-Leninist dialectics: "development is a 'ntest of opposites".
Thus, in conformity with this law, there are two opposite, yet dialectically re-
lated contestants to be considered: air power directed against ground forces and
other objectives(let us call it assault aviation), and fighter aviation, which is
intended to protect them from air strikes. Assault aviation tactics are a very im-
portant factor affecting the development of fighter aviation tactics. In following
closely the aviation tactics against which fighter aviation is deployed, its past,
present and even its future, we can also make objective evaluations of methods used
in the development of fighter aviation tactics. A word of reservation here: we are
not interested in all tactics employed by assault aviation, but only in those which
are implemented in the fierce hostilities accompanying PVO penetration to the

strike objectives. This particular aspect of assault aviation tactics also exerts
a direct effect on fighter tactics.

Chapter h. The Ability to Fbresee
1. When unexpected conditions are encountered

"Target group, ahead and to the right... Commence attack!" The radioed instruc-
tions were heard by the flight Commander, Capt. S. Klochkov. They were followed a
short time later by commands to two other flights.

These commands were given by Lt. Col. Brusentsov as he oversaw the operations of the
control tower crew and gazed intently at the plotting board displaying the tactical

air situation. The "enemy" was employing Jamming countermeasures, making the situa-
tion in the air uncertain. The commander had no way of knowing what type of combat

flight formation the enemy aircraft were in, or which of his tactical group would

_________________
* "Interavia", 197k, no 12.

7
FOR OFFTCIAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

encounter fighters. Hhat, if any, information had his pilots to act on as they scram-
bled their flights to intercept individual targets? He was assuming that, as in
previous training excercises, the "anew" would seek to penetrate PVO defenses in
separate small groups and in individual unescorted aircraft. In that case, the pre-
determined defense plan had to be the right choice if it was to ensure successful
repulsion of the assault forces.

But then Capt. Klochkov reported:
"I see the target. Eight aircraft..."

Brusentsov's knitted brow revealed his concern. The balance of strength was clearly
not in our favor. At this moment, the noisy bustle of the control tower was inter-

rupted by a new alarming report:

"I am under attack from a pair of fighters"--transnitted the comander of the sec-
ond flight.

Lt. Col. Brusentsov moved close up to the plotting board. "Where in hell did this
pair come from?"--he wondered aloud. "And what is going on with the third flight?
Maybe it has not sighted its target, and is still continuing the search?" It was
already becoming clear: a serious miscalculation had crept into his planning.

Let us now attempt to analyze what has happened. At first glance, the actions of
the comander are above reproach. It is a fact that he did not have at his disposal
complete information about the "enemy"--he had no knowledge of his plans or tactical
strength. The "enemy"--as later became clear--intended to strike with eight air-
craft under escort of two fighter groups. It was precisely this that the Lt. Col.
was not able to foresee. In point of fact, after being apprised of the situation,
he redirected the third flight to assist the flight led by Capt. Klochkov, and
scrambled an additional flight from the airfield. The pilots subsequently attacked
the strike force and engaged the fighter escorts in combat. Nonetheless, the mo-
ment of opportunity had been lost. A well-synchronized launch into combat at the
pre—assigned line had not materialized. And most important of all--as a result,

the comnander was not able to achieve superiority in strength in order to decisive-
ly rout the "enemy".

Tnere can be no doubt that Lt. Col. Brusentsov was placed in a difficult situation
as a result of insufficient information. But it must be obvious that modern aerial
combat cannot possibly be force-fit into some sort of a priori routinized scheme.
Opposed warring sides are constantly striving to hide their intentions, to create

tional fighter forces. For this, he needed to have a deeper insight into the very
complex situation, to secure the missing information from his own or neighboring
forces(he had the time needed for last-minute target reconnaissance), and then to

piece together the fragmentary data or indirect indicators to reveal the "enemy"
plan: h-om what direction; using what forces; in what combat formations; which

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
objectives the "enemy" would strike, as well as the kind of tactical measures he
might employ. If a commander finds that he cannot obtain sufficiently reliable
data for a clear-cut analysis of the situation(and this is exactly what happened

in the situation Just described), he is then obliged to evaluate all possible
courses of action an "enemy" might take and to determine corresponding courses of
action to be taken by fighter aircraft against each of them, i. e., he must foresee
the development of events both in regard to their nature and their chronology. In
other words, combat success and the extent to which the planning behind it conforms
to a constantly variable situation depends on the ability of the comander to fore-

see events.
Chapter 5. Complete Utilization of Weaponry Capabilities
l. The commander, planning and weaponry

Tactical flight training had come to its most tension-filled moment: the ”enemy"
had begun a massive air assault. Displayed on the plotting board was a distinct,
straight target track, the tactical responsibility for which belonged to the fight—
ers of Lt. Col. Priskul'skiy. The control tower crew quickly and efficiently sup-
plied the necessary data to the comander, and when the target approached the
fighter-launch point, they scrambled to meet the "enemy". The self-assured actions
of the control tower crew, the pilots' reports, and even the brightly flashing in-
dicator lights of the control boards and instrument panels--all seemed to speak of
iminent success. But suddenly the commander was startled. He watched on the
plotting board as the target track to which the fighters had been directed abruptly
Split apart and one of the lines sharply curved away at a wide angle-~the "anchor"
group had split into two parts and one of them had changed course. Now, in order to
attack the "anew", the fighters would have to greatly increase their flight speed.
But in the situation as it now stood, the tactical range of the interceptors on
afterburners would not permit this: there simply would not be sufficient fuel for
the return trip to their home base.

Now what course of action must the commander take? He was faced with the necessity
of making an assessment of the flight capabilities of the fighters at their range
limit, and adopting a new plan of action. He took his time in deciding on this
plan. But, in fact, it portended of additional difficulties in effecting the in-
tercept.

In the meantime, the combat capabilities of the fighters allowed them to carry out
their assigned mission. But, in order to accomplish this, they had to operate at

the limit of their range, and then land, not at their own, but at another airfield.
The commander, however, had not been able to utilize those capabilities. The situ-

ation had become critical. At a subsequent point in the exercise, the chief of
staff had to intervene.

bilities of aviation technoloar. The maximal utilisation of these capabilities is
the basis for successful fulfilment of any tactical mission. It is futile to ex-
pect victory when a commander consciously avoids courses of action which require

9
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fighter operations at the upper limit of their tactical flight range, as well as
maximum possible usage of the operational ranges of on-board avionics instrumenta-
tion and weaponry. In order to adopt a sound and reliable combat operations plan,
a commander must possess--among many other qualitites—an impeccable background in
military technology. But, having possession of even the most ultramodern weaponry
comes to naught if one does not know how to manage it.

The fact that a commander who is making tactically skilled and unrestricted use of
the capabilities of his weaponry can seize victory in combat against even a techno-
logically superior opponent is widely known, and there is hardly any need to com-

ment further on the matter. The annals of history also provide ample testimony on
this account.

* *
*

Complete utilization of weaponry capabilities implies the acceptance of planning
based on technical knowledge, the skilled control of all aspects of flight--from
the simple to the complexnthe ability to deetroy an enemy in the face of formid-
able electronic and combat countermeasures, under any weather conditions and over
the entire spectrum of flight ranges, altitudes and speeds as they apply to weapon-
ry applications. Moreover, the more skillfully a comander handles weaponry him-

self, the more confidently he controls combat operations, and the better he is able
to train subordinates.

Chapter 6. The Importance of Minutes and Seconds to a Comander

1. IQ the airfield control tower

This mission, having begun like most others, seemed not to presage anything unex-
pected. When the tracks of airborne targets appeared on the plotting board and on
the tracking screens of the control tower, Lt. Col. Bocharov, directing the opera-
tions of the control tower crew, evaluated the situation and made the decision to
scramble fighters. In pairs, one after another, the aircraft were launched into
the air. Bocharov, counting off the seconds of the fighters' launch time on his
watch, smiled to himself: his pilots had beaten their normal time limits. At that
moment, even he could not appreciate just how important this specific ability was
to him--the ability to count the seconds. The vectoring of the fighters to the
targets took place in the usual sequence. But suddenly a new target appeared on the
board--in fact, it was quite close to the defensive reaction line. Apparently, it
had been traveling at a low altitude and the radar tracking stations were late in
detecting it. Judging by the rapid movement of the target tracks on the plotting

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
under the comand of Sr. Lt. Derbenyev. This pair was proceeding to intercept
another target which, however, was still at a considerable distance from the de-
marcation line. After assessing the possibility of launching other fighters in
pursuit of this target, the comander--having convinced himself of its feasibility--
immediately gave the order to the tower crew to revector the Derbenyev fighters to
the low-flying target. All targets were intercepted, and the "anew" was not suc-
cessml in carrying out the intended air strike.

It would almost seem that such a course of action would have suggested itself to
Bocharov, but behind it stands the intense mental activity demanded of a comander,
a multitude of calculations and recalculations of positions and flight conditions
affecting the fighters, and the precise control of crews in the air.

Indisputably, it is difficult for a commander in situations marked by a critical
time deficit, such as, for example, when the adversary approaches fighter defensive
lines at low altitudes and high speeds. Should the connander delay in his assess-
ment of the situation, show indecisiveness, hesitate in issuing combat orders--or
the pilots be slow in getting airborne--the result is inevitable: even the most
well-conceived combat operation may end in failure for the fighter forces.

The time element always plays a critical role in combat operations. Even in the
remote past, commanders have found themselves in conflict with time deficits. Suc-
cess on the fields of battle belonged to those military leaders who knew the value
and proper use of time. "Money is dear; a man's life-~even dearer; but time is
dearest of all"-said A. V. Suvorov. "The slightest delay provides the enemy with
the means to offer resistance, while for us it creates new obstacles" *.

One may say without exaggeration that aviation today functions not in terms of days,
not in terms of hours, but in terms of minutes and seconds. Our time has seen ex-
traordinary growth in the possibility of grave consequences resulting from intell-
igent planning which was, however, neither timely nor suitable to a rapidly chang-
ing situation. Today there is nothing which is increasing in value more than time.

* * *

Time w neither slow down nor speed up. The hands of the clock run on always at
the same unchanging pace, but now within the same space of time, the approach of the
enemy is ever nearer, changes in the situation are ever more critical. The burden
of minutes and seconds increases on a comander from day to day. They are becoming
"heavier". The minimal time spent in adopting a course of action, the launch, the
convergence, maneuver and attack--these are the specific indicators which charac-
terize the ability of a comander and each of his pilots to use the time factor and
to gain a few additional minutes and seconds to seize victory.

The reader would do well to examine the manner in which he adopts a course of action,
how he spends the time alloted to him in a combat training situation. Minutes, lost
in time-consuming assessments of a situation, evaluations of teclmical reports.

Long seconds lost to a comander's hesitation during the critical developments of

a lightning-quick attack. Think what may be gained from learning the value of time.
* Suverov, A. V. , Papers, Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1975, vol. 1;, p. 116, 338.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7. The Element of Surprise--the Mother of Victory
1. First to make visual contact

The training critique, for which the students had assembled, had come to an end.
As they filed out of the lecture hall in groups, the officers engaged in a lively
exchange of opinions.

The young officers clustered around one colonel, a veteran aviator.

"Tell us, what sort of tactical measures did fighters use in your day to gain the
element of surprise, comrade colonel?"--asked one of them, a swartlw, thin lieuten-
ant colonel.

Twicc that day he [the lieutenant colonel] had been obliged to listen to the
senior commander conducting the critique rebuke him for being unaware of past
experience and unfamiliar with methods of achieving the element of surprise in
aerial combat.

"Well, of course, it all depends on the situationﬂ-canswered the colonel, pensively
surveying the officers. Judging from the multitude of variegated rows of combat
decorations, it was not difficult to recognize a veteran of the Great Patriotic War.
"Usually, we tried to come up on the enemy unnoticed, stealthily, out of the sun,
from behind clouds, in the twilight, or we came at him from the dark side of the
horizon. we achieved surprise attacks by closing at great speed, maneuvering and,
most importantly, by being the first to make visual contact".

"Sure, in the past it was advantageous for fighters tr. attack from out of the sun;
they could feel certain of their superiority over an anemyL-interjected another
officer. "But today, with on-board radar tracking astems, detecting fighters pre-
sents no special difficulties. In fact, if we were to carry out complicated man-
euvers in approaching targets, we would only hasten the time of our own detection.
And using the sun or a cloud as a scream-you yourselves know-does not hinder
radar detection."

"And what about speed, climb rate and ceiling in modern aircraft? They have in-

c reased greatly in comparison with the piston-driven machines of the Great Patri-
otic Har"-offered another officer in support of the first. "Today, when bombers
strike against ground targets and employ powerful long-range missiles to repel
fighter attacks, those tactics seem somewhat anachronistic. And is it possible to
speak in general terms about fighter tactics that only concern the use of the ele-

ment of surprise?"

The combat veteran smiled to himself, wanting to reply that it wasn't so, but there
was no time. The buses which were to take the officers to their quarters had ar-
rived and, not bothering to conclude the discussion, everyone departed.

The reader should join in a discussion of this subject and give some thought to it
himself.

12

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Heated discussions revolving around the fact that the appearance of potent avionics
systems and radical changes in aviation technology have obviated the use of the
element of surprise are not so very unusual. Could it in fact be that the surprise
factor has lost its importance? Let us attempt to answer that question.

'I- *-
*

The element of surprise: as alarming and unnerving as a combat alert signal, this
expression carries with it a multitude of problems and dangers, and its role, in

all probability, cannot be overemphasized. The controversy surrounding the sur-

prise factor in modern air warfare is of critical as well as topical importance,

and will likely remain so until such time as the conflagrations of aerial combat

appear in the sky.

Chapter 8. Skillful Control of Aerial Combat
1. The use of modern weaponryua collective skill

What does a comander do in the control tower? Applied to the other personnel com-
posing the combat team, this question would seem to have a more or less obvious an-
swer. Plotters and trackers tirelessly conduct target tracking; navigation offic-
ers, glued to their instruments, vector the fighters to aerial targets; radio tele-
graphers and telephone operators work feverishly to ensure uninterrupted comunica-
tions. But what about the commander? The only role left for him-~and it is brief
indeed--is to issue comands, such as: "9h9--commence target attackl'I But this is
simple enough for a child to perform.

let us not be hasty in our judgment. Instead, let us use our mind's eye to adjourn
to the control tower, where we shall peer through the door of the combat control
center at a moment most germane to our topic: the interception of an "enemy" target
had Just begun. In the dim light, indicator lights blink off and on, countless
numbers and letters fluoresce across digital display panels, and various screens
glimer with an eerie greenish light. The large upright plotting board displays a
confused mass of target tracks. Every minute, new, rapidly moving tracers wind
their way into the mass. These are the airborne targets with all of their identi-
fying characteristics: numbers, altitude, time of initial tracking-~and among them
are some which have been ordered intercepted and "destroyed".

The comander is in the "red room'I in his own work area. He has at his counand a
sufficient number of fighters to repulse an even more powerful air strike. Very
deliberately he listens to reports from his technical specialists and gazes thought-
fully at the plotting board and tracking indicators. His data are quite complete,
but we can see that he is spending an inexcusable amount of time in evaluating it,
and will therefore be late in implementing a course of action. Moreover, this
course of action turned out to be less than the best on several points. The selec-

exact accounting of the strengths and tactical capabilities of the "energy". The

delay in implementing his command decision naturally led to a delay in laun hing
the crews. His composure cracking, the comander glared anyin at his crew as
they labored frantically to put his plan into action. Their performance was

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

faultless. Over the loudspeaker he listened to the voices of his pilots, who, with
delicate precision, were carrying out the commands given them by navigation ofﬁcers
vectoring them to the targets. But he could also see on the plotting board the
tracks of targets which had alreachr reached the assigned combat defense line. The
scrambled fighters were still too far away, and, in addition, their combat strength
was not evenly matched to that of the "enezw"...

This example is not typical, but it clearly illustrates the fact that no matter how
precise and well-coordinated the efforts of a coubat crew, they cannot compensate
for miscalculations which are built into a command decision. The specific causes

of such miscalculations are already essentially familiar to us: The inability to
foresee events and detect the eneuw's plan of attack, as well as to correctly assess
and many utilize one's own combat capabilities, in addition to the time factor.
Although, as we look deeper, we see that this inability is only one result of gaps
in the tactical competence of the comander.’ Under more complex conditions, they
inevitably give rise to incorrect assessments of situations involving noise jam-
ming and meteorological or radiation factors.

But now it is time to once again close the control tower door and attempt to ana-
lyze what we have witnessed.

It is the commander who oversees the actions of the control tower crew. He is the
sole organizing force behind combat operations. His tactical intelligence and or-
ganizational capabilities determine just how effectively aviation technology and
weaponry will be used in combat.

Does this mean, however, that the course of action followed by a commander is the

only determining factor in combat success? He shall also attempt to deal with this
question.

The air control center exists for combat. It may be compared to a nerve center, or
to a large research laboratory, where each has his own work, but all work together--
conunonly and collectively. It is here that combat planning originates, here a com-
: mder's well-conceived idea is translated into the precise and laconic formulas of

combat comands. He is aided in quickly implementing sound planning by the automat-
ic control systems at his disposal. In this highly complex world of emotionless dis-
play screens, panels and intelligent electronic devices, a commander must carry out
his extremely sensitive mission. Should fighters not be launched to intercept a

S. Fighter aviation tactics--a scientific breakthrough

The stages in the development of tactics--where are their dividing lines? How long
a period of time will serve to emmnerate them? Sometimes it is decades-~sometimes

1!:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
months. There are also very brief, but nonetheless critical stages which occur
during wartime or when aviation technology is undergoing radical changes. The sci-
ence of fighter aviation tactics was enriched by new approaches to combat opera-
tions developed in the wartime dogfights with the forces of fascism, and it was the
beneficiary of remarkable evolution in the post-war years. Like a timeless mili-
tary roll-call, the development of tactics continues in our day.

In examining the history of tactics, we have seen an inexorable movement of tactic-
al thought, conceived in battle against a powerful and devious opponent and giving
rise to new, inchoate, but eventually tried and proven tactical procedures. The
reader has probably noted how wide a field of view is presented by a causal outline
of the evolution of fighter aviation tactics: the interrelationships of tactics and
technology; the development of mutual interaction with groundpbased PVO facilities.
And the most important link in this unbroken chain of influential factors remains
always the tactical skill of fighter pilots.

"In tactics there are no prescriptions"-some commanders, when they wish to describe
the complexity and multiformity of tactical skills, are wont to repeat these words
which they have long ago learned by rote. This expression has almost become axio-
matic. Even though these are the final pages of this book, the reader is once more
requested to give thought to a question. Could not the reason for this be, as it

is said, that the case is just exactly the opposite? Prescriptions, i. e., tactical
recommendations, are far too numerous, while situations in combat are such that
only a single specific tatical procedure can be applied to any one of them. But,

on the other hand, what works well at first, less well the second time, and is act-
ually harmful the tenth time around is plainly a rigid stereotype. The import of
this then is obvious--even the most well-conceived tactical procedure, many times
repeated, becomes ineffective. This is precisely what is meant by those who speak
of the absence of prescriptions in tactics. But it follows from this that what is
needed is not "written prescriptions", but an entire mobile "drug store" right at
the scene So as to have at hand at any given moment the necessary tactical proced-
ure. This also is what constitutes the tactical skill of a commander, a pilot, or
a control tower officer, essential to them just as is the air they breathe to be
able to select quickly and judiciously those very "prescriptions"--which, supposed-
ly, are not to be found in tactics-~and apply them effectively in combat.

Every year, the air arms of the military services are replenished by massive infus-
ions of highly trained personnel who are experts in various specialties. They have
been entrusted with awesome weaponry which they will employ in combat. Having
studied the lessons of the past, they have learned to revere and they seek to en-
hance the Combat traditions established by front-line veterans. But under the on-
slaught of scientific and technological progress, any attempt to cling to past
achievements--referring to them in resounding terms as a "combat tradition"-will
ultimately lead to failure. For all of the humanse importance of historical tacti-
cal measures, there is a critical need to find new keys to victory over a powerful,
crafty and fierce opponent who is constantly improving his own tactical capabili-
ties; there is need to develop all of the elements which contribute to tactical

know-how, or, in other words, to conquer the frontiers of scientific knowledge in
this field.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tactics is the science of beating an enemy in anynincluding the most trying--cir-
cumstances, even against great odds such as when the anew has the advantage of
numerical superiority or the element of surprise. Attempts to find the means to
victory in such circumstances are properly classified among the "eternal questions"
of tactics. No matter how much is said or written about these questions, they will
never be settled. Every commander, flyer, and control center officer is more than
capable of resolving them. It is hardly within the scope of this book to provide
them with prescriptions, much less to teach them. But, after all, how many obstac-
les and disappointments, how much difficult and tedious labor, perseverance and in-
spiration lie hidden within what is called a scientific breakthrough?

Now, after examining the makeup of tactical skillfulness, we may draw conclusions
about what is involved in conquering the frontiers of scientific knowledge-4t
means:

being selflessly dedicated to the great ideals of commism, recognising one's high
personal responsibility for the defense of the socialist homeland, correctly per-
ceiving the meaning of current political and military events, conﬁdently handling
oneself in certain situations, extracting useful knowledge from them, and employing
it in one's day-to-day work;

being able to anticipate and turn the course of events to one's own use, to confi-
dently apply dialectical methods to situation estimates, to make use of modeling to
derive quantitative estimates, to efficiently and eclectically conceive combat plan-
ning, to make sound decisions and firmly put them into effect;

fully utilizing the capabilities of one's weaponry, acheiving its meadmal effective-
ness in combat, maintaining it in constant readiness for use, rapidly and unerringly
operating aircraft controls and equipment;

recognizing the value of time, not admitting delays to enter into decisions and act-
ions, gaining precious time by speeding up all flight preparation processes, find-
ing time for careful analysis of alternate combat plans, as well as the intelligent
use of technical control equipment, teamw°rk in the control center, and lightning-
like quickness in intercepting and attacking;

m'king prudent use of the surprise factor, employing safeguarded technology and un-
expected tactical procedures, stealth, and operational quickness in order to gain
the initial detection advantage and force the action in a beneficial way; success-
mlly countering the use of the element of surprise by the anew, not allowing the
implementation of rash decisions and actions;

skillmllv and firmly controlling aerial combat from the ground and in the air,
while achieving precise and harmonious operations on the part of all combat team
members within the framework of a collective combat effort and under the guiding
influence of the commander, making creative use of the abundant potential of auto-

mated systems while combining knowledge, experience and tactical thought with fem-
a1 logic and the operational speed of computers;

possessing a sense of the new, seeing imminent as well as distant prospects in tac-

tics, learning from situations approximating combat while resisting oversmplifica-
tions, developing combat preparedness and a readiness to assume valid risks within

16
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
the limits of flight safety regulations and the planning of the commander, compre-
hensively and objectively evaluating the tactical training of flight personnel.

These then, in my view, constitute a basic listing of the component elements of tac-
tical know-how, which set multifarious and exacting requirements for fighter avia-
tion personnel. It would be incorrect to suppose that these requirements can be
satisfied spontaneously, that combat training in and of itself leads to the devel-
opment and cultivation of the requisite skills. Combat aviation personnel, like
soldiers, are made-mot born, but only if the training calls for tenacity, will pow-
er and logical tactical thinking, as well as a bmming desire to develop these qual-
ities in combat training missions.

Victory by scientific means is not merely a romantic notion conveying the idea of a
furious, irrestible assault. It is an element which is inseparable from the crucial
role and personal tactical skill of a comander. In any situation, he must with-
stand and surmount the difficulties confronting him. The fortitude, self-control
and composure shown by a comnander, his boldness and resoluteness in achieving es-
tablished goals are the formative factors which instill the same qualities in his
subordinates.

A commander's responsibility is onerous indeed! He is at once required to be both
an organizer responsible for the military and political education of subdivisions
and units under him, and an educational methodologist concerned with training sub-
ordinates. There is also a heavy burden of professional responsibility riding on
his shoulders whenever he undertakes a course of action. It must be the optimal
solution. And what is the upshot of all this? This position requires an account-
ing of all factors of a situation, the ability to improvise, to make choices based
on a wide stock of past associations, and, when confronted with unexpected circum-
stances, to come up with new plans which do not incorporate previously implemented
courses of action. And no matter how complicated the situation, the fate of the
battle resides in his hands and depends on his organizational ability and efficien-
cy, as well as on his ability to make use of the key elements of socialist competi-
tion and its proven method-~competitiveness. Thus, tactical preparation is becom-
ing something more than just a training process. It will involve the creative use
of technology and active searches for innovation in tactics. As the quality and
effectiveness of such a process is realized, there can be no limit to the further
perfection of tactical skills.

r
COPXRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981

92:81
CSO: 1801/1137

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GROUID FORCES

BOOK EXCERPTS: ARTILLERY SERGEANT'S HANDBOOK

Moscow SPRAVOCHMIK SERZHAMTA ARTILLERII in Russian 1981 (signed to press
21 Jan 81) pp 1-6, 73-82, 220-224

(Annotation, table of contents, introduction and excerpt from chapter 2 from
book "Artillery Sergeant's Handbook," by Ivan Nikolayevicb Anashkin and
Mikhail Nikonorovich Delokur. USSR Ministry of Defense Order of Labor Red
Banner Voyennoye Izdatel'stvo. 20,000 copies. 224 pages. Passages enclosed in
slantlines printed in boldface.]

[Emcerpts] The Handbook sets forth the rights and obligations of sergeants.
training methodology, and questions of combined-arms, technical and special
training to the extent necessary for performing duties as squad (team, crew)
commander in artillery subunits.

The Handbook is intended for squad (team. crew) commanders and reserve
sergeants.

Table of Contents

Introduction 3
Chapter One. Basic Rights and Duties of Sergeants 7
1. Duties under USSR VS [Armed Forces] Internal Service Regulations 7
1.1. Squad Cornunder 7
1.2. Deputy Platoon Commander 8
1.3 Battery Pirst Sergeant 9
2. Relationships Among Servicemen 11
2.1. Foundations of Relationships Among Servicemen 11
2.2. Superiors and Subordinates. Seniors and Juniors 12
2.3. Procedure for Issuing and Executing Orders 13
2.6. Rights and Duties of Sergeants in Military Indoctrination 16
3. Duties in Performing Internal and Guard Services 16
3.1. Procedure for Assigning and Preparing Duty Details 16
18

FOR 0F11CJAI.lEﬂE(HVLY
3.2.
3.3.
3.6.
3.5.
3.6.
3.7.
3.8.

Assistant Regimental Duty NCO

Traffic Control Point Duty NCO

Battery Duty NCO

Mess Hall Duty nco

Procedure for Assigning and Preparing Guards
Guard Commander

Corporal of the Guard

1. Duties in a Specialty

6.1.
6.2.
6.3.
6.6.
6.5.
6.6.

6.7.
6.8.

General Duties

Reconnaissance Squad Commander

Signal Squad Commander

Gun (Mortar. Combat Vehicle, ATGM Launcher) Commander
Topogeodetic Squad (Topographic Survey Vehicle Squad) Commander

Meteorological Squad Commander (RMS [Radiotechnical Meteorological
Station] Chief)

Sound Ranging Squad Commanders
Battery Transportation Section Commander

:hapter Two. Combined-Arms Training
1. Drill Training

1.1.
1.2.
1.3.

General Provisions
Basic Drill Movements. Commands and Actions of Squad Personnel
Commanders' Duties Before Formation and in Formation

!. Physical Training

2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.6.

Morning Physical Training
Training Classes

Incidental Physical Training
Sports Work

1. Small Arms Training

3.1.
3.2.
3.3.
3.6.
3.5.

Concise Technical Specifications of Small Arms and Hand Grenades
Storage. Safekeeping and Care of Small Arms

Basic Techniques and Rules in Firing Small Arms

Basic Techniques in Throwing Hand Grenades

Safety Precautions in Firing Small Arms and Throwing Hand Grenades

19
FORlNﬂﬂC]Al.USE(NNLY

17
17
18
21
23
25
29
32
32

82328

36
37
39

60
60
60
61
63

65
66
67
68
68
68
50

22"..."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. Working with Topographic Maps

4.1.
4.2.

4.3.

Topographic Maps

Measuring Angles and Distances and Determining Coordinates of
Points (Targets) from a Map

Topogeodetic Survey

5. Engineer Organization and Camouflage of Combat Formations

5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
5.4.

General Provisions

Engineer Organization of Observation Posts
Engineer Organization of Firing Positions
Camouflage of Combat Formations

6. Defense Against Mass Destruction Weapons of the Probable Enemy

6.1.
6.2.
6.3.

Radioactive and Chemical Contamination
Personnel Actions with Contamination by Toxic Chemical Agents
Decontamination of Clothing. weapons and Equipment

Chapter Three. Technical Training

1. Artillery Instruments

1.1.

1.2.
1.3.
1.4.
1.5.
1.6.
1.7.
1.8.
1.9.

General Information on Instruments. Angle Measurement and
System of Readings in Artillery

Binoculars

Stereoscopic Rangefinder

FAB-2A Periscopic Artillery Aiming Circle
Reconnaissance Theodolite

STM TOpographic Computer

Fire Direction Device (PUO)

AK3 Artillery Protractor

Devices for Calculating Corrections for Meteorological and
Ballistic Firing Conditions

2. Devices for Ballistic. Technical and Meteorological Preparation

2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.
2.6.

Chamber Hear Gauge (PZK)

Battery Thermometer

Gunner's Quadrant and Master Level

Field wind Gauge

Assault Meteorological Set

Care. Storage and Safekeeping of Instruments

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. Artillery aardvare
3.1. Purpose and Combat Features of Artillery Systems
3.2. Artillery Piece
3.3. Hortar
3.4. Rocket Artillery Combat Vehicle
3.5. ATOM Launcher
3.6. Sighting Devices
3.7. Preparing Equipment for Fire

3.8. Maintenance, Care and Safekeeping of Equipment
4. Ammunition

4.1. Artillery Rounds

4.2. Fuses

4.3. Painting, Marking and Stenciling of Ammunition

4.4. Storing Ammunition and Handling It at the Firing Position
5. Communications Gear

5.1. Basic Technical Specifications of Radios

5.2. Basic Technical Specifications of Hire Communications Equipment

5.3. Basic Rules for Transmitting Commands in Conducting Fire
6. Basic Characteristics of Motor Vehicles and Prime Movers

Chapter Four. Special Training

1. Combat Hbrk of Artillery Weapons Subunits
1.1. Selection and Occupation of Indirect Firing Position
1.2. Work at Indirect Firing Position Until Opening of Fire
1.3. Conducting Fire from Indirect Firing Position
1.4. Selection and Occupation of Direct Firing Position
1.5. Conducting Fire from Direct Firing Position

2. Artillery Fire Training
2.1. General Provisions
2.2. Determining Firing Data
2.3. Registration and Fire for Effect from Indirect Firing Positions

2.4. Direct Fire

21
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter Five. Tactical Training 187
1. Fundamentals of Combat Employment of Artillery Subunits 187
2. Control of Artillery Subunits 188
3. Reconnaissance Squad in Combat 190
3.1. General Provisions 190
3.2. Selection and Occupation of Command-Observation (Observation) Post 191
3.3. Organization and Conduct of Reconnaissance at Observation Post 192
3.4. Target Revealing Signs 197
3.5. Servicing Fire 201
3.6. Features of Organizing Reconnaissance from Mobile Observation Post 202
6. Signal Squad in Combat 203
5. Artillery Piece (Mortar, Combat Vehicle, ATCH Launcher) in Combat 205
5.1. Types of Fire of Artillery Piece (Mortar. Combat vehicle) 205
5.2. The Attack 209
5.3. Defense 210
Chapter Six. Methods Training 212
1. General Provisions 212
2. Logistical Support of Classes 213
3. Preparation for Conducting Classes 213
4. Conducting Classes 218
Appendix: Table for Determining Distances on an Auxiliary Base 219
Introduction

It is a great honor for every citizen to be a soldier of the Soviet Army and
fulfill a sacred duty to the Motherland in conformity with the Constitution of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the USSR Law "On Universal Military
Obligation." It is an even greater honor to perform duties as a soldier-
commander. Command cadres represent the backbone and foundation of the Soviet
Army. The quality of personnel training and indoctrination, discipline, effi-
ciency and. in the final account, the state of combat readiness of the subunits
and units depend on their training level.

NCO's are at the level of junior commanders and represent the largest detach-
ment of command cadres. They are the assistants of officers in training ideo-
logically persuaded. capable and courageous defenders of the socialist Mother-
land. Nco's are the privates' immediate superiors. They help then study weap-
ons. combat equipment, regulations. manuals and instructions. They organize
and perform the daily detail service together with the privates and perform

22
FOR 0F11CIAI.UBEGMNLY
daily work to strengthen military discipline, firm military order. and effi-
ciency. One of the very important tasks for NCO's is to develop the privates'
patriotism, proletarian internationalism, and readiness to give their all and
even their lives if necessary to defend the interests of the socialist Mother-
land.

To be an NCO is not only an honor, but also a great responsibility. In order
to perform his duty the NCO must have appropriate political, military and ape-
cialized knowledge, be able to pass it on to subordinates. have high moral
qualities and set a personal example.

For successful training and indoctrination of subordinates the NCO needs not

only good training, but also a knowledge of the principles of military peda-
gogics.

Basic Training Principles

[Party and scientific spirit./ Training bears a class character in its goals
and tasks. Every class with privates must be thought out and arranged so that
material to be studied contributes to their development of a Harxist-Leninist
outlook, love for their Motherland and hatred for her enemies, and conviction
as to the superiority of the socialist system and its army over the capitalist
system and its army, and of the force and might of their weapons.

/Teach the troops what is needed in war./ This training principle is one of
the basic ones and reflects the need to train personnel in a difficult tactical
situation and with great psychological stress, i.e., in a near-combat situa-
tion.

/Awareness and activeness of the trainees./ A high awareness of the honorable
duty of defending the achievements of socialism acts as the primary source of
all personnel's vigorous participation in the training process.

To assure the privates' better assimilation of subject material, one must
strive for their intelligent understanding of the goals and tasks of every
class, the practical importance of knowledge and skills acquired. an under—
standing of training which precludes mechanical assimilation of material, and
the ability to apply one's knowledge in practice. There also has to be exten-
sive use of the competition method in performing individual tasks and norms,and
the privates' abilities to critically evaluate their own and comrades' actions
must be developed.

[Graphic effect./ This is above all a complex of measures providing visual
and aural effect in the process of training personnel. Capable application of
these measures makes it easier to assimilate training material and intensifies
the psychological-pedagogic effect on trainees.

/Systematic nature and consistency./ Success in training is possible only with
the systematic and consistent presentation of training material. This means
that training material must be presented to trainees in such a way that new

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

knowledge rests on that they previously acquired, and the techniques and actions
already learned contribute to the assimilation of subsequent ones.

/Simp11city./ Training material is assimilated easily if it is drawn up with
consideration of the trainees' experience and knowledge and is simple in con-
tent and scope. Simplicity of training is helped by a rule borne out in life:
from the known to the unknown. from the simple to the complex.

lFirmness of knowledge, abilities and skills/ is assured by the combat training
process,which envisages a systematic repetition of covered material, daily
application in practice of what has been learned, multiple repetition of exer-
cises. and drills to develop stable skills in the soldiers.

/Collectivism and the individual approach./ Privates spend a greater part of
the time training as part of a military collective,which brings together people
with different abilities, habits and cast of character. The psychology of the
military collective (public opinion, mutual relationships, nature of reaction
to events within and without the collective. sentiments, habits) takes shape in
the process of their interaction and under the affect of various factors
(influence of the commander. the party and Komsomol organizations, and the
entire system of indoctrinationsl work).

Training success largely depends on the ways and methods used to see that sol-
diers assimilate knowledge and develop skills and abilities, i.e., on training
methods and forms.

IBasic training methods are as followszl verbal presentation of material
(narrative, explanation), discussion of subject material (discussion, seminar),
display (demonstration), drills, practical group problems and exercises, and
independent problems.

[Basic training forms are as follows:/ classroom (theoretical) and practical
(field) activities, field firings and missile launches, exercises; servicing
days and days of periodic technical servicing. self-training, and the check and
evaluation of knowledge, abilities and skills.

Basic Principles of Indoctrination

[Party spirit and ideological direction./ This principle is the leading one in
the entire system and methodology of personnel indoctrination. It reflects the
dominant role of the policy of the Communist Party and Soviet government in
indoctrinating personnel and requires the commander above all to have a firm
knowledge of the indoctrination goals and clearly picture those qualities which
much be developed in subordinates.

[Indoctrination of personnel in the process of military 1abor./ Each service-
man's strict, precise observance of procedures and rules established by Soviet
laws, the military oath and military regulations is a necessary condition for

high troop efficiency, their combat teamwork, and constant readiness for imme-
diate actions.

2h

FOIHOFFKJAI.USE|DNLY
[Indoctrination in the collective and through the collective./ This principle
requires the commander's constant work to unite subordinates into a cohesive.
firmly knit family and develop in them feelings of troop comradeship, brother-
hood and collectivism.

Ikeliance on positive elements./ The essence of this principle is to take
advantage of the best positive qualities of a soldier and rely on them in
indoctrination work.

[Exactingness and respect toward people./ A combination of high exactingness
toward subordinates with respect for their personal dignity and concern for
them--two interconnected aspects of the indoctrination process are merged in
this principle.

/Unity. coordination and continuity./ To achieve coordination in indoctrina-
tion work means to present uniform regulation requirements on subordinates, to
make proper use of indoctrination principles and methods. and exert an influ-
ence on soldiers through the common efforts of commanders and the party and
Komsomol organizations.

[Basic indoctrination methods are as follows:/ persuasion, encouragement. coer-
cion, and the commander’s personal example.

The range of the junior commander's duties thus is broad and requires him to
have a high theoretical and practical training. extreme composure and, finally,
good methods skills in training and indoctrinating subordinates.

The basic rights and duties of Nco's are highlighted in the Handbook in a
separate chapter with consideration of the fact that a knowledge of regulations
is the basis of combined-arms training.

Chapter Two. Combined-Arms Training

5.6. Camouflage of Combat Formations

Camouflage includes a complex of activities performed for purposes of conceal-
ing friendly forces from the enemy, providing for surprise in their cperations
and reducing personnel and equipment losses, as well as for purposes of leading
the enemy astray with respect to our strength, means. actions and intentions.

Camouflage activities achieve their purpose only when they are carried out
vigorously, continuously, diversely and convincingly. It is very important to
be able to take advantage of the concealing features of terrain. its natural
masks, and authorized and improvised means of camouflage.

[Use of the terrain's concealing features] consists of locating objects to be
camouflaged behind natural masks, which can be forests, mountains. ravines,
settlements. local terrain features and so on.

Camouflage of combat formations and equipment must be performed above all with
the help of improvised means and materials (twigs, grass, snow).

25
FOI.OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Authorized camouflage sets/ are used for camouflaging command-observation
posts. firing positions and means of traction against enemy air and ground
reconnaissance. They are of the following types:

HKT-L-a summer set of netting for camouflage against backgrounds of vegetation
and bare ground;

HKT-S--a winter set of bleached netting for camouflage against backgrounds of
snow;

HMT-T--a summer set of cotton net with a 50 x 50 mm mesh filled with pieces and
strips of cloth for camouflage against backgrounds of vegetation.

All camouflage covers of the sets have the same 12 x 18 m dimensions and
include 12 standard 3 x 6 m elements. The set includes connecting cords, metal
pins and a packing cover. Elements of the camouflage cover are interconnected
into a coupon cover by closed, quick-release seams with the help of connecting
cords.

One HKT set can be used to camouflage two or three command-observation posts,
the firing position of one piece with an all-around field of fire. or a truck
or prime mover in a shelter. Arrangement of an overall camouflage net using
the MKT is shown in Fig. 14 [figure not reproduced].

[Caption to Fig. 16]: Fig. 16. Kinds of masks: a. Vertical; b. Horizontal;
c. Overall camouflage net.

Individual camouflage gear includes the camouflage overalls and white camou-
flage suit, used for concealing scout-observers and radio telephone operators.

NCO's must know camouflage rules and demand that personnel observe them; they
must limit the movement of people and equipment in areas under enemy surveil-
lance; they must prohibit the trampling down of grass, cutting of vegetation,
or laying of new trails and access roads outside of specially allocated areas;
and they must ensure strict observance of rules of light discipline at night.

6. Defense Against Mass Destruction Weapons of the Probable Enemy
6.1. Radioactive and chemical Contamination

[Radioactive contamination./ The terrain, air and various objects are con-
taminated by radioactive substances chiefly as a result of their fallout from a
radioactive cloud which formed after a surface nuclear burst. The radioactive
mushroom cloud is very noticeable.at the moment it forms and during movement.
when it assumes a dark color, but it is impossible to detect radioactive sub-
stances on the terrain by smell, color or external appearance. Special instru-
ments are used for these purposes: radioactivity indicators. roentgen meters
(Fig. 15). and radiation meters (Fig. 16).

26
FOR*OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
Fig. 15. DP—BB roentgen meter:

1. Measurement device
2. Measurement panel
3. Remote unit

A. Cable
3. On

b. Off
c. Test
d. Puze

   
   

nu

      
 

P13. 16. DP-SB radiometer-roentgen
meter:

1. Measurement panel
2. Flexible cable
3. Probe unit

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n noticing the flash of a nuclear burst a person must take immediate shelter
in a trench. crater, ditch or other nearby refuge; in the absence of cover lie
down quickly on the ground, face downward. legs toward the burst.

When a person is in the open on terrain contaminated by radioactive substances,
he nust put on a respirator (Fig. 17) or protective mask (Fig. 18); and a

respirator
fallout of radioactive substances.

 

 

(protective aask), protective cape and gloves (Fig. 19) during the

Fig. 17. R-2 respirator:

1. Rose clip

2. Head band with straps

3. Inlet valve

4. Outlet valve

Fig. 18. Conbined-arms respirator:
a. Respirator filter canister
b. Pacepiece

c. Pack

1. Absorbent

2. Eyepieces

3. Rim

6. Valve holder

5. Connecting tube

6. Cord (harness)

7. Strap

8. Rubber plug

9. Filter

/Chemica1 contanination./ Means_by which the probable enemy employs 0V [toxic

chemical agents] may be missiles, artillery rounds, mortar rounds, chemical
nines, aerial bombs, aircraft sprays and so on.

28

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE1ONLY
Fig. 19. Use of the protective cape:

a. As a cape
b. Horn with sleeves
c. As coveralls

Having high toxicity, modern 0V have an injurious effect even in very small
concentrations. Therefore one can determine their presence reliably only with
a chemical reconnaissance instrument (Fig. 20). But one also has to know cer-
tain signs indicating the enemy's use of chemical weapons. the primary ones
being:

A faint muffled sound and rapidly dispersing cloud at the location of bursts of
artillery or mortar rounds, serial bombs and missiles;

A rapidly settling cloud or trace left after an aircraft flies over;

Oily spots on leaves. the soil. or buildings and near the craters of exploded
bombs and artillery or mortar rounds;

A change in natural coloration of vegetation (green leaves acquire a brown
color, red berries turn blue);

The appearance of strong smells of bitter almonds (prussic acid), rotting hay
(phosgene),mustard or garlic (mustard gas) and so on;

Irritation of the nssopharynx,eyesandskin. contraction of pupils. heavy feel-
ing in the chest and so on.

with any of these signs, immediately put on the protective mask and skin pro-
tective gear without awaiting a signal or command. It must be considered that
injurious concentrations of 0V may remain for several hours or days (especially
in winter) in ravines. hollows, dense forests, bushes and trenches.

[Warning signs./ Authorized warning signs-rectangular panels or cloth flags
colored yellov are put in place to warn personnel about terrain contamination.
Paper triangles are attached to the panels and snsll pieces of cardboard are

29
FOR‘OFFKJAI.UBE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 20. Wk troop chemical racon-
naissance instrument:

1. Snake filters

2. Case

3. Heater cartridges
6 . Flashlight

5. Heater

6 . Lid

7 . Travel

8 . Paper casings
9 . Hand pump

10. Pump attachnent
11. Protective caps

inserted in the flag pockets with an inscription of what is contaminating the
sector, the type of 0V, radiation level, date and time the sign was set up.
At night authorized warning signs are illuminated with flashlights. Boundaries
of contaminated sectors say be denoted by inscriptions on buildings and local
features.

6.2. Personnel Actions with Contamination by Toxic Chenical Agents

On being stricken by V-gases (satin), symptoms of which are a contraction of
the pupils. loss of sharpness of vision, a sharp pain in the eyes and a heavi-
ness in the chest. imediately put an the protective mask and. using the
syrette in the personal CH decontanination kit. introduce an antidote into the
thigh muscle.

0n discovering drops of (N on the skin or clothing. immediately treat the con-
taminated areas using the individual decontamination kit (Fig. 21). On dis-
covering a reddening of the skin area, one must wash the contaminated area
with soap and water. If drops of 0V get into the eyes, imedistely wash them
several times with clean water from a canteen, then go to a nedical station.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 21. Individual decontamination
kit (IDP):

l. Tin container

2. Paper napkins

3. Glass ampules

lo. Lid

5. Instructions for using the kit

With injury from prussic acid (a bitter. metallic taste in the mouth. throat
irritation. dizziness. headache. nausea) Miately put on the protective
mask. crush an ampu1e with the antidote and insert it under the helmet face-
piece of the protective mask.

with injury from phosgene (a sweetish taste in the mouth. coughing, dizziness.
shortness of breath), one must put on the protective mask and leave the con-
taminated area.

A toxic chemical agent with psychochemical action (32) gives rise to mental
disorder in the victim. A protective mask protects reliably against 32.

A toxical chemical agent with irritant action (CS) causes strong eye irrita-
tion. A person must leave the contaminated area, stand facing the wind and
wash the eyes with water or a two-percent solution of baking soda.

6.3. Decontamination of clothing. Weapons and Equipment

When personal weapons. instruments, artillery hardware and prime movers become
contaminated with radioactive substances they are wiped with pads of rags or
oakun soaked in a decontaminant solution. gasoline. kerosene or water. Process-
ing is from the top downward. repeating it two or three times with soaked and
then dry pads. Individual or group decontsnination kits are used for decon-
taminating guns and prime movers.

When personal weapons and cowat equip-ant are contaminated by toxic chemical
agents. they are fully decontaminated using individual or group decontamination
packets (kits) or pads out of rags soaked with decontaminant solution (soapy
water. gasoline, or kerosene). with subsequent wiping with a dry rag or oakum.

Clothing. gear and footwear contaminated by toxic chemical agents are wet down
and wiped with decoutaminant solutions from the individual decontamination
kit. Clothing and gear decontaminated by "sarin" 0V vapors are sprinkled

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(powdered) with powder from the individual decontamination kit. then shaken
off. Articles to be decontaminated also can be soaked in water for 3-5 minutes,
then wiped dry with a soap and baking soda solution or aired out for an hour in
summer or for up to three hours in winter.

All work of gas or radioactive decontamination is performed wearing the protec-
tive mask. protective overboota and gloves and. in some cases. a protective
cape as well.

Observation posts, trenches and connecting passages are decontaminated (radia-
tion or gas decontamination or disinfection) by cutting away a layer of con-
taminated soil up to 3 cm thick (up to 4-6 cm of snow) from the berm. slopes
and bottom. If the slopes have revetment, a layer of soil is cut from the berm,
the revetment of slopes is cleaned with a damp broom or a damp bunch of straw
or grass, then a layer of soil is cut from the bottom. The soil which has been
cut away is collected in a specially dug ditch. pit or shell crater.

Full decontamination of personnel, weapons and combat equipment is performed at
areas for gas and radioactive decontamination and personal cleansing.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat. 1981

6906
cs0: 1801/142 “w,

32

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY