FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10423

31 March 1982

Translation

TANK ATTACK

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR omcw. USE ONLY
NIB

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGH' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1043

31 March 1!

TANK ATTACK

Moscow TANKOVYY UDAR in Russian 1977 (signed to press 1 Dec 76)
pp 1-271

[Book by Prof, Arm Gen Aleksey Ivanovich Radziyevskiy “Tankovyy udar
(Tankovaya armiya v nastupatel'noy operatsii fronta po opytu Velikoy
Otechestvennoy voyny)‘ ITenk Attack (The Tank Army in a Front-Level

Offensive Operation from the Experience of the Great Patriotic War]

Voyenizdat, 20,000 copies, 271 pages plus appended diagrams]

CONTENTS

Introduction . . . ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

CHAPTER I: TANK ARHIES AND TﬂE BASES OF THEIR COMBAT EMPLOYMENT . . . . . . . 4

1. Soviet Armored Troops on the Eve of the War . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2. The Formation of Tank Armies. Their Organisational Structure
and Combat Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ll
3. Principles in the Combat Employment of Tank Armies . . . . . . . . . 28
CHAPTER II: THE PREPARATION OF OFFENSIVE OPERATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
1. Conditions and Methods for Preparing the Operations . . . . . . . . . 63
2. Adopting the Plan for the Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3 The Planning of Combat Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6. Issuing of Combat Missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5. The Organization of Cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
6. The Organization of Control Posts and Communications . . . . . . . . 76
7 Combat-Training of the Troops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
8 Party Political Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

CHAPTER III: THE CONDUCT OF OFFENSIVE OPERATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97

1. The Committing of Tank Armies to the Engagement and the

Development of the Success . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
2.!‘ur9uit ...... . ...... ..................111
3. The Conduct of Meeting Encounters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
4 Crossing Intermediate Defensive Lines and Haneuvering in th

Operational Depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
5. Crossing Hater Obstacles ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
6. Oprrntions of Tank Armies in Pincer Operations . . . . . . . . . . . 141

[II - USSR - POUO]
-a- [III - USSR - 4 FOUO]

FOR(Nﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(NVLY
Page

7. The Conduct of Combat Operations to Capture Cities . . . . . . . . . 168
8. A Tank Army Offensive from Direct Contact with the Enemy ..... . 153

9. The Conduct of the Defensive in the Course of Offensive Operations . 158
10. Troop Control in the Course of Offensive Operations . . . . . . . . . 165

CHAPTER IV: MAINTAINING AND RESTORING THE BATTLEHORIHINBSS OF TANK ARHIBS . . 184

1. Operations of Tank Armies with Limited Forces under Conditions of
Significant Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186
2. The Repairing of Combat Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
3. Maintaining Material Supplies at the Required Level . . . . . . . 199
4. Bringing the Armies Up to Strength for Personnel . . . . . . . . 208
5. Measures to Maintain High Troop Morale . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211

as.
so.

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Appendices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225

Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236

[BRIEF ANNOTATION]

Using extensive factual material. the work analyzes the experience of employing tank
armies in offensive operations during the Great Patriotic War. The book discloses
the prerequisites for forming tank armies, their organizational structure and combat
capabilities, the questions of preparing for the operations, the committing of the
armies to an engagement and actions in the operational depth. A major place has
been given to the art of controlling the tank troops. Also examined are the ques-
tions of maintaining and restoring tank army combat capability.

The book is designed for officers and generals in the Soviet Army as well as for
everyone interested in military history.

FINICNWHCIAI.USIICNILY
IWJR OFFICJAI.USIII”VLY

INTRODUCTION

The main trend in the development of present-day international relations is the turn
away from hostile confrontation to detente and to peaceful coexistence and coopera-
tion between states with different social systems. ‘This turn of events has been
caused by changes in the balance of forces on the world scene and has been possible
due primarily to the active and enterprising foreign policy of the USSR and the
other nations of the socialist camsonwealth. In consistently and steadily carrying
out a policy of strengthening universal peace and international security and supple-
menting political detente with military detente, the Communist Party and the Soviet
government at the same time have not for an instant overlooked the aggressive aspir-
ations of the reactionary imperialist circles and decisively condemn their efforts
aimed at increasing military preparations, continuing the arms race, inflating nil-
itary budgets and returning to Cold "at times.

The General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, in the
Accountability Report at the 25th CPSU Congress said: "The enemies of detente and
disarmament still possess sizable resources. They are working actively, in various
forms and from different directions. Although at present the possibilities of ag-
gressive actions by imperialism have been significantly curtailed, its nature re-
mains the same. For this reason the peace-loving forces must show high vigilance.

Energetic actions and unity are required among all the forces of peace and good
will."

The Soviet Armed Forces vigilantly guard the interests of the Soviet state, peace
and the construction of communism. In the postwar times they have changed beyond
recognition in a comparatively short historical period.

On the basis of scientific and technical achievements, at present new types of
weapons are being developed more rapidly than ever before and these have signifi-
cantly increased the fire power, strike force and maneuverability of the troops,
the organizational structure of the Armed Forces has been improved and the methods
of preparing and conducting combat operations have been bettered.

Quite understandably all of this has constantly necessitated the further development
of a number of military theoretical questions, including the provisions related to
defining the role of tank troops in modern warfare and the methods of their combat
employment. A profound, critical analysis of the very rich experience of the Great

Patriotic War and, in particular, the employment of tank armies in it helps largely
in successfully solving these problems.

£1HICNWWCIA1.USE(NNLY
During Lhc years of the past war the Soviet Tank Troops were the main assault and
maneuvering force of the Ground Troops. They played an important role in breaking
through enemy defenses and were the decisive means for developing a tactical success
into an operational one. The first of these tasks was carried out predominantly by
a portion of the tank forces, that is, by the separate tank brigades and regiments
which were attached to the rifle formations and used for direct infantry support.
The second task was carried out by the basic mass of the tank troops, that is, by
the tank and mechanized corps and tank armies, although they frequently were em-
ployed for completing the breakthrough of defenses.

Over the war years, the tank troops developed into a mighty force. By the begin-
ning of 1945, there were 34 tank and mechanized corps in the operational army of
which one-half of them was part of the six existing tank armies.

The tank armies were a resource of Headquarters, Supreme High Command [Hq SHCI and
were attached to fronts operating on the main sectors, as a rule, for use as an
echelon to exploit a success. Having up to 600-800 and more tanks and self-propelled
artillery mounts [SAU], they made powerful tank attacks against the enemy to a great
depth, they defeated its operational reserves and rear services and created good con-
ditions for surrounding and destroying enemy groupings, often operating a significant
distance away from the fronts' remaining forces. In certain instances, the tank
armies advanced in the front's first echelon and in completing the frontal offensive
operations also engaged in defensive operations in a difficult and tight situation.

The extensive employment of tank armies, the general growth of the combat might of

the front field forces and the improved art of preparing and conducting combat oper-
ations considering the war's experience substantially have altered the nature of of-
fensive operations. Their decisivenees has risen, the depth and pace have increased.

the duration has been shortened while combat operations have become much more fluid
and dynamic.

Modern offensive operations will also be characterized by a decisiveness of aims.
by great scope, maneuverability and dynamicness of combat operations. For precisely
this reason, a study of the experience of the combat employment of tank armies dur-
ing the years of the Great Patriotic war at present is of important significance.

The wartime combat experience and theoretical views in many regards have not lost
thcir significance for present-day conditions. Their study, theoretical assimila-
tion and use are one of the important tasks of Soviet military science.

In generalizing and analyzing the experience of the employment of tank armies during
the offensive operations of the Great Patriotic War, the author has endeavored to
disclose the preconditions for their formation, their combat capabilities, the forms
and methods of preparing and conducting the operations, the most characteristic
traits of combat operations and the ways for improving the art of troop control and
command, the maintaining and restoring of battleworthinaas.

The work is based upon archival documentary materials, official manuals, published
military history works as well as the author's personal recollections. Since during
the war years the author served in the 2d Guards Tank Army, naturally the work pays
more attention to analyzing the experience of its combat operations.

“ son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A study of the experience of the combat employment of tank armies during the years
of the Great Patriotic War will contribute to a more profound understanding of the
nature of offensive operations, to broadening the operational-tactical viewpomt of
Soviet officers and to improving their military thinking. It will serve the cause
also of further strengthening the combat night of our Armed Forces.

FOOTNOTE

L. I. Brezhnev, "Otchet Tsentral'nogo Kouiteta KPSS i ocherednyye zadachi partii
v oblasti vnutrenney i vneshney politiki" [Report of the CPSU Central Omittee

and the Party's Next Tasks in the Area of Domestic and Foreign Policy]. Moscow,
Politizdat, 1976, p 28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER I: TANK ARHIES AND THE BASES OF THEIR COMBAT EMPLOYMENT

During the years of the Great Patriotic War the forming of tank armies which pos-
sessed high mobility, maneuverability and striking force was a natural phenomenon
stemming from the entire previous developmental history of the Soviet armored and
tank troops. This was caused by the need to conduct offensive operations with de-
cisive goals to a great depth and at a rapid pace. The successes of socialist con-
struction, in particular in the defense economy, created the material and technical
basis which made it possible to turn this necessity into a reality.

1. Soviet Armored Troops on the Eve of the Her
Weapons and Organizational Structure of Armored Troops

On 23 February 1922. on the day of the fourth anniversary of the creation of the
Worker-Peasant Red Army [RKKA], participating for the first time in the parade on
Red Square was an armored detachment consisting of seven armored vehicles and sev-
eral auxiliary ones. In it were also two Soviet-produced light tanks and during the
summer of the same year the T08 were for the first time established for peacetime
armored units.

A year later, at the beginning of September 1923, the armored forces underwent new
organizational changes. The individual small motor-tank detachments (armored de-
tachments) were grouped into a relatively large formation, a tank "squadron" which
consisted of two fleets: heavy and light.

In 1925, the TOE were introduced for the separate heavy and separate light tank
battalions. Each battalion was to have 30 tanks.

In the sumaer of 1929, an experimental mechanized regiment was organized and this
was under the command of one of the prominent proponents of creating the armored
and mechanized troops, K. B. Kalinovskiy. 0n the basis of this regiment, in May
1930, the world's first armored formation was organized, a mechanized brigade con-
sisting of tank and motorized regiments, reconnaissance and artillery battalions

as well as a number of special subunits. It had 60 tanks, 32 tankettes, 17 armored
vehicles. 266 motor vehicles and 12 tractors.2

Under the decree of the Labor and Defense Council of 1 August 1931, the so-cailed
large tank program was adopted and this proceeded from the view that technical

achievements in the area of Soviet tank construction "have created solid prerequi-
sites for a fundamental change in the overall operational-tactical doctrine on the

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂiE(ﬂULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of tanks and have demanded decisive organizational changes in the motor-tank
troops in the direction of creating higher mechanized formations capable of inde-

pendently carfying out tasks both on the battlefield and to the entire operational
depth of a modern combat front."3

In the autumn of 1932, on the basis of the 11th Rifle Division in the Leningrad
Military District the XI Mechanized Corps was formed and on the basis of the 45th
Rifle Division in the Ukrainian District, the V1 Mechanized Corps. The mechanized
corps included a mechanized brigade of T-26 tanks (three tank battalions, a rifle-
machine gun battalion, an artillery battalion, a combat engineer battalion and an
antiaircraft machine company), a brigade of the same composition but with BT tanks,

a rifle brigade and corps units. The corps had around 500 tanks, over 200 armored
vehicles, 60 guns and other armament.

During the same year the formation was commenced of 5 separate mechanized brigades,
2 tank regiments, 12 mechanized regiments, 4 mechanized battalions for the cavalry
divisions, 15 tank and 65 tankette battalions for the rifle divisions. As a result
of these measures, the number of personnel in the motor-tank troops by January 1933
had increased by 5.5-fold in comparison with 1931 while their proportional amount
in the army increased from 1.6 to 9.1 percent.“

The motor-tank troops were armed with new equipment including: the T-27 small tanks

('1nkettes), the T—26 and BT-Z light tanks, the T-28 medium tanks and the T-35 heavy
tanks.

0n 1 January 1933, our Arms: Forces had 2 mechanized corps, 5 mechanized brigades,
2 separate tank regiments, 12 mechanized regiments, 15 separate tank battalions and
69 mechanized and tankette battalions. In 1932-1933, the plant conveyors began
turning out BT-S and T-26 (cannon instead of machine gun) tanks as well as the T-37

amphibious tankette. In 1935-1937, the Red Army began to receive over 3,000 tanks
and tankettes annually.

In 1938, the mechanized corps were reorganized and renamed tank corps. By the start
of 1939, their number had been increased up to four. They each had two tank bri-
gades and one rifle-machine gun brigade. In September 1939, two tank corps, the

XV and XXV, participated in the Red Army's liberation of the oblaats of the Western
Belorussia and Western Ukraine. Due to the lack of experience in engineer and
material support for the large mobile rormations, the insufficient skills of the
personnel in controlling them and in carrying out marches, various shortcomings
were detected in the corps operations. Relying on this and considering the previ-
ously made proposals, the Main Military Council of the Red Army on 21 November 1939
ruled that the tank corps be broken up. In their place individual motorized divi-
sions were to be organized and according to the TOE they would each have 275 tanks.
The motorized divisions were to be used as an echelon for exploiting the Success of
a combined-arms army and also as part of the cavalry-mechanized group (mobile group
of a front). By May 1940, there were four such divisions in the Red Army.

Soon thereafter life showed that a motorized division could not perform those func-
tions for which a tank corps was destined. The erroneousness of the decision to
break up the tank corps was apparent with the start of World War II in Western
Europe. In June 1940, the combat experience in the West was discussed at the

FOI.OFTWCJA1.lEHE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

People's Commissariat of Defense [NRO]. The results of this discussion were re-
ported to I. V. Stalin.s The Soviet government took a decision to create a new type
of mechanized corps, separate tank and motorized divisions as well as tank brigades.

The mechanized corps was to consist of two tank and one motorized divisions, special
units and subunits. A tank division consisted of two tank regiments, a motorized
rifle regiment and a howitzer artillery regiment and support subunits. It was to
have 375 tanks of different types. A motorized division was to have two motorized
rifle regiments. a tank regiment and an artillery regiment (according to the TOE,
275 light tanks). According to the wartime TOE, a mechanized corps was to have a
total of 36,080 men, 1,031 tanks, 258 guns and mortars, over 5,000 different-purpose
motor vehicles, 350 tractors and around 1,700 motorcycles.

The generalizing of combat experience, the scientific prediction of the nature of
the impending war and the correct determining of the role of armored troops in it
made it possible for the Soviet tank builders to successfully solve the problem of
further improving armored equipment. From the winter of 1939. the troops began re-
ceiving tanks developed by a group of designers headed by H. I. Koshkin (T-34) and
2h. Ya. Kotin (KV). In terms of their basic indicators such as armament, armor,
cross-country capability and maneuverability, these tanks, particularly the T-34
tank, were the best in the period of World Hat II. This is also testified by state-
ments of foreign specialists.

Thus, the fonmer Nazi Engr-cen Erich Schneider has written: "The T-34 tank made a
sensation.... The Russians, having developed an exceptionally successful and com-
p1ete1y new type of tank, took a great leap forward in the area of tank construc-
tion.... The attempt to develop a tank along the lines of the Russian T-34, after
its careful inspection by German designers, was infeasible."6 Guderian was also
forced to admit that "...the enemy...had a new type of tank which greatly surpassed
the German ones in terms of cross-country capability, heaviness of armor and cannon
capability against armor."

Also noteworthy is the opinion of one of the leading bourgeois tank specialists

D. Orgill who in a book on the T-36 tank has written that "there should be a gold
inscription on the desk of the designer for successfully solving the basic problem
of maximum conformity of armament effectiveness and tank mobility, its ability to
make a destructive strike and remain invulnerable to the enemy strike.... The T-36
tank was developed by persons who were able to see the battlefield of the mid-20th
century better than anyone in the West was able to do."7

Thus, the development of the T—34 and KM tanks was a new stage in the development of
Soviet armored equipment which determined the basic direction in world tank building.

The rearming of the Soviet armored troops with new equipment should have sharply in-
creased their combat capabilities. These measures were to be carried out in 1941.8
By the start of the war. the tanks turned out had been only 1,861 (636 KV and 1.225
T-34) while a predominant portion of the armored equipment was old model tanks. By
the middle of June 1941, the manning levels of the mechanized corps in the border
military districts for all types of combat vehicles was 53 percent. while the pro-
portional amount of new tanks was insignificant (there were just 1,475 of them).9
The corps had 39 percent of the T03 number of motor vehicles, 46 percent of the
tractors, 29 percent of the repair equipment and 17 percent of the motorcycles.10

FOIfnﬂﬂCLALIEEZONlY
Consequently. the armored formations formed by the start of the war were not fully
armed with weapons and equipment. At the same time, their formation made it pos-

sible to pose in a new light the questions of using large armored formations in the
coming engagements.

Views on the Use of Armored Troops. Training of Command Personnel

The questions of the employment of armored troops were first reflected in the orders
of the Revolutionary Military COuncil [RVS] on the use of tanks and armored detach-
ments during the Civil War years. The basic principle of their combat employment
was considered to be close cooperation of the tanks with infantry. In the 1920's.
the question was posed of the possibility of employing tanks for carrying out inde-
pendent missions. In particular. the provisional instructions on the combat employ-
ment of tanks put out in 1928 provided for two forms of their employment in offen-
sive combat: in close cooperation with the infantry as close infantry support

(CIS) tanks and as a forward, freely maneuvering echelon operating outside of fire
contact with the infantry.

The tanks to be used in close support for the infantry were not given independent
missions. The tank saturation rate varied within the limits of one-three platoons
per rifle battalion. A freely maneuvering tank group was given an independent mis-
sion to neutralize enemy artillery, its close reserves and to disrupt communications
and control. It consisted of one or two tank companies per rifle regiment operating
in the first echelon. In addition, there were provisions to create a reserve tank
echelon for increasing success in combat. Soon thereafter this provision was rein-
forced in the 1929 RKKA Field Manual.

The gradual increase in the tank fleet encouraged the further development of Soviet
military theoretical views on the combat employment of tanks. In the 1930's the
basic provisions were worked out for the theory of a deep offensive operation. lts
essence was in the simultaneous neutralization of the enemy to the entire depth of
its grouping and for this the artillery, tank and mechanized troops, aviation and
airborne formations were to be employed. During these years new regulations and
manuals were developed on the combat employment of armored troops and these were im-
proved as the army was outfitted with new combat equipment.11 A number of military
theoretical works appeared and these examined the problems of the operational and
tactical employment of the armored formations and units.‘2 On the pages of the
periodic press, and particularly the journals VOYNA I REVOLYUTSIYA [Bar and Revolu-
tion], VOYENNAYA MYSL' [Military Thought], HEKHANIZATSIYA I MOTORIZATSIYA RKKA [RKkA
Mechanization and Motorizationl. VOYBNNYY VESTNIK [Military Herald] and
AVTOBRONETANKOVYY ZHURNAL [Motor-Tank Journal], as well as the newspaper KRASNAYA
ZVEZDA [Red Star], there was a broad exchange of opinions on the most urgent ques-
tions of employing the tank and mechanized units. Also of positive significance

was the work done to generalize the experience of controlling tank formations abroad.

It must be emphasized that the works of K. B. Kalinovskiy were of particularly great
significance for the development of operational-tactical views. He can rightly be
called one of the founders of the Soviet theory for the e.ployment of armored troops.
The tank's "technical evolution" which gave it greater mobility combined with suffi-
cient range, he wrote in 1930 in the newspaper KRASNAYA ZVEZDA. "has turned it from
a narrow tactical means of infantry attack into a means of broad operational scope.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The modern tank is capable of participating in all phases of an engagement and oper-
uliun. A significant portion of them will serve as the basis for creating independ-
ent mechanized formations."13 K. B. Kalinovskiy, like many other Soviet military
leaders and theoreticisns, was in favor of large mechanized formations the basic ad-
vantage of which, in his opinion, was "high cross-country capability combined with
mobility and a great strike force."l“

These ideas were also reflected in the draft manual "Vozhdeniye 1 boy samostoy-
atel'nykh soyedineniy" [Driving and Combat of Independent Mechanized Formations]
published in 1932. This pointed out that the mechanized formations are powerful.
maneuverable and strike means for achieving definite goals in an operation. Opera-
tions to develop a breakthrough with the subsequent coming out in the enemy rear
with the task of destroying its reserves and the disrupting of the system of control,
supply and communications were pointed out as the most characteristic forms in the
combat employment of the mechanized formati.us. It was felt that the transportable
supply of fuel and ammunition existing in a mechanized formation provided an oppor-
tunity to conduct independent combat operations to the operational depth up to 200 km
away from one's troops. There were also provisions to employ the mechanized forma-

tions on the flank of operational field forces in cooperation with troops advancing
from the front.

Consequently. Soviet military theory even then viewed the employment of tanks as a
means which in cooperation with the infantry, artillery and aviation was capable of
ensuring the breakthrough of defenses to their entire tactical depth as well as for
developing a tactical success into an operational one by the committing of armored
formations to an engagement. As equipment developed under the influence of changes
occurring in the configuration of the probable enemy's defenses, these views were
continuously improved.

In the 1930's it was felt that the infantry was the basis of a combat formation in
breaking through a tactical defense. The close infantry support (CIS) tanks oper-
ated in close coordination with it. Ahead of them operated the distant infantry
support (DIS) tanks with the mission of neutralizing enemy machine gun and mortar
fire to a depth up to 1-2 km ahead of the advancing infantry. Finally, the long-
range (LR) tank group operated deep in the enemy defensive positions with the task
of neutralizing enemy artillery and destroying its tactical reserves. After the
breaking through of the enemy defenses, the breakthrough was to be developed into
the operational depth by the tank and mechanized formations with air support. As
the might of antitank defenses increased (the experience of the battles in Spain,
on the Karelian Isthmus and in the Far East), the designated methods of tank employ-
ment and operations had to be adjusted and were subsequently altered. In particu-
lar, the DIS and LR tank groups were eliminated.

According to the draft 1941 Field Manual a single group of infantry support tanks
was to be set up. During the artillery softening up, the tanks were to advance to
their jump-off positions. After artillery fire had been shifted from the forward
edge deeper into the defenses, they were to rapidly attack the enemy. The infantry
could go over to the attack at the moment that the first echelon (heavy tanks) with
the mission of neutralizing enemy antitank defenses and destroying artillery would
reach the forward defensive edge. The second echelon was made up of medium tanks.
Its mission was, in advancing behind the first echelon, to neutralize and destroy

FOR OFFICIAL.USE‘0NLY
the enemy medium machine guns and antitank weapons in depth. The third echelon,
including light tanks, was to lead the infantry and neutralize enemy infantry and
weapons. The operational plans for the effective and numerical strength of a front
and army were based on the demands of ensuring 50-100 tanks per kilometer of front
in the sector of the main thrust.15

After the successful completion of the breakthrough, the most important mission for
the troops of a front (army) was to rapidly exploit the success. For this purpose,
a front was to have an echelon for developing the breakthrough and this was to con-
sist of tank, mechanized and cavalry formations. In organizatioal terms. they were
grouped in cavalry-mechanized groups (CH6) consisting of cavalry and mechanized
corps or mobile groups (MG) consisting of one or two mechanized corps. Armies ad-
vancing in the main sector (assault armies) bad a breakthrough development echelon
consisting of a mechanized corps.

0n the eve of the war, different variations were envisaged for committing the front
breakthrough development echelon to an engagement. with poorly developed defenses
and a lack of major reserves for the enemy, the echelon could be committed even be-
fore the complete breakthrough of the tactical zone with a mission of completing the
rout of the enemy and coming out in the operational depth. The committing of the
breakthrough development echelon after the complete shattering of the enemy tactical
defensive zone by the rifle troops was considered the most advisable. A front's
breakthrough development echelon was given the following basic missions: to pursue
the retreating enemy, to defeat its operational reserves, to disrupt troop control,
to seize the most important lines and objectives in the operational depth the taking
of which would ensure the most rapid achieving of the operations goal and would cre-
ate prerequisites for conducting the subsequent operation.. During the period of
commitment to battle there was to be the dropping (landing) of airborne troops to
seize important operational objectives in the enemy rear (airfields, road junctions

and crossings over major water barriers) and to cut off or destroy the enemy re-
serves.

The mechanized corps were to be committed to battle in a zone up to 20 km wide with
two or more routes in it and to a depth of 6-8 km either after the breakthrough of
the second defensive line by the rifle troops for the purposes of developing the
operation in depth or toward one of the flanks. The best was felt to be the commit-
ting of mob11e troops on the operation's first day in order to deprive the enemy of

an opportunity to bring up reserves from the defensive depths to the breakthrough
area.

Thus. the tasks of defeating the enemy to its entire depth at a rapid pace for those

times were to be carried out by the joint efforts of the ground troops, aviation and
airborne forces.

The questions of controlling the armored troops were reflected in the manuals,
orders and in a number of works generalizing the experience of the conducted exer—
cises and maneuvers as well as combat practice.16 It was felt that the basic de-

mands made upon troop control should be firmness, efficiency, flexibility, high
activity and initiative of the commanders.

FOR<MﬂﬁCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combat operations of the troops, in continuous control over the course of battle,

in the combat and logistical support of the troops, in monitoring the execution of
orders and instructions and in constant information on all the situational data.

The couuwnder's plan was the basis of control. Success depended upon organizing
tank cooperation with the other branches of troops. The questions of coordinating
the efforts were to be reflected in a special plan. In achieving close cooperation
great attention was given to explaining mutual tasks, to constant information, to

The high demands placed upon control necessitated an improvement in its equipping
and particularly the communications. However, on the eve of the war it was not pos-
sible to fully carry out this task. As a consequence of the insufficient develop-
ment of production capacity within the electrical engineering industry, the signal
troops had an acute shortage of technically more advanced radio equipment. The new
radios were introduced slowly and in insufficient numbers. The experience of combat
operations, maneuvers and exercises provided grounds for the Main Military Council
Commission in August 1939 to conclude that the available radios did not ensure con-
tinuous and dependable troop control.17 In the Armed Forces great work was carried
out to train coamand personnel for the armored troops. The decrees of the VKP(b)
[All-Union Communist Party (Bolshevik)] Central Committee and the USSR SNK [Sov1et
of People's Connissars] were aimed at solving these problems. In the prewar years,
an extensive network of secondary military schools had been set up as well as
armored courses for the advanced training and retraining of the RKKA command person-
nel. As a whole in the 1934-1939 period alone, the command personnel of the armored
troops increased by 154 percent. It is essential to emphasize that around 30 per-
cent of the command personnel had combat experience acquired during the period of
the Civil War, operations in the Far East, in liberating the western oblasts of the
Ukraine and Belorussia and in the Soviet-Finnish conflict.

0f great significance for the political indoctrination of the tank troop personnel
and for strengthening the authority of the command personnel was the Ukase of the
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet of 12 August 1960 "On Strengthening One-Nan
Leadership in the Red Army and Navy." The institution of military commissars estab-
lished in 1937 was abolished. The political apparatus had an opportunity to concen-
trate all its efforts on the political indoctrination of the subunit and unit per-
sonnel.

The reorganization of the political bodies and the ideological and organizational
strengthening of the party and Komsomol organizations helped to improve the content

of all political work among the tank troop personnel. In August 1940, the Main
Directorate of Political Propaganda, proceeding from the instructions of the party

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Central Committee, sent out to the troops the Directive "0n the Reorganization of
Party Political Work." This work began to be subordinate to the main task of teach-
ing the troops what was essential for wartime and the key focus was shifted to the
tactical exercise fields, the tank driving ranges and firing ranges.

Thus. on the eve of the war, proceeding from the demands of Soviet military doc-
trine. our military thought had worked out what was then an advanced theory on a
deep offensive operation and in it the chief place was assigned to highly fluid
combat operations. Large tank and mechanized formations were to be primarily re-
sponsible for them. The theory of military art gave great attention to examining
the questions of the most effective use and control of the armored and mechanized
troops. Under the conditions of the approaching war, the Communist Party and the
Soviet government carried out extensive work to train tank commanders and this,
along with other factors. provided our nation with the opportunity during the diffi-
cult war years to turn the tank and mechanized troops into a powerful strike and
mobile force.

As a whole, during the years preceding the war, a correct orientation was set in

the employment of armored troops. The measures carried out to improve the organi-
zational structure and the theoretical elaboration of questions on tank troop em-
ployment played an important role in the subsequent activi ‘ea of these troops dur-
ing the war years. The development of a theory for the combat employment of the
Soviet Army armored troops occurred independently without any borrowing from foreign
theories and was based not on the negation of the role and capabilities of the "old"
branches of troops but rather on a combination and unification of the combat efforts
of all modern branches of troops in an engagement and operation.

The entire history of the development of armored troops. their organizational de-
velopment and the elaboration of the theoretical bases for combat employment were
directly linked to the development of our advanced military science and to the suc-
cessful carrying out of the grandiose task of technically reconstructing the Soviet
Army on the basis of the stronger socialist economy.

The work carried out in the prewar years in the area of political and military in-
doctrination and the training of personnel was of enormous significance. This
strengthened the troops and helped instill high moral-combat qualities in the men.
This was to be of great importance in the severe testings which befell the Soviet
people and their Armed Forces during the years of the Great Patriotic War.

2. The Formation of Tank Armies, Their Organizational Structure and Combat
Capabilities

The war started by fascism on 22 June 1941 against the USSR demanded an enormous
straining of all moral and physical forces on the part of our people. As a conse-
qucnce of a number of factors, the Soviet Army was initially forced to retreat into
the interior of the nation. In heavy defensive engagements, the Soviet military

and including the courageous tank troops, in causing significant losses to the enemy
in personnel and equipment, courageously defended the cities and villages of their
horeland. In going over to a counteroffensive at Moscow, the Soviet Army shattered
the myth about the invincibility of the Nazi troops. The question arose of carrying
our major offensive operations along the entire Soviet-German Front. An important

role was assigned to the armored formations and field forces in carrying out this
mission.

11

FOR 0FF1C1A1.USE(NVLY
The Basic Prerequisites for Creating Tank Armies

One of the most important prerequisites for creating the tank armies during the
years of the Great Patriotic War was the great capabilities residing in the social-
ist economy. The conditions under which our Armed Forces found themselves at the
outset of the war with unusual urgency raised the question of the accelerated pro‘
duction of military equipment. The shifting of industry to the east in the summer
of 1941 and the reorganization of it for wartime needs led to a temporary decline in
in the volume of defense product and, as a result, to reduced offensive capabilities
of the Soviet Army. Economic difficulties along with other factors (significant
losses in tanks, organizational hitches and so forth) forced the Soviet High Command
in July 1941 to take the decision to break up the mechanized corps and create tank
divisions on the basis of them. Subsequently these divisions were turned into
separate tank brigades. Individual tank regiments and battalions were also formed.

The planned use of the human and material resources and the heroic labor by the work-

ers, scientists, engineers and technicians made it possible for the Soviet state in
1952 to achieve outstanding advances in the defense economy and ensure large-scale
production of armored equipment (Table 1).

Table 1

Tank and SAU Production in the USSR in 1941-1944*

 
 

Total Tanks
and SAU

    
 
    

Second half of 1941

First half of 191.2 11,178
Second half of 1942 13,327
191.3 26,088
191.1. 28,984

* "Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 511 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1961-1945 gg." [Operations of the Soviet Armed Forces in the Great
Patriotic War of 1941-1945], Moscow, Voyenizdat, Vol 2, p 17; Vol 3,

p 16; Vol 4, pp 10-11. "Istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny" [History of
World War 11], Moscow, 1976, Vol 5, p 48; Vol 6, p 343.

From Table 1 it can be seen that in the first half of 1942, tank output in compari—
son with the second half of 1941 increased by 2.3-fold. Here of the 11,178 tanks,

more than 6,000 (50.8 percent) were medium and heavy ones. In the second half of
1962, more than 13,000 tanks were produced and in 1943-1944. over 53.000 combat
vehicles. This created real prerequisites for organizing large tank formations and
field forces and replacing their losses.

As a total during the war years, the USSR turned out 104,000 tanks and SAU.la The
operational army received 78,000 tanks and over 16,000 SAU. In addition, the
armored troops received around 11,000 motor vehicles, 10,000 armored vehicles and
30,000 motorcycles.19

s

12

FOI:OFI1CLA1.USIiOWﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The output of artillery pieces and other types of armament increased continuously.
In 1942, the Red Army received 3,237 rocket launchers. The production of artillery

pieces with a caliber of 76 mm and above during the same year reached 29,561. As a

whole, the production level for all systems of guns in December 1942, in comparison

with December of the previous year, increased by l.8—fold. In 1943, gun production
increased by more than 2.2-fold.

The war required a great deal of metal which was the basis for defense production.
The Soviet people produced this metal. In 1942, the nation produced 6.8 million

tons of iron, 8.1 million tons of steel and 5.4 million tons of rolled metal. Pro-
duction of new high-alloy steels was developed.20

Hitler and his accomplices greatly misjudged the capabilities of Soviet industry.

In one of his talks in July 1941, Hitler boastfully stated: "It is very good that
at the very outset we succeeded in destroying the Russian armored troops and avia-
tion. The) will not be able to make up these losses."21 But the Soviet people led
by the Communist Party not only made up the heavy losses but also surpassed Nazi
Germany in weapons production. Under the severe conditions of the Siberian winter
and often under the open sky, they installed equipment, built new enterprises and

in a maximum short period of time organized the production of military equipment,
including combat vehicles. For the sake of victory over the enemy, our people ac-
cepted any sacrifices and hardships. The Soviet people helped the front not only by

their heroic labor but also by the fact that they contributed their personal savings
to arm the Soviet Army.

During the war years, the workers of the rear contributed to the defense fund over
16 billion rubles of their personal savings in money alone. More than 5.8 billion
rubles were received to build tank columns. This money was used to manufacture
30,522 tanks and 5A0,” or almost one-third of the tanks and sw produced by indus-
try over the entire war. The workers in the Urals created a volunteer tank corps
having manufactured at their own expense the tanks and other weapons for it. All of
this was a vivid manifestation of the unbreakable unity between the army and the
people and their solidarity around the Communist Party. The successes of the de-
fense economy had a direct impact on increasing the armament and technical level of
the operational army, on its successful carrying out of the combat missions on the
battlefield and on achieving a complete victory over the Nazi military machine.

It is wise to point out that the bourgeois falsifiers of history have endeavored in.
every possible way to play down the role of Soviet production during the war years.
In particular, they have depicted the American Lend Lease victories as a supposed
"crucial" factor in the victory of the Soviet Union.23 Pacts repudiate these fabri-
cations, for the deliveries of armored equipment, for example, were just around

7 percent of the total amount which Soviet industry provided the Soviet armored

tronps.2“ Naturally. they could not have a crucial impact on the course and outcome
of the Soviet Army's strategic operations. Here, during the most difficult time for
our nation, when as a result of the great losses in equipment, the incomplete reor-

cast, the Soviet Army greatly needed combat vehicles, during the 9 months of 1941-
1962 the Allies delivered just 377 tanks.25 A portion of them, in addition, was of

obsolete design, while another portion was lacking certain equipment or did not meet
the combat conditions on the Soviet German Front. By the start of the crucial

13

FIH113FF1CJAI.USIICHVLY
battles at Stalingrad, the deliveries of Anglo-American tanks had declined sharply.
This is also attested to by the advisor of the 0.8. State Department. R. Garthoff,
who in his book "Soviet Military Policy" has written that a large portion of the
Western equipment destined for the Soviet Union "actually arrived after the crucial

turning point in the war which was the battles at Stalingrad and Kursk at the end of
1942 and in the middle of 191.3."26

Along with the increased volume of armored production, its quality was also improved.
Particular attention was given to organizing the prouuction of medium and hsvey
tanks. Our medium T-34 and heavy KV tanks underwent a number of improvements. A
more powerful 85-mm cannon was mounted on the T-34 tank, the strength of the armor
welds was increased, the four-speed transmission was replaced by a five-speed,
shifting gears was made easier and the air cleaner was improved. The commander's
cupola made it possible to better View the battlefield. The fire power, armor pro-
tection, mobility and cross-country capability of the heavy tank were somewhat in-
creased. A new model of heavy tank, the 18 was developed as well as a new medium
tank, the T-44 (1945). The troops received the 80-76, SU-85, 80-100, SU-122, SU-

152. 180-122 and ISU-lSZ self-propelled artillery mounts. By the end of 1943, Eight
tanks had been taken out of production.

The basic technical and tactical specifications of the armored equipment of the
Soviet Army are given in Appendix 1. In comparing the given data, it can be con-
cluded that the main direction in its qualitative improvement was increased fire
power, armored protection and mobility. Thus, the increased output of armored
equipment and artillery equipment and the improvement in their quality created an
opportunity in 1942 to carry out the task of refurbishing the major armored forma-
tions on a new qualitative level and to create tank armies. The nature of the oper-
ations being conducted by the troops also necessitated this.

As is known, one of the reasons for the inability to follow through on our offen-
sive operations in the winter campaign of 1941-1942 was the lack of large armored
formations and field forces. This sharply restricted the possibilities for the
Soviet Command to conduct operations and did not make it possible to rapidly develop
a tactical success into an operational one and to conduct an offensive at a high
pace. Consequently, combat experience pointed to the necessity of not only individ-
ual tank units (formations) as part of the operational army for close infantry sup-
port, but also tank (mechanized) corps and tank armies operating as an echelon for
exploiting the success.

The need for this was also dictated by the presence of a large number of tanks and
assault guns in the operational forces of Nazi Germany (by the start of the attack
on the USSR there were 3,712 of them. 3.230 on 1 May 1942 and 6,600 on 1 November
1942),27 by their massed use as part of the motorized (tank) corps and tank groups

(armies), by the nature of the enemy defenses and by the methods of its combat
operations.

The highest operational-strategic field force in the ground troops of Nazi Germany
was the army group usually consisting of two or three and in individual operations
four or five field armies. At the start of World War 11, an army group included
30-40 infantry divisions and 4-10 separate tank and motorized divisions which were
combined in motorized corps. For the purposes of giving the tank troops greater

14

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(N9LY
independence, the Nazi Command in the spring of 1940 began to set up tank groups
which usually numbered 6-8 tank and motorized divisions and in individual instances,
as was the case in the K1eist tank group in the invasion of France, up to 12 of
them. From this time, an army group, as a rule, included 1 or 2 tank groups. Dur-

ing the war years a group numbered 30-50 divisions, up to 1,000 tanks and 9,000-
S,000 guns and mortars.

The field army was the basic operational field force. It included 3 or 4 army
corps of 3 divisions in each. Sometimes a motorized corps or separate tank (motor-

ized) divisions were also included. As a total a field army could have 9-12 divi-
sions.

At the start of the war against the USSR, the tank group was the highest operational
field force in the tank troops. At the end of 1941, the tank groups were changed
into tank armies consisting of 2 or 3 motorized corps.

The corp was the highest tactical formation. In terms of composition and purpose,
the corps were divided into army, motorized (in July 1942 these were renamed tank
corps), mountain rifle and reserve. Like the operational field forces, the corps
did not have an established TOE structure and during the war years their composi-
tion varied. However, in a majority of operations, an army corps consisted of 3
infantry divisions and reinforcement units. A motorized (tank) corps usually in-
cluded 2 tank divisions and 1 motorized division. In 1941-1943 such a corps num-
bered up to 500 tanks and SAU. For example, the XXIV Tank Corps at Prokhorovka

(July 1923) numbered 500 tanks while the III Tank Corps at Bogodukhov (August 1943)
had 360.

The infantry, tank, motorized and other divisions were tactical formations with a
TOE composition. An infantry division consisted of 3 infantry regiments. In a
tank division there were a tank regiment, 2 motorized regiments and an artillery
regiment. A motorized division consisted of 2 motorized regiments and an artillery

regiment. All types of divisions also included support subunits. A typical compo-
sition of a tank division is shown in Table 2.

Table 2

Typical Composition of a German Army Tank Division*

    

1941-1942

  
  

Men and Equipment

  
 

  

Personnel (in thousand) 16

     
   

 
    

Tanks 209 40
SAU - ‘0
Armored vehicles 25 16
Guns and mortars I 192 154 1]]
Armored personnel carriers l 160 172 90
Motorcycles } 2 915 788 350
Motor vehicles ’ 2,147 2,171
Tractors 200 115

* "Boycvyye deystviya Sovetskoy Armii v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne 1941-1945 gg."
[Combat Operations of the Soviet Army in the Great Patriotic War of 1941-1945],
Vol 1, Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1958, pp 360, 361.

15

INJR 0F?1CLAL.USE‘0NLY
Thus. the organization of the enemy troops made it possible for its command to have
the umHHed use of the tank troops, to carry out offensive operations with decisive
goals and with the going over to the defensive to make strong counterstrikes the
partying of which was more often beyond the capacity of the Soviet rifle formations.
During the war years the number of tank and motorized divisions in the Nazi Army
increased. While on 22 June 1941 there were 36 of them, including 22 tank, in the
period from December 1961 through Hay 1945, 26 tank and 17 motorized divisions, 12
motorized and 16 brigades were newly formed.29

The armored equipment of the Nazi Army was also improved. In 1942, the light tanks
were taken out of service while the T-III and T-IV medium tanks were modernized by
mounting long-barrel antitank cannons on them and by strengthening the armor.30 Be-
ginning in 1963, the enemy tank divisions and corps-level reinforcement units began
receiving a significant number of new types of combat vehicles (tanks, SAU, tank
hunters and assault guns) which had for those times better tactical and technical
specifications in terms of armor thickness, weapons and other indicators (Appendix 2%

In 1941-1962, the enemy organized its defenses, as a rule, following a system of
creating separate strongpoints and centers of resistance in the most important
sectors. This made it possible for our rifle formations reinforced by the CIS
tanks to break through the defenses, most often utilizing the spaces between the
strongpoints.

Having received a number of telling blows from the Soviet Armed Forces, the Nazi
troops by the spring of 1943, and in certain sectors even previously, had begun to
rapidly improve the defenses. The defeat of the enemy at Stalingrad was the crucial
event which determined the turning point in the tactics of the Nazi Army. As a re-
sult of this defeat the enemy was forced to go over to the defensive along the en-
tire Soviet-German Front. From this time up to the war's end, the elaboration of
defensive combat tactics assumed particular significance for the enemy and during
these years this underwent predominant development. In individual sectors, the
areas between centers of resistance were filled by man-made obstacles and connected
by trenches. There was a transition from defenses based upon a system of strong-
points to a solid trench defense.

The tactical defensive zone of the Nazi Army formations from this time onwards was
organized, as a rule, in the following manner. An infantry division occupied a zone
8-12 km wide in a stationary defense and 16-25 km wide in a mobile defense and on
particularly important sectors 4-7 km wide.31 The depth of a division's defensive
zone reached 4-6 km and sometimes up to 8 km. The zone consisted of three positions.
The first equipped with two or three lines of solid trenches was usually held by the
battalions of the first echelon regiments. In the second position were the regi-
mental reserves and artillery firing positions, and in the third the divisional re-
serves. The second position was frequently equipped with trenches and sometimes
strongpoints while the third position had a system of strongpoints. All types of
man-made obstacles were widely used ahead of the forward edge and in the defensive
dcpth.. At a distance of 10-15 km from the forward edge of the main defensive zone,
a second zone was organized and this, as a rule, was not occupied by the troops
ahead of time. The main and second zones comprised the tactical defensive zone.

16

FOI.0IWHC1AI.IEHB(HQLY
FORiOFFKJA1.USEZONLY

1hus, by the spring of 1943, the nature of the defenses had not fundamentally
changed in the Nazi Army. Our troops were confronted with a new mission involving
the organization of the breakthrough of the enemy's deep stationary defenses. This
required the more decisive massing of resources in narrow sectors of the front and
the more accurate neutralization of enemy targets by making powerful fire strikes.

At the same time, the problem of developing a tactical success into an operational
one had to be solved.

Subsequently (in 1944-1945), enemy tactical defenses were improved chiefly by the
developing of engineer-designed structures and improving the organization of the
fire plan. With the shifting of combat operations to German territory, the resist-
ance of the Nazi troops increased significantly. During these years defenses were
characterised by the wide development of a system of trenches and communications
trenches, by the massed use of man-made obstacles of the most diverse sorts and by
a high density of weapons, particularly antitank. The enemy began to deploy the
corps reserves in the second defensive zone, some 6-9 km behind the main zone. They
were largely committed to battle for the main defensive zone.

Some 20-25 km behind the forward edge, a third (army) defensive zone was organized.
Here were located the reserves of the army commander (1-2 divisions) and the special
army units. The reserves of an army group were concentrated at the rear defensive
zone set up 50-80 km behind the forward edge. From the second half of 1964, when
the fortified areas previously built on German, Polish and Romanian territory began
to be included in the defensive system, the depth of the defensive engineer works
for an army group increased up to 120-150 km and more.

The defenses of the Nazi troops, particularly in the tactical zone, were marked by
stubbornness and activity and these were expressed chiefly in the making of counter-
strikes and counterattacks, and in certain instances, by the carrying out of artil-
lery counterbombardment. The corps and army reserves, as a rule, were committed to
combat for the main defensive zone while the army group reserves were committed in
the course of the engagement for the tactical defensive zone as a whole. In organ-
izing counteratrikes, the Nazi Command widely maneuvered the mobile formations both
along the front and from in depth. Naturally, in the course of the offensive opera-

tions large tank field forces were required for repelling the strong enemy counter-
strikes.

Defenses in the operational depth of the Nazi troops were organized successively in
a series of lines by the rear guard units (up to one-third of all the defending
troops) equipped with motor transport making it possible for them to rapidly put
distance between them and the pursuing troops. The main forces were pulled back to
the rear after the advancing grouping had deployed for breaking through the next
line (for example, in the retreat at thev and Vyaz'ma). The intermediate lines
were organized at varying distances apart (5-25 km) depending upon the specific
situation and the nature of the terrain. In a number of instances the main forces
were disengaged in darkness in observing complete silence. Consequently, the task
arose of having in the Soviet Armed Forces those field forces which would surpass
the enemy troops in mobility and maneuverability and anticipate the enemy in reach-

ing the prepared lines in depth and carry out continuous pursuit along a broad front
and at a high rate.

17

FOR<0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY
Thus, the increased capabilities of the Soviet defense economy, the necessity of
conducting offensive operations of great scope with decisive aims, the generaliza—
tion of combat experience, the nature of the enemy defenses and their deep echelon-
ing with the presence of large tank grOupings in the defending troops in their ag-
gregate required the organizing of a qualitatively new type of operational field
force, the tank armies, during the war years.

The Organizational Structure and Combat Capabilities of Tank Armies

In the spring of 1962, the Soviet Army began to organize tank corps. In the second
half of 1962, a corps had three tank brigades (each with S3 tanks) and a motorized
rifle brigade, a motorcycle battalion, a rocket battalion and support subunits. A
corps numbered 7,800 men, with 168 tanks (T-36, T-60 and T-70), 32 guns (65-mn and
76-mm), 20 antiaircraft guns (37-mm), 66 mortars (82-mm and 1204mm), as well as 8

8H-8 or BM-lJ rocket launchers.32 In April and May, 11 tank corps were organized
in the fronts and 16 in the Hq SEC Reserve.

In September 1962, mechanized corps began to be formed. A mechanized corps included
a tank brigade, three mechanized brigades, an antiaircraft artillery regiment, an
antitank artillery regiment, a rocket battalion and support subunits. As a total a
corps had 13,500 men, 175 tanks, 96 guns (65-mm and 76-mm), 60 antiaircraft guns
(37-mm), 8 BH-13 rocket launchers and 116 mortars (824mm and lZO-mm). By the year's
end, eight of them had been formed.

In accord with the directive of Hq SHC, in May-June 1962, the first two tank armies
(3d and 5th) of mixed composition were organized on the basis of the headquarters of
the combined-arms armies. Later another four such armies were formed (the 1st, 2d,
6th and second 5th). The composition of these tank armies was set with: three tank
corps, a reserve tank brigade and one or two rifle divisions. In actuality, the
composition of each tank army varied and was determined by the directive for organ-
izing each individual army. For example, the 3d Tank Army in the Kozel'sk Opera-
tion (August 1962) had two tank corps, a separate tank brigade and three rifle divi-
sions; in the counteroffensive at Stalingrad (November 1962), the 5th Tank Army had
two tank corps and one cavalry corps, a separate tank brigade, six rifle divisions
and other units.

The mixed composition of the 1962 tank armies, that is, the incorporation of the
tank corps and rifle divisions in them, was determined by their operational purpose.
They were to independently carry out the breaking through of the enemy's defenses
and develop the tactical success in an operational one. In the offensive operations
(the 5th Tank Army in the Stalingrad and Donets Basin operations, the 3d Tank Army
in the Kozel'sk, Ostrogozhsk-Rossosh' and Khar'kov operations), they were actually
used as combined-arms armies reinforced with tank (mechanized) corps. The rifle
divisions with reinforcements were given the mission of breaking through the main
enemy defensive zone while the tank and mechanized corps remained the army mobile
group and were used for developing the success.

However, the presence in the tank armies of formations having a varying degree of
mobility and in addition with the lack of effective communications, greatly impeded
troop control in developing the offensive in the operational depth. This inevitably
led to a weakening of the force and to a reduction in the depth of the tank attack
and consequently to a reduction in the results of the operation as a whole. The

18

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR(MHHCJAL.USE(NNLY

experience of the operations conducted showed the need for creating homogeneous
highly mobile armored field forces which would possess great strike force and fire
power. In order that the tank armies could achieve even greater results than in
the operations of the 1942-1943 winter campaign, they had to be freed of the un-
motorized rifle formations, the mobility of the artillery and rear bad to be in-
creased and engineer equipment assigned to the army.

The organization of such homogeneous armies began in accord with the Decree of the
State Defense Committee [6K0] in January 1943. 3 The first homogeneous tank army
was the 5th Guards Tank Army. By the beginning of April, the 1st and 2d Tank armies
had converted to the new organization. According to the Hq Directive of 14 May 1943.
the 3d Guards Tank Army was formed, during the period from 4 through 18 July the

4th Tank Army and in January 1944, the 6th Tank Army. The standard composition of
a homogeneous tank army is shown in Diagram 1.

As a rule, a tank army included: combat formations (units) with one or two tank
corps and one mechanized corps, separate tank and self-propelled artillery brigades
and artillery formations (units); the combat support units including reconnaissance,
engineer, chemical and so forth; the rear support and servicing units and facilities.
All the combat formations and units possessed approximately the same speed of ad-
vance and the same cross-country capability. This facilitated the control of the
army's troops and significantly increased its maneuverability. According

According to the standard TOE, a homogeneous tank army had around 800 tanks and SAD.
However, the effective strength of the tank armies was not constant and depended
upon a number of factors, including upon the situation and pending tasks. The total
number of a tank army's personnel usually reached a total of 43,000-50,000 men. The
number of tanks and SAU was 550-700 and sometimes more. For example, the 2d Guards
Tank Army prior to the January 1945 offensive had 670 tanks and 187 SAU while the
6th Guards Tank Army in the Manchurian Operation had over 1,000 combat vehicles.

During the war years the general trend for the change in the effective strength of
the tank armies was an increased number of personnel, armament and military equip-
ment and, consequently, combat capability. This can be seen from Table 3 the aver-
age data of which are given for the experience of 40 army offensive operations.

Table 3

Increased Number of Personnel, Armament and Military Equipment
in War Year Tank Armies

1942 1943 1944

   
     
 

Men and Equipment

   
   
  
    
    

  
   
  
   
 

  
   
  
    
 

Personnel. men 35,000 46,000 48,000 60,000
Tanks 350-500 450—560 450-620 to 700
SAU --- 25 98-147 to 250
Total tanks and SAU 350-500 475-575 550-750 to 1,000
Percentage of medium and heavy tanks 30-40 45-50 50-55 65-70
Guns and mortars 150-200 500-600 650-750 to 850
and more

Note. In 1942. only the artillery and mortars of the tank (mechanized) corps
and tank armies have been counted.

19

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USI1NVLY
From Table 3 it can be seen that the composition of the tank armies from 1942
through 1945 increased by approximately one-third in terms of personnel, by approx-
imately 2-fold for tanks and SAU and by 4-fold for artillery. In comparison with
the mixed tank armies, those of homogeneous composition possessed greater strike
force and fire power as well as greater mobility due to the lack of unmotorized for-
mations. There were also significantly greater capabilities to support combat oper—
ations. The presence of separate tank and SAD brigades made it possible to have a

strong mobile tank reserve or when necessary to rapidly set out a forward detachr
ment .

The army combat formations and units, in being armed with tanks, SAU and artillery,
including antiaircraft and rocket, and firearms and machine guns. could hit large
enemy tank groupings numbering up to a tank corps (550-700 tanks and SAD in the
tank army in comparison with 200-500 tanks and assault guns in an enemy tank corps).

The tank corps which comprised the army by the beginning of 1944 according to the
TOE had three tank brigades of 65 tanks each and a motorized rifle brigade. three
SAU regiments (12 SU-152, 16 SU-122 and 21 SU-76), mortar and antiaircraft artil-
lery regiments and other units and subunits. As a total a corps numbered around
11,000 men, 209 tanks (1 KM and 208 T—34), 49 SA”, 152 guns and mortars, 8 lH-13
units and 1,295 motor vehicles.3“

A mechanized corps consisted of three mechanized brigades and one tank brigade,
three SAU regiments, mortar and antiaircraft artillery regiments and other units and
subunits. According to the TOE a corps had over 16,000 men, 197 tanks (176 1-34 and
21 T—70), 49 SAU, 252 guns and mortars, 8 EH—lS units and 1,835 motor vehicles.as

The tank and mechanized corps, being operational-tactical formations, could inde-
pendently carry out various missions, including: developing the success in opera—
tional depth, pursuing the retreating enemy, capturing important lines and objec-
tives, advancing against the enemy which had hurriedly gone over to the defensive,
and combating enemy tanks and motorized formations. With reinforcement by rifle
formations, howitzer and heavy artillery, heavy tanks and engineer units, in addi-
tion, they could carry out missions of breaking through defenses prepared under
field conditions. Considering the intensity of combat, fuel and ammunition supply
and the nature of operations. these corps could advance continuously for 5 or 6 days
at a rate of 50-60 km and more, being 30-40 km away from the army's main forces.

A separate tank brigade (three tank battalions, a motorized submachine gun battalion
and other subunits), in having 65 T-36 tanks, comprised, as a rule, the any command-
er's reserve. Very often it operated as the army's forward detachment. A brigade
was also capable of carrying out other tactical missions.

A separate SAD brigade had 65 SAM and also most often formed the army commander's
reserve.

A tank army could be reinforced with separate tank regiments (21-35 tanks), by heavy
tank regiments (21 KV tanks), and by SAD regiments (16-20 SU-85, SU—lOO and

SIP-122).“S The army cot-lander, as a rule, assigned these weapons to the corps
fighting on the main sector in an operation.

20

FOB‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
lery units. As a total an army numbered up to 850 guns and mortars and this made it
possible to create an average density in the sector of the main thrust up to 50-80

artillery capabilities of a tank army ensured its successful operations as the

mobile group of a front. In employing the army to break through the enemy defenses,
it required significant artillery reinforcements.
motorcycle battalions of the first echelon corps were organized in two or three re-
connaissance groups (a reconnaissance zone of 1.5-2 km wide and 25—30 km deep).

From the brigade reconnaissance companies and platoons reconnaissance patrols were
appointed (a reconnaissance zone up to 1.5 km wide and 10-15 km deep). As a total,
thus, in a tank army one or two reconnaissance detachments were organized as well as
8-11 reconnaissance groups, 17-20 reconnaissance patrols and 2-3 deep reconnaissance
grOups. In activating two-thirds of the reconnaissance resources, they were capable

of carrying out tasks in the army's zone of advance and on its flanks to a depth of
25-30 km. The main limitation was the capability for long-distance communications.

Frontal aviation provided data on the enemy at distances of 100-300 and more kilome-
ters. The time for transmitting air reconnaissance information made it possible to
promptly respond to the situation and was within the limits of from 1 to 5-6 hours
(from the experience, for example, of the 2d Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder
Operation).3 For precisely this reason, the basic emphasis in obtaining data on
the enemy by the tank army staffs upon reaching operational depth was put on air

reconnaissance which in 1943 was organized, as a rule, by submitting requests to
the front staff.

The transfer of the front's air resources to the tank armies from the middle of

1944 (in the Lwow-Sandomierz and Vistula-Oder operations), along with carrying out
the main task of supporting the actions of the ground troops, contributed to the
more efficient collection of information on the enemy. The data began to be re-
ceived not sporadically but rather constantly. For reconnaissance purposes the P0-2
liaison aircraft of the army signals regiment was used, for example, in the 5th
Guards Tank Army in the course of the Belorussian Operation. However as a conse-
quence of their inadaptability for reconnaissance, they could not fully carry out
reconnaissance missions.

The army's need for its own air reconnaissance resources to a certain degree were
fulfilled only in the Manchurian Operation (August 1945), when reconnaissance to a
depth of 50-100 and more kilometers was carried out by the reconnaissance air squad-
ron attached to the 6th Guards Tank Army.

Consequently, the basic trend in the organization and conduct of air reconnaissance
for the tank field forces during the war years was the transition from the supply

of data from requests of the army staff (l9b3) to the obtaining of information from
aviation which was under the tank army (1964-1945). Subsequently the army staff was
provided with capability to collect data from specially assigned reconnaissance
aviation (August 1945).

In the course of an offensive in virtually all the tank armies there was an acute
lack of engineer personnel and equipment, particularly in the crossing of major
water obstacles. In terms of army resources there were, as a rule, two or three
engineer or combat engineer battalions and in the corps a combat engineer battalion.
This made it possible to create a density of 1.5-2 combat engineer companies per
kilometer of front in committing the forces to an engagement. The capabilities of
an army increased somewhat from the middle of 1964, when certain tank armies (the
2d in the Lublin-Brest, the 4th Guards in the Berlin and the 5th Guards in the East

Prussian operations) received an engineer brigade consisting of three engineer bat-
talions and a pontoon bridge regiment (a IMP-l bridging park). As a result, the

22

FINI€NﬂﬂC1Al.lEﬂE(M§LY
density of the engineer troops rose by 2- or 3-fold. In addition, the army had a
TOE pontoon bridging battalion with a N2? bridge park and this made it possible to
erect a bridge with a carrying capacity of 16 tons, 120 m long or one with a carry-
ing capacity of 60 tons and 50-60 m long or two ferries of the same capacity. The
landing boats could carry l,300-l,500 men in one trop. In a number of instances,
the army began to be reinforced by a tank engineer regiment (22 T-34 tanks and 18
sweeps), a pontoon-engineer brigade (the lst Guards and 4th Tank armies in the
Proskurov-Chernovtsy operations) or with a motorized pontoon bridge regiment (the
lst and 2d Guards Tank armies in the Vistula-Oder Operation). However, in a pre-
dominant majority of the offensive operations, the tank armies needed reinforcing

by engineer troops and primarily heavy pontoon-bridge units.

in terms of motor transport units and subunits, the mixed tank armies in 1942 had
only a motor vehicle battalion. In the new organization, the armies received: a
motor transport regiment for the 1st Guards and from the summer of 1944, a motor
transport battalion; three transport battalions for the 2d Guards and from the sum-
mer of 1944, four such battalions and from 1945 a motor transport regiment and bat-
talion; the 3d Guards had three motor transport battalions, from the summer of i944.
four such battalions and from 1945 a motor transport regiment; the 4th. 5th and 6th
Guards each had two motor transport battalions and from the summer of 1944 three
such battalions. In addition. the tank armies also included two or three motor com-
panies for delivering fuels and lubricants (one for each corps). In a tank (mech-

anized) ccrps there was also a fuel supply company.

With the increased number of troops and military equipment in the tank armies, there
was also a greater need for motor tranpsort to transport the materiel. Thus, while
the tank armies in the middle of 1943 had a unit of fire weighing l,000-l,200 tons
and a fuel load of 600 tons, by the beginning of 1945, the weight of the basic sup-
ply accounting units for a three-corps tank army was: 2,385 tons for the unit of
fire, 985 tons for fueling and 100 tons for the daily food rations.

[E one considers that it was necessary to transport 2-2.5 units of fire and 4-4.5
fuelings for the tanks and the SAU, then for just these supplies the army would need
from 1,600 to 2,000 2.5-ton vehicles. In addition, it was essential to have at
least 500 vehicles which would service the tanks (repair shops, charging stations
and so forth). The artillery units would need 1,400-l,500 vehicles. Some 500-600
vehicles were needed for transporting food, spare parts, engineer, chemical and
other supplies. Thus, as a total the motor fleet of a tank army should have 4,500-
5,500 vehicles. Approximately this number of vehicles was in an army (up to 2,600
motor vehicles per corps and 800 for the army). According to the standard composi-
tion an army had: 4.380-5,000 trucks. 465-740 special vehicles and 163-236 cars.3e

As a whole, the motor transport units of the tank armies in terms of their TOE compo-
sition could fully satisfy the troops' needs for materiel but they were constantly

10-25 percent underequipped.

in terms of repair and evacuation units and subunits, the tank armies, as a rule,
included two repair and reconstruction battalions (one up to the middle of 1943),
one or two tractor-evacuation companies and one or two salvage points. I! a tank
(mechanized) corps there were tank-repair and mobile vehicle repair facilities.
These performed routine and medium repairs on tanks and motor vehicles using

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rrpnirud and spare parts. In terms of tanks their production capacity reached 22
medium uvcrhauls a month. In a tank (mechanized) brigade there was a technical sup-
port company which performed routine repairs on the equipment and weapons. Con-

sidering the organic repair facilities the tank armies performed 85 per -nt of all
the medium overhauls.

Combat experience affirmed the urgent need to have road units as part of the tank
armies. Without them the rears of the tank armies in virtually all and particular-
ly in the deep offensive operations had to operate in enemy-clear areas which were

completely unequipped and provided with supply and evacuation routes. This had a
very tangible effect upon the prompt delivery of materiel to the troops.

Great difficulties also arose in organizing commandant service due to the absence
of units and subunits which were specially trained for carrying out these tasks.

As a whole, the organizational changes which occurred during the war years in a tank
army helped to increase its strike, fire and maneuvering capabilities. Better con-
ditions were created for carrying out reconnaissance, air defense and rear support

tasks. The incorporation of new combat and rear support units in an army gave it
greater operational independence.

The troop control bodies of the homogeneous tank armies ensured the successful car-
rying out of the missions confronting them. In the course of the war their struc-

ture and technical equipping were improved considering combat experience and our in-
creased economic capabilities.

The first TOE for the field headquarters of a tank army was approved by Hq SEC in

February 1943 (Diagram 2). In terms of its structure it was virtually analogous
to the field headquarters of a combined-arms army and the mixed tank armies.

At the same time, the pending nature of tank army operations predetermined a number
of particular features in the headquarters bodies in organizing the armies. In
particular, they were somewhat more mobile than the combined-arms and mixed tank
armies having 15-20 percent fewer personnel. In addition, a field headquarters
lacked the headquarters of the army commander of the armored and motorized troops.

The experience of the first offensive operations by the tank armies in 1943 (the
Orel, Belgorod-Khar'khov. Kiev and others) showed that the tank army field head-
quarters structure basically conformed to the nature of the tasks to be carried out
but had, however, a number of shortcomings. For example, the staff's work was com-
plicated in assessing its own troops as there was not any special body to account
for the manning levels and casualties in the army and until the end of 1943 this
task was carried out by the joint efforts of the staff operations section and the
personnel section. The absence of a military communications (V030).section impeded
control over the advance of transports with supplies and their unloading. The
headquarters for armored repairs and supplies did not have a staff and this impeded
planning of technical supply and leadership of subordinates.

The abundance of acute combat situations and the speed of combat operations brought

to the forefront the question of the rapid collection and processing of information
and the transmitting of instructions to the troops. Under these conditions the

24

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

limited number of officers involved in staff operations work, and particularly in
its operations section, told negatively on troop control and consequently on the
activities of the troops. The control bodies, and in particular the staffs, still
remained little mobile due to the large number of personnel in the support and
service subunits.

in 1964-1945, the structure of the tank army control bodies was improved. The
staff's capabilities were increased from the viewpoint of more directly solving the
questions of troop control. A manning and casualty section was introduced on the
army staff. The staff personnel was reduced from 103 to 88 men, chiefly due to
persons not directly involved in troop leadership. The functional duties were some-
what redistributed within the control bodies. As a result, in the staff operations
section, for example, the capabilities in terms of labor expenditures involved with
purely operations work increased by almost double. The proportional amount of sup-
port and service subunits on the army staff declined from 60 to 21 percent. The
staff manning level, according to the experience of the lat, 3d and 6th Tank armies,
began to be 100 percent and over instead of the 60-65 percent in 1943.

The other field headquarters bodies were also strengthened. A military communica—
tions section and a political section were introduced in-the rear headquarters and

a staff for the headquarters of armored repairs and supply. The positions of deputy
chiefs of staffs and sections were established. At the same time a bottleneck in
control remained the lack of special departments for organizing and carrying out
operational camouflage, electronic countermeasures and a commandant service.

For continuous troop control, the army possessed radio, wire and mobile means of
communications. The handling of information was carried out by: the separate sig-
nals regiment which had 10-15 radios, including 3 or 4 high powered, and 18 tele-
graphs; by a separate air liaison regiment (32 P0—2 aircraft); a transport company
(15 cross-country vehicles, 17 motorcycles and 18 armored vehicles); 4 or 5 tele-
phone and telegraph construction companies.39

The experience of the offensive operations carried out by the tank armies in 1963
showed that the technical performance of the radios did not fully meet the needs of
the radio communications organization, as the range in movement did not exceed 25—
30 km, the calls could be intercepted by the enemy as a consequence of the single
wave band and the capacity of the communications channels was low. At the same time
precisely radio communications should become the basic one under the conditions of
highly fluid combat operations. The insufficient number of high powered_radios with
the need for them to maintain contact with the front's staff, with adjacent armies
and two or three first echelon corps in addition reduced the army's capabilities for
establishing individual links with the first echelon formations, the forward detach—
ments, reconnaissance as well as between the control posts. As a result, as is seen
from the materials from reports of the signals sections of a number of tank armies,
up to 50 percent of the information was processed with delays of 1-3 hours in rela-
tion to the established standards.“° The chiefs of the branches of troops and serv—

ices as well as the combat and logistical support units (subunits) had limited com-
munications equipment, and in particular radios.

In following years, the increased economic capabilities of our nation made it pos-
sible to increase the supply tables for the signals units and subunits in the armdes,
including for radios, by 2-fold in 1945 in comparison with l9k3 (Table 4).

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4

Change in Quantity of Radio Equipment in Signals Units (Subunits)
of Tank Armies, Corps and Brigades in 1943-1945*

    

 

Radio Equipment

 
  

Type RAF radios
Sever [North] radios

RSB type radios

Receivers

Total radios and receivers

 

*Arkhiv M0 SSSR [Archives of the USSR Ministry of Defense], folio 38, inv. 80050,

file 6, sheet 21; folio 240, inv. 16102, file 2, sheet 61; folio 236, inv. 168121,
file 3, sheets 1-40.

From the middle of 1943, a tank army, as a rule, was assigned a cable line battalion
and this broadened the capability for using wire communications. In 1944, a control
battery was set up under the tank army's artillery commander. During the war years
the performance of the radio equipment was somewhat improved in terms of range of
communications, including in operating in motion. This was particularly important
for the tank troops. The RSB radios began to be installed on the tanks and the
troops received the high-class Virazh receivers and the RDK-S radio centers mounted
on truck bodies. The capacity of wire communications was improved by 3-3.5-fold.
The troops were issued the PK-lO, PK—30 and K-lO field telephone switchboards, the
PRTs-lOO field telephone exchanges and the TAT-43 telephones. The communications
equipment began to possess greater capabilities in terms of concealment of sending
and receiving mainly by using radio teletype by introducing attachments on the RA?
and RAT radios. The mobility of the coununications centers increased. By the sum-

mer of 1944. up to 40 percent of the communications equipment in a number of armies
was installed on cross-country vehicles.

The improvement in the performance of the means of communication led to a situation
where the time for the receipt of data, for example, from the aviation was shorten-
ed by b-fold and from ground reconnaissance by Z-Q-fold. The increased number of
radios in the corps and brigades made it possible to transmit information simultan-
eously over several channels and to one or two levels below. This increased the
efficiency of handling and reliability of the data.

army troops were established by manning their control bodies with highly skilled
command personnel having rich combat experience. In organizing the tank field

forces of uniform composition, militarily well-trained generals and officers who had
undergone the hard school of combat were appointed to the leading positions.

Thus. the lat Tank Army from 30 January 1963 was under the command of Gen H. Ye.
Katukov, member of the CPSU since 1932. a participant in the Civil War, the commander

26

FOIlﬂﬂﬂClALlﬂﬂioNlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ul lhr Zﬂth Tank Dlvlslon In the battles on the southwestern sector. of the lat
Guards Tank Brigade in the battle for Moscow, the I Tank Corps at Voronezh and the
111 Mechanized Corps on the Kalinin Front in December 1942. The experienced politi-
cal worker Gen N. K. Popel' was appointed member of the military council. He at the
initial period of the war had been the commissar of the V111 Mechanized Corps and
later the deputy commander for political affairs of the III Mechanized Corps. From
February 1943 the staff was headed by Gen H. A. Shalin. Also widely known was the

commander of the 2d Guards Tank Army, Gen 3. I. Bogdanov, a participant in three
wars, a communist and Hero of the Soviet Union.

The 3d Guards Tank Army from the very outset of its organization was under the com-
mand of Gen P. S. Rybalko. a communist since 1919, a participant of the Civil War.
military attache to Poland in the 1930's, a military advisor to China and in 1942
the commander of the 3d and 5th nixed Tank armies. From March 1944, the 4th Tank
Army was headed by the experienced Gen D. D. Lelyushenko, member of the CPSU since
1925. participant of the Civil Har, Hero of the Soviet Union and who during the war
years was in command of mechanized and rifle corps and the 5th, 30th, lat and 3d
Guards armies.

From February 1963, the 5th Guards Tank Army was headed by the well known tankman,
Gen P. A. Rotmistrov who in the past had participated in the Civil War, had been an
instructor at the Hilitary Academy for the Hotorization and Hechanization of the Red
Army and during the war years had been a commander of a tank brigade. the chief of
staff of a mechanized corps and the commander of a tank corps. Gen P. G. Grishin was
appointed member of the military council. He arrived in the tank army from the posi-
tion of deputy commander for political affairs of the VI Tank Corps. The former
chief of staff of the III Guards Tank Corps, Col V. N. Baskakov, became chief of
staff.

At various times the position of army commanders were filled by V. H. Badanov, V. T.
Vol'skiy, A. G. Kravchenko and other generals who possessed rich experience in com-
manding various combined-arms and armored formations and field forces.

The situation was somewhat more complex with the manning of the staffs and sections
of the army field headquarters. As a result of the lack of personnel, a portion of
the staffs and sections was not fully manned in 1943 or frequently by officers who

did not have a higher military education and previously had not worked on the army

level. Thus. in the 5th Guards Tank Army the leading staff section. operations. by
March 1943 was only up to 65-70 percent of the established personnel and of the men
only the section's chief had a higher military education. The manning level of the

staff of the 3d Guards Tank Army was only 65 percent and in the 0th Tank Army around
70 percent.”'

In subsequent years, the manning levels of the tank army control bodies increased
significantly reaching, as a rule, 100 percent by the start of an operation. More-
over, from mid-1964. a reserve of officer personnel was created up to 10 percent of
the regular number and this guaranteed the replacement of casualties in the course
of the offensive up to a certain degree. The experience of the officers of the army
field headquarters increased as the operations conducted were a severe but necessary
schooling in the acquiring of professional skills. The number of staff and section
officers having a higher military education increased. Hhile in 1943 they were

27

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HMOHKMLWEOMN

15-18 percent on the staffs of the field forces and formations, in 1945 the figure
was 40-45 percent and considering retraining at academy courses, up to 55 percent.

Starting with mid-1943, the leadership of the army field headquarters was stabilized
and thereby better opportunities were created for more efficient work by the control

bodies and for increasing the level of reciprocal understanding while maintaining
Succession in their activities.

Thus, the uniform tank armies created in 1943 were powerful operational field forces
which possessed high mobility, great strike force as well as combat independence as
established in their organizational structure. They were well controlled and not
cumbersome. In including, as a rule, two tank corps and one mechanized one, separ-
ate tank and SAU brigades and the corresponding range of army formations and units,
a tank army could create a powerful first and second echelon, a strong reserve and
be capable of rapidly developing a tactical success into an operational one and
successfully carry out other missions. The improvement over the war years in the
organizational structure of the armies, the control bodies and the means of command.
the great work in training command personnel along with the heroism of the Soviet
military created real prerequisites for the troops of the armored field forces to

conduct offensive operations with decisive goals, to a great depth and at a rapid
pace.

3. Principles in the Combat Employment of Tank Armies

Soviet military art in the war years was improved in being enriched with the valu-
able experience of organizing and conducting combat operations under various situa-
tional conditions, under the influence of a whole series of factors and primarily

due to the wise policy of the Communist Party which correctly defined the military-

political goals of the war and skillfully utilized all the nation's resources for
achieving victory over the enemy.

The Suture of 3 Front Oftensive Operation

The forms and methods of conducting front-level operations during the years of the
Great Patriotic War were largely determined by the conditions of the operational-

strategic situation, by the composition of the field forces and by the art in em-
ploying the available resources.

As is known, during the first period of the war the offensive operations were car-
ried out in an unfavorable situation. The fronts possessed relatively limited
forces. In the second and particularly in the third periods of the war, the combat
and numerical strength of the fronts in the major operations increased significantly.
In addition to the combined-arms armies. a front had one or two and sometimes (the
lst Ukrainian Front in the Proskurov-Chernovtsy and LwowbSandomierz operations, the
2d Ukrainian Front in the Uman'-Botosani Operation) even three tank armies, as well
as one and in certain instances two air armies. Its forces included separate tank,

mechanized and cavalry corps break through artillery corps (divisions) and other
formations of the various branches of troops (Table 5).

From Table 5 it can be seen that over the war years the strength of the fronts in the
major operations increased as follows: by approximately 2-fold for the rifle troops,

28

F0l10511C1Al.lEﬂ£(MVLY
FOR‘OFHKJAI.USE¢NVLY

Table 5

Composition of Fronts in Offensive Operations in the Great Patriotic Har*

  
   
 
  
    

Composition of Front
Men and Equipment

  
  

      
   

    

Third Period
of War

First Period
of War

Second
Period of var

  

   

 

      
  
    
 

3-10

  

Combined-arms armies 3-7 4-9

   
 
    

  

   
  
  
  
  
 

   
  
  
  
 

Tank armies -- 1-2 1-3

Air armies - 1 1-2
Rifle divisions 18-30 20-40 40-80
Rifle brigades 12-18 4-8 -
Cavalry divisions 10-15 3-6 3-6
Separate tank and mechanized corps 1-2 1-6 2-5

Guns and mortars (76-mm and above) 1,000-3,000 b,000-8,000 6,000-lk,000
Tanks and SAU 200-900 600—1,200 2,200—3,300
Aircraft 200-500 1,000-1.300 2,000-3,200

*"50 let Vooruzhennykh Sil SSSR" [Fifty Years of the Soviet Armed Forces],
Moscow, 1968, pp 236-270; “Istoriya voyn i voyennogo iskusstva" [History of
wars and Military Art], Moscow, 1970. p 398; "Operatsii Sovetskikh
Vooruzhennykh 811 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne 19h1-1945 gg.," Moscow,
1959, vol 2, p 682; vol 4, pp 810, 817.

by 5-6-fold for the artillery, by b-S-fold for the tanks and SAD and by 8-9-fo1d for
aircraft. Consequently, the fronts acquired ever-greater capability to create
strong assault groupings and for conducting offensive operations with decisive goals
and to a great depth.

A front operation was, as a rule, a portion of a strategic operation by a group of
fronts. Depending upon the situation and the set mission, its aim consisted in the
defeat of from 6 to 12 enemy divisions and in the third period of the war up to 16-
18. to develop the offensive to a depth of 150-300 km and to capture important areas,
objectives and lines. The significant depth and decisive nature of the front aper-
ations determined the role of the tank armies in them.

For achieving an operation's goal, the front usually carried out two missions: the
immediate and the distant. The immediate task, as a rule, consisted in breaking
through the enemy defenses, defeating its close operational reserves and creating
conditions for the development of the offensive into the operational depth. Its
depth varied from 60 to 100 km and 3-10 days were spent on carrying out the mission.
The distant task usually consisted in developing the offensive. defeating the arriv-
ing reserves and taking the areas and lines which comprised the end goal of the

operation. This task in depth was carried out in limits from 80-90 to 200 km and
was executed over 8—10 days (Diagram 3).

29

li)R‘0FIﬂC1Al.lEﬂE(MHLY
In the first and partially the second periods of the war, an offensive by a front
was carried out in the form of making a series of army-level attacks on several sec-
tors. With the limited resources this did not lead to the desired results. Subse-
quently the most widespread were frontal attacks by strong groupings in the center
on one or both blanks with the development of the offensive along converging axes
for the purposes of encircling and destroying the enemy grouping. A front usually
encircled large enemy groupings in cooperation with other fronts (the Southwestern,
Don and Stalingrad fronts in the Stalingrad Operation; the lat and 2d Ukrainian
fronts in the Korsun'—Shevchenkovskiy Operation; the 2d and 3d Ukrainian fronts in
the lasi-Kishinev Operation and others). The demand to carry out this task as a
rapid pace led to the necessity of entrusting it to mobile troops, that is, the
armored formations and field forces capable of making a powerful tank attack.

In those instances when the situational conditions did not make it possible or ad-
visable to conduct a pincers operation, the fronts, in using the results of the fir-
ing for effect against the enemy defenses, made one or two frontal strikes to a
great depth and this again demanded the massing of mobile troops on the selected
sectors and they split the enemy groupings into individual parts and destroyed them
piecemeal (the lat Belorussian and 1st Ukrainian fronts in the Vistula-Oder Opera-
tion). Such a form of operation was equally decisive as an encirclement.

The correct choice of the direction of the main thrust was of great significance for
the operation's success. This was usually made by Hq SHC, considering the proposals
of the front commanders depending upon the overall concept of the strategic opera-
tion, the nature of enemy defenses and its troop groupings, the terrain conditions,
the available men and equipment and the conditions for cooperation with adjacent
units. in selecting the direction of the main thrust, foremost was the desire to
make it against the weakest. most vulnerable place in enemy defenses and on terrain
which would ensure the most efficient use of all the branches of troops, particular-
ly the armored formations and field forces. At the same time, in a number of in-
stances, proceeding from the operational situation (the complexity of regrouping,
the advantages of the terrain, the availability of staging areas and so forth), the
fronts also attacked strong areas of enemy defenses. This was the case, for example,
in the operations of the Voranezh and Steppe fronts in August 1943, the lat Belo-
russian Front in the Bobruysk Operation in the summer of 1946 and the lst Ukrainian
and 1st Belorussian fronts in the Vistula-Oder and Berlin operations.

The men and equipment were massed boldly and decisively on the sector of the main
thrust by sharply weakening the secondary sectors. As a rule, 50-80 percent of the
rifle troops, up to 70 percent of the artillery and 80-95 percent of the tanks and
aviation were concentrated in the breakthrough sectors with a total width of 20-35 hm
(5-12 percent of the width of the front‘s zone). The armies fighting in the sector
of the front's main thrust broke through the defenses in a sector 6-14 km wide and
here in individual instances the width of the breakthrough area and the width of the
army's zone of advance coincided.

Due to the skillful massing of men and equipment on narrow breakthrough areas, high
densities of troops and military equipment were created and during the course of
the war these continuously increased (Table 6).

30

IN)RTOFF1CIA1.thE:(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 6

Average Densities of Men and Equipment in Breakthrough Areas
During Different Periods of the Har*

  
 

Average Density per kw of Breakthrough Area

In Second Period

  
     
  
  

Men and Equipment

     
   
   
  

In First Period In Third Period

    
  

Rifle troops (km/rifle div.) 4-5 2.5-3 1.2-2.5

Guns and mortars 20-80 120-220 200-300

Tanks and SAU 3-12 18-60 70-85
(3-6 018) (10-20 618) (12-30 018)

*"Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh Sil v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1941-1945 gg.." Moscow, 1959, vol 2, p 685; vol 4, pp 815, 826; "Istoriya
voyn i voyennogo iskusstva," Moscow, 1970, pp 263, 618.

The data of Table 6 indicate that the densities of men and equipment in the break-
through areas during the third period of the war had increased, in comparison with
the first period, by 2-3-fold for the rifle troops, by 4-10-fold for the artillery
and by 6-lo-fold for the tanks and SAU. The density of the CIS tanks by the war's
end had reached 25-30 units of armor per kilometer of breakthrough area, however

such density, as combat experience showed, was insufficient and this to a signifi-

cant degree determined the use of the tank armies for completing the breakthrough
of the enemy tactical defensive zone.

As a whole the above-indicated densities made it possible to have, particularly in
the breakthrough period. decisive superiority over the enemy on the sector of the

main thrust. This superiority was 3-5-fold for infantry and 6-8-fold for artillery
and tanks.

The increased combat capabilities of the operational field forces and the improved

art in preparing and conducting operations considering the acquired experience of
the war determined the increased spatial scope of the front-level offensive opera-
tions (Table 7).

From Table 7 it can be seen that during the war years the depth of an operation (by
3-6-fold) and the average momentum of advance (by S-6-fold) increased particularly.
Here the momentum of advance for the tank armies significantly exceeded the momen-

tum of advance for the combined-arms formations.

A major stage in a front offensive operation was the breaking through of the enemy
tactical defensive zone. After the publishing of the Directive Letter of ﬁg 580 of
[0 January 1962, this was carried out by assault groupings. Hith the going over of
the enemy to a positional defense and the increased combat capabilities of our

fronts. the assault grouping began to include two or three and more armies, includ-
ing tank ones.

31

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
ETHICHWHCLAL USE¢NVLY

Table 7

Scope of the Front Offensive Operations
During the Years of the Great Patriotic Hsr*

First Period Second
- of War Period of War

75-250

     

 
 
 

Third Period

Indicators of "at

Zone of advance, km
Depth of operation, km

Average momentum of advance, km/day
Duration, days

Note. In the counteroffensive at Moscow, the depth of the operation reached
90-200 km.

*"Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 811 v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1961-1945 gg.," Moscow, 1959, vol 2, p 483: vol 5, p 813; “Istoriya voyn
i voyennogo iskusstva," Moscow, 1970, pp 189, 422.

A front usually broke through the defenses in one or two and sometimes three sectors.
For example, in the Belgorod-Khar'khov Operation in August 1963, the Voronezh Front
made two attacks: the main one with the forces of two combined-arms armies and two
tank armies and an auxiliary attack by the troops of two combined-arms armies. 1n
the Vistula—Oder Operation, the First Belorussian Front made three attacks: from
the Hagnuszew bridgehead with the forces of three combined-arms and two tank armies.
from the Pulawy bridgehead with the forces of two armies and on the right wing of
the front with the forces of one army.

Heavy artillery and air softening up was carried out for the purpose of securely
neutralizing the enemy defenses. The breakthrough task was entrusted to the rifle
formations reinforced by the CIS tanks and artillery with continuous support from
the artillery and aviation concentrated on the breakthrough sector. For achieving
a high rate in breaking through the tactical defensive zone, mobile army groups
were committed to the engagement consisting of tank (mechanized) corps and often
also partial or full-strength mobile groups of the fronts (tank armies).

of Brent importance for successfully carrying out the breakthrough were the skill-
ful massing and use of the close infantry support tanks in the sectors of the main
thrusts. The significant saturation of the infantry battle formations with the CIS
tanks contributed to the rapid breakthrough of the enemy tactical defensive zone.
This created favorable conditions for the committing of the mobile groups of the
armies and fronts to the engagement. At the same time the execution of deep pincers
movements by the armored field forces led to the disrupting of cooperation between
the separated enemy groupings, it deprived them of capacity to put up organized re-
sistance to our troops and contributed to the development of the offensive at a
rapid pace to a great depth.

32

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY
Starting in the third period of the war, the breaking through of the main enemy de-
fensive zone. as a rule, was completed in the first half of the offensive's first
day and the entire tactical zone was crossed in the second day or by the end of the
first day. Upon completing the breakthrough of the tactical defensive zone, combat
operations were shifted into the operational depth. Their basic content usually
were the operational pursuit of the enemy, the defeat of its reserves in meeting en-
gagements. the crossing of the intermediate defensive lines without halting, the
crossing of water barriers and the encirclement and defeat of the enemy groupings.
The tank armies played the leading role in successfully carrying out these tasks of
a front.

As a whole, the front-level offensive operations during the war years were charac-
terized by a decisiveness of aims, by maneuverability, by diversity in the methods
of carrying out various missions and by the great scope of the offensive. The
Soviet troops successfully solved the problems of breaking through the enemy de-
fenses to the entire operational depth, the development of the offensive at a rapid
pace and the encirclement and destruction of large enemy groupings. This was
achieved by the skillful use of all the branches of troops and aviation in the oper-
ations in accord with their capabilities.

The Place, Role and Tasks of Tank Armies in a Front-Level Operation

The tank armies, as operational field forces of armored and mechanized troops, dur-
ing the war years were under the control of ﬂq sac and were assigned to the fronts
operating on the major strategic sectors. Their place was determined by a decision
of the front's commander and sometimes by Hq SHC, depending upon the overall con-
cept of the operation, the composition of the armies, the nature of the enemy de-
fenses, the balance of forces, the terrain conditions and a number of other factors.

In an absolute majority of the offensive operations of 1963-1945, the tank armies
comprised the mobile group of the fronts (the success exploiting echelon). They
were used in the sectors of the main thrusts and were the basic means for developing
the tactical success into an operational one. Only in individual operations (for
example, the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy, Budapest and Han-
churian operations) were the armored field forces in the front's first echelon and
commenced combat operations in direct contact with the enemy.

Even in the prewar years the idea had been voiced that the breaking through of the
main enemy defensive zone should be carried cut by the rifle formations of the
combined-arms armies. It was felt that the mobile troops (meaning the tank corps)
could be employed for completing the breakthrough of the tactical zone to a depth
of 6-8 km or after the breaking through of the second defensive zone for the pur-
poses of developing the operation in depth as well as toward one of the flanks.“2

During the years of the Great Patriotic War, it was envisaged that the separate tank
and mechanized corps would be employed precisely thus. Thus, the draft 1943 Field
bhnuol stated: "Ordinarily the commitment of the mobile formations to the break-
through will start after the combined-arms formations have crossed the main defen-
sive zone and when the attacking infantry reaches the area of the enemy artillery

positions or (with a developed and fully occupied defense) after the combined-arms
formations have taken the second defensive line."'°3

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDRtOFI1CJAl.USE20hﬂJV

Ah lur lhv tank nrmlcu, the most favorable conditions for committing them to the
hrnuklhruugh were considered to be those where the combined-arms armies in the
front's first echelon broke through the tactical enemy defensive zone to its entire
depth. However, it was not always possible to achieve this. For this reason, in
the aim of increasing the breakthrough pace, the tank armies, as a rule, were com-
mitted to the engagement in the middle of the first day or on the morning of the
second day of the operation from a line which usually ran 4-6 km away from the for-
ward edge. As a whole for completing the breakthrough of the tactical enemy defen-
sive zone, the tank armies were used in more than 80 percent of the cases out of the
total number of offensive operations conducted by us. Such use of them in the spe-
cific conditions of the past war was necessitated chiefly by the insufficient num-
ber of CIS tanks. Although the tank armies. in completing the breakthrough of the
enemy tactical defensive zone, suffered definite losses in military equipment and
personnel, this did gain time and a possibility was created in anticipating the
enemy's maneuvers and to a greater degree preserved the forces and battleworthiness
of the combined-arms armies. The committingof the tank armies to an engagement for
completing the breakthrough of the tactical zone, as a rule, led to an increased
pace of crossing it and this often played the crucial role in developing the tacti-

cal success into an operational one and in achieving the ultimate goal of the front-
level offensive operation.

At the same time the war's experience confirmed the possibility of committing a tank
army also in a so-called "clean breakthrough," that is, after the combined-arms
field forces had destroyed the enemy in the tactical defensive zone. Such condi-
tions were achieved mainly, when, in the first place, the rifle formations, in
possessing great combat capabilities, in particular due to a significant reinforcing
by CIS tanks, carried out the breakthrough at a rapid pace; secondly, when army
mobile groups consisting of a tank (mechanized) corps or front horse-mechanized
(horse-tank) groups were involved in completing the breakthrough of the enemy tacti-
cal defensive zone. In being committed to an engagement after the breakthrough of
the tactical defensive zone by the combined-arms armies, the tank armies fully main-
tained their capabilities for highly maneuverable and rapid operations in the opera-
tional depth.

Regardless of the method, time and depth of the commitment to an engagement, the
tank armies played the main role in developing the tactical breakthrough into an
operational one. In possessing great strike force and high mobility, they made a
massed tank attack, they rapidly shifted combat operations into the operational
depth, they gave them a fluid nature and pursued the enemy at a rapid pace. In
fighting decisively on the internal or external encirclement perimeter, the tank
armies helped in successfully conducting the operations to surround the large enemy
groupings. They also played a leading role in defeating approaching enemy reserves
and repelling its counterstrikes. This was usually achieved by meeting engagements
and encounters (the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Kiev Operation, the 4th Tank Army in
the VistuIa-Oder Operation, the 5th Guards Tank Army in the East Prussian Opera-
tion and others).

In advancing a significant distance away from the remaining forces of the front, the
tank armies with air support usually with their own forward detachments without a
halt crossed the river obstacles, overcame the intermediate defensive lines in
depth and stubbornly held on to the captured bridgeheada, lines and objects until
the arrival of the combined-arms formations.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The tank armies also took large administrative centers (the 2d Tank Army captured
Lublin, the 3d Guards and 4th Tank armies took Lwow and so forth), they conducted
an offensive in the mountains (the Manchurian Operation), during the day and at

night and during various seasons: 32 percent of the conducted operations were in

the summer, 29 percent in the spring, 27 percent in the winter and 12 percent in the
autumn.

The aims and tasks of the tank armies in the offensive operations, as was already
pointed out, were determined by the front's comnder and in a number of instances
also by Bo SBG. They were the most diverse and depended upon many factors which
most often worked as an aggregate.

The most important goal of a tank army's operation was the rapid development of the
success of the troops in the first operational echelon to achieving the ultimate
goal of the front operation, the encirclement of large enemy groupings in coopera-
tion with the combined-arms armies or the splitting of them up. In encirclement
operations, the tank armies were used chiefly for creating the external encircle-
ment perimeter. The 5th Guards Tank Army in the East Prussian Operation, for ex-
ample, cut the Army Group Center off from the Army Group A; in the Korsun'-
Shevchenkovskiy Operation, the 5th and 6th Guards Tank armies surrounded the Korsun"-
Shevchenkovskiy enemy grouping and them formed the external encirclement perimeter
where they repelled strong enemy counterstrikes.

In a number of instances the goals of a tank army's offensive operation were the
breaking through of enemy defenses and the capturing of important lines or objec-
tives in the operational depth (the Orel, Budapest and Debrecen operations), the
splitting up of the enemy groupings and the defeating of them piecemeal (the lat and
2d Guards Tank armies in the East Pomeranian Operation) as well as the capturing and
holding of bridgeheads on major water obstacles until the arrival of the front's
main forces (the 3d Guards Tank Army in September 1943).

The tank armies achieved the set goals by successively carrying out a number of
tasks. As a rule, their combat operations were planned to the entire depth of the
front operation. Here the tasks were either divided into near and distant (the lat
and 6th Tank armies in the initial planning of the lwow-Sandomierz Operation and the
2d and 3d Guards Tank armies in the Vistula-Oder Operation) or were given by days
for the second-fourth days of the offensive (the 2d Tank Army in the Oreal Opera-
tion, the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Kiev Operation and the 2d Guards Tank Army in
the Lublin-Brest Operation). Sometimes the missions were set for 6-8 days (the 3d
Guards Tank Army in the Proskurov-Chernovtsy Operation).

The immediate mission (or the mission of the operation's first days) consisted in
defeating the opposing enemy and its approaching reserves and the taking of impor--
tant lines to a depth of 50-150 km.

The lung-range mission (sometimes the direction of the further offensive was given,
such as in the Lwow-Sandomierz, Vistula-Oder and other operations) consisted in
rapidly developing the offensive, pursuing the enemy, defeating its deep reserves
and capturing important lines, bridgeheads and objectives. In terms of depth, it
often coincided with the depth of the front's operation (the 2d Guards Tank Army in
the Lublin-Brest Operation and the 6th Tank Army in the Iasi—Kishinev Operation).

35

[138 OWWWCLAL USEICHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a majority of operations, in committing the tank army to the engagement, from the
first echelon corps it was the practice to set out forward detachments which should
assist the combined-arms formations in rapidly breaking through the main zone and
support the deployment of the army's main forces. b1pport for the committing of the
tank armies was entrusted to the combined-arms armies where the tank armies were to
be committed and to the front‘s resources (air army or engineer units).

It should be pointed out that the allocating of specific tasks to the tank armies
for just the first days of an operation was not an accidental phenomenon. Their
operations in the operational depth were characterized by great dynamicness. For
this reason it was difficult ahead of time to plan for the most probable variations
of enemy actions. As a result in setting the missions to a great depth they often
had to be changed and the armies reassigned to a new sector. Particularly indica-
tive in this regard are the actions of the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder
Operation when on 20 January it was turned abruptly to the south for attacking the
rear of the Katowice enemy grouping and at the end of January to the west for an
offensive in the Ratibor sector.

Thus, during the years of the Great Patriotic War the tank armies during offensive
operations most often operated as front mobile groups with the aim of turning a
tactical breakthrough into an operational one, attacking the deep enemy reserves and
taking important lines and objectives in the operational depth. They played the
crucial role in developing the tactical breakthrough into an operational one, in en-
circling, splitting and eliminating large enemy groupings in cooperation with the
other armies as well as providing significant spatial scope, decisiveness and man-
euverability in conducting front-level offensive operations. The tank field forces
could successfully carry out combat operations under different terrain conditions,
seasons and time of day. The goals of the operations were achieved by rapid and
bold fluid actions with the skilled regrouping of the troops, frequent changes in
the directions of the attacks and by the skillful concentration of the main efforts
on the crucial sectors.

The Width of a Tank Army's Zone of Advance

A tank army operating as a mobile group of a front, as a rule, was not given a zone
for an advance in the operational depth but rather just the axis of operations was
indicated. This was done from the consideration of not impeding the army's maneuver-
ing and not to deprive the army commander of initiative in the choice of methods to
carry out the missions confronting the army. In the event of encountering stubborn
enemy resistance, the army in the aim of rapidly carrying out the set task could by-
pass a center of resistance, cross the enemy defenses at a weaker point and then
come back to its axis.

Sometimes the front commander indicated what centers of enemy resistance could be
bypassed by a tank army without entering into an engagement so as to capture the
designated objectives and lines as rapidly as possible. An example of this would

be the instructions by the commander of the First Ukrainian Front, Mar SU I. S.
Konev, to the 3d and 4th Guards Tank armies in the Berlin 0peration.““ These armies
were ordered to skirt the centers of resistance and major population points in order
to more rapidly reach the southern outskirts of the capital of Nazi Germany.

36

FOI.OFIHC1A1.lEHE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although a tank army‘s zone of advance usually was not designated, the army always
entered into an engagement and operated in the course of an operation on a certain
front the width of which depended upon the mission, the combat capabilities and op-
erational configuration of the army, the conditions of the commitment to battle. the

state and nature of enemy aetions, the terrain and the development of the road net-
work.

In those instances when the tank armies were in the front's first echelon, they
fought until breaking out into operational space in a zone up to 20 km wide (for
example, the 3d and 6th Guards Tank armies in the Prague Operation), breaking
through the defenses most often on a sector up to 10 km wide. This made it possible
to create a density from 40 to 80 guns and mortars and considering the supporting

artillery up to 120 of them, up to 50-60 tanks and SAD per kilometer of breakthrough
front.

With the coming out of the tank army in the operational depth, in a majority of op-
erations it advanced in a zone 20-25 km wide. Sometimes the zone of advance reached
35-60 km, for example, the lat Tank Army in the Zhitomir-Berdichev Operation with up
to 40 km, the 3d Guards Tank Army in the battle of the Dnepr (September 1963) up to
60 km, the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation with 35 km and the

2d and 3d Guards Tank armies in the Vistula-Oder Operation with up to 40 km. During
the Manchurian Operation, the 6th Guards Tank Army advanced in a zone around 200 km
wide and its assault grouping operated along a front up to 100 km.

Experience has shown that with the presence of two corps (up to five brigades) in
the tank army's first echelon, the optimum variation was one where the army in the
operational depth operated in a zone 20-25 km wide. In this instance the average
tank density reached 10—15 per kilometer (not counting the army's second echelon)
and 20—25 guns per kilometer for the artillery. This made it possible to break
through the enemy defensive intermediate lines. Moreover, such conditions ensured
good maneuverability and favorable opportunities were created for control and imple-
mentation of rear support. with wider zones of advance, the basic difficulties
were related to the maintaining of uninterrupted control, the organizing of supplies

and evacuation as well as the possibility of effectively redirecting and massing the
resources on one of the axes.

The Depth and Momentum of Advance

During the war years the tank armies conducted offensive operations to a depth which
averaged as follows: 120—200 km in 1963 (the 1st and 5th Guards Tank armies in the
Belgorod—Khar'khov Operation with 120-150 km, the 3d Guards Tank Army in liberating
the left bank of the Ukraine with 200 km and 120 km in the Kiev Operation); in 1944,
200-400 km (the 2d Tank Army in the Uman'-Botosani Operation with up to 250 km, the
5th Guards and 6th Tank armies with 300 km; in the Lwow—Sandomierz Operation, the
lat, Jd Guards and 4th Tank armies with 330-400 km); in 1945, up to 500 and more
kilometers. For example the lat Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder Operation
fought its way up to 600 km while the 2d Guards Tank Army covered 700 km having in
fact carried out a number of successive army—level operations. The 6th Guards Tank
Army in the Manchurian Operation penetrated to a depth of 820 km. The average depth

of advance for the tank armies from the experience of 40 operations (Appendix 3) was
320 km.

37

FOR OFTTCbkLlﬂSE(NNLY
The increased depth of advance by the tank armies during the war years was caused by
a whole series of factors and primarily by the increased combat capabilities of the

fronts and armies and by the increased art of conducting operations and combat skill
of the Soviet military. The conducting of an advance to a significant depth re-

quired precise control over the troops, uninterrupted logistical support and a great
physical and moral strain on the personnel.

One of the particular features in the combat employment of the tank armies during
offensive operations was the desire to achieve a rapid momentum of advance as this
to a decisive degree determined the pace of the front's operations and the success-
ful achieving of their ultimate goals. The rapid momentum of advance helped to an-
ticipate the enemy in its actions, to achieve surprise attacks in the course of the
operation, to maintain initiative and defeat the enemy piecemeal. They deprived it
of the opportunity to undertake effective countermeasures.

An analysis of 40 operations by the tank armies during the war years has shown that
the average daily momentum of their advance over an entire operation varied from
3-5 km (the Orel Operation) up to 25-45 km (the Iasi-Kishinev, Vistula-Oder and
Prague operations). The maximum momentum of advance in individual periods of an
operation was 60-90 km per day and for the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Manchurian
Operation 180 km.

It is also important to point out that over the war years the average daily momentum
of advance continuously increased and this was the consequence chiefly of the in-
creased strike power of the front field forces, the acquired combat experience, the
improved skill in preparing and conducting the operations, the heroism and courage

of the Soviet military, the improved military equipment as well as a number of other
factors.

The Duration of Combat Operations

The duration of continuous combat operations by the tank armies during the years of
the Great Patriotic War varied. From the experience of 62 operations, it was as
follows: up to 20 days in 25 operations, up to 30 days in 7 operations and over 30
days in 10 operations. Here the offensive was the basic content of combat opera-
tions in the course of the operation. Thus, the 2d Guards Tank Army for 17 days of
the Vistula-Oder Operation continuously moved forward. During this same operation,
the lat Guards Tank Army advanced 18 days out of 20.

The duration of continuous combat operations for the tank armies was determined pri-
marily by the availability and technical state of the combat materiel. Considering
the average daily losses of tanks and SAD and the possibilities of army repair
facilities, the manning levels of a tank army in conducting combat operations within
limits of 18-20 days did not fall below 30 percent. In this instance it took a com-
paratively short period of time to bring it back to full strength or at least 70—75
percent of the personnel. Thus, it took the lat Guards Tank Army after 20 days of
fighting in the Vistula-Oder Operation some 16 days (from 12 through 28 February
1945) to resume the offensive in East Pomerania and to carry it out for about a
month. After 19 days of preparations (in April 1965) it was able to drive against
Berlin.

38

INJR OIHHC1A1.lﬂ5E:(HVLY
FINICHWWCJAL US£(NVLY

During the war years, the tank armies in a numb
days continuously and were pulled back into the reserves for reou
covering of battleworthiness when 15-20 percent of their materiel remained or some-
times even less (the tank armies in the Orel 0peration).‘°s As a result the armies

tional tasks inherent to them and

they had to be in fact organized anew. For example, the 3d Guards Tank Army over a
period of 3 years (1943-1945) replaced 90-100 percent

some seven times, including four times in 1943. Combs
ploymett of the tank armies up to the limit of their b

nificant time for reoutfitting. Moreover, combat experience acquired at a dear

uring the war years depended upon

the preparedness of
the personnel and equipment; the nature of conducting combat operations in the carry-

ing out of the mission by the army; the quality of logistical support; the degree of
enemy resistance and the nature of the engineer equipping of its defenses; particu-
lar features of the terrain and meteorological conditions° the state of cooperation
with the other branches of troops and aviation; the availability of reserves; the

trol in the course of the operation. An analysis of the operations conducted by
rank armies provides grounds to conclude that the state of the materiel, the train-
ing of the personnel, the capabilities of the repair subunits, the promptness of

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FoatlﬂﬁCJAl.USE10NLY

FOOTNOTES

Arkhiv M0 SSSR [Archives of the USSR Ministry of Defense], folio 15A, inv. 1844,
file 312, sheet 2.

Ibid., inv. 422, file 362, sheets 22-23.

Ibid., folio 38, inv. 29089, file 23, sheets 15-16.
Ibid., folio 15A, inv. 443, file 161, sheet 4.
VOYENﬁd-ISTORICHBSKIY ZHURNAL, No 8, 1968, p 110.

“Itogi vtoroy nirovoy voyny" [The Results of world War II], a Collection of
Articles, Izd-vo Inostrannoy Literatury, Moscow, 1957, pp 302-303.

KRASNAYA ZVEZDA, 13 August 1974.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 38, inv. 80030, file 4, sheet 12.
Ibid., folio 2, inv. 75593, file 13, sheet 25.

Ibid., folio 38, inv. 80030, file 4, sheets 14-15.

"Boyevoy ustsv nekhanizirovannykh voysk RKKA (proyekt)" {Field Manual of the
RKKA Mechanized Troops (Draft)], Part II, Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1932. "Vreuennoye
nastavleniye 'Vozhdeniye 1 boy sanostoyatel'nykh nekhanizirovannykh soyedineniy"
[Provisional Regulation "Leading and Combat of Independent Mechanized Forma-
tions"], Moscow, 1932. "Vrenennyy polevoy ustav RKKA. PU-36" [Provisional RKKA
Field Manual. FM-36], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1937. "Voyevoy ustav tankovykh voysk
Krasnoy Armii" [Field Manual of the Red Arny Tank Troops], Part II, Moscow,
Voyenizdat, 1940.

"Voprosy strategii i operativnogo iskusstva v sovetskikh voyennykh trudakh
1917-1940 33." [Questions of Strategy and Operational Art in Soviet Military
Works (1917-1940)], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1965. "Voprosy taktiki v sovetskikh
voyennykh trudskh 1917-1940 33." [Questions of Tactics in Soviet Military Works
1917-1940], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1970.

"Voprosy strategii i operativnogo...," Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1965, p 556.
Ibid., p 566.

"Istoriya voyn i voyennogo iskusstvs" [The History of Mars and Military Art],
Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1970, p 106.

"Polevoy ustav Krasnoy Arnii. Proyekt" [Red Army Field Manual. Draft], Moscow,
Voyenizdat, 1941. "Voyevoy ustav tankovykh voysk Krasnoy Arnii," Part II,
Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1940. S. Lyubarskiy, "Nekotoryye operativno-takticheskiye
vyvody iz opyta voyny v Ispanii" [Certain Operational-Tactical Conclusions from
the Experience of the War in Spain], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1939. A. Bogdanov,

40

FOI¢MﬂﬂChULlEI20NlN
"Cooperation of Combat Aviation with Mobile Formations," VESTNIK VOZDUSHNOGO
FLHTA, No 1, 2, 1940. S. Belkovskiy, "Operations of Tank and Motorized Troops
in Poland, France and the Netherlands," VOYENNAYA MYSL', No 8, 1940.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 19A, inv. 512, file 19, sheets 14-15.

"Istoriya KPSS" [History of the CPSU], Vol 5, Book 1, Moscow, 1970, p 644.
VOYENm-ISTORICHBSKIY ZHURNAL, No 1, 1972, p 21.

"Velikaya Otechestvennaya voyna Sovetskogo Soyuza 1941-1945 33. Kratkaya
istoriya" [The Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union of 1941-1945. A Concise
History], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1970, p 183.

G. Got, "Tankovyye operatsii" [Tank Operations], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1961, p 105.
PRAVDA, 21 November 1974.

J. Fuller, "Vtoraya mirovaya voyna" [World War 11], Moscow, 1956, p 248.
"Rokovyye resheniya" [Fatal Decisions], Moscow, 1958, pp 114, 115. M. Caydin,
“Tigry goryat" [The Tiger's Roar], New York, 1974.

KOMMUNIST, No 9, 1970, p 98.

Arkhiv M0 8888, folio 38, inv. 11355, file 656, sheet 2.

KRASNAYA ZVBZDA, 13 August 1974.

"50 let Vooruzhennykh Sil SSSR" [Fifth Years of the USSR Armed Forces], Moscow,
Voyenizdat, 1968, p 459.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 6598, inv. 12481, file 1368, sheet 11.

Muller-Hillebrand, "Sukhoputnaya arniya Germanii 1933-1945 gs." [The German
Ground Army of 1933-1945], Vol 2, Moscow, 1958, p 254. VOYENNO-ISTORICHBSKIY
ZHURNAL, No 2, 1976. p 49.

"Tankostroitel'nays promyshlennost‘ fashistskoy Geruanii" [The Tank Building
Industry of Nazi Germany], Moscow, 1944, p 4.

A. D. Bagreyev, "Voyennoye iskusstvo kapitalisticheskikh gosudarstv 1939-

1945 33." [Military Art of the Capitalist States 1939-1945], Moscow, Voyenizdat,
1960. p 90.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 38, inv. 80050, file 4, sheets 14-15.

Ibid., sheet 55.

Ibid., sheet 305.

ibid., sheet 320.

41

FOR‘OFHKJA1.USE(NNLY
.1"

37

38

39

50

‘ol

4?.

1.3

his

FIN!!)FFWC1AL.USE2(MVLY

in 1943 the SAM regiments consisted of four batteries each with four guns and
in 1944-1945, of four batteries with five guns each.

Arkhiv H0 8883, folio 307, inv. 4148, file 478, sheet 128.

Ibid., folio 332, inv. 4948, file 442, sheets 17-20 (the figures are given for
two- and three-corps arlies).

Ibid., folio 315, inv. 4461. file 2, sheets 1-99; folio 323, inv. 4756, file
173, sheets 266-268.

Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 412, sheets 32-34; folio 234, inv. 21034,
file 3, sheet 216.

"Boyevoy opyt 8T i “V v Otechestvennoy voyne" [Combat Experience of the Armored
and Mechanized Troops in the Patriotic War], Collection 3, Moscow, 1944, p 11.

“Istoriya voyn i voyennogo iskusstva," Moscow, 1970, p 107.
“Polevoy ustav Krasnoy Arnii. Proyekt," Moscow, 1943, p 257.

"Velikaya Otechestvennays voyns Sovetskogo Soyuza 1941-1945" [The Great Patriotic
"er of the Soviet Union of 1941-1945], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1970, p 498.

"Boyevoy opyt BT 1 MV...," Collection 3, Moscow, Voyenizdat. 1944, pp 4-41.

42

NR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER II: THE PREPARATION OF OFFENSIVE OPERATIONS

V. I. Lenin, in emphasizing the importance of careful preparations for the forthcom-
ing combat operations, pointed out that "...any engagement includes the abstract
possibility of defeat and there is no other way to reduce this possibility than the
organized preparation of the engagement."1 This demand during the war years under-
lay all the activities of the command, the staffs, the political and rear bodies as
well as the troops in preparing for the offensive operations in order to completely
ensure high effectiveness of their execution.

The preparations for a tank army offensive operation included a range of measures
carried out by the colmand, by the staffs, by the party political bodies, the

troops and rear bodies to organize, plan and completely support the combat opera-
tions. The basic ones were: the adopting of the plan by the army commander and the
setting of missions for subordinates, the planning of the operation, the organiza-
tion of cooperation and support, the creation of the required material supplies. the
training of troops, staffs and the readying of military equipment, the organizing of
control and communications posts. All this large amount of work was carried out by

diverse methods and in different forms depending upon the specific situational con-
ditions.

1. Conditions and Methods for Preparing the Operations

The preparation for a tank army offensive operation usually started the moment the
army was assigned to the front and the army commander had received from the front
coammnder a general orientation about the pending operation of the front and the
plan for using the tank army in it or a specific combat mission.

The entire process of preparing for the operation had to be completed before the
troops of the front went over to the offensive so that the army was constantly ready
to go into battle.

The basic conditions which had the most substantial impact upon the preparation of
tank army offensive operations were the available time. the disposition of the army
prior to receiving the combat mission and its place in the front's operational con-
figuration, the state of the army (the manning level, the level of military equip-
ment and weapons, the state of equipment, the training of the troops, the coordina-
tion of the units and staffs and the availability of materiel) and a number of other
factors.

63

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
During the war years the tank armies possessed varying times to prepare for the of-
fensive operations after receiving the combat mission. Depending upon the situa-
tion, this varied from 16-18 hours (the 4th Tank Army in preparing for the Oral
Operation of 1943)2 up to 42-43 days (the 1st and 4th Guards Tank armies in prepar-

ing for the Vistula-Oder Operation).3 In a majority of instances this was limited
to 1-7 days (Table 8).

From the data given in Table 8 for 60 operations it can be seen that the length of
their preparations was: 1-2 days in 7 operations (18 percent), 2.5-7 days in 20
operations (50 percent) and 8 and more days in 13 operations (32 percent). Conse-

quently, in 27 operations (68 percent) up to 7 days were allocated for preparing
them.

Characteristically the length of preparations for offensive operations by tank
armies during the war years showed a tendency to increase. In the 1943 operations.
it was within limits of from 1 to 11 days, in 1964 from 3 to 15 and in 1945 from

1 to 43 (an average of 15). This meant that with other conditions being equal. the
commanders, staffs and other control bodies as well as the troops had year by year
greater opportunities to carry out the range of preparatory measures.

The nature of an operation's preparations was largely influenced by the disposition
of the tank army prior to the obtaining of a specific combat mission. its distance
from the forward edge and from the sector of forthcoming operations. In one in-
stance a tank army was already part of a given front but in another arrived from a
different front or from Headquarters reserve. In the latter instance, the tank
army was already usually sufficiently manned and up to strength and this freed the
commander and the staff from solving these questions and made it possible to focus

basic attention on the questions of planning and supporting the forthcoming opera-
tions.

The tank armies which comprised a front's mobile group during the war years were
assigned, as a rule, concentration, assembly and jump-off areas (Diagram 4). The
distance of these areas from the forward edge and the time spent at them by the
tank armies from the experience of a number of operations are given in Table 9.

A concentration area was assigned to a tank army when it was regrouped from the
rear to the front or from one sector of the Soviet-German Front in the aim of con-
cealing its position prior to leaving for the assembly area and immediate prepara-
tions for combat. As an average this was up to 50 km away from the forward edge
and whenever possible away from the direction of the proposed committal to battle
as this prevented the enemy from promptly detecting the concentration and position
of the tank army as well as discovering the direction of the front's main thrust.
With the positioning of the army at such a distance, favorable conditions were also
created to prepare the troops for the pending operation as well as for carrying out

a maneuver if the committing of the army to the engagement was planned according to
two variations.

The tank army concentration areas were less than 40-50 km from the forward edge
mainly in those instances when the concentration area coincided with the assembly

area (20 km for the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Kiev Operation and 20-30 km in the
Berlin Operation; 18-20 km for the 4th Guards Tank Army in the Lower Silesian

64

FIHIIJFFICJAJ.IJSE (NWLY
Length of Preparation for Tank Army Operations

  

Tine for Preparation after
Receiving Mission, days

   

Army Name of Operation

    
  
        
               
       

1cm Belgorod—Khar'khov............. 11
Zhitonir-Berdichev . . , , , . , , , , , . , 9
Proskurov-Chernovtsy , . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Luau-Sandwierz.............. 7
Vistula-Oder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . “2
EastPoneranian.............. 5
Berlin................... 16

ZGTA Oral.................... 1
Umn'-Botosan1............... 5
Lublin-Brest................ 1.
Vistula-Odel’................ “2
BastPoneranian.............. ’0
Berlin................... 16

JGTA 0:21 1
Kiev. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Zhitonir-Berdichev . , , , , , . , , , , , S
Proskurov—Chernovtsy , , , , , , , , , , , 6
Luau-Sandman.............. 15
Vistula-Oder................ 3‘
Berlin.................. 12
Prague . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . about 2

461A Orel 1
Proskurov-Chernovtsy , , _ , , , , , , , , 3
Luow-Sandonierz.............. 5
ViatUIa-Merosoococo-.00.... “3
Berlin.................. 10
Prague . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85°“! 2

5cm nelgorod-lom'khov 2-5
Kirovogrsd . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy , , , , , , , , , , 3
Unan'-Botosani............... 5
Vitebsk-Orsha............... 3
East Prussian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

6 GTA Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy . . . . . . . . . . 3
Uman'-Botosan1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
lasi-Kishinev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Budapest................. 2
V1enna.................. 5
Prague..............-... aboutl
Manchurian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

45

IKMICHHHC1A1.US£(NVLY
ETHICMﬂﬂCJAl.tEﬂE(NHLY

One A Onn ONION OOIOO . . . . . . >o=w£owxluou9 <90 0

0000
sunshow
Ono N vaunon Onnna OOHIONN . . . . . . annuaaum yuan
9:0 n Ole nnnmv OOH . . . . . . anouOuxQOOuu>
o N n ONION ONION . . . >ozs.uuszu00uowuon <90 m
NH N e OnnON ONION . . . . . . . . . nuance
NHIOH a one ONION ONION . . . . . addendum uuaoa
O N n nN nN . . . . . . uqunoaauou>
OHIO m n ONION ONNIOON . . . . . nuoHaovaumlsbaq
O N nuN ONION On . . . . . . . . . . HOMO <90 0
N 0:0: OnnON OMION . . . . . . . . . :«Huon
NHIOH 9 c ON Onnoc . . . . . . novOIndsuaub
NHIOH a can ONInH OonOn . . . . . nuouaovcamnaolg
nu a 0 ON ON . . . . . . . . . . >ouu <90 n
ONINH a mIN nu Omuoe . . . . . . . . . cannon
OH n mic mu anon . . . . caduauoaom noon
«N N Ote nNION nNION . . . . . . novounuauuu>
OHuO n clN ON OOIOn . . . . . . uouunncuunsa <90 N
O Inn OH onlcq Onnoe . . . . . . . . . :«Huon
cm N m ONINH naHuOOH . . . . . . uovOuaasuoa>
o 9 Odie Oana OQIOM . . . . . uuouaovcum|3034 <90 9
muse: .uou< nauv .auu< won< uou< aou<

uuonaaan an aaaaoun< :H umoualsn hunaoua< couuwuu:00:oo

acoauwuomo nuuﬂu<

5:

ocean 0399 .ouvm vuaauom souu oucauuaa _

 

 

acou< vocwuaa< :« uuuau< sca9 an uconm 0399 can scum oucaunun

\ Jill!

46

FOI‘OIIICJA1.05310NLY
Operation and 20-30 km in the Berlin Operation; 18-20 km for the 5th Guards Tank
Army in the Belgorod-Khar'khov Operation). Usually this was caused by the nature
of the terrain (the absence of natural screens 40-50 km away or the presence of a
major water barrier) as well as by the necessity because of situational conditions

to shift the army from one sector of the front to another directly to the assembly
area.

In a number of operations the armies occupied_an_area which was a more significant
distance away from the forward edge (the 4th Tank Army in the preparations for

the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation with a distance of 200-220 km and the 5th Guards Tank
Army in the preparations for the East Prussian Operation with 130-160 km). This was
explained chiefly by the desire to conceal from the enemy up to a certain point of
time the army's roll in the forthcoming combat operations. In individual instances
(for example, the 2d Guards Tank Army in the East Pomeranian Operation) no concen-

tration area was set because the army's formations were close to the enemy's forward
defensive edge.

The tank armies moved up to a concentration area in strictly observing camouflage
measures ordinarily under their own power over a distance of 200 and more kilometers
with average daily moves of from 100-150 km. The marches, as a rule, were made at
night and under other conditions of limited visibility (fog or rain).

An assembly area was designated for the purpose of bringing the army's troops to the
sector of the forthcoming operations and to position then covertly at the minimum
possible distance away from the start line in order to ensure the prompt moving out
and deep penetration on the very first day into the enemy defenses. This was usually
chosen 15-20 km behind the forward edge, as a rule, in the start sector. The army's
troops were moved up to the assembly area only at night, usually just 2-4 days prior
to the going over of the front's troops to the offensive and took 1 or 2 days.

Thus, the 3d Guards Tank Army during May and June 1944 was in the Headquarters re-
serve for reoutfitting and was located in the area of Ternopol' in the rear area of
the First Ukrainian Front. 0n 3 and 4 July during 2 nights it, having carried out
a march, reached the assembly area in the zone of the 60th Army where it waited 9
days until committed to the breakthrough.“ 0n the eve of the Berlin Operation, the
3d and 4th Guards Tank Armies made a march from the left wing of the First Ukrainian
Front and concentrated in assembly areas over 2 days prior to the start of the of-
fensive with the first echelon corps some 20-30 km away from the enemy's forward de-
fensive edge and the formations of the second echelon and the reserve some 40-50 km
away.5 The assembly areas were occupied in the same operational configuration in
which the army was to be committed to the engagement.

The jump-off areas for the tank armies were usually set some 2-10 km away from the
forward edge depending upon the situational conditions and chiefly the terrain.
Surh a necessity was caused by a desire to bring the army as close as possible to
the battle formations of the combined-arms formations due to the fact that the pos-

sibility could not be excluded of using the tank army formations for completing the
breakthrough of the enemy defenses in cooperation with the rifle troops. In a
majority of operations, the tank armies took up the jump-off position during the
period of the artillery softening-up, in being in columns ready upon the signal to
drive into the breech or enter the engagement. The length of time the army spent in

47

itnllﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
a 1ump-off area was limited, as a rule. to 6-10 hours and sometimes somewhat more
proceeding from the existing situation (16 hours for the lat Guards Tank Army in
the VistuIa-Oder Operation, 18 hours for the 2d Guards Tank Army in the East Pomer-
anian and 1 day in the Vistula-Oder).

In certain operations, a jump-off line was designated instead of a jump-off area.
For example, in the Berlin Operation jump-off lines were designated for the forma-
tions of the 3d Guards Tank Army for commitment to the breakthrough. These ran
along the edge of the forest on the eastern bank of the Neisse River, some 1-2 km
from the enemy's forward edge where the first echelon troops had reached during the
period of the artillery softening-up and, having crossed the Neisse River, behind
the infantry were committed to the engagement on the very first day of the opera-
tion.

Proceeding from the distance from the forward edge of the areas designated for a
tank army, specific conditions were created for the work of the commander, the staff
and the other control bodies in preparing for the operations.

In the concentration area the army commander had an opportunity, if he had received
the mission by this time, of adopting a plan and together with the staff to a cer-
tain degree to plan the forthcoming combat operations and to organize cooperation
on the map and at conducted command-staff exercises, chiefly on the operational
level. Here also military and political training of the personnel was carried out
and the questions of material and technical support solved. Reconnaissance for the
purposes of clarifying questions of the plan of the operation was conducted, as a
rule, only on the army and corps levels.

In the assembly area, planning questions were clarified and cooperation was organ-
ized between the tank army formations (units) and the infantry and artillery of the
combined-arms armies. From this same area officers called on the tank commander in-
clusively to familiarize him with the area of the forthcoming operations and the
enemy's forward defensive edge. Here also inspections of tank unit equipment were
conducted.

The methods for preparing tank army offensive operations depended primarily upon the
available time, the personal preparation of the commanders, the chiefs and respon-
sible staff officers, the teamwork between the basic sections and field headquarters
of the armies as a whole and a number of other factors.

If over 10 days were available, the work of preparing an operation could be carried
out. as a rule, successively in the various command and staff levels, that is, ini-
tially on the army level, then on the corps, brigade and so forth. As preparations
were completed. mainly the planning of the army operation, the missions were issued
to the corps where the control bodies began to prepare for combat operations.

A positive aspect of this method was the fact that it ensured the high quality exe-
cution of the preparatory measures under the condition that sufficient time was al-
loeated to each level. The secrecy of preparations was also achieved as the sub-
ordinate staffs learned of the content of the forthcoming missions only at the
designated time. Here the following sequence of work by the control bodies was
most characteristic.

48

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR.0FFNJA1.USE¢DNLY

The army commander, having received the mission, along with the chief of staff, the
military council member and, in a number of instances, the artillery commander and

the chief of the operations section, studied it, assessed the situation and adopted
a plan. A textual plan of the operation was drawn up. The adopted plan, as a rule,
was reviewed by the front's military council. Then the questions of the plan were
detailized successfully and thoroughly analyzed in the conducted exercises, military
games and reconnaissances. During all this time the control bodies also carried out
the tasks of military and political training and the bringing of the troops and rear
support up to full strength. As the time for the start of the operation approached,
the commanders of the formations and the chiefs of the army branches of troops were
involved in concretizing the individual questions of the plan.

Several days before the start of combat operations the plan had been finally worked
out. The formation staffs began planning for combat operations on a basis, as a
rule, of a verbal receiving of the missions. The chiefs of the branches of troops,
special troops and army services worked out plans for utilizing the subordinate
units. During this period great attention was given to organizing cooperation with-
in the army and with adjacent field forces and air armies by joint elaboration of
the questions, including on the spot. In a number of instances, at sessions of the
army military councils they listened to the commander plans down to the brigade com-
mander inclusively and this was of important significance for working out a unity of
views on conducting the forthcoming combat operations.

The characteristic traits of the designated method can be traced in the activities
of the field headquarters of the 4th Tank Army in preparing for the Vistula-Oder
Operation. The army commander, out of the 43 days available to prepare for the
operation, during the first 5 days after receiving the mission adopted the plan for
the operation. The chief of staff in accord with the commander's instructions work-
ed out the textual plan which was approved by the front commander, Mar SU I. S.
Konev. During the following 18 days, the plans were adjusted and detailed. The
basic work of the control bodies involved the military and political training of the
troops and the organizing of logistical support. Some 17 days prior to the start of
the operation, Gen D. D. Lelyushenko announced the plan to the corps commanders and
to the chiefs of the branches of troops, special troops and army services. Fourteen
days prior to the offensive, the corps commanders gave the missions to the brigade
commanders. From this time in the army preparations began to be carried out in
parallel by the field headquarters bodies (the conducting of exercises, the working
out of the combat order and documents of the operation's plan, the organization of
control posts, commandant service, support, control in the troops and so forth) and
by the control bodies of the subordinate formations and units (the elaboration of
plans, the planning of combat operations and troop training).

Consequently. with 43 days to prepare for the operation, for 25 days, that is 59
percent of the time, only a limited range of persons in the army field headquarters
was concerned with the operational portion of preparations (the adopting of the
plan, planning and so forth) and this ensured the secrecy of preparations. The fol-
lowing 6 days were used for the planning of combat operations by the corps head-
quarters. Some 14 days prior to the start of the offensive, the brigades began to
organize combat and 5-6 days before in the regiments (battalions).

The presence of sufficient time made it possible to work out thoroughly and in de-
tail the forthcoming operation, to prepare precise and well-thought-out basic

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
documents for its planning and to carry out careful organization of combat opera-
tions on all levels. The tank armies were prepared in approximately the same se-
quence in the Lwow-Sandomierz, Iasi—Kishinev, Vistula-Oder and a number of other
operations. The time gap between the consecutively conducted preparatory measures
was determined proceeding from the time available.

Characteristic of the given method was the fact that the main emphasis was put on

a detailed elaboration of the possible methods for the actions of the army forma-
tions in carrying out the combat missions and on organizing cooperation between them
and with the combined-arms formations and aviation. Experience showed that with
such a work sequence, it was possible to achieve high quality preparations of the
operation. The army commander and the staff, the formation and unit commanders in
the course of the operation acted precisely and confidently even under the condi-
tions of an abruptly changing situation and successfully achieved the set goals.

Work was organized differently for the commanders and staffs of tank armies when
less than 10 days were available to prepare for the operation. Under these condi-
tions, with the obtaining of the combat mission, the commander, with the military
council member, the chief of staff and, in a number of instances, with the chief of
the rear and the assistant commander for technical affairs, began to study it. In
the course of studying the mission, the work in the army field headquarters was car-
ried out by groups: the commander's group studied the directive (order) and the
officers of the operations section plotted the mission and the situational data on
a map. After studying the directive, the commander, having sought the opinions of
those present, defined the content and times for carrying out the army's missions
stage by stage as well as the content and volume of data which must be prepared for
him by the staff, the chiefs of the branches of troops, special troops and services
for adopting a plan. At the same time the officers of the operations section pre-

pared the preliminary orders for the troops. Most often 1 or 2 hours were spent on
all of this.

During this time the work at the field headquarters was carried out in parallel.
The army commander, proceeding from the available data, assessed the situation, the

chief of staff (of the operations section) provided operational orientation for the
headquarters officials and they began to work on preparing proposals to the com-
mander and to issue preliminary orders to their subordinate troops.

The commander's work to elaborate the plan ended, as a rule, with a reconnaissance
conducted by him with the army's formation and unit commanders and officials from
the army field headquarters, where on the spot they clarified certain situational
data. drew up the plan and issued the operation order.

But if reconnaissance was not conducted due to the lack of time or the great dis-
tance of the position from the start line (the forward edge of enemy defenses), then
a detailed assessment of the situational elements was made using a map on the basis
of calculations prepared by the staff.

Work was carried out in this sequence by the control bodies in preparing a number

or tank armies for the Orel, Belgorod-Khar'khov, Kiev, Belorussian, Uman'-Botosani,

East Prussian, Budapest and Vienna operations. For example, in preparing the 5th
Guards Tank Army for the Belorussian-Khar'khov Offensive Operation, when a little

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
more than 2 days were assigned to carry out the entire complex of preparatory mens-
ures from the moment of receiving the mission, during the first 2 hours work was
dune to study the mission by the commander's group and operational orientation of
the field headquarters officials was carried out by the chief of staff. Over the
next 3 or 4 hours, the army general, Gen P. A. Rotmistrov, on the basis of the
available data and having heard brief reports by a number of the field headquarters
officers, assessed the situation. By this time through the staff preliminary orders
had been issued to the formation commanders. Some 5-6 hours after receiving the
mission, the commander with the formation commanders, the chief of the operations
section. the chief of intelligence, the chief of the army engineer troops and the
artillery commander began to conduct reconnaissance. The operation order was issued
on the spot.

Thus, in 7-8 hours, the subordinate commanders had all the required data for organ-
izing operations in the formations. Subsequently the focus of work in the army
field headquarters was shifted to providing aid to the troops and to working out the
questions of cooperation both within the army and with adjacent units.

The army staff worked out a cooperation plan and a scheme for committing the army to
the engagement.6 The support questions were reflected in the plans of the chief of
the army engineer troops, the chief of intelligence and the chief of the army rear
services. The political section drew up a work plan for the period from 2 through
5 August. During this time, the army commander reported his plan to the front com-
mander and his deputy coordinated actions with the lat Tank Army and 5th Guards Army
in the zone of which the entry into battle was to be made. In turn, the corps com-
manders after the approval of their plans by the commander set the combat missions
for the brigade commanders and together with them on the spot worked out the basic
stages of the pending operations and organized cooperation with the rifle division
commanders in whose zones they were to go into battle.

Such a sequence of work had a number of positive features.

In the first place, out of the 2k days available for preparing for combat actions,
the army commander spent 3 or 6 hours on adopting a plan and setting the missions by
issuing preliminary instructions. that is, a larger portion of the time was made
available to subordinates.

Secondly, the commanders and staffs of the army formations were able immediately
after the adopting of the commander's plan, to begin to work on planning combat
operations, and after the setting of the missions in the field, that is, after 7-8
hours, they were able to commence the direct organization of their subordinates'
combat operations.

Thirdly, the selected preparatory method made it possible for all the army field
headquarters bodies and officials, without waiting until the staff had completed
the basic planning work, to begin preparing for the operation and spend a signifi-
cant portion of the time (50-60 percent) on control and providing aid to the troops
in organizing their combat operations.

Common to all the operations prepared by this method was the fact that a large por-
tlon of the time was used to prepare combat operations in parallel in the army, the

corps and brigades.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such a method made it possible to prepare the operations in comparatively short
times (several days). This manifested its strong points. The negative aspects
were that the questions of organizing the pending combat operations were given
piecemeal to certain command and staff levels with subsequent concretization and
detailing. As a consequence of this up to a certain time the subordinates lacked
all of the essential initial data for the work.

From the standpoint of the allocation of time, the designated sequence of work has
much in common with the method where virtually all the command levels ilmnediately
begin preparing for the operation, that is. the army, corps and brigade. In this
instance, upon command successive instructions were issued of a clarifying and sup-
plementary nature.

As a rule, this method was employed when there were preparatory times limited to
several hours. Since the time element assumed predominant significance in the given
instance. the army commander very frequently studied the mission. assessed the situ-
ation, he adopted a plan not for the entire operation but rather for its individual
parts, proceeding from the main situational questions, and formulated for the forma-
tions the missions which had to be carried out first.

As the situation was clarified and the basic planning documents worked out, the
formations received the planning tables, copies of the cooperation plan and orders
for the types of support. Frequently in the sector where the basic efforts were to
be concentrated, a visit was made by the commander or his deputies who on the spot
issued orders on detailing and concretizing the overall concept for the operation.

This sequence. for example, was used in preparing the tank armies for the 1945
Prague Operation, when the commanders of the 3d and 4th Guards Tank armies, Gens

P. S. Rybalko and D. D. Lelyuahenko, after regrouping had about 2 days to organize
the offensive.

Thus. the commander of the 4th Guards Tank Army received a mission to regroup over

a distance of 200 km at 1630 hours on 2 May.7 Having studied it, assessed the situ-
ation and adopted a plan, in 30-40 minutes he issued preliminary instructions to the
troops through the chief of staff, Gen K. I. Upman, and the chief of the operations
section, Col S. S. Maryakhin. By 2200 hours on the same day. partial operation
orders for the regrouping had been sent out to the formations and by 0200 hours on

3 May (by the start of the march), a copy of the regrouping plan and the orders for
the types of support.

The army commander received the offensive's mission in the morning of 5 May. The
combat orders to reach the jump-off area were sent out to the formations by 1100
hours, the missions for the offensive had been set through the army staff by 1600
hours on S May and the operation order was received in the formations by 0400 hours
on 6 May.

Consequently, of the 9.5 hours available to organize the regrouping, the army com-
mander spent 5-7 percent of the time on adopting a plan. During the remaining time
the subordinate commanders carried out the work in the formations and units. In or-
ganizing the offensive which started on 1400 hours of 6 May, of the 30-32 hours
available from the moment the mission was received from the front's staff for the

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FTIC]AI.USE(MVLY

offensive operation. the army field headquarters spent 3 or 4 hours. that is, 10—11
percent of the time, after which the commanders and staffs of the formations began
to organize combat operations. '

As in the preparations of the 5th Guards Tank Army for the Belgorod-Khar'khov Oper-
ation, the issuing of preliminary instructions to the troops was aimed at gaining
time. This is the advantage of the given method. Its weak aspect was the fact that
the subordinate commanders and staffs did not immediately receive complete situa-

tional data. The data came in as the time drew nearer for the start of combat oper-
ations.

Thus. in preparing for the offensive operations of tank armies during the years of
the Great Patriotic War, basically three methods of work were employed where on the
various command-staff levels the preparatory measures were carried out successively,
in parallel or by administrative order. Each time the method was chosen which con-
formed to the specific conditions of preparing for the operation and ensured the
greatest results from conducting the preparatory measures.

2. Adopting the Plan for the Operation

Regardless of the method used to prepare for an operation, the adopting of a plan by
the tank army's commander always represented an involved creative process which was
made up of two interrelated stages in his work: studying the mission and assessing
the situation considering a possible change in it.

A study of the received mission was the initial principle in the work of an armycom-
mander in adopting a plan. In beginning to study a combat mission, the commander
first of all carefully examined the aim of the front's operation, its overall con-
cept, the composition of the assault grouping and he determined the place and role
of the tank army in the front operation, its tasks and the dates for preparing the
operation. Here the quality of understanding the overall concept of the front's
commander and the tasks of the army depended largely upon the detailed exposition

of them by the front commander as well as upon the level of knowledge on the part

of the army commander of the overall concept of the front operation and the
operational—strategic situation.

For effective work in studying the army's mission, it was desirable that the com-
mander possessed primarily and most completely the following data from the directive
(order) or from the verbal setting of the mission by the front commander. 0n the
enemy: its position, the nature of operations, effective strength, grouping of men
and eQuipment, possible intentions, battleworthiness and political-moral state, its
weak and strong points. 0n the aims and missions of the front and army operations:
the axes of the main and other thrusts, the tasks to be carried out by the front's
resources in the interests of the army, the methods and dates of their execution

and the nature of operations of the adjacent field forces.

A study of front-level documents provides grounds to conclude that beginning to pre-
pare [or offensive operations in 1943, the tank army commander and staff possessed,
as a rule, such data as a description of the enemy grouping, the axis of the advance,
the missions for the army for 1 or 2 days of the operation, the sector it was to be
committed to the breech, and the missions of the combined-arms army cooperating with

53

FIN!()FF1CJAI.I£SEZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the tank army. Only in individual instances were the missions indicated for more

than i or 2 days of an operation, for the operational configuration of the army or
for the nature of the maneuvers in depth.

A comparison of the needed and available data indicates that an army commander for
fully studying the mission in preparing for operations in 1943 had to obtain a num-
ber of data on the enemy (fighting strength, possible nature of actions, its weak
and strong points) as well as on his own troops by assembling the information
through his subordinate control bodies, chiefly through the staff. This compli-
cated the process of studying the mission as it required a large amount of time to
collect the lacking data. Moreover, in preparing, for example, the 3d Guards and

4th Tank armies for the Orel Operation, the army commanders received very incomplete
and even contradictory data on the enemy from the front's directives.

In preparing for the offensive operations of 1944-1945, the work of the commander to
study the overall concept of the operation and the army's missions was somewhat

From the experience of the operations conducted at this time, the initial data for
studying the mission were information describing the sector for concentrating the
basic efforts of the front to a depth of the front operation. The army's missions
began to be set not for l or 2 days, as was characteristic for the 1943 operations,
but for 3-5 days and in a number of operations for 6-7 days. This made it possible
to more clearly outline the future combat operations. Different versions of the
forthcoming operations were played through in the front-level command and staff
exercises and games. This increased the opportunities for the army commander to
master the overall concept of the front operation and with greater foresight to plan
the army operation and the possible variations of combat operations.

The process of studying the overall concept of the front-level operation by an army
commander most often occurred in the presence of the military council members who
supplemented the obtained information by data known to them and they also voiced
their own considerations. Having studied the overall concept, the army commander
moved on to analyzing the army's combat mission. Here he first of all defined the
essence of the mission, its content, the place and role of the army in the front's
operation, considering what formations had been attached to the army and supported
it and in what sequence the missions would be carried out by the army and adjacent
field forces.

The commander, from the viewpoint of the conclusions which stemmed from studying

the mission and on the basis of those data which had been obtained by now from the
staff, began to assess the situation. This work was expressed in a successive study
of data on the enemy, his own troops, adjacent units and terrain. Also considered
and assessed were the economic condition of the area of the forthcoming operations,
the sociopolitical composition of the population, the state of weather, the season
and their influence on troop operations.

56

FouioiIlCh\LlﬁSEINNLY
The staff and other control bodies carried out the work of assembling, studying and
generalizing the situational data needed to assess the conditions for adopting the
plan for the operation.

The army staff obtained data on the enemy from all kinds of reconnaissance, from the
information of troops operating ahead, from reports (summaries) by staffs of subord-
inate and supporting formations and by reciprocally informing the headquarters and
sections. Intelligence summaries as well as other informational documents of the
front's staff were also a source of information.

It is essential to point out that in the aim of bringing out the overall plan for
utilizing a tank army, the army, as a rule, did not conduct reconnaissance by its
own reconnaissance bodies in preparing for the operation. Only in preparing for in-
dividual operations did the army conduct sweeps and other reconnaissance actions be-
yond the forward edge of the enemy defenses. Most often this was the case when its
formations had for some time already been in direct contact with the enemy.

in possessing rather limited reconnaissance equipment, the staff in preparing for a
number of offensive operations constantly sought out opportunities to organize
radio, radar and ranging reconnaissance, monitoring and interception, for example,
in the 2d and 3d Guards Tank armies in preparing for the Vistula-Oder Operation.

The staff obtained a portion of data on the enemy in conducting officer reconnais-
sance basically through the staffs of the combined-arms armies and formations. .Con-
sequently, the army's reconnaissance bodies in the preparatory period of an opera-
tion at best could provide the army staff with data about the enemy on the forward
edge of the defenses or in the tactical depth. But the army commander and his staff
were more interested in the data on the deep operational enemy reserves. It was pri-
marily the front that could provide this information.

Intelligence information from the front's staff was received in the form of verbal
messages including in the conducted command-staff exercises and games, as written
intelligence summaries sent out by the front's staff. and from maps with adjusted
data using the results of aerial photography (the Belorussian, Iasi-Kishinev and
other operations).

As for his own troops the commander was most often interested in such information as
the battleworthiness of the attached and supporting army formations. their manning
levels. the presence and condition of equipment and supplies for the time of adopt-
ing the plan and by the start of the operation. The army staff clarified these

data through the staffs of the subordinate and supporting formations and by exchang-
ing reciprocal information with the administrations and sections of the field head-
quarters. For example, the administrations of the rear, armored repairs and supply
pruvided daily, weekly. once-a-month briefings (reports) as well as on the eve of
the operation with varying degrees of detail on the state of supplies and equipment
as well as proposals and conclusions proceeding from the situation. Analogous docu-
ments were received by the army staff from the motor vehicle, engineer and chemical
sections and from the administration of the artillery commander. The army political
section assessed the political-moral state of the troops.

information on the situation and tasks of adjacent field forces and formations and
on troops operating ahead was received from officials traveling to the staffs of

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

these field forces (formations) and by personal encounters of the commanders and
chiefs of staff.

Particularly essential was information on the terrain where the tank armies were to
operate, and in particular, on its relief, camouflaging properties. the state of
roads and the nature of natural barriers. For example, in the preparations of the
6th Guards Tank Army for the Manchurian Operation, it was important to have data on
water supply conditions. In a number of operations (Vistula—Oder or Berlin), the
army staff was interested in data on the condition of industrial enterprises,
material resources and the possibilities 9f employing them in the army's zone of
advance as well as on areas suitable for building airfields.

The staff obtained all these data as a result of studying the military geographic
descriptions of the theater of war, topographic maps, including captured ones.
aerial photographs, city maps, by conducting reconnaissance, by interrogating pris-
oners and questioning natives.

The intelligence section assembled the data on the enemy. The section's officers
drew up references on the composition, position and state of engineer-built struc-
tures and the presence of reserves deep in the defenses. These data were plotted on
a working map of the chief of the army intelligence section. In a number of in-
stances, for example, in the 3d Guards Tank Army, the intelligence section used pre-
viously worked out tabular and graphic forms of information to be filled out along
with the officers of the operations section and clearly showing the balance of men
and equipment both in terms of the axes of the pending operations and in terms of
the depth of the operation giving data on the enemy not only in terms of its compo-
sition but also for maneuvering capabilities. Information was also worked out using
the TOE for the enemy troops with a brief description of the commanders of their
formations and units.

Data on one's own troops, adjacent units and the terrain were obtained at the staff
operations section. They were assembled by representatives of the formations, by
the manning and casualty section, the engineer and topographic sections the chiefs
of which either submitted brief information to the staff or plotted the necessary
data on the map of the operation section's chief. Analogously data was received
from the rear, armored repair and supply administrations and from the staff of the
army artillery commander. The data were reported to the army commander by various
methods: by the chief of intelligence usually using a map with worked out calcula-
tions (the balance of the forces, the time to be spent on moving up and so forth):
by the chief of the operations section using a map with an appended written state-
ment in the form of an explanatory note. Sometimes these data were reported in a
generalized manner by the chief of staff. The commander could also summon other
officials and very often the artillery commander the chief of the rear services or
the assistant commander for technical affairs.

It is essential to emphasize that the specific features of assessing the situation
by an army commander, along with the available time to prepare for the operation.
were also determined by the place and role of the army in the front's offensive
operation, by the methods of carrying out the set missions and to a good degree by
the personal qualities of the commander and more accurately by his style of work.

56

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NWLY
IWJR OFF1CJAI.USI:(NVLY

As a whole, the work of a tank army commander in adopting a plan during the war
years encompassed many questions and required a thorough study of the combat mis-
sion, a careful estimate of all the situational elements, realistic calculations of

the men and equipment and a foresight of the possible nature of the forthcoming
operations.

The content of the plans adopted by the tank army commanders, from the viewpoint of
the amount of questions taken up in them, differed at different times of the war and

this was determined mainly by the conditions for preparing the operations and the
qualifications of the commanders.

In the plans for operations in 1943 and the beginning of l94h, as a rule, only very
general outlines were given for the methods of defeating the enemy. the operational
configuration of the army, the combat missions of the corps, artilleries, reserves
and forward detachments as well as certain questions of cooperation and support for
the operation. These questions were reflected, for example, in the documents of the
1st and 5th Guards Tank armies in the preparations for the Belgorod-Khar'khov Opera-

tion andethe 5th Guards Tank Army in the preparations for the Krivoy Rog Operation
of 1943.

In the preparation of offensive operations during the summer-autumn campaign of 1944
and the campaign of 1945 in Europe, most often the plan also encompassed such sup-
plementary questions as defining the tasks for aviation and the organization of con-
trol. These were reflected, for example, in the operation order for the offensive
by the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation and in the documents of
the 5th Guards Tank Army in the preparations for the Shaulyay Operation.9

As a whole, the commander's plan began to more clearly formulate an overall concept
and incorporate replies to the following questions: what sort of enemy it was and
in what sequence it should be defeated, where the basic efforts were to be concen-
trated for achieving the operation's goal, what the operational configuration of the
army's troops should be and what the nature of its maneuver in the operational depth
would be.

The questions of the commander's plan began to be more detailed and the quality of
its content improved. Thus, in the plans for the 1943 operations, for the enemy, as
a rule, they determined only the composition of its formations and units to a depth
of the tactical defensive zone, the engineer works of the forward edge and more
rarely the composition of its operational reserves. The plans for operations in
19b4-i945 began to define the main enemy grouping the defeat of which would deter-
mine the operation's success. 0n the basis of assessing the data this required that
conclusions be drawn not only on the position and state of the immediately opposing
enemy forces but also on the combat and maneuvering capabilities of the formations
which were in its operational-strategic reserves. Consequently, the possibility
arose of more correctly selecting the methods for defeating the enemy and for guid-
ing subordinate commanders and staffs for the entire course of the operation.

In determining the methods for defeating the enemy, the plans for the operations in
1944-1965 began to reflect the nature of tank army maneuvers. Their basic task be-

came a more rapid advance into the operational depth for the purpose of breaking up
the enemy groupings, reaching its rear and cutting off approaching reserves. This

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(N‘LY

created favorable conditions for completing the enemy's defeat by the combined-arms
armies and as a whole for the success of the entire front operation.

The axis of the army's main thrust was chosen considering the nature of enemy de-
fenses and the terrain which would permit the employment of large masses of tanks.
Concentrated in this sector were the basic efforts of the army and those formations
which had a high percentage of material strength while the commanders and staffs had
greater experience in combat operations. These formations were reinforced by a sig-
nificant portion of the army resources. For example, according to the plan of the
commander of the 2d Guards Tank Army, Gen S. I. Bogdanov, in the Berlin Operation,
the IX Guards Tank Corps which was operating on the main sector was reinforced with
an antiaircraft regiment, a mortar regiment, two tank-killing artillery regiments,
two engineer battalions and a company of bridging and landing equipment and with the
committing of the army to the engagement also by a ground attack air division while
the left flank XII Guards Tank Corps was reinforced only by antiaircraft and tank
killer regiments.‘°

The operational configuration of the army to a significant degree was determined
proceeding from its composition as well as considering other factors. The three-
corps composition of an army made it possible for the commander to have, as a rule,
two echelons and a reserve. The second echelon was used to increase the strength of
the attack from depth, for developing and reinforcing the success and for repelling
enemy counterstrikes (counterattacks); the reserve was employed for carrying out
tasks arising in the course of the operation as well as for developing and rein-
forcing the success. In those instances when an army consisted of two corps, its
operational configuration was most often single-echelon with a reserve (the 5th
Guards Tank Army in the Belorussian and East Prussian operations and the 1st Guards
Tank Army in the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation.

Most characteristic for the 1943 offensive operations was an army configuration in
two echelons with tank, artillery antitank and engineer reserves. In the l9bk-l945
operations, as a consequence of the increased effective strength of the army, army
artillery and antiaircraft artillery groups became elements of its operational con-
figuration. Stronger tank (separate tank brigades and regiments), antitank (separ-
ate tank and SAU brigades and regiments, tank killing brigades) and engineer re-
serves were created. A chemical reserve and a mobile obstacle construction detach-
ment became a component part of the operational configuration.

In determining the operational configuration it was essential to consider the combat
mission of the army and the nature of the maneuver. For example, in the Lublin-Brest
Operation, the commander of the 2d Tank Army, in setting the two-echelon configura-
tion of the army, proceeded from the need to maneuver in the second stage of the
operation when the enemy could encounter the deep enemy reserves. Moreover consid-
eration was given to the planned width of the starting area (it did not exceed

12 km) and the available roads. The command endeavored to lead the army in a com-
pact grouping. This made it possible to make a powerful tank attack and ensured the
increased effort and maneuvering from depth both on the attack line and in the course
of the operation.

Advancing in the army's first echelon was the III Tank Corps under the command of
Gen N. D. Vedeneyev and the V111 Guards Tank Corps under the command of Gen A. P.
Popov. in the second echelon were the XVI Tank Corps of Gen I. V. Dubovoy; the 26th

58

F0ltﬂﬂﬂCLALI£HEONlY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

Antiaircraft Artillery Division of the RVGK under the command of Gen 1. G. Lyarskiy
comprised the army antiaircraft artillery group. The reserves included: two
rocket regiments in the artillery reserve, one regiment and a battalion of tank

killing artillery in the artillery antitank reserve and an engineer battalion in the
engineer reserve.

Each tank corps in the army's first echelon was reinforced with light cannon artil-
lery, a tank killing regiment, a rocket battalion, a combat engineer battalion, a
heavy bridge park battalion and two platoons of a telephone construction company.

Such reinforcements of a tank corps pursued the aim of increasing its independence
in carrying out missions in the operational depth.

The operational configuration of an army differed somewhat in those instances when
it advanced from direct contact with the enemy, chiefly from the standpoint of em-
ploying the artillery. In particular. a tendency arose to centralize the artillery.
Thus, in adopting the plan to break through the defenses in the Budapest Operation,
the commander of the 6th Guards Tank Army, Gen A. G. Kravchenko, in considering that
the tank army was to operate in the front's first echelon, created an army artillery
group consisting of an artillery brigade and a rocket regiment. In addition, he put
the engineer battalion and the pontoon bridge battalion in the reserve. In the army
a mobile obstacle construction detachment was formed consisting of a combat engineer
battalion with a supply of 300-400 antitank mines carried by truck. Deployment and
mine-laying lines were set for it. In addition to the army one corps mobile ob-
stacle construction detachments were organized up to a combat engineer company in
strength with a supply of antitank mines. They were to be used on the probable

approaches of enemy tank counterattacks as well as on the flanks of the main army
troop grouping.

In the 1943 operations, in setting combat missions for the corps, most often the re-
inforcements, the attack line and the axis of the offensive were indicated, and in
1944-1945, as a result of the acquired experience, in addition, the nature of the
maneuver in depth, the lines which must be taken by the end of the first and second
days of the offensive and tentatively the missions for the subsequent days. In a
number of operations in which the armies had a single-echelon operational configura-
tion (the lat Guards Tank Army in the Berlin and the 5th Guards Tank Army in the
East Prussian), the battle formation of the corps was set by a decision of the com-
manders, Gena M. Ye. Katukov and V. T. Vol'skiy. This made good sense as the comp
mander was deprived of an opportunity of having any means capable of influencing the
course of the operation.

In 1943, in the plan of the army commanders, only the axes of movement were desig-
nated for the second echelons and in general terms the readiness to carry out the
possible missions; for the reserves only the axes of movement and the place in the
army's operational configuration were given; for the forward detachments the lines
which had to be taken by the end of the first day. In subsequent years, possible
missions began to be set more concretely for the army's second echelon in terms of
the attack line and the procedure was given for transferring over reinforcements.

ln addition, missions were set for the second echelon to secure the flanks; for the
reserves the composition and possible missions for 3 or 4 days of the operation were
given. For example. this was the approach to solving the questions by the commander
of the 2d Guards Tank Army in preparing for the Vistula-Oder Operation.11 This

59

IN)I.OFTWCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

facilitated the work of the Subordinate commanders and staffs including in adopting
a plan and organizing combat operations.

The combat missions for the corps were sometimes divided into immediate (to a depth
of 1-3 days of the offensive) and subsequent (as a rule, to the depth of the imme-
diate mission of the army). More often the missions were set for the corps in terms
of the days of the operation and were adjusted by the end of each day. In all in-
stances the axis of the offensive was indicated and the zones were very rarely set
out considering the fluid nature of operations.

The range of missions for the artillery and aviation as outlined in the commanders'
plans was also somewhat widened. Thus, in 1943, as a consequence of the decentral-
ized use of army artillery, the cammander, as a rule, did not set missions for it.
The missions for aviation to support combat operations were determined by the com-
mander only in the course of the offensive by submitting requests to the front's
staff.

From 1944, with the creation of army artillery groups, the army commander began to
assign them missions for the entire period of the artillery offensive with the in-
dicating of the direction of the move in the course of the operation. Air forma-
tions began to be put under operational subordination to the tank armies and for
them the army commander set missions to support the attack and development of the
army's offensive in depth with the allocating of their efforts to support the army
formations.

The questions of cooperation and support for the operation were reflected, as a
rule, in a general form in the army commander's plan. These were detailed in the
plan of the operation and in other planning documents. Cooperation procedures were
also defined for missions and time and for the operation's means of support.

For the organizing of control, the plan gave the deployment areas and from 1944,
also the routes for moving the control posts of the armies and corps, the procedure
for submitting reports and the control signals.

Consequently, the content of the plans of tank army commanders for an offensive dur-
ing the war years varied. It depended upon the situational conditions and upon the
overall concept of the front commander which defined the role and place of the ar-
mored field forces. But a general trend in its changes was higher quality, greater
completeness and soundness. To an ever-greater degree the creative approach of the
commanders to utilizing the available resources became apparent. All of this was a
consequence of the increased combat capabilities of the army and a result of the ac-
quired combat experience and the improved conditions for preparing the operations.

The commander's plan was drawn up, as a rule, graphically on a map without any ear
bellishments. 0n the map were plotted the enemy's defensive system and its troop
grouping, the axes of the main and auxiliary thrusts. the tasks of the army and
corps to the entire depth of the operation, the jump-off area, the line of attack
and the route of advance to it as well as the other essential data.

If 7-10 days or more could be assigned to preparing for the operation, then in
certain tank armies the plans were drawn up in text. Here were given the

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI4OFFKJAI.USE13NLY

conclusions from studying the mission and the evaluation of the situation, the
overall concept of the operation, its stages, their content and duration, the prob-
able balance of forces by the completion of each stage and other questions.

in order to avoid information leaks, the commander's plan was most often drawn up
personally by the commander or the chief of staff (the chief of the operations
section) and just in one copy. The plan map was the working document for the en-
tire period of the operation.

3. The Planning of Combat Operations

The army commander's plan was the basis for the organization and planning of the
forthcoming operation. The purpose of the planning was to determine the sequence
and methods of carrying out the missions set by the front'a commander, to establish

a firm procedure for cooperation and to organize all-round support for combat oper-
ations and troop control.

Planning was carried out under the direct leadership of the army commander. The
chief of staff was the basic organizer of the work and he set for the executors the
procedures and dates for working out the documents and directed the work of the ad-
ministrations and sections of the army field headquarters.

0n the basis of the commander's plans and his instructions for the planning of the
operation, the army staff together with the political section, the chiefs of the
branches of troops, special troops and services worked out a plan for the operation
which, as a rule, included a general operational part, the plans for the combat em-
ployment of artillery and aviation, as well as plans for the types of support, the
organization of control and party political work. A calendar plan or schedule of
dates for carrying out the measures to prepare for the operation, the troop regroup-
ing plan and other documents usually served as an appendix.

The openztional portion of the plan. The army staff worked out the operational por-
tion of the plan on a map, graphically, with a legend (explanatory note) or on a map
and textually. In a number of instances. for example, in the 5th Guards Tank Army

(Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy and East Prussian operations), the plan was worked out only
on the plan map.12

In preparing for operations in 1943 (Orel, Belgorod-Khar'khov and Kiev)}3 this por-
tion of the plan showed the evaluation of the enemy grouping, the axes of the of-
fensive, the operational configuration, the tasks of the army for 1-2 and sometimes
3-5 days of the operation, the routes for reaching the attack line, the army's for-
mation in moving up and the questions of support and control.

In preparing for operations in 19aa-19as. the plan reflected in addition such
questions as determining the methods for defeating the enemy to the depth of the
immediate mission, the dates for carrying out the missions, the axes of the main
and other thrusts, the missions for the formations, artillery, aviation and special
troops by days, the questions of cooperation with adjacent field forces (forma-

tions) and in addition the general axis of the offensive to the depth of the long-
range mission, the dates and so forth.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the plan a significant place was taken up by the questions of operational camou-
flage and electronic countermeasures. They also began to determine the composition,
the tasks and methods of combat operations of the forward, outflanking and assault
detachments, the traffic detachments and the mobile obstacle construction detach-
ments .

The main particular feature in the planning of tank army offensive operations start-
ing with the autumn of 1943 was the fact that from this time they began to envisage
two or three axes for committing the army's formations to the engagement depending
upon the results of the breakthrough of enemy defenses by the combined-arms armies.
This was the case in the Kiev Operation in the 3d Guards Tank Army, in the Vitebsk-
Orsha and East Prussian operations in the 5th Guards Tank Army, in the Vistula-Oder
Operation in the 2d Guards Tank Army and in other armies.

For each probable sector of the army's attack, routes were set for arriving at the
attack line. the procedure for forming up the march formation, the attack lines for
the formations, the procedure for supporting the attack by artillery fire and air
strikes, the axis of the offensive, the questions of cooperation with the combined—
arms army, the organization of control and command and signals. In that sector
which was considered the basic one, in addition more detailed elaboration was made
of questions involving the preparation of the attack routes and lines, support for
the flanks and the conducting of reconnaissance.

The experience of preparing tank.army operations showed that for highly maneuverable
combat operations, considering the elaboration of the missions in terms of several
variations, it was possible and advisable to draw up a graphic plan with an explana-
tory note. In this instance less time was required. It was easier to incorporate
the necessary corrections in the plan if they arose on the eve of the operation.

It was more visible and convenient in actual use in controlling the troops in the
course of an operation. For the operations of 1954-1965, and in particular in the
2d Guards Tank Army, it became characteristic to work out various diagrams, for ex-
ample, for the configuration of the march formations in the attack, artillery fire
in supporting the attack as well as diagrams and perspective plans for enemy engi-
neer structures and so forth which were an appendix to the plan. It must be empha-
sized that with today's level in the development of data transmission equipment, in-
cluding photographic and TV, graphic documents, along with the designated merits,
possess others such as the ability to transmit their content over distance virtually
instantaneously. For this reason the trends which appeared in the war years can be

developed at present.

Plans for the use of the branches of troops and aviation. The plans for the use of

army artillery and antiaircraft artillery weapons were worked out on the basis of
the commander's plan and his instructions by the administration of the artillery

commander together with the staff operations section. with limited times to pre-
pare the operation, these plans were compiled in the form of a single document for
artillery employment. If there were 5-7 and more days to prepare for the operation,
then more often the plans were worked out separately.

For planning the employment of artillery in the 1963 offensive operations there was

a characteristic desire for decentralized employment of it. This was explained by

the presence of a limited number of control facilities for the army artillery com-
mander, by the absence of large artillery formations and insufficient experience in

62

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

employing the artillery. For this reason, in an army only the general questions
were planned: the allocating of artillery weapons to the formations, the missions
for the period of attack and support in depth, logistical support procedures and the
fire control signals. In the operations of 1944-1945, the army artillery began to
be more frequently used on a centralized basis as a consequence of its improved TOE

munications equipment. The planning of artillery employment began to reflect its
utilization in the course of the entire operation. For the period of artillery

softening-up for the attack by the tank army the following were determined: the

The air defense plans described: the allocation of air defense weapons and the mis-
sions for the stages of the operation (what was to be covered, where, when and for
what time); the procedure for shifting the antiaircraft units in the course of the
offensive, the organization of reconnaissance, air observation and warning, the
questions of coordinating air defense weapons inside the army, with adjacent units
and with the fighter aviation, the organizing of control of the air defense weapons,
including the fire control signals.

In 1944, when the air formations began to be operationally attached to the tank
armies, the army staff, together with the staffs of the air formations, began work-
ing out a plan for the cooperation (employment) of the aviation either in the form
of a separate document, for example in the Ist Tank Army in the preparations for
the Proskurov-Chernovtsy Operationlg or in the form of a cooperation table with an

appendix of control, identification and target designation signals (in a majority of
operations).

The planning consisted in determining the tasks and methods of carrying them out to
cover the troops and rear facilities, to conduct air reconnaissance, to support the
army formations and to make airborne landings (the Manchurian Operation in the 6th
Cunrds Tank Army). In addition, such questions were defined as the procedure for
organizing control, the allocation of the air formations for supporting the tank

INDR 0F1ﬂ€1A1.USE‘0NLY
The basic document for the planning of intelligence during an operation was a
plan (the intelligence planning table) which was compiled by the intelligence sec-
tion on the basis of instructions from the army commander and the chief of staff.
The planning of intelligence was carried out, as a rule, for the first 3 or 4 days
of the operation.

The plan most often defined the intelligence missions, the methods for carrying them
out. the executors and dates, the zones for conducting reconnaissance by army and
corps resources, the areas, directions and objects of reconnaissance, the resources
to be used, the composition of the reserve, the organization of control and the
procedure for submitting the intelligence data.

The army staff organized operational, tactical, combat and special reconnaissance.
The specific missions which the army intelligence bodies should carry out, for ex-
ample, from the experience of the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Iasi-Kishinev and
Prague operations were:16 the discovery of the enemy grouping in the tactical de-
fensive zone; the discovery of the location of operational reserves and determining
the nature of their forthcoming actions; discovering the moves of enemy staffs and
formations deep in the defenses and the nature of engineer-designed structures,
particularly in antitank terms, the presence of gaps in the defenses and fortified
areas in depth; determining the state of the roads on the routes of advance and in
the zone of the offensive, the bridges and crossings; the prompt establishing of a
possible enemy retreat and the directions of its moves.

The intelligence missions determined by the chiefs of the branches of troops and
services were reflected in the plans for the combat employment of the branches of
troops and special troops and in individual special reconnaissance plans (for ex-
ample, chemical reconnaissance in the 6th Guards Tank Army from 17 August 1944,
artillery reconnaissance in the 3d Guards Tank Army of 12 July 1944 and others).17

The planning of engineer' support for the operation was carried out by the chief
of the engineer troops and his subordinate section together with the army staff on
the basis of the army commander's instructions. The engineer support plan was work-
ed out textually, in a tabular form or on a map. It usually reflected the tasks of
engineer support, the resources to be allocated for carrying out each task, the
dates for carrying out the work and the forms of inspection, the composition of the
engineer reserve, the mobile obstacle construction detachments, the traffic control
detachments, the tasks of the troops in the area of engineer support, the nature of
the maneuvers by the engineer units and the concentration areas by the end of each
day for the mobile obstacle construction detachments and the traffic support detach-
ments.

The specific missions planned for the army's engineer resources. for example, from
the experience of the lat Guards Tank Army in the Berlin Operation,18 were the con-
ducting of engineer reconnaissance, the preparation and support of the routes, cross-
logs and passages, the building of mixed minefields and the equipping of army con-
trol posts.

in organizing troop camouflage, the army staff, as a rule. did not draw up a
plan for carrying out camouflage measures. The basic tasks, methods, the nature and

amount of work, the resources to be involved and the persons responsible were

64

FOR'0FFKJA1.USE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

determined by camouflage orders or instructions. The basic content of operational
camouflage for tank armies during offensive operations was the concealment of the
army formations, simulation and disinformation of the enemy (from the experience of
the 5th Guards Tank Army in the Kirovograd and Hamel operations, the 3d Guards Tank
Army in the Kiev Operation and the 2d Guards Tank Army in the Berlin Operation).

Considering that the army upon reaching the operational depth carried out its mis-

sions away from the remaining forces of the front, particular attention was given to
planning the support for the army's flanks as well as for its formations by assign-
ing a portion of the forces from the corps or army resources. The questions of sup-
port for the flanks were taken up in the operation orders, instructions and special
plans which designated the commanders responsible for the support of the flanks, the

resources to be involved, the procedure for organizing reconnaissance and coopera-
tion with the flank formations.

The employment of incendiary, flamethrowing and smoke agents in an operation was
planned in documents worked out by the operations and chemical sections. For ex-
ample, by special plans in the preparations of the lat Guards Tank Army for the
Vistula-Oder Operation and the 6th Tank Army for the Iasi-Kishinev Operationlg; by
orders and instructions in the preparations of the lat Guards Tank Army for the
Berlin Operation."

A plan for the operation's rear support was worked out on the basis of the army
commander's plan and the instructions of the chief of the front's rear services by
the army rear services administration under the leadership of the deputy commander
for the rear. The plan reflected the tasks of the rear bodies and the contents of
the specific measures to support the operation, the questions of creating the neces-
sary grouping of army rear resources, and the organization of rear control and super-
vision of its work. The plan's sections included the questions of organizing the
delivery of materiel in terms of the types of supply, medical evacuation measures,
the security and defense of the rear, road support and the captured equipment serv-
ice. It designated the field dumps of the army supply depot or the supply stations
(unloading stations) at which the army's formations were to be based and the rear
corps boundaries. Proceeding from the scope of the coming operation, the standards

and procedure for echeloning material supplies were determined, primarily for fuel,
ammunition and food.

The deputy commander for the rear (the chief of the rear) also worked out a rear
order which usually indicated the basing procedure for the army's formations, the
supply and evacuation routes, the procedure for utilizing them, the organization of
the road and commandant service, the boundaries of the rear areas of the corps, the
positions and procedure for the movement of the rear units (facilities), the fuel
and ammunition consumption rates, the positions of the repair units, the repair and
evacuation procedure. the collection points for broken down equipment (for the army
and front), the position and movement of the medical facilities, the casualty evacu-
ation procedures, special measures for the combat support of the lines of communica-
tions as well as the rear echelons, the disposition of the field bakery, the place
of the sectad echelon of the rear administration and chief, the procedure and dates
for submitting rear reports. The order was signed by the commander, the chief of
staff and the deputy commander for the rear.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Lines with the increased number of army formations and units. the increased tech-
nical outfitting of the troops and the greater intensity of combat operations during
the 1944-1945 offensive operations, the troops' need for materiel and the amount of
work carried out by the rear services increased and this necessitated, on the one

hand, the reinforcing of the army with combat resources and on the other an in-
creased level in the organizational work of the rear services.

For precisely this reason the planning for the rear support of operations during the
third period of the war additionally took up such questions as the utilization of
captured materiel, unloading stations, the reallocation of rates for some types of
supplies in substitution for others and the equipping of equipment with additional
capacity for increasing the carried fuel supply. Antiepidemic and sanitation and
hygiene questions began to hold an important place. The principle of concentrating
the basic efforts on the main sector began to be more clearly outlined in the aim of

first supporting the formations making the main thrust or carrying out special mis-
sions.

Such a system for the planning of rear support along with the increased capability
of the nation made it possible, beginning in mid-1944, to have by the start of an
operation three-five fuelings, two or three units of ammunition and 8-10 days of
food rations in the army's formations and units. At the army dump there would be
2-2.5 fuelings, one unit of fire and 12 days of food rations and this ensured the

army's independence in carrying out missions to a depth of 300-400 km with the com-
bat operations lasting 10-15 days.

The immediate organizer of technical support was the assistant army commander for
technical affairs. The technical support of an operation, in pursuing the aim of
maintaining the weapons, combat and other military equipment in a battleworthy state,
during the offensive operations by tank armies was carried out on the basis of a
plan which was worked out by the administration for armor repair and supply textual-
1y or graphically, most often on the work map of the assistant commander for techni-
cal affairs.

This plan reflected the questions of utilizing repair and salvage equipment, the or-
ganizing of technical reconnaissance, the supply of the formation with armored
equipment and the control over the repair and salvage service. Planning was carried
out for the days of the operation with the giving of the disposition, the procedure
for the deployment and movement of the repair and salvage equipment, the organiza—
tion of the technical maintenance echelon and the work of rebuilding the equipment.
supplying spare parts, organizing communications and control posts. The same ques-
tions were also taken up in an order issued for the administration.

In the preparation for operations in 19b5, there was a tendency for unified planning
of logistical support and this was reflected in the drawing up of a unified plan for
the configuration of the rear and logistical support, for example, by the 5th Guards
Tank Army in the East Prussian Operation,21 as well as in the reflection of mainten-
ance questions in the rear service order. '

A calendar plan for the preparation of the operation served as an appendix to the

operation plan. Upon the instructions of the army commander, this was worked out
personally by the chief of staff. It took up all the basic measures which had to be

66

FOR‘0FFKJALlﬁﬂEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carried out in the preparatory period (reconnaissance, the setting of missions, the
organization of cooperation, the planning of combat operations and so forth). Spe-
cifically the plan indicated the dates, the executors, the officials Supervising
the fulfillment of the planned measures. The plan contained measures carried out
not only on the army level but also in the corps, brigades, regiments and subunits.
Such a procedure made it possible to regulate the preparatory process and gave it
purposefulness and a planned basis. Clarity was also achieved in the activities of
all levels of army troop control, and an opportunity was created to effectively ex-

ercise supervision and provide aid to the inferior levels in the organization of
combat operations.

The regrouping plan which was usually an appendix to the operation plan dealt with

such questions as the aim and methods of the rt:rouping, the zone or route of move-
ment, the date for arriving at the designated area, the march formation, the meas-

ures for combat and logistical support and the organization of control.

Starting in the autumn of 1943, in planning an operation, also as appendices to the
basic documents, the following were worked out: a plan for the shifting of the army
and corps command posts (for example, in the 5th Guards Tank Army of 4 October
19“).2 a plan or diagram for traffic control in moving up from the concentration
area and other documents which concretized and detailed the individual questions of
support for the forthcoming operations. This also contributed to the better prepar-
ation for the operation.

a. issuing of Combat Missions

The experience of preparing for offensive operations by tank armies disclosed two
basic methods for giving combat missions: personally by the commander or through the
staff (the field headquarters officers). The missions were given in various forms:
orally or in writing, in the form of general or particular (that is, issued to one
of the formations) operation orders, preliminary and combat instructions and indi-
vidual instructions for the types of support and for the organisation of control.
The choice of the method for assigning the missions was determined chiefly by the
available time. by the condition of the means of communications and the possibili-
ties of using them from the standpoint of the distance of communications and observ-
ing the requirements of covert troop control. by the personal qualities of the com-
manders and subordinate commanders as well as by the number of subordinate forma-
tions (units) to which the missions had to be given.

The personal assigned of missions by the army commander was the most rational. He
directly influenced his subordinates by his will, experience and knowledge and had

The increased length of preparing for the operation, starting in 1946, created
greater opportunities for employing this method of assigning missions.

The commander assigned the missions using a map or in the field personally in the
presence of all or a larger portion of the formation commanders in those instances
when there was sufficient time to summon the commanders (the Lwow-Sandomierz and

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Vistula-Oder operations) or when the formation commanders were in immediate proxim-
ity of the army command post or that place where the commander was planning the
assignment of missions (in the 6th Tank Army in the preparations for the Orel Opera-
tion). Along with the noted positive aspects of this method, a major plus was the
fact that the formation commanders had an opportunity to settle major cooperation
questions by exchanging opinions and oral agreement.

A trip (flight) by the commander to subordinate formations was made when it was ill-
advised to move the commanders from the work they were carrying out while the com-
mander possessed sufficient time and his presence at the army command post was not
strictly necessary. In these instances it took a commander from 6 to 12 hours for
successively assigning missions to the corps commanders, for example in the 3d Guards
and 4th Tank armies during the preparations for the [HowbSandomierz Operation.23

The commander more often issued missions to subordinate commanders personally using
communications equipment if he did not possess time to assemble them, for example,
in the preparation of the 3d Guards Tank Army for the Prague 0peration.2“ In a
majority of instances, under such conditions, the commander endeavored to make the
calls by wire communications as these provided greater security, but if they were
lacking, then by radio. Some 30-60 minutes were spent in successively assigning
missions to all the formation commanders while by radio this took 2- or 3-fold
longer. it is essential to point out that such a method for assigning missions in
preparing for an operation during the war years was employed very rarely, as it did

not guarantee a high level of secure troop control although it was marked by a com-
paratively short expenditure of time.

The staff also played an important role in assigning missions to subordinates, par-
ticularly when they had to be given in a short period of time.

The basic forms for issuing missions through the army staff were the transmitting
of written operation orders, oral and written combat orders as well as those given
graphically on a map or diagram. The orders and instructions were transmitted
through the staff officers using transport and primarily the PO-Z aircraft. motor
vehicles and motorcycles. Combat orders were also issued by the staff officers
over communications equipment, chiefly by wire, but only those which did not dis-
close the overall concept or dates for the pending operations. The staffs also
issued individual documents of the operation plan to the commanders and staffs of
the formations as well as instructions on the organizing of communications and co-
vert troop control. Appended to them were the tables of the radio nets and links
with the radio operating data, tables with the call numbers of officials and com-
munications centers and other documents. The chiefs of the branches of troops,
services and rear issued instructions for the types of support usually by personal
contact or through the courier communications service.

In terms of time, as the experience of the offensive operations showed, the most
economic were those methods where the missions were given by the commander person-
ally and simultaneously by the staff officers for the sectors using the communica-
tions equipment.

The most effective methods from the viewpoint of ensuring highly reliable assimila-
tion or the missions by subordinates and the possibility of providing concrete help

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
were the personal assigning of missions by the commander simultaneously to all sub-
ordinate commanders as well as the parallel traveling of officials to the forma-

tions considering, of course, the capabilities of the communications and the condi-
tions for preparing the operations.

In issuing missions to the troops, great attention was given to the promptness,

accuracy, completeness and secrecy of transmitting the contents of the instructions
and orders.

The practices of the war showed that preliminary information was of important sig-

nificance for better understanding of combat missions by the formation commanders
and staffs.

From the middle of 1966, following the example of the operational-strategic and in-
telligence orientation carried out by the front's staff, the tank army staffs began
to regularly provide incoming operational-tactical information to subordinates.
This made it possible for the formation commanders and staffs even before the re-
ceiving of a specific combat missions at least in a general form to understand the
nature of the pending operations while the army commander could subsequently give
the missions in a more abbreviated form. This approach was also aided by the es-
tablished practice of issuing subordinate staffs on the eve of preparing for an
operation (from the example of the 2d Guards Tank Army in 1966-1965) various in-
structions which disclosed the nature of enemy defenses, its firing system, provided
a description of engineer-designed structures, examine the particular features of
troop operations under certain geographic and climatic conditions and determined
the work procedure of the headquarters bodies upon the receiving of the mission.

In the aims of promptly providing background information to subordinates on the
forthcoming operations as well as for granting the troops more time to organize com-
bat operations in preparing for operations in 1963 in individual instances and in
1966-1965. as a rule. the army chief of staff on behalf of the commander issued
preliminary instructions which usually provided the data needed by the subordinate
troops to prepare to carry out the forthcoming missions as well as instructions on
the times and methods of carrying out the missions.

Supervision over the prompt issuing of missions was provided by the commander and
staff through the operations section which followed the transmission (issuing) of
the documents or oral instructions by the designated time by requesting confirma-
tion from subordinate staffs or by sending officers to the formations. Supervision
over the correct transmission of the contents of the instructions was carried out by
a check of the instructor or more often by the chief of staff as to how accurately

the officers had understood the received instructions prior to their leaving for the
troops.

Secrecy or the transmitting (issuing) of orders was provided by making available
dependable means of transport, more often the BA-66 armored vehicles, and an armed
escort for the liaison officers carrying combat documents for the troops. The army
staff informed the cormander or chief of staff of the subordinate troops that writ-
ten combat documents had been sent out indicating when the docment had been dis-

patched and by what means. The latter, having received notification from the super-
ior staff that combat documents had been sent out (transmitted), ensured the meet-

ing of the army staff officer. Secrecy was also achieved by restricting the number
69

FOR 051WC1A1.USEIDNLY
of persons who were informed of the missions, by the predominant use of oral infor-
nation. by excluding the use of radio and limiting wire communications and by send-
ing only extremely necessary textual (graphic) documents to the subordinate staffs.

Calls over the communications were made with the assigning of pseudonyms to the army
and corps leadership.

Thus, from the experience of the last war, the approach to selecting the methods and
forms of assigning (issuing) missions was based upon a desire to achieve a high de-
gree of efficiency in the work and a thorough understanding of the aims and methods
of the forthcoming operations by the subordinates and to exclude the interception by
the enemy of information disclosing the plan for the operation. The main trend in
the improving of the methods for issuing missions was the creativity of the offi-

cials (headquarters bodies) in this form of their activities depending upon the
specific situation.

5. The Organization of Cooperation

The organization of cooperation over the entire period of the war was a most impor-
tant duty for the tank army commanders and staffs in preparing an operation. The
tank army commander's plan served as the basis for organizing cooperation.

Cooperation was organized in terms of tasks. place (lines) and time to the entire
depth of the combat mission. It was worked out in greatest detail for the first
days of the operation, as a rule, to a depth of the immediate task, since the enemy
grouping and the nature of its defenses to this depth were known more fully and,
consequently, there was a real basis for carefully working out the possible varia-
tions for the coming combat operations.

The tank army commander was the immediate organizer of cooperation. However, many
questions going beyond his competence and related to the cooperation of various ele-
ments in the operational configuration of the front's troops and the adjacent fronts
in the interests of the tank army combat operations were settled by the front's com-
mander and sometimes by the representative of Headquarters (the Battle of Kursk, the
Belorussian Operation and others).

In the various stages of an operation, provision was made to isolate the basic ques-
tions of coordinating the troop efforts. For example. for the time of the artillery

softening up, the mutual operations of the artillery from the tank and combined-arms
armies were coordinated in terms of targets and time.

For the period of the moving up of the formations to the attack line, within the
army the actions of the forward detachments, the deployment into approach march and
battle formations of the army's formations, the antiaircraft cover of the troops and
the organizing of the commandant service and control were coordinated. With the com-
combined-arms armies in the zone of which the tank attack was to be made, the ques-
tions of freeing the routes of advance and engineer support were settled; with the

aviation, the procedure for covering the troops from the air, the making of bombing
and strafing attacks and conducting reconnaissance.

The experience of the war showed that the problem of freeing the routes with the ad-
vance of the army's formations to the attack line was particularly complex. For
this reason, in organizing cooperation a great deal of attention was always paid to

70

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE‘0NLY
FOR¢NHHCJAI.USE(NVLY

this, all the details of this problem were provided for and the appropriate instruc-
tions iSSued ahead of time to the troops.

In this regard of definite interest is the order issued by the staff of the 5th
Assault Army to the troops on the eve of the Vistula-Oder Operation. It stated:

"1. All the troop, divisional and corps wagontrains, the transport and other rear
services are to remain in place up to the arrival of the 2d Guards Tank Army....

"2. All artillery, in shifting to new firing positions, should move off the roads.
freeing them for the 2d Guards Tank Army.

"3. The CIS tanks are to move only off the roads.

"4. All the engineer troops assigned to support the movement of the 2d Guards Tank
Army are to rapidly and decisively clear the roads and mines immediately behind the
infantry battle formations. 0n the routes a rigid control service is to be organ-
ized stopping the movement of wagontrains, transport and other such which could im-
pede the move of the 2d Guards Tank Army."25

The given order was the result of joint work carried out by the chiefs of staff of
the 5th Assault Army and the 2d Guards Tank Army. This question was settled in a
similar manner in the preparation of other operations.

0n the line of committing the tank army to the engagement, basic attention was given
to carrying out the missions of artillery and air support. The questions were co-
ordinated for the passage of the tanks through the battle formations and the pas-
sageways in the mixed minefields, for supporting the flanks, artillery and air sup-
port.

The organization of cooperation for the period the army was to operate in the oper-
ational depth pursued the main task of ensuring a high rate of troop advance and
coordinating the actions of the armored formations primarily with tho aviation which
was to make raids against the enemy groupings, provide an air cover and transmit in-
telligence information to the army staff.

In the given stage of the operation, as a rule, the committing of the second echelon
of the tank army was planned and as a consequence of this, the procedure for sup-
porting its attack was worked out. This included: what routes for the attack were
to be cleared. by whom and when: how the flanks of the first echelon formations were
to be cuvered where the attack was planned; the procedure for regrouping reinforce-
ments. In providing for the repelling of enemy counterstrikes, the army commander,
for example, from the experience of the 5th Guards Tank Army in the Belgorod-
Khar'khov Operation. the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Kiev Operation and the 6th
Guards Tank Army in the Budapest Operation, determined the operating procedure and
methods for the armored formations, the aviation and artillery, the lines and pro-
cedure for reaching them by the antitank reserves and the mobile obstacle construc-
tion detachments.

In organizing cooperation, significant efforts were made to solve the questions of
suppnrl for the operation, including rear support.

71

FOR OIIﬂCJAI.USEIDNlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cooperation was planned on the basis of the adopted plan and up to the middle of
1946 was expressed, as a rule, in the drawing up of a cooperation table with the
giving of uniform control, target designation and warning signals. In planning
subsequent operations cooperation tables began to be worked out with the adjacent
armies and air formations.26 The basic content of these documents involve the ques-
tions of the allocation of efforts in terms of sectors, tasks, lines and time to the
depth of the immediate mission of the tank army and with the defining of methods for
defeating the enemy and the tasks of each element in the army's operational configu-
ration. As for the planning of the operation as a whole, there was a characteristic
desire to provide cooperation for several of the most probable axes. The documents
elaborated for the planning of cooperation also took up the question of the alloca—
tion of reinforcements and the organization of control and the persons responsible
for the security of the flanks were designated.

In the combined-arms armies in the areas where the tank formations were to attack. a
plan was worked out for supporting their commitment to the engagement. This plan
designated the time, the attack lines, the routes of advance, the engineer and ar-
tillery support (the allocating of resources, the missions, the artillery disposi-
tions, the commanders of the artillery groups and the ready time) and the antiair-
craft cover. The excerpts from the operation plan and the cooperation tables sent
out to the subordinate staffs served as the basis for the working out of the combat
planning table there.

The forms for organizing cooperation were the most diverse. The practices of the war
war showed that such a form as explaining to subordinates the questions of coordin—
ating troop efforts by the army commander using just a map in assigning the missions
was ineffective. For this reason, as early as 1943, considering the altered condi-
tions for preparing the operations, as experience was acquired, more active forms
for organizing cooperation began to be employed more often. The playing through of
the course of the operation in terms of axes, lines, missions and time, and here
using several proposed variations for combat operations, was carried out mainly dur-
ing the conducting of command-staff, command and troop exercises and in military
games using maps, terrain mock-ups and in the field. A number of questions were
worked out by this method at the conducted joint assemblies of commanders and staff
officials from the artillery, signals and engineer troops.

In the preparations of the 2d Tank Army for the Vistula-Oder Operation, the corps
commanders following the plan of the army staff organized demonstration tactical
exercises on the joint operations of the tank and motorized rifle units with the
artillery. engineer troops and aviation. The commander of the VI Ground Attack Air
Corps, Maj Gen Avn B. K. Tokarev and the commander of the III Fighter Air Corps,

Lt Gen Avn Ye. Ya. Savitskiy together with the commanders of the tank and mechanized
corps, made a great effort to develop coordinated actions between the aviation and
tank formations. In the army formations meetings were held between the tank troops
and pilots. The commanders of the tank and air units shared their experience of
cooperation in combat and voiced practical proposals on better coordinating opera-
tions. As a result of such painstaking joint work between the pilots and tank
troops, complete mutual understanding was reached. Many air and tank commanders
who had to carry out missions jointly learned to recognize each other's voices over
the radio and this was very useful later on as it accelerated the handling of infor-
mation and included enemy deception.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1hu vnnumnders and staffs trained along with the troops. In the aim of achieving
precise coordination between the tank armies, the combined-arms formations and the
aviation, the front commander, Mar SU G. K. Zhukov, conducted exercises with the
army commanders while the front chief of staff, Col Gen H. S. Halinin, conducted the
same with the chiefs of staff, the chiefs of the operations sections and the chiefs
of the army branches of troops. Different variations of combat operations in the
forthcoming offensive were examined in the exercises. All command personnel gained
great benefit from these exercises. Subsequently, such exercises were conducted in
the armies. corps and brigades and in conclusion there were command-staff exercises
in the field using communications equipment and troop exercises with field firing.27

The questions of coordinating efforts with the combined-arms armies were usually re-
solved by a personal meeting of the commanders, chiefs of staff and other officials,
After this joint documents were worked out for troop coordination. For example, in
preparing for the Berlin Operation, the commander and chief of staff of the 2d
Guards Tank Army met with the leadership of the 5th Assault Army: Gens N. E.
Berzarin. A. H. Kushchev and F. Ye. Bokov. These meetings were sometimes brief in
time but accomplished a good deal. The aim of all this joint work was to ensure
the comitting of the armored formations into the breech whereby they would not suf-
fer premature casualties and would pass through the breakthrough zone with maximum

signals and communications for the stages of the operation as well as to using the
engineer troops which would support the tank army operations (clearing the routes
for the tank army formations; organizing a commandant service on the cleared sec-

tions; organizing crossings over water obstacles and assisting the tank army in
rapidly crossing them).

At times cooperation had to be organized not with a single combined-arms army in the
area of which the tank army was to attack but also with adjacent units. For example,
the 2d Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder Operation was given the_mission of enter-
ing the breech in the zone of the 5th Assault Army or the 61st Army depending upon
where the enemy defenses had been broken. Not only was it necessary to organize co-
operation with these two armies, but also to carry out, in essence, double work in
preparing the routes, the assembly areas, the deployment lines, to organize commu-
nicutions and set up observation and command posts.

a) The amount of artillery to be assigned to support the committing of the tank
army to the breech and its disposition;

73

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
b) The procedure of artillery support for the committing to the breech, the depth
and method of fire support for the forward brigades and first echelon formation;

c) Which of the artillery officers, from what units and with what communications
and transport would be assigned for traveling with the forward units of the tank
army;

d) The procedure and signals for calling in, shifting and ceasing fire;

e) The procedure of artillery support for the tank army's flanks and its antiair-
craft artillery cover in the commitment to the breech.

The front commander and his staff were the organizer of cooperation between the tank
and air armies. The front commander's plan for the use of aviation and his instruc-
tions issued personally or through the front staff were the basis for organizing
direct cooperation with the aviation assigned and supporting the actions of the tank
armies.

The chief content of cooperation between the tank armies and aviation was the coord-
inating of their actions in terms of place, time and targets. For the tank armies
the aviation conducted reconnaissance, it combated approaching enemy reserves, it
suppressed enemy centers of resistance, control posts and communications centers, it
covered the basic troop grouping, it delivered materiel, it supported the landing
and combat operations of river (the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Budapest Operation)
and airborne landing parties (the same army in the Manchurian Operation) and also
carried out other tasks.

For the aviation the tank armies, in the aim of ensuring its maneuver behind the ad-
vancing army units also carried out a number of missions including the seizing of
airfields, the providing of help in building field airfields and protecting them
against attack by enemy ground troops. For example, in the Vistula-Oder and Berlin
operations, rapid actions by the forward detachments of the tank armies to capture
airfields were planned and carried out for the air army. In the battle formations
of the lat and 2d Guards Tank armies there were special teams from air formations
to determine the fitness of the airfields captured from the enemy and to seek out
areas suitable for building airfields. Reinforced airfield construction engineer
battalions moved along with the rears of these armies.28

The experience of planning joint combat operations indicated that the cooperation
plan with the aviation should best take up such questions as the missions of avia-
tion and the ground troops with the greatest detailing for the first 2 or 3 days of
the operation, the resources to be used to hit the various objectives, control pro-
cedures, calculations to provide communications for the air representatives in the
armored formations, the radio operating data, the target designation and identifica-
tion signals.

This was the case, for exasgle, with the cooperation plan of the 6th Guards Tank
Army and the 12th Air Army2 in the Manchurian Operation as worked out by the tank
army staff and by the deputy air army cummander, Gen P. D. Galunov, with a group of
officers. Its operational group was located at the command post of Gen A. G.
Kravchenko. The commander of the 245th Fighter Air Division was with the deputy

76

FOR‘OFIWCLAL.USE(MVLY
commander of the 12th Air Army while the commanders of the 248th and 316th Ground
Attack Air divisions with their operations groups were at the command posts of the
commanders of the 1x Guards and VII Mechanized corps. It was planned that with the
committing of the V Guards Tank Corps to the first echelon of the 6th Guards Tank
Army, the commander of the 248th Ground Attack Air Division with his operations
group would move to the comand post of this corps. For communicating with Gen

P. D. Galunov and the airfields and for controlling the air units in the air, they
had radios and a radar in. the 245th Fighter Division.”

The representatives of the air units who were to remain in the head tank (mechanized)
brigades in the course of the offensive directed aircraft to targets, informed their
commanders of the situation in the zone of cooperation with the tank army formations
and transmitted the requests of the tank troops to call in aviation.31 Due to this
structure of control over the aviation supporting the offensive by the mobile troops,
firmness. flexibility and continuity were achieved in the cooperation between the
formations of the tank and air armies over the rapid advance.

Cooperation of the tank armies with aviation was continuously improved during the
war years and it became longer in time and more extended in space, that is, it was
organized considering the making of joint attacks against the enemy to an ever-
greater depth of the conducted operations. The number of forces assigned to support
and cover the tank armies was increased. While in the Belgorod-Khar'khov Operation
the commanders of the lat and 5th Guards Tank armies had one ground attack division
and one fighter division each, in the Belorussian Operation the 5th Guards Tank Army
alone during individual periods was supported and covered by four air corps.32 In
the Berlin Operation up to 74 percent of the aviation from the two air armies of

Gens S. I. Rudenko and S. A. Krasovskiy were to be used for supporting tank army
operations.33

Serious attention was to be paid to coordination between the tank armies which com-
prise the mobile groups of various fronts. This was expressed primarily in the co-
ordinating of efforts by the mobile groups in adjacent fronts in capturing strategi-
callyimportant objectives. Examples of such cooperation were the Berlin Operation
in which the mobile groups of the First Belorussian and First Ukrainian Fronts were
directed to capture the capital of Nazi Germany, Berlin, as well as the Prague Oper-
ation where the mobile groups of the First and Second Ukrainian fronts liberated

the capital of Czechoslovakia, Prague. In the capturing of a major strongpoint or
strategically important objective often efforts were also coordinated between the
mobile group of the front and the mobile group of the combined-arms army as was the
case. for example, in the Vistula—Oder Operation in the capture of Czestochowa by
the forces of the mobile group of the 5th Guards Army (XXXI Tank Corps) and a por-
tion of the forces from the 3d Guards Tank Army. During the war years, cooperation
also had to be organized between the mobile group of a front and the mobile groups
or several combined armies in capturing a major fortified area. In these instances.
the mobile group of the front executed a pincer maneuver around the fortified area.
the mobile group of one of the armies without halting endeavored to break into it,
in leading the infantry behind it. while the mobile group of the adjacent army sup-
ported the enveloping flank of the tank army (the 5th Guards Tank Army, the VIII
Guards Tank Corps and the VIII Mechanized Corps in the East Prussian Operation).

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6. The Organization of Control Posts and Communications

According to prewar views, the troops of army field forces were to be controlled by
the commander through the staff located in the sector of the main thrust and com-
prising a unified control post. In the operations of the first two campaigns of the
war, the control posts were positioned in accord with these views. Such a system
for organizing control did not prove effective mainly because it prevented the op-
portunity of bringing the control bodies closer to the troops as a consequence of
the cumbersomeness and immobility of the control posts.

In the offensive operations of 1962-1943, the control bodies began to be echeloned
in the mixed combined-arms and tank armies. They were divided into the first eche-
lon or command post and the second echelon. In addition, auxiliary control posts
and observation posts were set up. The established principle of organizing control
posts also underlay their organization in the homogeneous tank armies. As a result,
in planning offensive operations for the tank armies in 1943-1964, provision was
made to organize a command post, a second echelon of control and an operations group
assigned from the army's command post. The term "operations group" began to be used
from mid-1944. In the combined-arms armies, such a control post was most often
termed a mobile conmmnd observation post.

The command post was the basic control body. As a rule, it was echeloned. The
first group was made up of the military council, the chiefs and officers of the
leading sections of the field headquarters and the representatives of the air forms-
tions. A second group was located 3-5 km behind it. This included the chief of the
political section with a group of officers, the staffs of the artillery commander,
the chief of the engineer troops, the officers of the personnel and chemical warfare
sections and the administrations of the rear, armored repairs and supply. Close to
the first group was located the communications center and the report assembly point.
The support and service subunits were located separately. The command post was
headed by the commander and in his absence by the army chief of staff.

It was planned to organize the commander's operations group in various stages of an
operation, and in the 3d Guards Tank Army, for example, from 1946 for the entire
period of combat operations. Its formation from the command post was determined. on
the one hand, by the increased capabilities of the cmmmudcations equipment and on
the other, by the necessity of bringing leadership closer to the troops as well as
by the fact that the command post, in being cumbersome and immobile, could not keep
up with the advance of the troops.

The personnel of the operations group usually included 10-12 generals and officers.
including the army commander, the military council member, the deputy chief of staff
(the chief of the operations section), the artillery commander, the chief of the
engineer troops, and officers of the operations, intelligence, cipher and communica-
tions sections. As for transportation they had commander tanks (2-3), armored per-
sonnel carriers (1-2), cars (5-6) and special vehicles (1-4); as for communications
equipment there was a Sever radio and 2-5 radios of the R58 (RB) type. Operations
groups in the corps and brigades were set up with the same structure but with fewer
personnel. As a whole the operations group was a workable, rather mobile troop con-
trol body, particularly when the army went over to pursuit. Moreover, there was a
smaller probability of the simultaneous knocking out of the army control posts.

76

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(M¢LY
In organizing the control posts in a number of 1945 operations (Vistula-Oder,
Berlin), the operations group in certain armies began to include also the chief of
staff with a group of officers. Often permanent communications groups were created
for the operations group and these had high powered radios and a significant portion
of the radios were carried on cross-country vehicles. Consequently an attempt was
made to create a mobile control post capable of controlling the troops by a compara-
tively limited group.

in the second control echelon, some 15-60 km behind the army command post were the
sections of the administrations for the rear, armored repair and supply, manning and
casualty records, personnel, artillery supply and so forth. It was usually headed
by the army chief of the rear.

The radios were allocated to the control posts considering the ensuring of depend-
able troop control.

The largest number of radios (15-25 in the various war years) was located at the
army command post and this made it possible to plan cmmmunications from it for 15-17
radio nets and 6-7 radio links. This met the needs for radio channels and provided
communications over a distance of 30-600 km.

The army operations group had radios (3-6) basically of medium power. These ensured
communications over 15-30 km and made it possible to organize radio communications
along 2-5 radio nets and 1-3 radio links, that is, as a rule. with the army first
echelon corps.

The presence of a single high-powered radio in the second control echelon provided
communications with the front and the army command post over a distance up to 600 km
while 2-4 medium-powered radios made it possible to plan communications over 1-2
nets.

In preparing for operations in 1963, the moving of control posts was not planned.

This was to be determined by the decision of the commander (chief of staff) in the
course of the offensive. Such an approach impeded the preparation of areas where

they should be moved. As a result the move was made over unprepared and unrecon-

noitered routes, sometimes at a situationally bad time.

As of 1946, the army staff began working out a scheme for shifting control posts
according to the lines and axis of the offensive. The basic questions related to
the organization of the move began to be set out in special instructions issued on
the eve of the offensive. Here it was demanded that measures be carried out ahead
of time to equip the control posts in the new area and to prepare it in communica-
tions terms. The move of the superior and subordinate staffs was to be coordinated
and dependable communications ensured between the control posts and the subordinate
and superior staffs during the period of the move.

The organization of communications in a tank army was determined by the operational
rnndillons proceeding from the aim of the operation, its scope, the sequence of car-

rying out the missions. the effective strength of the army. the reinforcements, the
opcrntionul configuration and a number of other factors.

77

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE‘0NLY
in the first offensive operations by tank armies in 1963 (Orel and others) with a
momentum of advance averaging 3-5 km and a maximum of 8-20 km per day considering
the limited number of radios, wire communications in the army was the basic means
of control. Radio communications were organized, as a rule, only over nets, trans-
port was widely used and most often solely along an axis or circular route.

However the increased momentum of advance even in 1963 demanded a revision of the
existing principles for utilizing the communications and the employment of them
chiefly on an integrated basis.

Radio communications were to be employed in the course of the entire operation and
particularly with the going over of the army to pursuit as well as by reconnaissance
and the battle outposts units (subunits). This made it possible to quickly estab-
lish contact with the control posts which were on the move or a significant distance
away and in those instances when their location was unknown. Radio provided communi-
cations across impassable barriers and over enemy occupied territory.

Hire communications (telephone and telegraph, over field, permanent cable and over-
head lines) was provided in the army's disposition in preparing for the operation,
in the course of the offensive with a momemtum of less than 3 km per hour, inside
the control posts and with the front and Hq SHC (General Staff). Here consideration
was given to such positive aspects of it as independence from the time of day,
season and atmospheric interference, convenience of use and relative secrecy of
calls and from 1965 also the possibility of obtaining several communications chan-
nels in one circuit using multiplexing equipment.

Communications by transport was planned for use in all stages of an operation and
from the summer of 1944 not only along an axis but also along routes. This acceler-
ated the delivery of documents to the addressees and increased reliability as the
failure of transport on one route did not involve prompt delivery in others. More-
over, transport was the sole means of control for a number of chiefs of the special
troops (engineer, chemical and other). In certain operations, for example, the
Uman'-Botosani, information was transmitted to subordinates solely by liaison air-
craft as well as tanks, armored personnel carriers and even SAU as a consequence of
the difficulties of moving the radios and establishing wire communications under the
conditions of the spring mud.

The planning of communications with the superior control bodies, with subordinates
and cooperating formations was carried out by the integrated use of the equipment
but if possible by duplication over several channels and even by using links with

the first echelon formations and the forward detachments. Considering these require-
ments communications was organized by telegraph, high frequency and low frequency
telephone, radios and transport, and for radio over several nets and links: 5—7
from the command post with the corps and 6-6 from the operations group, 2—4 from the

crmnmnd post with the cooperating formations and 1-2 from the operations group.
It must be pointed out that teletype communications between the army command post
and the front command post was established only in the autumn of 1954. Communica-

tions by liaison aircraft was established from the command post and from the second
control echelon and very rarely from the army operations group.

78

ﬁORioiIHCJAI.lHﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the artillery, communications was planned, as a rule, over one or two radio nets
and [rum lOLA. more often over two or three. In addition, a radio link began to be
rrvﬂltwf from the army artillery connwnder to the army artillery group and if this
group was not created then to the artillery brigade command post. Communications
were also organized by wire and transport.

Nlth aviation, communications prior to 1944 was established using one of the follow-
ing variations: over a cooperation radio net (the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Orel
Operation). using two radio nets, one for cooperation and the other for guidance of
the air army (the 2d Tank Army in the Orel Operation), over the air army's radio net
and over the radio link of the air and tank army staffs (the 5th Guards Tank Army in
the Belgorod-Khar'khov Operation). Prom mid-1944, more frequently provision was
made for communications over the following radio nets: cooperation, reconnaissance
(a network of receivers down to the tank brigade), guidance (to a tank brigade) and
over a radio link between the air army's staff and the operations air group at the

command post (as part of the operations group) of the tank army (Belorussian and
Vlstuln-Oder operations).

The basic changes which occurred in the planning of communications in the 1944-1955
operations were caused by the need for greater reliability, flexibility and effi-
ciency of control and became possible due to the improved performance of the commu-
nications, to the increased supply of them to the control bodies and to the acquired
experience. These changes came down mainly to an increased number of radio nets,

to the use of radio links, in particular with the army artillery group from the army
iwnmnand post or operations group, to introducing a system of duplicating some means
nf communications by others, and to providing the commanders and staffs of the corps
and brigades with an opportunity to directly call in artillery fire and air strikes
on well as collect intelligence data from an aircraft.

Communications with intelligence was organized using a Sever radio from the army
Cimﬂmnd post to the front command .ost (from its intelligence section) and using a
RSB-Lype radio with an army motorcycle regiment (battalion) in carrying out recon-
nnlssance tasks by the subunits. The receivers at the communications centers of the

army, corps and brigade command posts were used to receive data from reconnaissance
aircraft and from cooperating aviation.

The chief cl the engineer troops and his staff, for communicating with subordinate
and attached engineer brigades (regiments or battalions) used the radio net of the
commander and the staff. Communications between the staff of the army engineer
lru0p> and the corps engineers was most often carried out through the army report
Jescmhly point as well as by personal contact. Due to the virtual complete absence
.-l radios (radios existed only in a motorized engineer brigade) and the limited num-
ber nr transport, control of the engineer units and particularly the m bile obstacle
.onstrurliun detachments. the engineer reserves and the traffic support detachments
was urgﬂniﬁcd with a very low continuity factor (0.1-0.2). Communications with the
rear units and facilities was planned as follows: with the chiefs of the rears of
the curps and with the held dump departments most often by radio; with the army rear
dcpula by telephone and liaison aircraft; with a motor regiment, with the fuel sup-
ply battalions, the field dump departments and with the prisoner of war assembly
paints through a specially organized dispatcher service.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Communications with the units and subordinate control bodies of the tank technical
service was organized chiefly by transport and by radio only if captured radios
were available. As a whole, the limited number of communications equipment and
above all radios in the rear units and facilities complicated the attaining of de-
pendable information handling.

7. Combat Training of the Troops

Combat training in the tank armies was organized and conducted long before the army
had received a specific combat mission when they were in the second echelon or re-
serve of the front (Hq SEC). The troops used every pause between.operations in

order to assimilate the obtained combat experience and to prepare for successfully
carrying out the next combat mission. The basic content in the planned combat train-
ing of the troops and staffs was individual training, the developing of coordination
among the subunits, units and formations and increased professional skill and a
broader operational-tactical viewpoint of the command personnel. The basic subjects
of study were tactical, weapon, technical and special training.

The commanders and staffs learned to organize combat operations and control the
troops under complex situational conditions. Diverse exercises and military games
on maps were conducted for them and in those seetors where the troops were to oper—
ate. staff and command—staff exercises in the field with communications and radio
training. Great attention was paid to analyzing the conducted engagements and oper-
ations with a demonstration of the positive experience and reasons of existing mis-
calculations, to studying the methods and procedures for enemy combat operations and
to disclosing its strong and weak points. A careful study was made of the official
manuals, instructions, regulations and above all the 1943 Field Manual of the Armored

and Mechanized Troops in the aims of rapidly introducing their provisions into combat
practice.

in training the troops. the main emphasis was put on working out the questions of
conducting an offensive at a rapid pace, maintaining close coordination and on the
skillful mastery of the weapons and military equipment. In the combat training of
the tank troops, a significant place was given over to tank driving and weapons
training. The commanders achieved interchangeability among the crew members and
their smooth actions. With sufficient time for preparing for the operation, the
armies set up special ranges where they conducted exercises with field firing and
worked on the questions of combating enemy tanks particularly of the "Tiger,"
"Panther," and "Royal Tiger" types as well as the crossing of various obstacles. At
such exercises usually new tactical procedures for conducting combat and forms of
battle formations which had proven effective in combat practice were tested out.
All the best from the combat experience in the combat training process was intro—
duced into troop practices. The motorized rifle troops, artillery, antiaircraft
artillery troops and special units man trained purposefully and steadily.

Troop combat training was carried out under conditions as close as possible to a com-
bat situation. in strict accord with the nature of the forthcoming operations and
considering the specific features of the offensive. Thus, during the period of
March-June 1963 which preceded the Kursk Battle, in the training of the troops from
the lat, 2d and 5th Guards Tank armies, proceeding from the nature of their mis-
sions (participation in a defense and counteroffensive), particular attention was

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and counterstrikes and to widely maneuver the men and equipment in the aim of cre-
ating superiority over the enemy. The tank troops learned to cooperate with the
infantry, artillery and aviation in conducting an offensive against an enemy which
held well engineered defenses. In preparing the reinforcements which had arrived

at day and at night. A significant number of exercises was given on the subject
"The Actions of Tank-Borne Infantry." The tank crews trained in firing accurately,
in deploying rapidly, in boldly maneuvering on the battlefield and attacking rapid-
ly.3” The efforts of the army staffs were aimed at mastering the art of continuous
control of subordinates in any combat situation. For example, in the 1st Tank Army
in May a 2-day command-staff game was conducted on the subject "A Tank (Mechanized)
Brigade Counterstrike in Cooperation with Other Branches of Troops" and in June "The
Committing of a Tank Formation to the Breakthrough."35 Analogous work was carried
out in the other tank field forces.

in offensive operations by fronts as their mobile groups. This not only presupposed
the massed use of tank and mechanized formations but also confronted them with mis-
sions that were more decisive in terms of actions, depth and possible results. The

officers had to learn to reassess the capabilities of their troops and to skillfully
and with great initiative realize all their strongpoints, particularly the great
strike force and speed of maneuver. This task was carried out both in command-staff

air formations.

in the course of preparing for the Kirovograd Operation in the 5th Guards Tank Army
the tank troops in exercises conducted in the field, in any weather, during the night
and day, learned to detect trenches, pits and minefields beneath the snow, to drive

tank units. Enemy tactics, the combat capabilities of its equipment and the proce-
durcsund methods for destroying it were carefully studied. A technical conference

was held for the drivers at which there was an exchange of experience in wintertime
upcrhtion of the equipment. Skier teams trained in the motorized rifle subunits.

81

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
their combat experience. Tactical exercises for the subunits and units were held on
specially equipped training fields while planned exercises were conducted in the

firing compounds and tank driving ranges. Before beginning to instruct and train
the troops, exercises in the field were conducted in the formations for the sergeant

they worked out the questions of the configuration of the battle orders, the coord-
inating of efforts and the actions of the forward detachments. A portion of the
questions for shaping up the subunits. units and formations of the 5th Guards Tank
Army was worked out in a march from the concentration area. This unique exercise
provided the commanders and staffs with good practice in troop control. A similar
practice waséemployed by this army in the preparations for the Shaulyay and Hamel

In preparing for the LwowhSandomierz Operation, the personnel of the lat, 3d Guards
and 4th Tank armies made a great effort to master the most effective methods of ac-
tion allowing them to advance rapidly. The forward detachments of the corps pre-

Creat attention was given to the procedures-and methods for crossing rivers as the
Western Bug, San, Vistula and other water barriers had to be crossed. For several
days. they trained in the basic crossing procedures, including using local crossing
equipment and available materials as well as the rules of conduct on water and the
standing of commandant service by all the motorized rifle subunits of the tank
armies. The engineer troops, along with preparing the crossing equipment, readying
the bridge elements and building them on specially assigned areas, trained in build-
ing assault crossings from regular equipment and in laying column tracks across the
river floodplains. The attached pontoon units worked out the questions of building
raft crossings over the water obscacles, erecting pontoon bridges and building
permanent bridges with a load capacity of 30 and 60 tons.37

Other particular features were also considered in the preparations for this opera-

tion. The army formations and chiefly the motorized rifle and rear units (subunits)
received a flood of young soldiers from the liberated areas of the Western Ukraine.

This required an accelerated mastery of the young soldier's course. In training the
personnel, attention was paid to the fact that in the course of combat operations

they would have to fight against the new German heavy tanks, the "Royal Tigers"

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Intense combat training was also carried out in the tank armies during preparations
for the Vistula-Oder Operation considering the particular features of its conduct.
In the 3d Guards Tank Army virtually one-half of all the exercises, including driv-
ing and firing, were carried out at night. Some 45 motor hours were spent on train-
ing the tank crews and in many crews interchangeability was achieved. All of this
created the necessary conditions for conducting the offensive around the clock,

that is, its continuity was ensured.

Proceeding from the possible nature of combat operations, in the formations and units
such tactical subjects were worked out as a march and meeting engagement, an offen-
sive by tank and motorized rifle units in cooperation with artillery and aviation
against a defending enemy and an advance into the operational depth with the cross-
ing of water obstacles and broad maneuvering.3° With the tank troops, exercises
were conducted at which they learned various methods of crossing rivers: across the
ice, by fording, over bridges and using assault equipment. Here it was considered

that the troops would be operating in the enemy rear with exposed flanks and away
from the basic forces.

In training antiaircraft gunners in the 4th Tank Army, along with improving the pro-
cedures for countering an airborne enemy, the task was posed of learning to fire
against ground targets and primarily tanks. For conducting combat training firing,
damaged enemy tanks and assault guns were employed at a drilling field where the
army formations were stationed. The basic task set for the gun crews of the bat-
teries was to teach the weapons crews to hit the tanks with the first round. The
commander of the 4th Tank Army, Gen D. D. Lelyushenko, permitted the final combat
training firing to be carried out against enemy positions. For this purpose they
selected an area of terrain defended by the 97th Rifle Division. As targets they
used the Nazi fortifications on the forward edge, artillery and mortar batteries,
observation posts and tanks. During the night of 27 October, in observing blackout
measures, the batteries of the antiaircraft artillery regiment took up their firing
positions and on the following day conducted actual practice firing against real
targets.39

Considering that the enemy had been able to organize seven defensive lines which

had been built predominantly along the rivers between the Vistula and Oder to a
depth of 500 km, it was very important to anticipate the enemy in actions and thwart
the attempts to occupy prepared lines in depth. For this reason particular atten-
tion was given to preparing the forward detachments. This was a concern not only
for the formation counmnders, the army commanders and the Staffs but also the front
commanders. For example, the commander of the First Belorussian Front, Mar SU G. K.
Zhukov, personally conducted a conference with the commanders of the forward detach-
ments and demanded energetic actions from them in the operational depth. For them
a demonstration exercise was conducted on the subject "Operations of s Forward De-
tachment in the Operational Depth."

The pending combat operations required particular attention to organizing stable
troop control and primarily using radios. For this purpose in the 2d Guards Tank
Army the communications equipment was studied by the officer personnel, their abil-

ity to use this equipment was tested (particularly for radios), while drills. staff
and command-staff exercises were conducted in the field with communications equip-
ment. in the 3d Guards Tank Army more than 10 radio drills were conducted with the

83

F0!.0F1W(JA[.USE¢3NLY
personnel of the signals subunits. Moreover, the army staff organized assemblies
for the radio operators of the basic communications centers. Analogous work was
also carried out in the other tank armies.

A characteristic feature during the preparatory period of the Berlin Operation was
that in contrast to certain previous operations (Belorussian, lasi-Kishinev and
Vistula-Oder), our troops as a whole had not been able to conduct systematic combat
training for a relatively extended time. The preparatory time for this operation
was just 10-14 days. Moreover a significant portion of the troops up to the very
start of the offensive had been engaged in combat or was regrouping. Another
particular feature was that significant replacements had arrived in the formations
and units. Proceeding from this the combat training of the troops was based upon
the training of the crews (squads), platoons, companies and battalions. This was
also required by the nature of the forthcoming combat operations in the course of

which the troops were to fight to capture numerous strongpoints and centers of re-
sistance.

In all the field forces involved in the operation and particularly in the lot and 2d
Tank armies, assault detachments and groups were trained and their personnel under-
went training at specially equipped training fields. Successful training was also
aided by the fact that the staffs of the First Ukrainian and First Belorussian
fronts had worked out and issued to the troops instructions on organizing and con-
ducting an offensive engagements in the major cities of Germany.“

The training of the tank subunits basically consisted in the shaping up of the

crews and teaching them to fight in cooperation with the other branches of troops
under various conditions. Here consideration was given to the nature of the terrain
on German territory over which the troops were to operate. Here were numerous popu-
lution points with stone structures, water barriers, forests and swamps. For this
reason the tank units trained in cooperating with the infantry and artillery in
storming major population points. in crossing water barriers and fighting in forest-
ed terrain.

The artillery units and formations carried out intense combat training to shape up
the subunits and develop coordinated actions with the tanks and infantry. This work
was carried out widely at the beginning of April when they had finally clarified the
allocation of the artillery in the forthcoming operation, its grouping, the schedule
and procedure for conducting the artillery offensive and the ammunition consumption
scales.

The engineer troops trained in supporting the crossing of water barriers and for ac-
tions as part of the assault detachments and groups. In the 3d and 4th Guards Tank
armies, particular attention was given to training exercises for the engineer sub~
units in erecting floating bridges and assembling wooden bridges on piling and frame
supports. The drills were carried out on rivers similar to those which would be
crossed.

An important form of training, particularly for young soldiers, was speeches by men

who had excelled in combat and who had mastered the equipment and weapons. For ex-

ample. the experienced tankman, Hero of the Soviet Union, Sr Lt K. H. Blinov, a com:
wander from one of the tank companies, frequently spoke to the personnel of the

86

FOR OFFKJAL.US£!0NIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I03d Tank Brigade of the 2d Guards Tank Army. he had been awarded the title of
Hero for the fact that he and his crew had routed an enemy column in which were
traveling the staff of an infantry division, a signals battalion, an antitank bat-
talion and a motorcycle company. Naturally he had something to teach the young men.

There were a number of particular features in organizing the training of troops and
staffs in preparing the 6th Guards Tank Army for the Manchurian Operation. These
were determined chiefly by the fact that the troops which had arrived from the Nest-
ern Theater of War had rich combat experience but did not know the terrain condi-
tions where they would be operating or the opposing enemy.

The army staff, in considering the specific features of the forthcoming operation,
upon the decision of the army commander worked out a combat training plan. In work-
ing out the subjects of the staff and troop exercises and the battle drill exercises,
an important place was given over to troop actions in a desert steppe terrain and to
organizing and conducting an offensive in the mountains. For command personnel a
lecture was given on the nature of the theater of war, assemblies were organized and
at the final stage of them there was a quiz on the knowledge of troop organization
and enemy tactics."l The chiefs of the branches of troops worked out and issued to
the formation staffs instructions on the particular features of employing subunits
of the branches of troops. At least 10 percent of the time allocated for the exer-
cises was employed for working on the questions of orientation in the field under
the conditions of the Transbaykal area and Mongolia. For this special reconnoiter-
ings were carried out for the officers, the drivers of tanks (SAU) and truck drivers.
The administration of armored repairs and supply issued instructions and pamphlets
on operating the equipment in mountain-desert terrain.“2

in the army formations. combat training started with procedural assemblies for the
conmand personnel. Subsequently, battle drill exercises and company and battalion
training. including with field firing, were held. The following subjects were
worked out: capturing a mountain pass, an outflanking maneuver for the purposes of
reaching the enemy flank and rear, capturing a mountain defile. an attack against
mountain peaks (for motorized rifle troops). a night offensive by tank subunits and
a march in anticipation of a meeting engagement. As a result of the intense train-
ing in more than a month, the tank army personnel gained good training in conducting
offensive operations under exceptionally difficult and unique terrain conditions.

Thus, the basic principle which guided the commanders and staffs in organizing troop
combat training was the desire to teach what was needed in the forthcoming combat
operations. The most important forms of instruction were exercises and tactical
drills in the field identical to the one on which they would advance. Moreover,
there was the practice of holding conferences, assemblies for officers, particularly
for the special troops. meetings to exchange experience and analyses of conducted
engagements and operations. 7hese exercises were led by the army commanders as well
as the commanders of the formations. units and subunits. The staff officers pro-
vided significant old in solving the problems of troop combat training.

As n result, the effective combat training of the subunits, units and formations
combined with the training of the staffs and the party political work carried out
ensured the able and bold actions of the men in offensive operations.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8. Party Political Work

Party political work in the preparation of offensive operations by tank armies was
organized on the basis of the decisions of our party's Central Committee, the
Soviet government, the orders of the Supreme Commander-in—Chief, the directives of
the Chief Political Directorate and the operation orders of the commanders. This
encompassed all aspects of the preparation of the operations and had as its main
aim the fulfilling of the set combat missions and the creation in the personnel of
a high offensive drive and unswerving determination to achieve victory over the
enemy. Herc consideration was given to the particular features of tank army opera-
tions as mobile groups of the fronts. These included: the necessity of advancing
boldly and rapidly without engaging strongpoints in extended battles, the possibil-
ity of operations by individual units and formations away from the main forces and

the necessity for each tank crew to show initiative, boldness and daring in combat
operations.

The political sections of the armys and formations, in carrying out party political
work. were guided by the instructions of V. I. Lenin who said that where "...polit-
ical work is carried out most carefully in the troops...there is no laxness in the
army, its morale is better and there are more victories.“3

As a rule. the organizing documents for party political work were the calendar plan
of the army military council and the work plan of the political section for the
political support of the operation. These reflected the content, forms and dates
of the conducted measures and the responsible executors. In preparations for a
number of operations, a plan of measures for the assistant chief for political af-
fairs of the army political section was drawn up as a separate document. From
February l9hb, party political work for rear support in addition was planned by the
political section of the rear administration and this section had been set up in
the tank armies in accord with the order of the People's Commissar of Defense of

26 February 1944.

The forms and methods of party political work were determined by the conditions for
preparing for the operations and by the specific combat missions and were the most
diverse. Widely used were individual talks, assemblies, meetings, the showing of
films. the presentation of awards and letters of thanks, the publishing in the army
and corps newspapers of information on the heroic and decisive actions of the sol-
diers, letters from the parents of hero tankmen who had fallen in engagements and
so forth.

At the center of attention were questions relating to the organizational strength-
ening of the party and Komsomol organizations and above all the primary ones. The
best soldiers who had distinguished themselves in battles were admitted as members
of the VKP(b) [All-Union Communist Party (Bolehevik)] and the Komsomol. In prepar-
ing for the Belgorod-Khar'khov Operation, for example, in the 1st Tank Army, due to
the correct assigning of communists to the subunits, by 1 August 1943, there were
457 party organizations functioning (of the company and equal levels). In almost
every tank crew there was a VKP(b) member or a party candidate member.““ On

1 January 1945, In this army, of the 433 tank commanders, 258 were VKP(b) members
or candidate members and 85 were Komsomol members.“s 0n the eve of the Berlin
Operation. 60-70 percent of the tank commanders and drivers of the four tank armies

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
participating in this operation were communists. In the 6th Guards Tank Army by
the start of the Manchurian Operation, 72 primary party organizations had been or-
ganized and over 2,000 men admitted to the party.”

The Chief Political Directorate and the military councils of the fronts and tank
armies demanded that the commanders and political bodies be constantly concerned for
the military and political growth of the command personnel. Thus, a special order
of 19 Hay 1944 of the chief of the Chief Political Directorate demanded that the
questions of the political indoctrination of officers be viewed as one of the most
important tasks in all party political work. These questions were periodically
discussed at sessions of the military councils. meetings of commanders and politi-
cal workers and assemblies of the party aktiv and party organizations. Independent
work was the basic method for raising the ideological and theoretical level of the
officers. To help those independently studying Harxist-Leninist theory, lectures
and reports were given in addition to individual and group discussions, consulta-

tions, seminars, colloquiums, theoretical conferences and the discussion of arti-
cles published on the pages of the periodic press.

in the work with the military and political personnel, the military councils of the
armies saw to it that they were fully armed both with political as well as military
knowledge. In this regard the practice of holding assemblies for the leadership
during the period of preparing for an operation proved effective. The participants
of an assembly, for example. from the 2d Guards Tank Army (December 1964) heard a
report on the international situation and the party's decisions on ideological
questions and on the work methods of enemy agents. Special attention was paid to
explaining the missions with the shifting of military operations to enemy territory.
in exchanging experience such questions were discussed as the work with replace-
ments. the activities of the political bodies in organizing troop logistical sup-
port, the recruitment and ideological-political indoctrination of the personnel and
the content, forms and methods of party political work in all stages of the opera-
tion. The plan for the assembly held in the 6th Tank Army (July 1944) also included
the questions of familiarization with new Soviet and enemy military equipment."7

An important task on the eve of an operation was work with the arriving replacements.
This was aimed at instilling steadfastness. courage, combat activity and high disci-
pline in the young soldiers. For these purposes, wide use was made of propagandiz-
ing the combat traditions of the units and formations. The political workers al-
ways recalled the words of M. I. Kalinin, "it is essential...that each new recruit,
in arriving in a regiment, know not only its number but all its combat history...
that he be proud of his regiment and always defend its honor.""a

Fur example, in the 5th Guards Tank Army in preparing for the Belorussian Operation
the brigade commanders or their deputies for p‘litical affairs personally received
the young soldiers and spoke with them. The replacements were carefully trained in
thw subunits where talks were conducted on special subjects. The party and Komsomol
urgnnizntions helped the new men in mastering the program of military and political
training. they created a comradely situation and helped them to more rapidly and
completely become part of the combat life of the Subunits. They were acquainted
with the combat traditions and campaign record of the units and formations. Talks
by former soldiers were organized at meetings. Movies were shown devoted to the
Urcdi Patriotic War including to the defeat of the Nazis at Moscow, Stalingrad.
Leningrad and the Kursk Salient."g

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
political exercises (twice a week) and political talks. Moreover, of important
significance were the activities of the lowhlevel agitators, the readers and the
army press. For increasing the ideological level of political exercises as well as
all mass agitation work, seminars were conducted for agitators with reports and
lectures on the contents of the next subjects of exercises, on the international
situation and other questions as well as on exchanging experience in mass agita-
tion work in the subunits. Thus, at the end of July 1965, in all the formations of
the 6th Guards Tank Army, 3-day assemblies were held at which lectures were given
and reports made on the subjects "The Var in the Pacific and Our Missions" and "The
Communist Party--The Leader and Organizer of Our Victories." 0n the last day of
the assemblies, those attending exchanged work experience.5°

One of the aims of party political work was to instill in the men a burning hate for
the Nazi invaders. Here the basic forms were oral and printed propaganda and agi-
tation and for this materials were used from the State Extraordinary Commission,
facts about atrocities by the Nazis in the areas of army combat and letters to the
men from the nation's rear.

0n the eve of the counteroffensive at Kursk, in the 1st Tank Army, for example, the
army newspaper NA RAZGROH VRAGA [To the Defeat of the Enemy] published a special
issue under the overall headline "Soldier of the Red Army! Vengence for the Blood
of the Soviet People!" It published documents collected in Kurskaya Oblast. They
were widely used in conducting political exercises and agitator talks. In sending
out documentary materials on Nazi atrocities to the formations and units, the army
political section at that time appealed to the men:

"Fighter of the Red Army! Let your heart burn with a sacred flame. Our hate for
the enemy has neither a national or racial nature. We hate not merely the German
but rather the German invader, the enslaver. To hate the enemy means to so love
our motherland that for the sake of victory we disdain death and will not rest as
long as even one Nazi butcher with weapons in hand remains on our Soviet land."

Such appeals caused each man to think about his personal contribution to the defeat
of the enemy and they increased combat readiness.

An important area of ideological, political and military indoctrination was the work
with the soldiers of non-Russian nationality. Special mass agitation work was con-
ducted for them. It was entrusted to agitators, readers and propagandists who knew
their mother tongue. For working with this group of soldiers in all the armies use
was made of literature received from the Union republics and the frontline news-
papers published in Ukrainian, Uzbek, Kazakh and the other languages of the Soviet
peoples. The press widely used the appeal letters to the fronts to fellow service-
men from the workers of Azerbaijan, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekisran and the other
Union and autonomous republics. "'Victory or Death-There is No Other Hay Outi'

is what each true Uzbek patriot is now saying who is ready to surrender his life for
the motherland, forthe happiness and freedom of his fathers and children," urged,

for example, the appeal of the Uzbek workers to their fellow servicemen in the 4th
Tank Army on the eve of the Orel Operation.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Grunl attention was given to indoctrinating the men in a spirit of fraternal
friendship with the peoples of the liberated European nations. The Declaration of
the Soviet government on the liberation mission of the Soviet Army was explained to
the soldiers and officers, and meetings were organized, for example. between the
Soviet soldiers and Polish citizens. Party political work was organized considering
the necessity of conducting combat operations outside our motherland. A number of
measures were carried out for ensuring military secrecy and observing high military

discipline and \igilnnce. Special assemblies and seminars were conducted with the
propagandists and agitators.

The idea of the unity of the party and the people was broadly propagandized and
this was reflected in the numerous specific ties between the rear workers and the

frontline soldiers. For these purposes. for example, they used the delivery of com-
but vehicles built with the personal funds of our nation's workers to the forma-
tions .

During the days of the preparations for the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation the
army's formations received tanks built with the personal funds of the Kabardin
workers. The letter of the Kabardins addressed to the army commander was read in
all the units and subunits. In it they wrote:

"To general tank troops. Comrade Bogdanov!

"The Kabardin workers with enormous enthusiasm have collected money to build the
tank column Death to the German Invaders. In a short period of time 20,600,000
rubles were collected. Many patriot kolkhoz members contributed large amounts of
their personal savings. For example, the kolkhoz chairman from Nal'chikskiy Rayon,
P. Sabiirov, contributed 101.000 rubles, the kolkhoz members Kardangushev, Tlupov

and Kashirov each gave 50,000 rubles while scores of kolkhoz members contributed
lb,000-l0,000 rubles.

"Recently the Red Army Command informed us that the tanks built with the money from
the Kabardin workers have been turned over to the tank formation under your command.
All the population of our republic was informed of this. The Kabardin workers with
great joy welcomed this news. They are happy that the combat vehicles built with

their labor savings will be driven into battle by the glorious tank troops of your
forwation....

"He would like to learn to what men the tanks have been entrusted and how they will
defeat the Nazi invaders in these vehicles. At the same time we would like to pass

on an ardent Bolshevlk greetings to all the soldiers. officers and generals of your
formation on behalf of the Kabardin workers."5‘

The first-rate 1-34 tanks presented to the tank troops soon thereafter participated

in battles. The army military council sent to the Kabardin workers a letter of
(hunks whirh stated:

"In the mighty vehicles built with the money of the Kabardin workers, the courageous
and valorons tank troops of our formations have cut down hundreds of base Nazi
butchers and destroyed much various military equipment.

89

FOR10FFKJAI.USEGDNLY
"The tank column built with the personal savings of your republic's workers repre-
sents one of the remarkable manifestations of the friendship, unity, comonness of
efforts and unbreakable desire and will of our people by all means and methods to

aid the Red Army in the rapid and final defeat of the hated enemy.

"This gift from the Kabardin workers has reinspired the personnel of the formations
to combat feats in the fight against the enemy. The tanks have been received by the
crews with special affection. Here the personnel has vowed to mercilessly strike '
and destroy the enemy and is honorably carrying out its promise. The tanks have in-
scribed a glorious combat record and the workers of your republic can be proud that
their savings have been used to build mighty combat vehicles which are causing the
enemy great losses in personnel and equipment.

"...On behalf of all the personnel of the formations we would like you to pass on an
ardent Red Army greetings to all the gloriOus rear workers of Kabarda and wish them
new production successes in all areas of peaceful labor."52

0n the eve of the Vistula-Oder Operation, using money collected by the women of
Chimkent (YUzhno-Kszakhstanskaya Oblast), 26 tanks were sent to the men of the VI
Guards Tank Corps. All of them carried on their side the name of the glorious
daughter of the Kazakh people. Hero of the Soviet Union, Manshuk Mamedova. During
the some days the men of the 2d Guards Tank Army received tanks built with the per—
sonal savings of the Komsomol members and youth of the Poltava area (the Poltava
Komsomol Member Column), the workers of Moldavia and Kiev, the Yautia A553 and the
Smolensk area, the railroad workers of the Ryazan'-Urals and Kalinin railroads, the
students of Taganrog, the hospital personnel (the Suvorov Column) as well as workers
from other Union republics, krays and oblasts. The Soviet people. in sending the
mighty equipment as a gift, thereby commanded the Soviet military to finally catch
the Nazi beast. In understanding this, the political bodies organized excensive ex-
planatory work. The tanks were presented to the men in a solemn ritual under the
unfurled colors.

In party political work extensive use was made of transforming the tank armies into
guards ones. At a meeting in the 2d Tank Army, for example, on this occasion on

21 November l9h6, the units and formations were formed up with their colors. Here
was read the order of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief which listed the Uman' corps,
the Sevsk and Vapnar brigades, the Lublin and Deblin regiments and the Dnestr and
Prut battalions. The honorary names designated the previous service record. In
formation were the soldiers and sergeants who had stopped the enemy on the fiery
Kursk Salient, who had broken the enemy defenses and rapidly pursued the Nazi troops
in the Ukraine and Moldavia, in Belorussia and Poland. They had cleared dmdr modwr—
land of occupiers and now, in accepting the banner with the image of the great Lenin,
vowed to complete the defeat of the Nazi beast.

"We are on the eve of decisive battles," said Sr Lt V. Vokerin. "In these battles
we will honorably carry the guards banner forward. We vow to defeat the enemy in
its lair and will reach Berlin!"

"Today my dream is realized--to cut down the Nazis from a tank," stated the gunner
of the 103d Tank Brigade, Vera Poroshina, “to avenge the grief of the people and my

own personal grief. The Nazis murdered my father and mother.... I will mercilessly
destroy the enemy and prove what a Soviet girl is capable of."

90

Ff"!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.UGli€MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These words of the courageous patriot best expressed the thoughts and feelings of
the army tank troops in those days.

In his concluding speech the military council member, Gen P. H. Latyshev said:

"Comrade Guardsmen! The war is drawing to a close.... But before the signal is

gixen for the final engagement, each of us should again make certain that he is
rea"y to honorably fight the enemy under the guards banner."

In conducting party political work, significant attention was given to the psycho-
logical preparation of the men to conduct combat operations, particularly among the
recently arrived young replacements. For example, on the eve of the Kursk Battle,
in the lst Tank Army, upon the initiative of the political section, all the motor-
ized rifle subunits underwent a roll-over by tanks. The men in the trenches were
subjected to a "mental" attack and from their own experience were convinced that it
was possible to successfully combat the enemy combat vehicles. The battles on the
Kursk Salient showed that the men, regardless of the fierce enemy attacks and a mass
use of equipment never before known in military history did not experience tank fear.
The army newspapers devoted a significant space on their pages to the training of
the personnel. In particular, they published full sheets with a picture of enemy
tanks showing their vulnerable points for all types of weapons. As a rule, the
sheets were supplemented by qualified instructions worked out by the technical serv-
ices indicating from what range and from what types of weapons the vulnerable points
of the Tigers and Panthers could be hit.

The party political work was preceded by extensive organizational work of the mili-
tary councils. In the armies conferences were held for the chiefs of the corps and
brigade political sections and for the deputy regiment and battalion commanders for
political affairs. Here they discussed the questions of organizing party political
work in preparing for and conducting the operation. The communists of the army
political sections were assigned to the formations and individual units and here the
greatest attention was given to working in those formations (units) which were to
carry out the chief missions as well as in the forward detachments, reconnaissance

groups and so forth. In the corps and brigades, meetings were conducted for the sub-
unit political workers.

Through the system of meetings, the party-Komsomol activists, the assemblies and
seminars it was possible in a comparatively short period of time to provide help to
the commanders and political workers in more thoroughly understanding the missions
confronting the troops, to acquaint them with advanced experience in organizing party
political work in an offensive and to broaden political and military views. The in-
volvement of the political workers in playing through variations of the forthcoming
combat operations and in reconnaissance in the field as conducted by the command,
their involvement in command-staff and troop exercises and in assemblies for the
actual working out of field firing, tank driving and so forth helped the political
workers in working in the troops to provide skilled aid to the commanders and staffs
in preparing for combat operations.

The close professional contacts between the political sections and the staffs of the
army field headquarters must also be considered as noteworthy experience in organiz-
ing party political work in the aim of highly efficient troop control. For example,

91

FOR OFTWCJA1.USE(N¢LY
and the methods of keeping the preparations for the offensive operation a secret and
misinforming the enemy. A plan of measures were worked out for the political mis-
informing of the enemy and this included the queStions of propaganda among the enemy
troops, printed propaganda and oral agitation among our own troops and agitation
among the indigenous population.53 Measures were outlined for inform all the person-
nel of the contents of the commander's operation orders. Forms were elaborated for
generalizing advanced combat experience and the methods for disseminating this as
well as methods for organizing a study of the enemy and the work to demoralize it.
The measures to maintain strong military discipline in the troops. for their logis-
tical support as well as the subjects of the army and corps press were also subject
to careful joint discussion.

Together with the staffs, the political bodies also settled such important questions
as organizing the uninterrupted delivery of periodic press and newspapers to the
personnel. the organizing of prompt and effective information and so forth. Also
fruitful was the joint work carried out by the political sections, the staff sections
and adminiStrations in the area of military-technical propaganda, the elaboration of
instructions and leaflets, the holding of conferences, the issuing of technical in-
formation bulletins, the elaboration of recommendations on the methods of conducting
combat in mud, in mountains, in a large city, to combat German bazookas and so forth.

For example, during the preparatory period of the 1st Guards Tank Army for the
Vistula-Oder Operation, in considering the specific conditions of the forthcoming
actions (the wooded swampy terrain cut by numerous rivers, the military council
worked out instructions "Troop Operations in Hooded-Swampy Terrain." In preparing
for the storming of Berlin, the political section, together with the army administra-
tion for armored repair and supply, conducted a technical conference for the army's
repairmen. Here the results of their work were summed up and the advanced experi-
ence of the men discussed. Here awards were presented to many of them for courage
and ability in repairing combat vehicles under difficult conditions. The deputy
contender for the rear organized and conducted seminars with the officers of the
food, fuel and supply services.

The army military councils and political sections, the commanders, the staffs and
political bodies of the formations devoted a great deal of attention to enSuring un-
interrupted operation of army and troop rear services in being guided by the order
of the chief of the Chief Political Directorate of the Red Army of 24 January 1963.
This stressed that "...the battleworthiness and political-moral state of the troops
to a significant degree depends upon how the troops are fed, clothed and shod...."

The army political sections demanded that all the political workers and party organ-
izations in the units and formations always make certain that the men were promptly
and correctly fed and that the food units and field kitchens work correctly. In the
armies there were inspections of the food units and competitions for cooking.

Under the conditions of a front mass cultural work was an important part of military
and political indoctrination. Films were particularly popular. Often the showing

of films was accompanied by agitator speeches. Amateur artistic collectives were
organized under the army clubs. Groups of artists from various theaters visited the

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
armirﬁ npnn invitation of the front political directorates. All of this had a bene-
Iiaial influence on the mood and morale of the men.

In party political work an important place was taken up by the question of checking
on the understanding of the pending tasks, the support and readiness of the units
and the preparation of the military equipment, repair facilities and the medical
units. Individual work with the personnel was the basic form for achieving the goals
ol the organized checks and this work actively involved all the command and politi-
cal leadership, the communists and Komsomoi members. This achieved lively contact
with the men and a close link with the units and subunits.

1hruugh all the practical measures of the command, the staffs, the political bodies,
the party and Komsomol organizations one can clearly trace two basic trends in their
artlvities: the effective carrying out of ideological, indoctrinationai and organi-
zational work in the troops; the greatest possible strengthening of the primary and

inferior party (Komsomol) organl:atioas and a rise in their ideological tempering and
militancy.

It is important to emphasize that the communists. in carrying out extensive explana-
tuty work and in organizing the men to defeat the enemy. were a model of loyalty to
the Communist Party and the motherland. They were the most disciplined and showed
initiative, self-sacrifice, tenacity and stubbornness in the struggle to master
military skills and most importantly their personal example had the most convincing
elfccc on the masses. The political workers devoted great attention to supervising
the implementation of party decisions and to instilling exactingness for the party
members and candidate members. As the chief of the political section of the lat
Guards Tank Army, Gen A. C. Zhuravlev, recalled: "...If the question was raised of
who had 'zeros' in weapons firing, then the party not merely demanded but also helped
him in assigning more experienced communist soldiers to pass on their experience to
ramrades and acquaint them with the methods and skills of marksmanship." “

With the approacn of the start of combat operations, party political work acquired
chr-groater concreteness. in the armies conferences were held for the commanders
and political workers of the tank units and the air representatives on cooperation
questions and in the formations and units there were meetings between the representa-
tives of the various branches of troops and the tank troops. Joint party-Komsomol
meetings were held for the primary party and Komsomol organizations of the subunits
comprising the forward detachments which were to operate jointly in combat and carry
out ruxmun tasks. 0a the question of enSuring coordinated actions by the troops, an
important role was piaycd by systematic work in generalizing positive examples of
mulunl help and aid on the battlefield. 0a the eve of an offensive gatherings and
meet£ngs were organized in the army units and subunits. Speaking at them were the
rnwm1ndcrs. the members of the army military councils and other leading workers from
lhv armv and corps administrations. They urged the tankmen to accelerate the defeat
n the Nazis. Here hundreds of soldiers and commanders announced their desire to
enter battle as cownunlsts. For example, in the 103d Tank Brigade of the 2d Guards
Tank Army, after a meeting conducted on the eve of the VistuIa-Oder Operation, 30

applncatlons for admission to the party were submitted and around 60 applications in
the 57th Motorizad Rifle Brigade.54

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consequently. in carrying out work for the ideological and political indoctrination
of the Soviet military, the political bodies, the party and Komsomol organizations
by all their activities helped to maintain high battleworthinesa of the units and
formations and for them to successfully carry out their combat missions. The experi-

ence of organizing party political work in the preparatory period shows that its
most characteristic traits were high party loyalty, purposefulness, planning, flex-
ibility, efficiency and concreteness. It comprised an inseparable part of the en-
tire system of political and combat training and military indoctrination.

The high effectiveness of party political work in preparing for an operation was a
most important condition for the successful achieving of its goals. The heroism,
courage and high military skill of the tank troops in combat were a direct outgrowth
of that truly titanic work carried out under the leadership of the army military
councils in the area of troop political indoctrination. Party political work was
carried out in an inseparable link with the specific combat missions which the troops
were involved in during the preparatory period. It united the personnel, it ensured

the high combat preparation of the troops, it increased vigilance and strengthened
discipline.

rooruorts
’ V. I. Lenin, PSS [Complete Collected Works], Vol 6, p 137.
2 Arkhiv M0 sssn, folio 324, inv. 4761. file 1. sheet 83.
3 Ibid., folio 323. inv. 4756, file 7, sheet 12.

“ Ibid., folio 315, inv. 4440, file 18, sheet 16.

5 F. D. Vorob'yev et a1., "Posledniy shturm" [The Last Storming]. Moscow, 1970,
p 29.

5 Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 332, inv. 4948, file 90, sheets 4-6; folio 302, inv. 51354,
file 7, sheet 2.

7 Ibid., folio 236, inv. 2673. file 1, sheets 400-405.

9 Ibid., folio 332, inv. 4948, file 693, sheet 3; inv. 4988, file 36, sheet 21;
folio 240, inv. 13789, file 18, sheet 338.

9 Ibid., folio 233, inv. 2074, file 92, sheets 41-43.
'0 lbid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 316, sheets 33-37.
'1 ibid., folio 233, inv. 2356, file 431, sheet 43.

17 Ibid., folio 240, inv. 106995, file 12, sheet 102; folio 332, inv. 4948, file
245.

‘3 Ibid., folio 332, inv. 4948, file 65, sheets 4-5; file 36, sheets 21-23.

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17

10

19

20

21

22

23

210

25

26

27

28

29

30

.H

3?.

33

34

FOR_0FFKJA1.USE(MHLY

Il)id., folio 236, inv. 71455, file 17, sheets 57-58; folio 299, inv. 3070, file
712, sheets 152—153; folio 240, inv. 10659, file 12, sheet 116; folio 237, inv.
2394, file 1224, sheets 1-5; folio 332, inv. 4948, file 329, sheet 20.

Ibid.. folio 236, inv. 2673, file 108, sheets 3-5.

Ibid., folio 239, inv. 5181, file 19, sheet 123.

Ibid., folio 330, inv. 5197, file 1, sheets 47-48; folio 315, inv. 4455, file 40,
sheets 5-10.

Ibid., folio 299, inv. 213955, file 1, sheets 128-132.

Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 296, sheet 137; folio 339, inv. 5197, file 1,
sheets 47-48.

Ibid., folio 236, inv. 40334, file 60, sheets 236-245.
Ihid., folio 332, inv. 4960, file 53, sheets 16-30.
Ibid., inv. 4948, file 105, sheet 53.

Ibid., folio 236, inv. 2673, file 421, sheets 6-7; folio 315, inv. 4440, file
298, sheets 2-62.

Ibid., folio 315, inv. 4446, file 20, sheet 90.
Ibid., folio 333, inv. 4894, file 55, sheet 229.
Ibid., folio 315, inv. 4440, file 166, sheets 82-92.
Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 326, sheets 13-21.

"Sovetskiye Voyenno-vozdushnyye sily v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne" [The Soviet
Air Forces in the Great Patriotic War], Moscow, 1968, p 392.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 210, inv. 310117, file 1, sheet 32.
1b1d., folio 360, inv. 6134, file 31, sheets 58-59.

Ibid., inv. 6142, file 27, sheets 11-13.

"Osvobozhdeniye Be1:russii 1944" [The Liberation of Belorussis in 1944], Moscow,
Nauka, 1970.

"Sbornik materialov po izucheniyu opyts Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny" [Collection
of Materials on Studying the Experience of the Great Patriotic War], No 18,
Moscow, Voyenizdst, p 74.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 332, inv. 4948, file 31, sheets 16- 1; folio 299, inv.
3070, file 110, sheets 24-31.

95

lNJRMOFFIC1A1.UEIZ(HNLY
3'0

16

37

38

39

‘00

‘01

‘02

‘03

Mo

'95

'06

47

MB

'09

50

51

52

53

54

SS

lhld., folio 800, inv. 7139, file 2, sheets 76-79.
Ibid., folio 332, inv. 4948, file 101, sheet 43.

Ibid., folio 315, inv. 4440, file 375, sheets 18—22; folio 236, inv. 2673, file
1330, sheets 33-36.

Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 412, sheets 16-19.
Ibid., folio 324, inv. 4756, file 18, sheets 116-121.

"Berlinskaya operatsiys 1945" [The Berlin Operation of 1945], Moscow, Voyenizdat,
1950. p 84.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 339, inv. 5193. file 37, sheets 35-39.
Ibid.. inv. 5191, file 34, sheet 149.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 39, p 56.

VOYENNO-IS'DORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 8, 1973, p 25.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 300, inv. 23667, file 2, sheet 415.
Ibid., folio 339, inv. 5187, fi1e 66, sheet 210.

1bid., file 13, sheet 168.

M. I. Kalinin, "0 koununisticheskon vospitanii" [0n Communist Indoctrination],
Moscow, Holodsya gvardiya, 1956, p 172.

Arkhiv HO SSSR, folio 332, inv. 4948, file 444, sheets 290-293.
Ibid., folio 326, inv. 310115, file 1, sheets 136-137.

Ibid., folio 308, inv. 4144, file 12, sheet 212.

Ibid., sheet 211.

"Sbornik boyevykh doku-entov Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny" [Collection of Combat
Documents of the Great Patriotic War], No 27, Moscow, 1956, p 172.

A. G. Zhuravlev, "Kreyche hroni" [Stronger Than Armor], Moscow, Voyenizdst, 1974,
p 25.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 307, inv. 4148, file 411, sheet 131.

96

FOR‘DFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
CHAPTER III: THE CONDUCT 0F OFFENSIVE OPERATIONS

In the course of conducting offensive operations, the tank armies carried out
diverse missions, including: in cooperation with the combined-arms amires they
completed the breakthrough of the enemy tactical defensive zone, they rapidly de-
veloped the tactical success into an operational one, they pursued the enemy, de-
feated its reserves, crossed hurriedly occupied defenses, crossed water obstacles.
captured important operational objectives and lines and in individual instances in-
dependently broke through a prepared defense. The general nature of an offensive
operation by a tank army during the war years is shown in Diagram 5.

The actions of a tank army as the mobile group of a front always connenced with the
committing of it to the engagement (to the breech). This was one of the complex
problems of Soviet operational art in the past war, particularly from the viewpoint
of determining the most rational methods, the time and depth of comitting the tank
field forces.

1. The Committing of Tank Armies to the Engagement and the Development of the
Success

The depth and time of connitting tank armies to an engagement in each operation
were determined specifically by the developing situational conditions and primarily

by the course of the breakthrough of the enemy tactical defensive zone by the
combined-arms armies.

The first experience of employing the newly organized tank armies on an offensive
was gained in the Orel Operation which was carried out by the troops of the Western,
Bryansk and Central fronts from 12 July through 18 August 1943. By the start of the
operation only the Central Front included the 2d Tank Army which right up to going
over to the offensive was engaged in heavy defensive battles. The 3d Guards Tank
Army was turned over to the Bryansk Front from 14 July and was comitted to the en-
gagement on 19 July, that is, on the eighth day of the operation. The 6th Tank
Army was part of the western Front from 18 July and was committed to the engagement
only on the fifteenth day of the operation (26 July). Such a late time for comit-
ting the 3d Guards and 6th Tank armies to the engagement was caused by the fact that
by the start of the operation they had just completed organization, the former in
the area of Plavsk and the second around Moscow. Moreover, it was impossible to
determine ahead of time precisely the date our troops would go over to a counter-
offensive at Kursk.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UFI‘ILIAL USE UNLY

The delayed arrival of these armies in the fronts, the limited time to prepare them
for commitment to battle and the lack of experience in the combat employment of the
newly organized tank armies on the offensive made an impression on the nature of
their employment. Thus, the 3d Guards Tank Army, having carried out a 150-km march,
on 17 July was concentrated in the area of Novosil'. By this time the troops of the
3d and 63d armies of the Bryansk Front where the tank army was to be committed had
advanced to a depth of up to 22 km and had reached the rear defensive line on the
leshnya River where they encountered stubborn enemy resistance.

Initially the tank army's mission was to join battle on 18 July after the combined-
arms armies had broken through the enemy defenses along the western bank of the
Oleshnya and to develop the offensive around Orel to the north and west. But on the
morning of 18 July. upon instructions from Headquarters, the mission was adjusted.
The army was to advance to Stanovoy Kolodez' and then to Kromy, that is, around Orel

from the wouth. Because of this the start of the offensive was moved back to
19 July.

On the morning of 19 July. after a 10-minute artillery and air softening-up, the
troops of the 3d and 63d armies went over to the offensive. But as a consequence of
the poor artillery softeninguup and the insufficient number of CIS tanks, in 2 hours
of battle they were able to advance only to a depth of 1.5-2 km. The 3d Guards Tank
Army was committed to increase the strength of the attack and to accelerate the
breakthrough of enemy defenses. In cooperation with the rifle formations, it broke
through the enemy defenses on the Oleshnya River and by the end of the day had ad-
vanced 8-10 km.1 The army suffered great losses in the heavy battles.

In subsequent days, the army's mission was repeatedly changed. In continuously re-
grouping, it independently or in cooperation with the combined-arms armies succes-
sively broke through the enemy defenses in a whole number of sectors. Here the army
did not possess the necessary amount of artillery for dependably suppressing the
prepared defenses and the entire burden of combat rested on the motorized infantry
and the tanks. Although the army played an important role in the operation, it was
unable to gain freedom of maneuver. During the Orel Operation, it lost 60. 3 percent
of the T-34 tanks and 72. 9 percent of the T-70 tanks.2

The 4th Tank Army arrived as part of the Western Front on 24 July3 when the enemy
had already brought up significant reserves toward Bolkhov and had organized a
strong defense here. The army was given the mission on the morning of 26 July to
enter the breakthrough in the zone of the 11th Guards Army and develop an attack
along a southwesterly axis. By the end of the day it was to have advanced to a
depth of around 60 km.“ The time to prepare for entering the breech of around a
day was clearly insufficient and did not make it possible to organize cooperation in
detail. When on the morning of 26 July the Army began to carry out the set mission,
its actions assumed a completely different nature than those envisaged in the plan.
Instead of being committed to the breech, together with the 11th Guards Army it had
to break through four previously prepared enemy defensive lines which were fully
saturated with weapons, personnel and obstacles. Over the 9 days of the offensive,
the 4th Tank Army drove 25-30 km into the enemy defenses. The average daily momen-
tum of its advance equaled only 3. 3 km.5

98

F0310FFNJA1.USIZONLN
The 2d Tank Army of the Central Front was committed to the engagement on the first
day of the offensive, 15 July, for breaking through the deeply echeloned enemy de-
fenses in cooperation with the combined-arms formations of the 13th and 70th armies.
In conducting fierce engagements against the enemy in the course of which "one posi-
tion after another had to be gnawed through,"6 the army lost over 300 tanks, having
36 in fighting condition by the end of the operation.7

Thus, all three tank armies in the Orel Operation were committed not to develop the
success after the breakthrough of the defenses by the combined-arms armies but actu-
ally to break through a prepared defense. This was determined chiefly by the condi-
tions for going over to the counteroffensive as well as by the somewhat delayed com-
mitting of the 3d Guards and 4th Tank armies by Headquarters to action. The experi-
ence of the given operation showed that without dependable neutralization of the

enemy. Such employment of the tank armies led to high losses and because of this the

troops of the front were deprived of a powerful means for developing the success.
This experience was taken into account in subsequent operations.

In the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation (3-23 August 1963), both tank armies of the
Voronezh Front (lat and 5th Guards) with a portion of their forces entered the en-
gagement on the first day of the offensive, 3 August, to a depth of 3—5 km for com-
pleting the breakthrough of the main defensive zone. Initially the forward tank
brigades were committed to battle. one from each of the tank (mechanized) corps and

then the main forces of the corps for breaking through the second defensive zone
without a halt.

This employment of the tank armies was determined by a series of factors and primar-
ily by the slowdown in the momentum of advance for the rifle fozaations in front of
the third position. This was a consequence of the insufficient neutralization of
the enemy at this position during the period of the artillery softening-up, the weak-
ening of artillery support due to the movement of the artillery to new firing posi-
tions as well as the lack of CIS tanks (10-15 per kilometer of breakthrough sector,
including one-half of them light tanks). The committing to battle of the four for-
ward tank brigades (a total of 200 tanks and SAU on a lO-km breakthrough sector)
made it possible to rapidly complete the breakthrough of the first defensive zone
and at the same time preserve the main forces of the tank armies for combating the
near operational enemy reserves and for actions in the operational depth. By the

end of 7 August, the tank armies had advanced to a depth of over 100 km and had
left the rifle formations 25-40 km behind.

In the Kiev Operation (3-13 November 1943), the 3d Guards Tank Army was to be com-
mitted to battle on the second day of the operation after the enemy's defenses had
been broken through by the troops of the 38th Army. However, by the end of the first
day. the troops of this army had advanced only up to 7 km in depth. Hq SHC demanded
that the frat: commander accelerate the carrying out of the set mission of liberat-
ing Kiev. In order to more quickly complete the breakthrough of enemy defenses, the
second echelons of the combined-arms armies were committed to the engagement and
then the front's mobile groug. The 3d Guards Tank Army entered the engagement dur-
ing the night of 4 November. The tanks attacked with headlights and sirens on, in
firing intensely from the guns and machine guns. This method of attack coupled with
bold maneuvering over the forest roads and clearings stunned the enemy which began
to hurriedly retreat. By the end of the morning of 5 November, the army's forma-
tions had reached the region of Svyatoshino, having cut the Kiev--Zhitomir Highway.

99

FOR‘0ﬁ1ﬂClAl.lEﬂE(MNLY
The Nazi Command, fearing the encirclement of its troops in Kiev, began to pull them
back. On 6 November, the capital of the Ukraine was liberated.

15 January 1944), considering the limited time for its preparation (9 days), the
poor strength of the rifle divisions after the intense previous battles, the insuf—
ficient density of CIs tanks (8-9 per km of breakthrough sector and not in all di-
visions), as well as the focal nature of enemy defenses, the lat and 3d Guards Tank
armies were first planned to enter battle on the first day of the offensive for com-
pleting the breakthrough of the main defensive zone.9 In fact, they were committed
in the middle of the first day to a depth of 3-5 km from the forward edge. The go-
ing over of our troops to the offensive was a surprise for the enemy. The tank
armies, having advanced 15-20 km, fully completed the breakthrough of the tactical
defensive zone and began pursuit. Regardless of the extremely bad weather condi—
tions, by the end of 29 December they had advanced to a depth of over 100 km.

In the Kirovograd Operation (5-15 January 1944), the attack echelon of the 7th
Guards Army under Maj M. S. Shumilov, where the 5th Guards Tank Army was to be com-
mitted to battle, had no CIS tanks at all. The artillery density did not exceed 120
guns and mortars per kilometer of breakthrough sector. For this reason the commander
of the Second Ukrainian Front, Arm Gen I. S. Konev, decided to commit the mobile

enemy was expecting our offensive here), the insufficient effectiveness of the ar-
tillery softening-up and the lack of air support led to a situation where the XVIII
and XXIX Tank Cbrps of the 5th Guards Tank Army committed to the engagement for
breaking through the first enemy position were able to advance only 4-5 km by the
end of the day together with the infantry.’°

0n the second day, the breakthrough of the enemy tactical defensive zone was com-
pleted. But during the first 2 days the tank corps had lost 139 tanks and SAU, or
around 60 percent of their effective fighting strength. This sharply reduced their
capabilities in the operational depth.

In the Uman'-Botoaani Operation (5 March-6 April 1944) the Second Ukrainian Front
had as its mobile group three tank armies (the 2d, 5th Guards and 6th). In truth,
after the intense previous battles all of them were greatly understrength in terms
of tanks and SAU. Thus, the 2d Tank Army had 231 combat vehicles, the 5th Guards
Tank Army had 196 while the 6th had 153 tanks and SAU. The front had an extremely
insignificant number of CIS tanks. In the three combined-arms armies fighting in
the sector of the front's main thrust (25 km wide), there were just 51 tanks and SAD.
This made it possible to have a density of two combat vehicles per kilometer of
breakthrough sector. For this reason, forward detachments with groups of 20-30
tanks each were to be assigned from the 2d and 5th Guards Tank armies. These de-
tachments were to go over to the attack together with the infantry and actually
carry out the missions of the CIS tanks and simultaneously the role of the forward
detachments of their own armies.

After a 56-minute artillery softening-up with a density of 148 guns and mortars per
kilometer of breakthrough sector, the infantry and the forward detachments of the

100

IN3R1OFIHCJAI.UEIZ(MHLY
tank armies, with artillery support, attacked the enemy. The strike was unexpected
and they rapidly crushed the enemy resistance in the first position. After this

the main forces of the 2d and 5th Guards Tank armies were committed to the engage-
ment at a depth of 2-4 km and they completed the breakthrough of the enemy tactical
defenses. The 2d Tank Army during this day advanced 14-16 km and reached the Gornyy
Tikich River. In exploiting its success, on the second day at a depth of 15-18 km,

the 6th Tank Army was committed to the breech and it had the mission of driving
against Khristinovka.

The committing of the main forces of the two tank armies to the engagement immedi-
ately after breaking through the first position was caused by the shallow configura-
tion of the enemy defenses, by the low densities of CIS tanks as well as by the con-
ditions of the spring mud and lack of roads when a delay in committing than could
have led to the holding up of the breakthrough's development. At the same time the
successive commitment of another tank army to the engagement after the breakthrough
of the tactical defense provided an opportunity to maintain its strike force for
carrying out missions in the operational depth.

As a whole, in those operations involving the liberation of the right-bank Ukraine
in which tank armies were involved, in essence, they all participated in breaking
through the tactical defensive zone. Although this did reduce their combat capa-
bilities for carrying out tasks in the operational depth, it did meet the specific
conditions of the situation as the combined-arms armies, due to the lack of CIS
tanks and artillery were unable to independently break through the enemy defenses at
a rapid pace and create conditions for the committing of the tank armies to a so-
called "clean breakthrough."

During the summer-autumn campaign of 1944 and in the 1945 campaign in Europe, when
the strength and capabilities of our fronts had risen significantly, in a number of
operations the tank armies were committed after the breakthrough of the tactical de-
fensive zone by the combined-arms armies to its entire depth (the 1s: Guards Tank
Army in the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation; the 2d Guards Tank Army in the Lublin-Brest
and Vistula-Oder operations; the 5th Guards Tank Army in the VitebskPOrsha, Hemsl
and East Prussian operations; the 6th Tank Army in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation).
Such conditions for attack were particularly favorable for their rapid operations in
the operational depth, since their strike force was preserved. At the same time in
certain operations of these military campaigns the tank armies were committed to the
engagement for completing the breakthrough of the enemy tactical defensive zone.
Most often this use of them was caused by a situation which arose in the course of
the breakthrough but in a number of instances was planned ahead of time by the front.
This reflected on the creation of the CIS tank densities and on the course of the
entire operation.

or particular interest from this viewpoint are the operations conducted by the
troops of the First Ukrainian Front. Thus, according to the initial plan of the
Lwow-Sandomierz Operation (13 July-29 August 1944), the commander of the First
Ukrainian Front, Her SU I. S. Konev, proposed using all three tank armies on the
first day. Actually they were to break through the enemy defenses at the start of
the operation with the combined-arms armies. Hq SEC, in approving the submitted
plan. did not agree to this and demanded that the tank armies and horse-mechanized

groups be used not for the breakthrough but rather for developing the success after
the breakthrough.

101

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
In accord with the instructions from Headquarters, the front commander made changes
in the procedure for employing the tank armies. They were to be committed on the
second day of the operation after the breakthrough of the tactical enemy defensive
zone by the combined-arms armies. But here the distribution of the CIS tanks was
left as before. 0f the 1,179 tanks and SA” of the assault grouping which was to
advance on the Lwow axis, only 119 (10 percent) were to be used in the close support
groups.ll Their density in the breakthrough sectors of the 60th and 38th armies
where the 3d Guards and 5th Tank armies were to attack did not exceed 8 units of
armor per kilometer. According to the information of the former commander of the
38th Army, now Mar 80 K. S. Moskalenko, these tanks sufficed "only for supporting
the actions of the forward battalions. But when after the artillery softening-up
the first echelon rifle divisions went over to the offensive, this was an infantry
attack without sufficient support by the CIS tanks."12

The breakthrough on the Lwow sector, as is known, was carried out under a difficult
situation. By the end of 15 July, the enemy defenses had been broken through in a
narrow 6-km sector in the region of Koltow only in the area of the 60th Army under
Gen P. A. Kurochkin. The enemy was endeavoring at any cost to check our drive
against Lwow, it was throwing all reserves into the battle and continuing to bring
up new forces for attacking the troops of the 60th and 38th armies.

Thus, the situation required rapid actions by the Soviet troops. By this time it
had become obvious that the formations of the combined-arms armies were unable to
ensure favorable conditions for committing the tank armies to the engagement. The
basic forces of the 60th Army were tied down on both flanks by active enemy actions.
The 38th Army continued to repel a massed strike by a major enemy tank grouping
within the main zone of the enemy defenses and was unable to support the commitment
of the 4th Tank Army of Gen D. D. Lelyushenko to the engagement.

In the existing situation, the commander of the 3d Guards Tank Army, Gen P. s.
Rybalko, with permission from the front commander, Mar SU I. S. Konev, for support-
ing the commitment of his main forces to the engagement, committed the forward de-
tachments of the VII Guards Tank Corps and the IX Mechanized Corps. These during
the night, in cooperation with units of the XV'Rifle Corps, crushed the opposing
enemy and by the morning of 16 July had captured the Sasov--Zolochev road, 3 creat-
ing conditions for the commitment of the army's main forces.

The basic forces of the 60th Army at that time were holding the corridor formed be-
tween Koltow and Trostsyanets Haly (a narrow strip of terrain extending 20 km to the
northwest in the interfluve of the Western Bug and Zolochuvka). This was the only
breech cut with great effort in the enemy defenses on the Lwow sector. From both
sides it could be fired on by artillery, mortar and even machine gun fire. In addi-
tion the enemy was attempting to cut the Koltow Corridor by pincer attacks.

Mar SU I. S. Konev was confronted with a difficult problem. Hhether to commit the
tank army through the narrow corridor or continue the struggle to widen it. The
latter led to a loss of precious time as the enemy command could bring additional
reserves up to this sector and check our offensive. After a thorough assessment of
the situation, the front commander decided to commit the main forces of the 3d
Guards Tank Army to the zone of the designated success. In the morning of 16 July,
behind the forward detachments, the main forces of the 3d Guards Tank Army began to

102

FOIIOFFHJA1.USE(MHLY
advance along the single route. During the following 3 days the 4th Tank Army was
also committed to battle along this same route.‘“ As a result the front's operation
was Successfully developed.

The committing of the two tank armies to the breakthrough along a narrow corridor
undoubtedly was an indicator of the boldness, risk, decisiveness, unbreakable will
and creative approach of the front's commander to utilizing the large mobile field
forces under the specific conditions. At the same time it must be pointed out that
under the existing difficult situation, one-half of the armored formations (the
XXXI Tank Corps, the IV Guards Tank Corps and the VI Guards Mechanized Corps) had to
go into action for supporting the flanks of the corridor. Moreover, both tank
armies actually were not commutted to the breakthrough but rather "pushed forward"
through a narrow breech along one route and this held up their commitment. Having
spent 4 days on going through this corridor, they could not immediately begin to
carry out missions as they were without the necessary rear services and materiel.l5

In the Vistula-Oder Operation (12 January-3 February 1945), the tank armies on the
First Ukrainian Front were also to be committed to the engagement on the first day
of the operation for completing the breakthrough of the tactical defensive zone and
on the First Belorussian Front after its breakthrough by the combined-arms armies.
0f the 3.220 tanks and SAU on the First Belorussian Front, 1,688 units of armor (66
percent) were to be used as CIS tanks and on the First Ukrainian Front, of the 3,660,
only 820 or 23 percent. The average CIS tank density in the armies of the assault
grouping of the First Belorussian Front was 25 units of armor per kilometer of
breakthrough area (in the 8th Guards, 5th Assault and 33d armies, around 30), and in

the armies of the First Ukrainian Front around 17.5, while in the 5th Guards Army
just 10.3 and in the 52d Army 13.7.16

Hq SHC, in approving the operation plan submitted by the commander of the First
Ukrainian Front, again instructed that the committing of the tank armies to the
breakthrough need not be made on the first day of the offensive but rather after the

enemy tactical defensive depth had been broken through, with the preliminary permis-
sion of Headquarters.

0n the first day of the operation, 12 January 1965, because of the increased enemy
resistance on the 3d position, the commander of the First Ukrainian Front, Har SU
I. S. Konev, at 1400 hours ordered the commitment of the tank armies to the engage-
ment. here one brigade from each of the first echelon corps was committed for com-

pleting the breakthrough of the first defensive zone while the main forces were to
break through the second defensive zone from a march formation.

The forward brigades together with the rifle formations rapidly completed the break-
through of the first defensive zone but the commitment of the main forces of the

3d Guards and 4th Tank armies was held up approximately to 1600 hours as all the
roads and routes were clogged with artillery and transport of the combined-arms
armies. The 3d Guards Tank Army spent the entire night crossing the main defensive
zone without engagement while the corps of the éth Tank Army were held up behind the
infantry battle formations until morning.17

The extended engagements for the second zone lasting to the second day of the opera-
tion held up the front's mobile group from coming out into the operational clear.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In essence, up to the Nida River. that is, up to the rear defensive line, the tank
armies advanced together with the combined-arms ones moving ahead only on individual
axes.

0n the First Belorussian Front (commander, Hat SU G. K. Zhukov), the lat Guards Tank
Army was commutted to the engagement at 1400 hours of 15 January (the second day of
the operation) to a depth of 13-15 km and, having completed the breakthrough of the
second defensive line together with the 8th Guards Army of Gen V. I. Chuykov, by the
end of the day had advanced to a depth up to 25 km.18 The 2d Guards Tank Army en-
tered the "clean breakthrough" on the morning of 16 January. 0n the very first day
it moved forward rapidly some 70-90 km and with its main forces reached the area of

Zyrardow and Sochaczew. The army's troops maintained the high momentum of advance
until the end of the operation.

in the East Prussian Operation (13 January-25 April 1965), the commander of the
Second Belorussian Front, Mar 80 K. K. Rokossovskiy, planned to commit the 5th
Guards Tank Army after completing the breakthrough of the tactical defensive zone,
on the 3d day of the operation.1 0f the 2,260 tanks and SAD, some 830 (37 percent)
were assigned for close support and this made it possible to create a density of 25-
37 tanks and SAU per kilometer of breakthrough sector.2° Actually the tank army was
engaged on the fourth day of the operation at a depth of 20-25 km in a "clean break-
through," and by the end of the first day of its offensive had advanced 30 km.“ By
its rapid actions in subsequent days it cleared a path for the front's troops to the
Baltic Sea in the aim of cutting off the entire East Prussian enemy grouping.

In the preparations for the Berlin Operation (16 April-8 May 1945), Hq SHC ordered

the fronts to commit the tank armies for exploiting the success on the main axis
after breaking through the enemy defenses.2

The conmander of the First Belorussian Front, Mar 80 c. K. Zhukov. decided to commit
the let and 2d Guards Tank armies to the engagement on the first day with the cap-
turing of the ridge of the Seelow Hills by the combined-arms armies at a depth of
around 12 km. Simultaneously it was planned that if the force of the strike by the
front's first echelon was insufficient for rapidly crossing the enemy tactical de-
fenses and the danger arose that the offensive might be held up, the tank armies
were to be committed to the engagement in the aim of strengthening the strike by the
combined-arms armies and help them complete the breakthrough of the tactical defen-
sive zone.23

The commander of the First Ukrainian Front, Mar 80 I. S. Konev, according to the
initial plan intended to commit the 3d and 4th Guards Tank amires to the engagement
after the breakthrough of the defenses for exploiting the success.2“ But on

16 April, that is, 2 days prior to the start of the operation, he ordered both tank
armies to be cosmitted on the first day of the operation from the line of the basic

enemy artillery positions in order to increase the breakthrough capacity of the
combined-arms srmies.‘s

Because of the particularly stubborn enemy resistance and the necessity of quickly
piercing the enemy defenses all four tank armies in the Berlin Operation were com-

mitted on the first day of the operation at a depth of 3-8 km.

10‘

FCHICNﬁﬂC1A1.lEiE(NVLY
Generalized data on the depth and time of committing the tank armies from the ex-
patience of 26 operations are given in Table 10.

Table 10
Depth and Time of Committing the Tank Armies to an Engagement in the War Years

Depth of On what day of operation
commitment commitment was made

 

Armies ! Operations

1 GTA I Belgorod-Khar'kov
_ Zhitomir-Berdichev

LwowbSandomierz .
Vistula-Oder . . .
I
!
i

a o o e o
e s e o e
o . o o o
a o o o o
o e e e 0

Berlin . . . . . .

Uman'-Botosani . . . . . .
Lublin-Brest ...... .
Vistula—Oder . . . . . . .
East Pomeranian . . . ..
Berlin . . . . . . . . . .

Kiev . . . . . . .
Zhitomir-Berdichev
Lwow-Sandomierz .
Vistula-Oder . . .
Berlin . . . . . . .

Lwow-Sandomierz . . . . . . . . . .
Vistula-Oder . . . . . . . . . . .
Berlin . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 GTA

0 o e o o
a

a o e s o

o o o o a

3 GTA

0 a e e e
e e o a e
a e e e e
o o o o o

4 GTA

5 GTA Belgorod-Khar'kov . . . . . . . .
Korovograd . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uman'-Botosani ......... .
Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy . . . . .
Vitebsk-Orsha . . . . . . . . . .

East Prussian . . . . . . . . . .

6 GTA Uman'-Botosani . . . . . . . . . .

Iasi-Kishinev . . . . . . . . . .

e

:-
ras: £~b~h‘h‘b‘h‘ rte-é\ P‘F‘h’h‘h’ F‘P‘haU‘h‘ P'NDUIP‘FO

- From the data of Table 10 and the examined examples it follows that during the war
years the tank armies were committed to battle most often on the first day of a
front operation and at a depth of 3-10 km, that is, together with the combined-arms
armies they broke through or completed the breakthrough of the main (first) defen-
sive line or pierced the second defensive line.

The time and depth of committing the tank armies to an engagement were determined
specifically by the developing conditions as well as by the overall concepts of the
operations primarily from the viewpoint of choosing the methods of defeating the
enemy and to a large degree by the views held on this question by the individual
front commanders. For example, Mar SU I. S. Konev was always a supporter of employ-
ing the tank armies for completing the breakthrough of the main zone. In his post-
war memoirs. he wrote directly that on this question he had "his own opinion....

105

FOIlOFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
in the operation. The tank armies committed to the engagement for completing a
breakthrough had, as a rule, lower mountains of subsequent advance in depth. as

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combined-arms armies, the overall width of the zone of its commitment reached 10-

12 km and sometimes more. This created better conditions for comitment to the en-
gagement. As an average from the experience of a majority of operations, the width
of the zone for comitting a tank army was within the limits of 8-12 km (Table 11).

Table 11
Zone of Committing Tank Armies to an Engagement

Width of Zone of

Armies Operations C itment, km

1 GTA Lwow-Sandomierz . . 9—10
Vistula-Oder . . 8-10
Berlin . . . . 8

2 GTA Luhlin- Brest . . 18-20
Vistula-Oder . . 19
East Pomeranian . 10

3GTA Kiev . . . . . 8-10
Vistula—Oder . . 10

lo TA Vistula—Oder . . 10-12

5 GTA Vitehsk-Orsha . 7-8
East Prussian 13-14

 

GGTA Iasi-Kishinev................... 12-13

Such a width of the zone of comitment ensured the advancing of the army along four
routes, it excluded enemy artillery flanking fire and corresponded to the capabili-
ties of the combined-arms armies to break through the enemy defenses.

In certain operations the comitment of the tank army was made in a narrower zone.
For example, in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation, the let Tank Army was committed in
a zone 4-6 km wide, and the 5th Guards Tank Army in one about 5 km wide. Both these
tank armies were comitted in the zone of advance of one combined-arms army (5th
Guards). In the Luau-Sandomierz Operation, the 3d Guards and loth Tank armies were
consecutively committed through the "Koltow Corridor" 5-6 km wide in the zone of ad-
vance of one combined-arms army (60th). This was determined by the conditions of
the specific situation. But, as experience showed, such a width of the zone for
comitting a tank army to an engagement was insufficient for it and impeded the mov-
ing up of the army, its deployment and the making of a massed tank attack.

The operational configuration of the tank armies in being con-titted to an en-
gagement varied depending upon the combat missions, the overall concept of the oper-

ation, the effective fighting strength of the army, the width of the comitment
zone, the terrain conditions and the road network.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in a majority of operations of the Great Patriotic Her. a three-corps tank army was
committed to an engagement in a two-echelon configuration, most often over four
routes counting two routes per first echelon corps. Thus, of the 29 counted opera-
tions. the tank armies in being committed to the engagement had an operational con-
figuration of two echelons in 17 operations and a single echelon one in 12 opera-
tions. Here in the single-echelon configuration, in 11 operations a tank army had
two corps. Only in the Berlin Operation was the lat Guards Tank Army ccmmitted to

an engagement having all three corps in the first echelon and a tank brigade and
tank regiment in the reserve.

As a rule, strong forward detachments were assigned from the first echelon corps and
these were given the mission of supporting the deployment and commitment of the main
forces to the engagement and subsequently the capturing of important lines and ob-
jectives in the operational depth and the holding of them until the approach of the
army's main forces. On each route the reconnaissance groups were ahead behind the
advancing rifle units. The traffic support detachments and forward detachments
moved behind the reconnaissance and then followed the army's main forces. The total
depth of a three-corps tank army configuration in moving along four routes in two
echelons was, as a rule, 50-60 km. The configuration of the 2d Guards Tank Army in
the Vistula-Oder Operation can serve as one of the examples of the army's operation-
al configuration in being committed to an engagement (Diagram 6).

As a whole, the grouping of a tank army in being committed to an engagement was cre-
ated so as to ensure the necessary strength of the tank attack, rapid movement, con-
venience of deploying the first echelon. the possibility of independently conducting
combat operations, the least vulnerability to enemy artillery fire and air strikes
and continuous control of the army's formations (Diagram 7).

Support for the commitment of tank armies to an engagement durum ﬂu
war years was continuously improved. In particular the amount of artillery used for
supporting the tank attack was increased along with its density and the depth of
fire support. From 1944 onwards, as a rule, the artillery support included the ar-
tillery of the army, corps and divisional artillery groups fighting in the zone of
the tank army's attack and the artillery attached to the army. Its density in the
zones of attack averaged 60-70 guns per kilometer of front. Firing by sections at
several lines were planned ahead of time to a depth of 12-16 km behind the attack
line.

There usually was a brief intense shell fire prior to the committing of a tank army
to an engagement. For better artillery support, spotter officers were assigned to
the forward brigades from the artillery units and formations. They traveled in a
radio-equipped tank and called in and corrected fire. The artillery of the tank
army moved up in columns ready to deploy and provide fire support to the actions of
the forward detachments, to repel tank counterattacks and neutralize and destroy
enemy weapons and defensive centers. One of the versions of artillery support for
the committing of a tank army to a breakthrough is shown in Diagram 8.

Great attention was given to supporting the tank army's flanks. For this purpose,

plans were made to destroy the enemy antitank weapons located on the flanks of the
zone of attack at a distance of 1-2 km so that the enemy artillery was unable to

fire effectively against the tanks using direct laying. The enemy artillery

108

FDI:0I1WC1AI.[IHE(HVLY
INJRlOFFIC1AI.IJSEI(MNLY

batteries were also neutralized at a greater distance from the flanks of the zone of

attack. Artillery barrage fire was prepared in the eventuality of repelling enemy
cunnterattacks on the flanks Oi the zone of attack.

The tank armies during the war years were one of the basic objectives of enemy air
strikes and for this reason a dependable cover and air support were particularly
essential. Usually from 50-75 percent of the forces of the air armies were assigned
to carry out missions in the interests of the tank armies in committing them to an
engagement and in particular in crossing the tactical defensive zone. Thus, in the
Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation, for supporting the commitment of the lat and 5th Guards
Tank armies, all the forces of ground attack and bomber aviation and more than 50
percent of the fighters of the 2d Air Army were activated. During the Vistula—Oder
Operation, up to 70 percent of the bomber. ground attack and fighter aviation of the
16th Air Army was switched to support the cormdtment of the lat and 2d Guards Tank
armies to the breakthrough. In the Berlin Operation, up to 75 percent of the forces
of the 2d Air Army were assigned to support the commitment of the 3d and hth Guards
Tank armies to the engagement.28

In the committing of tank armies to an engagement, their air fighter cover was
strengthened, mainly by patrolling in the air, the enemy airfields were sealed off
and attacks made on several of them. This was the case, for example, in the commit-
ting of the 5th Guards Tank Army to the engagement (the Vitebsk-Orsha Operation),
when the bombers of the 1st Air Army made heavy strikes against enemy airfields at
Orsha, Dodukov and Borisov.29 In a number of operations, prior to the commitment of
the tank armies to the engagement, a brief but heavy air softening-up was carried
out in the aim of neutralizing the enemy centers of resistance, strongpoints and
particularly the antitank weapons in front of the front and on the flanks of the at-
tack zone (Orel and Lwow-Sandomierz operations). With the start of the attack and
until the tank armies reached the operational depth, the ground attack aviation con-
tinuously supported them in destroying enemy troops, weapons, tanks and other equip-
ment impeding the advance of the tank formations. Here particular attention was
paid to the flanks where the enemy usually prepared counterattacks and counter-
strikes.

The engineer support for the committing of the tank armies to the engagement was en-
trusted to the combined—arms armies where the tanks were to operate. Also used

were the resources of the front. as well as the engineer units and subunits of the
tank armies. The engineer troops prepared the routes of advance, they cleared the
attack lines of mines, they built bridges across water barriers, they organized a
commandant service and carried out other missions. However. as a whole, it must be
pnlntcd nut that the engineer support for the commitment of tank armies to an engage-
mvul during the war years represented a difficult problem. A correct solution to
the question of the concentrating of the basic efforts of engineer troops in a
breakthrough on the tactical level at the same time led to a weakening of their oper-
ational grouping. Under the conditions of little motorization, a wide regrouping of
engineer troops in a short period of time was difficult to carry out. The combined-
arms armies for supporting the commitment of the tank armies usually had limited en-
ulneer resources as the tank armies entered the engagement prior to the completion
ur the breakthrough, that is. at a moment when a predominant portion of the engineer
troops was working to support the actions of the rifle formations. This was partic-
ularly felt in the operations of l9b3—l94h. The chiefs of the engineer troops under

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UII'I'ILIAL USE ONLY

the tank armies in these conditions even before reaching the attack line were
forced to employ the regular and attached engineer units and this weakened the pos-

sibilities for engineer support of the army during operations in the operational
depth.

The committing of tank armies to the engagement was carried out under the
orders of the front commander. When necessary he clarified the missions for the
tank army, the situational data and the cooperation procedures with the combined-
arms armies, the artillery and aviation supporting the conmdtment to the engagement.
The tank army commander, in turn, on the basis of the instructions given by the
front commander. concretized the missions for the first echelon corps and the ques-
tions of their cooperation with the rifle formations and aviation.

The order of conndtment was determined chiefly depending upon whether the tank army
was being engaged to complete the breakthrough of the enemy tactical defensive zone
or after its breakthrough by the combined-arms armies.

In the committing of a tank army to complete the breakthrough of the enemy tactical
defensive zone. the forward detachments of the tank (mechanized) corps followed be-
hind the rifle divisions of the combined-arms army first echelon. As soon as the
rifle divisions had crossed the strongest two positions, the tank brigades went
around the infantry and completed the breakthrough of the main zone and advanced
rapidly to the second zone in the aim of taking it without a halt as well as for en-
suring the deployment of the tank army's first echelon. If the forward detachments
did not succeed in doing this, the first echelon of the tank army deployed and it
with a powerful tank attack completed the breakthrough of the enemy tactical defen-
sive zone to its entire depth. Similar actions were carried out, for example. by
the formations of the 5th Guards and lot Tank armies in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Opera-
tion.

If the commitment of the tank army was made in a so—called "clean breakthrough,"
then the army, without being involved in breaking through the enemy tactical defen-
sive zone (with the exception of its artillery), passed through the completed break-
through corridor and came out in the operational space. Keeping the reconnaissance
bodies and strong forward detachments in front, it moved behind the first echelon
rifle formations of the combined-arms armies and after these had crossed the entire
tactical zone passed by the infantry pushing deep into the enemy defenses. Such a
method was employed, for example, by the 2d Tank Army in the Lublin-Brest and
Vistula-Oder operations and by the 5th Guards Tank Army in the Vitebsk-Orsha and

East Prussian operations.

The experience of the war showed that the greatest operational effect in exploiting
an offensive operation by a front was achieved when the tank army was committed to a
so-called "clean breakthrough."

In those instances when the tank army was employed to complete a breakthrough of the
enemy tactical defensive zone, the most effective was an echelon-by-echelon commit-
ment of its forces to the engagement, that is, initially the forward brigades of the
tank (mechanized) corps for completing the breakthrough of the main defensive zone
and then the main forces for breaking through the second defensive zone. Such an
order of attack had a number of positive features. The rifle troops still maintained

110

FOR OITWCJA1.USE1ONLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sufficient attack capability to complete the formation of the breech in the most
strongly equipped zone of the tactical defensive area with comparatively little fire
and tank reinforcements; the tank (mechanized) formations, raving assigned approxi-
mately one-third of their forces to the forward detachments, were able, together with
with the infantry and CIS tanks, to defeat the last strong enemy antitank line formed
by the artillery firing positions without delaying the attack on the third position
where the enemy had not been able to prepare a solid defense and with the breaking
through of this to create favorable conditions for the main forces of the tank
(mechanized) corps to reach the second zone. This was a most important prerequisite
for breaking it through without a halt and. consequently, for developing a tactical
breakthrough into an operational one. In this regard it is essential to particular-

In committing a tank army to an engagement an effort was always made so that its
momentum of advance was a maximum. However, as combat experience showed, this
usually did not exceed 8-10 km per hour, particularly when the enemy main defensive
zone was being crossed as this was always cut up by trenches and foxholes, it was
full of enemy mixed minefields and other man~made obstacles and had a large number

of craters after the artillery and air softening up of the defenses and other ob~
stacles.

in coming out in the operational space, the actions of a tank army were character-
ized by the making of powerful tank attacks, by high maneuverability, by the broad

use of envelopments and outflankings, by the bold driving into the enemy positions
and by daring separation from the combined-arms armies.

The exploitation of the success in the operational depth was achieved by the efforts
of all the front's troops. However, in carrying out this mission the main role was

played by the tank armies and the separate tank and mechanized corps which in coop-
eration with the aviation made powerful tank attacks.

2. Pursuit

The tank armies as well as the separate tank and mechanized corps were the basic

force of the fronts in carrying out pursuit missions. In essence, they led all the
other troops.

The tank armies went over to pursuit after breaking through the enemy tactical de-
fensive zone or after the defeat of its reserves in the immediate operational depth
as well as after the unsuccessful outcome of a meeting encounter for the enemy.

The basic pursuit measures were planned along with the operation. However, the or-
gunlzntion of pursuit, the isSuing of new or supplementary, deeper missions to the
formations, the creation of the corresponding grouping of resources, the sending out

of forward detachments and the clarification of coordination questions were carried
out in the course of the commenced pursuit.

111

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
The combat missions for the tank and mechanized corps were given for 2 or 3 days and
this helped provide greater initiative among the formation commanders in conducting
pursuit. In setting the missions for the corps, the possible direction of the enemy
retreat, the dates and areas for intercepting its routes and the procedure for coop-
eration with the rifle formations and aviation were indicated.

The going over to pursuit was carried out independently by all levels of commanders
as soon as the enemy's retreat was noted but sometimes also according to orders from
superior chiefs. The most important condition for the prompt going over to pursuit
was continuous reconnaissance of the enemy for the purposes of establishing the
start of its retreat. The most characteristic features showing the start of an
enemy retreat were increased troop and motor traffic to the rear, the pulling back
of artillery, the conducting of feint counterattacks using limited forces and short
artillery shelling, increased reconnaissance and fires in the immediate enemy rear.

Pursuit started in the same configuration as the troops had been previously. The
tank armies conducted pursuit in a single- and double-echelon configuration along a
front up to 40-60 km and more. The width of the zone of pursuit for the tank and
mechanized corps was within the limits of 10-15 km. Here the gaps between the corps
frequently reached 10 km and more. Consequently, the formations in the course of
pursuit operated along individual axes without having close contact. The tank
(mechanized) brigades advanced in columns with intervals up to 5 and more kilometers.
The broad zone of operations of the tank armies and corps created conditions for
carrying out parallel pursuit. for maneuvering the resources, for outflanking cen-

ters of resistance and for coming out in the flank and rear of the basic enemy
grouping.

Parallel pursuit (Diagram 9) was the basic method of pursuit by the armored troops
in the war years. In employing it the greatest effectiveness of troop operations
was achieved in the course of pursuit. In advancing rapidly along routes parallel
to those over which the enemy was retreating, the tank and mechanized formations
created a threat to the flanks of the retreating enemy grouping, they came out on
the retreat routes of its main forces, they cut them off from approaching reserves,
they broke up. surrounded and destroyed piecemeal. Parallel pursuit made it possi-
ble to anticipate the enemy in capturing major road junctions and defensive lines,
to deprive it of convenient routes of retreat, to restrict maneuvers, to throw the
enemy back against impassable obstacles and then destroy it.

The conditions for parallel pursuit did not arise spontaneously but rather were cre-
ated by decisive and energetic actions by the tank and mechanized corps. If there
were no parallel routes for pursuit or if the roads convenient for rapid pursuit
were occupied by the enemy, then the armored formations, with the support of avia-
tion and artillery fire, by a powerful tank attack defeated the retreating enemy
units, drove them off the advantageous routes and axes and thereby created condi—
tions for parallel pursuit.

Along with parallel pursuit, frontal pursuit was also employed by a portion of the
forces, predominantly the mechanized brigades, in the aim of holding up the retreat
of the basic enemy forces, preventing them from disengaging and providing their own
main forces with an opportunity to reach the flanks of the retreating enemy group-
ing, to cut off the routes of its retreat and then by joint actions complete its

112

FIHRCHWHCJAIIUSEGDNLY
FI”!()FF1C1AI.I£5EZCMVLY

defeat. Frontal pursuit was carried out in detecting the retreat of the enemy in

direct contact with our troops. In such instances it started by an advance of the
entire battle formation.

The tank armies during the war years pursued continuously for 10-15 days to a depth
from 100—150 to 450-500 km at full strength, during the day and at night, in any
weather and under any terrain conditions. Such combat qualities as high mobility
and maneuverability were manifested most precisely in pursuit. The average daily
momentum of advance for the tank armies during pursuit in a majority of operations
was 20-50 km while the maximum was from 50-60 up to 90-100 km.

The Iasi-Kishinev and Vistula-Oder operations are instructive examples of rapid pur-
suit of the enemy by the tank armies.

In the Iasi-Kishinev Operation, the 6th Tank Army after crossing the army defensive
line pursued the enemy at an average daily pace of around 50 km and the greatest up
to 70 km. As a result of such rapid pursuit, the enemy was unable to regroup and to
bring up from the rear operational reserves capable of impeding the advance of our
troops while the tank army without halting captured the crossings over the Seret
River to the southeast of Pocsani then took Focsani and the oil fields at Poiesti.

In the Vistula-Oder Operation, due to the high maneuverability and speed of advance
in the operational depth by the let, 2d, 3d and 6th Guards Tank armies and by their
skillful actions, the enemy was always anticipated in occupying the numerous lines
prepared between the Vistula and the Oder, it was unable to organize defenses at a
single one and was destroyed piecemeal. The average rate of pursuit for the 2d
Guards Tank Army was around 50 km per day while in individual days this reached

90 km. Having crossed the fortifications of the Pomeranian Rampart without a halt,
the forward detachments of the army from the I Mechanized Corps of Gen 8. H.

of advance of the First Belorussian Front, they had cleared the enemy troops basi-
cally out of all the territory to the east of the Oder River. Crossing to the cap-
tured bridgeheads, the formations fought to widen them.

impossible to describe everything that occurred between the Vistula and the Oder

during the first months of 1945. Europe has known nothing similar since the time of
the fall of the Roman Empire.”0

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In pursuing the enemy at a rapid pace to a great depth, the tank armies most often
operated a significant distance away from the combined-arms armies (Table 12).

Table 12

Distance Between Tank Armies and Combined-Arms Armies
in Certain Operations

 
 

Distance of Tank
Armies from
Combined-Arms
Ones, km

 
  
 

   
 

Operation

        
     
   
   
    

Belgorod-Khar'kov (August 1943) 1 TA and 5 GTA 25-40
Kiev (October-November 1943) 3 GT1 15-20
Uman'-Botosani (March-April 1944) 2 TA, 5 GTA, 6 TA 15-30
Lwow-Sandomierz (July-August 1944) 3 GTA 30-60
Iasi-Kishinev (August 1944) 6 TA 60-70
Viatula-Oder (January-February 1945) 1 GTA, 2 GTA 60-90
3 GTA. 4 TA 40-60
Prague (Hay 1945) 3 GTA, 4 GTA 80-100

 

It must be pointed out that not only the tank armies as a whole operated in isola-
tion but also their formations did too. Thus, the corps of the 2d Guards Tank Army
conducted pursuit away from the army's main forces: the IX Guards Tank Corps up to
45 km away in the Lublin-Brest Operation and up to 50 km in the Pomeranian; the XII
Guards Tank Corps up to 100 km in the Viatuls-Oder Operation. In the 3d Guards Tank
Army in the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation, individual corps were 40-50 km away, and in
the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Budapest Operation, 25 km away. An analogous situa-
tion was also observed in the other tank armies in pursuing the enemy in the opera-
tional depth.

The rapid actions of the tank armies in corps in isolation from the remaining forces
made it possible to make a strong tank attack, to anticipate the enemy in reaching
prepared defensive lines in depth. to intercept the lines of communication, to de-
feat approaching reaerves piecemeal, to disorganise the enemy rear and thereby have
a decisive influence on the achieving of success in the front operation as a whole.
At the same time under such conditions the tank armies had to conduct combat opera-
tions with exposed flanks and rear.

In pursuit by the tank armies, an important role was played by the forward detach-

ments. An analysis of their composition and purpose in 31 offensive operations by
tank armies indicates that the army commander was the basic organizer in employing

the forward detachments as in 21 cases (70 percent) they were assigned upon his de-
cision.

Strength of the forward detachments increased year after year. while in the 1943
operations, at best a tank brigade reinforced by a combat engineer company was as-
signed as a forward detachment, in 1944-1945. there usually were a tank brigade. an
SAU regiment, an antiaircraft artillery regiment, a battalion of a cannon (howitzer)
regiment and a company of a combat engineer battalion. Such a forward detachment

114

FOIIOFFRJAI.USEIHVLY
FYHICﬂHWCJAl.USEGMVLY

was capable of operating independently a significant distance away from the main
forces and successfully carry out missions in the course of pursuit.

Considering the effective combat strength, the depth of the missions for the for-
ward detachments also increased from 35-40 up to 160-170 km (the forward detachment
of the III Tank Corps of the 5th Guards Tank Army in the Belorussian Operation).3x
Their distance from the main forces, instead of 15-20 km (the Belgorod-Khar'kov
Operation) began to reach 40-50 km (Lwow-Sandomierz and Vistula—Oder operations) and
even 80-100 km (the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Proskurov-Chernotsy Operation and the
6th Guards Tank Army in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation).32

In organizing the combat operations of the forward detachments, the army commander
and staff carried out a significant amount of work. If they were assigned from the

corps, then the army commander determined the jump-off area or line from which the
forward detachments would begin to carry out their missions, the composition and
missions for l or 2 days of the operation and in a number of instances to the depth
of the entire operation and the time for commencing combat operations. In accord
with the received instructions, the corps commanders carried out the numediate prep-
station of the detachments and set the assembly areas for the units and subunits to
be involved in them, the time to be ready to go, the control signals and the methods
of maintaining contact. In those instances when the forward detachments were as-
signed from army formations (units), the army staff not only gave them their mis-
sions but also carried out their concrete preparation for combat operations as well
as control over them in the course of the offensive. In a number of operations army
staff representatives performed the duties of detachment chief of staff while offi-
cers from the political section became the forward detachment deputy commanders for
political affairs.33 In individual operations, a forward detachment was headed by
the chief of the army operations section (deputy chief of staff). For example, the
deputy chief of staff of the 3d Guards Tank Army, Gen A. I. Ziberov, directed the
Combat operations of the army forward detachment in the course of the Prague Opera-
tion. In having army communications and a group of officers from the operations
section of the army staff, he was able, while remaining 60-80 km away from the army‘s

main forces, to maintain constant contact with the commander and at the same time
carry out reconnaissance missions.3“

The actions of the forward detachments were characterised by the fact that they,
without becoming involved in extended engagements with the enemy, boldly skirted its
centers of resistance, came out on the escape routes of the main enemy forces.
seized the designated objectives, primarily crossings, fords, bridgeheads, road
junctions and airfields, while in certain operations (the Vistula-Oder) they also
crossed fortified areas in the operational depth.

Thus, in the course of the Vistula-Oder Operation, the 46th Guards Tank Brigade (the
XI Guards Tank Corps, the 1st Guards Tank Army) moved off from the army's main
forces and by 2000 hours on 29 January 1945 had reached Hochwalde, a strongpoint of
the Neseritz Fortified Area. In conducting reconnaissance and detecting passage-
ways through the enemy fortifications, the brigade commander, Col 1. I. Gusakovskiy
(now army general) decided, without waiting for the arrival of the main forces, to
cross this line without a halt and to reach the Oder River. The brigade in a rush
and without losses crossed the fortified area and, without encountering serious
enemy resistance, by 0300 hours on 30 January reached the area of Mahlsow. Having

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

driven off all the enemy attacks during the night of 2 February, it crossed the Oder
River, captured a bridgehead on its right bank and held it until the approach of the
main forces. For exceptional courage and valor all the personnel of the brigade was

awarded orders and medals while 11 soldiers and officers received the title of Hero
of the Soviet Union. The brigade's commander received his second Gold Star.35

The speed of pursuit was directly dependent on its continuity. For this purpose,

in a number of operations, the forward detachments fighting on a certain sector were
periodically replaced. For-example, in the course of the Vistula-Oder Operation, in
the VII Guards Tank Corps of the 3d Guards Tank Army, such a replacement was made
five times from the period from lb through 24 January. The continuous actions of a
tank (mechanized) brigade as part of a forward detachment were 2 or 3 days.36 In
the I Mechanized Corps of the 2d Guards Tank Army, the forward detachments were
changed six times every 1-4 days from 18 through 30 January.37

It must be emphasized that the greatest success in pursuit was achieved with the
skillful use of nighttime conditions for conducting it. Darkness ensured the
secrecy and surprise of operations by the tank and mechanized formations and was
used to capture important lines and objectives on the move. however, the complex
nighttime conditions demanded great skill from the commanders in organizing and lead-
ing combat while the troops had to show great skill in making surprise and hold at-
tacks under the cover of darkness. The Great Patriotic War is rich in the experi-
ence of such combat operations by armored troops. Thus, in the course of the
Vistula-Odar Operation, the forward detachment of the 1x Guards Tank Corps of the

2d Guards Tank Army, the 47th Guards Tank Brigade, with reinforcements under the
command of Col N. V. Kopylov, by a surprise night attack captured the town of Gruec
and by 2400 hours on 16 January had initiated combat for Sochaczew, having cut off
the escape routes for the enemy out of Warsaw to the west. In operating predomi-
nantly at night, the brigade had fought up to 90 km in a day. Analogously the X
Guards Tank Corps of the 4th Guards Tank Army during the night of 21 January reached
the approaches of Schilberg. Breaking into the town and destroying the enemy garri-
son, it captured an important road junction on the way to the Oder. a

In carrying out the missions of pursuing the enemy, particularly by the tank army
main forces, of important significance was well-organized cooperation between the
ground forces and the aviation, the basic missions of which in this stage of an
operation were to conduct air reconnaissance, support the offensive, combat enemy
reserves, attack retreating enemy troops and approaching reserves, prevent them from
occupying the rear lines and to cover the tank (mechanized) formations against enemy
air strikes. As a rule, the actions of the tank armies were supported by one ground
attack corps and one fighter air corps acting under the army commanders. The de-
pendable air support made it possible for the main forces of the field forces and
formations to form up in a march formation and advance rapidly.

As a whole the experience of the Great Patriotic War showed that the characteristic
traits in the operations of tank armies during pursuit were: speed and a high aver-
age daily momentum of advance, a great depth and broad front of the zone of pursuit,
dynamicness of combat and speed in implementing maneuvers, a great length of the
rear services and lines of communications which necessitated particular concern for
the organizing of logistical support.

116

FINICNHH€1A1.USEGMVLY
The effectiveness of pursuit was achieved by its decisiveness. activeness, continu-
ity, by skillful maneuvering in bypassing centers of resistance and strongpoints, by
close cooperation among ell the branches of troops as well as by the constant con-
duct of all types of reconnaissance and by skillful actions of the forward detach-

Inc’s

High mobility, fire power and strike force of the tank armies made it possible for
them, in operating ahead of the front's main forces, to rapidly break through to the
enemy rear, to reach its routes of retreat, to get the jump on the enemy in captur—
ing major objectives and lines, to isolate reserves coming up from the rear and to
thwart the enemy's attempts to disengage and escape from the blow of our basic
forces.

In carrying out the missions of defeating the enemy in the operational depth. the
tank army troops had to carry out pursuit in crossing water barriers. capture large
pepulation points and operate not only during the day but also at night. Conse-
quently, pursuit in essence during the war years was an aggregate of diverse methods
‘of combat operations in which the main place was held by rapid advances combined '
with the making of powerful tank attacks against the retreating enemy and its re-
serves.

3. The Conduct of Meeting Encounters

In the course of developing offensive operations, one of the most important tasks
which had to be carried Out by the tank armies in cooperation with the aviation and
all branches of troops was the countering of enemy operational reserves. To a de-
cisive degree the course and outcome of the offensive operations by the tank aries
as a whole depended upon how successfully this mission was carried out. The defeat
of the enemy in a meeting encounter was one of the methods of carrying this out.

Meeting encOunters by tank armies during the years of the Great Patriotic War arose,
as a rule, on the axes of the main thrusts of the fronts, during the most crucial
moments of operations and in various stages of conducting them, from the start of
the operation, in the course of its development or in the concluding stage.

At the start of an operation, the meeting encounters occurred in completing the
breakthrough of the enemy tactical defensive zone by the tank armies or directly
after crossing it, when the enemy by committing the immediate operational reserves
to the engagement endeavored to restore the initial position. One of the character-
istic examples of a meeting encounter which arose under such conditions was the en-
gagement of the 6th Tank Army with the enemy XXIV Tank Corps in the area of Kielce.
This corps consisting of the 16th and 17th Tank Divisions and the 20th Motorized
Division (a total of around 360 tanks), in being in the operational reserve of Army
Group A, was given the mission on the morning of 13 January 1965, that is, on the
second day of the operation, to make a counterstrike, to destroy the troop grouping
of the First Ukrainian Front which had broken through and recover the previously
held position. During the night of 13 January, the corps' divisions began to move
forward to the deployment line. At the same time, the forward detachments from the
corps of the hth Tank Army. in reaching the second enemy defensive zone. crossed it
without a halt and at dawn of 13 January met the forward units of the XXIV Tank
Corps which was moving up for the counterstrike. The meeting encounter developed in
the region to the south of Kielce.

117

INDR‘OFFICJAI.lﬂﬂE(MVLH
PW UI‘I'ILIAL 030. URL!

The forward detachments from the first echelon corps, the 16th Guards Hechanized
Brigade and the 63d Guards Tank Brigade. in operating in an unclear situation, were
covered by a portion of the forces from the front but with the main forces maneuver-
ed and attacked the enemy in the flank and rear. By bold and decisive actions, they
thwarted the organized reaching of the designated deployment line by the formations
of the XXIV Tank Corps. The enemy was forced to engage its main forces to the en-
counter not simultaneously but successively. The commander of the 4th Tank Army,
Gen D. D. Lelyushenko, having assessed the existing situation, determined, in cover-
ing himself with two brigades from the front, to make a pincer movement around the

Tank Corps from the 3d Guards Tank Army, to make simultaneously attacks against both
its flanks.39 Having carried out the maneuver. the guardsmen of the X Tank Corps

and the VI Mechanized Corps made flank attacks against the enemy 17th Tank Division
which after a fierce battle by the end of 13 January had been routed. with the ap—
proach of the 16th Tank Division to the battlefield. it also was tied down by a por-
tion of the forces (by the 69th Mechanized Brigade) from the front in the area of
Radomice. But the main forces of the 6th Tank Army on 14 January attacked the right
flank of the enemy 16th Tank Division. 0n the following day the remnants of the
XXIV Tank Corps were surrounded and.destroyed in the area to the south of Kielce.

Thus. in the course of a fierce tank meeting encounter which lasted around 28 days,
the enemy counterstrike grouping consisting of three divisions was defeated. The
enemy lost up to 180 tanks and assault guns while the formations of the 4th Tank
Army lost around 130 tanks and SAU.“°

aided by the troops on the left wing of the First Ukrainian Front which successfully
developed an offensive on the Krakow axis, and particularly the troops of the First

Belorussian Front which, at the very peak of the meeting encounter. on 16 January
made a powerful attack against the enemy from the Magnuszew and Pulawy bridgeheads.

For repelling the offensive by the‘Soviet troop attack groupings, the Nazi Command
was forced to commit the remaining reserves to the engagement and could not provide

any help to its counterstrike grouping operating in the area of Kielce.

also rather large mobile reserves.§.. The front of the 4th Tank Army was broken in-
to parts...the enemy tank formations,..undertook a pincer maneuver against l<ielce."“l

The meeting encounter at Xielce arose in completing the breakthrough of the enemy
tactical defensive zone under conditions where both sides were endeavoring to carry
out the set missions by an offensise. The engagement was initiated by actions of
the forward detachments with the subsequent entry of the main forces into it. The
army connander made his plan with limited time available and under the conditions of
an insufficiently clear situation. For the successful outcome of the meeting en-
counter. of important significance was speed in deploying the tank army Iain forces,

ment. The defeat of the enemy counterstrike grouping was carried out piecemeal, by
attacking the enemy flanks and tying down its grouping by a portion of the army's

forces from the front. Such a method of action led to the breaking up of the enemy
formations and to their encirclement and destruction in isolated areas.

118

FIIICHHWCIAI.IEHECH§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Meeting encounters by tank armies in the course of the development of an operation
arose also in their offensives in the operational depth, when they encountered
counterstriking enemy operational reserves, mainly tank reserves (the meeting en-
counters of the 3d Guards Tank Army in the area of Fastov in November 1943 and the
5th Guards Tank Army on the Bohr River in June 1944).

Thus, the 3d Guards Tank Army, in developing_an offensive on the general axis

toward Belaya Tserkov'. in the area of Fastov encountered the XLVIII Tank

Corps which had made a counterstrike. This corps had the mission in cooperation
with the VII Army Corps to cut off a grouping of the First Ukrainian Front which

had broken through in the area of Fastov, to defeat it and restore the situation

on the given sector of the front. The meeting encounter started up on 7 November
1943 with a clash of the forward detachment from the VII Guards Tank Corps, the

54th Guards Tank Brigade, with the forward detachments of the German 25th Tank
Division in the area of Pastovets. In the course of the ensuing meeting engagement.
the 54th Guards Tank Brigade defeated the enemy but was unable to exploit the suc-
cess due to the fuel shortage. Benefiting from this, the enemy endeavored by active
operations of the forward units to tie down the troops of the 3d Guards Tank Army in
the Fastov area and gain time needed for it to bring up and deploy its main forces.
0n 8 November fierce battles raged all day long in the Fastov area. Gen P. S.
Rybalko committed his second echelon, the IX Mechanized Corps, to the engagement in
attacking the left flank of the enemy counterstrike grouping. Initially the attack
by the mechanized corps developed successfully but then the enemy command brought up
fresh forces, the SS Tank Division Adolf Hitler and halted the further advance of
the corps. During this time the enemy completed the deployment of its main forces
and on the morning of 9 November from the line of Trileay, Gribenki attacked the
left flank of the 3d Guards Tank Army. After a stubborn battle, the tank army's
troops were forced to go over to the offensive.

Thus, the untimely use of the achieved success by the forward detachments did not
make it possible for the tank army to commence the meeting encounter under condi-
tions favorable to itself. The result of this was the temporary loss of initiative
and the going over of the army to the offensive, although the enemy was unable to
also achieve its set goals.

Meeting encounters in the concluding stage of an operation (the lat Tank Army at
Bogodukhov and the 4th Tank Army on the Oder River) were initiated under conditions
when the enemy by committing its deep operational reserves endeavored to halt the

offensive by the tank armies which had significantly already exhausted their offen-
sive capabilities but were endeavoring to still take an advantageous line.

For example, the let Tank Army on 10 August 1963, in having 260 tanks in service,
began an offensive around Khar'kov and in the area to the south of Bogodukhov en—
countered a counterstrike by the enemy III Tank Corps (around 360 tanks). The ac-
tions of this corps were aimed at cutting off the lat Tank Army which had become
separated from the front's main forces, to defeat it in the area to the south of
Bogodukhov and ensure communications with its Khar'kov grouping from the west. The
meeting encounter started on 11 August by a clash of the forward brigades of the

let Tank Army (the 49th, 112th and 1st Guards Tank brigades) with the forward units
of the enemy ill Tank Corps which had moved up to the deployment line. The forward
brigades of the lat Tank Army had reached the line of the Khar'kov-—Poltava Railroad

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in running ahead of the main forces of the corps by about 20 km. They cut the rail-
road and seized an advantageous line but under the enemy attack went over to the
defensive. Their success was not supported by the main forces of the corps as they
had been stopped by the enemy on the Herchik River. '

The Nazi Command threw tank units from the SS Tank Division Death Head which had
arrived from the south against the forward detachments. The heavy and stubborn
battles lasted all day. The personnel of the forward detachments fought heroically
but the forces were unequal. By superior forces the enemy succeeded in encircling
our forward detachments in the area of Kovyagi and during the night of 12 August
they were forced to break out to link up with the main forces of the corps.

Thus. the success achieved by the forward brigades of the tank army was not promptly
utilized by the main forces and this predetermined the unsuccessful initiating of
the meeting encounter. By the morning of 12 August, the enemy had completed the de-
ployment of its main forces and made a counterstrike against the 1st Tank Army which
had gone over to the offensive and which now had only 134 tanks in service. As a
result of the meeting encounter which developed in an area to the south of Bogo-
dukhov, the lat Tank Army, although it had halted the enemy, was unable to defeat it
and during the night of 14 August was forced to go over to the offensive.

Meeting encounters by tank armies in the course of offensive operations occurred at
varying depth from the previous forward enemy defensive edge, they developed along a
front from 20-60 km and lasted 1-3 days and sometimes longer (Table 13).

Table 13
Certain Indicators of Tank Army Meeting Encounters
"‘ On what
Operation, Depth of day of Encounter Length of
area of meeting encounter Army encounter, operation front, encounter,
km encounter km days
started

Belgorod-Khar'kov

(Aug 1943), Bogodukhov 1 TA 100-130 9 40 3
Kiev (Nov 1943). Fastov 3 GTA 70-75 S 35 4
Proskurov-Chernovtsy

(Mar 1944), Proskurov 3 GTA 50-60 3 60 5
Belorussian (Jun 1944),

Bobr River 5 GTA 120 4 20 1
Vistula-Oder (Jan 1945),

Kielce 4 TA 20 2 20 2.5
Vistula-Oder (Jan 1945),

Oder River 4 TA 335-345 17 40 3
East Prussian (Jan 1945),

Wormditt 5 GTA 160-175 19 4O 2

From Table 13 it can be seen that the meeting encounters in the development of the
offensive in the operational depth arose at a depth from 20 to 345 km on the 2d-Sth

120

FOR10FFKJA1.USE(MNLY
and even on the l7th-l9th day after the start of the front operation. Under such
conditions the tank armies had to carry out their missions in a very difficult situa-
tion, including: away from the front's main forces, having an operational configura—
tion extended along the front and in depth, below strength in terms of personnel,
equipment and weapons, and in a number of instances with insufficient air support.
However, regardless of the complexity of the situation, in a majority of the meeting
encounters the tank armies achieved the set goals. 0f the seven examples given in
the table, in two encounters (in the area 6f Kielce and on the Bohr River), the
enemy was completely defeated, in three it suffered heavy casualties and went over to
the defensive (in the region of Proskurov, Hormditt and on the Oder River) and only
in two (in the region of Bogodukhov and Pastov) did the tank army temporarily go
over to the defensive because of an unfavorably developing situation.

The meeting encounters of the tank armies were characterized by great dynamicness,
maneuverability, by decisiveness of combat actions, by the presence of exposed
flanks and significant intervals and by frequent reciprocal breaking in by the as-
sault groupings. The fluid conditions of combat contributed to the employment of
envelopments and outflankings of the enemy flanks and the reaching of its rear.
Combat operations aSSumed the most diverse nature. At the same time that the basic
tank army grouping was conducting a meeting encounter, its individual formations
were on the defensive. others were retreating, regrouping or were still just advanc-
ing to the battlefield. Consequently. a meeting encounter included a whole complex

of diverse combat operations which occurred under an exceptionally complicated and
rapidly changing situation.

One of the particular features of the meeting encounters of tank armies was that
they were conducted regardless of the season or time of day. Thus, the meeting en-
counter of the 3d Guards Tank Army at Proskurov occurred under the conditions of a
heavy snowfall, the 3d Guards Tank Army at Fastov fought under nighttime conditions
in the course of the meeting encounter, as did the 5th Guards Tank Army on the Bohr
River and at Hormditt and the 4th Tank Army at Kielce and on the Oder River.

In a majority of the meeting encounters, both sides participated with from 500 and
more tanks and SAU, up to 1,500 guns and mortars and a significant amount of avia-

tion. They were organized in a limited time (from 3-4 hours up to a day) and under
a difficult and tense situation.

This diffiCulty was caused by the fact that the tank armies, prior to entering the
meeting encounter, were usually carrying out their previously set missions, and as

a consequence of this their grouping had already been formed in the interests of
carrying out precisely these missions and did not always meet the situation which
existed with the initiating of the meeting encounter. Under these conditions, the
organization of the meeting encounters was virtually carried out in the course of
their initiation, with an acute lack of time, when an entire range of organizational
questions was being carried Out simultaneously with the incipient combat operations.

or particularly important significance in organizing the meeting encounters were the
measures carried out ahead of time. The most important of these were: determining
the area of the probable meeting encounter, the organization and conduct of active,
deep and continuous reconnaissance, the creation of the necessary group of resources,
the dependable covering of one's troops against enemy air strikes and carrying out

121

FOR 0FF1CJA[.USE10NLY
I'D“ UFHLIAL USE URL!

the necessary measures for rear support. The prompt implementing of these measures
made it possible to significantly shorten the time required to organize the meeting
encounters and to anticipate the enemy in actions. This depended upon the opera-
tional foresight of the tank army commands.

The experience of the conducted meeting encounters showed that the basic conditions
for successfully defeating the enemy were: the prompt receipt of data about the
enemy, the speed of adopting a plan and issuing it to the troops, anticipating the
enemy in making air strikes, in opening artillery fire, in deploying and attacking
by the armored formations in the flank and rear of the basic enemy grouping, speed
and decisiveneas in troop actions. All of this was organically linked to a lead in
creating decisive superiority over the enemy in resources in the sector of the
strikes and primarily in the main sector.

In the meeting encounters which occurred in the course of developing an offensive,

a particularly important role was played by the forward detachments of the army
corps. Their composition varied. The tank (mechanized) brigade comprised the basis
of a corps' forward detachment. It was reinforced with self-propelled, field and
antiaircraft artillery, engineer and other subunits (Table 14).

Table 14
Composition of Forward Detachments in Initiating Meeting Encounters

   
     
     
   
 
 

Brigade assigned
as forward
detachment

Areas of

Reinforcements
encounter

     

Bogodukhov Two batteries of the 35th Tank Kill-

ing Art: Reg., Art. Battalion of the
265 Art. Reg., Antiaircraft Battery,
sapr

   
  
      
    
      
  

l‘l'A, XXXI TC

  

Fastov 3 GTA, VII GHC 1419 sap, sapr
Bobr River 5 GTA,
XXIX TC 31 tbr 1223 sap, company of 16 guards ttp,
battery of 678 rocket reg., 916 zenap,
75 omtsb, 2 sapr
5 GTA,III GTC l9 gtbr 1&36 sap, battery of 376 tsap, 1701
zenap, 10 omtsb, combat engr. bat.
Kiclce 4 TA,X GTC 63 gtbr 72 ttp (without company), art. bat.

of 1689 light art. reg., 2 art. bat.
of 359 guards zenap, sapr
l6 gtbr 2 companies of 28 ttp, bat. of 1433
sap, art. bat. of 258 light art. reg.,
art. bar. of 260 mortar reg., 2 anti-
aircraft bat., sapr
3 GTA,VI GTC Sl gtbr 1893 sap, bat. of 385 tsap, sapr,
eng.-bridge company
[Keyz TA—-tank army; TC--tank corps; GTA--guards tank army; GHC--guards mechanized
corps; GTC--guards tank corps; tbr--tank brigade; gtbr--guards tank brigade;
sapr--combat engineer company; aap--self-propelled artillery regiment; zenap-—
antiaircraft artillery regiment; omtSb—-separate motorcycle battalion; ttp--
heavy tank regiment; tsap--heavy self-propelled artillery regiment.]

10 TA, VI OK:

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The strong forward detachments possessed sufficient independence in conducting com-
bat operations. Supported by artillery fire and aviation, they boldly attacked the
enemy troops, they daringly penetrated their battle formations, defeated them, cap-
tured tactically advantageous lines, seized the initiative, forced the enemy to de-

ploy prematurely and created favorable conditions for committing the main forces to
the engagement.

If the forward detachments did not succeed in capturing the designated lines, they

actively checked the superior enemy forces on the following advantageous lines, sup-
porting the deployment and commitment of the main forces to the engagement (the en-
gagements of the lat Tank Army at Bogodukhov and the 3d Guards Tank Army at Fastov).

The success of the further conduct of the meeting encounter depended largely upon
the decisive actions of the forward detachments promptly supported by the army's
main forces. Conversely, any delay in exploiting the success achieved by the for-
ward detachments led to a temporary or complete loss of the initiative seized by

them (the meeting encounters of the lat Tank Army at Bogodukhov and the 3d Guards
Tank Army at Fastov).

In a number of meeting encounters, the tank armies made frontal strikes for the pur-
pose of splitting the opposing enemy grouping into parts and rapidly advancing in
depth. Such a method did not require additional time for maneuvering or for creat-
ing the necessary grouping of men and equipment and ensured the most effective use
of the results by the artillery fire strikes. However, the employment of this meth-
od in all instances required the creation of strong superiority in men and equipment
over the enemy in the selected sector. Frontal strikes were made in the meeting

encounters of the lst Tank Army at Bogodukhov and Akhtyrka, the 3d Guards Tank Army
at Fastov and the 5th Guards Tank Army in the area of Wormditt.

In . majority of meeting encounters, particularly when they developed in the enemy's
operational depth and were carried out along a broad front, there was a combination
of various forms and methods of actions (the 4th Tank Army at Proskurov, on the Oder
River and so forth). In such a situation the tank armies often had to fight several
enemy groupings which differed in importance and for defeating each of these they
employed that method which best conformed to the conditions of the specific situa-
tion.

Aviation played a major role in the successful conduct of meeting encounters. Sig-
nificant forces of an air army were concentrated for supporting the tank armies.
The basic indicators for its activities are given in Table 15.

From Table 15 it can be seen that in a short period of time the air formations were
able to make a rather large number of aorties. By attacking approaching enemy re-
serves nt the moment of their deployment during the period of the air softening-up
and the support for the attack, aviation contributed to the achieving of success in
the meeting encounters. In a majority of them it covered the troops on the battle-
field and their rears against air strikes.

Air support for the tank troops was particularly effective in the meeting encounters
arising at the start of offensive operations, when cooperation with the ground
troops had not yet been disrupted and the air resources had not been expended. The

123

FOR OFIHCJAl.lEH!(ﬂVLY
F0I10FFKJAI.USE(MﬁLY

Table 15
Air Support for Tank Armies in ﬂeeting Encounters*

_____________—_____—_———————————————-———

Sorties made
during encounter

 
   

Operation, Army,
Time of Encounter

 

Supporting Air Formations

Per Day
(average)
Belgorod-Khar'kov, 1 TA, 2 AA, portion of forces of
11-14 Aug 1943 17 AA and long-range
aviation 116
Belgorod-Khar'kov, 0 GA, 1 TA,
18-20 Aug 1963 2 AA 850
Proskurov-Chernovtsy, 3 GTA,
6-11 Mar 1946 5 shsk of 2 AA 14
Vistula-Oder, a TA, 13-16 Jan 1945 2 Guards shak, 2 iak of 2 AA 692
East Prussian, 48 A, 5 GTA, 0 shak, 8 iak of A AA 14

27-31 Jan 1945

Notes: 1. In the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation only the sorties of the 2 AA
on the entire front are given. Strikes during the first day of the
encounter (620 aorties) were made in the zones of the armies on the
front's right wing.

2. In the Proakurov-Chernovtay Operation air operations were
restricted due to bad weather.

[Key: TAP-tank army, GTA--guards tank army; AA-air army; shak—-ground
attack air corps; iak-fighter air corps.)

*VOYENNO-ISTORICHBSKIY ZHURNAL. No b, 1973, p 27.

conditions for air support for the troops in encounters starting in the course of
the offensive's development, particularly in the concluding stages of operations,
deteriorated sharply as a consequence of the delays in rebasing the aviation behind
the advancing troops, due to the shortage of available flying time and the necessity
of moving or creating new control posts. Because of this air support for troops sn-
gaged in a meeting encounter was often delayed. This was felt particularly sharply
by the forward detachments which aviation was unable to support.

Starting in mid-1944, when air representatives were present at the command posts of
the armies and their formations and guidance officers were in the forward detach-
ments, an opportunity appeared for more effectively giving the aviation new missions,
adjusting them, and retsrgeting the aircraft in the air in accord with the develop-
ing situation. Air support for the meeting encounters in these instances was signif-
icantly improved. Strikes against enemy reserves were most rationally combined with

close support for the troops on the battlefield. This was largely aided also by the
increased combat capabilities of our aviation.

124

INDITOFiICIAI.lﬂHE(ﬂ¢LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the meeting encounters conducted by the tank armies during the war years de-

manded great art in conducting them by the commanders and staffs and skill from the
Soviet tank troops. The bases for successful operations were established even in
preparing for the operations and they were ensured by the high ability to foresee the
nature of the encounters, by the effectiveness of troop control, by the skillful use
of all and primarily the most mobile resources capable of anticipating the enemy in
deployment as well as by highly effective air and artillery actions.

The success of the encounter often depended upon the rapid and skillful maneuvering
of the men and equipment from one sector to another. For a majority of the meeting
encounters there was the characteristic employment of exposed or poorly defended
flanks by the sides for the purposes of widely employing outflankings and envelop-
ments. In the course of the Great Patriotic War the meeting encounters by the tank
armies most often arose during the most crucial moments of front operations on the
main sectors. Their outcome for this reason had a decisive impact on the further
development of the front offensive operations and frequently predetermined their end
results.

6. Crossing Intermediate Defensive Lines and Maneuvering in the Operational Depth

The development of an offensive by tank armies in the operational depth during the
years of the Great Patriotic War involved the crossing of a number of intermediate
defensive enemy lines and broad maneuvering.

Intermediate defensive lines were prepared by the enemy starting in 1943 ahead of
time and in the course of combat operations they were occupied by troops which had
retreated after the loss of the basic defensive zone or by reserves brought up from
the rear or by both together. In many instances the enemy was forced to go over to
the defensive on unequipped lines endeavoring to gain time, to check the advance of
our troops and avoid complete defeat. Under such conditions the going over to the
defensive by the enemy was carried out hurriedly and for this reason its defenses
were characterized by poor development or the absence of engineer-designed struc-

tures as well as by an insufficiently developed system of antitank and antiinfantry
file.

This particular feature of enemy defenses on intermediate lines in the operational
depth necessitated the breaking through of them without a halt so as not to permit
the enemy to gain time for reinforcing its defenses. The maneuvering of the tank
forces for attacking in the flank and rear of enemy groupings provided a positive
result. Forward detachments and tank—borne infantry were widely employed for quick-
»v seizing advantageous sections of defensive lines and strongpoints. In penetrat-
Iﬂﬂ the enemy defenses, they impeded their organized occupying by retreating troops.
Combat operations to cross the intermediate defensive lines were carried out not
only during the day but also at night.

During actions in the operational depth, the tank armies frequently had to break
through independently the hurriedly organized enemy defenses on intermediate lines.
Thus, in the course of the Lublin-Brest Operation, the comnander of the First Belo-
russian Front, Nar SU K. K. Rokossovskiy, gave the 2d Tank Army the mission of cap-
turing the area of Deblin and Pulawy, seizing the crossings over the Vistula River
and subsequently developing the success in the direction of Harsaw (Diagram 11).

125

FOR OFTHCJAL USEZCMULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In carrying out the given mission. the army by the end of 25 July 1964 had reached
the eastern bank of the Vistula River on a front 20 km wide having captured the old
Polish fortresses of Deblin and Pulawy without a halt. However. the enemy had suc-
ceeded in blowing up the crossings over the river and in the aim of covering the
approaches to Warsaw had begun to hurriedly shift its reserves from the western
banks of the Vistula River to the area of Praga (a Warsaw suburb). Considering the
developing situation, the front's commander adjusted the army's mission ordering it
to turn from the west to the north and in advancing along the highway in the general
direction of Garwolin and Praga, to capture the suburbs of the Polish capital. seiz-
ing the crossing over the Vistula River in this area."2

In carrying out the instructions of Mar SU K. K. Rokossovskiy, the commander of the
2d Tank Army decided to leave the XVI Tank Corps on the Vistula River until it was
relieved by the approaching combined-arms formations and to advance in a westerly
axis with the forces of two tank corps (the III and VIII Guards). The XVI Tank
Corps after relief was to follow the VIII Guards Tank Corps ready to enter the en-
gagement on the approaches to warsaw. A tank brigade, an army tank killing brigade
and a rocket regiment were assigned as the army's reserve in order to repel enemy
flank attacks if necessary.

In developing the offensive toward Garwolin and Praga, the army twice had to inde-
pendently pierce the enemy defenses which had been hurriedly occupied by enemy
troops. For example, the line Stoczek, Garwolin which was defended only by the for—
ward detachments of the enemy reserves which had been brought up was pierced on

27 July without a halt along a broad front (29 km) by the forces of the forward de-
tachments and the advance brigades of the tank corps without artillery softening up
and the deployment of the main forces. But the line of Siennica. Karczew (on the
near approaches to Warsaw) occupied by the main forces of the enemy reserves which
could not be pierced without a halt was crossed with the quick preparation for an
attack (up to 10 hours were spent on the preparation). The breakthrough was carried
out by the tank corps on three independent sectors and this led to the splitting up
of the opposing Nazi forces and their annihilation piecemeal.“3

Equally characteristic were the actions of the 2d Guards Tank Army in breaking
through the intermediate defensive enemy lines without a halt in the Vistula—Oder
Operation. Between the Vistula and the Oder, to a depth of up to 500 km. the Nazi
Command had prepared seven defensive lines equipped with strong field works and anti-
tank obstacles. The major population points and road junctions had been turned into
strongpoints. The numerous rivers and canals which cut the routes running from east
to west were also difficult natural obstacles for the tanks.

The army, in having an operational configuration of two echelons (two corps in the
first echelon and one in the second). from the morning of 16 January 1945, was com-
mitted to the breech in the zone of the 5th Assault Army under Gen N. E. Berzarin.
The attack was carried out from the line of the Pilica River for the purposes of ex-
ploiting the success. Forward detachments from each corps of the army's first eche-
Ion were assigned to capture the lines which had been prepared deep in the enemy de-
fenses. These detachments had the mission, without initiating engagements for major
strongpoints, to advance rapidly, to anticipate the pull-back of the enemy to the
prepared lines, to cut its lines of communications. creating the threat of encircle-
ment, and thereby forcing the enemy to retreat.

126

IN3I‘OFINCIAI.IEHE(MVLY
In the aim of promptly rebasing the aviation and providing dependable cooperation
with it, the troops of the 2d Guards Tank Army without halting seized enemy air-
fields and readied them for the aviation. For example, the 66th Guards Tank Bri-
gade from the XII Guards Tank Corps captured an airfield and 62 working enemy air-
craft in the town of Luben while the 67th Guards Tank Brigade on 17 January 1955 by
a surprise attack captured an enemy airfield in the area of Sochaczew where the
265th Fighter Air Division was immediately rebased.““ The battles were drawing
ever-closer and enemy groups bypassed by the tank troops wandered everywhere. For
this reason for defending the airfield a tank battalion was assigned and it remained
until the arrival of the rifle divisions.

The experience of the breakthrough of intermediate defensive lines by the tank
armies showed that success was ensured primarily by effective reconnaissance, by the
prompt detection of weak points in enemy defenses, by decisive actions of the for-
ward detachments, by the massed use of men and equipment in selected sectors and by
precise cooperation between all the branches of troops and aviation.

The reconnaissance subunits operating ahead and on the flanks of the advancing
troops disclosed the enemy's forward defensive edge and groupings, they detected
weak points in the defenses and promptly established the retreat of the enemy and
the approach of its reserves. Combat engineers were also assigned to the reconnais-
sance bodies. Their mission consisted in detecting and marking areas of roads and
terrain which had been mined by the enemy, determining the passability of the routes,
the condition and carrying capacity of bridges, seeking out fords and detours and
reconnoitering the nature of the enemy defensive structures. In addition, a traffic
support detachment frequently reinforced by tanks with sweeps was assigned to each
of the routes.

The forward detachments, in possessing high mobility and tactical independence,
often suddenly approached the enemy's intermediate lines, took it by surprise and
without halting attacked the enemy at a moment when it had not yet been able to pre-
pare for combat. The capturing of lines suitable for the deployment of the main
forces was one of the main tasks for the forward detachments.

The tank and mechanized corps focused their basic efforts on comparatively narrow
sectors (3-4 km) and distant from one another. This made it possible, with support
by artillery fire and air strikes, to break the enemy defenses by a powerful tank
ramming. to break through in denth, to reach the flank and rear of the enemy's main
forces, to split its defending grouping into parts and to disorganiae control and
all defenses as a whole.

Precise cooperation was achieved by a number of measures, including decentralization
over the control of men and equipment on the brigade--battalion level. The SAD reg-
iments were usually assigned to brigades. The brigade and battalion commanders re-
ceived a large portion of the corps artillery. The infantry (notarized infantry)
was used as tank-borne infantry. Combat engineers also operated as part of it. The
rocket units were left under the corps commanders. Dependable cooperation with the
aviation at this stage of an operation was achieved chiefly by assigning representa-
tivus from the aviation to the tank (mechanized) formations, by assigning air guid-
ance officers with communications to the forward detachments and by providing help
to the aviation in rebasing to new airfields.

127

FORIMHHIJAI.USE(MNLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The crossing of the enemy intermediate defensive lines by the tank armies was car-
ried out not only during the day but frequently also at night (the Krivoy Rog,
Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy, Budapest, Vistula-Oder and other operations). Here partic-
ularly effective were the actions of the forward detachments consisting of rein-
forced tank (mechanized) brigades. Thus, the forward detachment of the 1x Guards
Tank Corps of the 2d Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder Operation during the night
of 16 January twice without halting pierced the intermediate defensive lines in mov-
ing rapidly forward. Very instructive in this regard were the actions of the for-
ward detachment from the lat Guards Tank Army during this operation in breaking
through the Heseritz Defensive Line. The forward detachments of the 5th Guards and
6th Guards Tank armies successfully carried out missions at night in the Hemel and
Budapest operations.

The experience of nighttime operations by the tank armies indicated that of crucial
importance for success under such conditions was the preliminary training of the
troops for nighttime operations. Usually this included the preparation of the com-
bat equipment, the supplying of the trcops with illuminating and signaling equip—
ment, the elaboration and issuing to the subunits of mutual recognition light sig-
nals, the designating of the advance. maneuver and evacuation routes and the carry-
ing out of special camouflage measures.

The breaking through of hurriedly occupied defensive lines during the night in the
course of developing an offensive was usually carried out without a halt by a strong
and surprise tank attack without artillery softening-up. If upon reaching a defen-
sive line in daylight it was impossible or ill-advised to cross it without the pre-
liminary neutralization of the enemy by artillery fire, then during the daylight,
using all types of reconnaissance, in the sector designated for the breakthrough.
the position of enemy antitank weapons was ascertained and these were neutralized
with the onset of darkness by a brief but as strong as possible intensive shell fire
by all artillery weapons. Often the tanks and SAD also participated in the intense
shelling, using an additional unit of fire brought up previously. After the fire
strike. the main forces of the formations went over to the attack.

In nighttime battles a great burden rested on the motorized infantry. In fighting
ahead and on the flanks of the tank battle formations, it attacked the enemy. de—
stroyed the surviving antitank weapons and protected the combat vehicles from the
enemy tank killers armed with close combat antitank weapons. One of the missions of
the infantry advancing ahead of the tanks was to promptly destroy enemy soldiers
who, in illuminating the terrain, provided an opportunity to carry out relatively
aimed fire from an antitank weapon. In conducting small arms combat, using tracer
bullets and rockets the infantry marked the targets for the tanks and they, advanc-
ing 100—150 m behind the infantry, fired from short halts.

Combat practice disclosed a particular need for dependable support of the flanks in
nighttime combat. For these purposes reconnaissance patrols were sent out on the
flanks of the units and formations, motorized infantry subunits reinforced with
self-propelled artillery or other antitank weapons were assigned specially and they
were kept ready to repel enemy counterattacks. Screens (two or three tanks or SAD
with a motorized infantry platoon) were also set out on likely tank approaches and
important roads on the flanks.

128

FtHRCHNIC1AI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Air support for the tank army formations also played an important role in achieving
high effectiveness of nighttime combat ope tions. In this regard very characteris-
tic were air operations in the Iasi-Kish178: Operation where during 2 nights of 20
and 21 August. some 143 sorties were made for the purpose of bombing the rail junc-
tions of nirlad and Romanesti. The enemyfwas caused great material harm, the bring-
ing up of reserves and troop trains was delayed and the rail bridge over the Prut
River in the city of Galati was knocked out. 5

in organizing nighttime operations for the tank army formations, usually the lines
were determined which they should take during darkness, the light support proce-
dures were established, measures were provided to blind the enemy observation posts
and gun crews as well as the methods for designated passageways through obstacles
and routes of advance. The control, warning, target designation and cooperation
signals were worked out.

The missions for brigades. as a rule, were limited in depth to 10-12 km and in de-
tormining them an effort was made to avoid complex maneuvering. The subunits were
given a series of successive tasks by lines. The missions of the tanks, as was em-
phasized in the Field Manual of the Armored and Mechanized Troops, should be simple
and designed for rectilinear movement to a shallow depth.

Cumhai practice showed that the clarity of control in nighttime combat was achieved
by the following: the establishing of a procedure for the movement of the coummnder
and stuff in terms of time and lines. the designating of command and observation
posts, report assembly posts and communications centers by agreed-upon light signals
and by the keeping of liaison officers in the formations and units during the period
of the attack. Sound and light signals duplicated by radio were widely used for
communications in nighttime combat.

In the aim of an organized transition from nighttime operations to daytime ones, the
army staff carried out measures to strengthen reconnaissance and collected data on
the position and condition of subordinate formations. The commander adjusted the
army's operational configuration. Particular attention was paid to supporting the
flanks and maintaining cooperation and to replenishing the ammunition. fuel and
other materiel for the formations. During the night the evacuation of sick and
”funded was organized. The second echelons and reserves were committed for the pur-
poses of increasing the effort and achieving continuity of combat operations.

Consequently, during the war years the tank army formations successfully carried out
their missions in operating under conditions of limited visibility. This success
nus nut accidental. It was caused by the correct consideration of particular fea-
.urv: in the combat employment of various weapons, by the choice of objectives for
air strikes at a sufficient distance away from the frontline, by the carrying out of
missions by the aviation and equally by the artillery to illuminate the battlefield.
In nrlpnt the troops and combat enemy illuminants. and by the use of a larger por-
liuu of the artillery for direct laying and the tanks in close cooperation with the
wuiurizud infantry and engineer troops. The particular features of organizing the
niIcnsivc consisted in the desire to utilize daylight for readying the troops, in
rarryiug out a number of additional measures ensuring success by the commanders and
staffs. 1n the careful choice of the terrain for the forthcoming operations and in
limiting the depth of the missions and battle formation of the advancing troops. As

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combat practice showed, it was very important to foresee all the necessary measures
in moving from nighttime operations to daytime ones.

In operations in the operational depth and in crossing enemy intermediate defensive
lines, of important significance was the skillfully executed maneuver of the armored
formations and the tank armies as a whole. Such a maneuver was an inseparable com-
ponent of virtually every offensive operation and was employed for shifting efforts
from one sector to another, for coming out in the flank and rear of enemy groupings
and encircling them, for bypassing large centers of resistance, for rapidly utiliz-
ing a marked success, for repelling enemy counterstrikes and for other purposes.

For example, in the course of the Lwow—Sandomierz Operation, Hq SHC on 27 July 1965
issued the mission for the commander of the First Ukrainian Front to concentrate
basic efforts on its right wing in the aim of capturing a bridgehead on the Vistula
River in the Sandomierz area. For this, it was proposed that the lst and 3d Guards
Tank armies be shifted from the area of Peremyshl' to the Sandomierz sector."6 Hav-
ing carried out a deep maneuver in a short time (within a day the troops traveled
90-120 km), the armies successfully carried out their given missions. The shifting
of the front's basic efforts from the Lwow to the Sandomierz axis ensured the rapid
crossing of the Vistula River, the capturing of a bridgehead on its left bank and
created good conditions for making the subsequent attack.

well-known is the maneuver of the 3d Guards Tank Army in the rear of the Silesian
grouping in January 1945 (Diagram 12).

In pulling back its troops along both banks of the Vistula River to the west, the
enemy command endeavored with the remnants of the 4th Tank and 17th Field armies (up
to 8 infantry divisions and l tank division)“7 to organize the defenses of the
Silesian industrial region which was of enormous economic significance. In terms

of the production of defense products it was second only to the Ruhr industrial

area of Germany. In order to thwart the enemy's plan to pull back its troops beyond
the Oder River and to accelerate the advance of the 5th Guards Army to the river,
the commander of the First Ukrainian Front, Mar SU I. S. Konev on 21 January decided
to turn the 3d Guards Tank Army from the Breslaw axis to the south and to attack in
the general direction of Oppeln in the aim of coming out in the rear of the Katowice
enemy grouping. In carrying out the set mission, the troops of the 3d Guards Tank
Army made a flank attack and cut the enemy lines of communications running to the
west and northwest. The Soviet troops hung over the entire enemy grouping in
Silesia and this forced the enemy troops to begin a hurried retreat in front of the

5th Guards Army.

in the course of the East Pomeranian Operation, the 2d Guards Tank Army, in endeavor-
in; to exploit the success on the axis of Gollnow, Kammin, encountered enemy resist-
ance in the sector of Freienwalde. Harienfliess. The army commander, Gen S. I.
hogdunov decided to use the success of the 3d Assault Army of Gen N. K. Simonyak and
the lst Guards Tank Army of Gen H. Ye. Kaukov. For this, having left a portion of
the forces on the former sector, the main forces of the army (the IX Guards Tank
Corps minus two brigades and the XII Guards Tank Corps) during 2 and 3 March carried
out a flanking maneuver in the zone of the 3d Assault Army on the axis of Nerenberg,
Hangerin and Naugard.

130

INJR‘OFFICJAI.IISIICMQLY
As a result of the skillfully executed maneuver, the army by 5 March, without losing
a single tank, by complete surprise for the enemy captured the town of Naugard and
reached the approaches to Kammin and Gollnow as well as the rear of the enemy group-
ing which was resiSting the troops of the 61st Army from the First Belorussian
Front. The Nazi Command was forced to hurriedly pull back its units fighting
against the formations of the 61st Army from the area of Stargard and regroup them
in front of the 2d Guards Tank Army. This significantly weakened the enemy forces
in the sector of the 61st Army and facilitated its breakthrough of the defenses.
Utilizing this, the troops of the 6lst Army, by an attack from the front combined
with a flanking maneuver on the east and with the aid of the 2d Guards Tank Army
which attacked the enemy from the rear, crushed the enemy resistance and captured

the town of Stargard. In 3 days of the offensive, the 61st Army advanced 30 km
ahead on its right flank.

Thus, the crossing of intermediate defensive lines by the tank armies during the
years of the last war was carried out by breaking through them without a halt or
after a brief preparation using the spaces in the configuration of enemy defenses

as well as areas weakly occupied by enemy troops. The main determining thing in
success was the art of the commanders, the staffs and the other control bodies in
rapidly organizing combat operations in a specific situation, in the broad maneuver-
ing of the armored formations on the battlefield and in conducting a continuous of-
fensive. Aviation provided effective support to the tank armies in crossing the
enemy's defenses in the operational depth. A high degree of efficiency in the work
of organizing combat operations was required from the commanders and staffs. The
achieving of the goal depended largely upon the prompt increasing of efforts on the
selected sector. Experience showed that the breakthrough of a hurriedly occupied
defense even on a narrow sector could ensure the successful carrying out of the mis-
sion as a whole, if strong forces were promptly engaged for attacking the enemy's
flank and rear.

5. Lrossing Water Obstacles

The expanses over which tank army offensive opeationa developed during the years of
the Great Patriotic war were crossed by several and at times scores of rivers, some
narrow (up to 100 m). some medium sized (up to 300 m) and some wide (over 300 m).
For the enemy these served as the most convenient natural lines for preparing de-
fenses. For this reason, the crossing of water obstacles, that is, the crossing of
them in force, during the years of the past war was a complex type of combat activ-
ity in the operational depth for the armored field forces and it was a rather fre-
quent one, particularly in conducting offensivea in 1944-1945. In the Uman'-
Mntosanl Operation, the tank armies had to cross such major rivers as the Southern
Bug. Dncstr, Prut and others, in the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation the Hestern Bug, the
$uh Vistula and others, while in the Vistula-Oder Operation, the lat and 2d Guards
Tank armies crossed up to 20 different water obstacles. 0f the total time spent by
the tank armies in carrying out the operations, almost one-third of it went to the
crossing of rivers. Here the fight for the lines on such rivers as the Dnepr,

Vistula. Oder and Danube and for bridgeheada on them had a protracted nature and was
often the end goal of an operation.

the difficulty of crossing the rivers was caused chiefly by the fact that a river
which was impossible to ford in and of itself represented an obstacle for the ad-
vuncing side and became an even more serious obstacle for crossing with enemy action.

131

FORlOFFKJAl.USE(NVLY
FinltﬂﬂﬂCLAl.USEiNVLY

The presence of a river impeded an attack on the enemy defending on the opposite
bank and did not allow the advancing side to simultaneously employ all the avail-
able men and equipment, it impeded the employment of tanks and other heavy combat
equipment, it restricted maneuvers and slowed down the advance. At the same time

a river allowed the defending side to save resources, to hold a broader front with
a smaller number of men and equipment, and to secure the flanks and rear of its
troops. The presence of a broad water obstacle ahead of the forward defensive edge
to a definite degree increased the moral-psychological state of the defending
troops.

The successful crossing of water obstacles by armored troops was achieved primarily
by the early preparations for this. In anticipating the crossing of water obstacles.
the preparation of tank armies to cross them usually started in the preparations for
the operation. The nature of the rivers and the adjacent terrain in the zone of the
forthcoming operations was carefully studied. Here the commanders and staffs en-
deavored to establish the following: the width, depth and current of the rivers,
the presence of fords and crossings on them, the profile of the river, the ground

of the bottom and banks, as well as the places convenient for the approach of the
tank units and formations to the sites of possible crossings or areas for assault
crossings, the presence of obstacles and natural barriers at them; the places and

nature of crossings on the river, the possibility of seizing them by forward de-
tachments and use for tank crossings; the presence nearby of local crossing equip-

ment for equipping the crossings; the nature of enemy defenses on the river, by
whom the defenses are occupied or could be occupied in the course of conducting the
operation; the most convenient lines for holding seized bridgeheads and developing
the offensive from them.

On the basis of a careful study of all aspects of the situation and the possible
course of the operation, the commanders and staffs of the tank armies planned the
crossing of the rivers. Here the actions of the troops were outlined generally:

the possible crossing zone and the areas of approach to the river were determined.
what crossings should be taken first and who would carry out these missions. A more
detailed planning of the crossing of the river was made in the course of the opera-
tion.

Some 1 or 2 days before the tank army reached the river, the combat missions were
clarified for the formations as well as the missions for the types of support, pri-
marily engineer. The commander's plan allocated the men and equipment of the en-
gineer troops and defined the necessary camouflage measures. The army staff organ-
ized reconnaissance of the water obstacle, particularly engineer, in the aim of dis-
closing the nature of the river and the system of enemy defenses on the opposite
bank, it clarified data on the terrain obtained as a result of studying geographic
descriptions, maps and aerial photographs questioning the local inhabitants and also
organized the receiving and allocation of crossing reinforcements received for the
army.

Having generalized the information, the staff together with the chief of the army
engineer troops, on the basis of the commander's decision, worked out a crossing
plan which provided for the following: the crossing procedure, the times to have
the crossings ready, the allocation of crossing equipment, the sequence for crossing
the troops, the assembly and jump-off areas, the missions of the troops on the

132

IN)! (lﬂﬂCJAI.lEﬂB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opposite bank. the procedure for organizing communications, support measures and
the organization of air and artillery support and antiaircraft cover."a

Thus, in tne preparations for the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation, the commander of the
3d Guards Tank Army, Gen P. S. Rybalko, in the operation plan designed the tasks
for the formations in crossing the San River only in a general form: the zones for
approaching the river and the possible allocation of engineer equipment."9 The
staff and other control bodies began to more specifically plan the crossing some 2
days before the forward detachments reached the river, immediately after the army
commander had clarified the missions for the formations in crossing the river and
conduCting combat operations on the opposite bank.

The army staff, proceeding from the plan, outlined the routes for the troops to
reach the concentration areas before the crossing and organized a commandant service
on the routes to the river. The chief of the engineer troops, together with the
chief of the operations section, made calculations for the crossing in terms of
equipment, time and place. The chief of the chemical troops along with the opera-
tional officer, determined the front for setting smoke screens and the smoke re-
lease time. The administration for armored repairs and supply planned the organiza-
tion of the repair and evacuation service in the crossing areas. The signals chief
made the necessary corrections in the signals plan and together with the chief of
the operations section clarified the positions of the control posts. The dag before
the approach to the river, the crossing plan was approved by the commander.5

Precise planning, the prompt issuing of missions to the troops and firm leadership
were important conditions for successfully crossing a river from a march formation.

If a water obstacle ran close to the line of committing a tank army to a break-
through, the planning of its crossing in the period of preparing for the operation
was carried out with much greater care. Ahead of time they determined the composi—
tion of the forward detachments and the possible nature of their actions, the routes
for the arrival of the formations at the river, the equipping of the crossings, the
sequence of using them by the combined-arms and tank formations, the possible help
to the tank armies in capturing the enemy's crossings existing on the river as well
as all types of support during the approach to the river and the crossing of it by
the tank armies.

Assigned to the forward detachments were brigades which in previous engagements had
showed an ability to quickly cross the rivers and to operate away from the main
forces and headed by commanders who possessed resourcefulness, decisiveness and the
ability to assess a difficult situation independently not only on the brigade level
but also considering the actions of the main forces of a corps and even the entire
tnnk army. With the commanders of the forward detachments the possible variations
of nrtinns were played through in capturing the crossings and the questions of co-
uperatiun with the aviation and other forward detachments, including those of the
combined-arms armies. The forward detachments were reinforced with engineer sub-
divisions nnd light crossing equipment. Precisely these and a number of other ques-
linns were planned out ahead of time and worked out in detail by the command of the
6th Tank Army in the Iasi—Kishinev Operation for crossing the Bahlui River and by
the 2d Guards Tank Army for crossing the Pilica River in the Vistula-Oder Operation.
This made it possible to cross them without a halt and from an approach-march for-
that ion.

133

FINII)FFIC]A1.[EHE(M¥LY
I‘UK UPIILIAL Dbl. \Iz‘l.‘

Hnwcver, it must be pointed out that although the preliminary preparation of the
tank armies for crossing the water obstacles was of very great significance, the
success of the crossing in the war years was frequently determined by the skillful
employment of opportunities which were disclosed by the very course of the operation,
and by the successfully conducted engagements on the approach to the water obstacle

and directly on it.

In the course of the Proskurov-Chernovtsy Operation on 22 March the troops of the
First Ukrainian Front broke through the enemy intermediate defensive line on the
line of Ternopol'--Proskurov. The 1st Tank Army committed to the engagement rushed
south. Across its route ran the Dnestr River along which the 1st Hungarian Army and
a number of other enemy formations had been moved up. These were to form a new de-
fensive line along it and thereby prevent the Soviet troops from reaching the Iron-
tier of Hungary and Romania.

The VIII Guards Mechanized Corps could move toward Stanislav, but in this sector the
divisions of the Hungarian Army had come closest to the river. Having assessed the
situation, the corps commander, Gen I. P. Dremov, sent only a small detachment to-
ward Stanislav and this was to indicate the movement of the corps' main forces in
this direction. In actuality the main forces were moving due south. In approaching
the river, the tanks of the main forces crossed it over discovered fords while the
motorized infantry crossed on available equipment. This made it possible to cross
the river before the approach of the 2019t Infantry Division to the crossing area,
to attack the division's column by surprise and to defeat it in a meeting engage—
ment.

The capturing of an extensive bridgehead on the Dnestr River by the corps made it
possible for the lat Tank Army to undertake a rapid offensive against Kolomyya and
without halting cross the Prut River.51 The creative and skillful use of the con-
ditions in the specifically developing situation underlay the success of crossing
water obstacles in other operations as well.

The crossing of water obstacles by tank armies during the years of the Great Patri-
otic Har was more often carried out without a halt, and if this was not possible,
then after brief preparations, when regular crossing equipment was brought up to the
river. crossings thrown up and the artillery and aviation prepared to support the
crossing with fire and strikes by carrying out a heavy artillery and air softening-
up. In the course of the Uman'-Botosani Operation, the 2d Tank Army had to cross
the Dnestr River after day-long preparations. All the army artillery was brought up
to neutralize the enemy on the opposite bank. A significant portion of it as well
as the tanks and SAN were set for direct laying.52

In all instances, in the crossing a major role was played by the forward detachments
which unexpectedly arrived at the river, often captured bridges in tact. "hen pos-
sible they crossed the river by fording or with the motorized infantry subunits
crossed without a bolt on available equipment and captured bridgeheads thereby pro-
viding conditions for building new or restoring destroyed bridges. Often the able
and bold actions of even small forward detachments led to major and at times even
operational results. Thus, the forward detachment of the XXVI Tank Corps of the 5th
Tnnk Army consisting of two motorized rifle companies and five tanks, during the
night of 22 November 1942, captured a bridge across the Don River in the area of

134

FOI:0FFKJAI.USE(M‘LY
. __-_-.. —- _ .- ‘wv .unu ‘v.rv vnv-u‘u vvus Luna tissues uuv bill a

13.ndc it possible to develop the offensive toward the troops of the Stalingrad Front
and quickly close the ring of encirclement around the major enemy grouping.

The crossing of a water obstacle without a halt usually was done in sequence. Ini-
tially. the reconnaissance subunits approached it and if possible captured crossings
or sought fords. They operated in a broad zone, endeavoring to discover the most
convenient places for the crossing and the enemy defenses on the opposite bank and

by the crossings, focusing their attention on locating weak or enemy unoccupied
areas.

Behind the reconnaissance subunits came the advance battalions of the forward detach-
ments (brigades). In reaching the near approaches to the river, they conducted addi-
tional reconnaissance of the river and its defenses, endeavoring by a surprise attack
to capture a crossing, to locate fords and cross the river by them. In the absence
of data on the defenses of the river, a reconnaissance in force was undertaken in
several areas and reconnaissance discovered weak areas or drew attention away from
those where the water obstacle was to be crossed.

An example of such actions is the crossing of the Harta River by a forward detach-
ment from the X Guards Tank Corps of the 4th Tank Army on 20 January 1945. After
the defeat of the Kielce-Radom enemy grouping, the formations of the ﬁth Tank Army
continued to develop the offensive. Ahead of the main forces of the X Guards Tank
Corps was the forward detachment (the élst Guards Tank Brigade). Its advance bat-
talion at 1430 hours reached the Harts River in the area of Burzenin. The battalion
conmmnder, having assessed the intelligence data, conducted a brief reconnaissance
and decided to capture the bridge before the arrival of the brigade's main forces.
For this a tank platoon with combat engineers was assigned and they without a halt
were to jump down onto the bridge and deactivate the explosive charges. The platoon
at a high speed crossed the bridge and destroyed the security. The entire battalion
immediately followed it and it captured the area around the bridge. The main forces
of the brigade which came up successfully crossed, they captured the town of
Burzenin and formed a bridgehead 4 km along the front and 3 km in depth. The X
Guards Tank Corps from it developed the offensive toward the Oder.

With the capture of two or three crossings or fords by the forward detachments, the
process of crossing the river by the main forces of the tank corps was significantly
simplified, particularly if the enemy was defending the river with retreating, bat-
tered troops.

h: those instances when reconnaissance and the forward detachments did not succeed
h: capturing crossings and fords or they did not do this before the arrival of the
umuin forces of the tank corps. the crossing of the river started immediately with
two or three brigades along a broad front. Indicative in this regard is the cross-

hxg or the Western Bug River in the course of the Lublin-Brest Operation by the XI
‘hlnk Corps.

'nuo corps was pursuing the retreating enemy with two brigades. The reconnaissance
subunits and advance battalions of the brigades were unable to capture the crossings
over the river. In the first attempt to cross the river without a halt. only the
65th Tank Brigade was successful and it had seized a small bridgehead with its in-
Luntry. At the same time reconnaissance found a ford at the village of Gushcha.

135

FINI()FFNJAI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to distract attention from it, the brigade's commander sent a tank bat-
talion to the north where there was another ford. The 20th Tank Brigade was unsuc-
cessful and began to search for fords to the north of the site of the first attempt
to cross the river.

In order to feel out the river along the entire 18-km crossing sector, the corps com-
mander put the 36th Tank Brigade also in the first echelon. As a total five conven-
ient crossing points were found and this made it possible to commence the crossing
along the entire front. The enemy, not expecting such decisive actions, was unable
to put up substantial resistance. The corps captured a large bridgehead and, having
driven off counterattacks, developed a further offensive from it.

In a number of instances, particularly when the crossing equipment attached to the
tank armies fell behind, in crossing large rivers, they used crossings captured by
the rifle troops. Thus, in the course of the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation the first to
capture a bridgehead on the Vistula River was the 350th Rifle Division of the 13th
Army in the area of Baranow. Having widened it, the division made it possible to
commence the crossing of the main forces of its army and the lst Tank Army and after
them the 3d Guards Tank Army crossed to the Sandomierz bridgehead.

The crossing of a river from a march formation was carried out by the tank armies
in zones 20—50 km wide. In the Proskurov-Chernovtsy Operation, the lat Tank Army
crossed the Dnepr River in a zone 70 km wide and the Prut River even in a zone 80 km

wide. The wide crossing zones made it possible to find the necessary number of con—
venient crossing points, to detect weak points in the enemy defenses and to scatter

enemy efforts and this told positively upon the successful crossing of the river by
all the army's forces.

The capturing of bridgeheads on a water obstacle by the forward detachments was an
important but still just the initial stage of its crossing by a tank army. Having
created certain prerequisites for the crossing, they thereby drew the enemy forces
to themselves and ordinarily the enemy made one after another counterattack in en-
deavoring to push the forward detachments back into the river. The fierce battles
for bridgeheads often obstructed the erecting of crossings without which it would
have been impossible for the tank army main forces to cross the river. For this
reason the next mission after the capturing of bridgeheads on a water obstacle by
the forward detachments was their widening with the simultaneous arranging of cross-

ings for the main forces.

The bridgeheads were widened by the forces of the forward detachments if the enemy
defenses beyond the river were weak or with the aid of a portion of the main forces
from the first echelon tank corps. In a number of instances, as was the case on
the Vistula River in the summer of 1944, the bridgehead was widened by the forma-
tions of the tank and combined-arms armies, particularly if the bridgehead or sev-
eral of them assumed operational significance and a new offensive was planned from

them.

A particular feature of the engagements to broaden the bridgeheads was that the of-
fensive and defensive battles frequently alternated. The skillful conduct of de-
fensive battles made it possible to hold onto the occupied lines and to cause the
enemy significant losses The going over to the offensive, particularly soon after
the successful repelling of enemy strikes made it possible to capture new lines, to

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shove the enemy back from the river and thereby create favorable conditions for the
crossing of the tank army's main forces.

The successful repelling of counterattacks and counterstrikes occurred when they
had been able to transfer to the bridgehead in the shortest time the largest pos-
sible amount of antitank artillery and even a small number of tanks and SAD while
aviation securely covered the troops fighting for the bridgehead.

During the war years the basic mass of the tanks and SA” crossed the medium-sized
and wide rivers on rafts or over bridges. For this reason, with the capturing of a
bridgehead on the opposite bank, further success depended largely upon the prompt
bringing up of regular crossing equipment to the site of the crossing and upon the
speed of erecting the bridge and raft crossings. It must be pointed out that the
armored and mechanized troops in the course of an operation very frequently lacked
the standard crossing equipment as this usually lagged behind the advancing troops.

Characteristic in this regard are the actions of the 3d Guards Tank Army in the
crossing of the Dnepr River. During the night of 20 September, having a mission of
'kn later than 24 September to reach the river ready to cross it from a march forma-
tion,"53 the army began to rapidly pursue the scattered units of the enemy LII Army
Corps. In the first echelon were two tank corps and a mechanized corps and in the
second a cavalry corps. A tank brigade made up the reserve. Advancing at a speed
of around 80 km per day, the forward detachments of the first echelon corps, without
engaging the large strongpoints, at mid-day of 21 September reached the Dnepr River
in the area of the Bukrin bend. The forward detachments immediately began to organ-
ize crossings. Contact was established with the partisans. During the night of

22 September, the infantry from the mechanized brigades with the aid of indigenous
inhabitants crossed the Dnepr River on boats, rafts and other crossing equipment.
However, the crossing of the tanks was held up due to the lack of crossing equipment.
For this reason the 3d Guards Tank Army spent around 16 days to cross the Dnepr in
September-October 19b3.

The more rapid erecting of crossings on the Vistuls River made it gossible for two
tank armies (the lat and 3d Guards) to cross this river in 3 days. “ Here in the
lat Tank Army the VIII Guards Mechanized Corps crossed the river in 29 hours and the
XI Guards Tank Corps in 31. As a total, 182 tanks. 11 armored personnel carriers

55 guns, 94 vehicles and 700 motorized infantry troops crossed during this time.sg
At the same time, the delayed arrival of engineer equipment at the river and the
slow erecting of bridge crossings led to a situation where even in the course of the
Vistula-Oder Operation in a number of instances the crossing of the tanks from the
army's main forces began approximately one day after the river had been reached by
the main forces56 and this ultimately reduced the momentum of advance.

Along with the using of bridge crossings, during the war years extensive use was
also made of the fording of rivers (the 1st Tank Army in the crossing of the Dnestr
and Prut rivers and the 2d Tank Army in the crossing of the Western Bug River and
others).

In individual operations, tank formations crossed a river over the ice. For example,
in the course of the Vistula-Oder Operation, the forward detachment of the VI Guards
‘hunk Corps of the 3d Guards Tank Army under the command of the deputy corps commander,

137

FOR‘OFFHJAI.U581NVLY
DUI UII'ILIAL USE. UNIJ

Col I. I. Yakubovskiy (now Mar 80) on 13 January reached the Nida River. The sub-
machine gunners crossed the river Over thin ice while the tanks and SAU forded it.
In order that the ice did not impede the movement of the tanks, it was broken up by
firing the tank cannons. For the crossing of artillery and motor vehicles the com-
bat engineers reinforced the ice with wooden planking. Soon a 60-ton bridge was
erected from prefabricated elements. Two days later, the forward detachments of
the VI and VII Guards Tank corps crossed the Pilica River in the same sequence.

The successful crossing of the Nida and Pilica rivers was the result of the mass
heroism of the personnel in the forward detachments as well as the resourcefulness
and determination of the soldiers, sergeants and officers. Heroism was manifested
by the army's personnel upon reaching the Prosnya River, where Stubborn battles
broke out for the crossings. The enemy mined the bridges in retreating and organ-
ized defenses on the opposite bank. The guardsmen acted boldly and decisively.
Submachine gunners under enemy fire crawled to the bridge and cleared it of mines.
As a result the tanks were able to cross to the opposite bank and capture a small
bridgehead. The first on enemy ground was the tank platoon of the communist Lt V. I.
Novikov who subsequently was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union for excep-
tional bravery. The machine gunner of the tank, Sr Sgt A. I. Daneliya, also commit-
ted an immortal feat during those days. Having taken over for the dead commander,
he skillfully conducted a fire duel with the enemy until his tank caught fire. The
Nazis endeavored to take the Soviet tank troops alive, but Daneliya, in rushing out
of the tank, met them with deadly fire. He was able to drive off several enemy at-
tacks and then extinguish the flames. Taking over the controls, he drove his power-
ful combat vehicle against the enemy and crushed its battery with the tracks. A. I.
Daneliya was also awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.57

The Pilica River was successfully crossed over the ice by the troops of the lat
Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder Operation. The forward detachment from the
X1 Guards Tank Corps (64th Guards Tank Brigade) during the night of 16 January 1945
reconnoitered the system of enemy defenses on the river's opposite shore and the
presence of fords. At 0500 hours, the brigade with a motorized rifle battalion,
with support from two tank battalions and the 1,456th SAD Regiment. after brief ar-

tillery shelling from the tanks and SAU, crossed the Pilica River on the ice, it
drove back the enemy and by 1000 hours had captured a bridgehead where it took up
the defensive with the mission of supporting the crossing of the river by the corps'
main forces. By this time the 20th Separate Pontoon Bridge Battalion had arrived.
In conducting engineer reconnaissance, the combat engineers rapidly erected a bridge
from a NZP park with a load capacity of 60 tons. First a strip of ice 50 km wide
was blown up. Simultaneously the combat engineers from the 134th Guards Combat En-
gineer Battalion equipped a ford having commenced the crossing of the forward de-
tnchment's tanks.

The crossing occurred almost analogously in the zone of the VIII Guards Mechanized
Corps where the forward detachment consisting of the lat Guards Tank Brigade cap-
turcd a bridgehead and supported the blowing up of a bridge across the ice by the
combat engineers from the 1st Separate Motorized Pontoon Bridge Regiment. Inci-
dentally, this was a very rare occasion when the pontoon sections were laid directly
on the ice (it was up to 35 cm thick) and the bridge assembled on the ice. As a
result, significant time was saved and the bridge over the Pilica River some 82 m
long with a load capacity of 50 tons was erected in 5.5 hours.58

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIN!‘MﬂﬂCLALIlSB(HVLY

In the course of the war, the tank armies had to cross deep canals with steep con-
crete facings. In this regard of definite interest were the operations of the
troops in the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Berlin Operation.

The army commander, Gen P. S. Rybalko, decided to cross the Teltow Canal during the
morning of 24 April (the canal was 30-35 m wide and 6-5 m deep) simultaneously with
all the corps. The VI Guards Tank Corps was to operate in the center. The crossing
was organized in a short period of time. The cot-sander and staff of the VI Guards
Tank Corps on 23 April conducted reconnaissance and organized cooperation with the
infantry, artillery and aviation. On the same day a reconnaissance in force was
carried out in the aim of detecting the enemy fire plan. The first canal was to be
crossed by the two forward detachments of the 22d Guards Motorized Rifle Brigade
which had the mission of capturing a bridgehead and supporting the erecting of pon-
toon bridges for the crossing of the corps' main forces. The brigade's actions were

to be supported by the firing of all the corps tanks and artillery as well as the
attached 3lst Artillery Division.

In the aim of supporting the crossing of the canal, the X Artillery Breakthrough
Corps and the 16th Assault Combat Engineer Brigade were attached to the 3d Guards
Tank Army. The average artillery density was 515 guns and mortars per kilometer of

front and considering the SAD, 348 guns and mortars. Some 700 guns were set with
direct laying (90 guns per km).59

On 20 April, after a 55-minute artillery softening up, the forward detachments from
the 22d Guards Motorized Rifle Brigade on wooden rafts and across the frameworks of
destroyed bridges, under the cover of tank and artillery fire, crossed the canal and
captured small bridgeheads on the northern bank. Some 50 minutes later. in using
the success of the forward detachments, the brigade's main forces began crossing on
wooden collapsible boats. The enemy responded with strong artillery and machine gun
fire. The boats on which the courageous guardsmen were crossing were repeatedly
pierced by bullets and shrapnel. The Soviet soldiers quickly repaired the damage
and continued to carry out the mission.

In the crossing many men of the brigade showed exceptional courage. The commander
of the minelaying platoon of the 22d Guards Motorized Rifle Brigade, HSgt A. I.
Vorob'yev, became a true hero of the battles on the Teltow Canal. Having skillfully
chosen the site of the crossing. the men of his platoon and he made 16 trips under
heavy enemy fire. After the capturing of a.bridgehead, being wounded, the master
sergeant and his comrades in arms made passageways for the infantry. Vorob'yev
personally removed 10 antitank mines. For courage and heroism shown in the crossing

of the Teltow Canal, MSgt A. I. Vorob'yev, Sr Sgts D. T. Pastukhov and N. N. Gurov
were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.

Behind the battalions of the 22d Guards Motorized Rifle Brigade, the forward units
of the 48th Guards Rifle Division began crossing and this division, from 23 April,
fought jointly with the VI Guards Tank Corps. The presence of bridgeheads made it
possible for the army engineer units by 1600 hours to throw up two pontoon bridges
over which the tank brigades and the main forces of the 48th Guards Rifle Division
began to cross. 0n the same day the other army formations also crossed the canal.

139

INJRIOFFICJAI.lEﬂ!(HWLY
I‘UK UI'PKMI. U3!— UNI-I

we must particularly emphasize the role which was played by the engineer troops in
carrying out the missions of crossing canals in Berlin. The great height of the
granite sides greatly impeded the crossing of the obstacles and the erecting of
floating and wooden bridges. Combat engineers were assigned to the forward detach-
ments. Under the cover of tank fire and smokescreens, they, using 60-kg explosive
charges, blew up the granite structures. Rope ladders 7 m long and elements of
floating small bridges were made for the infantry.

In conducting offensive operations to a great depth and at a rapid pace the tank
armies gained experience in the successive crossing of a number of water obstacles.
Thus in the course of the Vistula-Oder Operation, the 3d Guards and 4th Tank armies.
in carrying out the immediate mission of the front. in 5 days had to cross four
rivers, the Czarna Hoschodna, Nida. Pilica and Harts, while the let and 2d Guards
Tank armies had to cross the Pilica. Bzura and "arts rivers.

The essence of the successive crossing of water obstacles consisted in having the
army troops cross two or three rivers simultaneously. For example. the troops of the
2d Guards Tank Army on 16-17 January 1945 were crossing the Bzura River with the for-
ward detachments while the main forces were crossing the Pilica. The 3d Guards and
4th Tank armies on 13-16 January crossed the Kids River with the forward brigades
while the main forces were crossing the Czarna. when the main forces were crossing
the Hide. the forward brigades had already crossed the Pilica. Approximately the
same sequence occurred in the crossing of the Pilica and Warts rivers.

The experience of the successive crossing of rivers acquired during the Vistula-Oder
Operation when the rivers had an ice cover of up to 30 cm which with the limited
amount of crossing equipment made it possible to cross on two obstacles was further
developed in the course of the Berlin Operation under conditions when the spring
flooding had not yet abated.

The First Ukrainian Front began an offensive with the crossing of the Neisse River.
Some 45-50 km from it flowed the Spree River, and between them the small Helkse
River and the Fliess Canal. Having crossed the Neisse River, the 3d Guards Tank
Army attacked the enemy on the second zone running along the Pliess Canal. On

18 April it had already begun to cross the Spree River with its first echelon when
its second echelon was still crossing the Helkse River and the Fliess Canal.

For the successful crossing of the Spree River each of the tank armies was assigned
a pontoon battalion. This made it possible in the crossing area of the 3d Guards
Tank Army to build a tank ford, two crossing points using boats, two raft crossing
points and a bridge with 30-ton capacity. In the crossing area of the 6th Guards
Tank Army three bridges were built with a capacity of 30-60 tons and a raft crossing
point. Such a number of crossings made it possible for the tank armies to complete-
ly move the first echelon corps across the Spree River on 18 April and the second
echelon on 19 April. Having captured a bridgehead 10 km along the front and up to

5 km in depth in cooperation with the 13th Army, they created the prerequisites for
a drive toward Berlin.60

The experience of the Great Patriotic Har showed that for the tank troops rivers were
difficult-to-cross obstacles. Their crossing was complicated by the limited amount
of crossing equipment, particularly for tanks, and by their lag behind the troops.

lkO

F!)I|0I1IC1AI.lﬂﬂE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in many operations the tank armies were still able to cross numerous rivers. They
also gained rich experience in the crossing of canals along the banks of which many
reinforced concrete defensive works had been built. By their rapid actions and by
the capturing of bridgeheads on the water lines from a march formation or after
brief preparations, the tank armies supported the offensive by the main forces of
the fronts at a rapid pace, without extended delays on the water obstacles where the
enemy usually created defensive lines.

The success in crossing water obstacles by the tank armies was achieved by the early
preparation of the troops, the crossing equipment, including local, for the crossing,
by the decisive defeat of the enemy on the approaches to the river, by the surprise
reaching of the water obstacle by the formations along a broad front, by the daring
actions of the forward detachments, by the rapid construction of crossings, by the
precise organization of a control service on then and by the prompt increasing of
efforts on the opposite bank.

The experience of the war showed that for the rapid crossing of water obstacles by
tank armies, they should include such crossing equipment which would not lag behind
the troops, amphibious tanks and armored personnel carriers while ordinary tanks
should have equipment making it possible for them to cross deep rivers.

6. Operations of Tank Armies in Pincer Operations

Pincer operations and the destruction of large enemy groupings, particularly start-
ing with the counteroffensive at Stalingrad, were the basic form for the conducting
of a strategic offensive by the Soviet Army. In no previous war has any army of the
world conducted such a large number of pincer operations as the Soviet Army did in
the Great Patriotic War. In l9b6-l945 alone, 32 major pincer operations were car-
ried out. This was clear proof not only of the strength and might of our Armed
Forces but also the high development level of Soviet military art and its superior-
ity over the military art of the Nazi Army.

The encircling of large enemy groupings was carried out, as a rule, by two or three
fronts and sometimes by one front, under the most diverse situational conditions and
by various methods. In those instances when the Soviet troops deeply outflanked the
opposing grouping, its encirclement was achieved by breaking through enemy defenses
on the flanks and subsequently developing the offensive in depth along convergent
axes (the Stalingrad, Voronezh-Kastornoye, Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy, Iasi-Kishinev
operations and others). The encirclement of a large enemy grouping was also achieved
by breaking through the front of its defenses on several sectors with the subsequent
development of the strikes in depth and the coming out in the flank and rear of the
basic enemy grouping (Proskurov-Chernovtsy, Minsk operations and others) or by mak-
ing one or two enveloping strikes in the aim of pressing the enemy against impass-
nblc terrain or against the sea (East Prussian Operation).

In all instances an indispensable condition for the successful execution of a pincers
operation was the outflanking by the Soviet troops of both or one flank of the op-
posing enemy grouping. This required not only the rapid breaking through of enemy
defenses but also rapid maneuvering in the operational depth. This determined the

special role in the pincers operations for the formations and field forces of ar-
mored and mechanized troops.

141

FOR 0F1WCJAI.LEHE(MHLY
tlﬂilﬂQﬁLuAL.U5£iJNlJ

Tank armies in pincer operations carried out various missions. They quickly com-
pleted the breakthrough of the tactical enemy defensive zone and quickly reached

the operational depth, they cut lines of communications and in cooperation with the
mobile groups of the combined-arms armies closed the encirclement ring, they created
the mobile external encirclement perimeter or repelled the strong enemy counter-
strikes which sought to relieve the surrounded troops. They also played a major
role in breaking up the surrounded grouping into parts as was the case in the
Ostrogozhsk-Rossoch' and Berlin operations.

The Soviet armored troops gained their first experience in encircling a large enemy
grouping, and here under the conditions of the lack of overall superiority over the
enemy in resources, in the Stalingrad counteroffensive. The mixed 5th Tank Army
under the command of Gen P. L. Romanenko was fighting in the sector of the main
thrust of the Southwestern Front. Having broken through the enemy's defensive front
on 19 November 1942, the army on the same day with the forces of two tank corps
began to carry out the mission of exploiting the tactical success into an operation-
al one. Two mechanized corps of the Stalingrad Front were attacking toward the army.
With the reaching of the area of Kalach, Sovetskiy by the mobile troops on 23 Novem-
ber, the inner encirclement perimeter was created around the Stalingrad enemy group-
ing. Some 22 divisions and 160 separate units of the 6th Field Army and a portion
of the forces of the 6th Tank Army numbering some 330,000 men were encircled. The
high momentum of advance by the tank formations (up to 50-70 km on individual days)
made it possible to anticipate the enemy in responding to the situation, to quickly
and securely close the ring of encirclement and shift efforts to the external per-
imeter.

The mixed 3d Tank Army carried out approximately analogous missions in the
Ostrogozhsk-Rossoch' Operation (January 1943), where immediately after breaking
through the enemy defenses, its tank corps at a rate of 30-40 km a day rushed to the
inner encirclement perimeter as a result of which by 19 January the enemy grouping
consisting of 13 divisions was cut into two parts and quickly destroyed. Over 87,000
soldiers and officers were taken prisoner.61

Thus. the mixed tank armies in pincer operations independently broke through the
enemy defenses. after which they directed their tank corps to close the ring of en-
circlement. Generally their efforts were concentrated on the external encirclement
perimeter. The experience of employing mixed tank armies disclosed certain short-
comings in their organizational structure related chiefly to the presence of forms-
tions with varying mobility and the difficulty of control in the course of the oper-
ation. Hith the creation of homogeneous tank armies, these shortcomings were elim-
inated. The front's comaander gained a highly maneuverable means of attack which
could decisively influence both the course of the offensive operation as a whole as
well as the pincer operation, in particular. The tank and mechanized corps of a
tank army began to be employed in a pincer operation on a massed basis for carrying
out those missions which were the main ones at each stage.

In the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation (January-February 1944) during its first
stage. the tank armies were employed to encircle the enemy and in the second stage.
in accord with the specific conditions, to repel strong enemy strikes on the exter-
nal perimeter. In this operation, the first experience was acquired in employing
two tank armies (5th Guards and 6th) moving toward one another in the aim of closing
the ring of encirclement around a large enemy grouping.

142
FOIJOFTHCJA1.lEﬂE(HVLY

grouping was the 6th Tank Army. On 28 January, that is, on the third—fourth day of
the operation. the forward detachments of the tank armies linked up in the area of
Zvenigorodka and sourrounded an enemy grouping on the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy
Salient. Some 10 German divisions and l brigade (up to 80,000 soldiers and offi-

cers) were caught in the ring. The Nazi troops had fallen into a "new Stalingrad5
although in truth, the scale of the catastrophe this time was somewhat less...."6

It must be pointed out that by this time the tank armies had suffered significant
losses (in the 6th Tank Army there were around 100 tanks and up to 20 SAD, while the
5th Guards Tank Army had 250 tanks and SAU).53 Considring this as well as the need
for the tank field forces to conduct defensive operations, the commanders of the
First and Second Ukrainian fronts, Gene N. F. Vatutin and I. S. Konev, immediately
took measures to reinforce them. One rifle corps of four-division strength was at-
tached to each tank army. In addition they also received artillery units. The de-

groupings on the external perimeter, the 2d Tank Army was committed to the engage-
men: from the Headquarters reserve. Under the conditions of the spring mud during
one day it made a forced march over a distance of 120 km and successfully carried

out the set mission. The experience of employing it was a very instructive example

stroy more than 10 Nazi divisions. In carrying out all missions in the pincer oper-
ation, the tank armies demonstrated great maneuverability, power and strength of
their attacks on the offensive as well as stubbornness and tenacity on the defen-

cnemy in the operational depth. The splitting of the Army Group South by a powerful
tank attack on the axis of Chertkovo combined with a decisive maneuver by the tank
armies. led to a situation where on 28 March in the area to the north of Kanenets-
Podol'skiy, at a distance of 150 km from the forward edge, the enemy lst Tank Army
was surrounded. This army included 21 divisions, including 10 tank ones. The sur-
ruunding of the major grouping was achieved by the forces of one front, the First
Ukrainian (commander, Hat SU G. K. Zhukov) in the course of pursuit in the opera-

Lionel depth. This was a new contribution to the art of conducting pincer opera-
tions.

143

FIM!(HHH(JAL UEHE(NVLY
F03¢HﬂﬂCLALlEﬂZONLY

However. the initial success here was not completed by the achieving of the set goal.
The surrounded 1st Nazi Tank Army was not destroyed. This was caused by a number of

factors including by the shortage of tanks and artillery in the advancing armies, by
the great length of the lines of communications, by the absence of staffs and rear
bodies under the conditions of the heavy spring mud, by the poor organization of re-
connaissance and by the delayed adopting of measures by the command of the First
Ukrainian Front to reinforce the 4th Tank Army and create a strong internal encircle-
ment perimeter from the west.6“ On 30 March, the 4th Tank Army in its battle forma-
tions had just 67 tanks and SAU while the attached rifle corps (two divisions) had
an extremely limited number of guns.65 There was an acute shortage of fuel and am-
munition. This made it possible for the enemy to break through the front of the 4th
Tank Army in the area of Kadiyevtsy, Orinin and retreat in the direction of norsh-
chev, Buchach. The 3d Guards Tank Army had 166 tanks and SAM, but it was employed
not for enveloping the enemy flank but rather for actions jointly with the lat
Guards Army to compress the inner encirclement perimeter from the north.

The creation of an external encirclement perimeter in the operation was carried out
by taking up the defensive in anticipation of the approach of operational enemy re-
serves. This mission was carried out by the 1st Tank Army reinforced by a rifle
corps and the 351st Rifle Division.66 Obviously, for making a decisive strike
against the encircled grouping a tank reserve was essential. But by this time it
had already been used up and had not been replaced. Moreover, the tank armies of
the front were unable to achieve direct cooperation between themselves as they were

a significant distance apart. Nor was it possible to seal off the enemy from the
air.

"At present, in analyzing this entire operation," recalled Mar SU G. K. Zhukov, "I
feel that the 1st Tank Army should have turned east from the region of Chertkov--
Tolstoye for attacking the encircled grouping. But at that time we had valid data
obtained from various sources that the surrounded enemy had determined to break out
to the south across the Dnestr in the area of Zaleshchik. Such a decision seemed
completely possible and logical."67

Thus, the dissipating over a large area of the front's tank forces weakened in pre-
vious battles, in concluding the operation, reduced the effectiveness of their ac-
tions and at a price of heavy losses a portion of the enemy troops broke out of the
encirclement. The experience of this operation showed that under those conditions
when the enemy had succeeded in organising a sufficiently strong defense of the
ring, the use of tank armies for splitting up the encircled grouping required
secure artillery support, as without this the effectiveness of their actions was
reduced and they were unable to rapidly penetrate deep into the encirclement area
and split it up. In opposing the breakout of the enemy from the encirclement, par-
ticularly when there was already a significant shortage of tanks, due to the weak-
ness of fire power from the regular weapons, they were unable to form a strong de-
fensive capable of resisting a deep attack by enemy troops usually made at full
strength in breaking out of the encirclement.

In the Belorussian Operation, the 5th Guards Tank Army under the command of Mar Armd
Trps P. A. Rotmistrov, in being committed to the breakthrough in the zone of the 5th
Army, during the first stage of the operation by its offensive created an unique

external encirclement perimeter around the Vitebsk enemy grouping. Subsequently, in
developing the offensive toward the major strategic point, the capital of Belorussia,

144

INNRCIHHCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Minsk. the army in cooperation with other mobile formations of the Third and First
Belorussian fronts, cut off the routes of retreat for significant forces from the

Army Group Center operating to the east of Minsk. The encirclement of the enemy
grouping numbering over 100,000 men was carried out some 200-250 km away from the
initial position of our troops. Subsequently the 5th Guards Tank Army fought on the
external encirclement perimeter of the Minsk enemy grouping in carrying out its mis-
sions by a rapid advance to the northwest.

The creation of a mobile external encirclement perimeter in the Belorussian Opera-
tion, in contrast to the Stalingrad and Korsun'—Shevchenkovakiy operations, was a
further development of Soviet military art in the area of conducting pincer opera-
tions and destroying large enemy groupings. This deprived the enemy of an opportun-
ity to organize direct cooperation between its surrounded grouping and the troops
fighting outside the encirclement and ensured the reliable and complete destruction
of the surrounded enemy forces in a short period of time (2 days at Vitebsk, 3 days
at Bobruysk and 7 days at Minsk).

The Iasi-Kishinev Operation (August 1944) had a number of particular features from
the viewpoint of employing mobile troops. In it, individual tank and mechanized
corps (the XVIII Tank, the IV Guards and VII Mechanized corps) were employed for
forming the inner encirclement perimeter while the efforts of the 6th Tank Army, the
mobile group of the Second Ukrainian Front were immediately focused on developing
the offensive on the external perimeter with the aim of reaching the deep enemy rear.
Here. as in the Belorussian Operation, a mobile external perimeter was created
simultaneously with the inner encirclement perimeter. The encircling of the large
enemy grouping (18 divisions) was achieved on the fifth day of the operation and it
was wiped up in 5 days.

Over 70 percent of the mobile troops from the Second Ukrainian Front (commander,

Gen R. Ya. Halinovskiy) was sent to the external encirclement perimeter. Consider-
ing the XVIII Tank Corps which after successfully carrying out a mission on the in-
ternal encirclement front regrouped on the external front and came under the com-
mand of the 6th Tank Army of Gen A. G. Kravchenko, the development of the offensive
on the external front was carried out by all the mobile field forces. This was
aimed at more rapidly moving it back to a depth which would make it impossible for
the enemy operational reserves to have any influence on the elimination of the sur-
rounded troops and create favorable conditions for a subsequent rapid advance toward
the ultimate line of the operation.

As a whole, for the Iasi-Kishinev Operation the following was characteristic: an
\nnrmuus piercing strength for the initial attack by the combined-arms formations,
the roncentrating of basic efforts on axes where enemy defenses were most vulner-
able nnd which simultaneously led by the shortest routes to the crossings and cut
off the routes for bringing up reserves; short times for encircling and destroying
the large grouping; the creation of a mobile external encirclement front with the
assigning to it of large forces of mobile troops, including the 6th Tank Army, as a
result of which by the moment the enemy was encircled, the external perimeter had
been moved back 85-100 km from the inner one; this deprived the enemy of an oppor-
tunity to organize cooperation between the surrounded grouping and the troops fight—
ing on the external perimeter.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢M§LY

As in the other operations, the tank troops at this time showed high skill. Under
difficult terrain conditions and fighting night and day, they demonstrated examples
of valor and courage. Particularly distinguishing itself was the 20th Guards Tank
Brigade under the command of Hero of the Soviet Union, Col 8. F. Shutov. The guards-
men anticipated the enemy in reaching the "Focsani Gates" and thereby opened up the
way for the army. They destroyed much enemy military equipment. including 20 heavy
tanks. For able control of the formation and for personal bravery shown in battle,
the communist S. P. Shutov was awarded his second Gold Star. On 12 September 194A,
the 6th Tank Army became a guards unit.

The missions of splitting up large enemy groupings and creating favorable conditions
for encircling a portion of the enemy forces by combined-arms field forces by coming
out on the enemy's rear lines of communications were also carried out by the tank
armies in the Lwow-Sandomierz and East Prussian operations. In the first instance,
the Brody enemy grouping (8 divisions) was encircled and in the second the reaching
of the Baltic Sea by the 5th Guards Tank Army to the north of Blbing cut off the
escape routes of the East Prussian grouping to the west.

Also interesting and instructive is the experience of the employment of the 1st
Guards Tank Army in the East Pomeranian Operation, in the course of which, for ac-
celerating the destruction of the surrounded grouping in the area of Polzin, the
army, having left a portion of the forces on the achieved line of Belgard (des.)
Kolberg,with the main forces turned to the south. As a result of simultaneous at-
tacks along convergent axes by troops of the lat Guards Tank Army from the north.
the II Guards Cavalry Corps and the lat Polish Army from the east and southeast and
the VII Rifle Corps of the 3d Assault Army from the south and west, by the end of

7 March, the surrounded enemy grouping consisting of 5 divisions from the enemy X SS
Corps had been destroyed. Here more than 8.000 Nazi soldiers and officers were tak-
en prisoner, including the commander of the x Corps with his staff. The tank troops
again demonstrated their wholehearted love for their motherland and the Communist
Party and showed mass heroism, courage and valor. In the lat Guards Tank Army alone,
around 7,000 soldiers and officers were decorated while Col V. I. Zemlyakov, Lt Col
V. N. Husatov and Haj B. P. Ivanov were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet
Union.

The employment of four tank armies in the Berlin Operation was unique. The 2d and
4th Guards Tank armies closed the ring of encirclement to the west of Berlin. In
addition. the 2d Guards Tank Army destroyed the enemy in Berlin while the 4th Guards
Tank Army participated in creating the external perimeter. The 1st and 3d Guards
Tank armies split the Berlin grouping into two parts and attacked Berlin directly.
The departure from the established tendency to employ tank armies basically for the
development of operations in depth was explained by the fact that it was essential
to quickly capture the capital of Nazi Germany and this was the basic goal of the
Berlin Operation. The troops of the 4th Guards Tank Army were also used with great
success in opposing the breakout of the Frankfurt-Cuban enemy grouping from the en-
circlement.

Thus, in the operations of the Soviet troops conducted in the aim of surrounding
large enemy groupings. an important role was played by the field forces and forma-

tions of the armored and mechanized troops. From one to four tank armies and from
one-three to seven-nine separate tank and mechanized corps participated in such op-

erations (Table 16).

146

FOI.OIFICIALI15E(N‘LY
Table 16

Certain Indicators for Pincer Operations Involving Tank Armies

 
 
    
   
 

     
    
 

Participating in Momentum of

        
  
 

  
      
  

   

Day Number of Operation Advance. km/de
Operation Encirclement Surrounded
Effected Enemy Forces

   
 

Separate Mobile Rifle
TC 5 ac Troops Troops
a

    
      
 
 

  
 
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
  

Stalingrad 330,000 men 10-15
Ostrogozhsk-
Rossosh' l3 divisions - 10
Korsun'- 10 divisions
Shevchenkovskiy & l brigade 10
Proskurov-
Chernovtsy 21 divisions 8
Minsk Over 100,000
men 23
Iasi-Kishinev 18 divisions 25
East Prussian 29 divisions 15
Upper Silesian 5 divisions 20
Berlin 400,000 men 10
Prague Over 800,000
men 35-60

  

The momentum of advance for the armored and mechanized troops was 2-3- and more-fold
above the momentum of advance of the rifle troops. For this reason they were the
first to close the ring of encirclement. The high mobility. maneuverability, strike
force and armor protection made it possible for them to anticipate the enemy's re-
treat from the area to be surrounded, to cut off its lines of comunications and to
.dependably support the troops completing the defeat of the surrounded enemy against
outside attack.

The efforts of the tank armies in pincer operations were concentrated on the inner
or external encirclement perimeters. 0n the external perimeter they carried out
their missions both by going over to the offensive if the enemy had strong opera-
tional reserves as well as by advancing rapidly in the aim of preventing enemy
strikes from outside to relieve the encircled troops. The experience of the war
showed that the creation of a mobile external encirclement perimeter contributed to
the freedom of troop maneuver on the inner perimeter and impeded enemy operations to
relieve the surrounded grouping. For this reason the allocating of efforts between
the inner and external perimeters over the war years changed toward increased
strength in the external perimeter. While in the Ostrogozhsk-Rossosh' Operation

75 percent of all the forces of the Voronezh Front were employed on the inner en—
circlement perimeter, in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation 60 percent of all the forces of
the two fronts (30 percent of all the tank and mechanized troops). A trend also
appeared for splitting the enemy groupings into parts even in the course of complet-
ing the encirclement and the unity of the process of encircling and destroying the
enemy was achieved by this.

147

FIHI(Hﬂﬂ(1AI.UEI2(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the operations of tank armies for the purposes of defeating a surrounded
enemy, usually they made a strong attack on a narrow front or on several sectors.
Such a method was employed by the 3d Tank Army in the Ostrogozhsk-Rossosh' Operation
and by the lat Guards Tank Army in the East Pomeranian Operation. Extensive use was
also made of maneuvering to a new sector for the purpose of taking up an outflanking
position vis-a-vis the basic enemy grouping. An example of this was the operations
of the let Guards Tank Army in the East Pomeranian Operation after its left flank
had reached the Baltic Sea.

As a whole an analysis of the actions of tank armies in pincer operations shows that
in carrying out the tasks of creating the inner encirclement perimeter, by their
rapid actions they together with the other mobile formations closed the ring of en-
circlement. This was the main prerequisite for success in the first stage of such
an operation. Due to the speed of actions and to the great force of a tank attack,
in a number of instances even in the course of creating a solid ring of encirclement
they were able to split up the grouping being surrounded and this foreordained its
rapid defeat. With the forming of a fixed external perimeter, the tank armies
rapidly organized a strong defense. But if a mobile external perimeter was formed,
then they by their offensive threw back the enemy to a distance where it was impos-
sible to either have the enemy reserves break through to the surrounded grouping or
the latter to break out of the encirclement even in the event of the breaking
through of the inner perimeter.

7. The Conduct of Combat Operations to Capture Cities

In conducting combat operations in a city, the tank armies lost such combat qual —
ties as high mobility and maneuverability. They also suffered great losses, partic-
ularly in tanks and SAU. The momentum of advance declined sharply.

For this reason, during the years of the last war, a maneuver to bypass large popu-
lation points was the most effective form of tank army combat operations. It was
employed in the Orel Operation, where the bypassing of Orel by the troops of the 3d
Guards Tank Army contributed to the capturing of the city by the formations of the
3d and 63d armies as well as in the Kiev Operation, when the formations of the 3d
Guards Tank Army, in cutting the enemy lines of communications between Kiev and
Zhitomir, contributed to the capturing of the Ukrainian capital by the rifle troops.
Also characteristic was the bypassing of Minsk (the Belorussian Operation) by the
5th Guards Tank Army, Schneidemuhl by the 2d Guards Tank Army, Kielce by the 4th
Tank Army and Poznan by the lat Guards Tank Army (Vistula-Oder Operation). The com-
ing cut in the rear of the Harsaw enemy grouping by the 2d Guards Tank Army created
the threat of its encirclement and forced the enemy to abandon its positions. The
encircling of Budapest was aided by the drive of the 6th Guards Tank Army to the
north of the city. Often cities were sealed off by separate formations of an army,
as a rule, by mechanized (motorized rifle) ones while the main forces continued the
advance. Indicative in this regard was the example of the actions of the I Mechan-
ized Corps of the 2d Guards Tank Army. the commander of which, having encountered
stubborn enemy resistance on the approaches to Klodawa (Vistula-Oder Operation),
took the decision to leave the 35th Mechanized Brigade to capture the city. It suc-
cessfully carried out the set mission.68

148

FIN!(HHNC1AI.lﬂﬂE(HNLY
in a number of instances, the tank armies captured large population points without a
halt. For example, the formations of the 4th Tank Army captured Kamenets-Podol'skiy
(the Proskurov-Chernovtsy Operation), the 3d Guards Tank Army took Czestochowa
(Vistula-Oder Operation) and others. The suddenness of their emergence into the
operational space contributed to this. The rapid highly maneuverable actions of

the forward detachments sent out usually from the tank (mechanized) corps as well

as nighttime troop actions also contributed to the success.

At the same time, in the course of the war, the tank armies or their separate forms-
tions in a certain operational-strategic situation also carried out the missions of
direct combat operations in a city using all or a larger portion of their resources.

For example, in the Lublin-Brest Operation the formations of the 2d Tank Army con-
ducted heavy battles to capture Lublin. 0n the morning of 23 July, after a 30-
minute artillery softening-up, the army's main forces began to storm the city. lhre,
the III Tank Corps maneuvered to the northwest. 0n the south the city was skirted
by the V11 Guards Cavalry Corps. The attack from the east was made by the VIII Tank
Corps. In order to support the actions of the troops in capturing Lublin, a screen
was sent out to the north consisting of the XVI Tank Corps. Regardless of stubborn
enemy resistance, by the end of the day a significant portion of Lublin had been
liberated and up to 3,000 Nazis taken prisoner. In the Vistula-Oder Operation, the
formations of the 3d Guards Tank Army during the night of 24 January 1945 took the
town of Oppeln by stoma, the troops of the 1st Guards Tank Army in the course of the
East Pomeranian Operation liberated the fortress city of Gdynia while the tank
troops of the 5th Guards Tank Army in the course of the East Prussian Operation
captured the cities of Huhlhausen and Elbing. The guardsmen of four tank armies
fought fierce battles on the streets of Berlin and its suburbs.

The complexity of storming the cities was caused chiefly by the nature of the
enemy's defensive works. As is known, the inner (city) ring of the Nazi capital had
been carefully prepared by the enemy for defense. Barricades had been erected on
all the streets leading to the city center. Positions for artillery and mortars had
been set up on the intersections and squares. On this ring the enemy. as was point-
ed out in the orders for the defense of Berlin, planned "to fight for each street,
for each building, for each ruin, for each meter of ground, in extensively using the
underground utilities of the city for this."69 The stone buildings adapted for
permanent defense provided strongpoints. In them were groups of submachine gunners,
bazooka troops and guns with a caliber from 20 to 75 mm. Reinforced concrete bunk-
ers (there were more than 400 of them) with a capacity of 300-l,000 persons were
u15u built. A bunker was armed with up to 30 artillery pieces designed to fire
against tanks and other targets.

The basic features in tank operations in street battles were: the difficulty of
orientation, the presence of well camouflaged enemy guns, including antitank, and
their disposition behind strong emplacements (in walled-up buildings, in cellars,
in concrete and armored cupolas, around the corners of stone buildings and brick
walls; poor visibility during combat (fires, smoke, dust from the destruction of
buildings) and the difficulty of cooperating with the enemy which fought inside the
buildings; the limited room for tank maneuvering caused by the presence of a large

number of barricades, block obstacles and various engineer-designed obstructions as
well as the difficult firing conditions.

149

FOR 0511(1A[.USE‘0NIN
FOR‘OFFHHAL.USE<ONLY

The listed features for fighting in a city during the war years determined certain
specific approaches in the use of armored formations. Experience first of all
showed the advisability of creating assault detachments and groups as the most ap-
plicable form for massing the resources of the various branches of troops under the
conditions of close combat. The assault detachments in the tank armies were organ-
ized, as a rule, on the basis of subunits from the mechanized (motorized rifle)
brigades for the battalions of rifle divisions attached to the army. In the 2d
Guards Tank Army in the Berlin Operation, the assault detachments usually consisted
of a rifle (motorized rifle) battalion reinforced by a tank company, a SAD battery,
by cannon (howitzer) artillery and mortars and by engineer and flamethrower sub-
units.70 Assault detachments of approximately the same composition were organized
in other tank armies in fighting in Berlin. In particular, in the 4th Guards Tank
Army they were based on the subunits of the 350th Rifle Division transferred from
the 13th Army. The formations from the 3d Guards Tank Army were reinforced by in-
fantry from the 28th Army. However, frequently, particularly in fighting in the
Berlin suburbs, the assault detachments were organized from tank battalions to
which motorized infantry and other reinforcements were attached. The assault groups
were created consisting of a rifle company reinforced by tanks, artillery, mortars
and special subunits. Sometimes the assault groups were based on tank subunits re-
inforced by infantry and subunits of other branches of troops.

Assault detachments and groups had specific combat missions. The immediate task of
an assault detachment usually consisted in capturing one or two blocks or a major

objective with the further direction of advance indicated for it. An assault group
fought for individual strongpoints in carrying out a series of successive missions.

Advancing ahead of the tanks were the submachine gunners who moved along both sides
of the streets and carried out crossfire at the windows of basements and upper
stories, protecting the tanks from bazookas and supporting their advance. That the
bazooka was a powerful weapon in close combat can be seen from the fact that in
Berlin the 2d Guards Tank Army lost 50 percent of the tanks from their fire.71 In
those instances when the advance of the tanks was impeded by enemy tanks and assault
guns positioned in emplacements, our SAD moved ahead and they, firing at the enemy
tanks, supported the advance of the infantry and the tanks. If the situation per—
mitted, the tanks with tank-borne infantry crossed several blocks at a high speed,
took up positions at intersections or squares and thereby helped the infantry and
artillery in destroying Nazi centers of resistance. The combat engineer subunits
which made up the assault groups and detachments were equipped with concentrated
explosive charges weighing 5-10 kg (10-15 charges per combat engineer platoon), with
shaped charges and spare hand grenades. In a number of instances, captured bazookas
were used. If a tank company comprised the basis of an assault group, then one of
the platoons fought on the street and the other advanced within visual range ready
to replace it. The platoon conducting combat advanced behind the infantry and com-
bat engineers at a distance up to 100 m.

At the start of each day a strong artillery softening-up preceded the actions of the
assault detachments and groupings. The artillery fired from indirect firing posi-
tions to neutralize the reconnoitered enemy artillery batteries or the areas of
th-ir probable location. The fire was imposed on the entire mass of buildings in
the block to a depth of 300-400 m. Then, to a depth of up to 1 km, the neutrali-
zation and destruction areas were designated only in terms of intersections, includ-
ing all angled buildings.

150

FOR OFF1CLAl.lEHZ(M¢LY
The duration of the artillery softening-up ordinarily did not exceed 20-30 minutes.
The firing of rocket units was employed as follows: in a corps by battalion salvos
and in an army by regimental ones against separate-standing areas for destroying
objectives deep in the enemy defenses. Moreover, in the street battles in Berlin
and other cities. extensive use was also made of the rockets for firing by direct
laying. This was done directly from the ground for destroying barricades straight
from the carrying box or by using simple attachments or for destroying individual
buildings from windows or holes in walls. At a range of 100-150 m, a H-3l projec-
tile pierced a brick wall 70-80 cm thick and as a rule exploded inside the building.

in a battle for a city, the battery firing positions were located closer than under
ordinary conditions to the infantry and tank battle formations. The guns assigned
for direct laying were positioned not farther than 300 m from the infantry jump-off
position. Observation posts for the commanders of artillery subunits were located
in the battle formations of the first echelon companies and those for the unit com-
manders together with the combined-arms (tank) commanders.

Flamethrower and indendiary devices were widely employed. Incendiary bottles were
employed on a mass basis by special killer groups consisting of assault detachments
or groups for setting enemy strongpoints afire and burning out its firing points.

Smoke-generating agents were also used for setting out camouflage and blinding
smokescreens.

The specific features of combat in a city placed special demands upon the engineer
support for the offensive. Engineer reconnaissance in the interests of the advanc-
ing troops disclosed the type of building (groups of buildings) in which the enemy
defended itself, the presence of secret communications between buildings, the ap-
proaches to individual structures and their nature, enemy firing structures, the
position of embrasures and the nature of engineer-designed obstacles. Reconnais-
snnce was preceded by a detailed study of all data about the city using large-scale
maps. aerial photographs and descriptions.

In the course of street battles the engineer troops carried out also the missions of
eliminating mixed minefields, mined barricades and wire obstacles and they cut pass-
ages and holes through walls and floors. Particular attention was given to retain-
ing the captured objectives and to thereby creating opportunities for utilizing them
to develop the offensive. For this purpose the combat engineer subunits set out
mixed minefields and helped the tank troops and infantry in building structures for
weapons and shelters, control posts and communications centers.

Smoke. dust and the proximity of the advancing troops to the enemy impeded the wide
use of aviation. For aiding the assault detachments and groups, specially trained
crews of divebombers were assigned and by pinpoint bombing they destroyed centers of
resistance which impeded the advance of our troops. If the situation permitted,
aviation made strikes against areas of probable enemy positions and its centers deep
in the defenses. In individual instances (for example, in Berlin), groups of ground
assault planes initiated the attacking of the enemy for the purpose of demoralizing

it. that is, to hold it down and provide our troops with an opportunity to break in—
to the blocks to be captured.

Regardless of the difficulty in employing aviation in storming a major city, it suc-
rcssfuiiy carried out diverse missions, such as: it destroyed defensive works, it

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

destroyed and neutralized enemy weapons and personnel and disrupted its control.
This required consideration of the specific features in organizing air combat oper-
ations. In this regard attention should be shown to the practice of controlling
the aviation of the 16th Air Army in the battles for Berlin by locating a system of
checkpoints on its routes of flight. Their basic task was to inform the air groups
about the situation in the air and on the ground, to clarify the objectives and to

provide help to the crews in reaching the target. The centralized use of radar on
the air army level also proved effective.

As the practice of combat in a city showed, its effectiveness to a large degree de-
pended upon careful preparations. Proceeding from this the army commanders and
staffs on the eve of an operation devoted a good deal of attention to organizing
combat training considering the specific features of the forthcoming battles. Par-
ticular attention was given to solving the question of manning the assault detach-
ments and groups and to coordinating the actions of the various branches of troops.
For the staffs a question of particular concern was the prompt supplying of sub-
ordinates with city maps (diagrams) with updated data using aerial photographs.
There was a need for the more careful elaboration of questions involving troop
mutual recognition, as the disregarding of these requirements had sometimes led to
undesirable consequences and to cases of firing on our own subunits.72 In order to
avoid this, in conducting combat in Berlin, the staff of the 2d Guards Tank Army
worked cut a unified radio identification system, including with the cooperating
5th Assault Army, 1st Guards Combined-Arms Army and the 3d Guards Tank Army.

In an offensive in a large city, all levels of commanders had to be particularly
careful in coordinating efforts of all the branches of troops and special troops in
terms of their missions, tasks and time. For this reason the commanders of the for-
mations (corps and brigades) directly in the field established the procedure for the
carrying out of combat missions between the assault detachments and the subunit com-
manders did this for the assault groups. The commanders of the assault groups or-
ganized cooperation between the ”snatch" subgroup and the fire group in attacking
each object.

It must also be emphasized that the high effectiveness of combat in a city was en-
sured by the mass heroism of the Soviet tank troops and by their military skill.

For example, in the Vistula-Oder Operation, toward the end of 23 January 1945, when
the main grouping of troops from the First Ukrainian Front reached the Oder, the
formations of the 3d Guards Tank Army began the assault on the town of Oppeln. Here
the Nazis had brought up to two infantry regiments, an artillery regiment, a tank
battalion as well as a demolition battalion and had blown up all the bridges across
the Halo Panew and Oder rivers. By 2300 hours on 23 January, the men of the 22d
Motorized Rifle Brigade (commander, Col Rh. 8. Bogdanov) in cooperation with the
543d Rifle Regiment of the 120th Rifle Division broke rapidly into the city. The
battle for it was of an exceptionally intense nature. Here our troops skillfully
used not only their own weapons but also enemy weapons. Having captured a bazooka
dump. the motorized rifle troops turned them against the Nazis. By the morning of
24 January, Oppeln was completely cleared of Nazis. The victorious Red Banner
waved over it.

Unexpected and at times bold actions, including under conditions of limited visibil-
ity. led to good results. In this regard an example could be the surprise attack

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

during the night of 28 March 194k by the forward detachaent of the 1st Guards Tank
Army on the railroad station of hoshcha (to the north of Chernovtsy) as a result of
which dumps with various freight and several military trains, including a train with

tanks, were captured.73 For these actions 001 I. N. Boyko received his second Gold
Star.

The men of the 34th Motorized Rifle Brigade from the XII Guards Tank Corps under the
command of Col N. P. Okhman acted boldly and skillfully in the course of the Vistula-
Oder Operation in liberating the Polish town of Inowroclaw. The outcome of the bat-
tle for the town on 21 January 1945 was essentially determined by the bold action of
the battalion commanded by Capt V. N. Krott, a young, energetic and militarily in-
telligent officer. The battalion secretly approached the outskirts of the town and

rapidly attacked the enemy causing a panic on the central square. It took less than
an hOur to clear the city of enemy aubmachine gunners.

The conduct of combat by armored field forces in a city was a forced phenomenon
caused by a certain operational or strategic situation. The predominant desire was
to bypass the strongly fortified enemy strongpoints, to make a deep outflanking
maneuver or to capture the city without a halt. In those instances when a fight for
a city became inevitable, the armored troops operated in close cooperation with the
infantry and other branches of troops as well as with the aviation. Here close com-
bat tactics prevailed. Assault detachments and groups were the basic element in the
battle formations of the formations and subunits. Offensive combat in a large city,
as experience showed, is one of the most difficult types of troop combat activity
requiring significant preparation, prompt and correct consideration of the specific
situational conditions as well as bold. enterprising and able actions by the troops.

8. A Tank Army Offensive from Direct Contact with the Enemy

The independent breakthrough of enemy defenses during the years of the Great Patri-
otic War was not a typical phenomenon for the homogeneous tank armies. This was
rather an exception to the general rule which was determined by a number of specific
features in the preparations for and conduct of each such operation.

Thus, in the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation, the employment of the 6th Tank Army
in the first echelon of the First Ukrainian Front (together with the loath and 27th
armies) was caused primarily by the difficulty of the operational situation from the
viewpoint of quickly organizing a powerful assault grouping. A significant amount
of men and equipment from the front was employed for repelling strong enemy strikes
in the area to the north of Uman'and to the east of Vinnitsa. Certain formations of
the 60th Army were fighting surrounded. In the course of the previous Zhitomir-
Berdichev Operation the front's troops had suffered significant losses. The 27th
Army had virtually no CIS tanks. At the same time the situation demanded an imme-
diate elimination of the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Salient and the rapid encirclement
and destruction of the large enemy grouping fighting in it. Finally, the 6th Tank
Army had just been formed. It included the V Guards Tank Corps and the V Mechanized
Corps (a total of 152 tanks and 52 SA”). Here the V Mechanized Corps was already in
direct contact with the enemy the defenses of which were insufficiently equipped in
engineer and antitank terms. In such a situation, the use of the tank army in the
front's first echelon pursued the aim of giving the greatest possible might to the
initial thrust so as to ram through the relatively weak enemy defenses to their

153

FOR‘OFTIChkLIJSEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

entire depth and as quickly as possible link up with the 5th Guards Tank Army of the
Second Ukrainian Front in the aim of encircling the enemy grouping.7“

[n the Debrecen Operation (October 1944), the incorporation of the 6th Guards Tank
Army in the first echelon to a significant degree was caused by the delay in the
regrouping of the combined-arms armies while the situation demanded a rapid going
over to the offensive. In the Budapest Operation. in the area of Komarno, in Janu-
ary 1965, the need arose to immediately make a powerful strike and come out in the
rear of the enemy tank grouping advancing on Budapest in order to prevent the re-
lief of the surrounded Nazi troops. In the Prague Operation (May 1945), the 3d and
4th Guards Tank armies were used in the first echelon in order to make a strong ini-
tial thrust, to rapidly cross the entire tactical defensive zone of the Nazi troops
and without halting seize the passes on the Ore Mountains preventing the enemy from
organizing strong defenses there. In the Manchurian Operation (August 1945), the
6th Guards Tank Army was in the first echelon of the Transbaykal Front. proceeding
from the need to anticipate the enemy in taking the passes over the Greater Khingan.
It was given the mission, having reinforced their seizure with a portion of the
forces, no later than the fifth day of the operation, that is, at a rate of 50-60 km
per day, to capture the line of Lubei, Tuquan.7s Subsequently, the tank army was to
develop an offensive toward Mukden and Changchun in the aim of quickly splitting

the opposing enemy grouping, preventing its retreat from Central Manchuria to the
south and completely defeating it. The commander of the Transbaykal Front, Mar SU
R. Ya. Malinovskiy, in taking the decision to employ the tank army in the first
echelon, also considered that in the zone of the army's advance the enemy did not
have any previously prepared defenses.

Consequently, the use of a tank army in the first echelon of a front was determined
primarily by a situation which required an immediate powerful tank attack on a cer-
tain axis in the aim of carrying out the mission at a more rapid pace than could be
achieved at that time by the combined-arms formations. Here consideration was given
to the nature of enemy defenses, the possibilities of its fire neutralization and
the terrain conditions.

The actions of a tank army in breaking through the defenses had certain distinguish-
ing features in comparison with the combined-arms armies.

In the Korsun'Shevchenkovskiy Operation, the 6th Tank Army broke through the enemy
defenses in a sector 4.2 km wide having the V Mechanized Corps in the first echelon
and the V Guards Tank Corps in the second. The density of the artillery with a
caliber of 76 mm and above was 52 guns and mortars per kilometer of breakthrough
sector. The brigades of the V Mechanized Corps went over to the offensive on

26 January 1944 after a 35-minute artillery softening-up which involved a portion of
the SAD from indirect firing positions. Small groups of ground attack planes sup-
ported them from the air. The battles along the entire breakthrough front had a
stubborn nature. The tank troops encountered particularly strong fire resistance on
the line of the railroad embankment at a depth of about 2 km where the enemy had dug
tanks and Ferdinand assault guns into the ground using them as mobile point. By the
end of the day the army's troops had advanced just 2-5 km.76 Here its losses were
59 tanks and SAU,77 or almost 30 percent of the army's effective fighting strength.

On 27 January, the commander of the First Ukrainian Front transferred from the 40th
Army the XLVII Rifle Corps (the 167th and 359th Rifle divisions) to the tank army

154

FIN!(HHH(1A1.USEIJNLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

ummundcr. With the formations of this corps the army was to attack a strong enemy

enter of resistance in the popu
no skirt it on the south and north.78 As a result, on the following day the enemy's

Lactical defenses had been broken through. The army's forward detachment which in-
:luded a tank brigade, a SAD regiment, a motorized rifle battalion and a tank kill-
ing battery (a total of 39 tanks, 16 SAU and 200 submachine gunners mounted on motor
vehicles). in bypassing the strongpoints on the fourth day of the operation and
fighting its way 65 km, reached the area of Zvenigorodka wh
XX Tank Corps from the 5th Guards Tank Army, thereby closing the ring of encircle-
ment around the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy enemy grouping.

The breakthrough of the enemy defenses by the troops of this same army in the
Debrecen Operation was also carried out under difficult conditions. The Nazis had

covered the sectors convenient for the offensive with minefields, pillboxes and a
large number of assault guns. Tank ambushes had been organized on certain sectors.
The mountain wooded terrain and the presence of rivers contributed to the good or-
ganization of enemy defenses. Moreover the rains had made the roads unfit for
travel. 0n 2 October 1944, after a 25-minute artillery softening-up, the army's
troops made an unexpected attack for the enemy and advanced to a depth of 20 km.
However. subsequently enemy resistance strengthened. A brief artillery softening-up
was made prior to the breakthrough of each intermediate line and in the course of
this the combat engineers made passageways through the minefield in front of the
enemy foward edge. The tanks. in crossing the minefields through the passages, fir-
ing underway destroyed the surviving enemy personnel and weapons, primarily the anti-
tank ones. Rather frequently the motorized rifle units and subunits in a dismounted
formation attacked the enemy. The artillery. with the capturing of the enemy
strongpoints of the first echelon companies began to move in providing support from
indirect firing positions. The supporting aviation made bomb and strafing strikes.

Such "gnawing through" of the enemy defenses naturally led to a sharp decline in the
momentum of advance and to great losses in tanks and SAU. And only the decision of
the front's commander to turn the V11 Mechanized Corps to the southeast, toward the
6th Guards Tank Army in order to attack the enemy grouping located in the area of
Oradea from the rear brought a significant success on the Debrecen axis.

ration, on 20 December 1945, the 6th Guards Tank Army consisting

In the Budapest Ope
of the V Guards Tank Corps and the Ix Guards Mechanized Corps in having 229 tanks
ffensive in a zone 12 km wide.°°

and SAG, 390 guns and mortars.79 went over to an o
The army was operating as part of the assault grouping of the Second Ukrainian Front

in the aim of attacking Levice. Nitra and coming out in the interfluve of the Hron.
Nitra and thereby supporting from the north and northwest the actions of the troops

of the Second and Third Ukrainian fronts which had surrounded the Budapest grouping.
ional configuration. The concentration of resources

in a narrow zone and the use of the V Guards Tank Corps reinforced by three engineer
made it possible to achieve a decisive

battalions on the axis of the main thrust
ditions of a focal defense and the absence

superiority over the enemy. Under the con
of large reserves in it. the army commander did not assign definite zones of advance

for the corps but merely indicated the axes, thereby creating favorable conditions
for broad maneuvering in the course of the operation. Here only a day's task was
set. The battle formation of the corps was also formed up in a single echelon. All

the army repair and evacuation facilities were attached to the corps.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJA1.USE(M§LY

Regardless of the limited time to prepare for the operation, the military council
and the party political apparatus were able to carry out extensive party political
work. In it significant attention was given to creating viable party organizations,
to correctly assigning the communists and Komsomol members to the subunits and crews
as well as to preparing the personnel for decisive operations in the front first
echelon. Meetings were held in the formations and units at which the appeal of the
front and army military council was read.

The going over to the offensive by the army was preceded by 10 minutes of intense
shell fire against the enemy centers of resistance. As a result of this the enemy
defenses were significantly weakened.81 The tanks and motorized infantry, in over-
coming enemy resistance and also bypassing its individual strongpoints, in coopera-
tion with the 7th Guards Army and aviation from the 5th Air Army successfully ad-
vanced. By 1500 hours, the IX Guards Mechanized Corps with its main forces had
reached Kostolne-Morevcev, having driven up to 10 km into the enemy defenses; the

V Guards Tank Corps had captured Szank and was continuing the offensive on the axis
of Levice. Having advanced to a depth of 10-30 km on the first day, the army car-
ried out its mission.

During this time the Nazi command had concentrated units from three tank and two in-
fantry divisions (150 tanks and assault guns) in the area of Zelezovce, Tees and
Lontov for a counterstrike. 0n the morning of 21 October, this grouping made two
counterstrikes in the aim of cutting off the 6th Guards Tank Army from its rear and
the 7th Guards Army. These enemy operations could have nullified the results of our
troops' successful offensive. The army commander took the decision to repel the
enemy attack by the forces of a tank brigade and two mechanized brigades and in
holding on to the line of Levice, Zemberovce, with the main forces of the army to
strike south, in the rear of units of the enemy 3d. 6th and 8th Tank divisions. The
supporting formations of the 5th Air Army, including the 312th and 218th Night Bomb-
er divisions and the IV Guards Mechanized Corps attacked from the horse-mechanized
group were to carry out active missions.

The implemented maneuver by the army produced good results. Complete surprise was
achieved. The enemy counterstrike grouping was surrounded and together with the 7th
Guards Army defeated. Subsequently, having reached the Danube, the tank army formed
the external encirclement perimeter of the Budapest grouping and created advantage-
ous conditions for the troops of the 7th Guards Army to reach the Hron River.

In the Manchurian Operation, the difficult physicogeographic conditions did not make
it possible for the tank and mechanized formations of the 6th Guards Tank Army to
advance in a solid front. They were forced to operate along two axes running 75 km
apart. This complicated cooperation and required a significant reinforcing of each
formation in the aim of providing it with greater independence.

The basic forces of the tank army advanced on the axis of Mount Modon-Obo, Lubei.

In its first echelon was the IX Guards Mechanized Corps reinforced by the 57th
Motorized Rifle Division and by artillery and engineer weapons; in the second was
the V Guards Tank Corps. Following behind it was the reserve consisting of the 40th
Motorized Regiment, the 22d Light Artillery brigade, the 27th Rocket Regiment and
the 22d Engineer Brigade.

156

FOR‘OFFNJAI.UBE(MVLY
FOR‘OF1UCJAlyUSE‘DNLY

0n the axis of Makutang, Tuquan advanced the V11 Mechanized Corps reinforced by the
36th Motorized Rifle Division and by artillery and engineer units.82

Aviation played an important role in supporting army operations. Just during the
first 5 days of the operation, it made around 5,000 sorties in the zone of opera-
tions of the assault grouping of the Transbaykal Front. Of them almost one-half was
to support the offensive of the 6th Guards Tank Army.83 Formations of the 12th Air
Army during 9 and 10 August conducted reconnaissance of the enemy, it attacked rail-
road stations, airfields and concentrations of personnel and equipment and covered

the tank troops from the air. In subsequent days it additionally transported fuel
and supported the operations of the forward detachments.

In carrying out joint missions with the aviation, extensive use was made of the ex-
perience of the tank field forces in capturing Nazi airfielda, particularly in 1964-
1945. For preparing the captured airfields for the rebasing of our aircraft, the
commanders of the tank field forces assigned motorized rifle subunits and when nec-
essary. tanks and tractors. In addition the air army command as part of each first
echelon corps had one engineer battalion and one airfield maintenance battalion.
These units either followed behind the forward detachments or were in the battle
formations of the advance tank (mechanized) brigades. Upon receiving notice from
the reconnaissance groups of the capturing of an airfield or landing strip, they
immediately moved forward and together with the tank troops carried out all the

necessary work for receiving aircraft. From 9 through 22 August, the forces of the
designated battalions prepared 33 airfields.°“

Also successfully solved was such a crucial problem as the landing of personnel from
the motorized rifle subunits of tank armies in large enemy administrative and in-
dustrial centers with the landing of aircraft at their airfields. On 19 August,

two groups of 200-250 soldiers and officers each were dropped from the IX Guards
Mechanized Corps and the V Guards Tank Corps and 4 days later, another two groups:
one in Port Arthur and another in Dairen. The airborne groups, thus, in essence,
carried out the functions of unique forward detachments. In accepting the surrender

and occupying important operational-strategic objects, they contributed to the ad-
vance of the army formations.

Close cooperation between the formations of the tank and air armies in preparing for

and dropping airborne groups contributed to a sharp rise in the overall momentum of
advance.

Thus. characteristic for the operations of tank armies advancing from direct contact
with the enemy were: the making of a massed strike by the main forces of the army
first echelon with artillery and air support on a comparatively narrow sector of the
front and close cooperation of all the resources involved in the operation. An
artillery offensive was fully organized. Cooperation was closely established with
the rifle formations which were most often attached to the tank armies (the Korsun'-
Shevchenkovskiy, Debrecen and Manchurian operations). Under the conditions of a
focal defense and insufficiently high artillery densities. the enemy was neutralized
by massing the fire against certain of its defensive centers. This made it possible
to raise the average actual artillery density in the breakthrough sectors by approx-
imately 2-fold. At the same time, experience showed that for the successful break-
through of the defenses by a tank army in an independent sector it was essential

157

FORGDFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FUD! OFFILIAI. USE ONLY

that the enemy defenses and primarily its antitank weapons be reconnoitered ahead of
time and securely neutralized by artillery fire and air strikes. A tank army should
be reinforced by s sufficient amount of artillery, by special troops and sometimes
also by rifle divisions and securely supported by air.

9. The Conduct of the Defensive in the Course of Offensive Operations

The going over of the tank armies to the defensive in the course of offensive oper-
ations was carried out chiefly in the aim of repelling counterstrikes by large enemy
tank groupings, for retaining the external or inner encirclement perimeter as well
as important operational lines and bridgeheads (Diagram 13).

The necessity of going over to the defensive was caused by a significant enemy
superiority in men and equipment, primarily tanks and aviation. As a rule the Nazi
Command included in the counterstrike groupings several tank divisions. For example:
four in November 1943 in the zone of the First Ukrainian Front; four in February
1944 in the zone of the Second Ukrainian Front and five in August 1966 in the zone
of the First Belorussian Front. These numbered from 100 to 600 tanks and assault
guns. In addition, from one to three infantry divisions operated with them. The
tank armies which were the first to receive the attack by this time were signifi-
cantly weak in weapons and numbered from 80 (the 5th Guards Tank Army in August 1963)
to 160 tanks and SAU and in rare instances more.

Prior to going over to the defensive. the tank armies in certain instances conducted
a meeting encounter and in others developed the success, operating as part of the
front's mobile group or as its first echelon. Under such conditions the defenses
had to be organized in a limited time, under the constant exposure to a ground and
air enemy, often with the simultaneous repelling of its attacks.

A particularly complex situation developed for the tank armies in going over to the
defensive as a result of the unsuccessful outcome of meeting encounters, for repel-
ling counterstrikes by large enemy forces as well as in those instances when they
operated a significant distance away from the remaining forces of the front (the 2d
Tank Army to the east of Warsaw, the 5th Guards Tank Army in reaching the coast of
the Baltic Sea). The flanks of these armies were exposed, the supply and evacuation
routes were extended and in a number of places broken; the carrying out of internal
army regroupings was difficult. Cooperation between the army formations was fre—
quently disrupted. The complexity of the situation was aggravated by the fact that
the armies were left without proper air cover.

The characteristics of certain conditions for the going over of tank armies to the
defensive in the course of offensive operations are given in Table 17.

One of the first examples of organizing and conducting defensive actions by armored
field forces was the temporary going over to the defensive by the 1st and 5th Guards
Tank armies of the Voronezh Front during the concluding stage of the Belgorod-
Khar'kov Offensive Operation in the area of Bogodukhov, where the enemy grouping
consisting of four tank and three infantry divisions attacked our troops. The going
over of the tank armies to the defensive occurred in a very difficult situation as

a portion of the front's forces was conducting offensive operations while the other
was repelling fierce attacks by large enemy tank groupings supported by strong air
strikes.

158

FOI1NHHK1ALIﬂﬂEONlY
Table 17

Conditions for the Going Over of Tank Armies to the Defensive

Operation, army

Belgorod-Khar'kov,
Aug 1963, 1 TA

Kiev, Nov 1943,
3 GTA

Korsun'-
Shevchenkovskiy,
Feb 1944, 6 TA

Lublin-Brest,
Aug 1944, 2 TA

LuowHSandomierz,
Aug 19é4, 3 GTA

East Prussian,
Jan 1945, 5 GTA

     
     
     
    
   
   
   
  

Nature of tank army

ti 1 Time for
opera 0” Pr °’ ‘° Aim of defense organizing
going over to the defense
defensive
Meeting encounter to Repelling SECECR by Less than ‘

     
   

the south of Bogodukhov superior enemy forces day, directly
in the course
of meeting

engagement

  
  
      
   
 

   
 

Less than a
day, directly
in the course

Holding attained
line and repelling
counterstrike

Meeting encounter to
the south of Pastov

   
     
 
   
     
   
  

  
  

       
 
    
     
   
  

 
  

   
    
  
    

   
 

      
 

of meeting
encounter
Offensive in first Creating external 3 days
echelon of front encirclement perime-
ter and repelling
counterstrikes by
enemy relief grouping
Offensive away from Repelling counter- 2 days
basic forces of front strike by large enemy
tank grouping and
holding line until
approach of combined-
arma armies
Offensive to widen Jointly with 13 A, Less than a
bridgehead repelling enemy day
counterstrikes
Offensive as part of Creation of external Less than a
front mobile group and inner encircle— day

 
    

ment perimeters

The formations of the tank armies went over to the defensive in those battle forma-
tions in which they conducted the offensive actions, endeavoring to focus basic ef-
forts on retaining the held line. For this reason, with the start of organizing the
defenses, the second echelons and reserves of the corps were located a distance of
2-3 km behind the forward edge and then the depth of defenses gradually increased.
The defenses had a focal nature with the creation of a system of tank ambushes, anti-
tank areas and nixed minefields. The ambushss were located in a checkerboard manner
to a depth of 2-3 km together with subunits of submachine gunners and antitank ar-
tillery. The antitank areas were created on the corps and army levels on particu-
larly important sectors and consisted of a tank killing artillery battalion or regi-

ment in each.

159

FOI.OFFKJAI.U§E(NNLY
I'll“ urnuna. DOE. ‘II‘LI

The tank armies had a single-echelon configuration and rather low personnel and
equipment densities. They conducted the defensive actions together with the ap-

proaching rifle formations of the combined-arms armies. For example, the 1st Tank

for the 5th Guards Tank Army to repel the enemy counterstrikes. Here the army for

3 days suffered comparatively light losses, Just 38 tanks and SAD.°5 The formations
of the 1st Tank Army operated analogously. Dependable control and well organized
cooperation on all levels contributed largely to the success of organizing and con-
ducting the defensive. The formation commanders took their decisions using a map

The experience gained by our troops was later successfully employed by the 3d Guards
Tank Army in the Kiev Operation (November 1943).

repelled using a portion of the forces a counterstrike by three enemy tank divisions
(a total of around 300 tanks and assault guns)86 with-the firing of the tanks from a
halt and from ambushes and the extensive mining of likely tank approaches chiefly by
the mobile obstacle construction detachments. From 11 November, the tank army rein-
forced by the L Rifle Corps of the 38th Army. was given the mission to securely de-
fend a zone up to 35 km wide.37 The attaching of a rifle corps to the tank army
proved fully effective, since it helped to increase the stability of the defenses.
Subsequently it became a rule to attach a rifle corps to each tank army when it went

In the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation (February 1944), the 6th Tank Army of the
First Ukrainian Front received as reinforcements the XLVII Rifle Corps while the 5th
Guards Tank Army of the Second Ukrainian Front was given the XLIX Rifle Corps. They
occupied the defenses in zones up to 50 km each,88 having rifle and tank (mechanized)
corps in the first echelon and a tank (mechanized) corps in the second. Under the

mobile obstacle construction detachment with a strength of up to two combat engineer
companies with a supply of antitank mines. For the antitank artillery reserves and
mobile obstacle construction detachments, several sectors of joint operations were
designated ahead of time for repelling enemy tank attacks.

In the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation the increased strength of army defenses was
also aided by the creation of a significant number of antitank areas (six-eight per
corps) between the defensive zones using in them the antitank. self-propelled and a
portion of the field artillery from the rifle formations. In addition, a system of
tank ambushes was organized while a portion of the tanks and SAU was echeloned in
depth.89 As a whole the army defensive system included battle outpost positions. a

main zone, the positions of the army reserves, antitank areas and mixed minefields.
The battalion areas and company strongpoints comprised the basis of the formation's
defenses.

160

For OFFICIAL use ONLY
In a Very difficult situation, a transition to the defensive and its conduct were
carried out by the troops of the 2d Tank Army in the concluding stage of the Lublin-
Brest Operation when the army reached Praga, a suburb of Warsaw, being caught a sig—
nificant distance away from the front's remaining forces.

At the end of July 1944, from intelligence data it was learned that the enemy had
regrouped four tank divisions and other units here for making a counterstrike. As
was later ascertained, these were the 19th Tank Division, the SS tank divisions
heath Head and Viking, the division Herman Goring which had recently arrived from
the Italian Front and a number of infantry formations from the 2d German Army; these
units had been shifted from the south.90 Enemy aviation also sharply increased its
activity. The 2d Tank Army in a weakened condition was fighting along a 60-km front,
Its attempt to break through the Praga Fortified Area without a halt on 31 July was
unsuccessful. Then the army commander issued an order for temporarily going over to
the defensive. This decision was upheld by the front commander, Mar SU K. K.
Rokossovskiy, because according to updated intelligence data the enemy grouping by
this time already surpassed the army's forces by 1.5-2-fold.

The width of the army defensive zone initially reached 60 km but was subsequently
narrowed to 40 km. The army's operational configuration, regardless of the pres-
ence of three tank corps in it (III, XVI and VIII Guards Tank corps) was in a single
echelon. Moreover, a general reserve (the 109th Tank Brigade and the 87th Motor-
cycle Regiment) was created as well as an antitank artillery (the 1.239th SAU Regi-
ment, the 1,960th Tank Killing Artillery Regiment) and engineer (the 357th Combat
Engineer Battalion) reserves, a mobile obstacle construction detachment (a combat
engineer company with spare mines) and an army antiaircraft artillery group. The
corps organized the defenses in zones up to 15 km along the front and up to 7 km in
depth. having deep battle formations.

The going over of the tank army to the defensive was timely. 0n 1 August the enemy
had already commenced combat operations. The tank corps repelled up to 10-12 at-
tacks per day. A particularly difficult situation developed on 3 August when the
enemy made a strong attack against the Army's right flank. However due to the
prompt commitment of the army reserves to the battle and to the heroism and ten—
acity of the tank troops who were fighting under extremely difficult conditions and
with enemy aviation dominant in the air, all the enemy's attempt to throw back the
army from the occupied positions were repelled. In being 20-30 km away from the
front's basic forces, the army independently conducted a defensive for 3 days with
insufficient air cover (one fighter regiment from the 6th Air Army). The fierceness
of :hc nattles can be Judged from the losses which the army's formations suffered:
28A tanks and SAU. including 60 percent permanently lost.9

The successful conduct of the defensive by the tank army was ensured primarily by
well organized reconnaissance, by precise control and by skillful execution of broad
maneuvering by the men and equipment in the course of the defensive engagement. 0n
2 Augus: the attacks by superior forces of enemy tank groupings were repelled and
localized by the active and coordinated operations of the III and VIII Guards Tank
corps with artillery support, by the committing to battle on the following day the
second echelon and antitank artillery reserve of the III Tank Corps as well as by
bringing up the general and antitank artillery reserves of the army to the threat-
ened sectors. With the arrival of formations from the 47th Army, the 2d Tank Army
was shifted to the front's reserves.

161

FOR‘OFFﬂJA1.USE(NVLY
PU“ UPPILIAI. 03!. ONLY

A generalizing of experience in the organizing and conducting of the defensive by
tank armies in the course of offensive operations indicates that they, in being
significantly weak in personnel, military equipment and weapons, defended a zone
20-50 km wide. The depth of the army defenses reached 8-20 km. The army's opera-
tional configuration was single or double echelon, most often single echelon with
available reserves. Due to the fact that the tank armies went over to the defen-
sive chiefly in the concluding stage of front offensive operations and on relatively
broad zones, in suffering definite losses prior to this, the densities of men and
equipment were low (Table 18).

Table 18

Basic Indicators for Defensive of Tank Armies*

  
 
 
 
     
 

Density per km
Tanks Guns 6 Rifle
6 SAD Mortars Battalions

0.7
0.9

  
   
  

  
 

Width of Depth of Operational
Defense Defense. Configuration
(echelons)

 
 

Operation

         

Belgorod-Khar'kov

Kiev

Korsun'-
Shevchenkovskiy

Lublin-Brest
Lwow-Ssndomierz
East Prussian

HHHNNNI—IH

*The Table was compiled from data of the Ministry of Defense Archives.

Regardless of the limited resources and their comparatively low densities, the de-
fense of the tank armies was characterized by great strength. This was achieved by

the great stubbornness of the troops' actions, by their courage and wholehearted
bravery, by the skillful use of the tanks and SA" for direct laying firing as well

as guns, mortars and mixed minefields, by the activeness of the defenses, by the
broad maneuvering of the resources and by the high degree of organizational activi-
ties of the con-anders and staffs.

It should be particularly emphasized that in the defensive engagements of the tank
armies, in comparison with the combined-arms armies, maneuver was more widley em-
ployed and counterattacks and counterstrikes were more frequently conducted, not
only during the day but also at night.

The resources were maneuvered for increasing the resistance to the enemy in the sec-
tors where its troops were breaking through, for strengthening the defending first
echelon formations and for concentrating resources to carry out counterstrikes.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the course of the defensive engagements by the tank armies in 1963. a maneuver
was carried out usually from depth using the army and corps reserves. In moving up
to the areas where the enemy had driven in, the reserves took up the defenses and
eliminated the enemy breakthrough by firing from a halt. Experience showed that a
maneuver to the sector of a designated enemy main thrust played a very important
role in increasing the resistance to the enemy and preventing it from breaking
through to the rear and flanks of the tank armies.

Thus, in the defense of the 5th Guards Tank Army (Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation),
after the unsuccessful attempts by the enemy tank grouping to break through the de-
fenses of the first echelon formations the enemy decided to outflank the army on
the left. On 15 August 1903, units of .e SS Tank Division Reich broke through the
defenses of the 13th Guards Rifle Division which was defending the left flank of the
5th Guards Tank Army and advanced along the axis of Lozovaya. Bogodukhov. The tank
army commander at 1000 hours on 16 August ordered the 53d Tank Regiment (the general
reserve) and the army antitank artillery reserve to move from Bogodukhov to an area
south of Lozovaya. They arrived at the designated area by 1500 hours, they took up
the defensive and. having met the enemy with the firing of all weapons, halted its
advance. The prompt carrying out of the maneuver by the general and antitank artil-
lery reserves contributed largely to the enemy's abandonment of further offensive
operations in this sector.92

Naneuvering of resources was also characteristic in conducting a defensive by other
tank armies. Here the maneuver was carried out not only by the reserves but also by
the units and formations removed from unattacked sectors and secondary axes.

Counterstrikes were organized quickly (4-6 hours) in the course of commenced defen-
sive operations. They primarily involved the tank formations (one-two tank bri-
gades) as well as the SAU units and the motorized rifle brigades. rifle divisions
and artillery units. Due to the presence of a significant number of tanks and SAD
in the counterstrike groupings and to their good support by artillery fire. partic-
ularly rocket, the aims of the counterstrikes were usually achieved (Table 19).

The counterstrikes were made if possible against the flank and rear of the enemy
grouping which had broken through after a brief but powerful intense artillery
shelling.

For example, when the enemy troops had broken through on the boundary of the III and
VIII Guards Tank corps of the 2d Tank Army in the Lwow-Brest Operation, the army
rommander decided to make a counterstrike in the flank and rear of the units which
had broken through from the enemy 19th Tank Division. By 0500 hours on 2 August.
the army formations had received their battle orders which gave the strength of the
counterstrike grouping, its missions, the time was indicated for the start of the
counterstrike (1000 hours on 2 August) and the measures to support it.93 At 1000
hours, after heavy shelling by rocket artillery, the formations and units of the 2d
Tank Army attacked the right flank of the 19th Tank Division. As a result the enemy
which had broken tni-ugh was cut off from the remaining forces and by 1200 hours on
2 August had been destroyed. Close contact was reestablished between the army tank
corps and the breech by the enemy troops in the defenses had been eliminated.9“

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(ﬂﬂﬂChALlﬁﬂi0NLY

Table 19
Basic Indicators for Counterstrikes in Tank Army Defensive Engagements

 

  
        
   
 

Operations, armies
and time of
conducting
counterstrikes

 
 

Forces

involved Results of

counterstrikes

     
   

 

      
    
      
         
   

Korsun'-
shevchenkovskiy,
6 TA, 5 Feb 1944

Destruction of enemy
which had broken
through and restoring
of forward edge

Enemy was thrown
back 3-4 km, its
further advance
halted

 

 

Lublin-Brest, 2 TA,
2 Aug 1944

Elimination of enemy
breakthrough and re-
storing of defense

Enemy breakthrough
eliminated.
Counterstrike

grouping advanced
3 km

       
   
 
      
  

 

Enemy halted and
thrown back 2.5 km

Lwow-Sandomierz,
3 GTA, during

night of 23 Aug
1944

Destruction of enemy
which had broken
through and restoring
of foward edge

     
     
      

     
  
 

      
 

 
 

Enemy advance halted

 
 

Luau-Sandomierz.
3 GTA, 24 Aug 1944

Destruction of enemy

units which had
broken through

  

[Key to Forces: trb--tank brigade; msbr--motorized rifle brigade; sd--rifle
division; sap-SAU regiment; gmp-rocket regiment]

Along with conducting counterstrikes against the enemy flank and rear, in a number
of instances the situation required that they also be made from the front. This
occurred in the course of conducting a defensive engagement by troops of the 3d
Guards Tank Army on the Sandomierz bridgehead. In all instances an effort was made
to carry out the counterstrikes when the enemy had not yet succeeded in enlarging
the breech and digging in on the achieved line.

Thus, the experience of employing tank armies to carry out defensive missions indi-
cates that they possessed limited time for organizing the defensive. In such a sit-
uation it was essential first of all to gain a maximum amount of time for creating a
strong defense. The basic ways for achieving this goal were: the rapid taking of a
decision and the prompt issuing of missions, the strong reinforcing of achieved
lines, the skillful regrouping of troops to the axis of the enemy's main thrust, a
well organized fire plan, particularly for the firing of artillery, tanks and SAU
using direct laying and from ambushes as well as the creation of engineer-designed

obstacles.

The combat operations of tank armies on the defensive were characterized by great
activity, by broad maneuver, by the unflinching steadfastness of the troops and by

164

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
Lhr achieving of the set goals. The enemy offensive was halted, as a rule, within
the main defensive zone. Independently or in cooperation with adjacent units and

aviation. the defending troops thwarted the plans of the Nazi Command and this de-
cisively influenced the outcome of the front offensive operation.

In the course of defensive engagements, the enemy suffered significant losses. For
example, in repelling strikes by the enemy tank grouping at Warsaw, the troops of
the 2d Tank Army destroyed and captured up to 8,000 soldiers and officers, 273 tank
and assault gunsé 94 field artillery pieces, 216 motor vehicles and 100 armored per-
sonnel carriers. 5 In the East Prussian Operation, the 5th Guards Tank Army de-
stroyed three infantry divisions, one tank division as well as individual enemy
units and subunits. Here the enemy lost over 80 tanks and assault guns, 648 motor

vehicles and a large number of personnel.96 The enemy suffered equally serious
losses in other operations as well.

10. Troop Control in the Course of Offensive Operations

with the start of an operation all the work of a commander and the staff was direct-
ed at ensuring continuous control of the troops in the aim of carrying out the mis-
sions set for the army. The basic content of this work was the control and command
of the formations and units directly carrying out and supporting combat operations.
It encompassed the solving of such problems as the collection and analysis of situ-
ational data, defining and issuing missions to executors, planning and organizing
combat operations when the army received a new mission, maintaining continuous co-
operation and reliable communications, organizing control posts and their moving and
providing control and aid to the troops. For the successful achievement of an oper-
ation's goal, of important significance was the predicting of possible changes in the
the situation and the nature of combat operations, the prompt maneuvering of re-
sources, the increasing of efforts, the reassigning of a portion of the resources

to the formations operating on the main sector or in the most difficult combat situ-
ation.

In the course of an offensive, situational data were received from various sources,
including from the front staff, the army intelligence bodies, the staffs of subord-

inate and adjacent formations as well as from the field headquarters sections.

An army staff in the course of an offensive, used up to two-thirds of the men and
equipment from the army reconnaissance subunits (units) to conduct reconnaissance.
A large portion of the data was acquired as a result of organizing ambushes and
raids, particularly nighttime ones. For example, in the course of the Orel Opera-
tinn the staff of the 3d Guards Tank Army organized 91 nighttime raids and 32 am-
bushes as a result of which 266 enemy soldiers and officers were taken prisoner.97
In the course of the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation the reconnaissance subunits of this
same army conducted 110 nighttime raids, 69 ambushes and about 400 other reconnais-
sance operations and captured over 460 prisoners.98

An essential drawback of reconnaissance conducted by the army resources was its
shallow depth, as the existing radios could transmit the information a maximum of up
L0 15 km. This failure was made up for by using the attached (support) aviation for
conducting reconnaissance from mid-i944. A search was also made to better organize
ii. In this regard of definite interest was the experience of conducting reconnais-
sauce in the 6th Guards Tank Army during the Manchurian Operation. The rapid

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rvn Ul'l'auuu. val. UI‘Lt

momentum of advance required the conducting of reconnaissance to a great depth.

This mission was carried out by assigning strong reconnaissance detachments from the
first echelon corps [This copy of the book was improperly bound. The tops of indi-
vidual pages have been inadvertently cropped. Indication of this will be made at
the appropriate space. here a section of text is missing.] ....It [the 14th Separ-
ate Motorcycle Regiment] carried out the mission from 14 through 17 August operating
150-200 km away from the army's main forces. Hith such a distance the PO-Z aircraft
were the main means of communications. Also characteristic in this operation for
the actions of the reconnaissance detachments was that they, along with reconnais-
sance in a number of instances carried out missions of the forward detachments. that

is. they captured important objectives (bridges, airfields and road junctions) in
the enemy operational depth.

Data on the enemy were received from the front's staff upon request by the army
staff or in the form of generalized daily intelligence information transmitted over
the communications or through the representatives of the front intelligence section.

Information on the nature of enemy operations and the enemy grouping was received
from the subordinate and supporting formations usually every 2 hours and in the
event of abrupt changes in the situation immediately in the form of reports over the
communications, by the sending of battle reports through the liaison officers and
once a day a final intelligence summary. Generals (officers) from the army field
headquarters were sent out with radios during the most intense and crucial moments
of an operation to the formations for prompt obtaining of data from subordinates

and for increasing the degree of their reliability.

Data on the state of one's own troops and the terrain were received basically from
subordinate levels.

Close contacts between the army staff. sections and headquarters were of important
significance in achieving efficient collecting of information. Information on the
situation and on the course of carrying out the set missions by the troops was or-
ganized between the control posts and within the staff by its chief. For example,
in the operations section of the 2d Tank Army, starting in the autumn of 1943, offi-
cers were appointed who constantly informed the artillery commander, the chief of
the rear and the assistant commander for technical affairs on the situation. More-
over, in the staff operations group and at the command post constantly present were
officers from the designated administrations and they in turn informed the officers
of the operations section who kept the collecting of information as well as the
officer who kept up the map of the army and corps rear units on the new situational
data. At the end of each 26 hours, it was also a practice for the officials of the
field headquarters to assemble for general operational information and this was pro-
vidcd by the commander, the chief of staff or, upon their orders, by the chief of
the operations section.

The incoming data from all sources were initially analyzed by the officers of the
staff operations and intelligence sections and were plotted on the map of the chief
of the operations section and the chief of staff. Usually they were reported in a
general form to the comnder immediately as they came in or periodically, depend-
ing upon importance.

166

INDRiOIHNCJAI.IlSE2(M§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPurlinn of text missing here.] ...adopted decision, or made a new one, and thereby
periodically, depending upon the situation. he determined the missions for the

troops. As an average the missions were adjusted every 2~3 hours of combat opera-
tions.

In adjusting his plan. the commander most often made changes in the methods of de-
feating the opposing enemy as well as in the times for carrying out particular mis-
sions. The army's operational configuration and the direction of the offensive were
adjusted and reinforcements allocated. Often there was the resetting or specifying
of missions for the army artillery or the subordinate (attached) aviation with the
indicating of the forces to be used in carrying out the missions, the time and tar-
gets to be neutralized. Instructions on the employment of special troops and for
the types of support were given in detail by the appropriate chiefs.

The determined missions were issued to subordinates either personally by the com-
mander when he traveled to the troops or over the communications equipment as well
as through the field headquarters officers and the liaison officers (delegates).

The experience of issuing (assigning) missions in the course of an offensive dis-

closed the possibility and necessity of comprehensively utilizing all the then-
existing communications (radio, wire and mobile).

The plan was adjusted most daily at the end of the day. For example, the military
council of the 2d Guards Tank Army, as a rule, with the onset of darkness, when the
intensity of the offensive declined, summed up the results of combat operations.
The reasons for various failures were analyzed and positive experience generalized.
The commander, if the army formations as a consequence of certain factors did not
carry out a mission, adjusted the previously given instructions and the lines which
should have been taken as well as the methods of actions. Missions were also ad-
justed in the event that the formations carried them out ahead of time. Most often
the results of the day were summed up at the army cmmmand post with the corps com-
manders sometimes being present. Brief reports were heard by the chief of staff
(the chief of the operations section), the chief of the rear and the army artillery
commander.

In the course of an offensive, the basic content of the assigned missions was the
setting of the axes of operations. the lines (objectives), the time and methods for
defeating the enemy.

In the committing of the army formations to an engagement, the commander, if the
previously elaborated plan had not been disturbed, gave the established signal for
the army formations to move up to the attack line. But if corrections had to be
made because of changes in the situation, then oral instructions were issued in
which, for example, following the experience of the 5th Guards Tank Army in the
Belorussian Operation. the commander clarified the lines for bypassing the infantry,
the routes of advance, and the cooperation procedures for the corps and other
branches of troops.99

With the going over of the army formations to pursuit, the commander indicated the
axes and routes of the enemy's retreat. the basic axis of operations for the corps
(separate brigades) and forward detachments, the times and areas for intercepting
the enemy escape routes, the methods of defeating it, the measures to secure the
army's flanks and the cooperation procedures, particularly with the aviation.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rout urﬂuu. USE ONLY

With the maneuvering of an army or its formations, the corps commanders were in-
formed of the direction of the forthcoming operations, the intelligence missions,
the lines or areas which they should take, the time and sequence for carrying out
the missions, the questions of coordinating efforts, changes in the control system
and the procedure for supporting the army lines of communications.

With the committing of the army second echelon or the reserves to the engagement,
the commander indicated the attack line, the procedure of advance, the reinforce-
ments, the axis of the offensive, the lines or areas which had to be taken, and the
cooperation procedures with the adjacent units and aviation. At the same time mis-
sions were given to the first echelon formations where the commitment was to be made
for the freeing of the routes and to the artillery and aviation for supporting the
attack.

During the period of an offensive the question of organizing the carrying out of the
set combat missions held an important place in the work of the commander and his
subordinate troop control bodies. The staff exercised control over the actions of
the formations and provided help by sending staff officers to the formations. Par-
ticular attention was given to supervising the prompt receipt of battle orders and
instructions by the troops, to organizing reconnaissance and camouflage measures, to
the truthfulness of the information received on the position and condition of the
troops, to exercising control and cooperation, to checking the subordinate staffs'
knowledge of the cooperation signals and procedures, to their observance of the
rules for covert troop control and to the supply of materiel to the troops. The
staff organized the commandant service on the routes of advance behind the first
echelon, on the passages through the engineer-designed obstacles. in the crossing

of water obstacles and so forth; it provided cooperation between the army formations
and informed the field headquarters sections and staffs of the nature of the mis-
sions and the methods of carrying them out.

In the course of front offensive operations, a situation often arose when the mis-
sions for the tank armies were changed by the front commander even before they had
achieved the previously set goals. In such instances the army commander had to
adopt a plan for the new mission, while the staff and the other headquarters bodies
had to prepare the data, plan the combat operations and issue the missions to the
troops. All the work of organizing combat operations had to be carried out in a
very limited time. Usually this was from 5 to 16 hours considering the time for
withdrawing the army's formations from combat and their regrouping (Table 20).

Moreover, the staffs frequently did not possess complete data on the situation for
which the carrying out of the missions was being planned. Data on the enemy in the
new sector were often vary contradictory and incomplete. The difficulty was aggra-
vated by the fact that a portion of the troops was in direct contact with the enemy
and a portion was carrying out missions a significant distance away from the main
forces and it was not always possible to transmit certain instructions to them im-
mediately.

As a rule, the missions were issued to the army orally with the subsequent confirma-
tion by a written directive (order, instruction). The oral giving of missions was

made in general outlines indicating only the ultimate goal and the time for the
start of combat operations.

168

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
Time Available for Preparing to Carry Out New Missions
in the Course of Conducting Combat Operations*

 
 
   
  
   
  

   
 
    
   

   
   

 
  
 
   

   
    
  
  

  

Time for
Beginning of
Nature of obtained Time °f operations organizing
Operation, army mission receiving under n." combat
mission mission operations,

hrs

         
       
    
    
    
   
   
 

 

    
   

   

 

Orel, 3 GTA Offensive on new axis 0700 21 Jul 5.5
Krivoy Rog, 5 GTA Defeat of Kremenchug 0700 23 Oct 9
enemy grouping
Lwow-Sandomierz, March maneuver to 1800 22 Jul 11
3 GTA outflank city of
Lwow
Vistula-Oder, a TA Development of offen- 1800 18 Jan 6
sive
Budapest, 6 GTA Regrouping of army 0100 6 Jan 13
East Pomeranian. Turn to new axis 2000 3 Mar 16
2 GTA

*"Sbornik 8T 1 MV" [Collection of the Armored and Mechanized Troops], No b, 1964.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 315, inv. 4640, file 18, sheet 8; folio 240, inv. 8860,
file 8, sheet 202; folio 308. inv. 4548, file 302, sheets 3-10; folio 32b, inv.
#757, sheet 100.

 

Thus, the organizing of combat operations for a new mission in the course of an
offensive was carried out in a limited time, under the conditions of an insufficient-
ly clear situation and with the simultaneous organizing of the disengagement. re-
grouping and carrying out of a number of other measures. This complicated troop
control. The time factor necessitated parallel work by the army and corps command
and staff levels or by administrative order. This can be seen. for example, from

the allocating of time to prepare the combat operations of the 6th Tank Army on
14 August 1943 and the 3d Guards Tank Army on 18-and 20 January 1945 (Table 21).

A study of the experience in preparing for the designated operations makes it pos-
sible to determine the most characteristic features in the work procedures of the

commander, his subordinate control bodies and the formation commanders and staffs.

With the receiving of the mission. the commander, as a rule, with the participation
of the military council members, studied it, issuing the necessary preliminary
orders to the troops through the officers of the operations section. With the re-
ceiving of these instructions the commanders and staffs of the formations became
involved in the work. The instructions reflected the questions of organizing the

169

For omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 21

Allocation of Time for Preparing for Combat Operations under New Mission
in Army and Corps Control Bodies*

    

3 CTA

3 GTA

[Key: 1--Armies; 2-Receiving of mission; 3-Issuing of preliminary instructions;
b-—Giving of missions in battle instruction; 5-Issuing of operation order
to army; 6--Start of offensive by army main forces; 7--Iime of parallel
work by army and corps control bodies.l

*The Table was compiled from data of the Ministry of Defense Archives. folio 315,
inv. 4440, file 658, sheets 1-62; folio 323, inv. #756, file 6, sheets 1-11.

disengagement (when necessary) and readiness for the regroupings on the new axis.
Sometimes the missions were set to organize support for combat operations and the
methods of the subsequent issuing of missions were indicated. The army staff, as
the commander adopted the plan, drew it up, it simultaneously informed the army con-
trol bodies and the staffs of the supporting formations about the change in the mis-
sions and the situational data and organized a commandant service. In parallel the
staff assembled. generalized and analyzed the necessary information and compiled the
calculations for the employment of the men and equipment in the form of references,
table and graphs as well as on maps and diagrams. With the adopting of the plan by
the commander, the main thing in the work was to issue the missions by the quickest
method, including: by the traveling of officials, including the commander in a num-
ber of instances, to the subordinate troops; by radio with the aid of "marker“ maps

and procedure charts.

A particular feature in the commander's plan in those instances when the army chang—
ed only the axis of combat operations was the fact that most often in the aim of '
saving time and excluding involved regroupings to the new axis, the second echelons
or reserves were shifted first and these were restored as the first echelon forma-

tions disengaged.

la the Orel Operation, with the receiving on 20 July 1943 of a directive from the
front commander to destroy the Htsensk enemy grouping, Gen P. s. Rybalko, in order
to more quickly go over to an offensive on the new sector, decided to immediately
commit the second echelon, the II Mechanized Corps,”0 to the engagement and after
this to regroup the army's basic forces. An analogous decision was taken on 21 July
with a change in the army's mission, when the XII Tank Corps which had been

170

lﬂlﬂ<ﬂﬂﬂ€lAl.USE<DNlY
previously withdrawn into the second echelon and the reserve, the 91st Separate Tank
Brigade, were to be regrouped first to the new sector.l°'

Very often under such conditions forward detachments, including army ones, were em-
ployed. They had an opportunity in a shorter period of time to get ready to carry
out the new missions and by their combat operations to create favorable conditions
for the subsequent going over to the offensive by the army's main forces under the
new mission.

Immediately reconnaissance was sent out in the aim of obtaining the required data on
the enemy in the new sector. 0f great significance was a well-organized comandant
service, particularly when the army formations had to make a march to the new jump-
off area. The possible measures were taken to conceal the plan of the forthcoming
operations by deceiving the enemy, for example. by the staff of the 2d Guards Tank
Army by transmitting false radio messages on 23 January 1945 in the course of the
Vistu1a«0der 0peration.1°2

Here the basic method of supervision was the traveling of the field headquarters of-
ficers to the formations and units.

The coordinating of efforts of the army formations and units, the branches of troops
and aviation in terms of target, place and time as well as the methods of their
joint operations in carrying out a specific mission was one of the basic tasks of
control in the course of an offensive.

In those instances when an army received new men and equipment, for example, in the
course of the Berlin Operation, rifle divisions and artillery formations, the com-
mander in assigning them their missions. orally or in written instructions, also de-
termined the bases for cooperation, that is, with whom actions were to be coordi-
nated. at what time and for what purpose. The staff provided these formations with
the planning table of combat operations and a table of control, cooperation, warn-
ing and identification signals; it defined the signals procedures between the coop-
erating troops. Within the army, when its formations were reinforced by new means,
the latter were instructed as to the routes and time of approach and the missions to
be carried out; the staffs of the formations were instructed as to which units (for-
mations) should arrive where and how to organize their meeting and use.

Very often temporary operations groups were sent out for closer cooperation with
adjacent field forces of a front in the course of an operation. Thus, for coordi-
nating the actions of formations from the 4th Tank Army and the 60th Army in the
course of the Proskurov-Chernovtsy Operation, there was an operations group of offi-
cers from the staffs of both armies at the command post of the flank X Guards Corps.
It was headed by Gen Ye. Ye. Below, the deputy commander of the 4th Tank Army.

Cooperation questions were also settled simultaneously in the issuing of new mis-
sions to subordinates. If time was available, the commander played through varia-
tions of the combat operations on maps, for example, in preparing to defeat the
Vilnius enemy grouping by the 5th Guards Tank Army (the commander possessed 1 day
for preparations),'°1 including with a representative of the III Guards Mechanized
Corps, Gen V. T. Obukhov, which was to carry out the mission as the front's mobile
group.

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the capturing of Vilnius, cooperation was similarly organized with the approach-
ing formations of the 5th Army under Gen N. I. Krylov.1°“ The deputy commander of
the 5th Guards Tank Army with a group of officers, in the course of the Hamel Opera-
tion, traveled to the staff of the 43d Army under Gen A. P. Beloborodov for coordi-
nating actions with the XXIX Tank Corps.”s Gen P. S. Rybalko in the course of the
Berlin Operation repeatedly met with Gen A. A. Luchinskiy, the commander of the 28th
Army. for coordinating questions on the developing situation with him and his chief
of staff, Gen 5. H. Rogachevskiy.

Consequently, in the course of an offensive, contact between officials by personal
meeting or by using communications equipment was the basic method of organizing and
maintaining continuous cooperation in the army and with adjacent units.

In the course of an offensive great attention was given to maintaining close cooper-
ation with the aviation, particularly if the tank army was a significant distance
away from the front's main forces. This was achieved by constant clarification by
the cooperating staffs of questions related to the employment of men and equipment
to defeat the enemy, by the continuous exchange of reciprocal information, by the
prompt rebasing of the aviation, by the joint moving of control posts and by the or-
ganizing of air guidance using radios located in the brigades and sometimes even
battalions. for example, in the 6th Tank Army in the Budapest Operation. In the
operations of 1945, with the going over of an army to pursuing the enemy (for ex-
ample, in the Vistula-Oder Operation), the air divisions were often put under the
commanders of tank (mechanized) corps and this made it possible to more precisely
coordinate the efforts of the aviation and armored formations.

Cooperation with the artillery was maintained by its prompt movement. although with
the high momentum of advance this was often difficult as a consequence of the in-
sufficient mobility of the artillery, the decentralized use of it, particularly in
an offensive under specific situational conditions (at night. in mountains and so
forth). by the controlling of artillery fire through the artillery unit officers who
were at the control posts of the tank (mechanized) formations and subunits, includ-
ing in the forward detachments.

The experience of the operations at the end of 1944 and the start of 1965 was also
enriched by the joint combat operations by tank armies and river fleets which sup-
ported the movements of army personnel and equipment by water and provided assist-
ance in the crossing of water obstacles (the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Budapest
Operation).106 Cooperation was provided by an officer from the river fleet who was
part of the army operations group or in a corps. Direct communications by radio or
by wire were organized between the fleet staffs and the army formations. The obser-
vation posts of the fleet artillery officers were located in the forward tank bri-
gades on the main sector, at a command post or as part of the corps commander's op-
erations group. In addition to this from the fleet's ships, as necessary, correc-
tion posts were sent to the shore to the battalion battle formations and this pro-
vided for the rapid neutralization of enemy targets.

The stability of control in the course of an offensive depended chiefly upon the
choice of a structure of the control posts and communications system which was ac—
ceptable under the specific conditions. 0f important significance were the prompt
and organized moving of the control posts in the course of combat operations as well
as a well planned organization of their protection against enemy actions.

172

FOI1OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
The experience of tank army offensive operations showed the advisability in moving
up the army and committing it to battle of having the same location for the com-
manders of the tank and cooperating field forces, the commanders of the air corps
and the commanders of the artillery from the tank and combined-arms armies support-
ing the attack. To a definite degree this guaranteed firm and uninterrupted control
of the armored formations, aviation and artillery and the effective solving of
questions necessitating coordinated actions. A need was also evidenced for echelon-
ing the control posts, bringing them closer to the troops and considering the spe-
cific features of combat operations under various conditions.

In the course of offensive operations, the tank army control posts were located as
follows: the operations group a distance of 6-10 km away from the corresponding
corps control posts, the command post 15-25 km away and the second control echelon
25-30 km away (Table 22).

Table 22

Distance of Army Control Posts from Corresponding Corps Control Posts
in Certain Offensive Operations

Distance, km

Operation

Army Second
operations control
group echelon
Belgorod-Khar'kov 1 15-20 to 25-60
35-45
Uman'-Botosani 2 13-47 25-30
Lucw-Sandomierz 3 10-20 25-30
Lublin-Brest 2 8-10 10-25
Iasi-Kishinev 6 40-80 20-60
Debrecen 6 15-20 25-30
Vistula-Oder 4 10-30 25-30
2 12-15 25-30
East Prussian 5 15-25 20-30
East Pomeranian 2 15-17 25-30
Berlin 1 6-10 ---
2 12-15 25-30
Manchurian 6 25-60 60-50

 

Such a distance ensured ratler dependable communications with the existing equip-
ment and as a whole dependable control of the subordinate troops.

Consideration of the specific features of army combat operations was expressed in
the varying approach to organizing the control structure. With the going over of
the army to pursuit, for example, it became characteristic to locate all the con-
trol posts in the sector of the planned success. The commander, as a rule, exer-
cised control as part of the operations group. In a number of operations, temporary
control posts were set up. Thus. in the 6th Guards Army in the area of Inglava
(Czechoslovakia), because of the rapid advance of the troops, a temporary control

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

post was established and this was entrusted with the missions of transmitting re-
ports and obtaining data on the situation and other information from the front‘s
staff. The commander, the chief of staff and the chiefs of the branches of troops
and special troops advanced directly behind the troops with their communications.”7

In the crossing of rivers, control posts were brought somewhat closer to the troops
and the command post was also echeloned. Along with the operations group or obser-
vation post, a temporary control post was created for organizing the crossing and
controlling the troops in conducting combat operations on the opposite bank.

Deep echeloning and dispersion of the control points were widely employed in a
mountain offensive. For example, in the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Iasi-Kishinev
and subsequent operations, for directing the troops, as under ordinary conditions,
the following were organized: a command post, a second control echelon and an oper-
ations group of the staff. At the same time in the mountains it was essential to
more frequently organize temporary control posts manned by the army command post as
well as forward, side and alternate observation posts. In particular, such control
posts were organized in the approach of the army to the Transylvanian Alps, when its
formations were a significant distance apart and were extended along a front 60—

60 km. The creation of a temporary control point headed by the deputy commander
having one or two medium and high powered radios on one of the army's sectors im-
proved control and maintained its centralization.

There was also a desire to bring control closer to the troops. For example, in the
Budapest Operation, the army control posts were the following distances from the
first echelon battle formations: 4-8 km for the operations group and 10-12 km for
the command post,108 that is, they were somewhat closer than under ordinary condi-
tions. However, in individual operations, the distance of the control posts from
the forward units, as a consequence of a number of factors including the terrain
conditions, was more significant: 16-18 km for the operations group; 60-80 km for
the comand post in the Cluj and Debrecen sectors (September-October 19106),”9 80-
90 km in the course of the Manchurian Operation.no In these instances, a well con-
ceived system of organizing troop control and the carrying out of organizational
measures assumed particular significance. For example, in the Manchurian operation
basic troop leadership was assumed by the operations group headed by the commander
and this followed behind the army's first echelon; in the airborne landing at
Mukden, a group of aircraft was assigned from the attached air squadron and these
had radios to relay the operations signals.111 In the army, for the purpose of in-
creasing the mobility of the control posts and communications centers, all radios
down to the brigade ones inclusively were reinstalled on vehicles with better cross-

country capability.112

The control posts were brought as close as possible to the troops in conducting com-
bat in a major city. From the experience of the battles in Berlin, the army command
post was 4-10 km distant and the operations group 2-3 km.113 A second particular
feature was that a more diverse than usual network of temporary control posts was
set up headed by officials from the field headquarters. This was due to the fact
that the formations were conducting independent combat operations in being reinforc-
ed by rifle divisions and artillery. As a result the actions of the troops had to
be coordinated in the field.

174

FOR‘OFFKJAJ.USE(MVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEGDNLY

These and other particular features required the organizing of communications con—
sidering the conditions for conducting combat operations. In particular, a more

significant supply of communications equipment was organized. A portion of the
radios was employed for relaying. The reorganization of the traditional scheme was
carried out by creating the largest possible number of radio links. In conducting
combat operations in a city, the antennas were set up on the roofs of buildings.
Hire commnucations lines were laid along canals and lawns and across the most de-
stroyed and impassable streets. Do the tactical level, sound and visual signals
were employed more widely than under ordinary conditions.

The exercising of control, from the experience of combat operations on the right
bank Ukraine, was largely impeded by the spring mud. For example, in the Uman'-
Botosani Operation, the tanks and motor transport were either completely stopped or
advanced at an extremely slow speed. This limited the use of ground command trans-
port and the radios. There were instances when the staffs abandoned virtually all
the radios on the roads, in particular, the 5th Guards Tank Army when it reached the
Southern Bug River. As a result communication by aide remained virtually the sole
means of control. Liaison officers were also widely used, mainly on horses. One
of the particular features in the organization of control was that the operations
groups advanced along with the tanks (the commander, the chief of staff, the artil-
lery commander and the chiefs of the sections for operations, intelligence, signals
and other officials), having two or three RSB—type radios, two or three RB radios
and a large portion of the radios were carried on the tank chassis. The staff ad-
vanced 10-15 km behind the operations group. For preventing the lagging behind of
the staff vehicles with the radios, ahead of time they were assigned to certain
tanks the mission of which was to ensure the unimpeded movement of these vehicles
over the roads washed out by the spring floodwaters.

Consequently, a consideration of the particular features in the nature of combat
operations was, along with the carrying out of a number of organizational measures,
an important and essential condition for achieving stable control over the tank
army troops in the course of an offensive.

The moving of control posts (Diagram 14) with the continuOus combat operations last-
ing an average of 12-13 days was as follows: 9 or 10 times for a command post, or
approximately a distance of 25-30 km per day; once, twice or more times a day for
the operations group; once every 2 or 3 days for the second control echelon.

For example, from the experience of the 1st Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder
Operation, with an average momentum of advance of 25-30 km per day, the army command
post remained at one place for 18-20 hours.1‘“ This meant that its distance from
the troops, considering their advance at an average rate of 1-2 km per hour, was 30-
40 km. This ensured control by communications equipment, and in particular by radio.
With a momentum of advance of 3-4 and more kilometers per hour, a command post was
moved. as n rule. twice a day (the Manchurian Operation in the 6th Guards Tank ArmyL
This was essential in order not to allow the basic control post to become more than
40 km distant from the troops. This required that 48-50 percent of the time each
day he spent on moving. The total time for the moving of a command post, from the
unr's experience, was 11-12 hours, including 1.5 hours for striking, up to 8 hours
for moving to the new area and up to 2 hours for setting up.115 In this instance
control had to be carried out by the operations group. However, the technical

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
performance of the means of communications did not fully provide for this. Stabil-
ity of control was sharply reduced. From the autumn of 1966, a solution was found
by creating two positions for the communications so as to exclude time expenditures
on setting up and striking the control posts from the total time. Time was also
shortened by flying the basic officials to the new area at the already set up con-
trol post. However the shortage of aviation in the army and the insignificant car-
rying capacity of the available liaison aircraft did not make it possible to fully
and systematically utilize the advantages of this type of transport.

The position of control posts was changed as follows: by one echelon which was char-
acteristic for the 1963 operations, chiefly as a consequence of the limited number
of means of communications; in two echelons by assigning a portion of the communica-
tions to the new position (the 1966-1965 operations); by leap-frogging. that is. the
command post to the place of the operations point jumping over one position, the
second control echelon to the place of the command post also jumping over one posi-
tion (a majority of operations in 1966-1965); by alternating the areas of the army
command post to the location of the command post of one of the first echelon corps.

From the viewpoint of the stability of control, the most effective was, as combat
experience showed, moving by leap-frogging and by two echelons of control posts.
This required particularly careful organization of communications. Otherwise con-
trol was disrupted. For example, characteristically in the course of the Vistula-
Oder Operation in the 3d Guards Tank Army the stability of control declined in com-
parison with the other tank armies as a result of the falling behind of the command
post and the second control echelon from the troops. The problem was that the army
command post for a long time remained at one place (up to 6 days), and its distance
behind the corps command post reached 65-80 km and more. This was explained, on the
one hand, by the delay in laying wire communications lines from the command post
and, on the other. by the absence of a second position for the communications of the
designated control posts. Only by 27 Hanuary 1965 was the situation somewhat recti-
fied by forming a reserve communications group.116

Communications in the course of an offensive was carried out comprehensively using
all available means and here in the 1963 operations on the army-corps level chiefly
by wire communications and in 1966-1965, predominantly by radio.

In speaking about the improvement in the communications system, it is essential to
point out that in the war years, precisely in the tank armies, the practice arose

of organizing communications channels in bypassing the individual control elements.
This is also characteristic for modern automated systems. This idea was realized by
creating commander radio centers, as a result of which the commander and staff re-
ceived information by intercepting the calls of the brigade commanders. in bypassing
the corps element. Such a system during the war years proved its effectiveness,
since the efficiency of receiving the data and the reliability of information were
increased. The communications channels were somewhat freed and this was very impor-
tant with a constant increase in the information handled under the conditions of the
highly fluid troop combat operations.

Increased reliability of communications was achieved by carrying out an entire com-
plex of measures. A positive result was produced by the practice of shifting a por-

tion of the corps radios, for example of the 2d Tank Army in the Lublin-Brest Opera-
tion. from a radio net to a radio link during intensive traffic as well as by

176

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
incorporating the radios of the chief of staff in the net of the commander.117 0f
Important significance was the prompt maneuvering of communications, the use of not
only the basic but also the bypass channels and the organizing from the signalmen of
teams to repair damaged communications lines. In a number of operations from mid-
1944 intermediate grou s of radios were established: in the 2d Tank Army in the
Lublin-Brest Operation ’3 and in the 4th Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder and
Berlin operations. This was done mainly when the army formations were 30-60 km and
more from the remaining forces of the front. Reliability of transmitting informa-
tion over the communications was ensured by increasing the class rating of signals
specialists from 10-15 percent of the signals personnel in 1943 to 88-90 percent at
the beginning of 1945, by improving the quality of the cipher bodies and by dupli-
cating the most important information over several channels. From the autumn of
1964, the degree of secrecy was increased by working out a code command system not
for an entire operation, as was done previously, but rather successively for its in-
dividual stages. Measures were also carried out to camouflage the communications
centers and equipment.

All of these ard a number of other measures made it possible in the operations of
1944-1945 to somewhat increase the continuity, reliability, dependability and

secrecy of handling information in the course of an offensive.

As a whole, research on the experience of the control of tank army troops in the war
years makes it possible to note that the high mobility and maneuverability of the
tank troops, their actions to a great depth, as well as the rapid change in the situ-
ation under which the engagements and encounters occurred placed particular demands
upon control in all levels. These came down basically to a continuous study of the
situation and to attentive observance of enemy actions and to the ability to quickly
and correctly estimate the resources and determine the method of action to carry out
the set mission. The struggle to save time was an important task in the activities
of the commanders and staffs. For precisely this reason, experience taught, all
orders should be brief and clear leaving no doubt as to the content of the mission
and upon receiving this mission a subordinate would clearly know what he should do
and when, with whom he was to cooperate and who was to support him.

of crucial significance for the success of an operation was continuous cooperation
and this was achieved mainly by a mutual examination of the tasks-and methods of
fulfilling them. by establishing a unified orientation and target designation sys-
tem. by maintaining dependable communications between the formations, units and
branches of troops, by quickly restoring disrupted cooperation or organizing it anew
with a new mission to carry out.

The expvricnce of the past war teaches us that the bodies exercising troop control
and command should each time show activeness and resourcefulness, depending upon the
nature of the combat missions to employ those methods of control which would provide
.unuuuurrtuuity for the army commander at any time to know where the subordinate
lrnnps wvre, what they were doing and what they needed and, finally, to promptly
tullueuce the course of the operation by the resources at his disposal without wait-
inn far requests from subordinate commanders.

177

IN3R OFTHCJA1.USEIDNLY
10

11

12

13

1'0

15

16

17

18

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES
"Istoriya bronetankovykh i nekhanizirovannykh voysk Sovetskoy Arnii" [History
of the Arnored and Mechanized Troops of the Soviet Army], Vol 1, Izd. Akadenli
BT 1 MV, 1953, p 286.
"Boyevoy opyt bronetankovykh i nekhanizirovanyykh voysk v Velikoy Otechestvennoy
voyne" [Combat Experience of the Armored and Mechanized Troops in the Great
Patriotic Her], Collection 3, Moscow, 1944, p 41.

“Pod znamenami tankovoy gvardii" [Under the Colors of the Tank Guardsmen],
Politicheskoye upravleniye GSVG, 1967, p 25.

"Istoriya bronetankovykh i nekhanizirovannykh...," Vo1 1, 1953, p 285.
Ibid.

K. K. Rokossovskiy, "Soldatskiy dolg" [A Soldier's Duty], Moscow, Voyenizdat,
1969, p 228.

N. F. Krasnitskiy, "2-ya taniovaya armiya v Orlovskoy nastupatel'noy operatsii
Tsentral'nogo fronts" [The 2d Tank Army in the Orel Offensive Operation of the
Central Front], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1967, p 45.

"Sovetskiye tankovyye voyska 1941-1965" [The Soviet Tank Troops in l941-19b5],
Moscow. Voyenizdat, 1973, p 159.

A. N. Grylev, "Za Dncpron" [Beyond the Dnepr], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1963, p 69.
Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 299, inv. 76786, file 1, sheet 6.
Ibid., folio 236. inv. 35149, file 2, sheets 13, 91.

K. S. Moskalenko, "Na Yugo-Zapadnon napravlenii 1943-1945" [On the Southwestern
Sector, 1943-1955], Moscow, Nauka, 1972, p 398.

"Operatsii Sovetekikh Vooruzhennykh 811...," Vol 3, Moscow, 1958, p 408.
Ibid., p 610.

Ibid., p 428.

Ibid., Vol ’0, 1959, p 111.

Arkhiv MO SSSR, folio 668, inv. 33765, inv. 1, files 13-16; folio 324, inv.
4756, file 137, sheets 158-162.

"Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 511...," Vol 3, p 140.

Arkhiv MO SSSR, folio 16, inv. 965, file 24, sheet 18.

178

EORTOFFHJA1.USE(NNLY
70

21
22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

3]

32

33

3'9

35

36

37

38

39

40

lol

42

FTNRCNHHCJA1.USEZ(HVLV

"lnformatsionnyy sbornik BT 1 VM" [Information Collection of Armored and Mech-
anized Troops], No 6, 7, p 30.

Ibid., No 25, p 67.
Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 132-A, luv. 2642, file 13, sheets 229-232.

Ibid., folio 233, inv. 2356, file 739, sheets 489-499.

I. S. Konev, "Sorok pyatyy" [1945], Moscow, Voyenizdet, 1966, p 98.
"Istoriya bronetsnkovykh i mekhenizirovannykh...," Vol 2, 1953, p 380.
I. S. Konev, "Sorok pyatyy," Moscow. Voyenizdat, 1966, p 23.

Ibid., p 26.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 302, inv. 2067, file 5, sheet 178.

"Sovetskiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily...," pp 298, 299.

H. Mellenthin, "Tankovyye srezheniya 1939-1945 33." [Tank Engagements of 1939-
1945], Moscow, Izd-vo Inostrsnnoy Literstury, 1957, p 280.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 324, inv. 4757, file 9, sheets 118-123.
Ibid., folio 315. inv. 4440, file 722, sheet 20.

N. K. Popel', "Vperedi Berlin!" [Ahead Lies Berlin!], Moscow, DOSAAP, 1970,
p 175.

Arkhiv MO SSSR, folio 315, inv. 4440, file 36, sheets 14-15.

N. G. Andronnikov et 31., "Bronetsnkovyye 1 mekhanizirovannyye voysks
Sovetskoy Armii" [Armored and Mechanized Troops of the Soviet Army], Moscow,
Voyenizdst, 1958. p 222.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 6669, inv. 264530, file 1, sheets 1-31.

lbid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 308. sheets 277-294.

Ibid., folio 324, inv. 4757, file 9, sheets 118-123.

Ibid., folio 323, inv. 4757, file 9, sheet 47.

Ibid., file 8, sheets 18-24.

K. Tippelskirch, "Istoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny" [The History of World War 11],
Moscow, Izd-vo Inostrannoy Literatury, 1956, p 508.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR. folio 307, inv. 17011, file 8, sheet 2.

179

FIN!(Nﬂﬂ(JAL.USEZCNVLY
43

44

45

46

47

48

us

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

Ibid., 1nv. 4148, file 227, sheets 10-12.

Ihid., file 188, sheet 18.

Ibid., £0110 370, inv. 455221, file 5, sheets 38-39.

"Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 811...," Vol 3. 1958. p 416.
Ibid.. V01 4. 1959. p 153.

"Sbornik materialov p0 12nchen1yu...," N0 16, pp 94-103.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, E0110 315, inv. 4440, file 184, sheets 13-14.
Ibid., file 189, sheets 93-106.

VOYENNO—ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No l, 1962, p 49.

"Gvardeysksys tsnkovsya" [Guards Tank Arly], Moscow, Voyenizdst, 1963, p 97.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 203, inv. 2770, file 97, sheet 315.
VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 7, 1964, p 37.

"Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 811...," V01 3, 1958, p 418.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, £0110 299, inv. 3070, file 712; £0110 236. 1nv. 212695, file 6;
£0110 307, inv. 4148, file 330, sheet 308.

VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 2, 1970, p 70.
"Sbornik boyevykh dokunentov Velikoy...," N0 30, p 176.

F. D. Vorob'yev et 51., "Posledniy shturn" [The Last Storming], Moscow,
Voyenizdat, 1970, p 211.

Ibid.. pp 177-180.

"Velikaya Otechestvennaya voyna Sovetskogo Soyuzs 1941-1945. Kratkaya
istoriya, " p 228.

H. Hellenthin, op. cit., p 228.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, £0110 339, 1nv. 5185, file 16; £0110 332, inv. 4948, file 275,
sheet 59.

"Operatsii Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh 511...," Vol 3, 1958, p 149.

Ibid.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, [0110 299, inv. 8793, file 1, sheet 502.

180

IN)R‘0FII(1AI.[EHE(MVLV
68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

8'0

85

86

87

88

89

90

G. K. Zhukov, "Vosponinnniys i rszuyshlsniye" [Remembrances and Reflections],
Vol 2, Moscow, APN, 1974, p 235.

Arkhiv no 3533, folio 307, inv. 4148, file 412, sheet 663; file 344, sheet 60.
F. D. Vorob'yev et s1., op. cit., p 37.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 233, inv. 355817, file 2, sheet 19.

Ibid.

Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 225, sheets 367-374; file 266, sheets 2-16.
Ibid., folio 299, inv. 32219, file 1, sheets 28-29.

Ibid., folio 236, inv. 2673, file 974, sheets 145-147.

Ibid., folio 210, inv. 20837, file 48s, sheets 78-81.

Ibid., folio 236, inv. 13428, inv. 46, sheet 53.

Ibid., sheet 230.

Ibid., file 6, sheets 297-302.

Ibid., folio 339, inv. 5179, file 12, sheet 26.

Ibid., inv. 15789, file 20, sheet 406.

Ibid., folio 327, inv. 4999, file 171, sheets 114-116.

Ibid., folio 210, inv. 310117, file 1, sheets 33-34.

Ibid., folio 360, inv. 6134, file 41, sheets 6, 42.

Ibid., file 34, sheets 26, 42-44.

lbld., folio 332, inv. 4948, file 2, sheet 50.

Ibid., folio 315, inv. 4442, file 40, sheets 1-30; folio 236, inv. 2673, file
61, sheet 97.

Ibid., folio 315, inv. 4440, file 4, sheet 92.

Ibid., folio 236, inv. 13315, file 112, sheet 261; folio 240, inv. 15789,
file 16, sheet 278.

Ibld., folio 670, inv. 148761, file 10, sheet 149.

S. H. Shtemenko, "General'nyy shtab v gody voyny" [The General Staff in the
War Years], Book 2, Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1973, p 79.

181

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR‘OFF"JA1.USE(NVLY

9' Arkhiv no sssn, £0110 307, 1nV. 414a, £11e 238. sheets 174-183.
’2 1h1d.. £0110 332, inv. 50664, £11e 9, sheet 185.

93 Ibid., £11e 307, 1nv. 4156, £11e 27, sheets 78-79.

9“ 1h1a., sheet 99.

95 Ih1d., £0110 233, 1nv. 2309, £11e 1s. sheet 164.

95 1h1d.. £0110 237. 1nv. 2394, £11e 1224, sheets 55-56.
97 Ibid.. £0110 315, inv. 4442, £11e 14. sheets 88-91.
9° Ibid., £110 50, sheets 40-47.

99 lbid., £0110 332. 1nv. 4982, £11e 140, sheet 12.

'°° 1h1d., £0110 315. 1nv. 4440, £11e 1, sheet 4.

‘01 Ih1d., £11e 18, sheet a.

‘02 Ibid., £0110 233. inv. 2307. £11e 189, sheet 164.

‘03 Ibid., £0110 332. inv. 4365. £11e 18. sheet 82.

‘0“ 1h1d., inv. 4948, £11e 7s. sheet 101.

105 "K beregan yantarnogo norye" [To the Shores of the Amber Seal, Moscow.

Voyenizdac. 1969, pp 100-105.

1°5 "Khronika boyevykh deystv1y Dunayekoy £10t1111" [Chr0n1e1e 0£ the combat
Operations of the Danube Fleet]. Voyennorizdac, 1951, No 2, pp 109-120.

107 Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 339, inv. 5179, file 103, sheet 280.
1°“ Ib1d., 1nv. 5175, £11e 26, sheet 640.

1°9 1h1d., inv. 4179, £11e 4, sheet 38.

11° Ih1d., £11e 98. sheet 10.

"' 1h1d.. 1nv. 5195, £110 32, sheet 10.

“2 1h1d.. 1nv. 5179, £11e 86. sheet 136.

'13 1h1d., £0110 299, 1nv. 3074, £11e 244, sheets 2-13.

1'“ Ibid., 1hv. 3070. £11e 712. sheets 18-19.

182

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
11'.

H6

117

118

FOR 0F11C1Al.lEﬂE(MVLY

"Sbornik naterlalov po 12nchen1yu...." No 14, 19109, p 11.6.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 236, 1m]. 21084, file 3, sheet 216.

Ibid.. folio 307, inv. 51108, file 226, sheets 237-238.

A. V. Kuz'lin, "Voyevyye deystviya 2-y tankovoy amii v Lyubltnoko—Brestskoy
operatoii" [Combat Operations of the 2d Tank Amy in the lanolin-Brest Opera-
tion], Moscow. 1961, pp 103, 201.

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER IV: MAINTAINING AND RESTORINC THE BATTLEUORTHINESS 0F TANK ARHIES

The problem of maintaining and restoring the battleworthiness of troops has always
held an important place in military art. As the means of combat have developed, the
solution to this problem has become evermore complicated since with the increased
destructive might of weapons and the increased intensity of combat operations, the
protection of the troops has become more difficult and, correspondingly, their
losses have risen. This has necessitated the seeking out of the most effective ways
for maintaining and restoring the battleworthiness of the units, formations and
field forces.

During the years of the Great Patriotic Her the Soviet troops, and particularly the
armored formations and field forces, gained great experience in maintaining and re-
storing battleworthiness. The tank armies, in conducting combat operations to the

depth of the front offensive operations against a strong and resourceful enemy and

often in isolation from the combined-arms armies, suffered significant losses. In

the control bodies, casualties were as follows: up to 10-15 percent on the army

level; up to 40-50 percent on the corps (brigade) level and up to 70-80 percent on
the battalion level. In an absolute majority of instances, the tank armies, being

significantly short on personnel and equipment, continue to carry out their combat
missions, attacking the opposing enemy groupings.

Research on the experience of tank army offensive operations indicates that the
battleworthiness of the troops in those years was maintained and restored by the
carrying out of an entire range of measures, primarily by ensuring a high level of

a political-moral state and an offensive drive in the troops, by carrying out effec-
tive and direct staff training and combat training for the troops, by making up for
the losses in the control bodies by various methods, by bringing up the army forma-
tions and units to strength in terms of personnel, weapons and equipment, by forming
made-up detachments under certain conditions, by maintaining materiel stocks at the
established rate and by continuously rebuilding damaged equipment.

1. Operations of Tank Armies with Limited Forces under Conditions of Significant
Losses

1n the course of the offensive operations, rather frequently, particularly in the
middle of 1943 and the beginning of 1966, a situation developed whereby it was es-
sential to continue the offensive, however the armies, in suffering significant
losses of personnel, weapons and military equipment in the course of the previous
engagements, frequently lost their combat capability. The military councils, staffs

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR13FFK]A[.USE(M¥LV

and other control bodies had to carry out intense organizational work and creatively
search for ways to solve such a complicated and sometimes seemingly insoluble prob-
lem of restoring troop battleworthiness.

One of the methods for temporarily restoring the battleworthiness of the army
troops was the creation of made-up detachments capable of carrying out certain in-
dependent tactical tasks.

For example, as a result of the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation, favorable opportunities
arose for pursuing the enemy and bringing our troops to the Dnepr River. On

27 August 1963, the commander of the Steppe Front, Gen I. S. Konev, gave the 5th
Guards Tank Army the mission together with the 5th Guards Army to throw the enemy
back from Khar'kov to the southwest. By this time. the formations of the 5th Guards
Tank Army had just 66 tanks in working order and this was 12 percent of their ini-
tial number.1 The staffs of the corps had an officer manning level that did not ex-
ceed 30—35 percent. There were also high losses in the means of communications and
in a number of formations the losses were up to 75 percent. Almost 85 percent of
the company and battalion commanders were out of commission.

Under these conditions the commander of the 5th Guards Tank Army, Gen P. A. Rotmis-
trov took a decision to make up one brigade in each corps using the remaining tanks
and personnel. to reinforce these with artillery and combine them into a made-up
army detachment under the command of Gen B. M. Skvortsov, the commander of the V
Guards Mechanized Corps. This corps had the greatest strength in terms of staff
personnel and radios. 0f the three tank brigades of the XVIII Tank Corps, a made-up
brigade was organized with the transfer of cor-land to the staff of the 181st tank
brigade as it had over 55 percent of the tanks and the brigade's staff had survived
almost intact.2 A made-up brigade was also organized from units of the XXIX Tank
Corps. All the remaining personnel was moved back to the concentration area for
manning and restoring the battleworthiness of the units.

Consequently, by carrying out these measures the commander of the 5th Guards Tank
Army solved, as it were, two problems: to defeat the opposing enemy grouping and
restore the battleworthiness of the remaining army formations and units.

There were certain differences in the conditions for creating the made-up detach-
ments of the let Tank Army in developing the offensive after the Belgorod- -Khar'kov
Operation. This army had a higher level of surviving tanks than the 5th Guards Tank
Army. The V1, XXXI Tank and III Mechanized Corps as of 23 August had 141 tanks.3

For this reason there was no need to organize a single made-up detachment. How-
ever a number of army formations were below strength in personnel and equipment.

For example, the 262d Tank Brigade of the XXXI Tank Corps had lost up to 80 percent
of the tanks and 65 percent of its personnel. In the 6th Motorized Rifle Brigade

of the VI Tank Corps, 7-10 percent of the personnel remained in fighting condition.
Losses in command personnel from the III Mechanized Corps were almost 90 percent.“

In addition, the very mission set for the lat Tank Army by the front commander, that
is, to develop the offensive together with the 27th, 5th and 6th Guards army, as
their forward detachments, required at least three formations. Since by this time
a number of the tank brigades in the lat Tank Army did not have any tanks at all,
the army commander. Gen M. Ye. Katukov, took the decision to create made-up corps

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
detachments. For improving the organization of control in the corps, the non-
battlewurthy units were broken up and the newly formed ones were reinforced by them.
The made-up detachments in this army were created on the basis of the formations and
units which had maintained high battleworthiness and by reducing the number of ex-
isting units and Subunits; here certain of them were shifted to a lower TOE level.
For example, in the lII Mechanized Corps, of the five brigades two were left (a tank
and motorized rifle), while the remainder were changed into battalions. Control
was exercised by the staffs of the 1st Tank and 3d Motorized brigades. The staffs
of the other brigades directed the combat operations of the made-up battalions.

Unique conditions for creating made-up detachments also existed in the 2d Tank Army
in the course of the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation, when on 27 January, in en-
deavoring to eliminate the breakthrough, the enemy attacked with four tank and two
infantry divisions against the Soviet troop grouping which had broken through its
defenses. On 4 February, having created a tank ram from six tank divisions, it
again made a counterstrike. At a price of great losses, the enemy succeeded in
breaching our defenses. The situation required the immediate commitment of new
forces. The 2d Tank Army which had still not been brought up to strength was shift-
ed to the site of the enemy breakthrough. Its formations had a little more than
160 tanks‘in fighting order and the corps staffs were 40—50 percent of their
strength.‘

The difficult situation on the front required the committing of the army's units and
formations to the engagement as they arrived in the new area. By the decision of
the army commander, Gen 8. I. Bogdanov, made-up detachments were organized for giv-
ing them greater independence and eliminating multiple levels of command.

The made-up detachment No 1 included the control bodies and tank subunits from the
11th Tank Brigade (without the rear subunits), an army SAU regiment and an artillery
unit from the III Tank Corps (as a total the detachment numbered: 19 tanks, 12 SAD
and 6 guns). The made-up detachment No 2 consisted of the subunits from two tank
brigades and an army artillery regiment (66 tanks and ll guns). 0n 3 February, for
reinforcing the 6th Tank Army, a made-up detachment was sent off consisting of sub-
units from motorized rifle and tank brigades with the army rear subunits.6 It was
given the name of the combat section of Col Maksimov (the deputy commander of the
xv1 Tank Corps).7

From the given examples it can be seen that the forming of the made-up detachments

for carrying out active missions was a compulsory measure and was carried out under
the difficult conditions of an operational situation with limited resources in the

units and formations because of losses in previous battles. The aim of organizing

such detachments was to restore the battleworthiness of the formations (units. sub-
units) as independent tactical units, to improve control by eliminating intermedi-

ate levels, to form new control bodies or on the basis of these levels to recreate

the old control bodies capable of carrying out their inherent tasks.

One can clearly trace the desire of the army commanders to ensure the made-up de-
tachments with the possibility of highly effective independent actions. This was
achieved by incorporating in them artillery, antiaircraft weapons and without fail
subunits supporting troop combat operations along with the tank and motorized rifle
units. For example, in organizing a corps detachment from the XXXI Tank Corps of
the 1st Tank Army, the made-up tank brigade which was created from the corps'

186

FOR‘OFFKJAL.US£10NLY
brigades transformed into battalions had: a battalion of the 79th Rocket Regiment,
two batteries of the army tank killing and SAD regiments and a corps-level antiair-
craft battery. Due to the fact that the rear subunits of the brigades were out of

commission, the made-up detachment was reinforced by a fuel supply company from the
xxx: Tank Corps. 9

Consequently, the main principles in organizing the made-up detachments, the experi-
ence of the examined operations, were: the unifying of the remnants of several
units (subunits) in a made-up formation on the basis of those which had maintained
the highest battleworthiness for tanks and personnel and had TOE control bodies; the
maintaining of the organizational integrity of those subunits which had suffered the
least losses. When necessary the TOE composition of the formations (units) could be
fundamentally reorganized when the made-up detachments were created from them. In
this instance, the incorporating in them of subunits ensuring the combat operations
of-the troops assumed particularly important significance.

Thus, from the experience of the tank armies. the made-up detachments during the war
years were temporary formations which were organized out of the subunits, units and
formations which had lost their battleworthiness or at the moment of their formation
did not possess the quantitative and qualitative characteristics inherent to their
TOE. However, regardless of their limited combat capabilities, in comparison with
the capabilities of the TOE strength, these temporary formations were capable of
carrying out a number of independent active tasks, including pursuit and repelling
counterattacks by enemy reserves in an offensive. to capture important objectives
and lines deep in the enemy defenses and so forth. Proof of the capability of ef-
fective actions by the made-up detachments was the carrying out of the set missions

in the Belgorod-Xhar'kov, Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy operations and in pursuing the
enemy on the left bank Ukraine.

The particular features of leadership in organizing and in the operations of the
made-up detachments were caused by the fact that the control bodies, as a rule, were
not up to full strength in officers and suffered an acute shortage of communications.
For example, in the field headquarters of the 5th Guards Tank Army on 27 August 1943,
there was 23 percent of the radios and 26 percent of the signals transport in com-
parison with their TOE level.‘3 A difficulty in the activities of the comanders

and staffs was that along with the organizing of the made-up detachments, they con-
trolled the combat actions and brought the units (subunits) back to the assmbly
areas for manning-up (reorganizing). All of this taken together, in comparison with
ordinary conditions, required even more intense work by the commanders and staffs

and the showing of great initiative by them.

The restoring of the troop control bodies under such conditions was carried out by
various methods.

Thus, in the 5th Guards Tank Army, in organizing a made-up detachment and in turning
over control to the staff of the V Guards Mechanized Corps from the XVIII and XXIX
Tank corps, two high-powered radios and three medium-powered ones were provided.

The operations and intelligence sections of the corps were reinforced by officers
from the appropriate army staff sections.

187

INJR10FF1CJAI.IISEZCNNLY
I'D! Ufl'lLIAI. use ONLY

In the corps of the 5th Guards Tank Army the control bodies of the made-up brigades
were recreated basically by unifying several staffs which had lost a significant
portion of their resources. For example. the commander of the 25th Tank Brigade
was in command of the made-up barigade of the XXIX Tank Corps, while the staff was
organized from the staffs of two other brigades (the 31st and 32d Tank brigades).
The corps transferred the operations and intelligence sections to the staff of the
made-up detachment. Here the corps engineer directed engineer support.lo Such a
method required time and was compulsory under the conditions of the high losses of
leadership and means of control.

The restoring of control bodies by made-up detachments in the 2d Tank Army was car-
ried out by transferring the battalions reorganized from brigades to the staff of
one of the corps tank brigades. Thus, a SAD regiment and a number of other sub-
units which previously had been under the army were transferred to the headquarters
of the 11th Tank Brigade. Understandably. this was the simplest and quickest method
for creating control bodies for the made-up detachments, however it was not always
applicable.

As a whole, the specific choice of a method for restoring battleworthiness or cre-
ating new leadership bodies for the made-up detachments was determined proceeding
from the available time. the control equipment and by the manning level of the
staffs.

Control over the made-up detachments in carrying out combat missions was exercised
by methods characteristic for usual conditions. Only the structure of the control
posts was somewhat altered. For example, in the 5th Guards Tank Army, along with
the basic command post the personnel of which was engaged with the questions of man—
ning the units and formations in the concentration area, an operations group was or-
ganized for controlling the actions of the made-up army detachment. In the 1st Tank
Army, a single command post was maintained which provided leadership over the corps.
In the 2d Tank Army, the commander from the command post directly controlled all the
made-up detachments created in the army without any intermediate levels. In the
first instance. the army commander controlled one made-up detachment through the op-
erations group. focusing basic attention on bringing order into the units withdrawn
from battle. In the second instance the control over the three tank corps ensured
their rapid and organized transfer to the combined-arms armies.

Thus. control in the organizing of the made-up detachments and in the course of
their combat operations. was determined by the uniqueness of the missions, by the
necessity of a high degree of efficiency and by the presence of limited means of
control. The stability and results of this control to a large degree depended upon
the quality of work in restoring the control bodies and providing them with commun-
ications. As a result by using the made-up formations, troop control was improved,
the degree of centralization was increased and better conditions were created for
the massed use of the available forces, for bringing up to strength and putting to-
gather LhOBe formations and units which had been taken out of combat and served as
one of the sources for additional formations in the course of the operations.

An analysis of the activities carried out by the troop control bodies in partially
restoring the battleworthiness of tank army troops during the years of the past war
shows that under conditions where an acute need arose to conduct combat operations
with limited forces, the organizing of made-up formations produced a definite ef-
feet.

188

FINICHWHCJAI.USEiONl¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The methods of forming the made-up detachments were determined chiefly by the situa-
tional conditions, by the available time, by the battleworthiness of the equipment
and personnel as well as by their purpose. It is also important to emphasize that
the made-up detachments were used for carrying out active offensive missions both
independently as well as in close cooperation with other formations. The experi-
ence of organizing the made-up detachments in a short period of time and under a
difficult situation of combat activity as well as their rather good results in com-
bat employment confirm the possibility and in certain instances the necessity of
organizing them in a specific situation.

2. The Repairing of Combat Equipment

Among the measures to maintain the battleworthiness of tank armies, the repairing
of military equipment held one of the leading places. Its importance was determined
primarily by the fact that the supply of new combat equipment for the combat sub-
units was carried out chiefly in the preparation of an operation as well as during
the period of extended operational pauses. In the course of combat the delivery of
tanks from the plants to the units was an extremely rare phenomenon. For this
reason, the repair of damaged armored equipment in the course of engagements and its
rapid return to combat was the most essential source for replacing tank losses. For
example, from the experience of the repair bodies of the 3d Guards Tank Army in the
Lwow-Sandomierz Operation. the number of repaired tanks and SAU significantly ex-
ceeded the number of combat vehicles existing in the tank army by the start of the
operation.11 In other words, during an operation each tank (SAD) was out of commis-
sion two or three times and just as many times was returned to the battle formations
of the units and formations.

An analysis of the data on losses in tank armies during 11 offensive operations
(Appendices 6 and 5) makes it possible to note a number of important aspects in the

designated problem.

In the first place, the irrecoverable losses of the tank armies in an offensive op-
eration lasting an average of 15-20 days were around 25 percent of the initial num-
ber of tanks and SAU while total losses were around 82 percent. Average daily loss-
es were somewhat over 5 percent of the initial number of combat vehicles including:
0.6 percent for vehicles requiring a major overhaul and 3 percent for medium and
routine repairs.

Secondly, combat vehicles requiring salvage and rebuilding comprised up to 70 per-
cent of the total losses. Among the vehicles requiring rebuilding were approximate-
ly 70 percent of the tanks and snu put out of commission because of combat damage
and 30 percent as a consequence of becoming stuck or technical malfunctions. In in-
dividual operations the percentage of vehicles out of order because of technical
reasons approached 63.8 (the 6th Guards Tank Army in the Manchurian Operation).

Thirdly. the level of combat losses in tanks and SAD over time varied. This depend-
ed upon many factors and primarily upon the nature of army operations, the intensity

of the operation. the saturating of enemy defenses with antitank weapons and the
training level of the tank crews.

189

FIHI()FFIC1AI.IJSEI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, losses in armies involved in completing the breakthrough of the tactical de-
fensive zone (the lst Guards Tank Army in the Belgorod-Khar'kov and Berlin opera-
tions and the 2d Guards Tank Army in the Orel and Berlin operations)12 surpassed the
lusses of armies which were being committed to a so-called "clean breakthrough" (the
2d Tank Army in the Lublin-Brest Operation), averaging 0.7-3.8 percent per day.

The nature of the losses was largely influenced by the following: what missions the
armies were carrying out, by what methods, over what period of time and to what de-
gree the principle of the massing of men and equipment was observed.

For this reason it is no accident that the highest absolute losses in tanks and SAU,
as is seen from Appendix 4, occurred in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation, where the
lst Tank Army had to participate in completing the breakthrough of enemy defenses,

to fight for strongpoints and to repel counterstrikes by a powerful enemy tank group-
ing as well as in the Proskurov-Chernovtsy Operation where the duration of combat
operations was [portion of text missing here]...was actually committed to the en-
gagement piecemeal and at different times. Consequently, instead of a strong tank
thrust the actions were reduced to numerous tank attacks. This explains the fact
that the maximum average daily losses were recorded in the 2d Tank Army in the Orel
Operation.

As the data confirm, the armies suffered high losses in the first stage of an oper-
ation. While the average daily failure of tanks and SAD in the Lwow-Sandomierz Op-
eratlon, for example, in the 3d Guards Tank Army, was 7 percent, in the first stage
(15-18 July 1944) it reached 8.6 percent and in the third (28 July-29 August 1944),
in the course of pursuit, it dropped to 6.3 percent. The picture in the Vistula-
Oder and a number of other operations was approximately analogous.

The highest losses were in conducting combat operations in a city. For example, the
3d Tank Army in the approach to Khar'kov (January 1943) had 378 tanks, and emerged
from the battle in the city with 98 tanks.13

The combat losses from enemy artillery fire varied from 58.8 to 94.8 percent, from
air strikes from 0.5 to 17.7 percent, from hitting antitank mines from 2 to 14 per-
cent and from bazookas to 24 percent (Table 23). According to the data of the of-
fensive operations by the Soviet Army through 1944 inclusively, the irrecoverable
losses of tanks and SAD from artillery fire were 16 percent of all the hit vehicles,
starting with the second half of 1944, the losses from shaped-charge shells and
bazookas rose to 30-80 percent. 0n the basis of statistical data. the tank and SAU
losses from artillery fire with the employment of shaped-charge shells were dis-
tributed in the following manner: irracoversble losses up to 30 percent, losses
requiring major overhaul around 15 percent. for medium repair around 25 percent and
routine repair 30 percent.

Losses by types of vehicles were distributed as follows: up to 65 percent of the
total for tanks and up to 45 percent for the SAU, and the highest irrecoverable

losses were for medium tanks with up to 39 percent, for heavy tanks up to 31 per-
cent and the least for SAU with up to 20 percent. According to technical causes,
the tanks and SAD were out of commission as follows: up to 67 percent because of

natural technical wear, up to 35 percent because of poor technical operation and up
to 25 percent due to manufacturing failures.

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 23
Distribution of Combat Losses in Tanks and SAD during Tank Army Offensive Operations

     

Losses, 1

  
  

      
    

Operations from
artillery from other
fire aviation bazookas factors
Orei 2 14 ---
4 8 5.8
Kiev 3 2 2.7
Lwow- Sa ndomie r2 3 6 ---
4 3 1.8
Vistula-Oder 3 2 --
l 5.3 1.1
2 2 17
4 9.5 4.8
Berlin 2 5.8 4.9
3 6.6 ---

   

The given statistics again make it possible to note that a majority of the quality

indicators for the losses depended upon the nature of the combat employment of the

armored troops and the conditions of use. Dependable neutralization of the enemy,

the joint actions of tanks with the infantry and engineer troops, the providing of

the necessary time for maintenance, the high skill level of the drivers [portion of
text missing]...losses in an operation.

The experience of the last war showed that at least 60 percent of the combat ve-
hicles in the preparation of an operation and 85-90 percent of them in the course of
an offensive were returned after repairs. Consequently, the rebuilding of the tanks
and SAU was the main source for replenishing the losses. Under these conditions,
the tank technical service was confronted with two main tasks: rebuilding the con-
bat vehicles and carrying out preventive measures. The basic aim was to increase
the survival rate of the equipment. This was achieved by extensive organizational
work carried out by all leadership bodies considering the specific situation and the
combat operations conditions, by the heroism of the Soviet soldiers and by the labor
of the personnel in the rear units and subunits.

The planning of technical support for an operation started, as a rule, as of the
moment the army commander received the mission and issued it to the assistant army
commander for technical affairs. His job included: adopting a decision and working
out a plan for technical support, preparing the equipment of the repair and salvage
service for work and carrying out measures to organize the correct operation of the
materiel. The decision of the assistant commander for technical afisirs was based
upon the following calculations: the assumed losses. the means required for repair-
ing the personnel, available protaction capacity, and the necessary amount [portion
of text missing]...of units and spare parts for repairs.

191

FOR OFTHCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Organizational work for technical support in being carried out virtually continuous-
ly assumed a particularly broad scope from the very first days the tank army was put
into the reserves. During this period in the army's formations the efforts of all
repair and reconstruction resources and the tank crews were aimed at quickly ready-
ing the existing materiel. Special exercises were conducted with the drivers to im-
prove their knowledge in operating the vehicles under specific conditions. For de-
tecting and eliminating malfunctions, all the tanks and SAU underwent a careful plan-
ned preventive inspection. At the same time, the following were organized: an ex-
change of experience on technical support in the previous operation, the training of
crews in operating the vehicles considering the season and the particular features
of the theater of war, increasing technical ski‘ls, manning-up the repair and sal-
vage units and subunits, repair of equipment and so forth. The effectiveness of the
measures carried out can be seen, for example, from the fact that the repair units
of the 4th Guards Tank Army under the leadership of Engr-Col V. H. Lyapishev on the
eve of the Berlin Operation repaired over 200 combat vehicles.‘“ In the let Tank

Army onlghe eve of the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation, 1,250 motor vehicles were re-
paired.

[n carrying out the tasks of readying the materiel for the operation, the repair
troops showed great skill and inventiveness. Thus, in preparing for the final oper-
ation of the war, the soldiers and officers of the repair battalion of the 1st Guards
Tank Army (battalion commander, Bngr-Lt C01 A. A. Shsbokhin) showed resourcefulness
and boldness in manufacturing grouser bars directly in the army. They found steel
of the necessary size and quality, they stamped out the heads manually and tempered
them slightly. As a total around 30,000 grouser bars were made. As a result of
this, by the start of the operation on all the tanks the worn out bars had been re-
placed by hand-made ones; in addition each had 20 spare bars.ls The repair troops
of the 2d Guards Tank Army also showed great inventiveness in preparing for the
Vistula-Oder Operation. The problem was that because of the frosts which had set in
the tank troops were confronted with the problem of how under winter conditions to
maintain the combat capability of the vehicles and immediately start up the engines
without wasting engine life on warming them. In the XII Guards Tank Corps this
question was solved rather quickly as next to the tank emplacements [portion of text
missing] there was a pit 3 m deep with reinforced side walls and covered with a beam
roof and having a sloping entrance ramp which was covered with woven straw mats. In
pits under the T—34 tanks were tank warming stoves and this made it possible to main-
tain a positive temperature in the tank (8-12° above 0) and immediately start up the
engine. In emerging from the pit into the combat emplacement, the tank could fire
or advance for an attack. These structures helped to maintain motor life for the
forthcoming offensive.

In the course of an operation, the procedure of use and the methods of operating the
various elements of the repair and salvage facilities were determined by the partic-
ular features of the operation being carried out, by its depth, by the duration and
pace. as well as by the composition and technical state.of the tank fleet of the
units and formations. Depending upon the nature of tank damage and malfunctions and
upon the amount and complexity of repair work, the following three types of repairs
were carried out: routine, medium and major overhaul. Various times and conditions
for performing each of them were needed.

The maintenance platoons and companies of the armored units (formations) were used
to carry out routine repairs on the tanks and for providing help to the crews in the

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
maintaining of armored equipnent. This most frequent type of repair came down to
eliminating malfunctions by replacing damaged parts of mechanisms and devices as
well as to carrying out the required adjustment, fastening, welding and mechanical-
assembly work. The designated subunits repaired the basic mass of vehicles needing
a short period of time for the repairs. This was done directly where they broke

down. In order not to fall behind their units, the repair subunits remained only a
short time at One place.

The corps repair units (mobile tank repair bases), in advancing in the zone of oper-

ing units and weapons. This type of repair ensured a reserve operating life for the
vehicles within the designated period between repairs. The mobile tank repair bases
also carried out a portion of routine repairs which, because of a lack of time,
could not be done by the repair subunits of the armored formations (units). In the

not deployed and along with the salvage companies performed the functions of a tech-
nical maintenance echelon. Subsequently, in the course of combat operations, it
repaired the tanks requiring mainly a medium repair. Rather often the army repair
battalions and salvage companies were used as a means for reinforcing formations.
This wau the case, for example, in the 5th Guards Tank Army in the East Prussian
Operation. The decentralized use of the army repair and salvage equipment was

The data for the 4th Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder Operation show the distribution
of repair capabilities of the units, formations and field forces. The brigade facil-
ities repaired 648 tanks and SAU, the corps facilities repaired 150 tanks and SAU
and the army facilities some 171 combat vehicles.

upon reaching the assembly areas after carrying out the mission of the day they were

often located with the troops. However this was possible only with a momentum of
advance of 15-20 km per day.

The sharp increase in the troop momentum of advance characteristic for offensive

operations during the concluding period of the last war required a revision of the
adopted organization of troop technical support. Due to the falling behind of the
rear bodies, including the repair units (subunits), the established procedure for

utilizing repair facilities did not provide good results. It was essential to ten-
tralize all the army repair and salvage facilities.

This was done, for example, in the course of the offensive in January-February 1945
in the 1st Guards Tank Army, where in addition repair-salvage groups were created

193

FOR¢0FFﬂJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from the army repair battalion, the corps mobile tank repair bases and also two
regular army salvage companies and two SPAM. Some notion of the use of repair and
salvage equipment in this period is provided by the data in Table 210.

 

Table 24
Use of chair and Salvage Equipment in the lat Guards Tank Army
in January-February 1945*
Total Including
number
Position of SPAM 5:3“ 2:13:31: of Inspection Turned over
' e 1 ce repaired Re .1 d and mal- to front
on p a combat. p re functions for major
vehicles eliminated overhaul
Nowe Hiasto 18-20.1 23 8 -- 15
Nowe Miasto l8-22.1 38 30 -- 8
Strykow 20-29.l 61 19 32 10
K010 22.1-3.2 104 39 51 16
Piotrkow 29.1-7.2 123 23 90 10
Heisskauland 29.1-4.2 30 15 15 --
Alttierstigel 3-ll.2 115 33 75 7
Kris: 4-13.2 91 21 65 S
Soldin l3-l8.2 15 15 -- --
Stolgenberg 11-26 . 2 71 21. 28 10
Total 671 227 356 79

*VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No lo, 1967, p 19.

As is seen from the table, the SPAM were located at one place from 3 to 16 days in
carrying out repairs and evacuating the tanks and SAU. Over a period of 100 days
they repaired 227 combat vehicles, they carried out inspections and eliminated mal—
functions in 356 tanks and SAD, thereby providing a high level of battleworthiness
for the armored equipment.

In principle, by a decision of the army military council, upon the proposal of the
assistant army comander for technical affairs, Maj Gen Engr-Tech Serv P. G. Dyner,
considerig the forthcoming combat operations, the following changes were made in
the previously existing system of tank technical support: all medium repairs on
tanks and SAU were to be assigned to the army repair facilities; the corps repair
facilities were removed from the formations and put directly under the army and
these were given the job of carrying out routine repairs; the battalion and brigade
facilities were released from routine repairs and were required to be concerned
solely with maintenance.

During this operation the SPAN were deployed on the basic axes of the corps a dis-
tance of some 40-50 km apart. Each of the SPAM included: a tank repair company, a

mechanical platoon, the tractors of the salvage company, vehicles carrying spare
parts and fuel and a car for couunications and reconnaissance. In leap-frogging

1910

FORMALUSEONLY ,3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and in bypassing the located SPAM, they could remain up to 6-9 days at one place,
that is, until the completion of all work involved in repairing the tanks concen-
trated here, in falling behind 150 and more km from the fighting troops.

the course of combat operations to rebuild and return to the line virtually all
armored equipment which could be repaired in the field. The centralization of lead-
ership over the work carried out by the corps repair bases also simplified the or-
ganizing of the return of repaired vehicles. In groups of 5-10 units, .after skilled
technical aid and maintenance, they returned to their units. As a result, on

1 February 1965, of the 758 listed tanks and SAU, 577, or 76 percent, were in serv-
ice.

0f important significance in organizing the rapid repair of damaged combat equipment
was the specializing of the repair units and subunits. This provided an opportunity
to improve repair methods, to raise productivity and the quality of the work per-
formed. The mobile tank unit repair plants organized in 1963 rebuilt a significant
number of tank engines, assemblies and units directly in the front's rear. This
created the necessary conditions for widely introducing the most progressive unit
method of repair into the work practices of the troop repair facilities.

pairs and did not require complex production equipment needed for high quality re-
pairs on engines and units in all the repair units and subunits. As a result, the

mobility of the troop-level repair units was increased. field repairs were simpli-
fied and production capabilities increased.

It must be emphasized that the specializing of the repair facilities during the
last war was rather widespread. This was the path followed in the reorganizing of
the mobile repair plants, the repair units or their subunits, the individual repair
brigades which were part of the corps and army facilities. This contributed to the
more skilled performing of repairs in a limited time. For example, the temporary
transfer during the period of the Vistula—Oder Operation of the 152d Mobile Tank
Repair Base which was specialized in tank repairs to the 2d Guards Tank Army made it
possible to rebuild military equipment rather efficiently, without dissipating the
limited amount of spare parts, specialized equipment and tools and without diverting

to their repair the army facilities which in addition were not sufficiently trained
for performing such work.18

The rapid repair of armored equipment and the maintaining of high battleworthiness
in the tank units and formations during the course of offensive operations depended
also upon uninterrupted and close cooperation between the repair and salvage units.
For example, in using the repair units at the SPAM, the length of time the tanks
spent there was significantly shortened as a result of reducing working time losses
in locating the damaged vehicles and beinging them back to the repair brigades;
there was also the more productive process of repairs and the fuller utilization of
available equipment. In this instance, conditions were also created for better or-
ganizing the security of concentrated military equipment as well as the equipment
engaged in repairing it. This conclusion was reached, in particular, by the assist-
ant comander of the 2d Guards Tank Army, Gen N. P. Yushin, in organizing a tank
technical service in all 1945 operations using these principles.

195

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rapid advance of our troops as well as in operations on swampy terrain, when salvag-
ing involved serious preparatory work and the loss of significant time, a portion of
the damage equipment was repaired at the spot where it failed, particularly those
combat vehicles the repair of which did not require a large amount of work. More-

maintaining the battleworthiness of the tank formations, particularly in an offen-
sive under the specific conditions of the theater of war (wooded-swampy, mountain

tion advanced under such difficult conditions. The tanks had to cross wooded-swampy
and sandy terrain and operate under roadleas conditions with a high momentum of ad-
vance approaching 60 km per day on individual days. The time for maintenance was
reduced to a minimum. The consumption of motor potential by mid-July reached 900-
1,300 km and the engines operated 160-170 motor hours.20 The failure of tanks in-
creased, particularly the heavy tanks, due to technical reasons. In a number of
instances engines and running gear of the tanks had to be replaced. Under these
conditions a special role was played by the front commander's decision to assign
several days to the 5th Guards Tank Army during the period from 10 through 15 July

for the maintenance and repair of combat vehicles and for putting all equipment and
weapons in order.

0! important significance in carrying out the tasks was also the well-thought-out
organization for technical reconnaissance. From the experience of the lat Guards

A number of other organizational measures were carried out and these helped efficient
technical support in an operation.

For example, in the 2d Guards Tank Army from the summer of 1946, additional equipment
was sought out to increase the number of repair and salvage subunits. Salvage pla-
toons consisting of 3-4 tanks (tractors) were set up using written-off tanks and
captured tractors under the mobile tank repair bases of the corps.22 The technical

training of the personnel was improved. By the start of the Lublin-Brest Operation,
425 drivers had received various skill categories.23 In the 1st Guards Tank Army,
during the period of preparations for the Vistula-Oder Operation, 32 expert drivers,
70 drivers of first class and 151 second class were trained.2“ Upon a decision of
the army commander, in the course of the offensive, for servicing the equipment,

additional personnel was assigned from the rifle subunits. for example, in the 3d
Guards Tank Army. Other measures were also planned.

196

FORiOFTHCIAI.USElDNLY
INDR OF1WCJAL USEZCNVLV

in the course of the operation, as in the preparations for it, the repair troops
showed mass heroism, self—sacrifice in labor and a creative approach to carrying out
the tasks confronting them.

In the Vistula-Oder Operation which was marked by great depth and a high momentum
of advance, great difficulties arose in organizing maintenance. Thus, it required
no less than 12 hours for the crew to carry out the maintenance on the T-34 tank

No 2. In the 49th Guards Tank Brigade (the XII Guards Tank Corps of the 2d Guards
Tank Army), Engr-Lt Col 5. G. Karakodov proposed that separate technical inspections
be made, that is, carrying out several procedures in 2-3 hours. The question was
very complicated but it produced a good result. Soon thereafter this experience was
used throughout the army.

In the East Pomeranian Operation, in the same brigade the young tank repairman P.Ya.
Oreshkin distinguished himself. By this time he had great combat experience in the
army starting from the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation. At the village of
Sanmentin, the vehicle of Lt O. P. Hatveyev which was part of the 1st Tank Company
was damaged. The tank lost power but continued to fight firing its gun and machine
guns. The Nazis concentrated intense fire on the tank. Seemingly nothing could
save the vehicle as there were no salvage facilities nearby. But the repairmen
came to their aid headed by the deputy company comnmnder for technical affairs,
Tech-Lt P. Ya. Oreshkin. Under unceasing fire, they together with the crew rapidly
eliminated the damage and the tank again went into the attack. Thus, the workers
of the technical service acted heroically in fighting for the combat life of the
tanks and SAU. For this combat, Pavel Oreshkin, by that time the company party or-
ganizer, was awarded his second governmental decoration and he received his third,
the Order of the Patriotic War, in distinguishing himself in the ._rlin Operation.

As a whole, the measures carried out for technical support produced good results.
Characteristicslly, in the Vistula-Oder Operation in the lat Guards Tank Army, for
technical reasons 105 tanks failed, and 40 in the East Pomeranian Operation (as a
contrast, 33h failed in the Belgorod-Khar'kov Operation and 236 in the Proskurov-
Chernovtsy).29 The average daily production of the tank repairmen from the experi-
ence of 13 Tank Army Operations increased from 13-25 in 1943 to 22-58 in 1945
(Table 25).

Proof of the great work carried out by the tank army personnel to protect the equip-
ment and, consequently, to maintain the battleworthiness of the units and formations
is the indicators for the exceeding of the guaranteed operating lives26 of the com-

bat vehicles before their first major OVerhaul, for example, from the experience of

the 2d Guards Tank Army in January-February 1965 (Table 26).

Leadership over the repair of nquipment in the course of the operations was provided
by the deputy commander for technical affairs from the operations group of the ad-
ministration for armored repair and supply (usually this was at the army command
post) as well as through the sections of the administration for armor repair and
supply which were located in the second echelon of the army field headquarters.
Contact with subordinates was provided chiefly by transport and only in individual
operations (Vistula-Oder and Berlin) by special radio nets or over the commander
net. Wherever possible the receiving and transmitting of information were carried
out over the wire communications lines.

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHI(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(M¥LY

Table 25

Indicators for Work of Salvage-Repair Facilities of TLuk Armies
in Offensive Operations

Percentage of
tank repairs
Armies Operations Average daily to number of
production of tanks and SAU
tank repairs, at start of
units operation

1 GTA Belgorod-Khar'kov 115
Proskurov-Chernovtsy 139

2 GTA Vistula-Oder 221
East Pomeranian 108

Berlin 136

3 GTA Kiev 216
Luau-Sandomierz 210
Vistula-Oder 124

5 GTA Operations to defeat enemy in 160
Belorussia and in liberation of
Baltic
East Prussian 171

 

Over operation 115-221

Table 26
Number of Tanks and SAU Exceeding Guaranteed Operating Lives

 

     
 
    

Type of Vehicle Number of Vehicles Operating Above the Guaranteed Motor ﬂours

ISU-lZZ

15-2 16
SU-76 12
T-36 9

As experience shows, the basic measures in directing technical support in the course
of an operation were: the collecting of data on the condition of the equipment, the
setting of tasks for the subunits and units of the repair and salvage service, con-
trol and providing aid in carrying out the missions of maintaining and restoring
troop battleworthiness. The last of the designated measures, from the experience

of the 2d Guards Tank Army in the 1966—1965 operations, was carried out by personal
contacts between the officials and in analyzing the reports submitted from the corps

198

FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
the 1944 operations, the questions of technical support were solved very successful-
ly. Thus, in the course of the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation, the 1st Guards Tank Army
repaired 80 percent of the damaged tanks and SA”. In the 1945 operations, the per-
centage of repaired combat vehicles began to reach 90 percent and more. In this
regard we would particularly emphasize the heroic labor of those who "revived" the
tanks at plant shops and directly on the battlefield. They have been written about
with particular affection in the memoirs of Doctor of Military Sciences, Prof, Col

For exemplary work in repairing tanks and SAD, thousands of soldiers, sergeants and
officers from the repair subunits received governmental decorations.

3. Maintaining Material 1pplies at the Required Level

the particular features and, at the same time, the difficulties of organizing logis-
tical support for the tank-armies derived from the nature of their employment in
operations. Upon coming out in the operational space, the armies quickly moved away
from the bases, often at a very significant distance. For example, in the Vistula-
Oder Operation, the rear of the 2d Guards Tank Army fell 300-470 km behind, and that
or the 3d Guards Tank Army some 350 km. Their lines of communications running over
areas which had not yet been fully cleared of the enemy were subjected to the threat

of cutting. The operations of the tank armies in the operational depth had a fluid

Consequently, the organization of the rear of the tank armies during the war years
had a number of particular features. Among the most important were: the signifi-
cant distance of the troops from the supply bases and, as a consequence of this, the
great length of the army supply routes; the absence of an independent rear area and
sometimes also independent supply and evacuation routes, the frequent change of

199

FOR 0FFICJAL.UGII(MVLY
their directions in the operational depth. the relative vulnerability of the lines
of communications to enemy attack; the uneven consumption of fuels. lubricants and
ammunition in the various stages of an operation and in individual formations and
units and the limited supplies which could be carried by the transport of the armies
and their formations.

The demand for supplies for supporting a tank army offensive operation was deter-
mined depenﬂing upon the strength of the army, the missions to be carried out, the
overall operational (operational-strategic) situation, the depth and duration of
the operation. the momentum of advance and other factors.

Ammunition conSumption in certain offensive operations by the tank armies is shown
in Table 27.

Table 27
Ammunition Consumption in Tank Army Offensive Operations

Ammunition Consumption, units of fire

 

Operation 76-85-mm
Automatic mortar mortar artillery tank
rounds
Belgorod-Khar'kov 1 TA 0.35 0.7 1.74 1.93 0.43 1.7
Korsun'-

Shevchenkovskiy 2 TA 1.2 1.0 1.4 1.0 1.6 0.8
Luau-Sandomierz 4 TA 0.8 1.0 1.9 2.5 1.0 0.9
Lublin-Brest 2 TA 0.95 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.4
Vistula-Oder 1 GTA 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.7

2 GTA 0.5 0.6 0.2 0.5 0.4 0.65
3 GTA 0.6 0.8 0.6 2.5 1.4 1.5
4 TA 0.54 1.25 0.57 1.11 1.22 0.59
Berlin 1 GTA 0.38 0.98 0.26 3.7 1.64 1.9
2 GTA 0.7 0.8 0.8 2.1 1.55 1.9
3 GTA 0.64 0.62 1.3 1.7 0.85 1.06

The data of the table confirm that as an average ammunition consumption did not ex-
ceed: 1.2 units of fire for cartridges, 3.7 for mortar shells, 1.6 for artillery
rounds and 1.9 for tank rounds. By the start of the operations, the tank armies,
as a rule. created ammunition supplies as follows: 1.5-2.7 units of fire for fire-
arms and 1.9-3.6 units of fire for the artillery and tanks.28 Consequently, during
the var years, the tank armies were basically supplied with ammunition for conduct-
ing combat operations to the depth of the combat missions set for them.

'The data from reports on 22 offensive operations provide a notion of fuel consump-
tion by the tank armies in certain offensive operations (Table 28).

200

INJI!0ITNCIAI.IJSII(MVLY
FOR 0F1IC1A1.USE(NHLY

Table 28
Fuel Consumption by Tank Armies in Offensive Cperations
KB—70 Aviation

 

Diesel Fuel Gasoline _
Operation Army Gasoline
0re1 2 TA 232 2.9 656 5.0 112 4.3
3 GTA 1,100 3.7 2,224 9.6 190 6.4
4 TA 458 2.5 1,568 4.3 113 2.8
Belgorod-Khar'kov 1 TA 561 3.6 2,071 9.8 329 6.8
Kiev 3 GTA 459 2.4 1,014 3.6 101 3.5
Korsun'Shevchenkovskiy 5 GTA 500 2.2 850 2.9 39 2.4
Prpskurov-Chernovtsy 1 TA 500 3.3 1,090 5.0 75 3.6
Lwow-Sandomiera 1 GTA 1,720 7.5 3,090 11.2 235 5.7
3 GTA 1,435 8.6 3,077 10.2 303 7.7
4 TA 960 7 2,467 8.6 301 9.8
Lublin-Brest 2 TA 948 3.5 1,915 5.3 152 4.2
Vistula-Oder 1 GTA 1,175 3.9 2,535 5.5 382 6
2 GTA 885 3 2,182 4.0 218 4.5
3 GTA 1,920 6 3,519 7.6 392 6.7
4 TA 1,214 4.7 1,739 6.7 249 4.1
East Prussian 5 GTA 857 3.4 1,951 5.9 209 4.5
East Pomeranian 1 GTA 408 1.7 984 2.6 98 2
2 GTA 470 2.3 1,834 3.6 107 2.5
Berlin 1 GTA 525 2.7 1,192 3.2 148 3.5
2 GTA 800 4.1 2,149 4.8 157 4
3 GTA 654 2.6 1,746 3.9 147 3.5
4 GTA 458 2.5 1,568 4.3 113 2.8

As can be seen from Table 28, fuel consumption by the tank armies varied as follows:
from 1.7 to 8.6 fueling fill-ups (232-1,920 tons) for diesel fuel; from 2.6 to 11.2
fill-ups (656-3,519 tons) for gasoline; from 2 to 9.8 fill-ups (39-392 tons) for
aviation gasoline (KB-70). This depended upon the nature of combat operations, the
season, the duration of the operation, the amount of equipment, the condition of the
roads and the skills of the drivers. For precisely this reason the highest fuel
consumption was in the Lwow-Sandonierz Operation (the great depth of the offensive,

the frequent outfianking maneuvers and regroupings), in the Vistula-Oder Operation
(the depth of advance was up to 550-700 km) and in other operations. The supplies

by the start of the operations, as experience showed, were: 2.5-3 fill-ups in the
formations and 2 fill-ups at the army dumps (from the experience of the Belorussian,
Iasi-Kishinev, Vistula-Oder and Berlin operations).29

Thus, the rear bodies were actually confronted with two tasks: the delivering of
material supplies, particularly fuel and the obtaining of them from dumps (depots)

of the fronts and distribution to the formations.

201

F!”l(lﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(ﬂVLY
IWJR OFIWCJAL USEZCNVLY

Combat practice showed that the correct echeloning of material supplies largely de-
termined the prompt delivery to the troops of everything necessary for conducting
combat operations and, consequently, the level of troop combat capability.

The tank army rear was ordinarily divided into two echelons. The first echelon com-
prised its mobile part and this included the basic rear units and facilities: the
squads of the supply dumps, the squads of the field bakeries, the transport. road.
repair and medical units. These were designed to support the troops directly in the
course of the operation. This test echelon followed beyind the troops and did not
fall back from them while they worked. The second echelon included the rear units
and facilities the supplies of which could not be carried by the motor transport

available in the army. As a rule, these remained in the position of the army depot
until the end of the operation;

During the war years materiel was divided into troop supplies (in the motor trans-
port of the formations and an emergency supply in the tanks and for the personnel)

and army supplies (at the army dumps and in the army motor transport). A sample
cchcloning of troop supplies is shown in Table 29.

Table 29

Bcheloning of Troop Supplies*

 
 
  

    

0n combat
vehicles 0n transport In In
(on personnel) of subunits brigades corps

   

Name of Material

    
 
 

Ammunition, unit of fire 1.75

 
 
  

Fuel. fill-ups 3
Food, daily rations 11-14
(without
*From the experience of ten operations of the 2d Guards reserve)
Tank Army in 1943-1965. supp es

For supporting tank army operations in offensive operations the army dumps kept:
1—l.5 units of fire of ammunition, 2-6 fill-ups of gasoline and aviation fuel, 1-2
fill-ups of diesel fuel and 15-20 daily rations of food. Experience showed that
such echeloning of supplies under the conditions of highly dynamic combat operations

did not always make it possible to successfully carry out the set missions. For
this reason, for the uninterrupted replenishing of fuel and ammunition for the army
formations, it was advisable to have, in addition to the transportable troop sup-
plies, a mobile echelon of army dumps as a maneuverable army reserve, including
15-25 motor vehicles for the immediate delivery of fuel to the formations (units)
which had received a new mission, as well as a second echelon for rapidly replenish-
ing the supplies of units (formations) needing this. Such an approach to the eche-
loning of supplies became characteristic from 1964. This helped to raise the level
of battleworthiness in the army formations.

During the war years the army supply stations were determined by a decision of the
front commander. At them were deployed the army depots or dumps of the army depots
and here materiel was stockpiled during the period of preparing for an operation.

202

Iron oman. use ONLY '
1n the course of theoperation, the supply station with the advance dumps was de-
veloped usually into an army depot. with the concentrating of a tank army in the
assembly area, the army rear units and facilities were concentrated at the area of
the army dump. The rears of the units and formations were located with the troops.
The medical facilities of the formations and units prior to the committing of the
army to an engagement were ordinarily not deployed. The army field surgical hoa-
pital began to deploy with the arrival of the army in the assembly area for receiv-
ing wounded directly from the medical platoons in order to provide an opportunity
for the medical battalions to follow behind the troops.

The experience of organizing logistical support in the offensive operation of a tank
army showed that for uninterrupted feeding of the troops in the operational depth.
the subunits of the troop rear and a portion of the army rear must be put into oper-
ation along with the troops. Host often these were the mobile advance dumps (for
fuel and lubricants, ammunition and food), a surgical hospital. technical salvage
and repair facilities, the field bakery or its squad.3°

The army rear bodies and facilities in the operational depth were echeloned in the
following order. The rears of the battalions followed the combat subunits. The
rears of the brigades and corps were divided into two echelons and the first echelon
(the medical stations, repair and salvage equipment, and a portion of the ammuni-
tion, fuel and lubricants on motor transport) was in the area of the command post
while the second echelon was in the area of the rear command post.

Supplies were delivered by various methods depending upon the specific conditions as
well as upon the availability of transport.

if the army formations were over 100 km away from the army depot, most often the
motor transport of the formations was used for delivery while army transport was em-
ployed only as a reinforcement. With a longer supply route, the advance section of
the army depot was deployed in the field. Army motor transport was used for de-
livering supplies from the depot to the advance section and this transport. partic-
ularly with a high momentum of advance, frequently delivered supplies to the corps
exchange posts and sometimes also directly to the troops. Such a supply principle
was employed, for example, in the lat and 2d Guards Tank armies in the Vistula-Oder
Operation3l(chiefs of the army rears, Gen V. P. Kon'kov and Col P. S. Antonov).
This produced a positive result although significant time was needed to locate the
subunits and units. In the same operation, fuel was delivered to the troops by the
front's transport, in particular the transport of the First Ukrainian Front to the
formations of the 4th Tank Army.52

As a whole, the basic missions of delivering supplies were carried out by army
transport (Table 30). As is seen from the table, 65-74 percent of the fuel and
lubricants were delivered to the troops, and particularly the brigades, by army
metor transport.

There was an analogous picture in the Lwow—Sandomierz, Iasi-Kishinev and a number of
other operations. However, army transport, in not possessing sufficient carrying
capacity, could not always provide the prompt delivery of the necessary amount of
materiel to the troops, and primarily fuel. As a consequence of this the armies
were forced to halt while waiting for a delivery of fuel, in conducting combat

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INIR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USIi(HHLY

Table 30
Delivery of Fuel and Lubricants to Troops in the Vistula-Oder 0peration*

 

*Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 299, inv. 3070, fi1e 712, sheets 108-109.

operations only with individual subunits. Thus, in the Vistula-Oder Operation, the
2d Guards Tank Army, out of the 16 days of the offensive, was waiting for fuel a
total of 5 days (30 percent of the time), while the 4th Tank Army waited 6 days
(from 19 to 24 January), that is, 33 percent of the time33 of the operation, in
actually being deprived of combat capability during this time.

Experience showed that the successful solution to the logistical support problems,
in particular delivery, was achieved as a result of enormous creative activities of
the army military council, the staff and administrations (sections).

Proven effective was the practice of the prompt and complete operational orientation
by the army staff for the leaders of the rear services, well organized mutual pro-
viding of information. and the involvement of the sectorial specialists and leaders
of the rear services in the planning. Also of important significance was correct
consideration in planning rear support of geographic and climatic features in the
theater of war, the economic possibilities of the areas and the state of local sup-
plies. Thus, the use of captured fuel in the let, 2d and 3d Guards Tank armies in
the Vistula-Oder Operation3 made it possible in individual stages of the offensive
to avoid halting while waiting for the delivery of fuel. As a result of this the
average monentum of advance was increased. The data of Table 31 show the propor-
tional amount of captured fuel in its total consumption during an offensive.

As is seen from Table 31, captured fuel, in covering up to 70 percent of the re-
quired supplies, represented a powerful reserve in carrying out the tasks of prompt
logistical support for combat operations. Likewise captured fuel was utilized, in
particular, in the Zhitomir-Berdichev Operation, in the course of which the troops

of the II Guards Tank Corps under Gen A. A. Getman, having captured the town of
Kazatin, seized German supply dumps of the southern wing of the Nazi armies.3s Dur-
ing the Vistula-Oder Operation, the 66th Guards Tank Brigade (1st Guards Tank Army)
under Cogsl. I. Gusakovskiy captured major German food dumps in the area of

Gniezno.

In the 2d Guards Tank Army in the Vistula—Odar Operation, during the period of the
arising difficulties with supplies, from captured rolling stock two rail transports

20d

FOI<0FFKJA1.USE(HVLY
Table 31

Proportional Amount of Captured Fuel in Its Total Consumption by Tank Armies
during Offensive Operations

 
 
    
  
   
   

 
    
   

 
  
 
  
 

 
  
  
  

Proportional
Total fuel Including amount of
Operations consumption, captured, captured fuel.
tons tons X

BelgoroduKhar'kov 1 TA 23
Lwow—Sandomierz 1 TA 1.8
Lublin-Bresc 2 TA 30.5
Iasi—Kishinev 6 TA 71.5
Vistula-Oder 2 GTA 25
Berlin 1 GTA 65.5

2 GTA l8

3 GTA 15.8

were organized consisting of 2 steam locomotives, 65 freightcars, 10 flatcars for
carrying freight and 11 flatcars with coal. For protecting the trains, a squad was
assigned from the separate road construction battalion. The train brigades were
organized from army servicemen who previously had been railroad workers. An officer
from the operations section was sent out from the army staff to provide help in
forming the trains. Such rail consists were used for delivering freight to the
troops over the Western European gauge from the station of Gielniow to Friedeburg
Station. In the 4th Tank Army, upon the initiative of the chief of the rear, Col
A. K. Yarkov, during the period from 28 January through 2 February 1965, in the
zone of the army, rail transport was used for delivering fuel by setting up so-
called "shuttles" and this made it possible to eliminate supply stoppages. 7

In a n: :r of operations, materiel was delivered by air, for example, to the for-
mations ul the 5th Guards Tank Army in the Uman'-Botosani and Belorussian opera-
tions. to the 4th Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder and to the 6th Guards Tank Army in
the Manchurian Operation.38

Thus. in March 1944. with the reaching of the Dnestr River by the Soviet troops, the
Nazi Army Group South was split into two. The mission of defeating the enemy was
entrusted to the troops of the 2d Ukrainian Front in which the 5th Guards Tank Army
was fighting. Its formations were rushing to the rail station of Ryhnitsa. How-
ever. In fighting up to 80 km a day, the tank corps were formed to halt. By the
evening of 23 March, the XX Tank Corps had 20-40 liters of fuel in the tank fuel
tanks while only 10—15 liters remained in the tanks of the XVIII Tank Corps. During
this critical moment. upon a decision of the troop commander. fuel was to be de-
livcred by the air army formations. Soon thereafter groups of Li-Z aircraft ap-

peared over the troops and they dropped 15 tons of fuel by parachute. The tanks
Ime back to life.

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The experience of organizing air supplies showed that it was best to utilize air
transport for delivering materiel in the muddy season or with roads in a poor State.
when the ground lines of communications of the tank formations had been cut by the
enemy or disrupted as well as with a high momentum of advance for the troops.

Very often the tasks of maintaining materiel at the established level for conducting
continuous troop operations were carried out under conditions when it was essential
to maneuver the army's main forces. Such a difficult situation arose, for example,
in the 3d Guards Tank Army by 26 January 1945, when the front commander, Mar 50

l. S. Konev, set the mission of turning the army to the southeast to capture the
Silesian Industrial Area. The basic difficulty was that the diesel fuel supplies
had been almost completely consumed and the extended lines of comunications ex-
cluded prompt delivery. Under the developing situation, the army commander, Gen

P. S. Rybalko, took the decision to turn over the remaining fuel supplies to the

IX Mechanized Corps operating in front and the commander of this corps, Gen I. P.
Sukhov, having created two forward detachments consisting of the 69th and 7lst

Mechanized brigades reinforced by artillery and tanks, successfully carried out the
set mission.

The formations of the 6th Guards Tank Army operated under approximately the same
conditions in the Manchurian Operation. The most important particular feature of
the army's offensive after 11-12 August, that is, after reaching the area of Lubei,
was the going over to actions with just the forces of the forward detachments due
to the fact that interruptions in fuel supply were telling negatively on further
operations. The rear units had fallen behind. The IX Guards Mechanized Corps of
Gen M. V. Volkov remained completely without fuel while the V Guards Tank and VII
Mechanized corps had just 0.4-0.5 of a fuel load.39 The front's aviation could not
handle this mission. Thus, on 17 August only 40.6 tons of the fuel,“° or 30 percent
of the required amount was delivered to the V Guards Tank Corps. Then upon the de-
cision of the corps commander, Gen M. M. Savel'yev, all the fuel was put in the
tanks of the tank formations operating as a forward detachment and this continued

to advance against Mukden. The main forces advanced in pace with the approach of
the rear services.

Consequently, crisis situations in supply demanded bold, enterprising actions by the
commanders as well as great organizational activity by the staffs. As a whole the
creative approach to carrying out the mission of promptly supplying materiel with
the integrated use of all types of transport contributed to the achieving of suc-

cess in an operation and to the maintaining and restoring of the battleworthiness
of the army troops.

The experience of the conducted operations also makes it possible to conclude that
the basic reasons for the low productivity of army motor transport were: its de-
centralized use, the not always full loading of the trucks, the significa.t number
of empty runs, the great distance of the rear units (facilities) from the troops as
well as a number of other factors consideration of which is of practical signifi-
cance under present-day conditions.

The successful work of the motor transport units largely depended upon the organiza-
tion of the road service and in particular upon assigning advance road detachments
for restoring destruction on the supply routes. In the 1st Guards Tank Army

206

FI”!(HWWCJAL.USI§(HVLY
(Vistula-Oder Operation), the detachment consisted, for example, of traffic control
subunits with 62 men (14 posts), a road platoon, a bridge-building company and a
security platoon. As a total the detachment had 240 men, 22 vehicles and 3 motor-
cycles. During this same operation the 2d Guards Tank Army in its advance road de-
tachment had: a bridge-building company, a traffic control platoon and a mine-
clearing platoon, a total of 118 men and 10 motor vehicles. The detachment recon-
noitered 1,691 km of route and set up indicators on 1,396 km of roads. In the
Lublin-Brest Operation, from 17 July through 4 August 1944, the bridgehuilding units
in the army repaired and rebuilt 190 linear meters of bridges.

In the course of an operation control of the rear was carried out from the rear
control post (the second control echelon) and from the operations group of the rear
administration headed by the army chief of the rear. This directed the activities
of the advance dump groups and organized the delivery of materiel to the troops.
This group received all the major data on logistical support: from the troops on
the supplies and needs using the communications facilities and liaison officers,

on the reserves of supplies at the army dumps through the staff of the rear adminis-
tration which was located at the second control echelon as well as over the communi-
cations equipment, on the arrival of freight from the front's rear through the mil-

itary communications (V080) section located along with the staff of the rear admin-
istration.

For effective contact between the artillery supply service and the rear services of
the .ormations and for ensuring the army ammunition deliveries in the 2d Guards Tank
Army representatives were assigned from the artillery supply section of the army ad-
ministration of the artillery commander as part of the operations group for the rear
administration. Information on the consumption and needs each day was sent to this
group from the staff of the artillery commander's administration for artillery ammu-
nition and from the operations section of the staff for ammunition for firearms.

In accord with the data received, the chief of the rear established the procedure

for supplies and supervised the activities of subordinates through the officers of
the operations group and the representatives of the rear administration which were
together with the corps chiefs of the rear during the operation as well as by travel-
ing to the forward and rear units (facilities). The operations group of the rear
administration once a day through the rear staff submitted to the military council
information on the state of troop logistical support and troop needs, the available
Supplies at dumps and so forth.“

Thus, all the activities of the bodies controlling the rear services in the course
of an offensive operation were aimed at carrying out the main task of uninterrupted
logistical support for the troops and the maintaining of supplies within the estab-
lished (required) limits for conducting combat operations. The creative nature of
the work carried out by the commanders, the staffs, the political and rear bodies

considering the specific conditions contributed to the successful carrying out of
the tasks.

It must be particularly emphasized that the 1.rsonnel of the rear and particularly
the motor transport units (subunits) understood their tasks and devoted all their
forces and all their ability to successfully defeating the enemy. The motor vehicle
drivers worked without relief for several days, exceeding the wartime standards by
2— or 3-fold. For example, in the course of the Vistula-Oder Operation, the motor

207

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r0“ UI'I'ILIAI. ball ONLY

column headed by Lt Reznikov made a SOO-km trip in a day. The motor transport
workers surpassed the average daily run by almost 3-fold. This was a feat.

In order to exclude a halt in motor transport operations, there were spare drivers
in virtually every vehicle. Specially assigned commanders and political workers
helped organize the delivery on the basic routes and bore personal responsibility
to the army military council for the carrying out of assignments. Party political

work was carried out widely in the rear subunits.
4.' Bringing the Armies Up to Strength for Personnel

During the war years the basic difficulty in maintaining and restoring the battle—

worthiness of the tank armies was the problem of replacing equipment and weapons as
losses here comprised the greatest percentage. At the same time, in individual op-
erations and particularly in their final stages, the tank field forces experienced

an acute shortage of personnel as a consequence of the casualties suffered

(Table 32).
Table 32

Casualties of Tank Armies in Offensive 0perations*

 

Casualties

Operation Total, 1 of Killed and missing.
initial number 2 of total

Orel

Belgorod-Khar'kov
Proskurov—Chernovtay

Lwow-Sandomierz
Lublin-Brest

Vistula-Oder

East Prussian

East Pomeranian

Berlin

 

* The Table was drawn up from data of reports from the tank army field
headquarters kept in the Archives of the USSR Ministry of Defense.

208

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(MVLY
As can be seen from the data of Table 32, the tank army losses during the carrying

out of offensive operations varied from 7.2 to 24.9 percent of the number of per-
sonnel at the start of the offensive.

it must be pointed out that approximately 90 percent of the casualties were person-
nel from the motorized rifle subunits and units. This circumstance can also ex-
plain the fact that in the offensive operations in which the motorized rifle sub-
units participated in the more intense combat operations the proportional amount

of casualties inevitably increased. The tank troops suffered fewer losses. The
ratio between the combat losses of tanks and SAD and personnel casualties in the
offensive operations were: 1:6 (Vistula-Oder, Proskurov-Chernovtsy), 1:6 (Lwow-
Sandomierz, Berlin) and more rarely 1:2 (the 3d Guards Tank Army in the Orel, the

6th Tank Army in the Iasi-Kishinev and the 5th Guards Tank Army in the East Prus-
sian).

Casualties varied over the individual days and stages of offensive operations as
well as in different years of the war. For example, in the 2d Tank Army (Orel
Operation. 1943), casualties averaged 160 men per day and in individual days ap-
proached 282 (17 July) and 452 (22 July) men. In the first instance, the army was
repelling an enemy counterstrike of the 10th Motorized and 292d Infantry divisions
and enemy aviation was supreme in the skies; in the 2d, its formations independently
broke through a deeply echeloned defense of the Nazi troops. In the Berlin Opera-
tion. the lat Guards Tank Army had average daily casualties of 592 men, while tn

l9 and 20 April 19h5, when the battles developed to capture the major center of re-
sistance at Muncheberg, they were over 800 men, that is, they exceeded the average

daily casualties by almost 1.5-fold. An analogous picture was observed in other
tank army operations.

The fact must be pointed out that while in the 1943 operations casualties were 20-
30 percent and more of the initial number of personnel, in 1964-1965, as a rule,
they were 10-14 percent. An exception was the let Guards Tank Army in the Berlin
Operation when it broke through enemy defenses together with the 8th Guards Army
and fought in the city of Berlin. Statistics show that the killed and wounded in
the total casualties were from 10 to 31.8 percent, and as an average for the con-
sidered offensive operations. around 23-26 percent. The highest number of killed
and wounded was in the 4th Tank Army in the Orel Operation and in the lat Guards
Tank Army in the Lwow-Ssndomierz, Vistula-Oder and Berlin operations in breaking
through the enemy defenses and in the battles for bridgeheads and in large popula-
tion points; the lowest were in those instances when the formations were conducting
highly fluid combat operations (lasi-Kishinev and other operations).

As a whole the number of killed and wounded in the tank armies was, from the ex—
perience of the last war, up to one-third of the total number of losses, while the
remaining two-thirds of the losses were medical, that is, treatable.

The data on 11 offensive operations"2 show that wounds according to severity were
distributed in the following manner: severe wounds averaged 23 percent, medium
wounds were 37 percent and light wounds around 60 percent. Bullet wounds for motor-
ized rifle troops were approximately 32 percent and shrapnel wounds around 62 per-
cent. it is important to point out that in the tank troops bullet wounds were only
6-7 percent of all casualties while shrapnet wounds for them were somewhat higher

209

POR*OFFICJAL USIZCMHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

than in the infantry. Moreover, contosions, burns and concussions comprised a
rather high percentage of losses (around 20 percent).

Thus, based on factual material, the following conclusions can be drawn.

In the first place. the mechanized formations of the armies had the highest casual-
ties. In a number of operations they were so significant that every possible
measure had to be taken to immediately restore their battleworthiness. This was
all the more essential in operations which were conducted to a great depth, as in
the course of them the tank armies had to break through the intermediate defensive
lines while away from the combined-arms armies.

Secondly, a high portion of the casualties were medical, including up to 77 percent
light and medium wounds as well as concussions, burns and contusions. This portion
of the personnel was the reserve for replenishing the losses. Thirdly, the casual-
ties depended upon the nature of the missions being carried out, chiefly from the
viewpoint of the dependable neutralization of the enemy and the coordinated actions
of the various branches of troops.

The problem of restoring the losses of tank army personnel during the war years was
solved by several ways. The most widespread was the incorporating of draft re-
cruits in the army formations as was the case on the eve of the Kirovograd Opera-
tion in the 5th Guards Tank Army (2,700 recruits arrived to bring the rifle sub-
units up to strength),"3 and starting with 1944, chiefly the men arriving from the
hospitals after treatment. In a number of operations (Korsun'~Shevchenkovskiy,
Budapest and nerlin) in individual stages of the offensive, the armies were rein-
forced by rifle formations. At times the armies received formations which had just
been brought up to strength. This was the case, for example, in July 1944, when
the 93d Separate Tank Brigade, the 68th Antiaircraft Artillery Division and a motor-
ized rifle battalion were incorporated in the bth Tank Army.“

In individual operations, the mechanized formations were brought up to strength by
”partisans and the local population of liberated oblasts who were inducted into the
operational army, for example, in the 4th Tank Army in the course of the Proskurov-
Chernovtsy Operation."5 The problem was solved analogously in the 2d Tank Army in
the course of the Uman'-Botosani Operation as well as in the 5th Guards Tank Army
in the offensive in Belorussia. In the most complicated situations, the combat
units and subunits were also brought up to strength by the commandant and rear sub-
units. As the former commander of the 1st Guards Tank Army, Mar Armd Trps M. Ye.
Katukov, recalled, in the battles for Berlin "in order to somehow help the corps of
A. Babadzhanyan (the XI Guards Tank Corps), the last reserve had to be sent to it,
the army staff security company.“6 -

It was more difficult to make up for casualties in the specialists of the branches
of troops. The army's reserve battalion was the basic source here and it trained
drivers, gunners, signalmen as well as soldiers and sergeants for other special-
ties. Horeover, a certain reserve of drivers was also organized in the army forma-
tions.“7 Those vacant positions which did not require extended training (loaders
and others) were filled from the motorized rifle troops. In addition, rather often
the tanks received for bringing the units up to strength came with crews. This was
particularly characteristic for when the tank armies received tank columns formed

210

FOI:OFFKJAI.USE20NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from money collected from workers in the nation's rear. For exampoe, in Dccember
1944-January 1965, the lat Guards Tank Army received 675 tanks and over 200 drivers.
Here, upon a decision of the army military council, the crews were so manned that
each included both experienced soldiers and novices."8 Also not excluded were cases
when a portion of the specialists was redistributed from the rear units and subunits.

Losses in officer personnel were basically made up from the spare units of the re-
serve where officers who had come back from hospitals or sick leave up to a certain
time were involved in combat and political training under specially-worked-out pro-
grams. Officers were sent from the reserves to the troops according to the follow-
ing scheme: the central directorates of the People's Commissariat of Defense sent
the officers to the military councils of the fronts; the military councils of the
fronts transferred them to the military councils of the armies and than to the corps
and brigades. Officers were received in the same order from the military academies,
schools and junior lieutenants front courses.

Thus, during the years of the past war the arrival of personnel for the tank armies
for the purpose of maintaining and restoring their battleworthiness was carried out
by different ways and demanded great organizational work. creativity and initiative
from the commanders, the staffs, the political and rear bodies.

5. Measures to Maintain High Troop Morale

F. Engels pointed out that for a correct assessment of an army's battleworthiness
it was essential to have an understanding of not only its weapons but also the de-
gree of its steadfastness and "...particularly its morale.“9 Also well known is
the thesis formulated by V. I. Lenin that "in any war, victory ultimately is de-

termined by the morale of those masses who shed their blood on the battlefield."so

The experience of the tank army offensive operations has reconfirmed that a high
level of the political and moral state of the troops, as a component part of their
battleworthiness, does not develop spontaneously. The success in realizing the
favorable possibilities and overcoming the influence of unfavorable factors de-
pends upon the activities of the command personnel. the political bodies, the party
and Komsomol organizations. The role of party political work is particularly great
in this.

During the years of the Great PatriOtic War, party political work was carried out by
all communists, commanders and political workers under the leadership of the politi-
cal bodies. Its main aim was to firmly and steadfastly carry out party and govern-
ment policy, to ensure that the troops carried out the combat missions, to strength-
en the political and moral state of the personnel and mobilize its efforts to
achieve a complete victory over the enemy. 0f crusial significance was the main-
taining of a high offensive drive in the tank troops. Moreover, party political
work also had the task of achieving a high level of troop control by developing in
the command personnel volitional qualities, initiative. independence and creativity,
by increasing their responsibility for organizing combat operations and controlling
the troops in a complicated and rapidly changing situation, propagandizing advanced
experience of the conmmnders in leadership of subordinates and for showing constant
concern for maintaining continuous cooperation among the men and equipment involved
in the operation.

211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Party political work was carried out constantly both in the period of preparing for
the operations as well as in the course of them and was the basis for maintaining
high troop morale. The more complex and intense the combat situation was the more
intense the organizational and ideological work carried out by the commanders, po-
litical bodies and party organizations. As experience shows, the basic areas for
this type of activity were: organizational work for ideological, political and
military indoctrination, the personal examples set by the communists and Komsomol
members, the admitting of the best men to the ranks of the party and the Komsomol,
well organized party political information and coordination in the work of the com-
manders, political workers and the staff. Extensive use was made of moral incen-
tives such as: awarding orders and medals to outstanding men, units and formations.
the awarding of the title of guards, the declaring of thanks in orders and so forth.

The political workers, along with the commanders, generals and staff officers in
the course of the operation. in breaks between battles, gave talks in the troops
and made reports using materials of the summaries of Sovinformburo [Soviet Informa-
tion Bureau] and the orders of the People's Commissar of Defense. Also employed
were such a form of party political work as the presenting to the men of statements
of thanks from the Supreme Commander-in—Chief. All subunits and units put out
"pass-along" leaflets which told about the heroic feats of the men and the command—
ers and the bold and decisive actions of the subunits.

Combat leaflets were put out systematically. of important significance was the pop-
ularizing of heroism and the indoctrination of hate for fascism. Significant at-
tention was given to instilling a love for one's weapons. The political workers

and agitators conducted talks on the heroic labor of the workers who manufactured
the weapons and on their great strength.

Assemblies of the communists and Komsomol members and briefly-held meetings helped
in successfully carrying out the combat missions. Here the main thing was close
contact, the living word, concrete leadership and a personal example. Groups of
political workers were sent to the most crucial areas of combat operations, to the
forward formations and units, where the outcome of the operation was being deter-
mined at certain of its stages. This, for example, explains the trip by the mili-

tary council member of the 3d Guards Tank Army, Gen 8. I. Sel'nikov with a group of
workers from the political section to the river crossings in the regrouping from
the Lutezh to the Bukrin bridgeheads and the trip of the officers from the politi-
cal section of the lst Guards Tank Army to the region of Baranow in the course of
the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation.51 0n 2 October, 1943, the military council of the
3d Guards Tank Army adopted a decision to build a wooden bridge on pilings across
the Dnepr River in the region of Kozinets. For accelerating the work and for ef-
fectively carrying out the assignment, a temporary leadership staff was organized
headed by the member of the army military council.52

We should note the experience of party political work in supporting the crossing

of rivers. in particular the Oder, by the troops of the 2d Guards Tank Army in the
course of the Vistula-Oder Offensive Operation. In approaching the river, the army
cormanders and political workers began to propagandize the best experience of anal-
ogous operations in previous battles. They also told the personnel about the dif-
ficulties they could encounter in crossing it and what had to be done for rapidly
and successfully carrying out the missions. The army staff and political section

212

FOR‘OPFNJA1.USE(NNLV
FOR OFT“C1A|.USE¢DNLY

(the chief of the political section, Col H. M. Litvyak) sent their officers to the
pontoon bridge engineer units with the task of ensuring the readiness of the cross-
ing facilities and the personnel to promptly put up crossings under a difficult com-
bat situation and to ensure the crossing over them.

The practice of sending political workers to the crossing proved completely effec-
tive. They, like the crossing commandants, had the job of making certain that the
subunits and units precisely carried out the commander's orders. In essence, being
the deputy commandants for political affairs, they mobilized the personnel of the
crossings to maintain proper order and discipline.

The party political work carried out in the preparations for the crossing of water
obstacles, including the extensive popularizing of the heroism and courage of the
troops. was of important significance. Because of it the personnel showed boldness
and initiative. For example, in the Budapest Operation in December 1966, in the
battles to the west of Levice, a crew under the command of Guards Jr Lt A. I.
Sidorenko (the let Guards Tank Brigade of the 6th Guards Tank Army) was the first
to cross the ﬂron River, it scattered the enemy submachine gunners on the right bank
of the river and thereby provided an opportunity for the engineer subunits to erect

a crossing unimpeded.53 The news of this feat immediately became known to the men
in the army.

Analogous work was carried out in the other formations and field forces and as a
result of this heroism was a mass phenomenon. In January 1945 alone, 113 men of
the 2d Guards Tank Army received the high title of Hero of the Soviet Union while
32 formations and units received orders, including both tank corps and three tank
brigades which received the Order of Lenin.5“

The army political sections generalize the experience of not only specific feats but
also or a whole combat operations over a certain interval of time. informing the
personnel of this. Thus, on 20 April 1945, the political section of the 4th Guards
Tank Army (military council member, Gen V. G. Gulyayev and chief of the political
section, Col N. G. Kladovoy) worked out the "Instructions to the Chiefs of Corps

and Separate Brigade Political Sections on Eliminating Flaws in Political Support.“-5
These gave the results of 6 days of combat, they pointed out a number of shortcom-
ings, disclosed the reasons and outlined measures to eliminate them.

The party aktiv had a constant political influence on the masses and for this reason
the political sections of the armies and formations, as soon as the situation per-
mitted, held meetings for the representatives of the unit and subunit party organ-
izations. At them the results of combat operations were summed up. shortcomings in
party political work over a certain period were disclosed, experience was general-
ized and new tasks set.

For example. upon the instructions of the military council of the lst Guards Tank
Army in the course of the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation meetings were held for the party
uktiv in the formations and individual units. These were attended by an average of
from 80 to 100 men and from 16 to 30 communists participated in the debates. Con-
sidering the weak and strong points disclosed in the previous engagements as well

as th: new combat missions, the activists outlined specific measures to further im-
prove party political work and increase its effectiveness.56

213

FOI.0F1W(JAI.|HHE(NVLY
Characteristic was the rapid response by the political bodies to anything new in
the troops. Thus, in the Vistula-Oder Operation, from the very first days of combat
against the tanks of the 2d Guards Tank Army the enemy employed a large number of
bazookas which caused us significant losses. The army political section quickly
assembled the necessary materials on this questions and submitted specific propos-
als to the military council. These were immediately adopted. In particular. de-
tailed inst.uctions based on combat experience on countering the enemy tank killers
were worked out and sent out to the formations. Then upon the initiative of the
political section in the 33d Mechanized Brigade a movement was started to employ
captured bazookas against the enemy. A special order demanded that the motorized
rifle units and subunits set up bazooka-armed tank killing groups.57

The communists, Komsomol members and political workers inspired the men to feats by
their own personal example, particularly in a critical situation of an engagement
or operation. In them the men saw the strength of our party, the greatness of its
unbending spirit and its capacity for victory. Being where an inspiring example
was needed first and showing a readiness to give up their lives for the future, the
communists assumed the carrying out of the most difficult missions and if it was
necessary then made the supreme sacrifice. Often in the event of the death of the
commander they took over the subunits and units.

It is particularly essential to point out that the party and Komsomol stratum in
the tank armies was large. In January 1945, in the 1st Guards Tank Army of the 975
tank and SAU commanders and drivers, 395 were members and candidate members of the
VKP(b) and 226 were Komsomol members.58

At the same time, in the course of an offensive, losses among the communists were
significant. For example, in the Lwow-Sandomierz Operation. in the lat Guards Tank
Army, 1,534 connunists were killed and wounded, including 66 political workers, 25
party organizers of the primary organizations and 105 party organizers of the com-
pany organizations. The army political section, naturally, was confronted with the
difficult task of reinforcing the low-level party organizations and thereby restor-
ing their viability. This was carried out by organizing the admitting of men who
had excelled in combat to the party (in the course of the operation, 2,126 men were
admitted to the party's ranks in the army).59 by shifting party members and candi-
date members from the rear units to the combat ones as well as by correctly allo-

In the armored troops the tank (motorized rifle) company was the center of party
political work. For precisely this reason the commanders and political workers,
the party organizations were concerned with the correct placement of the communists
so that a large portion of them was concentrated in the subunits. Also apparent
was the importance of enauring'party influence in each crew. Party and Komsomol
groups were organized in the platoons and crews and agitators were recruited. All
of this was of exceptional important significance for ensuring the continuity and
effectiveness of party political work in a combat situation.

Combat practice also disclosed the optimum ways for maintaining close professional

relations between the political and command-staff bodies and based upon constant

personal contact of the officers from the staffs and political bodies and on provid-
ing mutual information on questions demanding joint measures.

214

FOI10FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
Experience showed that in the interests of coordinated work in the course of an of-
fensive it was advisable that the staffs promptly inform the political bodies on
the received missions and plans of a commander for the situation (this was most
often done through the political section's officer who was with the staff opera-
tions section), on the course of combat operations, on the battleworthiness of
friendly and enemy troops as well as on all other information requiring the adopt-
ing of the appropriate measures by the political bodies. They also participated in
measures to increase the political-moral state of their troops and in organizing
and carrying out political work among the indigenous population and enemy troops.

Moreover, it was essential that the political bodies provide information to the
staffs. in particular. on the political-moral state of the troops and indigenous
population, on the course of political indoctrination in the troops and on all meas-
ures carried out for ensuring the fulfillment of the tasks given to the troops as
well as on available information about the enemy (particularly its moral-combat
spirit). on measures to combat enemy propaganda and on the work carried out in the
aim of misinforming the enemy in the interests of operational concealment.

The widely developed party political work, the oral and printed propaganda and agi-
tation contributed to the increased political upsurge and to the strengthening of
discipline in the troops. As a whole they were an important factor in maintaining
the battleworthiness of the army. The increased organizing and directing influence
of the party on the life and combat activity of the armored troops and diverse party
political work among the tank troops played a crucial role in their successful car-
rying out of the combat missions. Party political work had a beneficial influence
also on the conduct of the Soviet military. Indoctrinated in the ideas of patriot-
ism and proletarian internationalism, in crossing the frontiers of their homeland .
and having driven the Nazi invaders out of it, they successfully carried out their
international duty. Having defeated the enemy, they liberated the peoples of
Europe from hated slavery and raised the prestige of the Soviet man abroad.

Thus, the experience of the last war shows that the maintaining and restoring of
tank army battleworthiness represented a very difficult problem and required the
skillful employment of the existing men and equipment as well as enormous organiza-
tional work. The employed methods for solving it by ensuring a high level of a
political-moral state and offensive spirit of the troops, by the prompt bringing of
the army up to strength, by maintaining equipment supplies at the established level.
by continuously replacing damaged equipment and under certain conditions by creat-
ing made-up detachments confirmed their high effectiveness.

The viability of the troop control bodies under these conditions was restored by
unifying several staffs which had lost a significant portion of their men and equip-

ment, by transferring control functions to an inferior command-staff level, by
directly assigning some control bodies which had suffered high losses to others

which were equal in the structure of their initial subordination as well as by pro-
viding reserve officers.

One of the most complex and difficult problems in the general measures to ensure
the combat readiness of the tank armies during the years of the last war was the

replacement of military equipment. The main task of the technical support facili-
ties during the period of preparing for an operation was before the start of combat

215

FOR¢NﬂﬂClALlﬁﬂ20NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operations to bring the troops as much as possible up to full strength using re-
paired equipment and to prepare the equipment for trouble-free work to the entire
depth of the offensive operation. 7n the course of the combat operations, the tasks
of salvage, repair and maintenance on the combat vehicles were carried out. '

The basic areas for improving technical support were: temporary (for the period of
conducting combat operations at a high speed) centralization of the salvage and re~
pair facilities, specialization of the repair units and subunits, the clearer or~
ganization of technical reconnaissance, increasing the technical skills of the per-
sonnel and improving the planning and organizational principles for the activities
of the personnel and control bodies.

The experience of rebuilding the combat equipment of tank armies during the war
years can be creatively employed under present-day conditions considering, certain-
ly, the changed means of technical support and the altered nature of armed combat.
At present, technical support is one of the most important factors of operational
significance. This support has ceased being the concern of just the technical serv-
ices and has become a primary responsibility for all commanders and staffs.

Logistical support for tank army operations in the war years in the aims of main-
taining their battleworthiness was of particular significance. This was caused by
the high-speed operations of tie armies to a significant depth and away from the
front's basic forces. The effectiveness of logistical support depended upon the
organizational activities of the commanders, staffs and other control bodies, upon
the creativity in achieving goals and the constant search for optimum variations for
organizing the rear services. The practice of the centralized employment of army
motor vehicles for delivering fuel, particularly with a high momentum of advance,

as well as rail and air transport, the delivery of material supplies directly to

the units (subunits) in bypassing intermediate levels also proved effective. Cap-
tured fuel was widely used. There was a reallocation of the various types of mater-
ial supplies depending upon the specific conditions of the combat situation. In
organizing control of the rear, a desire was shown to echelon the bodies which
directed rear support by creating small-sized operations groups located close to the
army command posts. This provided an opportunity to more efficiently settle ques-
tions proceeding from the situation and in obtaining prompt information on the
course of combat operations, the available supplies and needs of the troops. Sig-
nificant attention was given to organizing security on the rear lines of communica-
tions for the tank armies due to their vulnerability in the operational depth.

During the war years the question of promptly manning the army formations with per-
sonnel was successfully solved. The basic methods whereby the goals of restoring
their battleworthiness were achieved were: incorporating draft recruits in the

Combat practice teaches that the basic goal of party political work in an offensive
is to ensure moral, political and psychological readiness of the troops to fight
the enemy and achieve victory. This goal was always subordinate to the carrying
out of specific combat missions considering the conditions and particular features

216

FOR OFFICIAL LS! ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

of the combat situation. During the period of preparing for and conducting combat
operations, in the actual work of the commanders, political bodies, the party and
Komsomol organizations. the most effective and direct forms, methods and means were
employed to mobilize the men for decisive and bold actions and for demonstrating
initiative. Such forms were: personal contact of the commanders and political
workers with the troops, particularly in crucial moments of combat; studying and
fully explaining to the personnel the basic documents of the party and government;
popularizing the successes, heroic feats and best experience in meetings, assemblies,
in newspapers, combat leaflets and so forth.

The forms and methods of party political work employed in the war years have not
lost their importance now. Here it is essential to consider the particular features
stemming primarily from the constant threat of the employment of nuclear weapons by
the enemy, the presence of a large amount of new weapons and military equipment in
the troops and the greater intensity and dynamicness of combat operations. The

task of the commanders and political workers under today's conditions is to indoc-
trinate the personnel in comunist ideological conviction, moral-psychological
steadfastness and unswerving confidence in the justness of our goals remembering
that victory over the enemy depends decisively on this.

The basic principles in the approach to maintaining the battleworthiness of the
troops as elaborated by combat practice in the last war have largely maintained
their importance today. The restoring of troop battleworthiness is one of the most
difficult problems in modern military art. This consists in the carrying out by
the commanders, staffs, the party-political and rear bodies of a range of measures
aimed at regaining lost properties and qualities by the subunits, units and forms-
tions so that they can make organized and efficient use of the military equipment
and weapons as well as demonstrate their maneuvering and other capabilities in an

engagement and operation.
FOOTNOTES

1 0n 3 August 1943, the 5th Guards Tank Army had 550 tanks. Arkhiv H0 SSSR,
folio 332, inv. 4948, file 82, sheet 37.

Ibid., folio 223, inv. 50664, file 9, sheet 272.
Ibid., folio 332, inv. 4948, file 5, sheets 156, 160.
Ibid., folio 299, inv. 31147, file 1, sheet 28.

3 Ibid., r0110 309. 1hv. 4148, file 209, sheets 30-31; folio 236, 1hv. 13428,
file 6, sheet 84.

Ibid.. folio 236, inv. 13429, file 6, sheet 84.

7 Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 209. sheet 30.
8 Ibid., folio 332, inv. 4943. file 5, sheet 159.
9

Ibid., sheet 158.

217

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l0

1]

12

13

14

15

l6

I7

18

19

20

21

22

23

2‘0

25

26

27

28

29

1bid., folio 224, inv. 50664, file 9, sheet 273.

[bid., folio 236, inv. 21035, file 1, sheets 16-17.

In the Orel Operation, in the 26 Tank Army, 393 tanks were knocked out and this
was 112.9 percent of the total number of tanks existing in the army prior to the
start of combat operations. Some 74 percent of the losses were T-34 tanks, and
26 percent were T-70 and T-60. "2-ya tankovaya armiya...," p 45.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 217, inv. 4487, file 40, sheet 33.

D. D. Lelyushenko, "Hoskva--Sta11ngrad-Berlin-Praga" [Moscow-Stalingrad--
Berlin--Prague], Moscow, Izd-vo Nauka, 1972, p 314.

Arkhiv H0 5853, folio 299, inv. 29917, file 2, sheet 113.

A. Kh. Bahadzhanyan et a1., "Lyuki otkryli v Berline" [Hatches Opened in
Berlin], Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1973, p 290.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 47, inv. 352785, file 76, sheet 26.

Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4163, file 14, sheet 17.

Ibid., folio 324, inv. 4756, file 137, sheet 9.

Ibid., folio 38, inv. 282698, file 5, sheet 21.

Ibid., folio 299, inv. 350427, file 1, sheet 63.

Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4163, file 14, sheets 1-14.

Ibid., inv. 251512, file 1, sheet 16.

Ibid., folio 38, inv. 38809, file 9, sheets 165, 175.

Ibid.. folio 299, inv. 3067, file 11, 49; inv. 3070, file 372, 655, 673.

The average indicators for the operation of a tank before undergoing a major
overhaul according to the experience of the war were: 250-300 motor hours
(1500-24 km) for the T-34 tank and 200-250 motor hours (1,200-2,000 km) for the

IS. The average distance traveled per motor hour was 6-8 km.

1. H. Golushko, "Tanki ozhivali vnov'" [Tanks Brought Back to Life], Hoscow,
Voyenizdat, 1974.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 38, inv. 80042, file 70, sheets 140-145; folio 299, inv.
3070, file 382, sheets 107-130; folio 307, inv. 4148, file 224, sheets 177-190;
folio 315, inv. 4467, file 16, sheets 117-129.

Ibid., folio 299, inv. 3070, file 712, sheets 4-16, 98-113; folio 307, inv.
4148, file 224, sheet 18 and so forth.

218

FOI‘OFFKJAI.UBE(MVLY
30

31

32

3'4

35

36

37

38

39

'00

‘07

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 214; folio 315, inv. 4467, file 64.
Ibid., folio 324, inv. 4756, file 144, sheets 142-144.
Ibid., folio 236, inv. 52051, file 9, sheet 120.

Ibid., folio 324, inv. 4656, file 138, sheet 30; folio 307, inv. 4148, file 308,
sheet 280.

Ibid., folio 299, inv. 3070, file 712, sheet 110; folio 315, inv. 4467, file
125, sheets 112, 125.

M. Ye. Katukov, "Na ostriye glavnogo udara" [At the Peak of the Main Thrust],
Moscow, Voyenizdat, 1974, p 282.

A. Kh. Babadzhanyan et a1., op. cit., p 236.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 324, inv. 4756, file 144, sheet 65.

In the Belorussian Operation the tank armies (2d and 5th Guards) received by
air 1,182 tons of fuel, 1,240 tons of ammunition and 1,000 tons of technical
supplies. In the Manchurian Operation, the 6th Guards Tank Army received 2,047
tons of fuel and 800 tons of amnunition by air. "Voyennoye iskusstvo v vtoroy
mirovoy voyne" [Military Art in World War 11], Moscow, AGSh, 1973, pp 435, 436.
Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 339, inv. 5179, file 98, sheet 20.

Ibid., inv. 5185, file 29, sheet 189.

Ibid., folio 307, inv. 4148, file 145; folio 322, inv. 4948, file 315, sheets
1-13; inv. 4940, file 69, sheets 2-24.

The lst Guards Tank Army in the Belgorod-Khar'kov, Proskurov-Chelnovtsy, Luow-
Sandomierz, Vistula-Oder, East Pomeranian and Berlin operations; the 2d Guards
Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder, East Pomeranian and Berlin operations; the 3d
Guards Tank Army in the Vistula-Oder and Berlin operations.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR. folio 291, inv. 4948, file 154, sheet 2.

Ibid., folio 324, inv. 4756, file 36, sheet 12.

D. D. Lelyushenko, op. cit., p 232.

H. Ye. Katukov, op. cit., p 417.

A. Kh. Babadzhanyan et a1., op. cit., p 214.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR, folio 299, inv. 20543, file 1, sheet 196.

K. Marx and F. Engels, "Works," Vol 31, p 360.

219

IWJR 0FF1C1A1.USE(MVLY
50

51

52

53

54

55

56

S7

58

59

F03<Nﬂﬂ€1Al.USE(MVLY

v. I. Lenin. PSS [Complete Collected Works], Vol 41, p 121.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, folio 315, inv. 4451, file 16, sheets 9-12;

3063, file 91, sheets 305-318.

Ibid., folio
Ibid., folio
Ibid., folio
Ibid., folio
Ibid., folio
Ibid., folio
Ibid., folio

Ibid., folio

236, inv. 2698, file 1750, sheet 231.
32, inv. 440026, file 44, sheet 22.

233, inv. 2307, file 189, sheet 51.
299, inv. 17055, file 7, sheets 626-627.
32, inv. 3063, file 42, sheets 245-250.
307, inv. 4148, file 410, sheet 232.
300. inv. 23607, file 2, sheet 415.

299, inv. 76781, file 11, sheet 135.

220

FOI‘OFTHCIAI.lEﬂE(MVLY

folio 299, inv.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONCLUSION

The years pass separating us evermore from the terrible events of the war forced on
the Soviet Union by Naziism. This war was also one of the severest tests which
our motherland has ever experienced and a school of courage.

The Soviet people and their valorous armed forces under the leadership of the Com-
munist Party dealt a crushing defeat to Nazi Germany and its satellites, they de-
fended the liberty and independence of the socialist fatherland, they carried out
a great liberating mission and honorably fulfilled their international duty.

The victory over fascism was a world historical accomplishment and a triumph for the
October-born new social and state system, for the socialist economy, for the ideol-
ogy of Marxism and for the moral-political unity of Soviet society and the unshak-
able friendship of the Soviet peoples. It had the profoundest impact on the entire
course of world development.

During the time which has passed since the war, enormous sociopolitical and economic
changes have occurred in the world and these have fundamentally altered the balance
of forces on the world scene. The means for the destruction of life and property
have reached such a level that a new war, if the imperialists start it, will cre-
ate an enormous danger for mankind.

The CPSU Central Committee and the Soviet government have shown constant concern for
strengthening the defense might of the socialist motherland and for securely defend-
ing the peaceful labor and security of the nation. The postwar advances of the
Soviet people in the development of the economy, science, technology and culture
have made it possible to implement major measures in the area of defense construc-

tion. As a result of this, the entire system of national defense has been trans-
formed and the technical equipping of the Soviet Armed Forces and their combat might

have increased greatly.

At the 25th CPSU Congress, the General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee,
Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, said:

"Let no one doubt that our party will do everything so that the glorious Soviet
Armed Forces in the future possess every necessary means for carrying out their re-

sponsible mission of guarding the peaceful labor of the Soviet people and being a
bastion of universal peace."

221

FIIR()FFICJAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
FINICH“W(JAI.USE13NLY

The diverse combat experience acquired by our Armed forces in the hard and extended
war against a strong enemy is an invaluable property of ours and one of the impor-

tant sources in the further development of Soviet military art and in improving the
level of training and indoctrination for the commanders and all personnel. Much of
the rich combat experience of the last war has maintained its importance under to-

day‘s conditions. In particular. this applies to the experience of employing tank

armies to quickly achieve the decisive goals of operations.

During the years of the Great Patriotic War the tank armies possessed the greatest
mobility, maneuverability, strike force and armor protection. In the front-level
offensive operations, they were used on the main axes. Their actions were charac-

terized by a high momentum of advance, by the employment of broad and skillful
maneuvers, by dynamicness, by a rapid transition from one type of actions to another,

and by the successful carrying out of diverse missions under difficult conditions.

The conclusion of our military theory was confirmed that it was advisable to commit
the tank armies to the engagement after the breakthrough of the entire depth of the
enemy tactical defensive zone by the combined-arms armies of the front's first
echelon. In this case the tank armies completely preserved their strike power for
operations in the operational depth. The possibility was discovered and under cer-
tain conditions the operational advisability of employing the tank armies in the
first echelon of a front during an offensive operation and sometimes also for carry-
ing out defensive missions.

At the basis of the success in combat operations by the tank armies lay the skillful
employment of the principle of the massing of resources. V. I. Lenin taught:

“...It is essential to assemble a great predominance of forces on the crucial area,
at the crucial moment."2 "The source of successes and of the miracles which we
demonstrated in military affairs was that we always concentrated on the main and

basic thing...."3 These Leninist theses were skillfully carried out in the course
of the war.

The concentration of basic efforts on the selected axis in the course of an offen-
sive was achieved in the tank armies mainly by the maneuvering of the formations

and units and was an indicator of the high level of the art of command, the deep
penetration into the enemy's plans, an understanding of the situation and a skillful
determining of that enemy troop grouping the defeat of which would lead to a loss of
strength in the defenses. A miscalculation in the concentration of efforts involved

a danger of defeat as the defending enemy possessed sufficient mobility and fire
power.

The successful operations of the tank armies in the offensive operations were large-
ly determined by the achieving of surprise in the tank attacks. This made it pos-
sible to anticipate the enemy, to catch it by surprise, to paralyze its will, to

sharply reduce its combat capability, to disorganize control and create favorable
conditions for its defeat.

The experience of tank army combat operations convincingly confirmed the well known

thesis of Soviet military art that victory in an engagement and operation can be

achieved only by the coordinated efforts of all the involved men and equipment on
the basis of their close cooperation.

212

IIHICNWﬂCIA1.USEfﬂﬂly
The offensive operations by tank armies were characterized by effective results which
increased year by year. This showed the improved art of the military leaders and
the combat skill of the troops.

During the war years the Soviet tank troops showed unprecedented heroism and cour-
age. All 6 of the tank armies, 21 tank and mechanized corps out of the 38, 68 tank
brigades out of the 146 involved in combat operations and scores of regiments were
changed into guards units; 250,000 soldiers, sergeants, master sergeants, officers
and generals from the tank troops received orders and medals, around 200 received
the three degrees of the Order of Glory, l,lé2 tank troops received the title of
Hero of the Soviet Union while 16 men received this twice. Over 9,000 tank indus-
try employees received high governmental decorations and many of them were awarded
the title of Hero of Socialist Labor.

The tank armies during the years of the Great Patriotic Her made tank attacks in
more than 20 major strategic offensive operations of the Soviet Army and in scores
of front-level operations.

The lst Guards Tank Army participated in the Belgorodsxhar'kov, Zhitomir-Berdichev,
Proskurov-Chernovtsy, Lwow~$andomierz, Vistula-Oder, East Prussian and Berlin
operations. Its troops crossed such major rivers as the Dnestr, Hestern Bug, Vistu-
la and Oder and liberated the inhabitants of Bogodukhov, Chernovtsy, Rawa Ruska,
Sandomierz and many other population points.

The troops of the 2d Guards Army fought from the Russian city of Orel to the capital
of Nazi Germany, participating in the defeat of major enemy groupings in the KoraunL
Shevchenkovskiy, Lublin-Brest, Vistula-Oder and other operations. By their highly
fluid actions they contributed to the liberation of Warsaw and to the surrounding
and destruction of the enemy grouping in Berlin.

The 3d Guards Army fought its way across more than 6,000 km. Its men were ecstati-
cally greeted by the inhabitants of many cities and villages. The army's forma-
tions participated in the liberation of Poland, the storming of Berlin and completed
their victorious path in the capital of Czechoslovakia, Prague.

For almost 2 years the men of the 4th Guards Tank Army brought liberation to the
peoples. They fought a distance of 2,200 km, they crossed more than 30 rivers and
in cooperation with other troops liberated more than 16,000 population points.

Having started its campaign record in the Kursk Battle, the 5th Guards Tank Army
over the war years fought its way across many thousands of kilometers. The army's

troops participated in the operations to liberate the left bank Ukraine, Belorussia,
Lithuania and the northern regions of Poland as well as the crushing of the enemy

troops in East Prussia.

The troops of the 6th Guards Tank Army also traveled a great distance. They partic-
ipated in the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy, Uman'-Botosani, Iasi-Kishinev, Debrecen,
Budapest, Vienna, Prague and Manchurian Offensive operations, in overcoming the
rabid resistance of the enemy and freeing the peoples of Romania, Hungary, Austria
and Czechoslovakia of Naziism. Their path ended on the Pacific.

223

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FIHR()FIWCIAL UGEZCNVLY

The-campaign record of the tank armies in extremely diverse. Although more than 30

years have already passed since the end of the Great Patriotic war, a profound
study of it can provide much that is useful for broadening the operational-tactical

viewpoint of our commanders. Of course. the conbat experience must be perceived
creatively and one must not seek in it external similarity in the procedures and
methods of combat but rather view this experience through the prisn of the new con-

ditions, the new means, forms and methods of combat operations and thereby enrich
one's military viewpoint.

FOOTNOTES
1 L. I. Brezhnev, "Otchet Taentral'nogo koliteta...,“ p 100.
2 v. I. Lenin, PSS, V01 35, n 383.

3 Ibid.. Vol 40, pp 284-285.

224

IIHICNHNC1A1.USB(HVLY
Basic Specifications of Tanks and Self-Propelled

d Tum 690-, 4-

 

Tanks existing at the start

     
 

Heavy tanks '
KB-l 41.5 6 76+” 78 H ”fag; 1—10
75 to
Medium tanks
1528 27.8 6 30 so 20 15—40 so l—76
1334-76 30.9 4 45 45 45 so 52(c ; 1—76
450:3:
Light tanks
1-26 10.5 3 I5 15 15 10—6 l5 1-45
at 51.1. 51,8”. 14.6 a 20 I3 13 10—6 [5 1—45
geek
1’ l4 4 87 87 IS 31—l5 1—43
Tanks ’and SM) entering
Reavy tanks I
KB~I¢ KV-Is 42.5 5 so 1—16
PIC-85 18-85 44 4 :oo- oo l—u
“c3 15-2 46 4 90 1—122
ac; 13-3 45.8 4 so 1—”?
Hediutank
TM 32.0 5 45 1—03
Light tanks
no 6.4 2 15 1.30
7-70 l0.0 2 16 l—G
SAU
cy-m SU-76n l0.8 4 5— 1-16
CY-I22 "33"“! 3L9 5 4b l—lﬂ
Wu") 29.6 4 45 1—85
"CV-I22 ISU — 6 90 1—122
CV45! 45 5 00 1—!”
"CV-ls: . 6 00 n-m
cy-xoo 4L. 4 4s 1.100

   

Key: a--tank name; 1: "weight. tons; c--crsw; d--arnor thickness, In;
e--Eronta1; f--s1de; gut-ear; hnroof and bottom; i—turrst; )—
armanent; k--cannons (number and caliber, II);

225

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Artillery Mounts in the Soviet Army Appendix 1

  
     

      

nyamvoo
SWMI

(no. u u-
JII'. III)

of the Great Patriotic War

3—14» 1—1.6: - m woo as 24 I6 250 m 150 was
4—7.62 70 ms 45 — 220 — — 1933
2.7.62 100 3600 as 25 300 250 200 mu
no
mo-

8|

2—1.62
24,62

2-7 .62

l—1.62

I65 $54 30 IO I5 I70 I50 I937
1-1. 62

I88 2331 32 5 100500—550 510 3939
—uso4ooo 52 — - 3“ - - I9“

service d-urirm the- we:

3—1.6) - — Ill 3000 43 26 250 I00 I50 I96
3—1.6? — — 59 2520 37 22 lN—IW I20 "0 l9“
3 I-l2.1 — 28 ms: 31 22 ISO—I60 IN IN IO“
I—7.62 l—l'2J - 2O 40 — I” — - I945
2—7.6? -— — 65 I958 55 so M 250 200 I9“
I—‘l 62 -— — 1” 9‘5 42 25 450 W 250 I941
1—1.6? - 70 9‘5 ‘5 so 250 I” - I962
- - 2 00 INS ‘5 26 ”(I I” — I90
— — 2 w 55 so“ 360 M M 1962
.. — 2 £8 — 55 N am 260 N0 I9“
- — 2 so - 35 23 220 I“ 80 I944
— - 2 m - 43 25 g I65 I20 I943
— — 2 20 - 35 23 MS N I“!
— — 2 IO - 50 a SIG 140 I” I9“

 

j--amnent;1-nechinegme (number and caliber, In); watieircraft
machine guns (nu-her and caliber. In); n-oeubmhtne guns; o—unit of
fire; p--rounde; q--nachine gun rounds: r-speed. kl/hr; e--nexinun;
t—-averege over highway; u--nverege over country roads; v-fue1

supply, kn; w-highwey; x—country roads; y-over fields; :«yeer
entering service.

226

MOMLLISEONLY
Basic Specifications of Armored Equipment

 

Tanks and assault guns in service

Light tanks

-| 5—- 2 u 15 10—1 —
“In 3.3 a 15 15 I5 no 15 1—20
Medium tanks

1-"! 20.0 s so so — :2 — 1—37
nv 24.0 5 4o 20 10 lo — 1—15
cws v 22.0 4 so so 20 16-1 30—50 1-75
camoss no 4 so so so 23-10 30 1-405

(have)

Medium tanks,
1-"! (modern. 22.1 5

14v (underm) 24.0 5

 

Heavy tanks

t-V Panther 45.5 5 I1 45—l00 1—15

T-Vl Tiger 57.0 5 28 ”—100 He

mgr-"n 65.0 5 4o Isa—so I—u

( yal)

SM] and-

assault guns _

Ferdinand — 6 55—30 200 l-OO
1) Gilt-IR? (u 60:: 25.0 4 20—10 It!) 1-450
2);u..'... ’mo us o.- 24.0 s 15 no 1—3:

at “NV
3) 474m "To u 6a- 6.4 3 I—41
u nun 1-!
lo) 154m C! In one 16 4 1—76
umu 38-1
5) 154m c¥ In; on. 25.0 ¢ 1-15
6) ”Wu u «m 22 : 1-15
mm T~lll
Tank hunters
ass-5:555“ :5: : Hz.
a - er . ..
Blgfanl:8 55 6 1-”

Key; a--tank name; b-oweight, tons; c-crew; d—arnor thickness; e--fror.ta1;
f—side; g—rear; h-roof and bottom; i--turret; j-arnanent; k—nachine
guns (number and caliber, In); 1-SU-150 (based on T-IV); 2-884: antitank
gun based on T-IV; 3-47-13 antitank gun based on T-l tank; 4—75-5-1 80

based on T-IV tank; 5--75-nl SI) based on T-IV tank; 6—75-II 80 based on
T-III tank.

227

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Appendix 2
1n the German Army

 

by the start"bf -the attack Eon-tho USSR

2—1.92 - — so - — — — -

l—7.” 200 1523 45 30 25 300 220 l80 yea; gf prod”
1 3

2—1.9! 84 4050 55 35 5 150 "5 95 game

2-7.9! 80 2700 40 28—30 20- 200 Ii!) IOO yeﬁagf prod.,

2—7.92 56 21:00 50 ”—40 25- 150 "5 95

1—7.9! 38 2000 60 5 '25 150 IIS 95

service during the‘war

r3750 40 25 20 150 Its 96 in aerv.1942
3150 40 25-30 200 I3) I00 in new. 1962

2—1.9)
1—7.9?

380

2—7.92 80 2000 50 35 15.8 I70 no oo in son. 1953

291.92 as aooo « - Is- no — as one
2—1.92 so 5355 41.5 as on no — no cane
1—1.9: as 2000 on 10-15 — loo — 135 in urv. 1942
.1. 26 — so so as no no 55 am
.. 24 — 40 4o a zoo [so too am
40 no
40 '180
40 zoo
40 m
in term:
' '45 200 1944
i so no 1945
— | to no mo

j—annnent; lunch“. guns (amber and caliber); mutant: of fire; 0-
shells; o-mch1ne guns rounds; p—Ipeed, lat/hr; quantum; vantage
over highway; s—aveuse over country roads; c—rnnge, In; u—over highway;
v--over country roads; Humor fields; x—note.

228

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040069-7

II.‘ of nab—rd! F1ﬂ<vtlﬁdic Ev divhﬂﬁﬂ‘c Alp—Inf...- Q‘ [EIII o=<U 1‘. I350 u! iii-El

use "in no 83:09:00....0 30300:...— 30302: on»: 3qu0 353 £0.33 0.." 33032330 ">3.

 
    

. 88 8
alo— 8 8a RI...— 09 in .9. a .E. “Maw—S <._. o
O .8! it .0.- .u_— .9. .Oh
_ a. 8 08 an 0 a «38 E03 <._. n .830.
m. 8 8a 81... 03 .2. .c a J: .c : <._. . 391.882.; o
0.86 9 8 ﬁle. XN a: a .l .9. a Sp 0 ca
_ S 3 as al.6— RN 2. .2 an .3 3 “Wyn—3 (h .9. w 68.0833qu n
8 an 8- ecu 8v? ﬁlagdshgﬂrws <._..=a
_ .c 8 .:.: o. I a =8
m 8 8 8. 3 8 oz .2. .c a .ﬁ “.2“... <0 . ...£«em.oaeaa.x a
u 8 8 8. 88 .8 2:84:13; <0...” 36....xn
. R a on. Ble— % 0...... an: M...” “a.” o (h “H m noxanaxéxuuoaPEdcm-nm
8 o
_ 8 8. ale. .: : ﬁelomﬁazaa p v
. . <
e. a. 8 3|». 9K 8d 2; 38 3
3h “.3 For owAn‘wholhuMu <._. B n
I!“ o
mm “a M. MI...“ .8 3.8 .2 : E a 8 2 <0 a 58230 H
_ a 0 I u I J
_ M m“ m m m m WW .oluuh: 3 I 5...: «loo-I:
m .I mm m «u m m .n m .ﬁnﬂ Juno: lig- 3800 '3 0.38303» «.383 o
‘ n m n m Wm m m «HRH-83 £238. 0 A dug-8.0 a
I u U r— M w m u 002.020 “0
llllll'llllllllllllnll
ncaalnaon nu acouuauoao o>wacouuo hﬂu< some new «acuuuuvcu cuauuou
n x3302? .-

229

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDP82-00850R000500040069-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600040069-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.233»; 3.8.3357.» 3.288-; “$3....néoﬁ
:0 33:23.3!“ uuuogvaumuaoﬁle £257..” “Egg—33;!” 35.881582”

Toma.— oaoﬁium do» .0325 van .9333 55.30 3 >3— .3:

                                           

           

a: P. .3 .2 u (h .9. u i o
a.“ mow % anal“...— «mm x: 9. one “up”... 3—. v .
Blov 3 3. : ~«o J... 9.5.6.. 5 .3...” 1-... o fwd“ a
co 8 8h ov on 2.6 u: . E. 9. «.35 .Baoo <._. a g
. . :3 3..
Sn mm a...“ wok.» E. : ask-win
Qolh 3 8a an O» non-£3.38“
0v 8 8n 8 canning-30.5 n
no 3 3n ovlon .
8 3 3n 8. On a can”
. uncut-9.8833:
a m a" can.“ .35. n
on an 8— 3 cu 3353506393.. N
.l 3 .00
a a a an s 3
3 we a 8 cguuﬁeﬁgh .—
. O I I u
d mm W a m W m on... vino-ll.
.umom .mmm a“. 3.8.0: at...
a m“ m mm” .m 5.3 .
.. m s w u u

  

302.3908 n nun—noun?

230

l-‘OlOFFIClALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDPOZ-00850R000500040069-7
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040069-7

Fuﬂﬁﬁaﬂﬂﬂ NO “Old Ulhﬂu GGI nlhvE- 1:! IOGv—ylz Ran-FC.‘ CL 30.— ﬂesh

                          

  
        
 

I 8— 3o 22 E... .3. .9. a in .9. a <._. .9. c great-ﬁg m
l. .9. u
2. 3 3. 8.... d.- .9. 0.! Eu 5......»
l. .n. a
8 8. an 5.9.0.322 5......
8 8— 8'3 .3. a .9.. .9. h in .9. 0—9 (h d. n. .8093: o.
a: .9. e
on 2.. an .I. .9. o .9.. .9. o. <._..9. v
395 3
S 8. E d...£u.9.~.nu.9.o (Plan
a 8— «B 31.39.26.739 <P.Eu
33 .9. 3 .5 I
8 o: 8.. .2. .9. o .9. 9. 2 E. .9. _ «Quay-non n
x: _
.9. .9. _ J..— .9. o < .9. m
3 3— m8 new 6. 3 .3 : h
8 o! 3» a... .o. o J... .9. : <._..9. _ 35:93:.8553 N
3 3a on... 3.8 so .3 a .9. o. <h .n. n I-Boaacbuvoruoa H
m u u w J
M m M m m m m M W 3?: >40 I II...- 0303...:
. mom .I w . Mach“... 09...: in :3 I!“ stone-50'» .3095 a
a I.“ W m I u u 0.30.: 02.0 duo-coco
m m t w. M n 23! £0.03. 0 a N
u _. .. u a . . as... u ..

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00860R000600040069-7

2.03.3.5... n 82.5%?

231

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040069-7

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Inn .323." Sumac uuwugullm “woooou ouauugoguuunlu "accuucuccc «cf—:1 aquac—

HHIquvlv mono—v 3 v9.3»: and: 0230.— vowuon and: .3qu «25330an “mug-Bound "his

 

no.5- oauvoRo-acoao u

 

a;

mush—28
a on 9Q. a ungaé-En
5.9 9.8 n— Evens-aha
a 3 9.2. o- =3.on
0.3 v.3 o— cacao 23-9
o6. 9.8 2 58810.83;
0..“ n.2— o Insane-60
v6 oJu a sagas-nuaocéurog
a 8 v.62 «— zigzag-06382:.
o. .w 93. as uglaaxéﬁqSEQ-n

nu: 0335.8 23.5 o...» no 203308 53.30 5

HNF‘.Q|I\\DNQM

5......»

4... .9. v
5...: a

<._..3 «

<90
<._. .9. _

@352 3:8. Mo 3d 25 8—59 ca «2.03 3.25 0939.3 van 38.26 uo $3530»

9 5.533

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040089-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040069-7

Inc “was a.“ 63.58 0.53 3.33 “.3qu uoaa woulo “uneducuonoulp “acacia "has

 

on _ on owuumvd .
0.3 v.3 agar—6g o <.—. .9. a
0....“ 0.2.. snug-05¢ a
a.» «.3 :35 h <._. .2 v
9.8 5.2 unions-dun o 5— .B «
v.3 0.3 unannoquﬁ-n n
5.8 ”.2 558.8 a <._. E a
0.3 9.8 . canon-5010:0183 n
QR «.2. visionaaQouo-o-a: N <Ho
”.3 0.3 conceals-X653; H 1—. .9. _
3.r 5 8...... .3 3 I:
loos-Won“ 0-H"!!!— .Ev a
hay... dun: .1...“ .. a... .
iv 0
.83.- ..u 0 1.3.8 In no n
can: on
2.0.i0h8'
caclzz .830: v 0

no: 03033 :95 05 mo «30.3325 5398 cu
nous: scam. we :3 25 3:3. ca 339— 03395on 25 0332603: uo 0.33—

n vacuum}.

233

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040089-7
nuns u.ua> nu» ce an:
oNV >oa.uoazxun .n
.n onus suns suo.nux

Ace we: anon:
an: adv >oaduouuax .¢
.> cane scan coo nu:

Ame nun nuea Han
nuv >o=quun .2 .H goo

Anna o.ua3 Huu

no can a .ec Haa nu
up.» way awxu>ouua
nvnu .u .< use an!
Aae no“ mw

uaun «av >o~>u~.c;
.< «Qua sacs coo an:
nec.uxn_w~-~v

gauge .m J» Hoe

Ace can sumc has any
nus-auum .o» .o goo

Anc
an: «unnun may oxuo»
uuuaauo .m .a zoo nu:

Ava»
a.:3 "an me no» adv
auaanm .< .2 emu nu:

Ana pom ”Hume can any
pocouo .m .z coo «a:

macaw mo unease alu<

 

whoaaoa Huocsoo ahauuuwx

   

 

                                  
                            

  
 

Ame he: «a
scum nouasuv
sau< same on

“can
o.uaa Hay me an: adv
ox~aaam .m .m coo «an

acne a.uaa aw»
me an: «av >ouau.uoz
.H .m anus scan coo no:

    

    
 

Acne ..u~: Hwy
me can 5v poaavuon
.H .m cane aqua coo ago

an: can 5

.ae Han «NV maxupoaau
-vau .u .< use an:
Ace Han n~

.no no» av >oaueuon
.H .m .auu saga gnu a;

Ana
no» ounom «Hy aueau
.o .< onus Jana :uo u;

Ame no» ~auucn may
oxcunaeax .a .m goo a;

Anna u.uu3

Ha» me pom nv >osuuuua
.z .m 25. 3:8. :8 9.:

Ac: >0: on
noun nvuoauv

hau< sees an

 
 

Ave» 0.99:
Ha» no can any .Hoaom
.u .z anus sans goo «a:

Avco o.un:

Ha» me cue onv >ox=uqu
.u» .: anus aqua goo ya

Aceau um< mN
scum avuasov

aau< ages a

  

  

    

ouovnuaaoo mau< nouau<

Amqoa-neauv ooaau< saua coauuaonaoousuouqca as» «o aasmuovooa

236

FORINHWCJAI.USE10NLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040069-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 I‘ll! 1.1‘. 1‘ 11:

Ace goo as Ava» o.ua: Ava» ..uaa nu» «e
ucuw ouv poaau .H .a Han an gun nuv cumuuasa can oNV oxaono>ouu
onus sacs :ou nu: .a .0 cans sans coo nu: .u .< anus sans one a;

   

:3» Bus: .3»

me as: may oxcucum
.a .z anus Jana new no:

Ana an: 0H
nee n=< may muxa.ao>
.a .> «any sane coo ug

A3 w=< 3:3 :«uaoaow
.9 .2 0E scan. :00 u.—

Ace mac a
Inc now «8 >ouuauauox
.< .m wake Junk :00 u;

      

Avdo a.uu3 Hwy cc
>oz Nav sou>ououam .m
.9 many anus goo nu:

Ace >oz «auaqz
«NV oxaonoaauaax .H
.m onus Jana coo an:

Ace 5“: «mane nu: -v
>833. .z .> H8

        
      

       

  

2.3 u . nan

Hg» me ya: NV nasauue
.o .m none saga new “a:

    

8:0 ml!» .33
«e um: a~v oxaosa
unmaoa .n .n :00 pg

n¢e um: au
nne Han may >ocauun
.z .> cane sacs coo u;

2.30 01.83 ”.3
«c an: oHv cyan: .H
.x «any seas awe an:

Ace an: oaune Han nHV
>ouauo .H .m Hoo

  

23.0 Punk 3»
n.‘ :2. may Klaus-6
.o .> anus scan :09 nu:

  

:3» «0 30.30 >53 33608 3258 .33qu 33:33.3 as:

avoacuuuouv o “Suva—can?

Ace now «a
no.3 «0238

hau< anus sue

Ame sum oH
aouu noun-.8

>au< saga sum

Ame um: “a
39G 23:38
hau< snag sue

mﬂdﬁh<

235

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040069-7
run Utrabanu uon Uﬂhl

DIAGRAHB

[List of Russian abbreviations and acronyms used in the diagrams.]

TA--tank army
rs.--guards
BA--air army
MK--mechanized corps
cx--rif1e corps
Tx--tank corps
oTop--separate tank brigade
M6p--mechanized brigade
nc69--motorized rifle brigade
ca6p—-self-propelled artillery brigade
oce6p—-separate self-propelled artillery
brigade
na6p--light artillery brigade
mum 6p--engineer brigade
Top--tank brigade
na6p-—gun artillery brigade
Hunn-—mortar regiment
onc--separate signals regiment
on6c--seprate line signals battlation
ounn--separate motorcycle regiment
oanc--expansion unknown
opso--separate repair-maint. btln.
oaer--separate motor transport btln.
aarn--motor transport regiment
osp--separate salvage company
san6--unknown type of btln.
seuan-~AA artillery regiment
seuan--AA artillery battalion
n-u PA--rocket launcher battalion
nan--light artillery regiment
unran--antitank regiment
can--self-prope11ed artillery reg.
nn--infantry division
1n--tank division

cn--r1fle division
Mn—-mechsnized division

236

SO-battle outpost

n0-forward detachment
PP--reconnaissance group
0r-operations section
00n-traffic support detachment
HH-obaervation post
Kn-command post
BnY-auxiliary control post
pea-reserve

rns--rear security detachment
“03-mobile obstacle construction

detachment

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ASE: ~33»: 32:32 3 832 in... no 833088 A 3898

 

237

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

$23.33 828.8 2:333 “93.39:" < .n 5.339

538.83.". ham 63.3! 3.333 theme 30: wean—gm .n
savanna among-Sn no a: «:33. .c Jul: 5.“: 603033 .uoao 30: pan on: noon «30¢
30on a .330 .3003 van». an." 332—0 «0 fuoao «0 30¢ :03..— .axuauuuuougoo
How 95545 .39 a nil—3 .Houu nun-S: an. .0»: B dong £395 «0 33253.5 w .50!
naoo .nouuouonooo «0 8303.395 .n v3.33 ounum .998 uonoudoa £00 3 no gonadal—00 .N
00:39:. mouse—03¢ .95 0:93. we uni-union 60332—0 no
.9553 39.5 «math-5n no .395 .~ $5....» a.“ 0333qu anew vac wad-he ova." no noun was:
.590 9:53.7— .o:o«o 27>... 3 lug a «no» .303» 95:95 .00.» .a0 mo awouuu
I01 «0 was”... 693 952—03 .u .unu mo £usou£uxzun .auaov .uauoho 5 .30 no :59 .H
noun—2. 933395 «as. non; one: vacuum
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a) TA used to complete breakthrough of tactical zone

attack line concent rari

assembly
area

2d zoae lat zone

 

Diagram 4. Area Occupied by a Tank Ari-y Prior to Conitnent
to the Engagement

240

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
3.8 3239—98 as:
owuowuu-m undue 0:» ca mlh< such a up nowucuono o>w¢=ouuo :< .n aduuaaa

26.- a .53.... I m.

 

.2... mm aim- mm- m mm...” a”.

an In mama aw

 

Ja>umzouuo mom a com
”In.“- In»

   
      
  
    
      

     

pr ”~le no..." no... no... ".3; m 70""
€3th I

n

u ,

.73? . «J

 

0"...” ”n. n“.

It on than. 212...... m“.

 

"Jan.
1/73... 3/15... mu... “W m

*ESJ’EHEL

___ﬂ"_u._____. _

OlnmlpJ'J meal. "nu-01154 1.1.00.0
~00— ” n. ,,

  

   

Diagram 6. Configuration of the 2d Guards Tank Aruy

262

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

 

M0—
| ”1"
cu alum-o, rm“. nu. .m- rmm um. In
| O-v-v- . - 47>
I __.__..|
I.-
g“ It“, 2/)“.- a nu! 107-5, :- “cu-O- lin: hp.u~"’
Gnu-'- - I do 0 I ">

' .. a 'l u E ' - n '2. I
I [In "no u . n In. In ._,.

 

Couitnent to Breakthrough (ﬁstula-Oder Operation)

263

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) for completing breekthrough of main zone

«elem
m— ®art£1clj art! “0/

    

 

" ED r—o"/

‘)

h) after breakth 3b of tactic 1 zone

‘5“ ”gig, A,

$‘Wﬁ-

   

 

'0" main zone

 
   
 
 

      
 
  
 

Diagram 7. Continent of Tank Antes to Engage-ant

266

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Diagram 8. Artillery support in Conniting the 6th Tank Army to the Breakthrough fron
the Line of the nahlui River on 20 August 1906

[Key to boxes in upper right corner:]
Box 1: following officers assigned to radio-equipped tanks for cooperation and
fire correction

Box 2: following officers assigned to artillery connsnders of 6 TA corps for
cooperation and control

Box 3: target designation carried out from map using numbered squares. Each square
divided into 9 parts. For example: sq. 258. Target for antitank gun:
"258-8"

[Key to Legend in bottom right corner:]

a--firing positionsinjunp-off area for the offensive

b--formations in jump-off position before breakthrough

c--firing positions taken up to support 6 TA

d--nedium-caliber antiaircraft artillery

c-snall-caliber antiaircraft artillery

f--battle formation of AA artillery during period of conitting 6 TA to breakthrough

[Key to lines on lower left side:]

Line 1: Reaching of line by tanks: white rockets; radio "1111"
Line for bypassing infantry
Line 2: Reaching of line by tanks: white rockets; radio "2222"
Linc 3: Reaching of line by tanks: white rockets: radio "3333"
Line a: Reaching of line by tanks: white rockets; radio "4&66"
5

Line : Reaching of line by tanks: white rockets; radio "5555"

2&5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son on'i'cuu. us: ONLY

mu 1 l 23..

 

Diagram 8. Artillery support in Connit ing the 6th Tank Army to the
Breakthrough from the Line of the Bahlui River, 20 Aug 191an

246

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
luv-um nun-U"
no up“ n layup-I-

tomb of [in

    
 

\ an I 1" A“. (a
; \_._.2 1-7:. ﬁ' ‘97-;- A... (c
- : '-- m 0‘ w w
' hu- n ’ _ , ‘ Q9 ." natty-Ottawa's“.
._____ _____j. . I. . o glean. ‘-
I
-_.._...._....— ... w 4", ‘g -___——_-._-e-.-.!!-'-'E-'-'5'_-___

Diagram 8. Continued.

2107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"ouca>vo .uo E3530: 32.53 mo :03 mo

:3 dc.“ Hung

Rh

a. o .EMO .mWnWWMMEU w.»
sﬁﬁﬁm a... a. A a: u ._ mumﬁwmw 7/

13
0
J
3
a
8
O
1:

X

31:01;

' 5:503;- ~:r. ”-

Diagram 11. Actions of 2d Tank Amy in the Operational Depth
During Lublin-Brest Operation

250

FOIOFFIGALWONLY
«59.5.5 cauoonwm
0.5 no =3. 33 5 such. ovum-5 vn no 3.50:0: .2 awn—wag

9...: no 2.» lift
9...»... «0 cam %

o3..." no 3—0 IIIIIII.
mmuowummoa mocha

28.33003 0
of a Tank Army to the Defensive in the Course

of an Offensive Operation (Variation)

Diagram 13. Going over
ma omml. us: ONLY

 

\

3.33 as» 3.22.3 8.33.3 mo :owuanumwcuevanuu

«yucca-Boo 3033.5 Ea no coguauuaucuaoauuo 33.53 32.135 mo mozuunv 33:0»
“sou-0:0 mo moi—0.50 33:33:33 .3971» 3.6.5 acozwuoaouna Scamp—um H9550
.vcouoonun Smog vcgounnu «303qu 603332.233 can 339 “Havana-Bo :33un
".2550! .3253 .3332. .33: mo mango 3:33 3ch mo muzu “hogan-noun; $3.

$2.92 me 283938 032.83
on» :u munch Hauucoo mah< 3:09 no ucolo>ot vac coaunmonwun .cu annuawo

UV 1.5!. o dos €303.30‘1lo. ‘5‘ 0V 3I~3 in. soul“:

. i. I, .1? ol'ilin ‘tl o'tootli-

a Isl§toaou¥ until... “W l. is.
-uoo0~.o~o Inuc~us

.aon u:

.3; 3 .5. .8... §
3

.3033sl- v." if:
snug-Is. unlis‘oﬁ‘
.3 3.3-3 I. fill

.. .§_§.. .I..-
I _H

as. ‘” ua>v canon Houucou mo coauumoa Am

right: Voyenizdat, 1977

8140/0355

-END-

253

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY