FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1059O
16 June 1982

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 7/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
more

JPRS publications contain information primarily tron foreign
newspaperc. periooicals and books. but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Haterials tron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerptl- in the first line of each itan, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was slnnarissd or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteratad are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion stark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. line within ituas are as

given by source .

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Government.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIOIS GOVERNING WHIP OP
MYERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMIMTION
OF THIS PUELICATION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL U83 ONLY.
USSR REPORT
MILITARY Asmns

(P'ODO 7/82)

Comeu‘rs

m m
Excerpts From Book on Higher mntéry-Politicol Schoola
(V W“. WWW V “W WO-
mmm mm, 1981) oouoooooouuuuou

Excerpts hon Book on the 'llemn’ ‘1?me Exercise
(WW', 19m) 0......O...0.0000000000000000...

-&- [III-USSR-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sums m soon: one arm mum-mum scaoozs

Dbscow V PONSHCI' POBTUPAY'USHCHW V "SSH“! VOYENNO-POLITICHBSKOYB UCHILISBCBE in
Russian 1981 (signed to preee 31 hr 81) pp 1-2, 13-28. 96

(Annotation, table of oontente and selected chaptere free boo); ”ha Aid to the
Higher Military-Political School Applicant", miled and authored by Colonel
e. N. Voekreeenshiy and Colonel v. u. Senenteov. Voyenirdat, 50,000 oopiee. 96 pageel

next] This manual containe a list of the higher military-political echoole and
their addreeeee, it explains the oonditione and order of adaieeion to then, and

it deecribee the prograee of the entrance era-inatioha and the teeting procedures.

It ie intended for thoee who have decided to devote their livee to the honorable
and noble profeuion of officer-political worker.

Contents Page

SuccessoreottheugenderyOo-Iieeare.................... 3

md‘ sml to M“? 0 O I 0 0 e O O O O O I O 0 0 O 0 O O O O O O O 0 O O O 13
“1331011 mlee and the Order of Selection. Preparation and Entry

mtonigh.rm11em.muucnschw1. eee ee e co. eee eoee ee e18
mutimﬂforw.lion....o.........o..........-
OrderOQCandidateSelection.......................19
Preparationot Candidatee for Entrance nominations. . . . . . . . . . . . 22
muummmum 000.000.000.000000000.0.0.23
marderot‘mrollingCandideteeaeSchoolStudente...........25
The Program in USSR Bietory, Rueeian Language and Literature,
Geography and hathenatice in Preparation tor emetitive Entrance
Examination of Higher Military-Political Schoole. and Some Advice
onthe'metingl’rooeduree...........'...............28
MPmrminmnaiﬂer-....o.o...-..........."
nePrograeinMeianLanmandLiterature........... ...67
mePrograeinGeography.........................76
'nIeProqranihuatheuatice........................84
00.000.00.000096

Literature....................

1
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which School to duoose?

Higher unitary-political schools prepare officer-political workers for all eras
of service and branches of troops. 'lhus on firmly resolving to become a silitary
nan and a political officer, and to enter a higher military-political school for

this purpose. the future student lust clearly determine the are of service or branch
of troops -in which he would wish to serve.

Exaaples of higher military-political schools whidi prepare polidcal personnel for
all ares of service and branches of troops are:

ﬂovosibirskoye vyssheye voyenno-politicheskoye obshchevoyskovoye uchilishche iuni
60-letiya Velikogo Oktyabrys (lovoeibirsk Higher Military-Political (Destined-Arne
Sdlool ineni Go-utiye Velikogo dctyabrya]. 630103. Novosibirsk. 1033

sisferopol'ekoye vyssheye voyenno-peliticheskoye stroitel'noye uchilishche [Sinfor-
opol' Higher Military-Political Construction School]. 333037, siuferopol'. 37;

L'vovskoye vyssheye voyenno-politicheskoye ordena lrasnoy Zvesdy uchilishche
[L'vov Order of the lid Banner Higher military-Political School], 290028. L'vov. 28:

leningradskoye vyssheye voyemo-politicheskoye uchilishche protivovozdushnoy
oborony [leningrad Higher Air Defense military-Political School), 198324, Leningrad.

V320

Kurganshoye vys'sheye voyenno-politicheskoye aviateionnoye uchilishche [Xurgan
higher mlitary-Political Aviation School]. 640025, Kurgan. 25 (oblast).

Intonation of greater detail on the names of higher military-political schools and
on the specialties political officers can study in these schools can be obtained

from the headquarters of Iilitary units and fro- silitary conissariats.

It is evident from the nanss theuselves of the higher military-political schools
that each of then trainspolitical officers in specific specialties: Mined-ans,
tank, construction, naval and so on. for exasple the Novosibirsk VVPU [higher
Military-Political School] trains political workers for motorised rifle subunits.
the sinferopol' school trains personnel for construction units. the Leningrad
school trains personnel for the air defense troops and the Kurgan school trains
personnel for air subunits. Sons higher unitary-political schools provide instruc-

tion in two specialties. the seas mo nay train political officers, as an simple.
for tank and artillery submits or for engineer troops and signal troops.

Graduates of all higher unitary-political schools except L'vov are appointed
deputy cox-sanders for political affairs in cospanies, batteries and subunits equal
to then. Graduates of the L'vov WPU work in cultural and educational institutions
and on the editorial staffs of ailitary newspapers.

What disciplines are studied in these schools? A large part of the training tire
is devoted to the social sciences. Students study (280 history, Marxist-uninist
philosophy, scientific cos-miss, political economics, USSR history, the history
of the international mist, worker’s and national liberation novenent, USSR

2
MWLUSEONLY
international relations and foreign policy. scientific atheism and the fundauntals
of harsist-Ieninist ethics and aesthetics. the theory and practice of party-politi-

cal work. military psychology and pedagogics. missian. Soviet and foreign litera-
ture and other subjects.

The social sciences develop the student's mist philosophy and nurture his
ability to withstand all forms of bourgeois influence. and they are the foundation
of a scientific understanding of the essence and nature of mdern warfare. of the
laws and trends of armed conflict. of the development of military affairs. of per-
scnnel training and indoctrination and of the ways of achieving victory over the
enemy. 'ihe ideological conviction of the soldiers is the fomdation of steadfast-

ness. and the door to heroism. Ideologically persuaded soldiers will never lose
confidence in the triuph of the cause in behalf of which they fight and shed

their blood. no matter the sort of trials and deprivations they must endure. Gon-

If he is to be a good indoctrinator. if he is to knowledgeably penetrate into all
aspects of the life and coinat activity of his subunit, and if he is to enjoy re-
spect and authority among the personnel, the political worker must possess firm and
sound knowledge in military affairs. “As indoctrinators.” said u. I. Kalinin.
political workers “must not only know how to give good speeches and they must not
only be able to answer questions posed by soldiers. but they must also be their
example in political and moral respects and have a comlete knowledge of military
affairs.“

Students of higher military-political schools acquire military knowledge by
studying many military-technical disciplines: tactics. fire training. materiel
and the rules of operating cosbat equipment. topography and others. they work with

conunication resources. and they isprove themselves physically and in drill. Each
student learns to drive a motor vehicle and, additionally in a naval school. a
motorboat.

Mastery of modern cosplex count equipment requires a firm knowledge of the exact
sciences: higher mathematics. physics. electronics and theoretical mechanics.
Study of a foreign language (English. German or French) is mandatory for students
of higher military-political schools. The mwer of these disciplines and their
volume are determined for each WPU in accordance with the particular military
specialty for which the political worker is trained.

Higher military-political schools are staffed by experienced officers and highly
qualified instructors. They are candidates and doctors of sciences and lecturers.
After graduating from military academies. they served for a long period of time
in the troops. where they acquired a considerable amomt of practical experience.
and now they are sharing their knowledge with students.

All of the conditions have been created for the students to study successfully.
The schools possess spacious auditdriuss. well outfitted classrooms. study rooms

and laboratories libraries and reading rooms. and a modern base for field lessons.
mniﬁ. H. 1.. '5 Emmisticheskom vospitanii i voinskom dolge" [Communist

Indoctrination and Military Duty]. )bscow. 1967. p 415.

POI OFFICBAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m cultural and educational work done at the schools is large in amount and sub-
stantial in content. Amateur art collectives have been created in every subunit.
Various circles. art and literary societies and culture universities function under

the sponsorship of the school clubs. Pilate are shown and visits to theaters.
mm and exhibitions and meetings with scientists. writers. actors and other

scientist, and artists are organised regularly for the students. Old Bolsheviks.
heroes of the civil and Great Patriotic vars, veterans o: the Soviet hrsed Forces

and the leading industrial and agricultural workers speak to then.

The schools have established close ties with enterprises. institutions, schools.
institutes and local party and homo->1 organisations. Future political workers
sponsor many schools and Pioneer detachnents. they lead clubs of young friends of

the Soviet Artsy and Navy, they conduct lessons in ailitary defense circles. and
they conduct lectures and discussions on the codaat traditions of the Soviet Armed
Forces for young people.

Much attention is devoted to mass sports in the schools. The students participate
in various sports sections (soccer. volleyball. hockey. gymastics, sharpshooting.
skiing. boxing, weight-lifting and so on); there are stadium. gymasiuns. athletic
fields, ski areas and water sports stations available to then. During their years
or study in the schools. nest students beco-e outstanding athletes and couprehen-
sively trained ranked sportsmen.

Good housing and personal conditions have been created for the students. Schools
possess spacious. brightly lit dormitory-barracks. dining halls. sttdent cafeterias

and various shopping centers. Every subunit has a lounge with television sets
and radios. and genes. susical instrusents. newspapers and journals are available.

The conditions for study, the leisure opportunities and personal conditions are
approxiaately the same in all higher unitary-political schools. 'Ihey are all
located is: the country's major economic and cultural centers. in large cities.
But this should not be the resin factor to be considered when choosing a school.

'me right choice would be made only in the event that the young nan has thought
seriously about the nature of. his work after school. its significance. the difficul-

ties and deprivations of military «Nice and the particular features of a politi-
cal officer's work in a particular are of. service or branch of troops.

What are the conditions for adniesion to higher unitary-political schools? "hes:
may they accept?

Admission Rules and the Order or Selection, Preparation and Entry Into nigher
Military-Political Schools

Conditions for Admission

Higher military-political schools are classified as being among the country's
nigher educational institutions.

The term of study in schools is 4 years.

FOR 05110131. USE ONLY
A graduate of a higher military-political school is awarded the nilitary rank of

lieutenant and an all-mien diploma attesting to cleetion of a higher military-
political education.

The schools accept privates, seamen, NOOs and extended-service petty officers,
graduates of Suvorov nilitary and hakhimv naval schools and young civilians from
17 to 21 years old. extended-service serviceaen not nore than 23 years old after

2 years of extended service, and seagoing and shore-based warrant officers not
more than 25 years old who had served at warrant officer or officer posts for not
less than 2 years: such persons must have declared their desire to become officers.
they must possess high moral, political and work qualities, they met have a con-
pleted secondary education, they must have received positive performance reports
in service. work or study. and they must be of suitable health for study in school.

Military-political schools accept only c980 neubers and candidate mowers and ,
Romsonol sewers who have displayed an interest in political work, on receuendation

of political organs of the Soviet busy and Navy or rayon (city) ml calmittees.

The age of candidates, the ties of service in the rank of shore-based and seagoing
warrant officer and the tine of service and the post presently occupied are

reckoned as of l Septeuber of the year of admission to the school.

order of Candidate Selection

Servicenen desiring to enter a higher military-political school Inst subeit an
application (1: the chain of comand over the signature of the cot-lander of the
military unit. The following intonation must be provided in this application:
rank. last name, first name and patronynic . the post presently occupied, year
and month of birth. education and the nane of the higher military-political school

into which entry is desired. ‘l‘he following are attached to the application: a
secondary education dominant (a notorised copy of an attestation, record, certifi-

cate or diploma). a party performance report (for CPS!) meters and candidates) or
a Kemonol perfornance report (for Kcnsoeol essbers) , an emioymsnt performance
report. three certified photographs (without headtear, 4.5X6 en) , an autobiography
and a copy of the birth certificate. First-tern and extended-service servicemen
additionally attach the following to the application: autobiography. service per-
formance report, record of service card and a copy of the birth certificate.

ﬁrst-term and extended-service servicemen lust suhnit their application prior to
25 March of the year of admission, while shore-based and seagoing warrant officers

nut admit it not later than 1 Deco-bar of the year preceding the year of amission.

0n receiving applications from servicemen declaring their desire to enter a
military-political school, unit co-anders, institution and service chiefs and
their deputies for political affairs must interview each applicant; medical appoint-

mnts are made for those who satisfy the conditions for achission with the purpose
of determining their medical fitness for study in a military educational institu-

Documents are admitted up the chain of cos-and to the political directorates
(sections) of the districts, groups of forces. fleets. armies and flotillas, not

FOIOFFICfALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

later than 1 January of the year of athission to the school for shore-based and
seagoing warrant officers and not later than 10 March for first-ter- and extended
service servicemen.

Confirmed attestations are attached to the personal files of shore-based and sea-
going warrant officers.

Politicaldirectoratee carefully study the documents of noninated candidates. they
detsraine whether or not these candidates satisfy the conditions for athission,
and they arrive at a decision in relation to each candidate.

The decisions ends by political directorates are brought to the awareness of
shore-based and seagoing warrant officers not later than 1 T'ebmery of the year of
admission to the school. while first-tern and extended-service servicemen are made
aware of the decisions not later than 25 narch.

Lists of shore-based and seagoing warrant officers selected for training are sent
together with the doctnsnts and the decisions of the political directorates to the
personnel organs of district. group of forces, fleet, any and flotilla political
directoratee by 1 February. while the docusnts of first-tern and extended-service
servicemn are sent to the appropriate higher military-political training institu-
tions not later than 25 March.

Young civilians stbnit applications to the rayon military conissariat at the
place of residence prior to 30 April of the year of admission.

'lhe following are indicated in the application: last name, first name and patro-
nyuic of the applicant. the year and month of birth, hoes address and the nale
(and the profile in the L'vov WW) of the higher unitary-political school for
which entry is desired. The following are attached to the application: autobio-
graphy. perfornance report fro. the place of work or study, party performance re-
port (for CPS!) answers and candidates) or the Koesouol perforlance report (for
Konsonol nesbers) . a secondary education document (students presently enrolled in
secondary schools aust subunit a transcript of current grades) , birth certificate,
a certificate free the military medical comission indicating fitness for admission
to an institution of higher education, and three certified photographs (without
headwear, 4.516 on).

The passport and the military card or draft registration card are presented to the
admissions coastission on arrival at the higher military-political school: students
of secondary schools (vocational-technical schools, tekhnikuas) uust also furnish

an attestation or diploma of secondary education.

Yomg people whose parents are servicemen or esployees of the Soviet Arty in the
groups of forces oust saw-it their applications for achission to unitary-political
schools through the appropriate selection coal-lesions of the groups of forces
prior to March of the year of admission. The documents are drawn up and the candi-
dates aro sent to the schools by the couanders of the ailitary units at the place

of service or work of the parents.

6
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘l‘he rayon military coamissariat thoroughly studies the documents of each candidate,
interviews each candidate and then submits the names of persons satisfying the con-

ditions of admission for examination by a medical conission to determine medical
fitness for adesion to school.

After candidates applying for school are examined by medical omissions, the docu-
ments of those deemed tit are submitted to the oblast (kray. city) military
cosmissariat not later than 15 May.

‘lhe selection commissions of oblast (republic, kray, city) military couissariata
also carefully and thoroughly examine the docments of the candidates submitted.
interview them, subject them to another medical examination and announce their
decision to them within 10 days. The docuIents or selected candidates are sent
to the appropriate military schools by 1 June.

The deadlines for announcing the decision of the school chief on admission to the

entrance examinations and the time applicants are to arrive for them are: 15 March
for shore-based and seagoing warrant officers. and l5 April for first-term and

extended-service servicemen, through the appropriate personnel organs of the
political directorates which had selected the candidates for training; 1 July tor

young civilians, through oblast (kray, city, rayon) military oomissariats.

The schools concurrently send lists of. rejected candidates, indicating the reasons
for rejection, and they return their docuents.

The documents of graduates of Suvorov military and ﬂakhimv naval schools are sub-
mitted to higher military-political schools directly by the chiefs of these schools
in accordance with their approved plans.

Servicesen who had formerly applied to a school but failed the entrance examinations
or placed low in the competitive selection process may be included among the
candidates for training and permitted to take entrance examinations in subsequent
periods of adaission to the school, but not more than three times.

Preparation of. Candidates for Entrance Examinations

Preparation of servicemen candidates for entrance examinations is organised and
camorted by comanders of military units and chiefs of services (institutions)
in accordance with the programs of the entrance examinations and the accompanying
instructions on testing procedures.

The programs or entrance examinations in general educational disciplines are
published annually by the USSR Ministry of Higher and Secondary Special Education.

From the moment servicemen are approved as candidates for training. they are not
to be reassigned, except when promoted to higher positions, they are not to be
sent on long business trips. and when possible they are not to be assigned to
various details on days off. and holidays.

FOR OFFICE“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

shore-based and seagoing warrant officers that are candidates for admission to a
school are excused from cos-lander lessons. using this time to prepare for the exam-
inations. Moreover they are provided two free evenings a week on work days to
prepare for the examinations.

Thirty-day training rallies are conducted in Hay-June in the garrisors and forma-
tions to prepare first-term and extended-service servicemen tor the examinations.

Young civilians prepare for the entrance ex-inations on their own at their place
of residence.

Travel orders are issued to servicemen for the entrance examinations by unit
comanders and the chiefs of services and institutions in response to invitations

from the school chiefs; travel is to be scheduled such that servicemen would arrive
at the place of examination 5 days before examinations begin.

Prior to leaving for the entrance examinations, serviceman candidates must undergo
repeat medical examination. they must make the change of con-and according to the
established practices, but their names are not removed from the unit's rolls until
they are registered as school students.

The medical log bearing the decisions of the military medical cosmission concerning
the first and second radical examinations is either sealed and hand-carried by

the serviceman or sent to the schools, to arrive there by the time of the service-
man's arrival.

All candidates arriving for the examinations are provided space in a dormitory
(barracks). tood, and training aids and literature.

antrance Examinations

School candidates are given entrance examinations by examination ccuissicns
appointed by the school chiefs.

Entrance examination admissions omissions remain in session from 20 July to
20 August for shore-based and seagoing warrant officers and from 15 July to
5 Augmt for first-term and extended-service servicemen and young civilians.

Traveling admissions conissions are created by order of the USSR minister of

Defense each year in the groups of forces and in some military districts for the
purposes of admitting applicants to the graduate examinations. Traveling achissions
emissions remain in session from 5 June to 5 July.

Military servicemen must arrive at the working locations of the traveling admissions
comissions 5 days before their work begins.

Before the start of the entrance examinations all candidates must undergo medical
examination by the school's military medical cosmission. Candidates deemed unfit

for training in the school by this comission are not permitted to take the
entrance examinations, and they are sent back to their former place of service

(young civilians are returned to the military cosmissariats).

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Applicants to higher unitary-political schools take entrance examinations in the
following disciplines:

(558 history (oral) 1

Russia! language and literature (written coaposition on one out of three or four
topics from the secondary school literature program and sociopolitical topics);

geogrlPhY (oral) 1

aathenatics (oral) .

Applicants to the L'vov Higher Military-Political School take an oral examination
in Russian language and literature in place of the oral examination in asthmatics;
they also undergo an interview within the specialty of their chosen profile--
journalism or cultural-educational work. Candidates that have not been interviewed
cannot take the entrance exuination.

Applicants to military schools who had studied massian language in the secondary

school under the national school prograu nay write a brief statement or a dictated
text in place of a cceposition.

In addition, candidates must undergo certain practical tests to determine physical
fitness: Serviceman must perfore the exercises of the USSR Armed Forces Military-
Sports Coupler, while conscripts and young civilians sust perform the exercises of
the All-(.hion "mady for Labor and Defense of the IBSR" Physical Culture Oowlex.

Persons who have graduated secondary school with a gold medal or received a diplona

with honors on graduating from secondary special educational institutions need take
only one exauination (oral or written) of the established entrance examinations at

the discretion of the higher military-political school to which they are applying.
it they score a grade of '5' in the examination on this discipline. they are re-
leased fron further entrance examinations and enjoy preferential selection for ad-
aission to the school in cowarison of other persons who had scored "5" in all
entrance examinations. If they score “d” or "3". these candidates must take the
exaninations in the rest of the disciplines included in the entrance examinations.

The name of the discipline and form of the entrance esamination are determined for
the above-indicated individuals by the schools, and they are announced to then to-

gether with the decision permitting them to take the entrance examinations.
Oral exaninations are heard by not less than two instructors.

Candidates who receive an unsatisfactory grade in one of the subjects of the examina-
tions are not permith to take further examinations, and they are returned to their
former places of service or to the military comissariats at their places of resi-
dence.

If an individual receives an unsatisfactory grade, he cannot take the examinations
again with the purpose of raising his grade.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If due to health or sons other reasons the candidate is unable to take the

examinations, he is obligated to report this to the examination omission before
the examinations start. Candidates who fail to appear at one of the examinations

at the scheduled tine without valid reasons are not permitted to take further
examinations.

Military servicenen returned to their units from the entrance exasinations for
unworthy behavior or for refusing to take the examinations for no valid reasons
any later on be included among candidates for training by decision of the cos-and,
though not earlier than after 2 years.

The results of the entrance examinations are scored separately for each subject
with grades of "5" (five), ”4" (four). ”3" (three) and '2" (two)-

The Order of Enrolling Candidates as School students

«he admissions conission makes a decision to enroll candidates as students or
to return then to their places of origin on the basis of the docments and a per
sonal interview with each candidate separately.

maduates of Suvorov military and Nakhinov naval schools are enrolled in higher
military-political schools without taking the entrance examinations.

Graduates of Suvorov nilitary and Nakhinov naval schools seeking admission to the
L'vov Higher Military-Political School are interviewed in their specialty by the

selected departmentnjournalisn or cultural and educational work.

In addition. persons who had graduated successfully (with grades of "good" and
"excellent") from the first and stbsequent years of civilian institutions of higher -
education in specialties corresponding to the profile and specialty of the given
school, and persons who satisfy other requirements for adnission to nilitary edu-
cational institutions may be enrolled for the school's first year course without
entrance examinations, after undergoing the appropriate interview.

The following are accepted ahead of ooapeting applicants if they recs ve positive
grades in the entrance examinations:

persons awarded orders and nedals of the Soviet Union for personal acts of heroism
or for high achieve-ents inconbat and political training;

first-term and extended-service servicenen who had been outstanding soldiers of
combat and political training (for not less than a year) and who had been declared
to be so in an order published by the military unit.

Candidates who successfully passed the entrance examinations are accepted on a
cometitive basis.

Cometitive selection of candidates from anong shore-based and seagoing warrant

officers and first-tern and extended-service service-en is conducted separately

from young civilians, on the basis of the total nulber of points, as determined

from the grades received in the entrance examinations and the aritluaetic average
of grades in all disciplines, as shown on the secondary education document.

10
NR OFHGAL USE ONLY
If the applicant possesses several secondary education docments. he is given the
right to choose the docusent to be considered in cmpetitive selection.

For persons who furnish secondary education docuuents (diplomas. certificates)
that do not slaw grades for specific disciplines, the arithsetic grade point
average is designated as “3" (three). If a diploma with honors is furnished, the
arithmetic grade point average is designated as '5' (five).

Along persons with the sane total mwer of points in disciplines covered in the

entrance examinations, the following are shown preference in competitive amssion
to a sdnool:

shore-based and seagoing warrant officers having considerable practical experience

in the service or having had long experience as political workers. and first-term
and extended-service servicemen who have a class rating in their specialty:

candidates submitted for training on the basis of all-union Konsomol passes issued

by formation (unit) political sections or by rayon and city Konsomol comittees,
and leading laborers and kolkhos farmers;

graduates of specialized boarding schools and youth unitary-patriotic schools;

young civilians who had been awarded honorable sentions after graduating from
secondary school, who present docusents attesting to active participation in
school and other circles and in Olymiads, competitions and reviews sponsored by
institutions and organizations of higher education, and who achieve the best re-
sults in a physical fitness test satisfying the requirements of the "Ready for
Labor and Defense of the [BSR' complex.

Enrollment of candidates as students is announced in orders published by the
school chiefs.

Serviceman candidates who are not accepted in the competitive selection process
are returned to their former places of service, while yomg civilians are returned
to the rayon (city) military coaaissariats at their places of residence. The
personal files and other docments of these candidates are returned to the appro-
priate military units, services (institutions) and military comissariats together
with the reasons for rejection.

School chiefs and chairmen of traveling achissions comissions have the right to

return the following candidates to their places of service or military emissar-
iats: those not satisfying the conditions for admission and unsuited in relation

to health-~before the start of the entrance examinations; persons receiving un-
satisfactory grades—in the course of the eminations; persons comitting breaches
of discipline and refusing to take examinations—before examinations start, and

in their course.

Shore-based and seagoing warrant officers admitted to the school are enrolled for
study as of l Septenber, while young civilians and first-tern and extended-service
service-en are enrolled as of 5 August.

11
FOR 0mm USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During their tern of study, each year the students are given two-wee): vacations in

winter. and on coupleting the school year they are given a Ionth‘s leave with paid
round-trip" travel .

now let us acquaint ourselves with what each person who has decided to apply for a
higher unitary-political school must know for the entrance examinations.

The Programs in ISSR History. Eurasian Language and Literature, Geography and Mathe-
natics in Preparation for Cometitive Entrance Buninations of Higher Military-
Political Schools, and Sons Advice on the resting Procedures

the competitive entrance examinations of higher military-political schools are taken
in accordance with program approved by the USSR Ministry of Higher and Secondary
Special Education for each school year. hereto" the programs presented here are

only typical ones, in which certain changes taking accomt of. the particular year of
admission to the institution or higher education say be possible.

Literature

Recognised secondary school textbooks and training Ianuals make up the basic liter-
ature used to prepare for entrance examinations in higher military-political schools.

Handbooks for applicants to institutions of higher education say be used addi-
tionally, to include:

I. Rosental' , D. 8., "msskiy yazyk. Posohiye dlya postupayushchikhv vusy"
[mneian Language. Handbook for Applicants to Institutions of Higher education],
Pbscov, 1972, 1975.

2. Hal'kov, v. v.} ”Posobiye po istorii 8888 dlya postupayushchikh v may“
[Handbook on 0551! History for Applicants to Institutions of Higher Education] .

Moscow, 1979.

3. 'Politicheskaya i voyennaya geografiya' [Political and Military Geography].
Moscow, 1980.

4. Doroteyev, G. V., Potapov, M. K., and Ibsov, N. Kh., "Posobiye po natenatike
dlya postupayushchikh v my” [Hathenatics Handbook for Applicants to Institu-
tions of Higher Education], mscow. 1976.

5. zorin, v. v. . ”Posobiye po natesatike dlya postupayushchikh v vuzy" [latheaatics
Handbook for Applicants to Institutions of Higher Hducation], Moscow, 1973.

common: Voyenisdat , 1981

11004
080: 1801/193

12
MOFHCIALIJSEONLY
exam MEMO” m 'm' mums ems:

Vilnius W'W in Russian 1980 (signed to press 21 Jun 80) p9 1.4-6.23-31.
267-269,?”

(Annotation, editorial board. table of contents. foreword and the chapter "A School
of Courage, mdurance and Military Proficiency“ fro. hook "me lean River-the
'Neuan' Training Exercise" compiled by v. mhin, Isdatel'etvo 'uintie", 20,000
copies, 271 pages]

a

['next] this collection of articles, reports, essays and sketches is devoted to the
”Ne-an“ troop enerciee of the Red Banner Baltic Military District. It describes
the difficult but honorable service of the soldiers.

It is intended for young people and soldiers of theboviet Any.

Editorial Board

P. P. Griehkyevichus, A. n. lsyorov, I. A. akin, V. V. Mn. V. V. Belyakov,
A. V. Snolyanko

Contents Page

“rewrdoeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseaee 5

Battle Report to the People and Party 7

1b the General Secretary of the cost: Central Genittee. claim of the
Presidiul of the 058R Supreme Soviet. Marshal of the Soviet mien. .
ConradeL.I.Brezhnev........................... 9

AOauseofAllPeople ............................ ll
ASchoolofcourage.Murmandliutuypmficiency ........... 23

'meDecisivePrereqnisiteof‘Succase..................... 32

13
momauustmv
MOFFICIALUSEONLY

Onthelve 45
Greetings................................. 47
meiplythemuclory......................... SO
mthcnxpmisr-nkemrrqntlmmldion................ 53
Noun-.‘Nonn'....‘........................... 54
monopumpmuozmmy.......'............... 59
Atthcﬂmntn'“ 61
malnunnityofcolbat‘rrnnmgcmw................... 63
m11ouingthocoqanofmd1tion.....'............... 63
Inwordandmmed............................ 71
Withﬂtghmnpirauon........................... 72
InaSpiritofRivalry............................ 73
mermmreuueNyavezhnnm...................... 75
mePIaoeofthonercm--mm.................... 76
Crossing:he00ntn1mtodﬂone....................... 78
Hiththerirstlbcket...................'......... 80
Pontonoerstoparefox-thoaurciu .................... 81
Alleounrymdlvidml........................... 84
wmmuriugthemOfmumcc................. 87
mrirststopcofmmnm.................... 89
niqhn'mue 93
PrepumgOurselvescOlprohensivoly.................... 95
(kossingthekthnomm......................... 98
Tradluonsinmtromtion....................... 101
Troopsndmgotommzcisehqion ....-........'....... 109
mthoninesotmutuyclory.................:..... n4
mahndofnavolutionmmcmmorclory ............. 117
mllovingaﬂcwvath............................ 119

...And the Battle 3091118 127
amqofthemcuiwmu(m8mports) ............... 128
maﬂtgltl’lqhtingPluol......................... 135
mundandinchonr. 137
PilotsmnductmconMLsmce....................... 140
mamlam'mnusttmum....................... 143

1!;
”WWMY
Inthomncuonotthomnmrmt.....................
minganmveloptnqmamr.........................
Iiththofitlthtuck,th0!1ntbckct ...................
Ankcurau.mucapablollov-........................
Wthol’mtunosoldicu.........................
hsmuoefonunmnytovictory.....................
mayuaungu-ndmmolvuinthemotdu
hallmaonnoldmu.............................
Wingedmfmttynttaclu ...........................
Attholator'oxdqo .............................

Pro. the Notebook 0! PRAVDA. Izmnu Md m'mn 9mm Journal.”
‘memtofmt..............................
AGenerationofMHurion.........................
Journuisuotthemvietnutichporc ...................
magytonetendmnothonand........................
mmmotuoroisn.............................
men-m..................................
mathsofthehtheta.wombotthema ...............
'mesparkaoftharty-Pouucaluatk ..................
mwzdandmedotmhu.._.....-................
mmmnda--Attack............................
Get-mthoratﬂnem‘b...........................
Inupaxableuuty ..............................
“8160380113.. ..............................
Recogntzmghapomibiuty..........................
Politicalaourmthemwmy........................
Anhyltationbrigadeianated....-...................
meaffalrsmchncomnofanAgitpzopGroup ................
memleSetbyaStauOo-mtst.....................
'mePennantGoestothemtDrivor.....................
AStuontheGunBaml...........................
@c-mgomrltthawtoun..........................
Aeoncmincberiold............................

MWMWLY

146
155
157
159
161
163
165
166
168
171

174
175
182
187

_187

193
202
205
206
206
208

210
212
213
216
218
219
220
221
221
222
223
224
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hdsuxs.0....0...O.O00....OOOOOOOCODCOOOI-224
InhonenteofSilence............................224
nepasswordofthecenerations.......................226

Introducing Accumlated Experience Into Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
'0: mt soviet ermd 0 0 O 0 O O O 0 O O O I o O C O 0 O I O 0 I O O O O 233
"m ﬁatgtme.. O O 0 0 O O Q 0 0 0 O O O O Q 0 O O O O 0 I O C O O O O O 0 2‘3

0000000000262

Foreword

Between 23 and 27 July 1979 troops of the Baltic Military District conducted an
exercise code-naned 'Nenan' in the vicinity of Panevezhis, raurage and Alitus. The

total strength of troops that had participated in the exercises was about 25,000
Inn.

‘l'he purpose of the exercise was to inrove field skills and find out how well the
actions of different branches of troops are coordinated. [hits and subunits of
the ground troops and the air force were brought in for the exercise.

The 'Nenan' exercise was the battle report of soldiers of the Red Banner Baltic
Military District to their Inninist party. It clearly denonstrated the indestructi-

' ble power of the Soviet Army. the proficiency of the conanders. the coordination
and high operational preparedness of staffs and the outstanding skills of soldiers

in all branches of troops. m Soviet people. who followed the progress of the
exercise by way of central television and radio. the newspapers and journals with
great interest, experienced a natural feeling of pride for our and forces, which
are honorably fulfilling the decisions of the 25th CPS!) Congress, the provisions
of the IBSR Constitution concerning the socialist fatherland's defense and the
defense directives of CPS!) Central Mitt“ General Secretary, duirnan of the
Presidium of the 188R Suprene Soviet. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev.

Born of Great October to protect the young upwlic of the Soviets, to defend the
just cause of the workers and peasants, the Soviet Arley was and continues to be

one with the flesh and blood of our Soviet people. It graced itself with unfading
glory in the years of the Civil War and the struggle against foreign military inter-
vention. and it defended the honor and independence of the notherland in the years
of the Great Patriotic War. 111:. i-eortal heroism of nillions of our arny's warriors
will stand as a permanent example for future generations.

Our arned forces enjoy the coeplete trust of the laborers and the sincere respect
of the people. airing the ”Noun“ exercise the Soviet people addressed the

soldiers of the had Banner Baltic nilitary District with words of love and grate-
fulness. wishing then further successes in imming their cotat proficiency.

And this is quite natural. ll‘he peopleand the any have the same goals and tasks-
ensuring the country's security and strengthening its defense capability.

For entire generations of Soviet people. any service has been and continues to he
the mtuseful. fruitful school of courage. a school of acquisition of high noral

16
summon“
qualities and, last but not least, a school of proficiency. Within its ranks,

the arty is nurturing avid patriots of the Soviet notherland, and internationalists
devoted to the cause of mists.

In the Accountability Report to the 25th CPSU Congress, Comrade 1.. I. Brezhnev
emhasized the enormous role played by our aruy in indoctrinating the Soviet people.
"Yomg people,“ he said, 'cone into the soldierly family with no experience in life.
But they return free the any as people who have graduated free a school of endurance
and discipline, as people who have obtained technical and professional knowledge

and political training."

The 'Neeen" exercise was one of the lessons of this school. It was a hard lesson,
one requiring its participants to exert their spiritual and physical strengths,
their will and their endurance. It was an instructive lesson of moral-psychological

maturity. It was a esmorable lesson of co-ming with the heroic traditions of
the fathers and grandfathers who, 35 years ago, annihilated select divisions of

aitler's Wehrmacht on the banks of the Noun.

The authors of this collection—mars, political workers and journalists from
central and local newspapers-vmake it their objective to describe the soldiers of
the Red Banner Baltic Military District to the general reader. bet mothers and

fathers get to know their sons better. not peers look more carefully into the
eyes of their comrades in uniform. Let yomg girls take joy in their fiancee and
friends. "The harshness of our times,’ said 1.. I. Brestmev, ”the iaaaitahle laws
of the struggle between the classes, and primarily imperialisn‘s aspiration to
oppress. to enslave nations and to wage wars doesnd from us. as well as all people
fighting for peace, socialise, liberty andindependence, that some part of the
nation--the strongest and soot active at that--secrifice its labor, its wisdon

and its talent...to the cause of armed defense of our fatherland“ (Brezhnev, L. 1.,
"Na strarh. lira i sotsializna" [Standing Guard Over reace and Socialism], Moscow,
1979, p 107).

his book is about you and for you, soldier. This book is for you, young man.
This book is for all to who. the ideals of peace and comnisn, the motherland and

liberty are precious. The book pays hostage to the soldiers of 1979. It calls upon
m to display even greater energy and effort in the struggle to strengthen the
fighting power of the Soviet Armed Forces and the defense capabilities of the
beloved fatherland.

“A School of Courage. Endurance and Military Proficiency," by my General a. u.
Hayorov, Troop Comander, Red Banner Baltic Military District

Occupied in peaceful creative labor, the Soviet people are successfully iaplenenting
the socioeconomic program of the 10th Five-Year Plan. Socialist industry is deve-
lOping dynamically, and major steps are being taken to transform agriculture into

a highly developed sector of the economy. The Interial and cultural standard of
living of the Soviet people is constantly rising.

Strong and unshakeable is the international authority of our state. All honest
people of the globe see the Soviet mion as a consistent and persistent champion
of peace, friendship and equitable cooperation between countries. Signed in

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vienna. the SAL‘bII treaty between the USSR and the usa was the result of the
mtiring and principled struggle of our socialist state for detente and of con-
sistent pursuit of a peace-loving foreign policy course charted by congresses of

our party, a course which, as Conrado L. I. Breshmv said, we intend to follow in
the future as well.

But at the sane tine the Soviet people clearly recognize that although the possi-
bilities available to the aggressive circles of imperialist have now been severely
restricted. its reactionary class essence remains as before. ‘me enemies of detente

are still' strong: they are now operating and, moreover, quite aggressively. Center.
of war danger still exist. and the arm race has not at all ceased. The present

Chinese leadership is aligning itself with the darkest forces of aggression and
war. This is why high alertness. cadet readiness, training and political aware-'
ness of the armed defenders of the motherland are such powerful factors of restraim
in today's restless world, factors standing in opposition to all aggressive forces.

mis is understood well by soldiers of the Red Banner Baltic Hilitary District--one
of the cosbat detachments of the Soviet Armed Forces. his is why they perceived,

as a sign of the enormous trust of the motherland, the Conunist Party and the
Soviet government, the mssage that between 23 and 27 July 1979 the Red Banner

Baltic Military District was to undergo a troop exercise code-named "noun” in the
vicinity of Paneveshis, 'raurage and hlitus.

Such exercises, conducted in accordance with the plans for mat and political
training. are iQortant events in the life of units taking part in them, and in the
life of the district and the armed forces as a whole. they are validly viewed as
an isportant exasination of combat maturity before the motherland and the Communist
Party. and before all Soviet people. And we are proud that this difficult examina-
tion was passed with honor. By their practical deeds on the fields of the training
battles. the district's privates. "we, warrant officers and officers once again
confirmed the high evaluation given to the Soviet Army in the CPS!) Central Oomittee
decree "On Further uprovenent of Ideological and Political Indoctrination.“ which
called the Soviet Army a remarkable school of labor and military proficiency, of
moral purity and courage. of patriotism and couadeship.

'me great unity of the any and people manifested itself with new force during the

preparations for and conduct of the "hem” troop exercise. hundreds of letters
and telegrams were received by the district's eilitary council and political

directorate, by cousnders and political workers and by the editorial board of
the district newspaper. Party and soviet executives. labor collectives and many

citizens of the Soviet Baltic republics and of Kaliningradskaya Oblast wished the
soldiers success in their missicms, good health and personal happiness. motion-
filled get-togethers were held with residents and with veterans of the civil and
Great Patriotic wars in the exercise area.

The participants of the 'Nelan' exercise met with executives of the party and

soviet organs of the Soviet Baltic reptilics and Kalining'radskaya (blast in a
lively, warn and cordial ateoephere. Participants of this nesting included:

MWWONLY
P. P. Grishkyavichus, first secretary, Lithuanian BSR Conunist Party Central
Oomittee; a. 3. Vbss, first secretary, Latvian 881! Cos-unist Party Central
mitten K. G. Vayno, first secretary, Estonian 881! Oeuunist Party Central
minutes: N. s. Konovalov, first secretary. Rallningradskaya Oblast CPSU Cos-ittee;
P. re. Strautaanis, chairman, Presidium of the sipreue Soviet of the Latvian 8811,
Yu. la. when, chairun. Latvian ssn Oo‘mcil of Ministers; I. K. Strelkov, second
secretary, Latvian 88R eon-mist Party Central (Jo-sittee; I. A. Anderson and

a. 3. Peterson, secretaries, Latvian 853 min Party Central Oosnittee:

Ya. Ya. Vagris, first secretary, Pica City Omittee of the Latvian 88!! Wet
Party; division directors of the party central oo-ittees of Lithuania, Latvia
and Estonia, soviet and panic officials, and ease aadia and propaganda workers.

All of this isparted new strength to the soldiers and elicited a burning desire
to fulfill their missions in an excellent manner, to exert their moral and physical

strengths to the fullest in the exercise and to use nodern equip-ant and weapons
proficiently in oosbat.

Another typical feature of the 'Nsoan' exercise was that it occurred on territory
where :35 years ago, soldiers of the Great Patriotic liar destroyed the Ger-an in-

vaders in the course of their liberation of the Soviet Baltic. One of the troop
units which helped to liberate these places was the Guards ibtorired Rifle Proletar-

ian hoscow-Minsk Order of Lenin, Nice-Awarded nod Banner, Orders of suvorov and
Kutuzov Division, the battle pennant of which has been scorched-by the flames of
mnerous engagements. me exalted Hero of the Soviet union title was awarded to
nany officers, We and enlisted asn for courage and valor displayed during crossing
of the Roman River in July 1944. My include senior lieutenants MtﬂY'YOMﬂCh
Kudinov and Yefio haksinovich Nikhayev, Captain Pavel Petrovich Holodykh, Major
Georgiy 'rrofinovich Sedov, Private lst Class Aleksey Alekseyevich Koloekov and
Sergeant 'l'urgun hkhnedov.

And it was quite natural that during the preparation for and in the course of the
exercise, the contenders, political organs and the party and Koasonol organizations
of the units and subunits did a great deal of work to pmlicize the glorious count
traditions of the Soviet Armed forces, to study their count experieme and to rake
creative use of it in application to today's requirements. lthe deeds of the
frontline heroes and their whole-hearted love for the sotherland became, to every
private, N00, warrant officer and officer, that ideal, that clear reference point

in relation to which they measured themselves during the training battles and
engagements.

And there were more than enough possibilities in the "Noun“ exercise to display
'all moral, psychological, physical and codaat qualities. The training battles
unfolded over a broad front, they were highly dynamic, and the actions taken by
the ”North" and ”South“ to achieve their goals were decisive. ﬁre fighting went
on day and night, in couples weather conditions, and in a situation as close to
that of real met as possible.

Rain fell every day. The marshy forests in which the troops he! to operate because

alaost ispaesable even to modern equipment. And if we consider that the troops
had to advance cross-country, we gain a clear iq>reesion of the trials that fell

to the lot of the drivers and driver-nachanics of the cowat vehicles and to the

' FOIOFHCIIZLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

soldiers of engineer subunits which had to ensure pro-pt and covert regrouping of

the units ‘and subunits so that a superiority over the opposing side could be
achieved.

Both the "South” and the 'North' continually escalated their effort and introduced

more and more fresh reserves in their attespt at exploiting even the most rudimentary
successes. In my sectors the cosbat assumed the nature of meeting engagements.

All of this requires couanders of all ranks to deeply analyse the situation. to‘
make grounded decisions cometently and quickly and to use the most expedient methods
of organizing cosbat in short time and with high quality. And as we know, this
requires a good knowledge of the enemy and of his tactics. It requires anticipation
of the enemy in maneuver of fire and troops. creation of a situation that is dis-
advantageous to him. imition of one's will upon him and retention of initiative

to the end. A duel with a strong. well equipped opponent can be won by a co-ander
having perfect mastery over the hard and coqlex job of scientifically organizing
coordination among all attached and supporting stbmits and artfully controlling
them in the dynamics of day and night coebat.

It shouldbenoted that in the “Noun“ exercise all conanders confidently controlled
the subunits and units subordinated to then. and they all displayed high organiza-
tional capabilities and a deep understanding of the nature of modern combined-arms

conbat. They include battalion cos-anders Captain V. Gavrilov and Major V. Drizhuk,
artillery battalion comnder Captain 5. Drozdov. company and battery commanders
Lieutenant v. Zavertalenko, senior lieutenants A. Kasynov and 8. Suvorov and Captain
V. snvets, platoon cos-sanders senior lieutenants G. Tupikov and A. Pestov, and many
others.

The twice-awarded Red Banner tank regiment con-ended by Lieutenant Colonel A.
Chernata also distinguished itself in the exercise. This regiment's personnel
initiated the socialist cowetition in the lad Banner Baltic Military District.

The tank crewmen acted in outstanding fashion. They exhibited high coordination in
combat and proficient handling of weapons and equipment. Here is one typical
example. After penetrating the 'North's" defenses the cox-sender of the 'South'
decided to cousit this tank regiment to codeat in the direction of the main strike
with the purpose of exploiting the breakthrough in depth. The tank crewman took

to the road. Lieutenant Colonel anernata and the regimental staff had extremely
little time to organize for cosbat. Coordination with attached and supporting
subunits had to be organised using a map. The details were subsequently worked out
on the terrain itself. Owing to clear organisation of coordination in time, lines

and missions, after marching many kilometers the battalions of the regiment reached
their attack line at precisely the appointed time and literally tamed through the

“ens-y“ defenses by a simultaneous thrust.

The "New" exercise once again confirmed that only decisive and coordinated actions
by all branches of troops can ensure victory. The actions of the troops were highly
maneuverable in nature. and the units and subunits were cos-itted to combat on the
stove, they broke through intermediate lines, they repelled counterattacks, they
fought meeting engagements. they crossed water obstacles and they participated in

tactical airborne assault landings. hormone loads were placed upon the soldiers
of the privates, N009. warrant officers and officers. All personnel displayed

aggressiveness, boldness and decisiveness in the exercise, and they performed their

20
”OFFICIALUSIONLY
missions with full exertion of moral and physical strength. The Baltic soldiers
showed their deep knowledge of modern weapons and combat equipment, and they demon-
strated its proficient handling. In the most diverse conditions and the most
diffith situations they struck their targets with the first attack, the first
shot, the first launch and the first round at maximum range, they took full account
of the properties of the equipment in terms of speed, maneuver and protection, and
they utilised all of the modern methods and tactics of fighting the enemy.

In the skies, the roar of jet engines never abated for even a single minute during
the 'Neaun' exercise. Operating in behalf of the ground troops, “North" and 'SOuth"
aviation made powerful fire strikes against coabat formations and against the
opposite side's advancing reserves. Aerial battles occurred at various altitudes.
There was a stuaborn fight for air supremacy. Outstanding tactical and fire skills

and a will to win were displayed by airmen of the squadron counnded by military
pilot 1st class Lieutenant Colonel v. Herchenko, by the fighter-beater flight headed

by Captain 3. verkhovykh and many others.

Fire support helicopters operated at low altitude. Oswetently capitalizing on the
terrain, they would appear suddenly over the ooebat formations of the "enemy" and
launch their missiles with deadly aim.

In one of the stages of the "New” exercise the comander of the ”South" decided

to land an airborne party in the "North’s” rear, so that the ”enemy“ could be pushed
away from his tactically advantageous line by a simultaneous strike from the front
and rear, and so that back-up echelons could be committed to the resulting breach
with the purpose of exploiting the breakthrough in the direction of the Neman River.
This landing was preceded by a considerable amount of careful work by comanders

and staff with the purpose of coordinating the actions of the advancing subunits,
the airborne force. artillery, aviation and fire support helicopters.

It seemed as if everything had been planned out, down to the finest details. But

when the time came for action , the weather changed abruptly. Strong gusty winds
threatened abortion of the mission. Nevertheless, after meticulous calculations,

the airborne forces and equipment were dropped. Displaying exceptional courage
and high proficiency, the paratroopere comleted their mission successfully. ll‘heir
strike at the rear of the ”North" was unexpected, swift and inescapable.

As in war, not everything goes smoothly in an exercise. But this is precisely where
the artfulness of coananders and staff proves itself-win their ability to find

a way out of what might seem to be a hopeless situation and strike the ”enemy“ where
he least expects it. During the 'Neman' exercise our officers displayed high art-
fulness in troop contend and control, a broad military-technical outlook, and the

ability to think creatively, to act boldly, decisively and with initiative, tn.
display resourcefulness and military cunning and to make competent use of the
combat experience of previous generations of the motherland's defenders.

Oo-unist Major viktor Nikolayevich Drizhuk, cos-ander of a motorized rifle bat-
talion and the son of a frontline veteran, is a typical representative of the
officers corps of our armed forces. After graduating from a higher military school

he oouanded a platoon and a company, and he was battalion chief of staff. when he
was 29 years old he seemed the post of battalion eta-sander, and this is already the

F0! OFF-1C“ IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fourth year in which he is certently fulfilling his duties. During the exercise
the battalion was in the regiaent's advance guard; it was the first to reach the
Neman, and it crossed the river on the move. securing the crossing for the main
forces. It is a difficult thing to organise and conduct a crossing of such a broad
water obstacle. It requires a thoroughly trained salamander who can efficiently con-
trol his subunits and the attached and supporting resources. Major Drishuk com-
pleted this task excellently.

No matter how sophisticated modern weapons and codat equipment are, in the final

analysis success in combat depends on people, on their ideological conviction,
proficiency. sense of personal responsibility for the motherland’s safety and a

deep understanding of their missions. Our people are remarkable. In the "Neman'
exercise. which proceededina situation close to that of real count, the privates,

NCOs, warrant officers and officers had to endure enormous physical and psychologi-
cal loads, and many of the inconveniences of life in the field. Sometimes without
sleep and rest, while wearing resources protecting them against mass destruction
weapons, and traveling on rain-soaked country roads and tracks. the troops made
marches many kilometers long and then entered into oodsat on the move.

Soldiers of the 1970s are highly educated, ideologically persuaded, physically

fit people with perfect mastery of modern weapons and cosbat equipment. Let me
introduce the reader to just a few of them.

Private Vasiliy Burlakov. the son of a frontline veteran, had worked as a tractor
mechanic and was a champion among the young field hands of Kaliningradskaya oblast.
In the army he mastered several specialties and becase an outstanding soldier of
easiest and political training. Sergeant Ivan Levchin. a detachment comander.
proved himself well in the exercise. For that matter, how could it have been other-
wise? After all, his father had served in the sue regiment during the war years.

Tanknen sergeants n. Orlov and I. Koloyunas, motorized riflemen privates s. 2vaygsne
and R. Hel'nikov, ooebat engineers Junior Sergeant v. nosey and Private 14. Podtelkov.

and gunners senior sergeants V. Pedorov and N. Bortun demonstrated high combat
proficiency. They are children and grandsons of frontline veterans, outstanding
soldiers of cosbat and political training and top class military specialists.

Here is another fact attesting to the training of the privates and mom. During

the exercise many of them performed duties one level of comand higher. Thus tank
cut-sanders Junior Sergeant N. Nesterovich and Senior Sergeant A. Pervakov confi-

dently cosmanded platoons during the "Neman" exercise.

Soldiers of all branches of troops and specialties underwent a real school of
field skill, combat coordination. interaction and courage. Tank-en and motorized
riflemen. missilemen and gunners, signal-en and airmen, chemists and scouts ac-
quire! firm habits in action in modern cosbined-arms oosbat.

The hard labor of soldiers in the engineer troops may be called truly heroic. It
was they who operated in march support detachments, clearing the way for the troops.

They laid minefields, created obstructions, cleared passageways through I'enemy"
minefields. built conand posts and bridges, supported the crossing of troops

over water obstacles and built and operated dually enlacements.

FOR OFFICIZAi USE ONLY
Subunits of the troop rear services operated well during the exercise. They de-
livered fuel, ammition and food to the troops on- schedule.

I read the following in a central press report on the 'heman" exercise: ”the
personnel worked at the limit of their moral and physical strength." Beautiful
words. But let the author not be insulted when I say that these words are not quite
accurate. Yes, it was hard. The soldiers withstood the test of combat in a training
situation. But had things been even more difficult, they would still have performed
their soldier‘s work well. 'l‘his is exactly how the soldiers of the 1970s reseﬁle
their grandfathers and fathers who, tested in years of hardship, destroyed the

heavily armed German hordes and raised the banner of the great victory above the
Reichstag in May of '45.

From where, from what life-giving spring do they obtain their strength? This spring,
were we to give it a name, is our glorious Oct-Innist Party. It was the party that
nurtured and raised this generation of Soviet people, armed them and entrusted the.
with the fate of the motherland, the first in man‘s history to lay a road to a

glorious future-Connunism. And there is nothing more honorable to a soldier, and
no cause more worthy, than to defend our commanist achievements.

Baltic soldiers expressed their thoughts and sentiments, their unlimited devotion
to the cause of the party and their readiness to rise. at any moment in the defense
of the fatherland and the great achievements of socialism in a warm letter to (2980
Central Connittee General Secretary, Chaim of the Presidims of the 083R Supreme

Soviet, Chairman of the Defense Council, Marshal of the Soviet Union, Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev.

Political organs and party and Komsomol organizations made a truly enormous contri-
bution to the successful cospletion of the missions of the 'Neman" exercise. he in
the war years, con-mists were present wherever things were the hardest. They
served as armies of performance, they encouraged the soldiers to compete in the
satisfaction of missions and standards, they generalized the experience of soldiers
who distinguished themselves, and they made this experience available to all. when-
ever the situation required, the political worker took con-land and led the subunit.
This is exactly what was done by Lieutenant I. 'l'iryavichyus, company deputy
cosmander for political affairs. (the political worker confidently managed the
actions of the pontoneers as they assedaled a pontoon bridge. Their are many
examles of this sort in the exercise.

Party-political work never ceased for a single minute in the tanks and infantry
combat vehicles, at the gun eqalacements, in the rocket launcher crews, in the radio
station crews and in the simulation groups. And the harder the situation was, the
more persistently and purposefully this work went on. Communists and active Komsomol
mesbers were. so to speak, the plenipotentiaries of the party in the military
collectives. They welded them into a single unit and steered them toward selfless
military labor. They offered brilliant propaganda on the successes of our mother-

land in con-unist construction, they unmasked the aggressive inerialist circles
and their Beijing acconplices, they competently mobilized the soldiers for resource-

ful and selfless action, they efficiently informed them of their forthcoming
missions, and they explained the need for keeping military and state secrets and

cosplying with firm military order, discipline and safety rules.

2
FOR OFFICIA USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the period of preparations for the exercise and in the course of the exercise
itself, a socialist «petition developed in the district's troops with new force.
Its organisersnthe comanders and political workers--always found the time, always
in what would seem to be the met complex situation, to sun-arise the results of
the conbat _work, to announce the names of the soldiers who had distinguished them—
selves the most and to set them up as examles to their comrades. The winners of
the conpetition received letters and words of gratefulness, their experience was
described in cosbat leaflets and flash bulletins, and red stars were adhered to
their gun barrels and combat vehicles. All of this created a high fighting morale
and elicited a desire to work even harder and to perform missions with high quality.

During the exercise an interesting patriotic initiative was born in subunits having
heroes of the Soviet Union Guards privates Aleksandr Hatrosov and Petr Naboychenko
and Private 1st Class Aleksey Koloskov enrolled in perpetuity: all colbat training
missions were to be fulfilled with nothing less than a grade of “excellent." This
initiative was especially valuable in that it sprang forth fro. the privates and
rims themselves, and that it was able to develop and attain the broad support of
the soldier masses.

If I were asked what was the most valuable about the ”Neman' exercise, the first
things I would single out would be the high control and initiative displayed and
the creative approach to solving problems at all levels. Bvery officer, warrant
officer. N00 and private tried to perform his duties in the most effective and best
way, no matter what the moral and physical cost.

Usually writers describing major maneuvers, cruises and emsrcises try to write about
situations associated with a great risk to life. when such situations do arise.
naturally our soldiers do display their best huaan qualities. they dive into icy
water to save expensive equipment and comrades, they double up beneath the same
parachute and so on. I am unable to bring up any such incidents. But that's al-
right too. The huge troop organism worked rhythmically and efficiently during the
"Neman" exercise. Fulfilling the will of their con-anders with their equipment.
and weapons, thousands of people fought stubborn and exhausting battles day and
night. Despite the enormous physical loads. there were no serious violations of
the safety rules or of discipline and military order. Each person performed his
military duty at his station with a sense of high personal responsibility. This
is primarily why the troops of the district were able to complete their missions
so successfully. '

The party teaches us not to be too proud of our achievements, and to capitalise on
our reserves with the purpose of going farther and achieving more. There are no
limits to improving cosbat proficiency. Though it was a glorious page in the
history of the lbd Banner Baltic Military District, the "Neman" exercise was never-
theless just a single page. And it has already faded into yesterday. May the
troops are comrehensively studying and absorbing the best experience of the
camanders, political organs, staffs, military collectives and specialists that
have distinguished themselves in the exercise. All of this will make it possible

to make another step forward in raising oosbat proficiency, and to constantly keep
combat readiness at the level demanded by the 25th CPSU Congress.
commas: Izdatel'stvo 'Hintis" 1980

11004
(50: 1801/192 END

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY