APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00080R0001000‘00874
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000400574

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRs L/8421
25 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 11/79)
BAsIc MILITARY TRAINING

U. S. ,‘OINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R0001000400574
NOTE

Jl‘ks publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

lleadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
ciea, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government

COPYRIGIT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSFIIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE MT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL 083 MY

urns L/scz1
as April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(F000 11/79)
BASIC MILITARY TRAINING

Moscow RACEAL'NAYA ‘VOYBNNAYA PODGO‘I‘OVKA (Basic Military Training)
in Russian 1970 signed to press 16 Jun ‘78 pp 1, 2, 3-6, 5-61.
61-62, 07, 137, 195, 217, 242—299, 300-303

(Annotation, table of contents, introduction, exoe to of chap-
ters 1-6 and text of Gupta: 7 from the textbook a ted by

Lt Gen Adi. Popov, Izdatol'stvo 008m 8888, 1,300,000 copies,
303 pages]

Author collective [page 2]

[Text] P. I. Bykov, M. A. Belikov. I. F. Vydrin, II. I. Denis. N. K.
Yendovitskiy, A. M. Kostrov, V. M. Konoplyanik. Ye. A. Lukanin, V. I.
Mironov, V. K. Novik. V. P. Nesterov. A. M. Popov. M. U. Sibilev, N. P.
Slobodchikov, and N. A. Yasinskiy.

Annotation [page 303]

[Text] The textbook contains basic intonation on the Soviet Armed Forces.
their nature and particular features, on the regulations of the Armed Forces.
on tactical training, weapon training. drilling, military topography and
civil defense.

The textbook is designed for the study or ailitary affairs by students in
secondary general educational schools. specialized secondary schools,

vocational-technical schools and for youth employed at enterprises. insti-
tutions, sovkhozes and kolkhozes.

Contents
Page
(page: 300-302]
Introduction . .......... . . ............ . . . . 3
1 [III - USSR - 4 P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 1:

Chapter 2:

Chapter 3:

Chapter 16:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Armed Forces on Guard for the Motherland. . .

‘1.

52.
I3.

“0.

IS.

'6'

The Defense of the Fatherland and Service in

the Soviet Armed Forces-n-A High and Honorable
DutyoftheSovietCitisen. . . . . . . . . . . . .
TheUSSRArmedForcesTodey. . . . . . . . . . . .
The CPSU on the Tasks or the Soviet Armed Forces
During the Period of Building Conunism . . . .. . .
The Comand, Political and hgineer-Technical
Personnel. The Political Bodies, Party and
Kouomol Organizations of the Soviet Armed Forces .
The Military Oath-The Oath of the Soldier for
Loyalty to the Motherland. The Colors of a Unit
(ThePlagofaShip)................
Soviet Military Legislation on Service in the
ArIedRorces....................

General Military Regulations or the USSR Armed Forces .

‘1.

32.
53.

The Internal Service Regulations of the USSR
AmdPorces....................
Disciplinary Regulations of the USSR Armed Forces .
Garrison and Guard Service Regulations of the
USSRArnedRorced.................

Tactical'rraining

51.

‘2.

53.
sh.

55.

i6.
57.

The Bases of the Combat and Organisation of a
Motorized Rifle Squad. Platoon and Coupamr .
The Actions of a Soldier in Combat . . . . .
ASquadontheOtrensive. . . . . . . . . . .
ASquadontheDefensive. . . . . . . . . . .
Reconnaissance. A Platoon in a Reconnaissance
Patrol
AMarchandmrchSecurity. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bivouackingandmtposts . . . . . . . . . . . . .

eeee

HeaponTraining....................

ll.
52.
53.

‘u.

’5.
56.

PrinciplesofShooting . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
TheSnallCaliberRif’le.....

The Procedures and Rules for Firing a Small Caliber
Rifle.......................
The Kalashnikov Autonatic (The Kalashnikov Suh-

mhinegun).....................

Caring for Ueapona, Their Storage and Satekeeping .
Procedures and Rules of Firing and Firing at Fixed
Targets

h

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0

e

15
25

32

133
13?

137
lh3

157

152
173

176
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Page
57. Praguentationﬂandorenades.............185
Chapters: DRILLTRAINIWG......................l95

ll. GeneralProvisiona .................195

52. Drill Movements and Marching With and Without
".‘pona I O Q C O C O I ' O I t I O O I O O 0 b I O 0 199

I3. Baluting, Breaking Ranks and Approaching a Superior . 207
55.3quadl'ormations..................210
is. Actions of the Personal by Vehicles and on Vehicles. 215

Chapter6: Military'l'opography....................217
I1. Positioning Finding Without a Map . . . . . . . . . . 21‘!
l2.MovementbyAsimuths.................221
53. The Concept of a Topographic Map. Using a Map . . . 22h

Chapter‘f. CivilDefense.......................2h2

51. Civil Defense at a National Economic Installation
(School).......................2hz
52. Characteristics of Weapons of Mass Destruction in

the Armies of the Imperialist States. . . . . . . . . 2M:
53. Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction . . . . . 255
sh. Radiation and Chemical Reconnaissance Instruments . . 271
$5. Reconnaissance of Strike (Contaminated) Areas . . . . 290

i6. Rescue and Imediate hergency Reconstruction in
Strike Areas and Disaster Regions . . . . . . . . . . 296

INTRODUCTION [pages 3-1.]

[Text] The defense of the socialist motherland against encroachments by .
its enemies has always been and presently is a sacred duty of the Soviet
people. The history of the Soviet state is rich in examples of the heroic
struggle against the imperialist aggressors.

During the years of the foreign intervention and the Civil War, the young
Soviet republic and its valorous Red Army under the leadership of V. I.
Lenin and the Communist Party were victorious over the sizable armies of

the imperialists and White Guards, and defmded the first worker and peasant
state born by October.

During the Great Patriotic War against German fascism and Japanese militar-
ism. the Soviet people and their Armed Forces led by the Conunist Party
defeated the shock forces 01‘ world imperialism. they defended the honor,
liberty and independence of their motherland. and made a decisive contribu-
tion to saving the peoples of the world from fascist slavery.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Comunist Party and the Soviet government, in carrying out Lenin's
legacy, have consistently conducted a peace-loving policy aimed at a less-
ening of international tension and the prevention of war. At the same
time they have shown constant concern for strengthening the defenses of
the Soviet state, for increasing the combat might of its Armed Forces and
for strengthening and developing the fraternal friendship and military co-
operation among the peoples and armies of the socialist countries.

The Soviet state proceeds from the view that as long as imperialism exists,
the danger of aggressive wars remains. The policy of imperialism in recent
years has provided new proof of the permanency of its reactionary and preda-
tory nature. The imperialists are continuing to prepare to start a new
world war, and above all against the USSR and the other socialist countries.
For this reason the Soviet people and their Armed Forces should be constantly
ready for a decisive and complete defeat of any aggressor.

This is why the party has posed the valid demands of increasing the vigil-
ance of the Soviet people, ensuring the security of the Soviet state, and
preparing the population. particularly the youth, for the armed defense of
the socialist fatherland.

Military service, states the USSR Constitution, is an honorable duty of the
Soviet citizens. The defense of the socialist fatherland is a sacred duty
of each Soviet citizen.

A future war, if the aggressive forces start it, will place exceptionally
high demands upon the Soviet military. In modern combat victory will come
to only that soldier who is totally loyal to the motherland, the Communist
Party and his people, who possesses high political, moral-combat and pay-
chological qualities, who is disciplined, profoundly convinced of the Just-
ness of his cause and in victory over the enemy, who has mastered the dif-
ficult weapons and military equipment, and who is physically strong.

It is a very complicated thing to master modern weapons and military equip-
ment in a short period of time and to become a trained defender of the
motherland. For this reason each young man, on the basis of the USSR Law
Governing Universal Military Service, even before induction into the Armed
Forces, must prepare himself for military service. In school during exer-
cises for basic military training, the students gain high ideological,
political and moral-psychological qualities and discipline, they acquire
military and technical knwledge and skills and are physically strengthened

in order in the crucial hour to come to the defense of their fatherland with
weapons in hand.

The textbook worked out in accord with the requirements of the USSR Law
Governing Universal Military Service and the program for basic military

training provides an opportunity for the students to firmly assimilate the
purpose of the Soviet Armed Forces, their nature and particular features,

and the requirements of the USSR law on Universal Military Service, the
military oath and the general military regulations.

b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I183 ONLY

IJ'he textbook examines the principles of military service, it gives basic
data on tactical and veapons training, drilling. military typography and
civil defense. The book helps to realise that military service is an
honorable duty of each Soviet citizen and that each person is personally
responsible for defending his motherland.

The textbook will help to indoctrinate in our youth Soviet patriotism and
proletarian internationalism, a love for the motherland, for the Mist
Party, the Soviet people and their Armed Forces, hate for the enemies of

socialisn and a readiness to defend their fatherland with weapons in hand.

CHAPTER 1: THE SOVIET Am FORCE 0N GUARD FOR THE murmurs [pp 5-101]

51. The Defense of the Fatherland and Service in the Soviet Armed Forces--
A High and Honorable Duty of the Soviet Citizen

V. I. Lenin and the CPSU on the Defense of the Socialist Fatherland

[Excerpt] Us. the Soviet people, live in a socialist country. Our Soviet
notherland is the world's first socialist state of all the people, and a
country of true daocracy. We are proud of the fact that the Soviet Union
is called the fatherland of the workers by all oppressed peoples who see
their bright future in the homeland of October.

With a special feeling we have read in the CPSU Program and the USSR Con-
stitution that the defense of the socialist fatherland is among the most
important functions of the Soviet state. and is a concern for all the people
and a sacred duty for each citizen of the USSR.

What is the fatherland? A comet answer to this question was first given
by the founders of scientific coalsunism Karl liar: and Friedrich Engels.

In examining this concept from a historical and class viewpoint, they re-
pudiated the assertion of the bourgeoisie of a single fatherland of the
suppressors and the suppressed. In the "Mist Manifesto." they pro-
claimed that under capitalism the working class has no fatherland, and
proved that only by overthrowing the exploiters could the proletarians

and all the workers achieve a real fatherland.

The founder and leader of our party and the Soviet state, Vladimir Il'ich
Lenin, in developing Marxist ideas, profomdly analysed the concept of the
"fatherland" and its role in the life of society. "The fatherland, that
is. the given political, cultural and social milieu," he wrote "is the
mightiest factor in the class struggle of the proletariat...”

The social and political milieu includes the population of .the given coun-
try. the economic relations existing in it, the class structure and the
state system of society.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘ roe ORIGIN. US! ONLY
In a capitalist society, the class structure is based on the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie. that is. the oppressed and ruling classes. ‘ihe bour-
geois state is a weapon of the exploiting classes for suppressing the work-
ing masses, for seizing foreign nations and enslaving other peoples.

A socialist society consists of friendly classes, the workers and peasants,
and the intelligentsia which has developed out of the people. A socialist
state serves as an implement for liberating the workers, for building a
socialist and communist society and for defending it against external
enemies.

II'he concept of a "fatherland" also includes the language of the people.
the territory of the nation, its nature and all the riches created by the
labor of the people.

Our great motherland, the USSR, is the true fatherland of the workers. It
arose as a result of the victory of the Great Patriotic Socialist Revolu-

tion which freed the peoples of Russia from capitalist slavery. and opened
the way to a free and happy life.

V. I. Lenin, in working out the program for implementing the proletarian
revolution and building socialist. considered the organization of the
armed defense of the socialist fatherland us an inseparable component part
of this program. He said: "Any revolution will be worth something only
when it can defend itself.. ”"2

With the victory of the working class initially in one country. Russia,
the overthrown exploiting classes. Lenin taught. with the aid of the in- -
perialists from other states will do everything to suppress the revolu-
tion and to restore the rule of the capitalists-and landowners. Under
these conditions. the working class and the working masses will be forced
to resort to arms in order to defend their revolutionary victories.

After the victory of Great October. Lenin's teachings on the defense of
the socialist fatherland were further developed and practically worked out.

Lenin defined the most important conditions essential for organising the
repelling of the enemies of the revolution and for their defeat. Il'he
main condition and inediate concern were the creation of a strong-armed
force of a new type. an army of workers and peasants.

Lenin and the Comunist Party pointed out that this should be a completely
new arsv which differs fundaaentally from the bourgeois armies. It is '
called upon to protect the vital interests of the workers. and is created
along strict class lines from representatives of the workers, peasants and
other strata of the workers. Leadership by the Communist Party is the
basic core in the organizational development of a socialist am. The
insutable principles in the creation and development of the new am are
its inseparable tie with the people and its international nature. The

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

party and the homeland involve the workers of all the peoples and nationali-
ties of the nation in the armed struggle against the enemies of the revolu-
tion. The new am is to be set up with a permanent, professional organisa-
tion, centralised leadership, unity of comand and strictest conscious dis-
cipline.

These were the basic principles elaborated by Lenin and the party for set-
ting up the new army and organising the defense of the socialist fatherland.

The Commist Party Headed by V. I. Lenin-Jun Organiser of the
Soviet Armed Forces

As V. I. Lenin predicted. isnediately after the victory of the Great Octo-
ber Socialist Revolution, the internal counterrevolution and international
imperialism Joined forces against the Soviet republic. Kaiser Germany and
later England, France, Japan and the United States committed their troops
to suppress Soviet power in Russia. They armed and fully supplied the
armies of the white Guard generals Kolchak. Denihin, Drasnov, Yudenich.

and others. The Soviet republic was in an exceptionally couple: and dif-
ficult situation.

During the first days of Soviet power, the sole armed force of the revolu-
tion was the Red Guard, the armed detachments of workers which had been
organized by the party upon the initiative of V. I. Lenin in 1917 and who
had participated in the October armed insurrection. But they were few

in number and weak. Under these conditions. it was particularly urgent to
organise a strong. large, regular, strictly centralised and disciplined
army. '

Upon the appeal of V. I. lenin and the party, the workers of our nation
rose to fight for the liberty and independence of their motherland.

The beginning of the organizational development of our Armed Forces was
the decrees of the Council of People's Co-issars [Somarkoa] on organis-
ing the Hornet-Peasant Red Arm (28 January 1918) and the Worker-Peasant
Red Navy (11 February 1918).

In January 1918, the German imperialists. having treacherously violated
the truce conditions, began an offensive along the entire Russo-German
Front. And the soldiers of the old Russian arm, wearied by the imperial-
ist war, threw down their weapons and headed for home. The mom virtually
ceased to exist. A mortal danger had developed for the young Soviet repub-
lic, and above all for revolutionary Petrograd. The Commist Party and
the Soviet government urged the workers to repel the enemy advance with
weapons in hand and to defend the cradle of the proletarian revolution,
Petrograd. On 21 January 1918, the appeal-decree "The Socialist Father-
land in Danger!" which had been worked out by V. I. Lenin was published.
Lenin's appeal resounded throughout the nation, it united the people, and
raised them to the defense of the Soviet republic. In a mnnber of cities.
and above all in Petrograd and Moscow, mass volunteering of the workers

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the ranks of the Red Army connenced. 'Ihe cos-unists were the unifying
force of the young regiments. 'l‘he formed units immediately set off for the
front and fought unstintingly against the German arm.

By 23 February 1918. the advance of the Oemn troops against Petrograd had
been stopped. The interventionists had sustained a crushing rebuff. In
commemoration of the patriotic upsurge and the mass mobilization of the
workers to defend the socialist fatherland and the first victories in the
armed struggle against the enemies of the revolution, 23 February is cele-
brated as a national holiday, Soviet Am and Navy Day.

In Russia the Civil war vas starting up and the imperialists comenced out-
right intervention. Under these conditions, V. I. Lenin and the Communist
Party took the most decisive measures to organise the Red Army and defeat
the enemy. In April 1918, universal compulsory military instruction of
the workers (Vsevobuch) was introduced in the nation, and on 29 May, a
decree on universal military service was approved. Intense organization
and training of the troops for the front were underway. While in the

. spring of 1918 there were 300,000 men in the ranks of the Red Arm. by the
spring of 1919, its size was 1.8 million. by the end of the same year,

3 million, and by the end of 1920 had reached 5.5 million aen.

The infantry was the basic branch of troops in the Red Army. At that time
the cavalry also played an important role. Artillery battalions and air
detachments were also formed. The armored forces had armored trains,
armored vehicles and later tanks. 'Ihe revolutionary Baltic Fleet comprised
the core of the Republic Navy.

The party Central Committee directed all the work of organizing the Red
Arm and the defense of the nation. Vladimir Il'ich Lenin carried out
titanic work. He headed the party Central Comittee, the Sovnarkom and
the Defense Council, combining party, state and military leadership of the
nation. Vladimir Il'ich worked out and signed hundreds of decrees, direc-
tives. letters and telegrams on the questions of organizing the defeat of
the White Guards and interventionists.

In this period the central and local military organization was set up, a
clear structure was defined, a unified organization of the troops was in-
troduced, regulations and manuals were worked out. and the task of train-
ing comand personnel was successfully implemented. Important measures
for strengthening the ranks of the Red Army were the introduction of the
institution3 of military commisaars. and the creating of a broad network
of party and Komsomol organizations in the Army and Navy. The party made
a colossal effort so that industry, agriculture and transport were sub-
ordinate to the needs of defending the nation and supplied the front with
weapons and food.

The Soviet Armed Forces which had been organized by the party and V. I.
Lenin, in the fierce struggle. defended the victories of the revolution
and defeated the hordes of interventionists and Hhite Guards.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Fundamental Distinction of the Soviet Armed Forces from the
Armies of Impsrislist States

The Red Am is a new type of am. an army of the workers and an am of
the socialist revolution. It differs fundamentally fra- the armies of the
capitalist nations. The historic Decree on the Organisation of the Worker-
Peasant Red Am signed by V. I. Lenin stated: "The old army served as

an implement of class suppression of the workers by the bourgeoisie. With
the coming to power of the workers and the exploited classes, the need has
arisen of creating a new army....” The decree emphasised that the Red
Arm is to be crested from the most conscious and organised elements of
the working masses. and it will "recruit every person who is ready to
dedicate his forces and life for defending the victories of the October
Revolution, the power of the sovicts and socialism.“

In contrast to the bourgeois armies which are used by the exploiters for
oppressing the workers. the Soviet Army is an arm of the workers and
peasants. a truly people's army. Prom the moment of its organization,

it expressed and defended the interests of the absolute maJority of the.
people. With the complete victory of socialism in the USSR and the con-
- struction of a developed socialist society. our any has become an any
of all the Soviet people. One of the most important sources of the might
of our Armed Forces is the inseparable tie with the people. As was
pointed out by V. I. Lenin. "This force is not divorced from the people
like the force of the old standing any, but is most closely linked to
it; in military terms this force is incomparably stronger than before; in
revolutionary terms it is unique."5

Antagonistic class contradictions are inherent to a bourgeois arm, like
all capitalist society. Its cox-tend personnel 'is recruited predominantly
from the exploiting classes and the interests of the count! differ from
those of the soldiers and sailors who are compelled to serve goals that
are alien to them. The ruling circles endeavor to conceal their revolu-
tionary class goals note the soldiers. and to persuade them that service
in an imperialist army and the aggressive wars waged by it are merely
business or a profitable undertaking. National and racial contradictions
are also inherent to the armed forces of imperialism. In a bourgeois army,
the lack of rights of dark-skinned soldiers is particularly‘ apparent.

The Soviet Armed Forces. on the contrary, are united by a strong class
unity and an unshakable friendship of the peoples and nationalities of

the USSR. Our comanders, soldiers and sailors serve the comon interests
and goals of defending the Soviet motherland and the cause of socialism
and commism. The Soviet Ann! and Navy are characterized by an atmosphere
of true equality of rights, fraternal unity, friendship and coau‘adeship.
The Soviet military is indoctrinated in a spirit of international solidar-

ity, fraternal friendship and cooperation with the peoples and armies of
the countries in the socialist connonwealth.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. A fundamental distinction of the Soviet Armed Forces from bourgeois armies
in also that they serve to defend their motherland against aggression. and
together with tho nmlen ol‘ the fraternal mtionn. dofond the security of
the socialist co-IonVealth and the cause of universal peace.

The Soviet Aray is a liberator arw. ‘I. I. Lenin repeatedly stressod the
liberating and international nature of our arlnr stoning from its very revo-
lutionary essence and the missions which it vas called upon to carry out.

"Our am," said Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev at the 25th CPSU Congress, "is in-
doctrinated in a spirit of profound loyalty to the socialist motherland,

to the ideas of peace and internationalism, to the ideas of friendship
among peoples. In precisely this the Soviet army differs n-on the bourgeois

armies. For precisely this reason the Soviet people love their army and are
proud of it."

The Purpose and Nature of the USSR Armed Forces

Marxism-Leninism teaches that the army is an implement of the ruling classes,
and its nature and purpose are determined by the political organization of
society and by the class essence of the state.

In a bourgeois society, the am serves as an implement in the rule of the
exploiting imperialists. Its purpose is to defend the bourgeois system,
to suppress the asses of people and their liberation struggle, to seize
foreign territories and to enslave other peoples.

The historic mission of the Soviet {aw created by the socialist system, in
the definition of V. I. Lenin, is: "...To defend the victories of the revo-
lution and our people's pouch..."

During the years of the Civil War, the Red Am was called upon to defend
the victories of the October revolution and the young Soviet state against
foreigrintervention and domestic counterrevolution. In the battles against
the enemies, the young Red Army von undying glory. In overcoming unbeliev-
able difficulties and under conditions of hunger and chaos, it defeated the

hordes of intarventionists and "hits Guards and defended the motherland and
the victories of October.

After the Civil War, the party directed the efforts of the Soviet people at
rebuilding the destroyed national econow, creating the foundation of a
socialist economy, and strengthening the military might of the Army and
Navy.

During this period the Armed Forces vere confronted with the mission of
being ready to repel a possible attack by the imperialist aggressors and

to ensure conditions for the building of socialism. The Red Arw vigilantly
guarded the Soviet frontiers. It dealt a crushing defeat to the attempts
of the imperialists to disrupt the peaceful labor of the Soviet people in

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OP'ICIAI. USE Oh‘b'i

the Far East and on the approaches to Leningrad. and it helped the people
of the western oblasts of Belorussis. and the Ukraine and the Baltic repub-
lics to Join the fraternal family of Soviet peoples.

The Great Patriotic War of 19301-1916. in which our people defended the lib-
erty and independence of their socialist sotherland. was the bloodiest and
neverest war in history. The material. political and nilitsry forces of the
Soviet state underwent a crucial testing. In this war, the fate of the
world's first socialist fatherland and all world civilisation was determined.

The severe hardships could not break the fighting spirit of our people and
their any. and could not shake the unlimited faith of the Soviet people in
the triunph of conunist ideals. During those days the song "A Soly liar"
resounded as a vow to the motherland and as a tocsin calling the people to
fight the cneru:

Rise up. oh vast land.

Rise up to nortal battle
Against the dark fascist force.
Against the accursed horde!

The Leninist Conuniat Party was the inspirer and organiser of the struggle
of the Soviet people for the freedom and independence of the notherland.
Under its leadership the nation was turned into a single military cup.

In the Battle of Moscow in necenber 19101, the Red Am defeated the crack
units of Nazi troops and thwarted hitler's plan for a "blitzkrieg.” and
shattered the wth of the invincibility of the ﬂasi any. This was the
first major defeat of the Nazis in the course of the entire world Var II.

The heroic defense of Leningrad. Kiev. Sevastopol'. Odessa, ‘i‘ula. the
Caucasus and the Soviet Arctic also played a naJor role in the achieving
of victory over the enemy. The great Battle of Stalingrad continued for
more than 200 days. and this ended with the encirclsnent and coaplete de-
feat of an any of more than 330,000 anew troops. The victory at Stalin-
grad marked the beginning to a fundamental change in the course of the war.
and was the start of the general defeat of the German invaders and the ex-
pulsion of that from Soviet land.

The battles at Kurax, Leningrad. llovorosaiyak. on the Dnepr and in Belo-
russia. on the Vistuls and Oder. in East Prussia in the Balkans and the

other nsJor engagements were the most important stages on the path of the
Soviet people toward victory in the Great Patriotic liar. 0n 8 May l9h5.

iiitler Germany surrendered unconditionally. In August 1955. the any of

niliterist Japan was defeated by Allied troops.

During the Great Patriotic war, as during the period of the Civil Var. the
truly popular nature of our Armed forces was fully apparent as well as the
ardent patriotisa of the Soviet military, their total loyalty to the

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Commist Party and the notherland. and unprecedented courage and mass
hnmlmr. nunffirned were the fervent wordn of Vlndlnlr Il'ich Lenin that
in the struggle for freedu and for Soviet power "Russia is capable of
providing not only isolated heroes...and that Russia can produce these
heroes in hundreds and thousands."8

The book "Malaya Zenlya" [The small Berth] describes with clarity and heart-
felt warmth the mass heroism of the Soviet soldier. In the course of battle
"the earth was set on fire. stones smoked. metal melted, concrete collapsed.
but the people. 10m to their oath. did not retreat from this land.“

For military feats in the Great Patriotic War. more than 11.000 men received
the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. Among them were the sons and daughters
of all the peoples of our motherland. Some 10’: soldiers became twice heroes
of the Soviet Union. while 0. It. Zhukov. I. ll. Koshedub and A. I. Pokryshkin
received this high title thrice. Among the Heroes of the Soviet Union. 7!:
percent were communists and 11 percent Konomol members. For military feats
for the sake of the motherland. more than 2,000 persons were awarded the
Order of Glory of the three degrees.

The Great Patriotic Var clearly manifested the international nature and the
liberation mission of our armed forces. In the unstinting struggle against
German fascism and Japanese militarism. they not only defended the honor.
freedom and independence of our motherland. but also saved many peoples
from fascist enslave-ent. "ore than a million Soviet soldiers gave up their
lives in battles for the liberation of peoples in foreign countries. The
Soviet Am liberated partly or completely the territories of 10 mropean
nations and two Asian countries with a total area of 2.5 million lust and a
population of over 180 million persons.

The victory of the Soviet Union in the Great Patriotic Var contributed to
the formation of the world socialist system and to the growth of the revolu-
tionary movement and the national liberation struggle throughout the world.
The sources of the world historical victory of our Armed Forces were the
leadership of the Communist Party. the firm alliance of the working class
and the kolkhoz peasantry, and the unshakc-ble friendship of all the Soviet
nationalities and peoples.

In the postwar period. our Armed Forces. under the leadership of the Con-
munist Party. have continued their successful development and strengthening.
and have honorably carried out their noble missions. Under present-day con-
ditions, the historic mission of the Soviet Armed Forces consists in reli-
ably defending the socialist fatherland. protecting the peaceful and cre-
ative labor of the Soviet people who are building conunism, and being in
constant combat readiness which would guarantee an imediate rebuff of am
aggressor. AlOng with the armies of the fraternal socialist countries, they
protect the security of the entire socialist cosmonwealth and are a reliable
bulwark for universal peace and security.

12

NR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Quiz Questions

1. What is the socialist fatherlandf
2. The legacy of V. I. Lenin on the defense of the socialist fatherland.

3. What is the fundamental difference of the 11888 Armed Forces from
the armies of the capitalist states?

It. What world historical victories did the Soviet Armed Forces win
over the enemies of the motherland? What were the sources of these victories?

5. "hat are the sources of the strength and might of the aoviet Am
and Navy?

52. The USSR Armed Forces ‘lbdsy
Leninist Principles of Military Organisational Development

After the victory in the Oreat Patriotic War. the Oouunist Party end the
Soviet government focused all the efforts of the people on rebuilding and
further developing the national econosv and on completing the construction
of socialism. At the same time the party never forgot the advice of the
great Lenin. to he always on guard, and to strengthen national defenses in
every possible way.

During the postwar years, the party and the goverrmnent have devoted unflag-
ging attention to strengthening and improving the Soviet Armed Forces.
Their development has proceeded on the basis of the Leninist principles of
military organisational dewelopent.

What is the content of these principles?

The leadership of the Columnist Party over the Armed l’orces is the basic
and main principle for Soviet military organisational developaent. V. I.
Lenin felt that party leadership was the decisive source of might for the
Red Army and all its victories. He taught that since the Columnist Party
is the leading and guilding force of all Soviet society. it should totally
direct the Armed Forces and lead the question of military organizational
development and the defense of the motherland.

The entire history of the Soviet state and its world historical victories
won in battles against the enemies of socialism have demonstrated the
vitality of this Leninist principle.

In speaking about the reasons for our victory in the Civil Var, V. I. Lenin
pointed out that ”the authority of the party unified all the departments
and institutions and scores. hundreds. thousands and ultimately millions
followed under the slogan which was given by the Central Co-ittee. as one
man.... Por this reason alone. regardless of the double. triple or four-
fold campaig: of the imperialists of the mtsnte and the imperialists of
the entire world. we were in a state to win."‘°

13

M OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The same thing mast be said about our victory in the Great Patriotic liar.

The organising and directing role of the Cosmunist Party in strengthening
the defense capability of the nation -and in defending the motherland is
manifested in the unity of the political, economic and military leadership.
This is caused by the very nature of a socialist society. and by the scien-
tific nature of its construction which is carried out on a basis of the
knowledge and use of the objective laws of social development. The reeli-
sation of this thesis makes it possible to utilise the advantages of social-
ism in a planned runner in the fight against the enemies of our state and

in strengthening the defense might of the motherland.

The leading role of the CPBU in directing all Soviet society, including the
Armed Forces. has been continuously growing. This is explained by the growth
and complicating of tasks in all areas of consmnist construction. in organi-
sing the defense of the motherland. and in the broadening of the inter-
national duties of the Soviet state and its Armed Forces.

One of the important principles is the class principle in the organisational
development of the Armed Forces. This is inherent to the armies of all
states. However. bourgeois theoreticians endeavor to conceal the class es-
sence of imperialist amiss, because this is profoundly antipopular. But
we, on the contrary, proclaim this principle outright. thereby stressing
the truly popular nature of the socialist any which defends the interests
of the workers and the interests of peace and socialism.

The USSR Armed Forces from the day of their birth became a powerful weapon
of the working class and the working peasantry in the struggle for the
liberty and independence of our motherland.

One of the crucial sociopolitical principles of Soviet military organiza-
tional development is the unity of the any and the people. This is based
upon the blood relationship of the Soviet Am and the masses of people.
The close tie of the Soviet Armed Forces with the people is one of the most
important sources of their might and invincibility. The Soviet peeple love
their army and spare nothing to increase its battleworthiness.

Among the fundamental principles of Soviet military organisational develop-
ment is the principle of friendship my peoples and proletariat inter-
nationaliem. On the basis of Lenin‘s nationality policy. our Armed Forces
have been developed, they have grown up and become stronger. as a unified
multinational military organisation of a socialist state. The indoctrinap
tion of the personnel in a spirit of friendship and fraternity among the
soviet peoples and total loyalty to the Soviet motherland is one of the
decisive conditions for the strength of the Am and Navy.

The beninist principle of proletarian internationalism under present-day
conditions is also expressed in the solidarity of the socialist countries.
in the cononness of social goals and tasks, in military cooperation among

1|;

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their armies. and in the solidarity with the workers of the entire world.

In defending the class interests of their people. the Soviet Armed Forces

at the same time defend the interests of the workers in the nations of the
socialist commonwealth. and they carry out their international duty to the
workers of the entire world.

An important organizational principle is the principle of a regular army.
Prior to the October Revolution. there was the opinion that the victories

of the revolution could be defended by an armed people or a people's militia.
lI'he experience of combating the united forces .of international imperialism
showed that the function of protecting the socialist victories of the people
could be carried out only by a regular, well-equipped and strictly disciplined
am. At present this principle underlies the entire military system of the
Soviet state.

The principle of centralised leadership is determined by the very specific
nature of the military organization and the missions carried out by the am.
Its essence is that the military comand. in being guided by the decisions
of the Communist Party. its Central Cosmittee and the Soviet government.
unites the efforts of the subordinate troops. and directs them at constantly
increasing the defense capability of the state. the combat readiness of the
Arno! and navy in peacetime. and at achieving victory in war.

The principle of unity of W is closely tied to the principle of cen-
tralized leadership. This is a most important organisational principle in
Soviet military development. It is founded on a party base and means that
the solely-responsible con-sander is the representative of the Conunist
Party and the Soviet state in the troops. their agent. the proponent of
their political line and the strict guardian of the Soviet laws and military
regulations. he bears hill responsibility for the fighting efficiency of

the subunit. unit. ship or formation. and for the successful fulfillment
of their combat missions.

V. I. Lenin considered unity of comand as "that system which most ensures
the best use of human capabilities and a real and not verbal check on the
vork." -

Unity of command ensures the greatest clarity. efficiency, and centralisa—
tion of troop comand; initiative, independence and freedom of the co-ander
in taking a combat decision; the M1 responsibility of the cos-lander for
the military training and readiness of the subunit. unit or ship assigned

to him, and for the indoctrination of the personnel.

The service activities of each servicemen. the standards of conduct and the

entire procedure of any life are determined by the military regulations

and the orders of chiefs.

The Soviet cosmender combines in himself the qualities of an exacting chief

and a considerate indoctrinator. Both the officer and the soldier of the
15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet Army are subordinate to the same moral principles and to the re-
quirements of the military oath and military regulations.

The order or a comnder in a lav for subordinates. and it should be carried
out unrul'llngly. precinnly and on time. The inaccurate or delayed execution
of n chief's order in peacetime causes groat harm to military order. it
weakens the combat readiness of the am. and in combat this is fatal.

M. I. Kalinin said: ”The order or comnd of a contender under any condi-
tions is the law for the soldier. and a law from which there should be no
deviations."12 If the men are not taught to carry out orders unswervingly,
sparing neither their forces nor life itself, the subunit vill be unable to
carry out its missions of defending the motherland. In carrying out the
order of a commandor and in protecting him in combat. the Soviet soldiers
shov concern for maintaining the fighting efficiency of the subunit. unit
or ship. The inviolable lav of friendship and comradeship among the Soviet
military and their glorious military tradition are manifested in a readiness
to help the cos-under out of a disaster and to rescue him in combat.

Unity of cos-land in the higher levels of the military organisation is com-
bined with forms of collective leadership. The military councils of the
services of the Armed Forces. the military districts. troop groups. fleets
and armier '«re collective military leadership bodies. They reviev and
settlethe most important questions in the life and activities of the Army
and navy.

The principle of the constant readiness of the nation and its Armed Forces
to repel aggression and to defend the socialist victories of the workers

is determined by the existence of a threat of var deriving from the imperial-
ist states. V. I. Lenin repeatedly stressed that it was essential to keep

a vigilant eye on the intrigues of the enemies. to maintain revolutionary
vigilance. and to always be on guard and in constant readiness to repel the
imperialist aggressors. The Conunist Party, in carrying out Lenin's legacy.
has done everything to maintain the Am and Navy in a state of high combat
readiness.

High conscious military discipline. as a principle of military organisa-

tional development. is an inseparable quality of the Soviet Armed Forces.
V. I. Lenin gave enormous significance to military discipline. He viewed
it as a most important factor in the fighting efficiency of the troops.

Under present-day conditions. the role of conscious discipline. organisation
and firm order has grown significantly. 'lhe nature of a possible var and
the complicating of all military affairs necessitate the strict and uneven!-
ing execution of the regulations and the orders of the collanders. great
teamwork, and rapid and precise actions by the individual men and troop col-
lectives.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most important principles in the organizational development of the
Soviet Armed Forces are reflected in the activities of the Conunist Party
and its Central ComIittee in the area of military organisational develop-
ment, in Soviet military doctrine and the military regulations.

Soviet Military Doctrine

Military doctrine is the system of views and concepts accepted in a state
and dealing with military organizational development and the conduct of
war. 'No aspects-opolitical and military-technicalucan be distinguished
in the content of Soviet military doctrine. Here the political aspect is
the main and determining one. This discloses the sociopolitical essence
of a future war which the imperialists can start. the nature of the politi-
cal goals and strategic tasks of a state in a var. their impact on the or-
ganizational development of the Am and Navy. and the methods for prepar-
ing for and conducting a war.

The military-technical aspect of doctrine includes the questions of the
organizational development, training and use of the Armed Forces in war,
the most important areas of the combat use. technical equipping, and organ-
izational structure of the Arm and Navy. the development of military art.
and the demands on the military training and combat readiness of the troops.
Soviet military doctrine perform a progressive social role to the highest
degree. It serves the cause of defending the most advanced social system,
socialism. and ensures conditions for the construction of cox-unism.

The presently occurring scientific and technical revolution has had a pro-
found impact on military affairs and on the development of weapons and mili-

tary equipment. Nuclear missiles have appeared and these possess enomous
destructive force and unlimited range. Combat aviation has become Jet-
powered and supersonic. Atomic submarines have been developed. The Armed
Forces are equipped with automated control systems for the weapons and mili-
tary equipment. All of this has led to changes in the methods of conduct-
ing combat, and in the methods and forms for instructing and indoctrinating
the personnel.

Fundamental qualitative changes have occurred in all the services of the
Armed Forces. The Soviet Armed Forces include the Strategic liissile Forces,
the Ground Forces. the National Air Defense Forces, the Air Force. the llavy.
as well as the Border and Interior Troops.

'lhe Strategic Missile Forces
The Strategic Missile Forces comprise the basis of the combat might of our
Armed Forces and are designed to destroy enm nuclear attack weapons.
large groupings of enenv troops and military bases as well as for the de«

struction of military industrial installations. They are armed with inter-
continental and medium-range missiles and dependable control systems.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Strategic Missile Forces are troops with a high degree of combat readi-
ness. And in peacetime they also carry out a combat mission. Night and
day the missile troops stand tours of duty and are row in the event of
on shew attack to inflict inevitable retaliation on it.

Ground Forces

The Ground Forces have acquired new combat qualities. These are the most
numerous service of the Armed Forces with diverse weapons and military
equipment. At present their fire and strike power and their mobility have
increased significantly. and they have acquired even greater independence
in carrying out combat missions;

Operational and tactical m’seilo units comprise the basis of the fire power
of the ground forces. Their missiles can accurately and dependably deliver
nuclear amunition to am! target within a range of from several score to
many hundreds of kilometers.

The motorized rifle and tank forces and the artillery have also been sub-
stantially changed. The motorised rifle units are outfitted with first-
rate transport and nodern types of weapons. The infantry combat vehicles
(MP) are capable of destroying various targets with their weapons and
rapidly covering significant distances. As a result of this. there has been
a sharp rise in the mobility. maneuverability, fire power and striking power
of the motorised rifle units and formations. Their personnel is capable of
conducting extended combat, to advance rapidly, to pursue the anew until
its complete defeat, and to firmly hold occupied positions.

The tank maps are armed with modern tanks having powerful. armor and first-
rate weapons, they possess excellent cross-country capacity and great range.
It is very important that the tanks and the MP are adapted for actions
under the conditions of the use of nuclear weapons. The tank troops are
the basic striking force of the Ground Troops.

The artillery and mortar subunits and units are armed with the most advanced
guns. mortars. recoilless guns, and rocket launchers which surpass the
performance of the famous "Katyushas." The present-day artillery is marked
by great mobility, maneuverability, range and accuracy of fire. and a more
powerful shell. Along with the antitank conventional artillery there is
also a new highly effective weapon used against armored targets, namely the
antitank guided missiles (ms) which are capable of hitting any tanks at
signifith distances.

The Air Defense troops of the Ground Forces have undergone significant
changes. The effectiveness of their use has risen greatly in protecting
the troops against enemy air attack weapons. They are armed with mobile
antiaircraft missile complexes. antiaircraft artillery. air target detection
radar and automated fire control systems.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The speciel brenches of forces have elso become quelitetive different. Thus,
the engineer troops heve been equipped with modern roed end eerthmoving
equipment, powerful equipment for throwing up crossings over lerge weter
obstscles, end verious devices noting it possible to erect shelters for
personnel end nilitery equipment within the shortest ties. The chemical
troops ere ermsd with modern equipment including fecilities end devices for
conducting redietion reconneissence. end protecting end deconteeineting
personnel. equipment. weapons end terrein.

The signal troops ere supplied with modern rsdio end redio relev equipment.
This mekes it possible for the comenders end the steffs to continuously

control the troops under any conditions of s repidly chenging conbet situa-
tion.

The Soviet Union is the world‘s lergest reilroed power. The totel length
of the reilroeds in the 088R exceeds 135,000 km. The Armed Forces else
have railroad troops. Orgenized during the yeers of the Civil her, they
rebuilt and opereted neny thousands of kilometers of reilrosds end bridges.
The reilroed troops elso honorebly endured the severe herdships of the
Greet Patriotic Her. During the postwer yeers, the reilroed troops heve
developed end improved. At present they heve new poweer end effective
nechenisms end equipment. including eerthmoving equipment. treck levers.
excevetors. mechenised lifting crenes, end so forth. The reilroed troops
ere else involved in the construction of the Beyhel-Amur Meinline.

with the eppeerence of nucleer missiles. the role of the airborne troops

has increased. They ere rightly celled the winged guard. In these troops
all the units heve the honoreble title of guerds. Both independently end

in cooperation with the units end subunits of the other services end brenchcs
of forces in the Armed Forces, the peretroopers ere cepeble of cerrying out
diverse combet missions in the enesu reer. The eirborne troops ere ensed
with eirborne cembet vehicles. esseult guns, ermored personnel cerriers,
effective entitenk end entieircrei‘t weepons. conventionel end rocket ertil-
lery systems. end powerful eutemetic weepons.

The Netionel Air Defense Troops

Considering the enormous importence of the missions cerried out by the
Netionel Air Defense Troops. the Columnist Perty end the Soviet goverment
heve teken neeeures to provide them with everything necessery for success-
mlly repelling en eir etteck end for covering the eir frontiers of the
motherlend.

The Netionel Air Defense Troops include entieircreft missile troops. missile-
cerrying fighter evietion. reder end speciel units end subunits. The enti-
eircreft missile units ere erned with entieircreft missile complexes.

The combet cepebilities of the weepons of the uetionel Air Defense Troops

nuke it possible to repel modern eir etteck weepons of the imperielist eg-
gressors et nexlmum renges. et verious eltitudee end supersonic speeds.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Modern interceptor fighters possess a speed which significantly surpasses
the speed of sound. a great flight ceiling, good maneuverability and power-

ful missile weapons. They operate during the night and day. in am weather.
and they successfully carry out missions of destroying enemy aircraft.

The combat capabilities of the radio engineering units of the Rational Air
Defense Troops have increased. Their modern radioelectronic equipment makes
it possible at am time and under the most difficult conditions to detect
air attack weapons at a great distance and provide prompt target desimation

for the antiaircraft missile troops and the missile-carrying air defense
fighter aviation. ‘

The air frontiers of the Soviet fatherland stretch for scores of thousands
of kilometers. They are vigilantly guarded by the air defense troops who
stand continuous tours of duty and are in a state of constant readiness
to repel an enew attack.

The Air Force

Our Air Force is a mighty service of the Armed Porces. The fundamental
scientific and technical achievements. particularly in the development of
new Jet engines and aerodynamic systems for airplanes and helicopters. as
well as the broad use of more advanced materials and radio and radio elec-
tronic equipment in airfrme construction have ensured the rapid develop-
ment of military aviation.

Today's Air Force is termed all-weather. It is armed with missile-carrying
aircraft which can make strikes with nuclear and conventional weapons against
any target located on the ground or at see. without entering the zone of

the enew air defense weapons. The Air Force also includes-missile-carrying
fighter aviation, military transport aviation and combat helicopters. '

The combat aircraft used by the Air Force possesses supersonic speed and
a stratospheric flight altitudes; the aircraft are equipped with powerful
missile and cannon armaments and advanced radio electronic equipment. New
aircraft have been developed with a-variable wing configuration. as well
as vertical takeoff and landing. These planes can take off and land on
limited-sized sirfields, they can operate successfully under difficult
meteorological .conditions and at night. and can make long-distance flights
at supersonic speeds. The modern helicopters are primarily combat air-
craft which are capable of carrying out a broad range of missions involved
in the support of the Ground Forces on the battlefield, including operations
in the enemy rear. the successful conducting of air reconnaissance. drop-
ping troops. delivering cargo and providing liaison and cound.

The Ilavy
The levy has become a mighty force. The development of missilry and atomic
propulsion-units have led to a sharp change in the direction of ship con-
struction, and this has been expressed in an increase in the role of atomic

20

10!! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

submarines carrying nuclear missiles. At present the chief merns capable
of carrying out the basic missions of the Navy are the atomic submarines
armed with various missiles and homing torpedoes and equipped with advanced
navigation. control and cosssunications facilities. They can attack from
great distances both against sea targets and ground installations located
on the shore or deep in enemy territory. The missile-carrying naval avia-
‘tion is the chief means of hitting the snow.

The Navy also possesses missile-carrying, antisubmarine, minesveeping, am-
phibious and other surface vessels. missile and artillery shore troops, and
nnrines. The Navy has left the coastal waters and inland seas and has pushed
out into the expenses of the world ocean. It has everything necessary for
extended operations on the oceans and seas.

The changes in the technical equipping of all the services of the Armed

Forces and the growth of their combat capabilities have caused a reorganiza-
tion in all the elements of rear support for the Army and Navy. Complete
motorization of the Rear of the Armed Forces and a reorganisation in its
structure have been carried out. This has increased its nobility and maneuver-
ability.

The personnel of the Border and Interior hoops carry out responsible missions
in defending the USSR state frontiers and maJor state installations.

The Border Troops during the entire history of the Soviet state have stood

a difficult but honorable service, in vigilantly guarding the state frontier.
and have fought enenzy spies and saboteurs. They have repeatedly rebuffed
armed provocations. During the years of the Great Patriotic War. the Soviet
Border Troops were the first to engage the fascist hordes and set examples
of tenaciousness and heroism. At present the Border Troops have the nest
advanced military equipment and weapons.

The USSR Armed Forces represent a mighty combat collective of ideologically
strong, courageous and able defenders of the motherland who are totally
dedicated to the party and the people and who are clearly aware and vorthiiLy
carry out their patriotic and international duties. Closely rallied around
the Comunist Party and under its tried leadership. they are capable of
carrying out any combat missions of defending their socialist fatherland.

Quiz Questions

1. What are the Leninist principles of military organisational de-
velopment?

2. what is the significance of unity of comand in the Am and Navy?

3. The services of the Armed Forces. "hat is their purpose?

lo. Hov are the services of the Armed Forces developing under present-
day conditions and what are their lissions‘!

21

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
53. The CPSU on the Tasks of the Soviet Armed Forces During the Period of
Building Communism .

. As a result of the enormous revolutionizing and creative activity of the
workers, peasants and people's intelligentsia under the leadership of the
Columnist Party, a developed socialist society has been built in our nation,
and socialism has been completely and finally victorious. At present a com-
munist society is being successnmy built.

Our achievements would have been even greater if it had been possible to
utilize all the resources of the nation for developing the economy and for
raising the standard of living of the people and improving culture. But
since aggressive imperialist forces exist in the world, our state has been

forced to allocate money for defense in order to maintain it on a modern
level. -

1he Soviet Union. along with the fraternal socialist countries. is fighting
steadin and consistently for peace and the security of peoples. But the
experience of history teaches that when confronted with world imperialism
it is always essential to be ready to repel any of its aggressive intrigues
and to be always on guard.

Imperialism-Aha Source of Hers and the Evilest new of Peace and
Socialism

Imperialism in the 20th century has led mankind into the abyss of two devas-
tating world wars, and has started up hundreds of local wars and military
conflicts. In the course of these wars. entire nations have been devastated.
thousands of cities and villages have been destroyed, and the results of the
labor of many generations have been wiped out. Many millions of people have
lost their lives in the wars.

Regardless of the defeats suffered by imperialism,_- at present it continues
its aggressive policy and has not abandoned the rabid plans for winning
world domination. "...Horld domination," wrote V. I. Lenin. "is to put it
briefly, the content of imperialist policy, the continuation of which is
imperialist war.””

In preparing for war against the world socialist system, the imperialist
states headed by the United States have instigated an unprecedented arms
race, they have increased military expenditures, they have created large
armies and ailitary bases. and have militarised the econouv and all social
life. As a result of militarization in the imperialist countries. there
has been an intermingling of the monopolies and the military, and the so-
called military industrial complex has formed. The monopolies are in favor
of carrying out the most militant, aggressive policy against the UBSR and
the other socialist countries.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev described the aggressive essence of modern imperial-
isn in the Accountability Report of the CPS!) Central Cosmittee to the 25th
Party Congress: ”The experience of the revolutionary movement in recent
years has clearly shown that if a real threat arises to the dominance of
monopolistic capital and its political henchmen, imperialism knows no limits.
discarding any appearance of democracy whatsoever. It is ready to violate
the sovereignty of states and am legality, without mentioning hmneness.
Slender, the stultification of public opinion, economic blockade, sabotage,
the organization of hunger and chaos, bribery and threats. terror. organiz-
ing the murders of political figures, and pogroms in the fascist style-th1s
is the arsenal of modern counterrevolution which always operates in alli-
ance with the international imperialist reactiona'm'

The aggressive NATO military bloc's represents a particular threat to peace
and to the security of our motherland and the fraternal socialist countries.
Its large armed forces equipped with nuclear weapons and a large quantity
of modern tanks, aircraft and artillery pieces are in direct proximity to
the Soviet frontiers, and in Europe oppose the armed forces of the Harsaw
Pact countries. The NATO military depots in Mops store thousands of nu-
clear warheads, and the armed forces are combat rem.

The aggressiVe nature of 0.8. imperialism was clearly manifested in the war
against the Vietnamese people, in the active support for the aggression of
Israeli military forces against the Arab peoples in the Near East and the
fascist regime in Chile, and in the attempt to suppress the national libera-
tion movement of the Angolan people and other peoples.

In Vietnam imperialism suffered a defeat in its most important effort since
World War II to settle scores with a socialist state and stifle the national
liberation revolution. "...The victory of Vietnam," said 1.. I. Brezhnev,
"shows how restricted the possibilities of imperialism have become in our
days. Now there are no means by which it could turn history new“

As a result of the consistent struggle which our party has carried out along
with the other fraternal parties of the socialist countries to prevent a
new world war, a certain lessening of tension can be noted in the world.
However the successful development of detente is impeded by the efforts of
the reactionary imperialist forces. They are continuing the arms race, they
are developing new types of lethal weapons and are strengthening the aggres-
sive blocs. The imperialists have endeavored to fan centers of tension in
various regions of the world such as the Near East, in the region of the
Indian Ocean, in Latin America, Africa and Asia.

The Communist Party considers that the present stage’in world development is
characterised by a complexity and contradictoriness. It is carefully fol-

lowing the state of affairs in the world, and is taking every measure to
prevent a new world war.

23

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Marxism-minim on the Causes and hsence of "are

War is an anaed struggle between states or social classes. Mumisn-Leninism
teaches that wars in an exploiting society are not a random but completely
natural phenomenon which does not depend upon the will of individuals. The
main reason for were lies in the economic and political system or this
society. -

Hare arose when private ownership of the means or production appeared and
when society was split into antagonistic classes and a fierce struggle de-
veloped between them.

With the rise of capitalism. wars becane its constant accomplice. War is
one of the means which provides quick riches tor the capitalists. The sys-
ten or the exploitation of one class by soother and the system of the eradi-
cation oi’ nan by man are two aspects of the capitalist system. Iaperlalisn
is an order of cruel oppression of the workers and the suppression of democ-
racy. an order which has given rise to faccin, the extreme embodiment of
reaction, obscurantisn and terror. -

The causes or inperialist wars were analysed by V. I. Lenin with exhaustive
thoroughness. he discovered the law or the uneven, abrupt econonic and
political development or the capitalist nations in the era of imperialism.
This law is expressed in the continuous economic rivalry or the capitalist
nations, in a struggle of the monopolies for raw material- sources and lar-
ksts. and in a desire or the progressing states to achieve world dominance
by any means. The aggressiveness of imperialism was further heightened with
the appearance of the Soviet state and then the other socialist countries.

In analysing the essence of war, Vladimir Il'ich Lenin pointed out that war
is the continuation of the policy of certain classes or states by other,
violent means. "Any war," he wrote, "is inseparably linked with that polit-
ical order from which it derives. That very policy which a certain power
or a certain class within this power has carried out for an extended tine
prior to the war inevitably and inexorably is continued by the class itself
during the war. merely having altered the tors: of its action."17

Depending upon this. wars may be Just or inJust, reactionary, serving to
reinforce class suppression, and progressive serving to overthrow this.
For a Marxist these wars must not be confused.18

The sociopolitical nature of a war is determined by those political aias
{or the sake of which it is waged. I! the policy of 5 state pursues liber-
ating and Just aims, then a war conducted by it is of a Just nature; it the
policy is predatory and unjust, then this war will be unjust.

In the present age. just wars are wars in the defense or the socialist
i’atherland and the states of the socialist cousonwealth against imperial-
ist aggression; civil wars of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie. as

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

well as wars of the working classes for democracy against the rule of im-
perialism; national liberation wars of peoples in colonial and dependent
nations. as well as wars of the liberated countries against neoeolonialisn;
wars of the peoples in bourgeois states for defending the independence of
their country against imperialist aggressors.

Thus. the Civil Har of the Soviet people against the formgn intenuntion-
into and internal counterrevolution in the defense of the victories of the
Great October Socialist Revolution was a Just war. The USSR fought a Just
war against the hazi invaders in the period of l9hl-l9h5. ‘i'he treacherous
attack of ﬂasi Ger-any on the 088R was an attempt by international imperial-
ism. with the aid of its most reactionary detachment. fascism. to destroy
the world's first socialist state. ‘ihe wars-of the peoples of Vietnen.
Korea, Laos. and Cambodia against the Anerican interventionists and their
allies in the aggression. the war of Angola and other peoples for liberty
and independence were Just. liberating wars.

Among the unjust wars are the wars in imperialisa against the socialist
states; the wars of the exploiting classes against the revolutionary nove-
mcnt of the working class and all workers; the wars of imperialism to Iain-
tain their dominance in the colonial and dependent nations or for the pur-
pose of enslaving the liberated countries; wars among iaperialist states
for spheres of influence and Iarkets.

The war or American imperialism against Vietnan as well as the wars of ,ihe
Israeli aggressors against the Arab states can serve as an example of an
unJust. predatory war.

war again It the USSR and the other socialist countries. if it is started
by imperialism. for the imperialist states in all instances will be an un-
Just. reactionary war and a continuation of their predatory policy. For
the USSR and the other socialist states. it will be a Just and progressive
war, and it will be a continuation of their revolutionary policy of defend-
ing the liberty and independence of their notherland and ensuring the great
cause of building socialism and cousunisn.

Depending upon their scale. wars can be local. that is limited to the par-
ticipation of two or several states. and world wars between systems 01'
states which may involve a significant portion or even all nations of the
world.

The Nature and Particular Features of a Possible Nuclear Missile war
If the imperialists. against the will of the peoples. succeed in unleashing
a war and involve the nuclear powers in it. it will be a nuclear missile

war. and hence the most destructive and fiercest of all the wars ever known
in hi story. Nuclear weapons will be the main means of attack.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

The war on both sides will assume a coalition nature. The aggressive coali-
tion of the imperialist states will be opposed by a coalition of the social-
ist countries vhich unites the might of the 0881i and the other states in
the socialist cosmonweslth.

In terms of its essence and political content. this war will be the deci-
sive armed clash of the two opposing world systems. It will demand from the
belligerents s colossal straining of all the forces and unprecedented. enor-
mous sacrifices. The soviet soldiers will need exceptionally high moral-
political and military qualities. unflinching determination. self-sacrifice
and a will for victory.

The imperialists will endeavor to achieve their partial aggressive goals by
waging local wars. These wars are undertaken in the aim of suppressing the
national liberation movement. for capturing or retaining colonies. as well
as for weakening the world socialist system. and for aaintaining a constant
tension in the relations with the socialist states. The local wars of the
inperialists against the peoples fighting for their liberty and independence
at any time can grow into a world nuclear war.

The CPSU on the necessity of Further Strengthening the Defense Capability
of the Nation and Raising the Combat Readiness of the USSR Armed Forces

Proceeding from the international situation and the interests of conunist
construction. our party and government are doing everything necessary to
further strengthen the defense capability of the motherland and the might of
the Soviet Armed Forces.

Due to the concern of the party and to the heroic labor of the Soviet people.
our Army and levy at present represent a powerful. mighty and invincible
force. They are always ready to repel any ens-v attack.

For the purposes of strengthening the collective defense of the socialist
states and in response to the creation of the aggressive IIA'rO bloc by the
imperialists in May 1955. a number of the socialist countries signed the
defensive warsaw Pact. This pact on friendship. cooperation and mutual

aid has become an important instruaent in the foreign policy cooperation
and for ensuring the security of the socialist co-nonwealth. Bulgaria.
Hungary. the ODE. Poland. Ronnie. the USSR and the CSSRuthe member nations
of this pactuare acting as a single front in the struggle for peace and
are strengthening their defense capability.

The political. economic and military cooperation of the warsav Pact countries
serves as a reliable guarantee for peace and security in Mops. All the
relations between the Harsav Pact states are based on a complete equality of
rights. The USSR government has been continuously concerned with the fur-
ther strengthening of the military alliance with the fraternal socialist
countries. "...As long as the NAN bloc remains and as long as the mili-
taristic circles keep up the arms race. our nation. along with the other
Harsav Pact members. vill strengthen this militarycpolitical alliance."'9

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the forms by which the Soviet Armed Forces fulfill their allied ob-
ligations and their international duty is the temporary stationing of Soviet
troOps on the territories of certain countries of the socialist cosmnwealth.
_0ur military sewing in the groups of Soviet forces carry high the honor

and dignity of the internationalist soldiers. They strengthen the military
cooperation with the fraternal .armies. and along with them vigilantly and
steadfastly defend the cause of peace and socialism.

The Soviet Armed Forces-ma Reliable Guard for the Construction of
Socialism and Conuunism. a Bulwark of Peace and Security for Peoples

The Soviet Armed Forces are equipped with modern weapons and military equip-
ment. No matter how powerful military equipment and weapons may be. in a
var. as before. man will play the main role. Only a soldier who has mm
mastered this equipment. who is loyal to the cause of «nutrient and poasesses
an unshaltable faith in victory. is capable of successfully carrying out the
combat mission and defeating the eneny. IIhis is why the Communist Party
pays constant attention to training the military personnel. to instructing
and indoctrinating the personnel of the Armed Forces, and to the military
patriotic indoctrination of the Soviet people.

The personnel of the Soviet Army and navy are totally dedicated to the cause
of coanunism and have fully mastered military skills.

To safely defend the security and peaceful creative labor of the Soviet
people means to always be ready to carry out one's military duty to the
fatherland. to learn what is necessary for victory in a modern war. and to
be profoundly aware of the class. Just nature of a war in defense of the
socialist fatherland and the cause of cousunism. liberty and independence
of the nations in the socialist community.

"...'i'he Soviet people can be confident." stated Leonid Il'ich Breshnev at

the 25th 0980 Congress, "that the fruits of their creative labor are securely
defended.

"No one should doubt that our party will do everything so that the glorious
Armed Forces of the Soviet Union in the future will possess all of the

necessary means for carrying out their responsible mission of guarding the
peaceful labor of the Soviet people and being a bulwark of universal peace.”o

Quiz Questions

1. How does Marxism-Leninism define the causes and essence of war?

2. What were are Just and why. and what are unjust?

3. What distinguishes local wars from world ones. and what are their
role and place in the plans of the imperialist powers?

h. How is the aggressiveness of modern imperialism manifested?

5. What do the documents of the 25th CPSU Congress state on the
struggle of the Soviet Union and the fraternal socialist countries for
the peace and security of peoples?

27
FOR OPPXCIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3h. The Osmond. Political and Engineer-Technical Personnel. The Political
Bodies. Party and Komaonol Organisations of the Soviet Armed Forces

The Concern of the Conunist Party for the Training of Military
Personnel

Counsnd persoan are the basis and backbone of the Soviet Amy and Navy.
They cenent the ranks of soldiers together, and indoctrinste then in a
spirit of discipline, vigilance. organization and high ideological loyalty.
In peacetime. the co-snders train and indoctrinate their subordinates. and
they thoroughly prepare then for the able and unstinting defense of the
socialist fatherland. During the difficult years of a war. the co-snders
lead' the soldiers and sailors into conhat. and they direct the actions of
the troops. directing their efforts at defeating the enesv.

The Conunist Party and the Soviet govermnt are constantly concerned with
indoctrinating strong. well-trained cousnd. political and engineer-technical
personnel for the Arned Forces. The Soviet cousnd personnel were created,
grew up and tempered along with all the Armed Forces in the fight against

the enemies of Soviet power on the fronts of the Civil Var. "...In building
a new am." said V. I. Lenin. "we should take the co-Ianders only fro- the
people. Only Red officers will have authority among the soldiers and be

able to strengthen socialisa in our arsv. Such an am will he invin-
cihle."2

In the nation. a broad network of military training institutions and courses
was developed for training the cos-anders of the young Red Any.

The party repeatedly carried out party nobilisations. It scnt its best
representatives to the front. it kept track of their growth and provided
complete support. At the heads of the units. ships and fornations were the
organisers of the fighting worker militias. detachments of the Red Guard
as well as soldiers and sailors who had received battle experience during
the period of world Her I. hch day of the fierce struggle against the
Vhite Guards and forcig: interventioniets oromht news of the heroic ac-
tions of the brigades. divisions and armies under the couand of the .
people's military leaders M. V. Prunes. 8. M. Budennyy. K. Ye. Voroshilov.
V. K. Bly'ukher. 8. 8. Vostretsov. P. Ye. Dybenko. A. l. Yegorov. 8. K.
Tinoahenho. H. II. Tukhschsvskiy. I. P. Uborevich. Ya. I". Pabritsius. I. P.
Fed'ko. and I. E. Yakir. Our people fondly rem-her the legendary heroes
of the Civil Var V. I. Chapsyev. 0. I. Kotovskiy. II. A. thhorse. A. Ya.
Parkhomsnko. 8. 0. base. A. o. Zhsleznyakov and others. Books have been
written about than and songs coaposed.

0n the fronts of the Civil Var. the military cos-isssrs. the glorious rep-
resentatives of the beniniat party in the troops. prove thenselves to be
remarkable political leaders of the Red Amy nsssea. The nilitary consis-
aars united the Red Am nasaes. they explained party policy. and aaintained
strict order and discipline in the units. Due to then, the party succeeded

28

POI! OWICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in most offcctively utilising in nilitnry service may of the old experi-
cnced military specialists who voluntarin came over to the side of Soviet
power.

Among the hero cosmissars were Aleksandr Parkhemenko who subsequently be-
came a famous division commander; Nikolav Markin. a sailor of the Baltic
Fleet, and the organizer and cemmissar of the Volga haval Flotilla; Dmitriy
Furmsnov. a talented and courageous fellow fighter of Chapayev; Ivan Case.
a worker from the Putilovskiy Plant. and a conissar of the Putilovskiy
Armored Train imeni V. I. benin; Ivan Konev. subsequently Marshal of the
Soviet Union. a famous military leader of the Great Patriotic War. and
many others.

In the interwar years. the party continued to giVe great attention to the
training of comnand. political and engineer-technical personnel for the

_ Army and Navy. The network of military schools was significantly enlarged.
By the end of 19150. the military schools had 3.6-fold more officer candi-

dates than in 1937. Over this same time. the nunber of students in the
military academies rose by over 2-fold.

During the years of the Great Patriotic "er. the scale of training for com-
mand. political and technical personnel in the Am and navy rose signifi-
cantly. During the time of the war. the military schools trained around

2 million officers who honorably Justified the confidence of the party and
the people. They withstood the severe testing on the battlefields of the
Great Patriotic war.

In the course of this war. the Soviet Armed Forces surpassed the then
strongest army of the capitalist world. the any of fascist Germany. not
only in moral-politic?“ terms and weapons. but also in military art and in
the organizational abilities of the co-Iand personnel.

During the Great Patriotic war. the party and the people developed remark-
able co-nanders who mastered the art of conducting modern combat. and they
brought forward a large group of military leaders who have become famous
both among our people and among the peoples of other countries. Among them
are 0. K. Zhukov. A. M. Vasilevskiy. I. Kh. Begrawan. Ii. F. Vatutin. L. A.
Govorov. A. G. Golovko. A. I. Yeremenko. I. 8. Konev. II. 6. Kusnetsov. R.
Ya. Halinovskiy. K. A. Meretskov. K. S. Moskalenko. F. 8. Oktyabr'skiy. I.
Ye. Petrov. K. K. Fokossovskiy. F. I. Tolbukhin. I. D. Chemakhovskiy.

v. I. Chwkov and may others.

The miltiary councils and political bodies played a prominent role in the
war. The members of the military councils for the fronts. .fleets and
armies and the chiefs of the political bodies included experienced politi-
cal workers who had been in the any prior to the war as well as members of
the party Central Conittee. secretaries of the Union republic cos-unist
parties. the hreykome and obkoms who were sent by the party for carrying
out political work in the Armed Forces. Among them were: L. I. Brezhnev.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. I. Asarov. V. N. nogatkin. M. A. Burmistenho. S. F. Oaladnhev. K. 8.
Orushevoy. I. 8. Orushetshiy. K. A. Ourov. A. A. Yepishev. P. I. Yefimov.

A. 8. Zheltov. A. I. Zaporoshets. It. A. ZyRov. A. P. Kirilenko. M. A. Koslov.
K. V. Kraym/ukov. A. A. Kusnstsov. h. M. Kulakov. I. I. larin. D. 8. Leonov.
D. A. Lestev. V. Ye. Makarov. S. I. Nel'nihov. A. P. Pigurnov. A. M. Pronin.
I. V. Rogov. M. V. Rudakov. A. O. Rytov. z. T. Serdyuk. ll. Ye. Subbotin.

Ie 2s Sunwkov. As Ne Tevcham'. Ks F. Telesln. 0e Re TainOV. 80 8e dhatllov,
I. V. Shikin. T. P. Shtykov. A. S. Chuyanov and many others.

The people and party highly praised the military shill, courage. heroism and
self-sacrifice of the generals. admirals. and officers. hundreds of thou-
sands of them were awarded orders and medals. and 6.187 men received the
title of Hero of the Soviet Union. Many of them. for able leadership of the
troops in combat. were awarded the Orders of Suvorov. Kutusov. Aleksandr

Nevskiy and Bodgan Khmel'nitskiy. and for naval leadership ability. the
Orders of Ushahov and Nakhimov.

For particularly outstanding military leadership. the talented Soviet mili-
tary leaders. Mrs 80 L. A. Oovorov. I. S. Konev. R. Ya. Malinovskiy. K. A.
Meretskov, K. K. Rokossovshiy. S. K. Timoshenko. F. I. Tolbukhin and Gen Arm
A. I. Antonov were awarded the Order of Victory. the highest military order
of the USSR. and Mars 80 A. M. Vasilevskiy and O. K. Zhukov received this
high order twice. The Order of Victory was twice awarded to the Supreme
Comander-in-Chief of the Soviet Armed Forces. Oeneralissimo so I. V. Stalin.

The Order of Victory was awarded to the General Secretary of the CPSU Cen-
tral Comittee. the Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet.
the Chairman of the USSR Defense Council. Mar 30 L. I. Brezhnev, for a
great contribution to the victory of the Soviet people and their Armed
Forces in the Great Patriotic Var. for outstanding achievements in strength-
ening the defense capability of the nation. for elaborating and consistently
carrying out the peaceful foreign policy of the Soviet state which has safe-
ly ensured the development of the country under peacetime conditions.

The unbounded loyalty of the comand. political and technical personnel

in the Army and [levy to the party and their motherland. their high military
training and exceptional organising abilities were one of the most import-
ant conditions for the victory won by the Soviet people and their Armed
Forces over fascist Germany and imperialist Japan.

Military Academies and Schools-The Forge of Officer Personnel

The couanders, political workers. military engineers and specialists are
trained for the Soviet Armed Forces by the military academies. the higher
military schools. the military institutes. the military faculties and
chairs under civilian ms... and the training and retraining courses for
officer personnel. we have superior military col-hand. military political,
military aviation. naval. military engineer and other schools. They all
possess modern training and laboratory equipment and well developed field

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and sports facilities. The faculty of the nilitary schools has high theo-
retical and practical training.

All the training of ailitary personnel is aimed at developing their qualities
which both fully correspond to the general demands of the party on the
leadership personnel of the Soviet state as well as those needed in ailitary
affairs. These qualities are conuniat conviction, total loyalty to the
party and the people. high discipline and efficiency. initiative and inde-
pcndencc. conned will and organisational capacities. high professional and
physical training. general and military-technical culture. and the ability
to train and indoctrinate subordinates.

In order to fully saster these qualities and to be ready to carry out the
responsible and difficult tasks of Am and navy service, the Soviet offi-
cers sacredly carry out Lenin's admonish-ant of learning military affairs

truly.

The Soviet state provides our youth with all opportunities to receive a
military education and to become officers in the valorous Armed Forces.

Esch soldier and sailor. sergeant and petty officer who has a secondary edu-
cation. and each young man who has successfully completed a secondary school.
technical school or vocational-technical school can be admitted to a lili-
tary school. and become an officer after completing it.

The combined-am. tank. artillery. air defense, military-engineer. chemical
defense and other higher nilitary schools admit young men from the civilian
youth and soldiers. sailors. sergeants. petty officers. and warrant officers
["praporshchik” and ”michman") of all the branches of forces who have a
secondary education. in good health and who have successfully passed the
competitive entrance exams. 'me age of those admitted is from 11 to 21 years
as of 1 September of the year of admission to the school.

Kcnsonol Isenbers who are reconsended for training by the Komsonol raykoms

and gorkons are given preference in admission among other candidates who
haVe received the same grades on the exam.

Only Konsonol neubers and menbers and candidate nembers of the CPS” are
admitted to the military political schools.

The entrance exams to the military schools are held for the curriculum of
a secoadary school.

In line with the specific nature of the higher military schools. entrance
exams are held only for general education subjects. Candidates hon among
civilian youth. in addition. are tested for physical training on a level
of the requirenents for the individual standards of the cm 8888 [Ready
for Labor and Defense of the USSR] complex.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P03 OWICIM. USE ONLY

Civilian youth desiring to he admitted to military schools should submit
applications to the rayon (city) ailitary cosmissariat at their residence
or directly to the chief of the military school.

Those who complete silitary schools are awarded the rank of lieutenant and
are presented with a chest insignia and a national diploma.

Soviet Conanders. Political workers. Engineers and Technicians--
loyal Sons of Their People

The soviet officer corps is node up of worthy representatives of the working
class. the kolhhot peasantry and the people's intelligentsia. from all
nations and nationalities of our country. They express the interests of

the workers. they actively fight for carrying out the Deninist policy of

the Conunist Party and the Soviet government. and have won universal re-
spect and honor.

The Cot-mist Party has siVen great significance to the leadership of national
defense and the Arned Forces. The General secretary of the CPSU Central Con-
nittce. the Chairman of the Presidiun of the 0881i 8uprene Soviet. liar EU

1.. I. Brezhnev. is the chairman of the 088R Defense Council. Thus. he car-
ries out party. state and Iilitary leadership of the nation.

Prominent party and state figures. and talented ailitary leaders who have
great practical and military experience have been proaoted to the leading
positions in the Med Forces.

The USSR minister of defense is Mar 80 Dnitriy Pedorovich Ustinov. He was
born in 1908 in Samara (now the city of Kuybyshev) into a worker family.

He has been a umber of the CPBU since 1927. In 1927 he completed a
vocational-technical school and worked as a machinist. After completing
the Military Mechanical Institute in 1935. he worked as a derisn engineer
in a scientific research institute. and later as the deputy chief designer
and plant director. In l9bl-19S3. D. P. Ustinow was the people's conissar
of ordnance and later the USSR minister of ordnance. In 19“. he was
awarded the military rank of Colonel General uncaring-Technical Service.
In 1953-1957. he was the USSR minister of the defense industry. From

1957 through 1965. he was the deputy and then the first deputy chairasn

of the USSR Council of Ministers and the chairman of the USSR Higher Coun-
cil of the National Renew. In 1965-1976. he was the secretary of the
CPSU Central Committee. In 1965-1966. he was a candidate member-of the
Presidium of the CPS!) Central Cos-ittee. Since 1966. a candidate menber of
the Politburo of the 0980 Central Cssnittee. and in March 1976. was elected
a member of the Politburo of the CPSU Central Codttee. he is a deputy of
the 0883 Supreas Soviet.

For outstanding achievements in organising the production and develop-tent
of new types of weaponry. D. !. Ustinow was twice awarded the title of hero
of Socistliat Labor (in 1952 and 1961). and he is the winner of the state
Price.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0’. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mm- m N. V. Ogsrhov in the chief of the Generel Bteff of the 088R Aresd
Vorcen end the neon first deputy minister of defense: Her BU V. 0. Kulikov
is the 088R first deputy minister of defense; her 80 B. L. aokolov is the
USSR first deputy minister of defense. The uses deputy ministers of de-
fense ere Gen Are V. P. Tolubko. co-ender-in-chief of the Stretegic his-
eile Forces. Oen Are I. o. Pevlowskiy. co-ender-in-ohief of the Ground
forces. Mer Avn A. l. Koldunov. conender-in—cbief of the hetionel Air
Defense Il‘roops. Chief Her Avn P. 8. Autehhov. conender-in-chief of the
Air Force. Adm Flt SO 8. O. Oorshkov. co-ender-in-cbief of the levy.

They ere ell experienced eilitery leeders who distinguished theeselves in
bettlcs for the honor. liberty end independence of our notherlend. end

they node e significent contribution to the orgenisetion end develop-set
of the‘Areed Forces.

The Soviet people ere proud of the officer personnel of their Areed Forced,
end see in then not only highly skilled nilitery specielists. but eleo un-
flogging executors of the policy of the Columnist Perty end Soviet govern-
nent in the Am end levy.

V. l. Lenin pointed out thet the perty should fill conend positions with
people who ere “pore developed. more ewere end with firner spirit."22 The
officer corps of our Army end Nevy consists precisely of such people. Over
90 percent of the officer personnel et present is conunists end Koesoeol
members. More then one-half the officers beve e higher eilitery end spe-
ciel nilitery educetion. end in certein breaches of forces virtuelly ell
do. Engineers end techniciens fill up to ks percent of the officer posi-
tions in the Anny end levy.

A distinguishing feeture of the officer corps in the USSR Arled forces is
its youth. Our young officers possess such quelities es ebullient energy,
conbet dering. e greet reserve of knowledge end pMeicel endurence. They
confidently trein end indoctrinete their subordinetes. end elong with ex-
perienced personnel ere thet elloy which provides the necessery strength
to the complex nilitery orgenisn.

As e whole the Soviet Armed Forces ere e monolithic collective where the
norel end politicel soliderity end the unity of goels end interests eeong
the 'generele. ednirels. officers. werrent officers. sergeents. petty offi-
cers. soldiers end seilors ere indestructible.

A significent portion of the eilitery personnel is nede up of politicel
workers including chiefs of politicel bodies. deputy regieentel. ship end
subunit connenders:.for politicel effeirs. propegendists of the units end
fornetions, end secreteries of the perty end Koesoeol orgenisetions. They
elso heve high politicel. nilitery. generel end technicel treining. "The
present politicel worker in the em,” wrote L. I. Brezhnev. "is e person
eround who‘s the people ere grouped. he thoroughly knows their Ioods. needs.
hopes end dreens, end he leeds the: to self-secrifice end e feet. And if

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL "8!! ONLY

it is considered that the norsls of the troops hes elweye been considered
the nest inportent fector in the strength of the troops. then precisely

the politicsl worker hes been entrusted with the sherpest weepon during wer-
tine. He tempers heerts end souls. end without this neither tenks. cennons
nor eircreft would bring us victory."23

The Soviet tic-senders end chiefs ere surrounded with effection end cere
from the perty end the people. Meny officers. generels. ednirsls end
nershels hove been elected deputies of the USSR Supreme Soviet. end the
Union republic supreme soviets. end thousands of servioenen ere deputies
in the locel soviets. The nest neritorious end worthieet em communists
have been elected to the CPSU Centrel Ccuittee end the centrel couittees
of the Union republic conunist pertties. end to the locel perty bodies.

The isnediete sssistents of the officers. the werrent officers. pley e neJor
role in the Armed Forces. The institution of werrent officers wee intro-
duced by the Ukese of the Presidius of the USSR Suprene Soviet of 18 Novenber
1971. This is s new detechnent of professionel co-endsrs which closely
complements the officer corps.

The renk of werrent officer existed in the old Russien em for Junior
.officer personnel. It wes introduced by Peter the First wss initielly pre-
sented to the unit stenderdbeerers. The word "werrent officer " ["preporsh-
chik”] derives from the Old Russien "prepor" or "stenderd." The newel wer-
rsnt officer of "nichnn" wee the first officer reel: in the Ruseien levy.

At present the werrent officers in the Soviet Arned Forces ere highly skilled
specielists end nesters of their Job. The rent of werrent officer cen be
presented to soldiers. seilore, sergeents end petty officers who heve served
their reguler ective service.

They con-end pletoons end equel subunits. they perforn the duties of tech-
niciens end supply end edninistretive specialists. they work in the aili-
tery conisseriets. end so forth.

The sergeents end petty officers ere the lergest group of Soviet couenders.
During the yeers of the Greet Petriotic Her. the sergeents end petty offi-
cers, elong with the soldiers end seilors. brevely endured the herdships
end deprivetions of life on the front. they led the sounds. crews end teens
into conbet. end set en exe-ple of brevsry. velor end eilitery skill for
their subordinetss. The Soviet notherlend hes highly regerded their lili-
tery service. Tens of thousends of sergeents end petty officers hove re-
ceived orders end nedels of the 0888, end eround 2,800 men received the
title of hero of the Soviet Union. These include Bets )4. Yegorov end )4.
Kenteriys who reised the Victory Sennsr over Berlin. The squed couender

8r Sgt It. A. Zeletow. Pfc u. T. Pitenin end Sr Sgt K. K. Shevchsnko were
the first winners of the Order of Glory of ell three degrees.

3’:

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
POI! ONIOIAI. US! ONLY

'rhe nnrucnntn nnd petty officers are the inediate superiors of the sol-
dicrn and nnilors. and they constantly instruct and indoctrinate their
subordinates. The character of the young soldier is forged under their in-
fluence. and the qualities needed for victory in battle are developed.

In comnnding squads. teens. crovs and battle stations. the sergeants and
petty officers naintain exemplary order and set an emple of flawless
service for their subordinates. For the exemplary fulfill-ent'of military

duty. the most outstanding sergeants and petty officers. like @he officers.
are awarded high governmental decorations in peacetime.

Political Bodies. Party and Konomol Organisations of the Soviet
Armed Forces

The CPSU devotes a great deal of attention to ilproving the political aware-

ness of the soldiers. to their ideological tempering. and to developing their
high combat moral qualities.

Party political work in the USSR Armed Forces is directed by the CPSU Central
Connittee through the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Am and navy.
The prominent political worker. Gen Ara Aleksey Alekseyevich Yepishev. is
the chief of the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and levy.

In the organisation and execution of ideological and political indoctrina-
tion of the servicemen. a leading role is played by the political bodies
and the Am and levy party organizations. Created upon the instructions
of V. I. Lenin. the political bodies of the Soviet Armed Forces have been
and renain the silitant party bodies in the Arm and Navy. Together with
the party organizations and in unity with the couanders. they steadfastly
carry out the policy of the Coammist Party in strengthening the combat
night of the troops.—

Party political work in the troops and fleets is organized and led by the
political directorates of the services of the Armed Forces. the districts.
troop groups and fleets. They direct the activities of the political de-
partnents of the fomtions. the party and Komsomol organizations as well
as the deputy unit and ship co-anders for political affairs.

As always. the cosmunists and Komsuol members are the main support for the

comanders and political workers in carrying out all the lissions confront-
ing the Amy and Navy.

The party amortisation of the Soviet Amy and navy represent a fighting
detachment of the 0P9! which is closely rallied around its Lcninist Central
Comittee. The conunists and Komsomol members col-prise over 90 percent of
the personnel in the Armed Forces. This is the strength of our Amy and
llavy. the basis for the high political and noral state of the troops. and

a guarantee for successmlly carrying out the missions of ensuring the se-
curity of the motherland.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
During the period of the foreign military intervention and the Civil "er.
the party Central Cosmittee sent over 300.000 eesmunists to the Red Army.

During the years of the Great Patriotic war. the con-unists were in the
aunt crucial arses of battle and by their personal example led the soldiers
to defeat the enemy. The soldiers who most distinguished themselves in
combat endeavored to link their life to the party. Often party docuents
were presented to young conmmnists by the chiefs of the political bodies
directly on the battlefield.

By the end of the Great Patriotic "er. the Am and Navy had some 3.325.000
columnists. or 60 percent of the entire party membership. The commists
were that great force which inspired the men to a heroic struggle against
the Nazi invaders. .

At present party organisations and party groups exist in companies end in
the equivalent subunits.

The primary party organizations of the Am and Navy are created by the
appropriate political departments in the regiments. detached units (bat-
talions. companies. batteries. squadrons end equivalent subunits). and on
ships.

Hithin the primary party organisations. in the battalions. squadrons. the
departments of ships and detached-subunits of units (ships). with three or

more party members. party organisations can be set up which are the equiva-
lent of shop organizations.

within the party organizations of the subunits as well as within the pri-
mary party organisations. party groups can be set up for the companies.
batteries. flights, detachments, on small ships. in platoons. in aircraft
crews. groups end tens.

The army party organizations are confronted with great and responsible tasks.
These include: Ensuring the execution of party policy. indoctrinating the
men in a spirit of the ideas of Harxism-Ianinism. a love for the motherland
and a hate for the enemies of socialism. being concerned with strengthening
military discipline. and mobilizing the personnel to successfully carry out
the tasks of military and political training and to flawlessly perform ons's
military duty.

The party organisations direct the Komsomol orgemizations and are concerned
with the political and military indoctrination of the Komsomol members.
Party leadership over the Komsomol is the source of its strength and cre-
etiwe activeness.

The Kansanol organisations of the Army and levy are a component part of
the Komsomol. In the Armed Forces. the primary Komsomol organisations are
set by the political departments.

36

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

In their activities. the Amy Konsomol organisations are led by the Kolsolol
ny-Laws. and operate on the basis of the Instructions to the xolsoaol or-
ganizations in the Soviet Army and Navy under the direct leadership of the
political bodies. the deputy comanders for political affairs and the party
organi sat ions .

The primary Konsonol organizations in the Amy and Navy are set up in the

regiments. detached battalions. squadrons. coapanies. batteries and equiv-
alent subunits.

within a primary Konsomol organisation. Koasouol groups may be organised in
platoons. crews. air detacMents. squads. teens and crews.

ll‘he Komsomol organizations of the Army and Navy have a great role to play in
the ideological strengthening of the men. and in indoctrinating in the.
courage. tenacity. endurance. discipline and an improving or military skills.

Quiz Questions

1. How did our party and V. I. Lenin recruit and indoctrinate cosuand
personnel for the young Red Anny?

2. What role did the comand and political personnel of the Armed
Forces play in the battles to defend the Soviet state?

3. What do the present comand. political and engineer-technical
personnel of the Soviet Am and Navy presently represent?

lo. Hhat work is carried out by the co-anders and political workers
to ensure the security of our socialist motherland?

5. "hot tasks are carried out by the political bodies. the party and
Komsomol organizations of the Soviet Army and navy?

roomnowss
lv..I. Lenin. ”Polo. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Collected works]. Vol 17, p 190.
2ms” Vol 31. p 122.

3The word "institution" and "corps" here designate the aggregate of persons
in a definite specialty or professional affiliation.

“”Dekrety Sovetskoy Vlasti" [Decrees of Soviet Power], Vol 1. Moscow. 1957.
P 356.

5v. I. Lenin. "Poln. Sobr. Soch.," Vol 3i. p 30h.

Wagering XXV S”yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress]. Moscow.
19? . p 7 ~

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7v. I. Lenin. ”Poln. 80hr. 80ch.." Vol 35, p 216.
°ma.. Vol be. p Is.

91.. g. Brezhnev. ”Malaya anlya" [nu Small Earth]. Moscow. Politizdat,
197 v P 22‘

”v. I. Lenin. "Poln. Bohr. Soch.." Vol ho, p also.
”Ibid.. p 76.

”M. I. Kalinin. ”0 Kmmisticheskon Vospitanii i Voinskon Dolge" [On
Commist Indoctrination and Military Duty]. Moscow, 1967, p 529.

13v. I. Lenin, ”Poln. 80hr. Soch.," Vol 30, p 85.

“mater-1m xxv 8"yezda me," p 30.

15NATO is the abbreviation for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization which
was set up in 19109 by the imperialists. This is an aggressive military

bloc directed against the USSR and the other socialist countries and
against the world comunist novenent and the national liberation struggle

of peoples .

‘51.. I. Brezhnev, "Inninskin Kurson" [up a Lsninist Course], Vol h, Moscow.
1975. P 107.

”v. IfLenin, "Poln. Sobr. Boch.." Vol 32, p 79.
"mm, Vol 38. p 331.

-”"Materialy XXV 8"yezda ms," 1) 8.

29mm;? p 83.

“y. I. L'enin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch.," Vol 37, p 200.
"ma” Vol _39, p 208.

”I... I. Brezhnev. "Malaya Zenlya," p 215.

cm 2: cm MILITARY WNOIS OF THE USSR ARMED FORCES [pp 61-62]
[Excerpt] The regulations of the USSR Arled Forces are a compendium of laws
dealing with military service and the basis for the instruction and indoc-

trination of the personnel. 'lhey define the rights and duties or'the serv-
ice-en and the relationships between then.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE OllLY
IOR. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The regulations strictly and precisely regulate all aspects of daily routine
and life or the troops. and provide exhaustive instructions on the questions
of maintaining firm military discipline. organisation and proper order in
the troops.

A start to the creation of Soviet military regulations was made by the intro-
duction of the ”Service Booklet of the Red Army-an" in the autumn of 1918.

It contained questions of the nsrss Constitution. the Decree on the Creation
of the Red Am. the text of the Solemn Promise of the Red Amman. and

gave the concepts of military tactics and the basic obligations of the sol-
diers and comanders.

Considering the great role of the regulations in the organisational develop-
ment of the Red Army, V. I. Lenin took a direct part in their elaboration.

The All-Russian Central Executive Comittee on 29 November 1918 approved
the Internal Service Regulations and the Garrison Service Regulations. In
the beginning of 1919. the Field Manual (Part 1 "Maneuver Rarfara”) and
the Drilling and Disciplinary Regulations were approved. Subsequently the
contents or these regulations were amended and supplemented. and after the
end of the Civil her they were significantly revised.

The old regulations were revised and new ones creatu-d with the development
of the Soviet Armed Forces in keeping with the rece.’.ving of new types of
weapons and military equipment in the troops, changes in the organisations.
structure of the subunits. units and formations, the acquiring of experi-

ence in the training and indoctrination of personnel. and also the experi-
ence of conducting combat.

The current regulations consider and have creatively generalized the many
years of experience in the organizational development of the Soviet Armed
Forces and the experience of the Great Patriotic Var. They reflect the

present development level of military affairs achieved as a result of the

military-technical revolution, as vell as the changes which have occurred
in military affairs in recent years.

The provisions of the regulations are closely linked to the moral princi-
pl ~r of the moral code of a builder of conunism.

The general military regulations include the Internal Service Regulations.
the Disciplinary Reginationo. the Garrison and Guard Service Regulations
and the Drilling Regulations. Since the first three regulations deal with
the principles of military order, military discipline and the service of
the troops. they have been approved by ukases of the Presidium of the
USSR Supreme Soviet. The Drilling Regulations of the USSR Armed Forces
vere put into effect by an order of the USSR minister of defense.

The provisions of the general military regulations are binding for all
servicemen of the units, ships and subunits of the Soviet Arm. the Ravy
and the Border and Interior Troops.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cm 3: TACTICAL mmno [p 87)

ll. The Bases of the Coahat and Organisation of a Motorised Rifle Squad,
Platoon and Conpany

The Essence of Tactics

[neerpt] Tactics are the teachings about oenbat. They encompass the
theory and practice of the preparations. organisation and conduct of cmhat
by the subunits and units of all the branches of forces and services or the
Armed Forces. Tactics require high nilitary skills from the hen. the sub-
units and the units. the full utilisation of the combat capabilities or
personal weapons as well as the weapons and equipnent in the subunits and
units. and great diversity and creative use of the procedures and methods
of combat. ‘

Victory in conbat is the criterion for the correctness of tactics. The

higher the art of tactics and the more diverse the procedures and actions
which the sen. the subunits and the units have asstered. the greater the
opportunities for victory. Any conbat begins. is carried out and termin-
ates with tactical procedures. Tactical training in the USSR med Forces
is a nost important sthect in the training of the personnel and it brings
together all the subjects of nilitary training.

A profound knowledge of tactics and an ability to act in combat and sake
best use of one's weapons and equipment will nake it possible for the sol-
diers to achieve victories over a strong enew.

cm In Huron, mum (p 1311

[Excerpt] Weapon training is carried out for the purpose or instructing

the personnel in the skillful use of their weapons under various coabat
conditions.

weapon training for young persons undergoing basic military training in-
cludes the study of the following sections: Principles of shooting; the
design or weapons; the procedures and rules of firing; throwing hand
grenades; observation in conbat and detenining distances.

The principles or shooting deal with the phenonenon of a shot as well as
the features of the hullet's flight through the air. This must be learned
{or nastering the firing rules and for the sauna use or weapons to hit
the eneay in combat.

The design or weapons includes a study of the combat capabilities. purpose
and design or the weapon. This is essential to know for correct handling

of weapons. their safekeeping and ensuring dependable operation in firing
under various conditions.

no

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A study of the procedures and rules of firing is essential in order to

learn hov to accurately hit mobile. bobbing and moving isolated and group
targets at various distances from various positions. and with diverse con-
ditions of terrain. weather, season and time of day.

A study or the throving of hand grenades is aimed at learning to throw
hand grenades from various positions at different targets under any condi-
tions vhich develop in combat, particularly in a close engaging of the enesy.

A study or observation in combat and determining distances is carried out
for developing skills in observing the anew. detecting targets. accurately
determining distances to them. correctly choosing the sight setting and the

point or aim, as well as for correcting tiring and carrying out a fire task
in the shortest time.

cuurrm s: DRILL mmmo [p 1951

[Excerpt] Drill training is one of the most important subJects for mili-
tary instruction and indoctrination. It is aimed at developing the soldiers
(sailors) military bearing, alertness. preciseness. discipline. and the able
and rapid execution of individual drilling procedures and coordinated ac-
tions as part of a subunit. Drill training includes: Individual drill in-
struction without weapons and with weapons° drill work of the squads (crews
and teams), platoons. companies (batteriess. battalions and regiments dur-
ing actions on foot and mounted; inspection parades of the subunits and
units. as veil as the methods for the movement or servicemen on the battle-
field.

Drill training is carried out during training time provided by the schedule
of exercises. This is also improved during exercises involving tactical.
weapons and plwsical training, in all other exercises. in formations and
movements and in daily life.

CIIAPI'ER 6: MILITARY mrocm [p 2111

[Excerpt] Military topography is a special military discipline. It examines
the methods for studying the terrain. position finding and other questions
involved with evaluating the terrain in the interests or troop combat. and

teaches the use of topographic maps and aerial photographs for carrying
out various combat missions.

A study or military topography is of important significance in preparing
the troops for practical actions in combat, and helps to develop such im-

portant qualities as vatchmlness. accuracy. and the ability to analyze the
results of an observation and draw conclusions on the influence of the ter-

rain on carrying out the combat mission.

bl

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The ability to find one's position and to move along not directions under
any conditions and to freely use a topographic map is essential for service-
men in different specialties. This is essential for the paratrooper who

is to carry out a combat mission in the anew rear. a scout operating on
snow territory. a sapper who is blowing up bridges in anew positions. an
observer who is spotting enelv weapons. s motorised rifleman. artillery and
tank troops. as well as men of other branches of forces in carrying out
combat missions.

cm-m 7: CIVIL omen [pp 21.2.2991
51. Civil Defense at a national neonomic Installation (School)

[Text] The USSR Armed Forces are the chief defender of the victories of
_aocialism. Along with the decisive actions of the Armed Forces to repel
an attack and defeat the new. of enormous significance is the advance
preparation of the entire population and the national economy to defend
themselves against weapons of mass destruction. A special role is en-
trusted to the 038}! Civil Defense [CD] in carrying out this mission.

The Missions of Civil Defense

Civil Defense is a component part of the system of statewide defense mess-
ures carried out in peacetime and wartime for the purposes of protecting
the population and the national economy against weapons of mass destruction
and other enemy means of attack. as well as for carrying out rescue and
ismediate emergency reconstruction work [SHAVE] in the strike areas.

The missions of CD are divided into three groups.

The first group includes the missions of protecting the population. These
are solved by the carrying out of a series of measures. the basic ones

being:

a) Providing protection for the population in protective shelters; disper-
sal and evacuation of the population from the cities into the suburban zone;

b) Supplying the population with individual protective devices and train-
ing the population in the methods and means of defense;

c) warning the population of the threat of an anew attack and the use of
weapons of mass destruction by the anew.

The second group of tasks includes measures aimed at ensuring the stable
operation of national economic installations under wartime conditions.

The third group of tasks includes the carrying out of SNAVR in the strike
areas (areas of contamination).

h2

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

'{he Organisation of Civil Defense at a national Economic Installation
school

In cities and stion points. CD is organised by the CD chief. The chair-
man of the city rayon or settlement) executive ccsmittee of the soviets is
the CD chief of the city (rayon or settluent).

The on system of the city (rayon or settlement) includes the national eco-
nomic installations (plants. factories. facilities. holhhoses. sovhhoses
and schools). The director of the enterprise. the leader of the holkhot.
sovhhos. institution or school is the CD chief of the national economic in-
stallation. lie bears full responsibility for the organisation. state and
constant readiness of on at the installation assigned to him.

Por ensuring the fulfillment of the CD measures. a CD staff and services
are organised at the installation. and these organise and execute their vorh
on the basis of the decisions of the installation CD chief. In addition.

an evacuation omission is created under the installation CD chief.

The work of the co staff is headed by a chief of ma. h'. is the deputy
CD chief at the installation and bears mn responsibility for the carrying
out of the tasks entrusted to the staff.

Usually at an installation. the following services are organised: Co-unica—
tions. shelters. radiation and chemical defense. medical. emergency-technical.
firefighting. the maintaining of public order. and so forth.

For the direct implantation of the CD measures and for carrying out slum.
at all national economic installations. paramilitary co formations are set
up. The masher and site of the installation formations depend upon the
scale of production and the nuber of employees.

At industrial enterprises. general-purpose formations and formations of the
CD services are set up. Among the former are the composite. rescue detach-
ments (teams and groups); the latter includes the co-unicatione grows
(units). the shelter servicing coups (units). the firefighting teams. the
emergency technical teams (groups). the radiological decontamination teams
(groups), the detachments of medical teams (medical teams). the teams (groups)
for naintainine public order. and so forth.

The holhhoses and sovhhoses can set up the same teams as the industrial
enterprises. as vell as teens for protecting animals and plants.

In the secondary schools, depending upon the specialty of instruction. the
number of faculty and students. and also the availability of training fa-
cilities. it is possible to organize: Rescue team or groups. reconnais-
snnce groups and radiation and chemical observation posts. medical stations.
groups for the protection of public order. co-unications units. firefight-
in; units. and shelter servicing units. These are manned by the instructors.
_service personnel and the students.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OHIO!“ US! ONLY

The rescue team (groups) are the basic CD formations at an installation.
They are designed for locating injured persons. rsnoving then from under
rubble and evacuation fron the strike areas; clearing sway rubble; digging

out buried shelters; providing nedical first aid to injured persons and
evacuation of then to medical facilities.

The fornations of the services carry out special measures (reconnaissance.
radiological decontamination. providing of medical aid. the servicing of
shelters. the protecting of public order and so forth) during rescue work.

and they also reinforce and support the actions of the general purpose
formations.

Quin Questions

1. What is civil defense and what tasks does it carry out?
2. now is civil defense organized at a national economic installation
(at a school)?

3. what formations are set up at an installation and what are their
missions?

52. Characteristics of Weapons of Mass Destruction in the Armies of the
Imperialist States

The sodern weapons of mass destruction in the armies of the imperialist
states include nuclear. chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons.
They are capable of causing injury to a large number of persons and sninals
over vast territories in a brief time. Nuclear weapons. in addition. cause
the destruction of buildings. installations and other objects.

The lsture of the Destructive factors of a Nuclear Explosion. the
Strike Area and Zones of Radioactive Contamination

A nuclear weapon is one where the destructive action is based upon the use -
of the energy within the nucleus which is instantaneously released in a
nuclear explosion. The power of the nuclear charges is usually expressed

in a TNT equivalent. that is. the quantity of the conventional 'explosive,

the detonating of which releases as much energy as would be released in
detonating the iven nuclear snunition. This is measured in tens. hundreds.
thousands (kilo and millions (megs) of tons.

In the armies of the imperialist states. missiles (the basic scans of making
nuclear strikes). aviation and artillery are the basic means for delivering
nuclear a-unition to targets. lioreover nuclear landmines can be used.
Nuclear explosions are carried out in the air at varying altitudes. at the

earth's (water's) surface and underground (underwater). In accord with this.
nuclear explosion are usually divided into high-altitude. sir. ground-level

lab

1’01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OWICIM. USE ONLY

(water-level) and underground (underwater). The point at which the explo-
oion occurred is called the center. and its projection on the surface of
the ground (water) is the epicenter of the nuclear explosion.

A nuclear explosion is capable of knocking out unprotected persona. exposed
equipment. facilities and various nateriel at a significant distance. The
basic destructive factors are: The shock wave. light radiation. penetrating
radiation and radioactive contamination.

The shock me is the basic destructive factor of a nuclear explosion, since
a majority of the destruction and damage to installations and buildings as
well as human casualties are caused. as a rule. by it.

The source of the shock wave is the area of great compression for-ed in the
center of the explosion. the pressure in which during the first instants
reaches billions of atmospheres. The greatly compressed incandescent gases.
in expanding rapidly. transmit the pressure to adjacent layers of the air.
compressing and heating them. and they. in turn, effect the subsequent
layers. As a result a high pressure zone spreads at a supersonic speed in
all directions from the explosion center. The leading edge of the compres-
sed layer of air is called the frent of the shock vave.

The degree of damage caused by the shock wave to people and various objects
depends primarily upon the power and type of explosion. as well as upon the
distance at which the explosion occurred. the topograpw and the position
of objects on it.

The destructive action of the shock wave is characterised by the overpressure
value. The overpressure is the difference between the nor-a1 atmospheric
pressure ahead of the wave's front and the naxirnna pressure in the front of
the shock wave. This is neasured in nevtons per square meter (ll/a'). This
unit of pressure is called a pascal (Pa). 1 l/I’Il Pa.

With an overpressure of 20-350 hilopaacals. unprotected people can sustain
light injuries (light contusions and bruises); if unprotected persons are
exposed to a shock wave with an overpressure of h0-60 kilopascals. then
injuries of medium severity are observed. including: boss of consciousness.
impairment of the organs of hearing. severe dislocations of extremities.
hemorrhaging from the nose and ears. Severe injuries occur with an over-
pressure above 60 kilopaecals and are characterised by severe contusions of
the entire organism. fractures of extremities. and injury to internal organs.
Extremely severe injuries are observed vith an overpressure of 100 kilo-
pascals. and can often lead to death.

The speed of the shock wave's spread depends upon the air pressure in its
front; with an increase in the distance from the place of the explosion.
this drops rapidly. Thus, with the explosion of anunition with a power

of 20.000 tons. the shock vave travels 1 km in 2 seconds. 2 In in 5 seconds.
and 3 km in 8 seconds. Over this time a person vho has seen the explosion
can take shelter and thereby reduce the probability of injury fron the shock
wave or completely escape it.

1:5
roe onrcm. use om:
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Light radiation is the flux of radth energy including ultraviolet. visible
and infrared rays. Its source is the fireball which consists of incandescent
products of the explosion and incandescent air. Light radiation lasts up to
20 seconds depending upon the power of the nuclear explosion. however its

strength is such that. regardless of the briefness. it is capable of causing

burns on exposed areas of the body. inJuring eyes. charring or igniting various
aaterials and causing fires. Its spread is virtually instantaneous.

Four degrees of burns are distinguished. First degree burns are character-
ized by the foraation of redness. swelling and edema of the skin; second
degree burns by the formation of blisters; third degree by the‘ necrosis of
the skin and the foraation of ulcers; fourth degree by the necrosis of not
only the skin. but also the deep-lying tissues as well as the carhonisation
cf the exposed parts of the body.

Light radiation does not penetrate through nontransparent materials. and
for this reason aw obstacle capable of creating a shadow provides protec-
tion against direct exposure to light radiation and excludes burns. The
light radiation is significantly attenuated in dusty (snow) air. in fog.
rain or a snowfall.

The third destructive factor is penetrating radiation. This is the flux of
genus rays and neutrons which spread out in all directions from the nuclear
explosion. This radiation lasts 10-15 seconds.

In passing through any medium. the effect of penetrating radiation is re-
duced. The attenuating action of the material is usually characterised by
the half-talus thickness. that is. the thickness of a material which re-
duces the radiation by 2-fold in passing through it. For ens-pie, the in-
tensity of gal-a rays is attenuated by 2-fold hy the following materials:
Steel 2.8 on thick. 10 on of concrete. 1'. ca of dirt. and 30 CI of wood.

Open and particularly covered slot trenches reduce the effect of penetrating
radiation, while radiation shelters virtually provide complete protection

against it.

In passing through living tissue. gens radiation and neutrons ionise the
stone and aolecules comprising the cells. Under the influence of ionisa-
tion. biological processes occur in the organiaa and these lead to a dis-
ruption of the vital functions of individual organs and to the developent
of radiation sickness.

The fourth injurious factor is radioactive contamination. The basic sources
of radioactive contamination are the fission products of the nuclear charge

and the radioactive isotopes toned as a result of the effect of neutrons on
materials from which the nuclear ununition has been manufactured as well as
on certain elements which asks up the soil in the region of the explosion.

h6 ._.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a ground-level nuclear explosion, the fireball touches the ground.
Munnnn or vaporized ground are drawn into it and are lifted upwards. Tn
INK)IInn off. the vapors of the fission products and the ground condense on
solid particles. A radioactive cloud is formed. This rises many kilometers

in altitude. and then at a speed of 15-100 km per hour travels in the direc-
tion of the wind.

The radioactive particles. in falling out of the cloud onto the ground. form
a zone of radioactiVe contamination (the track). the length of vhich can
reach several hundred kilometers. here the terrain. buildings. structures.

planted areas. bodies of water. and so forth as well as the air are con-
taminated.

Radioactive substances represent the greatest danger in the first hours after
fallout. since at this moment their activeness is the highest. Then this

declines. initially rapidly. and then ever more slowly, and finally reaches
insignificant values after several days.

Persons and animals who hsVe been trapped in contaminated regions are ex-
posed to external radiation as well as internal. that is. with the ingestiOn
of radioactive substances into the organism with food. vater and air. This
can lead. as with exposure to penetrating radiation. to radiation sickness.

Electromagnetic fields occur in a nuclear explosion. This phenomenon is
termed an electromagnetic pulse. This leads to a change in the ionization
of the atmosphere. As a result the operation of radio and radar equipment
may be disrupted.

Protective structures are the most reliable means of defense against all
the inJurious factors of a nuclear explosion.

In the field it is essential to take shelter behind strong local objects.
the back sides of elevations. and use terrain folds. Here it is recommended
that if the explosion has caught one in an exposed area and there are no
shelters nearby (2-3 meters). one should quickly lie face down on the ground
with one's fee: facing the explosion. raise the collar on one's clothing.
with one's arma under oneself and remain immobile until the shock vave has
passed.

In working in contaminated areas for protecting the respirrtogy organs. eyes
and exposed areas of the body against radioactive substances. individual
protective gear is used ( as masks. respirators. fabric dust masks and
gauze and cotton bandages . as well as equipment for protecting the skin.

Characteristics of the Nuclear Strike Area

The nuclear strike area is the territory which has been directly subjected
to all the injurious factors of a nuclear explosion. It is characterized
by the mass destruction of buildings. installations. by rubble. by failures
in the utility networks. by fires. radioactive contamination and significant
casualties among the population.

h?
roe omcm use our
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

The size of the area is larger the stronger the nuclear explosion. The
nature of the destruction in the area depends slso upon the strength or the
buildings and structures. the nuber of floors and the developaent density.

As the external li-it oi‘ the nuclear strike area one uses a hypothetical
line on the terrain drawn at a distance fro- the explosion epicenter (center)
where the amount or the shock wave overpressure equals lo hilopascale.

The nuclear strike area is conditionally divided into zones or areas with
approxiuteLv the same type of destruction.

The sons of couplets deemed-ton includes the territory which is exposed
to a shock vave with an overpressure (at the exterior boundary) of over

50 hilopascals. here all civil and industrial buildings will be coapletely
destroyed. as well as the fallout shelters and a portion of the other shel-
ters, solid obstructions will be formed, and the utility networks damaged.

The sons of heavy destruction has an overpressure in the front of the shock
wave free so to 30 hilopascals. In this zone, the above-ground buildings
and structures will sustain heavy daaage. Local obstructions will be toned
and solid and ease tires will break out. A laJority oi‘ the shelters will
survive, but for individual shelters the entrances and exits will be buried.
The people in then nay be inJured only due to destruction of the shelter
airtightnese. flooding or the leaking of gas into then.

The sons of medium destruction has an overpressure in the front of the

shock wave frou 30 to 20 hilopascals. In this zone the buildings and struc-
turee sustain moderate damage. The underground shelters will survive. Solid
tires will break out caused by light radiation.

The sons of weak destruction is characterised by an overpressure tron 20 to
lo kilopascals. In this zone the buildings will sustain slight damage.
Individual tire areas can be caused by light radiation.

Characteristics of Fallout Areas

The fallout area is the name given to the territory which has been contami-
nated by radioactive substances as a result of their falling out after a
ground-level (underground) nuclear explosion.

The injurious action of radioactive contulnation is caused basically by
gene radiation. In passing through one or another media, for exalple
living tissue or the organism. this radiation ionises it and this leads
to the disruption of vital processes in the organism.

The ionising capacity of gene radiation and its destructive action are
evaluated by the size of the gene radiation dose or the radiation dose
(D) neasured in roentgens (ﬂ).

3:8

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.083 trillion

that e rodtetlon vhich create: 2
pereture of 0° end e preonure

oentgen 19
in 1 on" of m e
nteﬂel enned

n certetn the 1
tuineted ten-em).

or evaluating the intensity or some
n content» ed terrain, the concept or the
redlutlon 1eve1 1: our in roentgene pe ho
ed in aunt-cents“: p (IR/h).

tencee o
co introd ed. Th
th). low not 13 are eeur
the redle ton even decnn sudden: Thus. 1' the momma level. 1 hour
after n ound-1 ve1 nuc1 er exp1oe1on is t en 100 percent. after 2 hours
1t v11). dec11ne w 2-fo1d. 3 hours 1 t r by h—fold. 1 hour: 1eter by 10-fo1d,
and ’19 hours 1eter h loo-tom.

me was“

  
    
 
 
 
 
    
  

    

        
 
      
   

   
 
   
 

V

V "ﬂax 4';

14;.“ ,. .,_
1 inj‘ta,"

n...

    

   
    

 
 

»»/~,~,.
. , ..,,

’ O I l - I ’ﬁ A I, V
luI//////////////l II////’/////

ﬁn and tho the of the
W Of

ninetion of the tort
d upOn the power end
the nature of

The degree of I'
contuineted one in e nuc1eer x91oelon depen
the amnion, the meteorol steel conditions. as wen .0 upon
th terrain en the ground. The contuioeted er: of terrein nu cone to
he dlvlded into es (F1 113). no follow:
1) The zone of moderate rumination. 0n the xterior boundary of thin
zone. the redletion dose ( the went o the teno t or redioecttve
oubotencee tron the cloud onto the tenth un 1 the“ c 1ete decoy)
V111 he hon. end the reunion 1eve1 1 hour oft r the xplouon V111 he
8 thz
“9

FOR OWICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2) The sons of heavy contamination. 0n the exterior boundary of the zone,
the radiation dose vill he 500 R. and the radiation love; 1 hour after the
explosion viil be 80 ﬁlm

3) The sons of dangerous contamination. 0n the exterior boundary of the
acne. the radiation dose viii be 1.200 R. and the radiation level 1 hour
after the explosion viii be 2&0 R/h.

As a result of the effect of ionizing radiation. as well as in exposure to
penetrating radiation, radiation sichnens occurs in people. A dose of 100-
200 a causes a radiation sickness of the first degree in man. a dose of
200-300 R causes second degree radiation sickness. a dose of 300-500 R
causes third degree radiation sickness. and a dose over 500 n causes fourth
degree radiation sickness.

A single radiation dose up to 50 R over a lo-day period, as veil as multiple
irradiation up to 100 R in 10-30 days. does not cause external indications
of the illness and is considered safe.

Various structures provide protection against penetrating radiation (radio-
active radiation). Thus, a dirt roof 1 neter thich'attenuates ionizing
radiation by more than loo-fold.

Devices for protecting the respiratory organs must be used to prevent radio-
active substances from penetrating into the organisa.

Quiz Questions

1. What is called a nuclear weapon?

2. Name and describe the destructive factors of a nuclear explosion.

3. What is a nuclear strike area?

5. what protective equipent is used in vorking on terrain contami-
nated by radioactive substances?

Characteristics of Chemical Heapons in the Armies of Imperialist States

Chemical weapons are the name given to the toxins and the devices for their
application. 'lioxina are chaical compounds which. in combat use. are cap-
able of inJuring people and aniaais over large areas. to penetrate into
various structures and contaminate the terrain and bodies of water.

In the armies of the imperialist states. toxins have been used in missiles.
bombs. artillery shells and mortars. special chemical landmines. as veil as
aircraft sprays (VAP).

At the want of use. the toxins can be in a varying state: In a liquid-
drop form. as a gas (vapor) and as an aerosol (tag or smoke). For this

50

M OFFICIAL I152 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reason they can penetrate the human organism and affect it differently:
Through the respiratory organs. the eyes. skin and digestiVe organs.

In terms of the action on the human organism. toxins in the armies of the
imperialist states are divided into the following groups: Neuroparalytic.
skin-blistering. suffocating. general poison. irritants and psychochemicals.

Toxins of a neuroparalytic action (V gases and sarin) affect the nervous
system in acting on the organism through the respiratory organs. in pene-
trating in a vaporous or liquidudrop state thro.3h the skin. as well as in
getting into the gastrointestinal tract along with food and water. In the
summer they may last more than a day. and in the winter for several weeks or
even months. These toxins are the most dangerous. A Very small quantity of
them is sufficient for inJuring man.

The indications of exposure to these tt ‘ns are: Salivating. contracting of
the pupils (missis). difficulty in breaaaing. nausea. vomiting. convulsions
and paralysis.

Gas masks and protective clothing are used as individual protective equip-
ment. For providing first aid to a victim, a gas mask is put on him and
the antitoxin is administered to him with a hypodermic. If the toxin falls
on the skin or clothing. the exposed areas are treated with the liquid from
the individual antichemical warfare kits.

Yperite is among the toxins with a skin-blistering action. This toxin pos-
sesses a multiple injurious action: In a liquid-drop and vaporous state

it affects the skin and eyes. and in inhaling the vapors. the respiratory
tracts and lungs. and if ingested with food and water. the digestive organs.
causing a general intoxication.

A characteristic feature of yperite is the presence of a period of latent
nation, that is. the action is not immediately apparent. but rather after
a certain time (5 hours and more).

The indications of an external exposure are a reddening of the skin and the
formation of small blisters which then merge into large ones. and after

2-3 days these break. becoming difficult-to-heal ulcers. with any local
exposure the toxin causes a general poisoning of the organism which is mani-
fested in an increased temperature. a general bad feeling and an acute weight
loss.

Under the conditions of using the skin-blistering toxins. it is essential
to work in a gas mask and protective clothing.

Hith the falling of the toxin drops on the skin or clothing. the exposed
areas are immediately treated with the liquid from the individual anti-
chemical warfare kit or with aqua ammonia.

51

FOR OFVICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Phosgene is among the toxins of suffocating action. The first indications
of exposure are a sweetish unpleasant taste in the mouth, nausea, dizzi-
ness and general lability. After leaving the area of contamination, these
symptoms pass, the victim feels normal for 13-6 hours, without suspecting
he has been exposed. During this period (the latent period), edema of the
lungs develops. Then respiration can deteriorate acutely, then coughing
with abundant sputum appears along with headache, increased temperature,
shortness of breath and palpitation.

With exposure a gas mask is put on the victim, he is evacuated from the
contaminated area. he is kept warm and quiet. In no instance must artifi-
cial respiration be given!

Prussic acid and cyanogen chloride are amng the group of toxins with a
general toxic action. These toxins take effect only in inhaling air con-
taminated with their vapors (they do not act through the skin). A gas mask
alone is sufficient for protection against them.

The symptoms of exposure are: A metallic taste in the mouth, irritation of
the throat, dizziness, lability, nausea, acute convulsions and paralysis.

For aiding the victim, it is essential to crush the ampule with the antitoxin
and introduce it under the facepiece of the gas mask. In difficult cases,
artificial respiration is given, the victim is kept warm and he is sent to
the medical aid station.

Toxins with an irritating action cause irritation of the eyes and respiratory
organs. These include cs, adamsite and others. The gas mask is a reliable
defense against these toxins.

The group of toxins with a psychochemical action includes the substances
which specifically act on the central nervous system and cause mental (hallu-
cinations, fear and suppression) or physical (blindness. deafness) disturb-
ances. The 32 toxin is a representative of this group. The gas mask is a
dependable means of protection. With exposure, the contaminated parts of
the body should be washed with soapy water, the eyes and nose and throat
should be carefully flushed with clean water, and clothing should be shaken
out or brushed. The victims must be removed from the contaminated area and
provided with medical aid.

Characteristics of an Area of Chemical Contamination
An area of chemical contamination is the name given to the territory which
has been exposed to the toxins. The size of the area of chemical contamina-
tion depends upon the scale and method of employing the toxin. the type of
toxin, meteorological conditions. terrain and other factors.
Particularly dangerous are the long-lasting neuroparalytic toxins the vapors
of which are spread by the wind over rather great distances (15-25 km and more).

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this reason people and animals can be affected not only in the region
where the chemical munition is used, but also far beyond it.

The duration of the inJurious action of the toxins is less the stronger the
wind and ascending air currents. In forests. parks, ravines. and in nar-
row streets the toxins last longer than in open terrain.

In order to protect oneself against the toxins. it is essential to know
their combat properties. the indications of use. the warning signals for
chemical contamination. to be able quickly and correctly to use the protec-
tive equipment. to provide aid to oneself and mutual aid with exposure to
the toxin, and carry out personal cleansing and gas decontamination.

The indications of the possible use of chemical weapons by the enemy are:

A weak dull sound of the exploding ammunitionon the ground and in the

air and the appearance of bursts of smoke which is rapidly dispersed; dark
strips which stretch behind an enemy aircraft. settling on the groundg

oily spots on leaves. ground. buildings. as well as around the craters of
exploded bombs and shells. a change in the natural color of vegetation (the
turning brown of green leaves); irritation of the nose and throat, eyes.
contraction of the pupils, and a sensation of heaviness in the chest.

with the appearance of any of these symptoms, without waiting for a signal.
the gas mask and skin protective equipment must put on imcdiately.

Characteristics of an Area of Bacteriological (Biological) Contamination

The bacteriological (biological) weapons in the armies of the imperialist
states are a means of mass destruction of humans. agricultural animals and
plants. Pathogenic microorganisms are the basis of their destruction ac-
tion, and these include: Bacteria. Rickettsia. fungi. as well as the poisons
(toxins) produced by certain bacteria.

The enenw can use the agents of various infectious diseases as bacterial
(biological) weapons. and these include: Plague. anthrax, brucellosis.
glanders. tularemia. cholera. Q fever. Russian tick-borne encephalitis.
smallpox, yellow fever. and others. In affecting agricultural plants, it
is possible to use the agents of grain rust. potato rot and other diseases.
eases.

Contamination of humans and animals can occur as a result of inhaling con-
taminated air. the falling of the microbes or toxins on mucous membranes
or damaged skin. the consmnption of contaminated food product and water.
bites from contaminated insects and ticks. coming into cantact with con-
taminated articles. wounding by framents of shells carrying bacterial
agents. as well as a result of direct contact with sick persons (animals).

The use of bacterial (biological) weapons by the enemy can be determined
from the external symptoms as well as by laboratory research. The external
symptoms of the bacteriological (biological) weapon used by the enemy

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-include: The dull sound of the explosion of the shells and bombs which is
unusual for regular amunition; the presence of large fragments and indivi-
dual parts of the amnition at the site of the explosion; the appearance
of drops of liquid or powdery substances on the terrain; an unusual accu-
mulation of insects and ticks in the places where munition has exploded
or the containers have fallen: mass illnesses of humans and animals.

Areas of bacteriological (biological) contamination are considered to be
towns, population points and national economic installations which have been
directly exposed to bacterial (biological) veapons. 'Ihe duration of the
action or bacteriological (biological) contamination is determined by the
ability of certain pathogenic microbes to maintain viability for an extended
time in the environment.

In detecting the indications of bacteriological (biological) contamination,
one must resort to means of collective and individual. protection and imme-
diately inform the nearest CD staff, school principal. or the leaders of an
enterprise, kolkhos or sovkhos of this.

The limits of the area of bacteriological (biological) contamination are
determined on the basis of the data of bacteriological (biological) recon-
naissance. from laboratory research of samples from objects in the environ-
ment. as vell as by detecting sick persons and the paths for the spread of
infectious diseases which have broken out.

Among the basic means for protecting the public against bacteriological
(biological) weapons are: Vaccines and sera, antibiotics, sulfanilimides
and other medicines used for special and emergency prevention of infectious
diseases. the collective and individual protective devices; chemicals used
for decontamination.

In order to prevent infectious diseases among the population. a range of
antiepiduic measures are carried out, including: mergency prophylaxis;
observation and quarantine; personal cleansing of the population; disinfec-
tion of various installations contaminated by bacterial .(biological) agents.
When necessary insects, ticks and rodents are eradicated (insect and rodent
control .

By observation one understands specially organized medical observation of
the population in an area of bacteriological (biological) contamination
with a series of measures aimed at preventing the spread of epidemic dis-
eases. ‘1‘his is done for the purpose of the prompt detection and isolating
of sick persons. Simultaneously using antibiotics emergency propmlaxis
against possible discuss is carried out. and the required innoculations
are given. Observation over the strict fulfillment of the rules of personal
and public hygiene is carried out, particularly in food preparation units
and in public places. In order to exclude the possibility of the spread
of the infection into neighboring areas, entrance to and exit from the
area of contamination are mimally restricted. Food and water are used

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only after their proper decontamination. The period oi‘ observation is de-
termined by the duration of the maxim:- incubation period for the given

disease. and is calculated from the moment of isolating the last patient
and the end of decontamination in the area of contaaination.

In the eVent that the enemy employs the pathogens of particularly dangerous
infections such as plague. cholera or smallpox. a quarantine is established.
In contrast to observation. a quarantine is a system of the strictest iso-
lation and restrictive antiepidemic measures.

Armed security is set up around the area. entrance and exiting are prohibited.
as well as the transporting of supplies.

If the complex or antiapideaic and sanitation measures are carried out prompt-
ly in the area of bacteriological (biological) contuination. the outbreak
of mass infectious diseases can be prevented.

Quiz Questions

1. What is a chemical weapon and an area of cheaicnl contamination?

2. Give a description or the neuroparalytic and skin-blistering toxins.

3. What are bacteriological (biological) weapons and an area of bac-
teriological (biological) contamination?

53. Defense Against weapons of Mass Destruction

The protecting of the population against weapons of mass destruction is the
main task of Civil Defense.

'lhe methods of protection include: ‘me sheltering of the population in
protective structures, the use of individual protective equipment. dis-
persion and evacuation.

Collective Means of Protection

The sheltering of the population in protective structures is the basic
method of protection against weapons of mass destruction.

All CD protective structures are divided into shelters and radiation shel-
ters. The simple shelters are a separate group.

Shelters is the name given to special structures which protect the persons

taking shelter in them against all the inJurious factors of a nuclear ex-

plosion. toxins. bacterial agents. as well as high temperatures and harn-
rul gases formed in tires.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The protecting of shelters against the shock wave and fragments of collaps-

ing buildings is ensured by the strong enclosing structures (walls and
roots) and entrances. as well as by the installing or special protective
devices on tho air intakes and exhaust vents.

The persons taking shelter are supplied with fresh air by a filter ventilat-
ing system. Moreover. electric power. water supply. sewage. heating and
communications systems are provided in the shelter for ensuring the possi-
bility of an extended stay of the people in the shelter.

Depending upon the location of the shelter. it can be built-in or separate
standing.

Built-in shelters are set up in the buried (cellar) floors of buildings.

and these are the scat widely found type of shelter. Separate standing
shelters are erected in the form of special structures which do not haVe

a above-ground superstructure on the tree territory'near the buildings.

Radiation shelters (PRU) are specially built or adapted quarters which pro-

tect the people against ionizing radiation with radioactive contamination
of the terrain.

The PRU provides protection also against fragments of collapsing buildings
and structures and against the low shock wave pressures.

The covered slit trench (Fig. llh) is a narrow trench covered on top. The
trench is dug in the torn of several rectilinear sections placed at an angle
to one another. It can hold lo-ho persons.

 

Pig. 11h. Covered Slit Trench
(dimensions in cm)

56

F0! OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAI. 083 ONLY

The places for the construction of the simple shelters are chosen on areas
which would not be covered in rubble and which would not be flooded with
thaw and rain waters. At the sane ties the shelters should be as close as
possible to the places of work and residence of the people. In a rural

locality. it has been recomsnded that the shelters be located on the sides
of ravine hollows end in other terrain folds.

The shelters should be entered in an organized asnner'. First of all. chil-
dren. women with children and elderly should be allowed in. and they should
be kept in a separate area or in places assigned to then.

' The persons taking shelter must have a 2-day supply of food in polyethylene
packaging. toilet articles. documents. a aininul of personal effects and in-
dividual protective gear (gas necks. respirators. fabric dust Iasks or the

cotton-gauze bandages ) .

It is prohibited to bring easily infla-eble or strongly saelling sub-
stances, or cunbersoae articles into the shelter, to bring in domesticated
animals. to walk about the shelter without necessity. to light kerosene
leaps. candles or self-made lights without permission. The persons in the
shelter must carry out all the instructions and deaands of the co-andant
and the personnel of the servicing teen.

Persons in the shelter nay cone out upon the instructions of the conander
of the servicing teen after receiving the "All Clear" signal or in the event
of an emergency condition in the structure threatening the life of people.

with the burying of the basic exists from the shelter. the persons inside
nay exit through the energency exit, and if there is no emergency exit.
measures are taken to independently open the doors and clear. away the rubble
on the entrance using the forces of the servicing teen and the persons in
the shelter.

Quiz Questions

1. What are collective leans of defense?

2. Tell about the purpose and design of a radiation shelter.

3. "bet are the purpose and the design of a slit trench?

is. In what order are the shelters entered and what are the rules of
conduct in than?

Individual Protective Gear

Individual protective gear is designed to provide protection against the
penetration of radioactive substances. toxins and bacterial agents into
the organism or on the skin and clothing. They include protective devices
for the respiratory organs (gas masks. respirators. fabric dusk necks. and

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the cotton-game bandages) and devices for protecting the skin (protective
clothing. as vsll as available devices for protecting the skin).

has masks are designed to provice protection against the penetration of
poisons. radioactive substances and bacterial (biological) agents into the
respiratory organs, the eyes or onto the face.

Gas masks for the adult civil population include: the 09-5 (civilian as
mask. fifth type). the OP-hu (civilian gas mask. fourth typo. improved .

For school children. the PDP-Sh (children's filtering school gas nask) is
recommended. They are all filtering. that is. they operate according to
the principle of purifying (filtering) the inhaled external air against
harnful impurities (toxins, radioactive substances. bacterial agents. smoke,
dust and so forth) in the respirator filter cannister.

The GP-du filtering gas mask (Fig. 115) consists of the respirator filter
canister and the facepiace. In addition. the set of the gas mask includes
a gas nask bag and a special stick for preventing the fogging of the glasses.

The natal container of the respirator
filter canister contains special ab-
sorbants and a dust filter. Upon entry.
the air going into the canister passes
initially through the filter which picks
up the particles of dust, smoke. and
fog. and then through the absorbers where
the toxic vapors are held. The face-
piece of the gas mask is used for sup-
plying the air purified in the canister
to the respiratory organs. as well as
for protecting the eyes and the skin of
the face. It consists of a rubber mask
with glasses and a valve holder and a
connecting tube. There are straps with
' a backpiece for holding the wk on the
Fig. 115. fi'he OP-hu filtering head.

gas leak.

 

In the valve holder are one intake valve
(pure air is supplied through it fron the connecting hose to the mask) and
to exhaust valves through which the air is removed from inside the mask in
exhaling.

One end of the rubber connecting tube is firmly attached to the connector of
the valve holder, while the other end is fastened by an union nut to the
throat of the canister.

Before using the gas mask it is very important to correctly select the proper

size and lake sure it is in working order. For selecting the size of the
mash, it is essential to measure the length of the face. that is. the

58

FOR 0P71CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distance from the bridge of the nose to the lower point of the chin. using
n ruler or a sliding calipers. with a face 99-109 II long. a mask of the
firut uise is required; with 109-119 In. a second sine: with ll9 - and
more, the third size. The size of the mask should conform precisely to the
size of the face. If a larger mask is used. contaminated air will pene-

trate under it. and if a small one is used. it puts great pressure on the
head and causes pain.

A new mask must be carefully wiped off with a clean moist rag or cotton.
and the connecting tube blown out. If the mask has been used, it must be
disinfected with cologne or a Formalin solution.

In order to make certain that the gas mask is in proper working order. it
must first be inspected to make sure that there are no cracks or punctures
in the mask and the connecting tube. that the packing ring and valves are
in place. and the glasses have not been damaged. Then the gas mask must be
assembled. put on. the opening in the bottom of the canister must be closed
with a plug and then a deep breath taken. If air does not penetrate be-
neath the facepiece. the gas mask is in working order.

The gas mask must be carefully stored and protected against wetness and
blows. Foreign objects must not be put in the gas mask bag as they may
puncture the bottom of the canister and small pieces might fall into the
intake valves.

A gas mask is worn in positions: ”March" (if there is no immediate danger
or an enesu attack); "on the ready" (if there is a threat and the "Air
Alert" signal or the "Gas Mask Ready!" cosssand has been given); and "combat"
(upon the comand "Gas." as well as with the first indications of chemical
or bacteriological (biological) contamination).

In the "march" position, the gas mask is located on the left side. for
moving into the "on the ready" position, the gas mask bag is brought for-
ward. the flap is opened, the cord is removed and tied around one's waist
and its end is fastened to the semicircle of the bag.

The gas mask must be put on (moved to a ”co-bat" position) quickly and cor-
rectly. For this it is essential to hold one's breath and close one's eyes,
take off any headgear and hold it between one's knees; pull the mask from
the bag and take it by the straps with both hands in such a manner that the
thumbs are facing inwards; having put the lower part of the mask to one's
chin. draw it over the head and secure the side straps behind the ears.

The free ends of the back straps should be tightened so that the edges of
the mask fit snugly to the face. After this one must make a sharp exhale.
resume breathing. open one's eyes and put on any headgear. The gas mask

is removed upon the comand "remove gas mask.” For removing the gas mask.
the valve holder is taken in one's free hand. the mask is pulled down
slightly and with a movement of the hand the mask is removed forwards and
upwards. Before replacing in the bag. the mask should be wiped off with

a clean rag or handkerchief.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The GP-G filtert gas mask (Fig. 116) consists of e filter box end e
fecepiece (hel-et . The set includes e be? end e box with nonfog films
which ere inserted in the eyepiece freses with the sweeting side fecing
the gless) end ere festened with snep rings.

For determining the eize of the fece-
piece. using e tepe meesure the heed
should he meeeured eround e line pess-
ing ecroes the top of the yoed. the
chin end the cheeks. end the neceseery
size esteblished (Fig. 117). with e
neseurenent up to 63 cm. e 0 size fece-
piece is required; e size 1 for 63.5-
65.5 cm; site 2 for 66-68 cm; size 3
for 68.5-70.5 em; size h for 70.5 on
end sore.

 

The OP—S gee mesh in e "merch" position

is cerried on the left side. end here
Fig. 116. OP-S filtering gee meek: the fecepiece end the box ere put in e
l--fi1ter box; 2-fecepiece; beg.

, 3-beg;.h--box with nonfog films.

In order to bring the OP-S gee seek to

e "coebet" position. one should close one‘s eyes, hold one‘e breeth. remove
the gee meek from the beg, teke the fecepiece in such e menner thet the
thumbs ere on its inside (Fig. 118). end drew it over the heed. After this
exhe1e end open one'e eyes. The OP-S gee seek is removed in the eeme se-
quence es the OP-hu gee meek.

   

Fig. 117. Meeeuring the heed Fig. 118. Procedure for putting
for fitting the fecepiece of on GP-S gee meek.
the OP-S gee mesh.

60

P0! OFFICIhL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The set of the PDF-ah for students in senior grades includes: The (JP-5

filter box. a facepieee of sizes 0. l. 2 and 3. the OP-S bag. nonfog fills.
and warning sleeves.

The facepieee is selected in the one sanner as for the OP-s gas mask.

Here it is essential to measure the length along a line running across the
chin. the cheeks and across the top of the head. "ith a aeesursnent of

up to 63.5 on. a o-eise facepiece is used; sise l for 63.5-65.5 on; size 2
for 66-68 on: size 3 for 68.5-10.5 ca. If the vertical length of the school
child's head is over 70.5 on. a size 1: feeepieee of the OP-S gas leak aust
be used.

Procedures for using a damaged gas mask. If the leak is ripped. the ripped
portion lust be firstly held or pressed to one's face with the palm of one's
hand. With severe damage to the mash (denage to the eyepieees or breathing
valves). hold your breath and close your eyes. Then remove the seek. un-
screw the connecting tube fro: the box. put the collar of the box into your
mouth. hold your nose with your fingers and breath through the box (without
opening your eyes). Punctures (holes) in the filter box can be snared with
modeling clay. paste. clay or plaster.

in order to put a OP-lou gas mask on an injured person (if he is lying down),
one should kneel down by his head and rest his head on one of your knees.
Then remove any headgear from the injured person and take the gas has): out
of the bag. Grasping the forehead and back straps. take the nae): by the
edges in such a manner that the thuabe are on the outside end the other
fingers inside the seek. After this, having applied the lower part of the
mask to the chin of the victim, drew the mask on the face and bring the
back straps behind the ears. After this carefully adJust the Isaak.

The OP-S mask is put on in the same manner. here the headpiece must be
drawn on over the head so that there are no folds.

In a number of instances the public will be issued the regulation military

filtering gas masks (Fig. 119). These are used according to the sale rules
as the gas aeska described above.

 

Fig. 119. Regulation military filtering gas leak: a-cenister; bc-faee-
piece; cubeg; l--absorber; 2--eyepieees; 3-cap; h—valve holder; S—eon—
neeting tube; 6-strap; Tushoulder strep; 8—rubber plug; 9—filter.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Respirators can be used for protecting the respiratory bodies agath radio-
active substances and bacterial agents.

The 3-2 respiretor is sisple and dependable (Fig. 120); it is a filtering
half-Wk with a head strap and nosepieee. It is produced in three sises
(they are shown on the inside of the hash). For selecting the proper size.
the length of the face is neasured betueen the bridge of the nose and the
lover point of the chin. Hith a face from 99 to 109 m long. the first
respirator sire is required. the second free 109 to 119 u. and the third
f r 119 end over.

The respirator should be pieced on the face in such a manner that the
chin end nose are vell inside the seek and then the ends of the nosepiece

are pressed against the nose.

Among the single protective devices for the respiratory organs are the
fabric dust aaehs end the cotton gauze bandages or bindings.

   

Fig. 120. 3-2 respirator: Fig. 121. The P'DI-l fabric
suaverall View; bo-vorn. dust mask on: lubedy;
2--cross strep; 3-vrubber good;
unstrengthenins; 5--etrsps.

These articles can be made fro-
available materials by oneself
(canvas. fustian, baize. gauze and
so forth).

The body of the Phi-1 fabric dust

nest (Fig. 121) is node from fabric

folded into four or five layers.

' At eye level. openings are node in it
and goggles are inserted. For hold-

Fig. 122. Making of cotton ing the use]: to the head, pieces of

gauze bandage fabric are used and these are em to

the side edges of the bow. as vell
as rubber straps.

 

62
'01! ORIGIN. USE ONLY
For making the cotton gauze bandage (Fig. 122). a piece of gause 100:: so ea
in size is used. On it is placed a layer of cotton 1-2 ca thick. The edges
of the gauze are folded over on both sides and laid over the cotton. while
cuts are sade from the ends to a depth of 30-35 on frets each aide. The
bandage should cover the shin, south and nose. The eyes are protected by

goggles.
Equipment for Protecting the Skin

In actions in regions of radioactive. chenical or bacteriological (biologi-
cal) contuination. it is essential to protect not only the respiratory
organs but also the entire huaan body. For this various protectiVe devices
for the skin are used. In terns of their purpose they are divided into
two groups: special and available.

The pulation not involved in working in the strike area (area of contanina-
tion can use available skin protecting devices. These include daily and
industrial clothing and footwear which can be adapted for defense against
radioactive fallout and bacterial agents, and in certain instances also
against toxins.

Thus. cloaks and raincoats made free rubberized fabric and synthetic film
provide protection against contamination by radioactive dust. bacterial
aerosols and for a certain time also against toxins.

Ordinary sports. working and school suits, quilted Jackets and other cloth-
ing can be used for protection against radioactive substances after it has
been made airtight. Airtightness of a chest opening can be provided by
using a bib Isade from heavy fabric while on sleeves and trousers caps should
be attached (Fig. 123). the neck and exposed parts of the head are pro-
tected by a simple hood or an ordinary kerchief. Feet are protected by
ordinary rubber or leather boots, and rubber gloves can be worn.

 

a. 1"

Fig. 123. Adaptation of daily clothing:
a--pnttern of bib; bo-hood and its use; c--sealing caps sewn to cut-off
ends of Jacket and trousers (dimensions given in In).

63

NR OFFICIAL USE (DULY
FOR OWICIAL US! ONLY

In arch-r to stake adapted protective gear (ordinary or industrial clothing)
provldv protection against toxic vapors. they are saturated‘vith a special
paste (it-la) or a seep-oil eaulsion.

'i'ho soap-oil emulsion is prepared using a formula or 250-300 gm of pulver-
iscd household soap and 0.5 liter of mineral or vegetable oil in 2 liters
of water vhich is heated to 60-70° c. The oil is added after the soap has
completely dissolved. and this is then energetically nixed. The suit is

placed in the basin (bucket) vith the solution. then lightly squeezed out
and dried in the open air.

Special protective clothing is provided for the CD formations. This in-
cludes the light protectiVe suit (lo-l). the protective filtering clothing
(ZN), the regulation protective set and the protective coveralls.

The ipi light protective suit is ends from rubberized fabric and consists
of a shirt with a hood. trousers vith boots. two-finger gloves and a helmet
liner (Pig. 12h); there is also a bag for carrying the suit.

 

Fig. 12". The L-l light protective suit:
l--trousers with boots; zooshoulder straps; 3--helnet liner; hnshirt
vlth hood; Suneck flap; 6-«crotch band; ‘Iubsg; 8--tvo-i'inger glove;
9--ntreps.

me suits are made in three sizes: size 1 up to 165 cm tall. size 2 iron
165 to 172 cu. and size 3 for over 112 ca.

The set of the ZPOoGO protective filtering clothing is aaong the filtering
type gear for protecting the skin. This provides reliable protection of
the skin against radioactive substances and bacterial agents. When it is
saturated with a voter solution of a special paste it also provides pro-

tection against toxis vapors.

6h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OHM!“ US! 0““

The set consists of a cotton overall at a special design (Fig. 125). under-
wear and two pairs or cotton rootcloths. The overalls are made in three

sises: size l for persons up to 160 on tall. size 2 from 160 to 170 can,
and size 3 over 110 on.

There are a regulation military protec-
tive set (Fig. 126) and a protective
overalls (Fig. 127) for protecting
prople in working under conditions of
heavy radioactive and toxic substances
and bacterial (biological) agents and
which can he issued to the CD torna-
tions.

     
    
   
   
 

.tr‘

  

s17

. to»?
Q;-

a‘\

As a rule. the special protective cloth-
ing is put on in uncontaminated terrain
(in shelters. inside buildings and so
forth) directly before work. Under con-
ditions of contaminated air, this is
done wearing the gas mask.

 

" The protective clothing is removed on
uncontaminated terrain. Bore it is
essential to make certain that the un-

Fls- 125- The avenue of protoc- protected parts or the body do not

“'9 filtering clothing (ZN): come into contact with the exterior or
ao-gencral vievz balm in the protective clothing. After renov-
"conhat" position; l-ohood; ing the protective clothing. one must
2--chest flap of overall; 3- move away to windward and remove the

throat flap; ho-hand hands; gas mask. removing the tacepicce with
snstrings. one‘s thulb from the back or the head.

Fig. 126, Regulation am
protective set:

a--in the torn or cloak;

huraincoat; c-as overalls

 

FOR OFI'ICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 12?. Protective enrolls in set vith boots. gloves end hood:
eP-overeli eppeerence; b-in "contet" position; 1—overe11; 2--hood;
3~rubher boots; lourubber gloves.

Among the medics]. protective end preventiVe devices are the individnel first
eid m (AI) and the individuel entichelicel vertex-e kit (mas).

oneself end others for the purpose or preventing severe consequences from
exposure to veepons of mess destruction, es well so for preventing end
veekening the course of infectious discuss. The kit conteins mdioprotec-
tive, entichenicel, entihecteriel and other preventive end first aid egents.
Instructions cone with the kit. ‘

The individual ohmical mfm kit (m) (Fig. 129) is designed for de-
ectiveting' liquid drop-toxins vhich have fellen on exposed arm of the

 

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 088 OMS

 

Fig. 129. The individual anticnemical warfare kit (HP-8):
a--overall view of kit; b--cotton gauze tampons; c--i‘lask vith fluid

The kit consists of a glass flask vith a screw-on top and it contains a
gas decontamination solution and four cotton-gauze tampons. The flask and
the tampons are sealed in a bag. In using the IPP. the tampons are moist-
ened with the fluid from the flask and then the contaminated areas of the
skin and clothing are wiped with them. It is essential to Law that the
fluid from the individual antichemical warfare kit is poisonous and is
dangerous if it gets into the eyes.

Quiz Questions

1. mm is individual protective gear?
2. What is the design of the GP-ltu filtering gas mask and what does
it provide protection against?
How is the size or the slum (GP-S) fitted for size?
. how is the gas mask put on correctly?
How is a cotton-gauze bandage made?
. List the skin protecting gear.

cum #4»

Dispersion and macuation of the Urban Population

One of the methods for protecting people against veapons of mass destruc-
tion is the dispersion of the enterprise employee" and the evacuation of
the remaining population of cities into the suburban zone a safe distance
away from the possible objectives of enemy nuclear strikes.

Dispersion is the organized transporting (carrying) of the employees tron
national economic installations out or the cities and their quartering in
the suburban zone.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPHCIM. US! ONLY

Evacuation is the organized carrying (transporting) of the population not
employed in production. including students. from the cities into the subur-
ban sons.

The purpose of dispersion and evacuation is to exclude or minimise losses
among the population in the event that the ens-or employs nuclear weapons
or other modern weapons against the cities and national economic installa-
tions.

All levels of on staffs direct the dispersion of employees and the evacua-
tion of the remaining population. The CD staffs notify the population of
evacuation using mass intonation media including the radio. television.
press. and so forth, as well as through the ZhEK [housing operations office]
(housing administrations)

Each enterprise. institution, school. 2113K or housing administration should
draw evacuation lists ahead of time for all the employees and members of
their families. The lists and passports (identification cards) of the
evacuees are the basic docmaents for accounting. quartering and support in
the dispersion areas.

with the announcement of a decision to evacuate the population. the citizens
must quickly ready their individual protective gear, personal effects and
documents, and then prepare the apartment to be turned over for guarding
by the housing administration. They should take only essential things
with them. including: Individual protective gear. clothing. footwear. bed-
ding. a supply of medicines and 2 or 3 days worth of food products. or
one's documents, it is essential to take along the passport. military
service record, educational diploma. and birth certificates of children.
All personal effects are put into a suitcase. sack or bag. On each piece
of luggage. a tag is attached giving the last name, first name and patro—
nymic. permanent address and where they are being evacuated. A-labcl of
white fabric giving the last name. name and patromic. birthdate. the
address of the parents and the final destination of evacuation should be
sewn to the clothing of preschool age children.

In the apartment it is essential to shut off the gas. electrical appli-
ances and remove curtains from the windows. All highly inflamable ef-
fects and articles should not be placed in front of windows, and transoms
and small ventilating windows should be closed. After this the door is
locked and the apartment is turned over to the housing administration for
guarding. having done this work. one should proceed by the designated
time to the evacuation assembly point and undergo registration.

School children are ordinarily to be evacuated with their parents.
In the cities evacuation assembly points (82?) are set up for promptly and

precisely carrying out the dispersion of the employees and the evacuation
of the remaining population. As a rule, the 82? are located in clubs.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

movie theaters. palaces of culture, schools and other public buildings.
nearby railroad stations. railroad platform. ports and piers to which they
are assigned. Each 8!? is given an ordinal number and the employees of
nearby enterprises, organizations. schools and the members of their families

as well as the population living in the housing of the Zhnt (housing ad-
ministrations) located in this area are assigned to it.

Organisation and discipline. prompt and unfailing fulfillment of all the
requirenents and instructions of the administration at the 83? are the
basic rule of conduct for the population in carrying out dispersion and
evacuation. Callsness and patience must be aaintained in am situation.

For the purpose of evacuating the population in a short period of time. the
basic portion of the population can'be sent out of the cities on foot. 'ihe
rcnaining population is transported to their assigned places in the suburban
zone or to intermediate evacuation points from whence they can depart by
various types of transport to their ultimate destinations. Such a method
of evacuation is termed combined and is the basic one.

The receiving and quartering of the arriving population in the suburban
none are carried out by the local Soviet bodies together with the CD staffs
of the rural regions. For this, under the executive comittees of the rural

soviets, evacuation receiving points are organized. and greeting points are
fern-ed in the disenbarhing stations.

The dispersed and evacuated population in their assigned areas are provided
with food and industrial vital necessities by the local authorities through
the existing trade network.

Quiz Questions

1. what are dispersion and evacuation!

2. What is the combined method of dispersion and evacuation?

3. What must be taken along in leaving for the suburban zone?

1:. "hat is the procedure for receiving. quartering and supplying the
arriving population in the suburban zone?

Rules of Conduct and Actions of Persons in Centers of Radioactive,
Chemical and Bacteriological Contamination

With a threat of enemy attach, the bodies of Soviet power and the CD staffs
notify the population of this and establish the rules of conduct in terms
of the specific conditions.

Having received the appropriate message, the population should prepare for
defense against weapons of sass destruction.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

For receiving messages and signals transmitted by the CD staffs. the loud
speakers must be constantly connected to the radio broadcasting system at

the national economic installations. in the residential buildings and apart-
ments.

All citizens should acquire (receive at their place of work or study) in-
dividual protective devices for respiratory organs or make for themselves
and the members of their families simple protective devices (the fabric
dust mask or the cotton gause bandage). and prepare daily clothing for
defense against radioactive substances. Each family must prepare a home
first aid kit with a supplv of medicines.

The adult members of the family should learn the location of the shelters;
if there is none nearby. then an active effort must be made to build them
quickly. During this period it is very important to take measures to pre-
vent possible contamination of food supplies and water. to carry out fire-
fighting and blackout measures in the apartment. and to improve the protec-
tive properties of the apartments (housing) against radioactive substances.

Uniform nationwide CD signals have been established for promptly warning
the population of the threat or use of weapons of mass destruction by the
sum. as well as the danger of flooding. These are: "Air Alert,” ”All
Clear." "Radiation Danger," and "Chemical Alert."

Actions of the Population Upon the "Air Alert” Signal

The "Air Alert" signal warns of a direct threat of an enesv attack. The
signal is given over the radio and television. as follows: ”Attention!
Attention! This is the CD staff speaking. Citizens! Air Alert! Air
Alert" and this is duplicated by the extended sounding of electric and
manual sirens and by the intermittent sounding of plant and transport
whistles for 2-3 minutes.

If the signal comes when you are at home. you should quickly get dressed.
dress the children, take the individual protective gear. the prepared
personal effects, food supplies and vater, close the windows. shut off the
gas and immediately proceed to the nearest protective structure.

If you are in the street (in a public place or on municipal transport)
when the signal comes. you should head to the nearest shelter.

In schools. upon the "Air Alert" signal, exercises are stopped and the
students in an organized manner proceed to the shelter.

Citizens who have been unable to reach protective structures by the moment
of the explosion should take protective measures in using nearby under-

ground passagevays, ditches, pits. stone walls, or lie face down on the
ground on territory that would not be covered in rubble.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

After the "Air Alert" signal. the "All Clear” signal can be given to notiiy
the population that the threat of an enemy attack is over. This signal is
given by radio and television: "Attention! Attention! This is the CD
staff speaking. Citizens! All Clear." Upon this signal the population
may leave the shelters. In leaving the shelter. the population should
observe the rules established for the period of the threat of an attack.

Actions of the Population Upon the "Radiation Danger" Signal and in
Areas of Radioactive Contamination

The "Radiation Danger" signal is given in detecting fallout. This signal
is also transmitted over the broadcasting network. On the spot the signal

is duplicated hy rapid blovs on ringing articles (a ball. a piece of rail.
and so forth).

On this signal. you must put on the individual protective gear. take your
documents. prepared personal effects. food supply and water, and leave for
the shelter. In leaving the apartment, the water and gas should be shut
off. the lights turned off. and the vindovs and doors closed.

The procedures for remaining in the shelters are set by the CD staffs de-
pending upon the degree of contamination in the area.

In a zone of moderate contamination the population takes shelter. as a rule.
for several hours, after which it can leave the shelter and return to its
customary quarters. During the first an hours one should not leave the
house for more than k hours.

In a zone of strong contamination. the people should remain in shelters
up to 3 days, leaving them in extreme necessity for 3-” hours. Here de-
vices for protecting the respiratory organs and skin must be put on.

In a zone of dangerous contamination. the people should remain in the
shelters for 3 days and more. after which they can move to their usual
quarters and remain in it for at least h days. here they may go outside
for only a brief period (for not more than k hours a day).

In all instances individual protective gear should be worn when outside
the shelters and buildings.

The radioprotective tablets from the individual first aid kit (in compart-
ment No l) are used as a prophylactic agent which reduces the harmful
effect of radioactive radiation. Up to six tablets at a time may be taken.
Another six tablets must be taken h-S hours later with a continuing radia-
tion or a new threat of radiation.

71

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
Actions of the Population Upon the "Ch-ical Alert“ Signal and in
Areas of Chenical Contamination

If the enemy uses chemical weapons. the signal "Chemical Alert” is given.
ll'his signal is transmitted over the broadcasting network: "Attention!
Attention! Il'his is the CD staff speaking. Citizens! Chenical Alerti,"
and this is duplicated everywhere by rapidly striking ringing objects.

Upon this signal. the gas mask nust be isnediately put on and one's cloth-
ing must be adapted so that no area of the skin remains unprotected.

Persons who at the noment the "Chemical Alert" signal is given arc in
shelters should remain in them until permission is obtained to leave. 'lhe
protective equipment should be kept in the shelter and everyone should be
ready to put them on upon the co-and (instruction) of the person on duty
for the shelter.

Persons who are in fallout shelters should insdiately put on gas masks
and the available skin protective squipunt.

The direction for leaving the area of contamination is designated by indi-
cators. and if these are absent one must leave in a direction perpendicular
to the direction of the wind.

One must move quickly over contaminated terrain. but one must not run or
raise dust. one lust not touch surrounding obJects or walk on visible
drops of poisons.

In an area of contamination. one must not enter houses. take anything from
the contaminated terrain. snoke, eat. sit down or lie down on the ground.

men with great fatigue one must not remove the protective gear.

hith an individual first aid kit. it is essential to take one tablet from
the round red container located in compartment no 2 of the first aid kit
for preventing injury by the neuroparalytic toxins. '

If in an enemy chemical attack poisonous drops have fallen on exposed areas
of the skin or clothing. these must be inediately treated using the indi-
vidual antichenical warfare kit (IPP). If there is no IPP. treatment may
be carried out with aqua mania.

Once outside the contaminated area. the surface of clothing. footwear and
protective gear can still be contaminated with toxins. ’ For this reason
the protective gear and particularly the gas mask must not be taken off
without permission.

Persons who have been exposed are inediately given medical first aid, in-
cluding: the administering of an antitoxin (antidote). the treating of
exposed areas of the skin using the contents of the individual antichenical

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

warfare kit, and artificial respiration is given in the event of the stop-

ping or weakening of breathing (on contaminated territory the gas Wk
must not be taken off).

All persons affected by the toxins are brought (transported) out of the
area or chemical contamination and are delivered to the medical aid station.

Persons who have come out of a contaminated area without fail undergo full

personal cleansing and decontamination of clothing at the special decontamin-
ation washing stations.

Actions of the Population in an Area 01‘ Bacteriological Contamination

In detecting the indications of the use of bacterial (biological) agents.
all citizens should imadiatelv put on individual protective gear and take
shelter in the shelters. If there are no shelters. remain in the apart-
ments having closed the windows and doors securely.

The length of the stay in the shelters and the procedure of actions for the

population in an area of bacteriological contamination are determined by
the CD bodies.

0n contaminated territory one must not take off the individual protective
gear, raise dust. touch various objects, smoke or eat or drink. The popu-
lation in an area or bacteriological contamination must strictly observe
the requirements or the CD medical service. It is particularly important
to observa eating conditions. Only those products which have been kept in
refrigerators or in covered packaging may be consumed. In addition. both
food as well as drinking water must be heated or boiled without fail.

Under these conditions it is extremely important to keep the housing, court-
yards and public places constantly clean. The requirements of personal
hygiene must be carefully observed. A bath with soap must be taken once

a week. underwear and bed linen must be changed, hands and hair must be

kept clean, and so forth.

In detecting diseases in any area. a quarantine or observation is estab-
lished (depending upon the nature or the disease).

In all instances, in being in an area or bacteriological (biological) con-
tamination. the population must show calmness and discipline. it must
strictly observe the established rules or conduct, it must carry out the
orders of the CD bodies and the instructions of the medical workers.

Quiz Questions

1. List the CD signals and tell who gives them and in what order.
2. What are the actions or the public upon the "Air Alert" signal?

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. must are the actions of the public upon the "Chemical Alert"
signal?

la. What are the actions of the public upon the "Radiation Danger”
signal?

Personal Cleansing. Deactivation, Oas Decontamination and Disinfection
of Clothing. Footwear. Protective Gear. Weapons and Equipment

Personal cleansing is the name given to the removal of radioactive sub-
stances. decontamination or removal of toxins and bacterial (biological)
agents from the skin of persons as well as from worn individual protective
gear and footwear. Cleansing can be partial and complete. Partial per-
sonal cleansing consists in the removal and decontamination of radioactive
substances. toxins and bacterial (biological) agents which have fallen on
exposed areas of the skin. on clothing, footwear. individual protective
gear and firearms.

Partial personal cleansing in contamination by radioactive substances is
carried out directly in the zone of radioactive contaminaLion or inediately
after leaving it.

With contamination by liquid-drop toxins. partial personal cleansing is
conducted inediately.

with simultaneous contamination by radioactive. poisonous and bacterial
(biological) agents. the toxins should be decontaminated first. followed
by the bacterial (biological) agents and the radioactive substances.

With contamination by poisons, the population should use the individual
antichemical warfare kits for partial personal cleansing. and various avail-
able means with contamination by radioactive substances.

With contamination by radioactive dust. partial personal cleansing is car-
ried out in the following manner. The outer clothing is removed. and with
one's back toward the wind. the clothing is shaken out. After this the
clothing is hung up on a line (or crosspiece), and is cleaned with a broom
(brush or cluster of grass) or beaten with a stick. Footwear should be
washed off with pure water or wiped with a wet rag. Then the exposed areas
of the hands and neck and the facepiece of the gas mask are washed off in
clean water, the gas mash is removed. the face is washed carefully with
water, and the mouth and throat rinsed out. If there is little water. the
exposed skin and the facepiece of the gas mask may be wiped with wet pads.
In the winter the clothing and footwear can be wiped with clean snow.

In conducting partial personal cleansing with contamination by toxins.
it is essential. without removing the gas neck. to i-nediatl: treat the

exposed skin. the contaminated areas of clothing. and the facepiece of the
gas mask using the solution from the individual antichemical warfare kit.

Tl.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Complete personal cleansing is carried out at the decontamination washing
stations which are set up by the CD formations. This consists in washing
the entire body with soap and water. as wall as providing special medical

aid to the affected. Here underwear. clothing and footwear are changed or
processed.

The decontamination washing stations are set up on the basis of the medical

checkpoints. the shower pavilions. bathhouses and other service facilities
or on the spot using tents (awnings. and so forth).

In warm weather complete personal cleansing can be carried out in bodies
of water which are not contaminated.

As a result of working (staying) in a contaminated area. clothing. footwear,

protectiVe equipment. transport and equi ent can be contaminated by radio-
active substances. toxins and bacterial biological) agents. For decontami-

natingthem and for preventing the inJury to personnel. the following are
carried out: Radioactive decontamination or the removal of radioactive sub-
stances from contaminated surfaces to acceptable levels; gas decontamination
or the deactivation of toxins or their removal from contaminated objects;

disinfection or the removal of pathogenic microbes and toxins on contami-
nated surfaces.

Radioactive decontamination (gas decontamination and disinfection) can be
partial or complete.

Partial radiological decontamination is carried out for the purposes of
reducing the degree of contamination. and consists in removing the radio-
active substances by brushing (wiping) the entire surface of the objects
to be treated.

Partial radiological decontamination and disinfection consists in the neu-
tralization (removal) of the toxins and bacterial (biological) agents on
those sections of the surface of the treated objects with which the person-

nel of the formation is in contact in the course of work; here the surface
of a tool or device is fully treated.

Complete radiological and gas decontamination and disinfection of clothing.
footwear, supplies. transport and tools consist in treating the entire sur-
face of the contaminated obJects to safe levels. This is carried out at
the special cleansing stations (PuSO) by the CD formations.

For radiological decontamination. special deactivating solutions are used
as well as aqueous solutions of laundry powders such as ”Don." "Era." and
"Iotos" as well as other detergents. and in addition ordinary water and
solvents (gasoline. kerosene and diesel fuel).

For partial gas decontamination. the fluid from the individual antichemical
warfare kit is used. as well as various solvents (kerosene or gasoline).

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

For disinfection. special disinfectants are used such as phenol. kerosene.
Jysol and others. as well as the gas decontamination solutions.

Radiological decontamination of clothing. footwear end individual protec-
tive equipment is carried out by shaking and beating. by washing or wiping
(on rubberized or leather articles) with aqueous solutions of detergents
or with water, and by washing with radioactive decontamination agents.

Oas decontamination of clothing. footwear and individual protective equip-
ment)io carried out by boiling..washing or airing (natural gas decontamina—
tion .

Disinfection of clothing, footwear and individual protective equipment is
carried out by treating with a steam mixture. by boiling. and by vetting in
disinfectant solutions (or wiping with them). and by washing.

l(\ll t).hese Jobs are carried out at the clothing decontamination stations
m 0

For decontamination equipment. structures and territories. various national
economic equipment can be used including: Street washing and sweeping
equipment. sanders and snow removal equipment, fertiliser spreaders. spray-
ers. bulldozers, graders. and so forth.

The basic procedures for complete radioactive decontamination of equipment
and transport include: The washing off of radioactive substances using
decontamination solutions and solvents with the simultaneous brushing of
the contaminated surface; washing off the radio active substances with a
Jet of pressurized water; removal of the radioactive substances by wiping
down the contaminated surface with pads of rage moistened with the decon-
taminating solutions. water or solvents; brushing (wiping) off the radio,-
active dust with brooms. brushes. rags and other available means.

Gas decontamination and disinfection are carried out by wiping the contami-
nated surfaces of the equipment and transport with gas decontaminating
(disinfecting) solutions. and in their absence. by using solvents.
Quiz Questions
1. What is personal cleansing?
2. In what sequence is partial personal cleansing carried out!

3. what are radioactive decontamination. gas decontamination and
disinfection?

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sh. Radiation and Chemical Reconnaissance Instruents

The Purpose, Tactical and Technical Data. Design and Operating Principle
of Radiation Reconnaissance Instruments

These instruments (they are also called dosimetric) are designed for detect-
ing radioactive contamination. for measuring the radiation level and the _
degree of contamination or various objects. as well as the radiation doses.
A majority or then uses the radiation method of detecting and metering the
radioactive radiation.

The method is based upon the use of one or the properties of radioactive
radiation. that is. its ability to ionite the medium in which it spreads
(that is, to split neutral molecules or atoms into pairs which are positive
(ions) and negative (electrons)). If an enclosed volue of a gas is taken
and an electric voltage is applied to it. then the electrons and ions
formed in it will move in an ordered manner. with the electrons moving
toward the anode and the ions toward the cathode. As a result. between
the electrodes (the anode and the cathode). a so-called ionisation current
arises, and the amount or this is directly proportional to the power or

the radiation dose. From the force of the radiation current it is possible
to Judge the intensity of radioactive radiation.

The sensing devices or dosimetric instruments are ionisation chambers and
gas discharge counters.

A diagram of an ionization chamber is
shown in Fig. 130. A current conduct-
ing layer is used as its anode. ands
metal core as the cathode. The voltage
from the power source is delivered to
the electrodes; this voltage creates
an electric field in the chamber. The
chamber is filled with air. If there
is no radioactive radiation. then the
air in the chamber is not ionized and
no electric current passes. Under the
effect of radiation, the air is ionized.
the circuit closes and an ionisation
current is passed through it. This

 

arrives at the electric circuit or the
2:12:22” Bhombesrff instrument (Fig. 131), it is amplified,
l--inner surface and core converted and measured by the microm-
of chamber (positive meter, the scale of which is graduated
electrode); 2"th ”he in roentgens per hour or milliroentgens
(negative electrode); per hour. Such ionization chambers are
3--bottom of chamber; used in instruments which measure

huamber insulator; radiation levels on the terrain.

5--safety .

77

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

 

4

Fig. 131. Scheaatic diagru of design of dosinetric instruents:
l--ionizing radiation; 2--radiation detector; 3--nicroanneter; I'm-power
source.

The gas discharge comters operate under the condition of gas anplification
which occurs because of secondary (inpact) ionisation. The current which
passes through the circuit of such a counter is significantly greater than
in an ionisation chamber and the counter itself is more sensitive. The

gas discharge counters are used in instruments designed for detecting and
netering the degree of contanination of various surfaces by radioactive
substances. They can also he used for neasuring the pover of s ga-a radia-
tion dose.

A diagram of a gas discharge counter is show: in Fig. 132. The counter is
a natal (or glass) cylinder filled with a discharged sixture of inert
gases with slight additives to improve its vork. Here the anode is a thin
netal thread stretched inside the housing which is at the sane tine the
cathode (in glass counters the cathode is a thin layer of natal applied on
the inner surface of the housing).

 

Fig. 132. Gas discharge counter with metal housing:
luhouaing of counter (cathode); 2--filanent of counter (anode); 3—leads;
buinsulators.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In accord with their purpose. dosimetric instruments are divided into

radiac indicators, roentgenometers. radiometer-roontgenometer. radiometers
and dosimeters.

The DP-63-A radiao indicator (Fig. 133) is designed for detecting radioac-
tive contamination of the terrain by beta— and game-active substances and
for an approximate evaluation of the radiation levels. These can be used
to measure the power of a game radiation dose from 0.1 up to 50 ﬁll: (in
the first subrange from 0.1 up to 1.5 B/h. and in the second from 1.5 up to
50 R h .

The indicator has two gas discharge counters, a semiconductor voltage con-
vortcr with power sources (two 1.6-2Plﬂ‘s-U—l.05 cells which provide continu-
ous operation for 50 hours) and an integrating circuit with a micrometer.
The instrument weighs 1.2 kg.

 

Fig. 133. The DP-63-A radiac indicator with the removed lid of
power compartment:
l--i‘ront panel; 2-lid of power compartment; 3-contact spring; 15--
l.6-2PMTs-U-l.05 (l.5-SNMTs-0.6) cells; S-ohousing of instrument: 6—-lid
catch; 1--colored marker indicating centers of counters; 8--sec;:-.ri subrange
button; 9--i'iret subrange button.

For preparing the indicator for work. the cells should be inserted in the
power compartment. the lid screwed down and the voltage of the power
sources tested by simultaneously depressing the buttons "1.5 R/h" and

"50 R/h." Here the arrow or the instrument should be to the right of the
figure 5 on the lower scale. For testing the proper working order 01‘ the
indicator, the botton "1.5 8/11" is depressed. The arrow or the instrument
should stop on the "0" mark or the upper scale.

In reading radiation levels. the instrument should be placed at a height

of 70-100 cm from the surface of the ground. In pressing the "50 R/h" but-
ton, the radiation level is read on the lower scale. It the arrow does

not move or moves insignificantly, then, having released the "50 R/h" button.
press the "1.5 R/h" button and read the upper scale of the instrment.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The detection and metering of beta radiation are carried out only on the
first subrange of the indicator at a distance of 20-30 cm from the con-
taminated surface. Here two measurements are made: the first as was
described above, and the second with the simultaneous depression of the
"1.5 R/h" button and the button located on the side of the instrument. An
increase in the readings of the micrometer in the second measurement
shows the presence of beta radiation.

The DP-2 roentgcnaneter (Fig. 13'!) is designed to measure radiation levels
from 0 to 200 R/h in conducting radiation reconnaissance. The instrument
operates on three subranges (0-2, 0-20 and 0-200 RIM, and has, correspond-
ingly, three changeable scales which are switched in moving from one sub-
range to another.

 

Fig. 13". The DP-2 roentgenometer: Fig. 135. DP-SA- radiometer-
l--microammeter, 2--power compartment; roentgenometer:
3--zero-setting knob; lo--"Pre ration" l--earphone cable; 2--case;
button; Snsubrange switch; micro- 3--case lid; humetering panel;
smetsr scale light button. 5--test preparation; 6--probe;
T--probe cable; 8--extension rod.

The basic parts of the instrument are: Ionization chamber, DC amplifier,
microammeter, an power source (one 1.6-PMTs-U-8 cell which provides continu-
ous operation for 60 hours). The instrument weighs around 3.5 kg.

In order to ready the DP-2 roentgenometer for work, the subrange switch is
put in the "Off" position, the lid of the power compartment is opened, a
battery is inserted and connected to the terminals, the lid is closed and
screwed dovm. Then the subrange switch is put in the "zero test" position,
and with the "zero-setting" knob the arrow of the micrometer is lined up
with the zero division on the scale. The subrange switch is put in the
position "2 R/h" and the "Preparation" button is depressed. It the arrow
of the microammeter moves to the control division indicated in the specifi-
cations, the instrmsent is ready for work.

80

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The measurements are started from the first subrange (the instrument is
held at a height of 0.7-1 m from the ground). When the micrometer arrow

crosses the scale. the roentgenometer is switched to the next subrange.
Using the instrument it is possible to monitor radiation levels on the ter-
rain while in a vehicle. however. in this instance the readings must be
multiplied by a radiation attenuation factor for the body or the vehicle
(for a motor vehicle this equals 2, and for an armored personnel carrier. 1:).

with the aid of the DP-SA mdiancter-mntgenamter (Fig. 135). it is pos-
sible to measure the gems radiation levels on the terrain and the degree
of radioactive contamination of various obJects.

The range or measurenents for the instrument has been divided into six sub-
ranges (see Table ’1).

Position of 8 a1 Unit of
switch button c e measurement

'i'ablc lo

   
  

     

  

Measurement

I‘
aubrange limit

I 5-200
II 500-5.000
III 50-500
IV 5-50
V 0.5-5
VI 0.05-0.S

 

The basic parts of the instrument are the metering panel and the probe con-
nected to the panel by a flexible cable 1.2 m long. In addition, the set
or the radiometer-roentgenometer includes: Earphones. an extension rod.

a battery connector for connecting the instrument to an external Dc source.
a case with strap: and a test radioactive source, and spare parts.

0n the front or the metering panel are (Fig. 136): The microammeter. the
subrange switch. the adjustment potentiometer, the ”reset" button. the
scale light switch. and the headset plug.

The probe (Fig. 137) is sealed. In it are two gas discharge counters and
other electric circuitry elements. there is a window for the indicating of
beta radiation which is covered with a waterproof film, as well as a ro-
tating screen which can be put in two positions "8" and "c."

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The instrument is powered by three l.6-PHTs-U—l.05 cells which provide its
continuous operation for he hours, or from outside Dc sources with a volt-
age or 3, 6 or 12 volts.

 

Fig. 136. Metering panel of DP-SA

radiometer-roentgenometer:
l--housing; 2--panel; 3-"reset"
button; h--headset plus; S--knob
for adjustment potentiometer;

 

6--microammeter; 7--scele light Fig. 137. Probe with removed
switch; 8--subrange switch; 9-- housing:

plug for connecting probe cable; l--steel housing; 2--rotating
lO--plug of mechanical zero-setting screen; 3--window; h--support lugs;
corrector. 5--SI-3Bc gas discharge counter;

6--STS-5 gas discharge counter;
7--plate; a-union nut; 9--handle.

The instrument weighs 2.1 kg and the weight of the total set with the

box is 7.6 kg. .

In preparing the instrument to work, the arrow of the microammeter should
be put on "0"; the "Mode" button must be turned counterclockwise to the
stop; the subband switch knob should be put in the "Off" position, the
power compartment should be opened and the dry cells connected, in making
sure of proper polarity. Then the instrument should be turned off, having
put the switch in the "Mode" position. and in gently turning the "Mode"
knob in a clockwise direction. place the microumneter arrow on the triangu-
lar marker on the scale.

After this the proper working order of the instrument must be tested from
the test device by putting the screen of the probe ahead in the "B” posi-
tion and bringing it up to the radioactive source, having first opened it.
in turning the protective plate around its axis and having connected the
headset. Then in sequence put the switch in the following positions:

"x 1,000, "x 100," "x 10." "x l." and "x 0.1."‘ Here in the earphones one

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

should hear clicks, and in addition, on the subrange “x 10" the arrow
should move approximately to the middle of the scale, and on the subranges
"x 1" and "x 0.1" beyond the scale.

Radiation levels are measured on the terrain from the "0-5" scale (with
radiation levels up to 5 R/h). with the switch in the ”X 1,000" position;
with higher levels, from the scale "0-200" with the switch in the "200"
position. The panel of the instrument with the probe should be at chest
height. and the probe should be in its case.

The degree of contamination of the skin of persons. clothing, equipment,
transport, food. water and other articles is determined on the subranges
"I 1,000." "X 100." "x 10." "x l," and "X 0.1," in reading off the upper
scale of the instrument ("0-5") and multiplying these by the coefficient
corresponding to the position of the subrange switch.

Thus, for example, if in measuring the degree of contamination of human
skin the readings on the upper scale of the instment are 2.5 mR/h, and

the subrange switch is in the "i! 10" position, the degree of contamination
will be as IIR/h.

Before measuring the degree of contamination, the gamma background value
is determined, and for this purpose the radiation levels are measured a
distance of 15-20 m away from the contaminated obJect. Then the probe of
the instrument is brought up to the surface of the contaminated object

and moved over it locating the most contaminated area from the frequency
of the clicks in the earphones. The probe is put 1-1.5 cm above the place
of maximum contamination, and the switch is put in a position whereby the
instrument's arrow provides readings within the scale. and the readings
are taken. From the obtained readings the value of the genus background
is subtracted. For example, if in the measurement the amount of the gains
background was 200 mR/h and the amount of the total contamination of the
obJect was 250 mR/h, then the value of the contamination of the object
will be SO mR/h.

The DP—18 radiometer (Fig. 138) is designed to determine and measure the
degree of contamination of various obJecte for beta and game radiation.

Due to the fact that at present the contamination of various obJects is
measured by gamma radiation. let us examine the procedure for measuring
the contamination of various obJects using the DP-l2 instrument for Just

gamma radiation. The range of measurements for gamma radiation is from
1 to 125 mR/h.

The instrument consists of a panel and a probe connected by a flexible
cable. earphones and a rod for the probe. In addition. the set includes

a strap for carrying the instrument, a case, a test radioactive sample,

spare supplies and tools. Without the case the instrument weighs about

5 kg. The radiometer is powered by two 1.6-?MTs-U-8 cells which provide
its continuous operation for 15 hours.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 138. The DP-12 radiometer:
lnoutside housing (screen) of probe head; 2--housing of meter; 3--i‘ront
of meter; lam-lid; Snviewing aperture; 6-earphone cable; 7--probe cable;
8--probe handle.

0n the front of the instrument are: The aicrouneter. the aubrange switch,
the knob for adJusting the filament voltage ("Incam"), the knob for adjust-
ing the anode voltage ("Anode"). a headset plug ("TIP"), a "Illua." button
for the scale light. a lovable arrow for recording the instruaent readings
and the lid of the power compartment.

For carrying out aeasurements using the instrument there are five subranges
which have five colored scales. For measuring gonna radiation. three sub-
ranges are used (the blue, green and white scales). Moving from one sub-
range to another is carried out by turning the subrange switch. The out-
side casing of the probe head is put in the "6" position.

In preparing the instrument for use, first of all the power is connected.
For this, having prepared the cells for connecting, the subrange switch
is put in the "Off" position, the "Incan." and "Anode" knobs are turned as
to: as possible in a counterclockwise direction. the lid of the power con-
partnent is removed and the switch is put in the "Paral." position. the
cells are inserted in the power compartment. they are connected to the
corresponding terainals and the lid is closed. Then the subband switch
is moved to a position in which the ueasurenent will be made, the "Incan."
knob is depressed and, in turning it clockwise. the arrow of the aster is
put on the "R" line. Then the "Anode" know is depressed and in turning it
also clockwise, the arrow is lined up with the suns "R" line.

8’:

FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

llhe clicks in the earphones and a slight high sound from the voltage con-
verter show the normal operation of the instrument.

In measuring the degree of radioactive contamination for gasses radiation,

the probe screen is put in the ”0" position, and the measurement is made in
the subrange corresponding to the blue scale, and then the probe is brought
up to the examined surface and from the greatest Frequency of the clicks in

the earphones or from an increase in the microas-eter readings, the place
of maximum contamination is determined.

having put the probe above the place of maximum contamination, the reading
is taken from the upper microammeter scale.

If there are no readings on the subrange of the blue scale, then the switch
is moved to the next subrauge (green and white scales).

Dosimetric inatrwsents should be stored in areas the air temperature of

which is kept from +10 to +25° c with a relative humidity of trom 50 to 65
percent. They are kept on shelves in cabinets.

If the instruments are to be stored for more than 10 days, the power sources
must be disconnected,.they must be removed from the instrusents and stored
separately in a dry, cool (an air temperature from +5 to -6° c) and dark
area. The leads of the power sources should be caremlly insulated.

In using the instruments, they must be handled carefully and they must be
stored and used correctly. For example, the instruaents must not be ex-
posed for extended times to direct sun rays, heavy rain or snov, and they
'must be protected from mud and dust. The instruments must be protected
from blows and shaking, and in being transported in motor vehicles they
must not be put on the floor. The insides of the meters must not be opened
nor mist their surface be touched with a bare hand.

Quiz Questions

1. What is the essence of the ionization method of detecting and
metering radioactive radiation?

2. Sketch the schematic diagram of a dosimetric instrument.
3. List the basic types or dosimetric instruments.

lo. How are the DP-GSA, DP-2, and DP-SA instruments readied for use?

Purpose, Tactical and Technical Specifications and Operating Principle
of a Chemical Reconnaissance Instranent

Modern toxins possess high toxicity. Many of then have neither aroma nor
color. For this reason it is possible to reliably determine their presence

in the air, on the terrain and on various obJects only by using instruments.

85

ran onrcm. use ONLY \
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The operating principle or such instruments (chemical reconnaissance) is
based on a change in the color of specially selected substances (they are
called indicators) in interacting with toxins.

The field chemical detection device or VPKhR (Fig. 139) is designed for
determining toxins in the air, on the ground and on various obJects.

 

P13. 139. Field chemical detection device (vrm):
l--hand pump; 2--shoulder strap; 3--nozzle for pump; h--protective cOVers
for nozzle; 5--smoke filters; 6-burner cartridge; 7--flashlight; 8--burner;
9--probe; lO-blade; ll-odetector tubes in holders.

The instrument consists of a case with a lid and a hand pump, paper holders
with detector tubes. dust filters, a pump nozzle, protective covers, a flash-
light, a burner and cartridges for it. In addition. the set includes a
blade and instructions for using the instrument. The instrument weighs
around 2.3 kg.

The detector tubes which comprise the set (Fig. 1ho) are of three types:
One with a red ring and a red dot (for identifying sarin and V gases); with
three green rings (for identifying phosgene, prussic acid and cyanogen
chloride); with one yellow ring (for identifying yperite).

The burner is used to warm the detector tubes in operating under low air
temperature conditions (from -ho to +15° C).

Toxins in the air are identified by using the VPKhR in the following order.
The lid of the instrument is opened,the catch is released and the pump
taken out. Two tubes with a red ring and a red dot are removed from the

86

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
70R ONICIAL ”8! ONLY

holder. their ends are cut off and opened. Using the anpule breaker with a
marking corresponding to the marking on the detector tubes. the upper am-
pules or both tubes are broken and they are energetically shaken two or
three tines (holding them by the marked rings). Then the unmarked end of
one of the tubes is inserted into the pup and it is activated five or six
times (the second tube is the control. and air is not pumped through it).
Using the sane ampule breaker. crush the lower ampules of both tubes. shake
then and watch for a change in the color of their tillers. The turning of
the upper layer of the filler in the experiaental tube to a red color (at
the moment of the appearance of a yellow color in the control tube) shows
the presence or sarin and V gases in the air. If the color or the filler

in both tubes changes color simultaneously. then there are no dangerous con-
centrations of the given toxins in the air.

 

Pig. lho. Detector tubes for identifying toxins:
a--sarin and V gases; b--phosgene, prussic acid and cyanogen chloride;
cnyperite; l--tube body; 2--cotton pads; 3e-filling; Isa-ampules with agents.

Depending upon what the tube with the red ring and the red dot shown. it
is essential to continue identifying toxins using the remaining tubes. ini-
tially with the three green rims and then with one yellow ring.

The tube with the three green rings (for identifying phosgene, cyanogen
chloride and pruseic acid) is used in the following sequence. The tube
must be opened. the ampule in it 'broken, inserted in the pump and then the
pup operated 10-15 times. Then the tube is removed from the pump and the
color of the tube filler is compared with the scale printed on the holder.

After this, the presence of yperite vapors is determined (using the tube
with one yellow ring). For this the tube is opened. inserted in the pump.
the pump is worked 60 times, the tube is removed from the pulp and held

1 minute. After this the color of the filler is compared with the color
shown on the holder.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

In identifying toxins on the terrain. equipment and various objects, initially
the detector tubes vith the red ring and the red dot are used. and then the
one vith a yellow ring. They are prepared (in the same sequence as in de-
termining a toxin in the air) end inserted in the pump. Then the nozzle is
put on the pump and on the nozzle there should be a protective cover. The

nozzle is held to the ground (or contaminated article) and the necessary
number or pups is made.

One then proceeds as in identifying toxins in the air.

In order that the chemical detection devices operate dependahly, they must
be properly stored and used. In subunits they are stored in cabinets and
on shelves. in field conditions on shelves. and in regiments on wooden floor-

ing or padding.

Before leaving for reconnaissance, it is essential to lake certain that the
set of instruments is complete, that the ampules in the detector tubes are
not broken and that the pump is vorking.

In operating on contaminated terrain. the instrments nust be protected
against contamination with toxins and radioactive substances, and in the
event of contamination gas and radioactive decontamination must be carried
out carefully on them.

The chemical detection devices should be protected against extended exposure
to direct sunbeams. Particular attention must be given to the guaranteed
storage life of the detector tubes, in replacing them with good ones.

Quiz Questions

1. What is the operating principle of the chemical detection device?

2. How is the VFW chemical detection device designed?

3. what is the procedure for using the VPth. in determining toxins
in the air. on the terrain and on various objects?

55. Reconnaissance of Strike (Contaminated) Areas

Principles for Organizing and Conducting Reconnaissance at an
Installation in an Area of a Strike (Contamination)

Reconnaissance is one of the types of support for successml actions of
the CD forces. This is carried out continuously and actively, and the data
should be reliable.

The continuity of reconnaissance is achieved by using all types of it ac-
cording to a unified plan and by coordinating actions in terms of place
and time in any veather, during the day and at night, and under any condi-
tions.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL 083 ONLY

The activeness of reconnaissance consists in the desire of the commanders

and chiefu by all methods and means to secure the necessary data on the
situation by the established time.

The reliability or reconnaissance data is established by a careful study,
generalisation and comparison with data obtained from other sources"

In obtaining contradictory data, a recheck and additional reconnaissance

are organised, primarily in regions with the most complicated radiation,
chemical, tire. engineer and medical situation.

Depending upon the nature of the missions carried out, reconnaissance is
divided into general and special.

General reconnaissance is conducted by: Reconnaissance subunits of troop
units, observation and laboratory'control stations, reconnaissance air-
craft and helicopters, reconnaissance units of river (naval) reconnaissance.

rail transport, the reconnaissance groups of cities, rayons and national
economic installations.

Special reconnaissance is carried out by groups for radiation. chemical,
engineer, tire, medical and epidemiological reconnaissance.

Depending upon the method of securing the data, reconnaissance is divided
into air, river (naval) and ground.

Air reconnaissance is carried out by trained crews of reconnaissance air—
planes and helicopters which are equipped with radiation reconnaissance
instruments. This is capable of detecting a radiation, tire and engineer
situation over large areas in a comparatively short time.

River (naval) reconnaissance is carried out by trained teams of specialists
from the river (naritime) fleet on high-speed launches, diesel vessels,

motor boats and other vessels which are equipped with radiation and chemical
detection devices.

Ground reconnaissance is carried out by reconnaissance units or troop units,
by the observation and laboratory control stations, by reconnaissance teams
on rail transport. by the reconnaissance groups or cities, rayons and
national economic installations, by radiation and chemical observation posts
and by other special reconnaissance groups (teams).

This type of reconnaissance can establish with the greatest completeness
the nature of contamination. destruction and fires. the state of protective
structures and the people in them, the conditions for providing them with
medical aid, that is. with the greatest completeness and reliability it

solves the entire range of reconnaissance problems on the routes of advance
'and in the strike areas (areas‘bt contamination).

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

The basic missions of reconnaissance are:

1) Determining the rayons. cities and objects which have been exposed both
to weapons of mass destruction as well as conventional weapons, natural
disasters, and the consequences of emergencies and catastrophiee;

2) Disclosing the degree of destruc‘. ion, the nature of fires and contamina-
tion in the areas of mass destruction and the adjacent rayons;

3) Determining the stats of the routes of advance. the national economic
installations. the protective structures and the conditions for providing
medical aid to victims in the strike areas (areas of contamination);

1:) Conducting observation and laboratory control over the contamination of
the air. water, soil, livestock and plant products and other environmental
objects with radioactive substances. toxins and bacterial agents.

The reconnaissance formations perform their tasks by observation and direct
inspection of the obJects of reconnaissance using instruments.

3ﬁeconnaissance groups and radiation and chemical observation posts are set
up for carrying out missions for national economic installations at indus-
trial enterprises, on kolkhoses and aovkhoses. 'l'hese comprise the recon-
naissance formations of an installation.

A reconnaissance group is used for conducting reconnaissance in the location
of the installation's formations in the suburban zone. on the route of ad-
vance and at their installation in the strike area (area of contamination).
It also may be used for monitoring the contamination of people, equipment.
property, food and water by radioactive substances and toxins.

A reconnaissance team in a reconnaissance group consists of a comander, a
dosimetric scout and a chemical scout. This is supplied with filtering

and worsen-breathing gas masks, individual protective equipment. radiation
and chemical detection instruments, dosimetric monitoring devices, trans-
port, commications, devices for designating contaminated areas. for partial
special processing and other required supplies.

The radiation and chemical observation posts is used for observing changes

in the air and ground situation on the territory of the installation and

in adJacent areas, as well as in the quarters of the installation's employees
in the suburban zone.

In addition. the posts are given missions of observing changes in the situap
tion in areas of natural disasters and in places of maJor production acci-
dents and catastrophies.

A post consists of three persons. the post chief, the dosimetric scout and
the chemical scout. The post is equipped with filtering gas masks,

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

individual protective equipment, radiation and chemical detection instru-
ments. a dosimetric monitor, a compass and watches.

Moreover the post should have: in observation log, a diagram of landmarks,
a table of warning signals, binoculars, equipment for giving warning signals,
wire (or wireless) conunications, and other necessary supplies.

Quiz Questions

1. what demands are made on reconnaissance?

2. lame the types of reconnaissance and the methods of carrying it
out. Hhat are the basic missions of reconnaissance?

3. Tell about the purpose and missions of a reconnaissance team, its
composition and equipment. .

10. Tell about the purpose of a radiation and chemical observation
post, its composition, missions and equipent.

The Actions of a Scout as Part of a Radiation and Chemical Observation
Post

The post is equipped with a place for the observer and a shelter for the
personnel. The place for the observer is chosen in such a manner that a
good view of the installation's territory be provided (the terrain in the
quarters of the employees in the suburban some).

The CD chief of staff of the installation gives the mission to the radiation
and chemical observation post. In giving the mission he indicates: The
composition of the post; location; the sons (sector) of observation; what
should be particularly watched for; the procedure for reporting on the re-
sults of the observation; the time to be ready to carry out the missions.

Having received the mission, the chief of the post assembles the personnel,
he issues equipment. he gives the mission to subordinates, he determines
the procedure for observation and equipping the post, he makes certain the
equipment is in proper working order, he organizes comunications with the
installation comend post and directs the actions of the observers. The
chief of the post also performs the obligations of a duty observer.

The duty observer is obliged to remain continuously at the designated place
and continuously observe the changes in the air and ground situation. He is

to report all changes in the situation immediately to the chief of the post
and to follow his instructions.

The duty observer carries out his tasks wearing the individual protective
equiment. and has his gas mask in an "on the ready" position. The radia-
tion and chanical detection instruments should be ready for use.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0’. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Upon the "Air Alert" signal, the personnel of the post takes to the shelter
and the duty observer continues his watching. From external indications he
determines the type of nuclear explosion, and from the diagram of landmarks,
the direction (azimuth) to the explosion, he reports these data to the chief
of the post and continues to observe the direction of the radioactive
cloud‘s movement and changes in the situation in the adJacent terrain.

The observer keeps the radiation detection instrument on and watches its
readings. With fallout. from the readings of the instrument he determines
the radiation level, he reports to the chief of the post and upon his con-
mand gives a sound or light signal for warning of radioactive coatanination.
He puts on the gas lush and protective equipment and continues to monitor
the readings of the instrument without a break.

Hith a rise in the radiation level, the observer reports this to the chief
of the post, and with his permission takes shelter.

Monitoring the changes in the radiation levels is carried out from the
shelter, and here consideration is given to the attenuation factor of the
ionising radiation. The factor is determined by two measurements with the
instrument, outside the shelter and inside. The radio of the former to the
latter is the attenuation factor. In measuring the radiation level in the
shelter and in multiplying its value by the attenuation factor, the radia-
tion level on the terrain can be detemined.

The observer, in measuring the radiation levelt, establishes their rise and
fall. with a decline in the radiation level, the observer can periodically
leave the shelter and investigate a portion of the installation's terri-
tory (the location of the installation's formations in the suburban zone).

If the anew has used chemical weapons or the indications of toxic (paison-
ous) substances have been detected in the air, the duty observer puts on the
gas mask and protective equipment, he gives the sound or light warning sig-
nal, he reports to the chief of the post and follows his instructions. In
investigating the territory, the observer using the chemical detection in-
strument determines the type of poisonous (toxic) substance, places of
stagnant contaminated air, and the concentration of toxins in it. The
contaminated area is marked off by signs. He continuously monitors the
changes in the chemical situation on the territory of the installation and
in adJacent regions, and reports the results of the observation to the chief
of the post.

The basic mission of observation in areas of natural disasters, production
accidents and catastrophies is to promptly warn the formations carrying out
rescue and emergency reconstruction work of any sharp change in the situa-
tion in the areas or work sections.

In regions of natural disasters (earthquakes, flooding, hurricanes, catas-
trophic flooding, slides and so forth), observation is carried out over

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rcglnnn (scetionn) or possible collapses or destroyed buildings. structurcn
and ground. the water level in bodies of water. the direction and speed of
the wind in the ground-level air lwer. the condition of levees. dams and
other water-retaining structures. and so forth.

In areas of fires, observation is carried out over changes in the situation
on the spot and in the regions of their outbreak. First of all the nature
of the fire and the direction of its spread are determined. Observation

is also established over areas in which fires have been eliminated or
localized.

Quiz Questions

1. How is the place selected for a radiation and chemical observa-
tion post and what is the procedure for equipping it?

2. What are the actions of an observer upon the "Air Alert" signal
with a nuclear explosion. in detecting radioactive contamination and with
the appearance of indications of toxic (poisonous) substances in the air?

3. Describe the conducting of observation in regions of natural dis-
asters, major production accidents and catastrophies.

Actions of a Scout as Part of a Reconnaissance Team in Conducting
Reconnaissance at an Installation in a Hit Area (Area of Contamination)

A reconnaissance group (team) moves to the assembILv area of the suburban
zone along with the other installation formations.

The mission of conducting reconnaissance is given to the colander of a
reconnaissance team by the contender of the reconnaissance group (the CD
chief of staff at the installation). In giving the mission he indicates:
The time of passing the starting point; the areas (sections. of the route)
of possible radioactive and chemical contamination; vhat specially should
be looked for in approaching the strike area. in the strike area and on

the territory of the installation; the procedure for maintaining co-unica-
tions and submitting reports; the maximum tolerable dose of radiation.

The commander of a reconnaissance team gives the mission to the personnel
of the team. he gives the consand to put on individual protective equipment.
and to ready the detection instruments, the communications and transport.
Having done this, the team carries out the given mission.

In advancing over the route. the scouts, in watching the readings of the

instruments. establish the presence of contamination of the terrain with

radioactive and poisonous substances.

Having detected radioactive contamination. the scout reports to the com—

mander and the personnel dons gas masks. Then the scout determines the
93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radiation level and marks the forward edge of the contaminated area (0.5 Mb).
The sign is put up on the shoulder of the righthand side of the road; on an
insert to the sign the radiation level is given as well as the date and the
tine of the measurement.

In the same manner the scout marks the boundaries of zones with higher radi-
ation levels. With high radiation levels the scouts seek out (from the
readings of the radiation detection instruments) the direction where radia-
tion levels make it possible to carry out the mission.

The scout marks the direction of a detour with indicators. On leaving the
zone of radioactive contamination, the scout marks its rear limit (0.5 R/h).
In detecting a toxin. the scout using the chemical detection device deter-
mines the type and concentration. The boundaries of contamination (front
and rear) as well as the direction of the passage through (detour) are
marked by the scout with signs. 0n the insert of the sign he indicates the
type of toxin, the date and the time of detection.

In detecting destroyed areas of the route. rubble. fires in population
points and other obstacles, the scout clarifies the nature of the en-
countered obstacle and its effect on the actions of the installation's
formations and seeks out routes for overcoming them (a detour).

The commander of the team reports the situation data on the route to the
comander of the reconnaissance group (to the CD chief of staff of the
installation), and mks them on the route (the boundaries of areas of
radioactive and chemical contamination, radiation levels, the type of
toxins, the date and time of their detection. the places of obstacles which
have arisen on the route, their nature. the direction of the detour and
other particular features).

having arrived at the territory of the installation, the team works in the
area assigned to it for reconnoitering (a shop, a separate'standing shel-
ter. building shelter, warehouses. and so forth).

First of all the scouts should determine the radiation level, and the pres-
ence and type of toxin (poison). Then they seek out the shelters, they
ascertain their state, and the most convenient and safest approaches to
them. If the entrances to the shelters are buried, the scouts should lo-
cate the heads of the air intake, make certain they are in proper working
order, establish contact with the people inside the shelters, establish
their condition and determine the conditions for providing help.

The comander of the reconnaissance teen marks the situation on a map of
the installation (radiation levels, the nature of destruction or fires,
the state of the protective structures, the most convenient approaches to
the areas of rescue work, places of rubble, damaged pipelines, electric
lines, and so forth), and he reports the results of reconnaissance to the
colmnander of the reconnaissance group (to the CD chief of staff of the in-
stallation).

9b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP02-00050R0001000600674
POI OFFICIAL USE OIL?

Having carried out its missions. the reconnaissance teen can be used for
conducting observation on the territory of the installation in the course
of carrying out sum or it can be recalled to the assembly point.

Quiz Questions

1. Tell about the preparations of the reconnaissance group for con-
ducting reconnaissance in the assembly area of the suburban sone.

'c. what are the actions of scouts in detecting radioactive and cheni-
cal contamination on the route?

3. what are the actions of the reconnaissance group in conducting
reconnaissance in a strike area (area or contamination)?

36. Rescue and Innediate mergency Reconstruction in Strike Areas and
Disaster Region.

Principles for Carrying Out Rescue work in a iluclear Strike Area

The carrying out of SNAVR is one of the inportant CD tasks. This work is
carried out infstrike areas for the purposes or rescuing people. providing
aid to Vivian. preventing an increase in casualties and material losses
Tron the secondary destructive factors (fires. accidents. collapses, poison-
ing with industrial gases and poisons. and so forth). and creating condi-
tions for carrying out subsequent reconstruction work.

Rescue nor-1: includes: Reconnoiterir; the approach route and the work area;
localization and extinguishing of tires on the routes and work areas; lo-
cating injured persons and freeing then tron rubble. damaged and burning
buildings. smoke- or gas-filled areas; opening buried protective structures.
supplying air to then and rescuing the people inside; providing medical
first aid and physician first aid to victios and their evacuation; the
evacuating of the population to safe areas; personal cleansing of inJured
persons and decontamination of their clothing. decontamination of the terri-
tory. transport and equipment.

Imediote energency reconstruction work includes: Laying colt-In tracks
and building passegevays in rubble for equipment and transport. shoring

up or demolishing structures which threaten to collapse; localizing ener-
gencies on utility networks; temporary restoration of damaged and destroyed
coununications lines and utility networks for the purposes of carrying out
rescue work.

he general units and paraailitary CD formations, as well as the fox-nations
of the various ..ervices (oedical, firefighting. engineer. maintenance of

public order. uteri-ll and technical “991?. and others) are invoked for
carrying out SHAVE.

95

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m MICIAI. USE ONLY

Military and national econonic equipment available for the CD units and
formations are used to mechanise the work. This includes: Earthmoving.
road and materials handling machines and equipment. mechanized tools.

street spraying equipment. special machines for radioactive decontamination
and sanitation processing. firefighting equipsent. pumps and motor pumps.
mobile electric generators. public and special motor vehicles. and so forth.

Prior to the arrival of the rescue tom (groups). reconnaissance determines
the level of radioactive contamination in the area (at the installation).

it locates the entrances to the protective structures and emergency exists
from them. and establishes the nature of destruction to the structures and
the state of the people inside.

The containing and extinguishing of fires are carried out first directly at
the sites of rescue work by the firefighting formations with the help of
the engineer and rescue formations equipped with mechanized devices.

Small fires are eliminated by the rescue formations using the regulation
firefighting equipment and engineer vehicles.

The locating and rescuing of persons from the nuns of destroyed buildings
are started i-ediately as the fonations reach the strike area.

In looking for victims. a detailed examination is made of all places where
persons may possibly be. above all basements. various depressions and road
structures (culverts and pipes). exterior window and stair areaways. and
areas near walls in the lover floors and buildings.

The rescuers should periodically make loud signals by shouting or by hitting
the elmnents of rubble or surviving parts of the building. When it has
been established that there are people under the rubble. an effort is made
to establish contact with them by talking or knocking in code to determine
their number and state.

As a rule. the victims are dug out and removed from under the rubble by hand
in clearing away the rubble off the top. A victim is first freed from large
fraoents and rubble and then smaller pieces are removed.

The personnel of the teams digging out the victims is supplied with port-
able tools convenient for use under close conditions. including: wrecking
bars and axes. ssmll sapper shovels. metal and wood cutters. trowels. ham-
mers and drills.

The rescuing of people from destroyed bming buildings is carried out by

firefighting formations workiu together with engineer formations. in ex-
tinguishing the fires simltaneously.

In the event of the destruction of stairwells or their individual sections.
victims may be evacuated down surviving stairs. down fire ladders. through

96

POI onxcm. USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

windows using a nechanical fire ladder. sectional and rope ladders. and
truck cherry pickers. Persons may be lowered from the upper floors down
an inclined cable using special belts.

In locating persons in smoke-filled areas. the rescuers should vork in owgen-
breathing gas masks and carefully cxanine the rooms. as the victims. particu-
larly children, can be unconscious and be in the most unexpected places.

For protecting the victims agath smoke. wet clothes or si-ply pieces of

thin fabric ma? be used, in placing these over the respiratory organs of
the victin.

The general formations dig out and open the buried protective structures
with the subsequent removal of the persons inside and the carrying out of
injured. They may be assisted by firefighting. engineer. and technical
emergency fornations with aid fron the medical service formtions.

The locating of protective structures among rubble is carried out according
to previously compiled plans and from characteristic signs (energency
exits, air intake, the heads of entrances and so forth). After locating
the protective structure, it is essential first of all to establish contact
with the persons inside, to ascertain their condition. the degree of dam-
age to the structure and its internal equipment (chiefly the air supply
system). At the sane time the location and condition of the Iain entrances
and emergency exits are determined. and the place and method for digging
out and opening the shelter are chosen. If damage to a gas or water line
has been detected close to the protective structure, it is essential to
immediately shut off the gas (vater) to prevent the structure from filling
with gas or water.

If there is no emergency exit. for opening up the shelter. the rubble is
cleared away in front of the safety door in the stairwell or in the out-
side entrance.

If the entrance has been covered by large frogsents with tvisted reinforc-
ing and this would be difficult to clear away, the shelter my be reached
by drilling an opening in the roof or in the wall.

In protective structures with a danaged filter ventilating system, measures
should be taken to supply fresh air simultaneously with the digging out of
the shelter.

Medical aid for the victims is organised by the formations and facilities
of the medical service.

Medical first aid is provided directly at the site of the rescue work by
the personnel of the nedical teams or other CD formtions.

The ability of the population to provide aedical self-aid and mutual aid
will be of great inportance.

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Victims requiring physician aid are carried to loading arses (stations)
and transported to the medical first aid detaclments or to the uedical
stations set up in surviving ladies). facilities of the city.

Quiz Questions
1. who carries out SIIAVR and for vhat purpose is this done?
2. In Vhat order is rescue work carried out?

3. 80v are victims rescued from rubble. and from the upper stories
or destroyed and burning buildings?

m

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat. 1918
Imtel'stvo 008M? 8881!, 1978

10272
080: BIN/09101

98

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY