APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: clA-RDP02-00060R0001000100‘0-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00850R000100010040-5

FOR OH'ILIAL USE (“LY

arm was:
19 January 1979

TRANSLATIMS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOU0 3/79)

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NILY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010040-5
NOT 8

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was marked or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Government.

WWW? OP PUBLICATIWS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, virginia 22151. In order-
ing. it is reco-ended that the JPIS number. title, date and
author. if applicable. of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Regrts
Announcements issued uni-monthly by the National Technical
Intonation Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Govern-not Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.5. Government Printing Office, Hashington. D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author. personal names.
title and series) are available through Bell 5 Howell, 01d
Mansfield Road. "0031.“, main, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service.
1000 North Glebe Road, Arl ington, Virginia 22201.
LI Ne.
.... mm, _W
II

"'0

msmms on ussn nun-rm “was. (P000 3/79)

   
     
 
 

  
     
   
   

let-II. Ouaeiluieo Nana eel Adieu
Join: Publicatiooa Iaaaaseh Satviea
1000 north Globe load

Arlington. Vitainia 22201

'1. Snow!“ Omani-ado. lla- aal “he”

“1' elle IP05“

The report éontaine infornation on the Soviet Iilitary and civil defenee
eetabliahlenta. leaderahip. doctrine. policy. planning. political affaira.
organization. and equip-ant.

 

. (1 e - “Annie. emu."

USSR

Hilitary Organizations
Military Facilities
Military Personnel

"L Heathen/03.43““ Tot-O

notcrmvur—uhhqo 15C

3.. Avadobo’luy Sane-eon
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY. Liltted Hunter of

Coplea Available Pro. JPIS

 

. m nun-n we 7. iv"! 1"“ '0‘. “Y I! Ilnmm ”eon-toe mew-m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS Ia/OZ

19 Joann:

TRMSLATIMS 0N USSR HILITARY AFFAIRS
(moo 3/79)
COﬂTEN‘I’s

Book Prouau Sociologtcnl Study of Soviet lunar! Engineer
(rm. Shaman; SOVBTSKIY V018!!!" mm (sorrstow-
GICIIBsKIY ocusm. 1977) .......... ......
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

300! PRESENTS SOCIOLOGICAL JTUDY OP SOVIET HILITIRY ENGINEER

ﬂoscov SOVBTSKIY VOYINNYY INZCINBR (SOTSIOLOCICHBSKIY OCHBRK) in Russian 1977
signed to press 18 Pet 77 pp 1. 2. 3-5. 60-111. 196-198. 199

[Table of contents. annotation. introduction. chspter 11. conclusion of book
"Sovstskiy Voyennyy Inshaner (sotsiologicheskiy ocherk)" published under the
general editorship of Col H. P. Shendrik. doctor of philosophical sciences.
professor. Hoscov. Voyanizdat. 1977, 199 pages]

[Bxcerpte] Title Page:

Title: "sovetskiy Voyannyy Inehansr (sotsiclogicheskiy ocherk)" (The
Soviet Military Engineer [A-Sociological Studyl)

General-Editor: Colonel H. P. Shendrik. doctor of philosophicsl scien-
ces. professor.

Authors: Engineer-Colonel A. P. Volkov. candidate of philosophicsl
sciences. decent; Lieutenant Colonel V. S. Gorbunov. candidate of
philosophical sciences, docant; Lieutenant Colonel V. P. lovalevshiy.
candidate of phi1osophica1 sciences; Colonel I. la. Lysukhin. candi-
date of historirel sciences; Lieutenant Colonel Ye. V. Halaiayav.
candidate of nilitary sciences. decent; Colonel 1. V. Halyshev. doc-
tor of philosophical sciences. docent; Colonel Yu. 1. Rachev. candi-
date oi philosophical sciences; Colonel C. 8. Thachenko. candidate
of philosophical sciences. docant; Captain 2d Rank V. P. Prolov.
candidate of philosophical sciences; Engineer-Colonel Yu. G. Pokin.
doctor of technical sciences; Lieutenant Colonel 8. P. Utlik. candi-
date of psychological sciences; Lieutenant Colonel I. s. Shstilo.
candidate of philosophical sciences; Colonel H. P. Shendrik. doctor
of philosophical sciences.

Publisher: Ordene Trudovogo Krasnoso Znaleni Voyennoye Izdstel'stvo
Hinisteratve Oborony 8883

Place and yesr of publication: Hoscov, 1977
lulbers of Copies published: 20.000

1
POI OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Signed to press: 16 February 1977

Annotation:

The increase in the nunher of engineers and technicians in the arny and navy
is one of the lost inportsnt nanifestations and results of the revolution in
Iilitary affairs. At the present tine, ellost half of the officers, and lore
than 80 percent of those in the Strategic Missile Porces. are engineers or
technicians. It has hecone necessary to thoroughly study the place and role
of the engineer within the structure of the nilitary organisation and to pro-
vide a thorough description of his personality. which is depicted 6y the con-
hination of his ideological-political. social, professional and psychological
qualities.

This hook attenpts to clarify the peculiarities of the social nake-up of the
Soviet nilitary engineer. It was written for the officer corps and for a broad
range of nilitnry readers.

Table of Contents:
Page

Introduction ........................................................... 3

Chapter 1. The Socialist Mature of Soviet Military Engineering Personnel 6
l. Methodological Principles for Classifying the Soviet
Military Engineer's Personality ................................ 6
2. The Col-unist Party's work to train and Indoctrinate
Soviet Military Engineers ..................................... 23

Chapter II. The Revolution in Military Affairs and the Professional
Qualifications of Engineering and Technical Personnel of the
Army and Navy ................................................. 60
l. Aug-entation of the lequirenents Made of Military Engi-
neers in Connection with the Scientific and Technological
R‘Volutton IOOOIOOOOOOIOOOOOOC.0.0.0.00IOOOOOIIOOOOIOOOOOOOO0.0 ‘0
2. The Make-Up and Mature of Military Engineering Bork ........ 69
3. The Military Engineer as a Technical Specialist ............ 58
a. The Operational-Tactical Training of Military Engi-
neering Personnel ............................................. 69
5. The Military Engineer as the Organizer and Indoctrina-
tor of the Men Under Hie ...................................... 75
6. Career Selection for Military Engineering Personnel ........ 90

Chapter III. The Soviet Military Engineer's Intellectual Uorld ........ 112
l. The Main Features of the Soviet Military Engineer's
Horld Outlook ............................................... 112
2. The Soviet Military Engineer's Moral Make-Up .............. 120
3. The Eethetic in the Military Engineer's Life and Bork ..... 132
6. The Military Engineer's Thought Process ................... 162

Chapter IV. The Social Activity and Responsibility of the Soviet Mili-
tary Engineer ................................................ 152

2
POM OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'W Ufl'lhllls Ual'a was

1. The Nature and Substance of the Social Activity of P3;
Military Engineering Personnel ..............................

2. The Military Engineer’s Socio-Political Activity . .. . . .. . . 157
3. The Military Engineer's Professional Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
6. The Responsibility of Military Engineering Personnel . . . . . 179

Concliﬂloﬂ ssssssesssssosssssssssossassesoasseassaesessoesssseoessseoo 196

Introduction:

While persistently and steadfastly pursuing a policy of peace, the Mist
Party constantly concerns itself with strengthening the nation's defensive
night. In the report. "The CPS" Central Co-ittee' a Report and the Perty' s
Main Tasks in the Area of Donsstic and foreign Policy," which Coersde L. l.
Brezhnev, general secretary of the CPS" Central Co-ittee. presented at the
25th Congress. he states the following: "our party will do everything possible
to see that the glorious Arned forces of the Soviet Union continue to have at
their disposal everything necessary to perforn their responsible task. that

of guarding the peaceful labor of the Soviet people and serving as a bulwark
of universal peace. The fornulation and the performance of this task clear-
ly reflect the class. socialist nature of the party's foreign policy and the
concern denonstrsted by the CPSU for the creation of favorable foreign poli-
tical conditions for the successful building of a co-unist society in our
nation and for strengthening the forces of socialise, peace and progress
throughout the world.

The officer corps has an active role in the accolplishnent of this task. The
task of strengthening the power and combat capability of the Soviet Arned
Forces depends to a considerable degree on their successful work. Soviet
officers are active agents of party and govern-eat policy in the any and
navy and of the class. revolutionary and ailitsry spirit of the any and its
coIbat traditions.

between the tine they were created and the present, Soviet military personnel
have undergone great changes based on the profound social and spiritual pro-
cesses taking place in the develop-eat of the Soviet socialist society and

in the inproveaent of the Arned Forces. which has been based on the achieve-
Isnts of science and technology. The successes achieved by developed social-
isn. the rapid flourishing of the socialist sunny and culture, the unprece-
dented ideological-political and noral unity of the Soviet society have been
reflected in the social. ideological. noral and professional lake-up of Soviet
ailitary cadres. The revolution in silitary affairs has slro greatly affected
the structure and make-up of the work perforned by any and navy personnel.
An increase in the nulber of engineers and technicians in the any and navy
has been one of its lost important results. The large specific proportion of
military engineers and technicians in the Soviet officer corps is one of the
significant features of the Soviet Aned Forces at the contenporary stage.

At the present tine, slaost one half of the officers are engineers or techni-
cians. More than 00 percent of the officers in the Strategic Missile forces

are engineers or technicians. Their nubers are tending to grow in all ser-
vices of the Arled forces.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The increasing number of engineering personnel in the army and navy, which
has had a considerable effect with respect to further improving the Armed
Forces of the USSR, has also brought about the theoretical problea of study-
ing the Soviet ailitary engineer's personality.

The Soviet military engineer's personality is a coabination of all the so-
cial. ideological-political. professional, moral and psychological qualities
which make him like the rest of the officer corps and the Soviet society, of
which he is a full member. and at the sane tine. reflect his specific charac-
teristics. which are peculiar only to this group of military workers. Using

a systematic approach, the authors analyze the problem of the Soviet military.
engineer's personality in a comprehensive manner. Such an analysis also re-
quires clarification of those features of the Soviet military engineer's per-
sonality. which are con-on and identical for all representatives of the Soviet
officer corps (specifically. the social-political. ideological and noral quali-
ties). without such an analysis. however. it is impossible to create an inte-
gral social portrait of the Soviet military engineer.

The sociological aspects of the Soviet officer's personality in general, and
that of the military engineer in particular. have still not been adequately
explained. A general description of Soviet officer personnel is provided in
a number of works, but they are primarily of a historical nature. In the in-
terest of a comprehensive approach to the analysis and elaboration of this
problea, we need a broad study of the social. mental and professional quali-
ties of Soviet officers. Even less has been writen about the Soviet military
engineer: the list of works on this subject consists of articles published in
military journals and newspapers.

In an attempt to-analyse the Soviet military engineer's personality psycholog-
ically, the authors of this book have relied on the basic principles set forth
by the Harnist-Leninist classics on matters of military organisational develop-
ment and engineering work and on guiding documents provided by the CPS", which
formulate the most ieportant principles of the party's cadre policy at the
stage of developed socialism, the scientific and technological revolution and
the contemporary revolution underway in military affairs.

The authors are cognizant of the complexity and of the multifaceted nature
of this subject. A number of issues. which require further study and investi-
gation. have naturally only been mentioned in this book.

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter II: TNB REVOLUTION IN MILITARY APPAIRS AND TNB PROFESSIONAL QUALI-
FICATIONS 0P ENGINSBRING AND TECNNICAL PERSONNEL OP TN! ARHY AND NAVY

l. Augmentation of the Requirements Made of Military Engineers in Connection
with the Scientific and Technological Revolution

The process of creating and developing a military engineering corps is pre-
sently taking place under conditions created by the scientific end technical
revolution underway in our nation and the closely linked revolution occurring

in military affairs. It would therefore be impossible to properly understand
the causes of the fundamental changes presently occurring in our engineering
personnel. the nature of those changes end the trends apparent in them, without
analysing the manner in which these changes are effected by scientific end
technological progress end the revolutionary transformation of military affairs.

Army and navy engineering personnel form a special category of the nation's
engineering cadres. on the one hand. end an integral pert of the officer corps
of the Soviet Armed Forces. on the other. Scientific end technological pro-
greas can therefore effect niSitery engineers both directly end indirectly.

In the former case, this influence assumes the form of general changes occur-
ring in the nation's engineering cadres as a whole. a result of the scientific
and technological revolution. In the letter case. it is a matter of specific
changes occurring only in military engineering personnel. changes brought
about by the revolution in military affairs. primarily the qualitative trans-
formation of the Armed Forces' technical military base. In both cases, an
analysis of this influence includes the disclosure of certain aspects of both
the scientific and technological revolution and the revolution occurring in
military affairs. Since this subject has been thoroughly covered in the lit-
ersture, we shell discuss it only briefly.

The contemporary scientific end technological revolution constitutes a spe-
cial phase, a concentrated manifestation. of scientific end technological
progress, end represents an enormous advance in the understanding of nature
and man's application of its laws. an advance characterized by the transform-
ation of science into a direct productive force for society and the reform of
the entire system of productive forces. The substance of this revolution is
formed of the sum-total of scientific discoveries and technological achieve-
ments. which are of world importance. historically speaking. and have brought
about the use of basically new machines and tools of labor. technological pro-
cesses and materials in the production sector.

The peculiar nature of the modern scientific and technological revolution lies
in the fact that it is developing vith unprecedented speed. as e singly pro-
cess embracing all of science and all of technology, transforming science into
a direct productive force for society. Among the trends in the development of
the modern scientific and technological revolution. special mention should be
made of the developeent of the energy base and the growth of the power supply
per production unit. the qualitative changes occurring in the production of
materials. the improvement of tools of labor. based on total mechanization

and automation. and the adoption of progressive new technology.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scientific and technological revolution has significantly altered the
conditions and the nature of public labor. An intensive process involving
the shifting of a number of man's direct production functions. primarily
those involving heavy. monotonous physical labor. to machine complexes and
automated systems. In the process. man is dropping out of the technological
cycle. rising above it. as it were. performing observation. physical control
and regulation functions. Specific sociological studies have shown that the
amount of time spent by skilled personnel on operations requiring predominat-
ly physical labor is frequently reduced by up to 20 percent at enterprises
thoroughly outfitted with modern equipment. Prom 70 to 95 percent of the
time is spent monitoring. adjusting and regulating the equipment. and on the
performance of analytical computations and other. primarily mental. work.2
This means that the scientific and technological revolution is leading to
the saturation of physical labor with intellectual elements and bringing the
work performed by kolkhoz and other workers into line with that performed
by the engineer and the technician.

All of this is making the work not only more productive but also more crea-
tive and attractive. changing people's attitude toward work and helping to
transform work into a prime inner need for all members of society. At the
same time. these circumstances are making it necessary to further develope pub-
lic education and constantly elevate the technological sophistication and the
occupational skills of the workers. The introduction of universal secondary
education among the youth. improvement of the occupational training system

and the implementation of a planned process of raising the workers' skills.
taking the requirements of scientific and technological progress into account.
are all having a profound influence with respect to elevating the general and
work standards of the workers and the training of skilled workers for all sec-
tors of the national economy. Suffice it to say that more than 76 percent of
the workers employed in the national economy today have a higher or secondary
(complete or incomplete) education.

The problem of providing the national economy with highly skilled engineers
and technicians has also been reformulated. The process of combining science
with production and adopting new technological processes. automated systems
and modern equipment is making the work performed by engineers. scientists and
technicians considerably more important.

A new system of training engineers. acknowledged by the entire world. has been
created in our nation during the years of Soviet government. Hhile a total of
only 8.000 specialists with a higher education worked in tsariat Russia's in-
dustry prior to World Her I.6 9.641.000 specialists with a higher education
and 13,306,000 with a secondary specialized education are presently employed
in our national economy.5

It is not only the absolute number of engineers and technicians which is grow-

ing. but their relative strength as well. That is. their specific proportion
is increasing both among production personnel in industry and among all specia-
lists with a higher education. The scientific and technical intelligentsia in

our nation has begun increasing in recent years at a rats outstripping that

6
POR.OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

any other social group. Between 1950 and 1970. for example. the number of
workers increased 2.1-fold, while the number of engineers and technicians
grew 2.9-fold.6 The engineering profession in the USSR is also the most
common among specialists with s higher education. while engineers accounted
for one fifth of the total number of specialists with a higher education in
the 1930's, the proportion had increased to more than one third by 1970.7

At the present time, more than 60 percent of the students attending Soviet
VUZ's are studying to become engineers. and almost one out of every twoscien-
tists deals with problems in the technical sciences.

Another important point to be stressed is the fact that until recently the
VUZ's mainly concentrated on increasing the number of engineering graduates,
whereas, dispite the continuing increase in the need for engineers. the focus
of importance is switching to the quality of their training. based on the de-
mands of the scientific and technological revolution. The engineer now per-
forns as a designer of machines, structures. instruments and mechanisms. as

a mathematician utilizing high-speed computers, as a technologist creating and
establishing progressive production nethods. as an organizer and econonist. as
an operator and. finally, as a researcher utilizing theoretical achievements
for practical purposes.

Engineers and technicians are the ones directly involved in conbining science
with production. developing. creating and introducing new equipment. studying
and perfecting production control systems, investigating possibilities for
transferring non-creative production functions to autonstic machines. and per-
forning the work of improving production organisation and introducing scienti-
fic organization of labor at the enterprises themselves.

The main effect of the scientific and technological revolution on engineers

is thus manifested in two dialectically contradictory and interdependent trends.
In the first place. by contributing to the growth of the scales and conplexity
of production and the equipment. the scientific and technological revolution
is thereby placing new and greater demands upon the quantity and caliber of
engineering and technical personnel. In the second place, by altering the na-
ture of public labor, inserting creative elements into it and contributing to
the elevation of the Soviet people's general education and their cultural and
technological sophistication, the scientific and technological revolution is
thereby creating the conditions and expanding the possibilities for satisfying
man's need for knowledge and creative activity. These trends are reflected in
specific form in the work of nilitary engineers and technicians as well.

Improvement of the Soviet people's welfare, their cultural standards and tech-
nical sophistication. which has resulted from party and government efforts
during the course of the cultural and the scientific and technological revolu-
tions. has resulted in the present situation, in which more than 75 percent of
the fighting-en in the army and navy have a higher or secondary education. The
young people entering the military service have a sufficiently broad technical
perspective, a good general education and specific technical skills. More than
84 percent of the draftees have acquired one or another civilian specialty. and
this applies to the technical specialties as well. Many of them also have

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL.USE ONLY

experience in working with the new equipment. Every third draftee has ac-
quired a military skill in a DOSAAI training organization.9

At the present time. personnel of the Soviet Armed Forces have every oppor-
tunity to master rapidly and successfully the new military equipment which

the troops are receiving, to competently service and maintain it in a con-
stant state of trouble-free performance, to take an active and productive

part in invention work and that of improving efficiency. In order for mili-
tary engineers to realize these possibilities effectively, they must possess

a great deal or knowledge. a good general education and good.overall standards.
a broad political and military perspective, and a high level of professional
and pedagogical skill.

The development of the scientific and technological revolution. in conjunction
with other factors. has resulted in a situation in which the engineering spec-
ialty. particularly that of the military engineer, has become one of the high-
ly intellectual and creative lines of work. Combined with the population's
high general education level, this has resulted in the availability of a large
group of young people who not only desire to link their lives and work with
the Armed Forces, but who also possess an education adequate for becoming a
tpecialist in one or another military engineering field. The foundation for
creating and replenishing the corps of military engineers is thus constantly
expanding, which makes its possible to provide the personnel on s more goal-
oriented basis, selecting candidates who satisfy to the greatest degree the
present large requirements made of military engineers. Furthermore, many
young specialists holding diplomas enter the army directly from higher civi-
lian educational institutions.

We have now described the main trends in the area of the scientific and tech-
nological revolution's immediate influence on the development of engineering
and technical cadres. The direct effect. however. describes only one aspect
of the matter, an analysis of which makes it possible to reveal only certain
general elements characteristic of the changes occurring in all engineering
cadres. without considering their specific field of endeavor. And it is ilk
portant for us to explain the specific nature of those changes occurring pre-
cisely in the area of military affairs. This is only possible with an analy-
sis of the scientific and technological revolution's indirect effect on mili-
tary engineering cadres (those occurring as a result of the revolutionary
changes taking place in military affairs).

The nature of the present revolution in military affairs is revealed in the
qualitative changes being made in military weapons and equipment, in the en-
tire material and equipment base of the forces, forms and methods of conduct-
ing combat operations, the organizational structure of the Armed Forces and
the caliber of the personnel. One of the most important peculiarities of the
present revolution occurring in military affairs. as noted above, is its close
interrelationship with the scientific and technological, which is transforming
the military base of the army and navy.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the first place. technology is being introduced in the forces in an in-
tensive process; the quantity of combat weapons and equipment is growing;
all services of the Armed Forces and branches of troops are becoming fully
outfitted with modern equipment; and the amount of work performed by the
fightingmen with technical equipment is rising. The soldier's work in the
Soviet Armed Forces has been placed onto a base consisting of the latest
technical equipment in the form of highly developed. electrically powered
facilities. various automatic and semiautomatic systems. computers. reference
instruments and mechanisms ensuring successful combat employment of the wee-
pons. Naturally. the increase in the volume of technical equipment is also
producing an increase in the number of engineers and technicians.

in the second place. the weapons end combat equipment are now more powerful
and complex. and they operate at higher speeds than ever before. he know,
of course. that a single SO-megaton thermonuclear bomb explodes with a force
exceeding that of all the explosives used in previous wars waged by mankind.
The combat copibilitiea of conventional weapons have grown. For example. it
was announced at the session of the USSR Supreme Soviet which passed the Law
"On Universal Mandatory Military Service" that the total power of an artil-
lery end mortar salvo by a modern motorized rifle division has reached 53
tons. exceeding the total force of such a salvo by a 1939 division more than
30 times over. The power supply per unit for a modern motorized rifle divi-
sion ha» increased 10-fold over the 1939 level.10

hodern military technology is such that it would now be practically impossible
to enumerate all of the sciences connected with the creation and production of
weapons. The combat equipment is constantly improving and becoming more com-
plex. Just 15 to 20 years ago. a technical device of average complexity con-
sisted of 700-800 parts and assemblies. 3 the beginning of the 1970's. such
a device contained around 1400-1500 parts. 1 According to foreign data. the
radio-electronic equipment carried by a modern bomber alone consists of 75.000
to 100.000 various components. It is clear from this why the production of
a jet aircraft requires ten times more work on the part of enginefsing end
technical personnel than that of an aircraft with piston engines. That
which applies to the production of equipment, however. applies to its opera-
tion to an equal. if not greater, degree. The complexity of the combat equip-
ment and weapons and the need to make them highly dependable and constantly
ready for combat naturally means that greater and more serious demands must

be made of the caliber of operation of the combat equipment, the full respon-
sibility for which is borne by the military engineers.

In addition. the increase in the power of weapons and the complexity of the
equipment is causing them to cost more. and. consequently. military engineers
have a greater responsibility to maintain the equipment in model condition.
to preserve and care for it. Modern equipnent is expensive. This explains
why careful handling and careful operation of the equipment produces such a
great saving for the national economy and explains why military engineers are
expected to play such a major role in the matter.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the third place. the increasing complexity of the equipment is resulting

in diversification and increasing the complexity of military occupations. espe-
cially the technical specialties. The operation and servicing of the modern
missiles. submarines. military aircraft and tanks demand specialists in engines.
fuel and fuel equipment. radio and radio-electronic equipment. missile weapons.
electric-power engineering. instments and so forth. According to data com-
piled by American experts. 37 specialists are required to service medium-rang, a
missilsa in the field. A total of 600 technicians and operators are required
for a single missile unit of 10 Atlas missiles.”

It is therefore not surprising that there was a total of only 15-20 military
specialties during world war I. the number increasing to l60 in Horld Her II.
but that there was more than 400 technical specialties alone in the army by
the beginning of the 1970's.“ The increase in the number of specialists in
the forces has been accompanied by an increase in the number of specialties.
the performance of which requires not so much physical as mental work. The
nature and make-up of military work as a whole is changing: it is beeomng

increasingly technical. intellectual and creative.

In the fourth place. the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of mili-
tary engineering personnel are being affected considercbly with respect to
increased demands being made of them by the process of rapid application of the
latest discoveries in military affairs. the replacement of certain technical
models. and sometimes. entire weapons systems. with new ones. and those. with
even more modern ones. the obsolesence of equipement and its reduced service
life. The time elapsing between the development of new equipment and its
adoption for operational use is being reduced.

A period of 35 years (1867-1902). for ample. was required before radio could
be used as a means of co-unicstion. television required 16 years (1922-1936).
the atomic bomb--6 years (1939-1945); and transistors-4» years (1968-1953).1

At the beginning of our century. 20 to 30 or more years was required to develop
an improved weapon and outfit armies with it. whereas this process in the
armies of larger nations has now been accelerated 2- to 3-fold. Suffice it
to say that two or three generations of missiles have been replaced during the
past l0 to 15 years in our nation and abroad. a considerable portion of the
fleet of military aircraft. surface ships and submarines has been renewed. and
the surface-to-air missile and radar systems. control and communication equip-
ment have changed several times. The time required to design this or that
technical model sometimes exceeds its service life in the armed forces. A
technical model sometimes becomes obsolete even before it is placed into op-
erational use.

while the complexity and diversification of military equipment demand greater
specialized knowledge and lead to diversification of the technical military
professions and to increased specialization of military engineering work. the
replacement of weapons systems is resulting in integration of the knowledge
required by the specialist and demanding thorough theoretical training to
permit the engineer to independently master the new equipment models. to rapid-
ly grasp the new technical concepts underlying their designs. and so forth.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Scientific and technological progress and the revolution in ailitary affairs
have thus created a solid objective foundation for increasing the nuaber and
inproving the caliber of Iilitory engineers. raised the role and the inpor-
tancs of engineers and technicians. produced qualitative advances in the na-
ture of nilitary engineering work. and placed new daaanda upon the ailitary
engineer's professional qualifications.

2. The Hake-Up and Nature of hilitsry Engineering Work

in the preceeding paragraphs. we have discribed the factors producing the
growth end inproveaent of nilitary engineering personnel of the Soviet Arned
forces. There is yet another. equally iaportant aspect of the astter: um
has the nilitary engineer brought to the forces? This question can be an-
swered by analyzing the stake-up and nature of ailitary engineering work.

The ailitary engineer's work represents the socially conditioned. purposeful
occupation of the nilitary engineering cadres. which focuses on the creation.
testing. analysis. operation and repair of conbat weapons and equipaent for
purposes of raising their effectiveness and aainiaining the. in a constant
state of operational efficiency and conbat readiness.

The nilitary engineer perforns various functions in ailitary units (chasti)
and nilitary institutions. In the sub-units (podrasdeleniya) and units of
engineer troops. he nay design weapons and direct the work of constructing
then: at repair offices. he nay be in charge of operations. develop techno-
logy. perfora design work. detect defects. adjust and test arena-ant systeas;
and at research institutes and testing grounds. he night investigate the con-
bnt and technical features of weapons and nilitsry equip-ant. arc-arise test
results and develop reco-endations for eliainating defects and improving Ia-
thods of eaploying the equipment and weapons for conbat and operating then.
Military engineers help to creat aethoda for studying and prograns for aodel-
ing the weapons systeas being designed. using electronic coaputers. and ae-
thods of eaploying the. for coabat. and to coapile instructions. quidea and
annuals on the operation and study of technical equip-ent " '.a Iilitary
units.

The operation of coabat and nilitary equipnent. however. is the aost prevalent
type of engineer work in the Araed forces. The engineer nay direct the work
of crews perforning various operations or he lay participate directly in the
perforlance of the more coaplicated and responsible operations involved in the
technical servicing and readying of equip-ent. the detection and eliaination
of aalfunctions and breakdowns and the control of the couples and crucial tech-
nical equip-ent. Regardless of the specific work perforled by the engineer.
his nain task is one of ensuring technically coapetent operation of the con-
bct weapons and ailitsry equipaent end the tinely and quality perfornsncs of
nessures to ensure that the weapons and equipaent are Iaintained at the re-
quired high level of readiness for coabat enployaent. And one should not lose
sight of the fact that certain types of.weapona are so couples that in aaster-
ing then. nany line generals and officers becoae true scientists in their
service field.

ll
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The conceptn "the Ieke-up" end ”the neturc" or eilltery engineering work cen-
not be eepereted. beceuee the functione pen‘orned by :Iilitnry engineere de-
tereine the etructure. the focue end the epecific quelitetive eepecte of their
work. The neture of the work ie at the use tine greetly influenced by ite
netcriele nnd equip-ent beee. the level of the epecieliete' ecientific trein-
ing. the objective of the work. end no forth.

The chengee brought ebout in the neke-up end neture of eilitery engineering
work by ecientific end technologicel progreee in generel. end by the revolu-
tion in eilitery effeire in perticuler. heve been reflected prieerily in the
fore of greeter epecielizetion by nilitery engineere. The nieeione of the
different eervicee of the Areed Porcee. the peculieritiee of their eilitery
beeie end the neture of the technicel treining received by the pereonnel de-
terline the epecific feeturee of the work perforeed by the nilitery engineer
of e eerviee of the Arled Porcee end hie profeeeionel cherecterietice.

Depending on the take-up of the engineer'e work end hie functionel dutiee.

the eilitery engineer perform in one of the following nein cepecitieex engi-
neer co—ender. reginentel engineer. deputy co-ender for technicel effeire.
weepone engineer. engineer of the technicel engineering eervice. unit engineer.
engineer operetor. engineer progre-er. deeignengineer. teet engineer. eteff
engineer. end othere.

Neturelly. the neture of eilitery engineering work is greetly deter-ined by
the type of engineer end hie field of work. hie epecieliution. the poeition
he occupiee. end the eervice of the Arned Porcee or the brench of troope to
which he belonge. The neture of the work perfoned by the deeign engineer.
for exuple. epproechee thet of o ecientiet. while the work of en operetione
engineer in einiler to thet of e co-nnder. The fectore nentioned eleo heve
e nejor effect on the divereificetion of functione (functionel dutiee) per-
for-ed by eilitery engineere. ‘l'he functione of the nieeile engineer in the
Air Defence Forcee. for exeeple. differ eignificently froe thoee perfoned by
e equedron engineer of the Air Force or en engineer perforning reeeerch on e
weepone eyeten in one or enother reeeerch orgenitetion. None the leee. it ie
poeeible to ieolete eeverel beeic. doninent functione. which not fully depict
the neke-up of ell nilitery engineering work.

The fact ie thet the greet veriety of functione perforned by nilitery engi-
neere heve the use objective: to unite the weepone end coebet equipent eore
effective end to nintein then in e conetent etete of operetionel efficiency
end conbet reedineee.

The teek of ieproving the cowbet reedineee of the erny end nevy in the ege of
nucleer weepone end nieeilee. jet eitcreft end redio-electronice in e couple:
end eultifeceted one. It ie cenprieed of any fectore end ie echieved by
neene of en entire eyetee of neeeuree cerried out by conendere end eteffe.
politicel orgene. perty end Keene-cl orgeniutione. by ell pereonnel of the
Arled Porcee. Since the weepone end conbet equipeent colpriee the Interiel
foundetion for the coebet reedineee of eny eervice of the Mud torcee. coe-
bet reedineee depende greetly on the preciee etete of thin equip-eat. Thie
circuutence ie reeponeible for the enlerged role of the eilitery engineer.
en ieportent ole-eat of when job of Ieinteining colbet reedineee ie none
other then thet of ccnetently eeeing to the etete of repeir. ebeolute relie-
bility end trouble-free Sanctioning of1 {he coebet equip-eat.

POI OFFICIAL 083 all!
TOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The state of the equipment defines only one aspect 0‘ conbat resdiness. how-
ever. The combat readiness of the Armed Forces is to a crucial degree de-
terninad by the people who control the equipment. by the personnel directly
involved in the combat employment of the equipment. its operation and ser-
vicing. The era in which we live dictates the need for all army and navy to
be skilled in the use of all types of weapons and equipment and to be able

to employ them without delay and with maximum effectiveness. The military
engineer. who bears full responsibility for the combat readiness of the equip-
ment. must deal to on equal degree with the problems of training and indoctri-
nating the personnel in the interest of maintaining combat readiness. This

is on important part of his work.

Finally. the collective nature of modern weapons demands skilful organization
and efficient control of the work performed by the personnel operating the
equipment and employing it for combat purposes. the two functions being re-
quired in the interest of improving combat resdiness. Scientific organiza-
tion of the work involved in operating. servicing and providing smterial
support for modern equipment and weapons systems constitutes one of the im-
portant functions of military engineering personnel. The main task of mili-
tery engineers. that of ensuring a high level of combat readiness and opera-
tional efficiency on the part of the military equipment and servicing person-
nel. has thus given rise to such functions as special professional. organiza-
tional and control. training and indoctrinational duties. which are shared by
all categories of military engineers.

These functions are the most co-on and basic ones. in the first place. because
they reflect most accurately the main objective of the military engineer's
work and contribute to its achievement to the greatest degree.

In the second place. they are standard for all types and fields of military
engineering work. regardless of the service of the Armed Forces of which the
engineer is a member. and regardless of his position or specialization (al-
though they are manifested in a specific form for the various categories of
military engineers).

In the third place. these are collective functions. All other functions per-
formed by military engineers are included in them as sub-functions. The man-
nor in which these functions ere related and correlated basically defines the
structure of every type of work performed by the military engineer.

In the fourth place. the total group of the functions singled out. in combi-
nation.raveal most completely the basic essence of the military engineer's
work. and the changes occurring in these functions as a result of the scien-
tific and technological revolution and the revolution in military affairs
reflect the corresponding changes occurring in the nature of the military
engineer's work. A functional approach. which implies an investigation into
the basic functions characterizing the cllitary engineer's work. is there-
fore required for extensive analysis of the make-up and nature of military
engineering work.

13
f0! 0!?ICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OVPICIAI. "$3 ONLY

Since these functions are discussed in detail in subsequent sections of the
book. we shall lilit ourselves to only a general discussion of then at this

point.

The special professional function of the nilitary engineer's work is sani-
fested in the creation. operation and conbet enploynent of military equip-
nent. In order to perforn it. the engineer as a technical specialist lust
possess profound theoretical knowledge, good technical and engineering train-
ing and precise practical skills in the operation and servicing of the aili-
tary equipnent. This does not exhaust the group of require-ents, however.
In nodern warfare. which is distinguished by exceptionally dynaaic colbat
operations and the large scale of battles. operations and engagements. the
lilitnry engineer's operatiouland tactical perspective and his ability to
understand and inple-ent the co-ander's concept. utilising the capabilities
of the nilitary equipnent, are of' great ilportance. The technical engineer-
ing specielist's nilitary training becones exceptionally important in this

situation.

The ailitary engineer's organizational and control function is reflected in
his ability to organise precisely and scientifically the operation and servic-
ing of the nilitary equip-ant by the personnel and the nobilisation and or-
ganization of his subordinates for the parfonance of the lissions assigned by
«mud.

Previously. letters of organization and control were not so acute for the

silitary engineer. in addition to which he was in charge of fewer Ian and far
fewer specialties. with the contemporary revolution in nilitary affairs. the
nilitery engineer. who efficiently organises the work of large technical lili-
tary teas, and the operation and repair of extranely couple: equip-ant. Iust
be able to freely use the skills. techniques and nethods involved in supervise

ing people.

Organisational neasurea to develop rationalization and invention work in the
forces occupy a place of proninence in the activities of the Iodern Iilitary
engineer. The search for nore efficient leans of training the troops and
operating the Iilitary equip-cot and weapons are of basic ilportance in the
age of autonation and renote control. radio-electronics and electronic con-
puters. Good technical erudition on the part of the personnel. their talent.
native intellegence and initiative contribute greatly to the successful accou-
plishnent of this task. This is why rationalization and invention work forns
an inportant elenent of the nilitary engineer's occupation.

The training and indoctrinational function of silitary engineers is manifested
in their ability to work with people. to train the. in the use of the couple:
nilitary equip-eat and to develop in than a spirit of co-nnist ideals. con-
nunist noral principles and standards, and the requirenents contained in the

silitary oath and regulations.

16
roe OFFICIAL 05! our
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The collective nature of modern weapons means that each military specialist
determines to one degree or another how reliably every unit and assembly
operates. how well it is tuned and adjusted, and how promptly and well the
preventive maintenance is performed. This means that the military engineer
must take an active part in all types of practical training classes. show
true concern for improving the personnel's ratings and pay close attention
to the level of technical military information work.

The scientific and technological revolution and the revolution in military
affairs have created new and greater demands not only with respect to the
training of the personnel but also in the matter of indoctrinating them. The
Soviet officer today is not simply an engineer or technician and not just a
military specialist in the narrow sense of the word. he is also both a peda-
gog and an indoctrinator. In order to properly structure the training and
indoctrination of his men. an officer muct not only have good political and
technical military training. but he must also possess a certain knowledge of
the science of teaching and of technology. These needs make it necessary to
provide extensive pedagogical training for military engineers. and army and
navy engineers are provided with such training during their studies at a mili-
tary VUZ. by the officer training system and by their practical service in
the units and sub-units.

The following must be mentioned as we complete our functional analysis of the
make-up and nature of the military engineer's work.

In the first place. the basic aspects of military ngineering work which we
have considered are extremely fluid and dynamic. Each of them acquires greater
or lesser specific weight in comparison with the others. depending on the mili-
tary engineer's field of specialization. the position he occupies and the
service of the Armed Forces or the branch of troops in which he serves. The
individual functions have specific substance. which differs considerably for
the different categories of military engineering personnel. Finally, the sub-
stance of these functions is not the same for the different phases in the de-
velopment of military theory and practice.

In the second place. these functions are closely interrelated; they influence
each other significantly and are manifested in dialectical unity. Disregard
for any one of them therefore has an immediate. negative effect on the others.
in contrast. the successful realization of each specific function increases
the probability that the remaining functions will also be effectively per-
formed.

In the third place. the trend toward the convergence of the duties performed
by the military engineer and those of the commander is becoming increasingly
clearly defined under the effects of the revolution in military affairs. we
are speaking of a peculiar synthesis of those features and qualities charac-
teristic of the work performed by both the commander and the engineer within
a single individual. While there were formerly certain grounds for distribut-
ing duties according to the principle "the commander works with people. while

15
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the engineer worka with equip-ant." the concepte "line co-ander" and "etrict-
ly nn engineer" ere now heconing archeic. Naturally. working with people ie
etill one of :ha aoat iaportent aapecta of the eo-andar'e work. just an work-
ing with equip-ant continuea to be the engineer'e prinary duty. ‘l'hie in it-
aelf ia no longer adequate. however. The work perforned by the co-ander with
equipnent. like the engineer‘e work dealing with people. ie no leee inportant.

Thin can be fully explained. . The forcea are exteneively provided with techni-
cal equiplent. and the acoupliehnant of the tank of keeping the unite and the
cub-unite in a atate of reedineee. which ie now the Iain upect of the col-an-
der'e work. therefore depende eignificantly on the atate and perfornance of
that equip-ent. Victory in a battle will alao be greatly dater'nined by the
ability "to extract" fro. the equip-cot everything it hae to offer. The con-
eander'a perfornence of hie operational and tactical nieeione in thc refore
linked to hie ability to lake good uee of the diveree nodern equip-eat. Pur-
theruore. today's co-ander nuet not only know the technical epecificatione
of the codat weapone and the poeeibilitiee for ueing than effectively under
verioue battle conditiona. but Iuet aleo pay conetant attention to the battle
readineee of the technical equipnent and delve into any of the finer pointe
of the eervicing. operation and repair work. the technicaleupport aepect of
keeping the unite and eub-unita coabat-ready neat therefore be coneidered an
inportant elenent of the coatenporary co-ander'e range of functional dutiea.

0n the other hand. the nilitary engineer today cannot keep the equip-ant oper-
ating eaoothly and in e conetant etete of coebat readineee or organize ita
Operation without working with people. with the peraonnel eervicing and oper-
ating that equipnent. painetelringly and on a daily baeie. In addition. my
categoriee of engineering and technical peraonnel are directly in charge of
Iilitery-technical collectivee. of which they are the aole co-andera. Final-
ly. and thin in eepecially inportant. the contenporary engineer not only organ-
izee the operation of the equip-cut and readiae it for coebat. he aleo hae a
direct role in ita conbat enploynent. Engineers perforl reeponaible and con-
plex conhat taeha in the proceaa of perforling combat alert duty in the Strate-
gic Hieeile forcea. at the cone“ poate of varioue air defenae radar facil-
itiea. and no forth. In thia caae. the engineer'e decieion in at the ease
tine the co-ander'a deciaion in the full eenae of the word. "hen he nakea a
deciaion an to the atate of repair or dierepair of the airborne equip-ant on
an aircraft. for exanple. the engineer in thereby aleo naking a con-ander'e
decision ae to whether the aircraft whould be per-itted to fly. and he heara
full reaponeibility for hie decieion. The Iilitery angineer'a range of dutiea
ie thua increaeingly including ole-ante which were alwaye coneidered the ex-
clusive prerogative of-the co-ander.

Thin proceaa ie reflected in the daily affaire of the Araed Iorcee: eany engi-
neera new aerve aa emotion. and there are engineer ce-andera in the nie-
eile unite. engineer pilota in the air force. technician oe-andere and enchan-
ic co-andera in the other brenchee of troope and aervicea of the Arnad

Porcea.

16
FOR onrcw. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

None of this oeana, of course. that every engineer should becoae a coeaander.
Nor does it lean that the con-ander should be replaced by the engineer or

that their functions should serge coapletely. The duties and authority of
each are clearly spelled out in regulations. manuals. instructions and orders.
Us are speaking only of a certain degree of change occurring in the aake~up
of these functional duties. The changes indicated are also reflected and

set forth in the proper Iilitsry doculents and are defined by those docuaents.

All of this aenns that the Iodern con-ander lust possess the proper scienti-
fic knowledge peraitting hi- to analyze problems pertaining to the operation
of equipsent with technical coapetence. and that the engineer aust have a
basic knowledge of tactics, operational art. and so forth, to serve his as
reliable guidelines for making proper decisions on the coabat e-ploynent of
the equipnant.

Sun-ing up whet we have said. we can state that the Iilitary engineer now
serves as a well-trained theoretician, who resolves couples scientific and
technical problesq and as a practical operator. who understands all of the
finer points of the equip-ant and gear and participates directly in the ex-
treaely coupler technological processes. He anbodies the qualities of the
skilful organizer. scientifically directing the Iilitary tea-'s work of ser-
vicing. operating. repairing. preserving and protecting the Iilitary equip-
ment and combat weapons. and of an inspired innovator, a cha-pion of every-
thing new and progressive. directing the work of srly efficiency experts and
inventors and asking a personal contribution to this work. Finally, he is a
skilled pedagog and instructor, responsible not only for the technical train—
ing of all the personnel. but also for the effective combat eaploylant of the
weapons and coahst equip-ant entrusted to the fighting-en, and a akilful and
sensitive indoctrinetor bearing full responsibility for the aoral-political
and psychological conditioning of those under his. The rege.rch.r. the Pr.ct1.
cal engineer. the engineer inventor and efficiency expert, the engineer organ-
izer. the engineer pedagog. the engineer indoctrinator and. finally. the angi-
neer col-snder-these are only a few of the Iain facets of the Iilitary angi—
neer'e work.

In this section we have concentrated Iainly on those factors which have in-
fluenced the changes occurring in the Iilitary engineer's work and the direc-
tion taken by those changes, and. consequently. on the lake-up and nature of
his work. The analysis contained therein was presented for purposes of demon-
strating precisely what the engineer has to do. and why. Equally iaportant

is the question of precisely how the lilitary engineer can successfully per-
fora his nu-erous and sultifaceted functions, what specific set of tools he
has to work with. what aethods and for-s of professional. organizational, prac-
tical, training and indoctrinational work he should enploy, what specific
knowledge he should possess and what qualities he lust develop in hi-self in
order to achievethis.

3. The Military Engineer as a Technical Specialist

The lilitsry engineer's individual qualities are Ianifested to the greatest
degree in his activities as a technical specialist. It is precisely this
area of work which sakes it possible to separate the engineer fro. the gen-

eral group of service-an. to reveal the ailitsry engineer's personality as
17
F0: OVPICIAL USE OIL!
l'VI‘ Vl’l'lbll'u UJD Union

a subject of study. The technical engineering work perforned by specisl-
ists in this category effects the work of sub-units and units of the Soviet
Armed Forces in s specific nenner.

‘l‘he individual's Min personal qualities can he revealed by isolating in the
nilitary engineer's work those operations which he periorns as a technical
specialist. and by analysing the require-cuts sede of him by this area of his

work.

The sein quality characterizing the ailitary engineer as a tschnicel special-
ist is his scientific erudition end the scope of his technical perspective.
This quality is so isportsnt primarily because the work perforeed by the oili-
tsry engineer in the operation of couples Iodern equip-ent can in no way be
reduced to a setter of carrying out ready instructions alone. The engineer
operator hes to rapidly resolve non-standard creative problems pertaining to
the specific operating conditions of a_facility consisting of eeny different
devices. Missile facilities. for emple. say include couples nechanicel ele-
seats. pneustic and hydraulic systels, electromechanical. ad electronic
control systess. as well as radio, heat end chenical systess and devices. in
order to provide optimal conditions for all of these couples devices, the sol-
dier operating the couple: equip-eat lust heve a high level of technical sophis-
tication. and the engineer operator lust denonstrete a high level of creative
energy in his work.

Speciel studies perforned in the United States for purposes of revealing the
csuses of low reliability on the part of various weapons have clearly damn-
strated that an awareness by nilitery operators of the technical and creative
importance of their work constitutes an sxtrenely inportsnt condition for in-
proving the reliability of weapons and cod)“ equip-ent. It would not be an
overstate-ent to say that the trouble-free operation of the equip-sat is a
service no less important than its develop-ant. 1his neans that the engineer
lust have a detailed knowledge of the equip-sat and be able to apply scienti-
fic reco-endations in practice.

The servicing and operation of eodern eilitsry equipeent, which incorporates
the latest achieve-ents of modern scientific and technical thought, require
highly skilled specialists with a broad and thorough theoretical background
and a thorough hnowledge of special disciplines, a good nestery os-design con-
cepts. a taniliarity with the basic principles or the techology e-ployed in
the senufacture of the equipsent being operated and of the control and sea-
suring instrunents. and practical skill in working on the equipesnt.

Given the increasing coeplexity of nilitsry equip-eat and of the operating
sethods, there is increasing responsibility for‘the engineer's decisions.
thorough and cosplete reasoning for which is provided by a detailed analysis
of the specific situation and by the perfonsnce and study of a large n‘er
of eatheeetical computations asking it possible to provide quantitative sub-
stantiation and to adopt the nest optiul decision. This is iepossible with-
out a knowledge of and without skilful aploylent of such quantitative ene-
lytical nethods es lathe-sticel statistics, the theory of use servicing, in-
vestigative theory. asthensticel planning. ssthenetical sodeling. and gas
theory.

18
m OMCIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hathenatical asthode now penetrate deeply into nilitary engineering prac-
tices end are beconing an integral part of the engineer's work. Matheneti-
cal statistics. for emple. per-it the engineer not only to process infor-
mation on equipment failures scientifically. but also to predict the possi-
bility of their occurance. A knowledge of use servicing theory peraits the
engineer to outline optiaal plans for servicing the equip-ant. taking into
account the capabilities of personnel under hie co-end. and to properly
deter-ins the most important areas of the work.

The scientific and technological revolution has Iade it necessary for the
engineer to deal with an enormous end constantly increasing flow of techni-
cal nilitary intonation. The speed and accuracy of the technical decisions
adopted depend greatly on the promptnese and quality of the intonation pro-
cessing. The extensive use of electronic computers is hecoeing highly im-
portant as a result. Electronic colputers. however. are only a technical
neens of reinforcing the engineer’s capabilities and improving the efficiency
of his work. They are not capable of replacing the engineer's creative think-
ing. initiative or will. he alone. using all of the diverse intonation. in-
cluding that which does not lend itself to nechine processing. nekes the engi-

neering decision. assigns the tasks to the non under him. organises and moni-
tors their performance.

A thorough understanding of the peculiarities of the equipment being operated
and the design of and the technology for servicing an aleaent of a given type
of equiplent or weapon. and an understanding of the nature of the physical
proceseea occurring in the machines and nachanians and the principles of their
interaction and functioning are of ante-sly great importance in the engineer's
practical work. Englas wrote the following: ”Ito aware soldier should be igno-
rant of the principles involved in the designing of his weapon or of how it
ahould perfora."15 This is all the more essential for today's military engi-
neer. since such knowledge. conbined with practical skill. per-ita the engi-
neer to work expertly on the equipment entrusted to him. to handle it freely.
to perform its technical servicing well and in good time. to constantly main-
tain optimal operating conditions for the equipmt, to skilfully elininate
this or that malfunction and to take tinsly steps to avert their occurrence.
The engineer who lacks practical skills in working on the equipnent is not
capable of efficiently directing and monitoring the work of those under him.
of providing than with pro-pt assistance or of filling in for this or that
specialist in his service. should the need arise. It is one thing to know
all of the aechanisne. units. assenblies and parts making up a certain tech-
nical system. and another—to be able to operate it with technical conpetence,
to inspect it well at. the right tine and using the proper Iathods. to check
its perforlence. tune. adjust and repair it.

Practical skill requires knowledge but does not autonatically result fro. it.
As a rule. therefore. even nilitary engineers with a good theoretical and
technical background do not achieve good results in their work if they do
not accent to understand all of the finer points and peculiarities involved

19
M OHIO!“ USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in operating the equipment entrusted to then and do not attempt to acquire

practical skills in servicing it. In order to achieve success, it is abso-
lutely essential skilfully to coabine theoretical knowledge with practical

experience.

In order for the military engineer to colbine theory and practice in his work,
he aust be able to perforn well the entire range of jobs done by those under
his command. to check and adjust any assembly in the equip-eat entrusted to
his. to detect and eliainate e nalfunction even when it is not within the
range of his functional duties.

It is when he is actually working with the equip-ent that the engineer checks
the validity and effectiveness of his theoretical knowledge, obtains and re-
inforces his practical skills, acquires confidence in hinself and develops

as an engineer. There is no other way for his to acquire those invaluable
qualities out of which engineering intuition and professional perceptivity
gradually develop and grow. and they are what help the specialist to deter-
mine the state of the equip-eat. to point out a malfunctioning part and deter-
mine the cause fron barely discerneble signs. froa barely noticeable deviations
in the parameters. soaetiles at a single glance and sonetises by the sound.

We could give many examples of such professional skill. The following is just
one of then. During an exercise. the repair battalion con-ended by Engineer-
Lt. Col. A. H. Yeroaekhov was assigned the aission of entering the area

of "combat" operations and repairing tanks which had been put out of action.
One of the tanks was being repaired by a group of specialists headed by Ser-
geant N. Anisinov. The vehicle began operating again within the slloted tine.
and the commander was ready to turn it over to the driver-aechsnic. Lieuten-
ent Colonel A. H. Yeronakhov is an experienced specialist. however. he deter-
mined that soaething was wrong fro. the ruable of the noving vehicle. "hen.
at his insistence. all of the final drive ssseablies were checked. it was dis-
covered that Iistakes had been Iade when the pinions and bearings had been
replaced. This had resulted in barely perceptible. extraneous noises. which
had alerted the engineering officer.

Or take the following case. Upon exanining the causes of a drop in voltage
in the radar jes-er, Engineer-Captain V. I. Shishov suggested that the valve
diodes in the power supply unit were bad.

"I checked the diodes. and they are all good." Lieutenant Goroshkov objected.

“No. that is where the problen lies.” the engineer-captain repeated. Two
diodes were immediately replaced.

"You see. I told you..." Gorshkov could not refrain froa saying. when he saw
that the replace-eat of the two diodes had not produced the desired results.

"Bring ne sone nore diodes. These have probable been at the warehouse too
long." Shishov directed. and bent over the circuit again. when other diodes
were delivered and inserted without elilinating the problem. the technician
fell into a triumphant silence. waiting for the engineer to'bapitulate."

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"He shall Just have to replace them again. Do we have more diodes"? This
time. to the technician's great surprise, the voltage returned to normal.

This is what it means to be confident of ones knowledge and experience. This
in what it means to be a reel engineer. He can only add that it was natural
for the officer in this case to have confidence: Engineer-Captain Vladimir
lvsnovich Shishov is one of the best specialists in missile unit "x" of the
National Air Defense Forces. During his period of service in the unit. he
has received 20 rationalization proposal certificates. There has never been
a time when Engineer-Captain Shishov has left his work station without com-
pleting the job or has refused to help a colleague. he generously shares his
extensive know-how with the young officers and his subordinates. and serves
as secretary of the party organisation.

Not so long ago. when the technical equipment was not overly complex and was
relatively standardised, the technical work performed by an engineer in a
military unit consisted in periodically checking the technical state of the
equipment used and the quality of the technical servicing. Malfunctions in
such equipment could be identified and therefore, eliminated. by the battle
crew. using the exhaustive instructions contained in operating documents. In
the case of complicated malfunctions not covered in the instructions, the tech-
nical equipment .waa sent to repair agencies and replaced~withiitems is working
order from reserve stocks.

The situation is different “cc complex equipment is being used. It is expen-
sive and impractical to keep in the unit a complete set of parts for replacing
those which break down. The great range of possible malfunctions of such equip-
ment, which consists of hundreds of thousands of elements. makes it a problem
to compile documents which list all of the possible equipment failures and
their indications. In many cases. the time required to remove malfunctioning
equipment and replace it with equipment in good working order may considerably
exceed the time required by a skilled specialist to search for and pinpoint
malfunctions. At the same time, the interdependence and complex nature of
this equipnnt reduces the unit's fighting capability when individual unit! of
equipment break down: it is impossible to use even the good equipment without
the malfunctioning units.

In this situation, breakdowns of the technical equipment must be prevented by
skilful prognostication, and when they do occur, the defect must be detected
rapidly and the malfunctioning device's efficiency restored by adjusting or
repairing it. The detection of malfunctions requires competent technical diag-
nosis, a thorough understanding of the design arrangement of the technical
equipment and a clear understanding of the physical processes involved in its
Operation. The engineer's search for defects can be compared with emergency
treatment performed by a medic--there is no time for referring to manuals,

the responsibility is great. and people expect skilled and effective deci-
sions and action of the individual.

Experience has shown that it takes considerably more time to find a defect
then to eliminate it. The possibility of reducing the time spent pinpointing
a malfunction depends mainly on the engineer's erudition and skill, on his

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

capable application of the rules governing technical diagnosis. The engi-
neer's skill is manifested in his ability to make a decision on the basis of
a tow indirect symptoms. without dismantling the equipment for a direct in-
spection or for testing.

Breakdowns of the complex equipment cannot be prevented by performing the
regularly scheduled technical maintenance alone. The technical condition of
the equipment being operated can only be actively controlled by carefully ans-
lyzing irregularities, determining the connection between the regular occur-
rance of malfunctions and the general pattern of irregularities. and perform-
ing additional technical servicing measures in connection with the occurrence
of irregularities and changes in the technical performance of the equipment.
We are essentially talking about the controlled operation of equipment. The
object of control in this case is the technical condition of the equipment
being operated. The irrelugarities dealt with are various changes occurring
in the operating conditions: environmental conditions, rate of consumption of
service life. transportation conditions and distances. and other similar fac-
tors. Various types of technical servicing serve as the controlling actions.

Systematic, quantntive analysis of both the irregularities and the object's
reactions to them is required in order to creat the conditions for controlled
operation. Only this type of identification can provide a solid basis for
working out and implementing control actions.

As a rule, the connections between the processes are not obvious. They are
revealed by determining how the processes influence each other. This is ac-
conplished by comparing and st-arizing a large nuber of observations and
measurements. Only the individual with a combination of the qualities of a
practical specialist and a thorough investigator can make efficient use of
such a volume of information and determine how the processes influence each
other. without "drowning in the sea of information."

This intonation can, of course. also be generalized adequately outside the
military unit--at the control center for the operation of a given type of equip-
ment. but some irregularities demand that the operator engineer take i-ediate
steps to confine their effects (technical confinement servicins). to prevent
damaging effects from adverse actions which have already taken place (compen-
sating technical servicing) and to eliainate defects (restorative technical
servicing).

lhe situation which we have discussed graphically demonstrates how items of
weaponry have changed qualitatively under contemporary conditions. They can
no longer be regarded as simple technical devices. The technical condition of
a weapon is inseparably linked with the work of the specialist servicing the
item. This circumstance forces us to take a new approach to the study of an
object and the ensursnce of its functioning, regarding it as a "man-machine"
system or an anthropo-technical system.

22
P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A change in the state of a coaplex ayatea'e operation can no longer be dia-
cribed by aeana of deteminantn. The reciprocal influence of the proceaaea
can only be revealed atatiaticaily by the coabined proceaaing of a large
voluae of data on a variation in the state of one or aore objecta over a
long period of actual operation. Thin teak can only be perfor'aed by ueing
electronic digital coaputare and epecial. aatheaatical etatiatica cathode.
and regreaaion. correlation and factora analyaia cathode.

Hoot apecialieta now have acceea to theae Mann. due to the broad availabi-
lity of electronic coaputere.

Electronic coaputera are extensively used in varioua atagea of the engineer'a
work. They incraaee the engineer'a capability with reapect to the perfora-
ence of logic. ecientific and technical. engineering and organizational taaka.
and ere uaed to apeed up the perforaance of varioua engineering and technical
couputationa and aa eleaenta of auto-atic control eyateaa.

by uaing aodern coaputera. the ailitary engineer can ace the nature of vari-
oua effects. which peraita hita to deliberately influence the proceaaea in-
volved in the operation of weapona and ailitary equipment. Further-ore. a
detailed underetanding of the weapona ayateae and the proceaaea occurring
within their eleaente. and eyeteaatic obeervation of theae proceaaea perait
the akilled apecialiat to detect chengee occurring in the condition of the
eleaenta and to adjuat than. deliberately and. eoaetilaea. intuitively. Like
the ertiat who ie capable of dietinguiehing up to 20 gradationa of a aingle
color or a textile worker who can diatinguiah up to '00 ehadea of black. the
chilled engineer operator develops an eapecially aenaitiwe perception with
reepect to the condition of the unit operated.

All of theae circuetancea account for the fact that the dependability of
weapona and ailitary equip-ent in directly dependent on the akill of the per-
eonnel aervicing it (aee table).

Table. Reliability Index for Radio Bquipaent of Varying Degreea of Coa-
plexity Operated by Specieliata with Different Skill Levele“

     

yeragc tile (houra) of trouble-free opera-
ion of radio equip-ant conaiating of n ele-

Specialiat training
level

   

Alternating peraonnel
who have coapleted
brief training couraea

Techniciana

angineere

23
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’PICIAI. 088 ONLY

it is clear iron the table that the work perforned by the engineer in the
forces and his skill level are of state importance. since raising the reli-
ability of veapons systems frees capacities at the enterprises producing
those uyetens and spare parts for than. and these capacities can be used
for other production purposes. The table also shows that the index of reli-
ability in an extremely inportant operational factor. it deternines the con-
bat capability of the weapons systess and their elensnta and is a function
not only of the quality of the technical equip-ant but also of the skill of
the personnel servicing the equipncnt. This point is another graphic con-
firnation of the fact that nodern equip-ant and the personnel serv..ing it
nust be regarded as a single "nan-nachine" systen. the properties of which
are detersined by both conponenta.

Anerican experts believe that huen error reduces the dependability of nia-
siie aystess by 20-50 percent. and in acne cases improper huan actions are
the cause of more than half of the sission failures)7

A high level of personal discipline and strict observance of technical and
technological discipline on the part of the nilitary engineer have an organ-
ising effect on the personnel and are one of the chief factors responsible
for naintsining a high level of battle readiness and fighting capability on
the part of the troops. This is due to the fact that nodern weapons and lili-
tary equip-ant can only be in s battle-ready state and perforn their functions
at the required level. vhen the periodic technical servicing is perforned
well and at the proper tine. ‘l'he nilitary engineer deternines to a great de-
gree whether the procedure for perforning this work and for operating the
equipnent becones a steadfast lav for each technical sub-unit. for each
specialist.

Specific aspects of military discipline. technical and technological disci-
pline are reflected in this work of the nilitary engineer. The for-er densnds
the substantiated resolution of problems, based only on current technical
standards and netth set forth in orders and directives. uhile the latter
requires careful adherence to the established technology for perforning all
of the jobs. The observance of strict technics'i and technological discipline
ensures the precise execution of instructions contained in guiding and oper-
ating docunents on maintaining prescribed operating conditions for the vea-
pons and eilitary equiplent. periodic inspection and nonitoring of their tech-
nical condition. tinely and quality perforlsnce of periodic nsintenance ever]:
and strict adherence to the procedure and the netth for perforning it. in-
cluding proper preparation of the toilet equipnent for use.

Careful monitoring of the performance of all operations required by the oper-
ating instructions is a manifestation of teclmological discipline. This is
eapec ially inportant. because these instructions are the result of a sari--
zat ion of nany years of experience in operating the conbst equipnent. l’ailure
to perforn the operations required by the operating instructions or violation
of the set rules is a violation of the technology for operating weapons sys-
tens and can entail serious consequences.

26
'0! OI’PICIAI. US! OHLY
Naturally. the instructions should not be regarded as dogna. Under the super-
vision of coensnders. politicnl workers and Iilitary engineers. the personnel
constantly inprove the standards set for the operation and coabat eeploynent
of nilitary equip-ant. And this is a natural trend in the develop-ant of the
technical nilitary night of the soviet Arned Forces. It is furthered by the
active rationalisation work carried out in the forces. Technical and techno-
logical discipline auat also be exercised in rationalisation work. howeVer.

In this case. it requires that rationalization proposals which have been worked
out not be adopted until the various effects of the proposed changes have been
analysed and they have been approved by the agency overseeing the operation
of the given type of equip-ant.

The nilitary engineer's professional technical activities are thus diverse
and nultifacated. They require good parforaance and investigative qualities.
initiative and a creative approach to the selection and perforaance of tasks.
coabined with thorough evaluation of proposals and strict technical and tech-
nological discipline. peraonal technical knowledge and skills. and the ability
to utilise the infornation contained in operating instructions and to expand
one's knowledge in a process of systeaatic self-education. The lore highly
developed these qualities are in the ailitary engineer. the lore successful
is hie professional work and the greater hie influence on the process of op-
erating the weapons and nilitary equip-ant. which provides the technical sup-
port for aecoaplishing the combat nisaions assigned the nilitary unit and

the Arled Forces as a whole.

The inportance and the guiding nature of the nilitary engineer‘s technical
work are also reflected in the fact that the role of the engineer, who ensures
the nastary. effective use and trouble-free enploynent of the weapons systals.
is highly valued by the CPSU Central Connittee end the Soviet Govern-ant. A
large number of Iilitary engineers have been awarded orders and nedals for
their successes in the testing and incorporation of the latest types of was-
pone and Iilitary equipnent. The contribution Iade by eilitary engineers to
nilitary science and to the develop-ent of ailitsry equip-cot has brought

nany of then Lenin and State prizes and the honorary title "Distinguished
Scientist and Technician." The university degree of doctor or candidate of
te.hnical or chenical sciences had been conferred upon a large nulber of engi-
nears.

6. The Operational-Tactical Training of Military Engineering Personnel

Re have already said that two aspects of the nilitary engineer's work, the
strictly nilitary. cos-under's work. and the engineering and technical side
are increasingly nerging in organic unity in his activities. It is already
difficult to distinguish then on a practical level. This situation lakes it
necesnary to provide military engineers with both technical and operational-
tactical training.

A nunber of circa-stances have brought about the enlarge-eat of the role of
operational-tactical training for nilitsry engineering personnel. In the
first place. operational-tactical training nukes the engineer of the Soviet

25
FOR OPIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arlcd Forces a nilitsry specialist. In the second plece. it closely links
all of the forts of his work with the nissions perforled hy the forces to
saintein coehet reediness end to preparefor end conduct conhst operations.

In the third place. operetional-tectical training develops, inproves end ex~
panda the nilitery engineer's perspective as e con-ender (his operationel-
tecticsl scope) end his officer quslities. end lakes it possible for the
engineer end the cue-ender to perforn each other’e duties. Good operational-
tecticel training is especielly essentiel for such groups of nilitery engi-

neering personnel es engineer coesenders. deputy consenders for technical
affairs, and so forth.

"he: do we seen by the operationel-tsctical training of the nilitsry engineer?

A nilitery engineer's operetional-tecticel treining is the systes of Iilitsry
knowledge. abilities end skills necessery for his to successfully perforl the
functional duties required et engineering. con-end end eteff posts for direct-
ing units and sub-units during preparetions for end the perforuence of coshet
tasks in vsrious situations end for neintsining the weepons end nilitery
equipnent in e constent state of readiness for effective enploylent. It sn-
hrsces the study of a broad range of setters pertaining to nilitary affairs
as a whole end to silitery art specifically.

An snelysis of the work perforled by e Iilitery engineer in the forces shows
that his operetionsl-tecticsl training includes. first and forelost. a know-
ledge of the hesic principles of Soviet nilitery science end nilitery doctrine
and of the role and nissions of the various services of the dried Forces and
brenches of troops end of this or thet weepon systen in e possible war of the
future. An extrenely isportent eree of silitery knowledge for engineering
personnel of the Soviet Arued Forces is their knowledge of the cachet char-
acteristics end cepehilities of the weapons and coshet equip-eat possessed
by units (chesti. soyedineniya) of their service of the Arled Forces (or
htench of troops). the procedure for reedying then for coehat esploylent end
nethods for using the. effectively in conbet.

The silitery engineer is required to have s thoroueh knowledge of the organi-
retion of the battle order of units in the verious types of bottles. of the
methods and for-s of coshet operetions perforled by the troops in vsrious
situations in eccordsnce with the require-eats set forth in onlbet regula-
tions end senusls. of setters pertaining to the control of units end sub-units
in all pheses of their work. and of the nsture of neasures providing ell-
sround support for the coohet operations of units end sub-units. and weys of
accoeplishing then.

The peculiarities of werfere in e situstion involving the use of nucleer wee-
pone seke it necessery to know the procedure for tsking steps to protect per-
sonnel ageinst weapons of sees destruction end to protect radio col-unicstioo
couipnent egeinst ja-Iing.

26
POI OIYICIAL US! OILY
FOR OVPlClAL ”8! ONLY

The nilitnry engineer In fnnillnr with the techniquee nnd the organizational
fornn of treining for teaching the prreonnul tn perforn ekilfully and with
coordination in the acoeplinheent of coebat nieeione. A good knowledge of
the ereed forcee of likely eneniee. the nilitery-politicel nature and the
eubetence of their nilitery doctrine. the eethode end eeene by which the
enely conducte and counterecte radio reconnaieeance. and so forth. are of
coneidereble importance in hie work.

All knowledge naturally becoeee velueble if it ie ekilfully applied on a
precticel level. There in e feirly breed range of jobe. in the perfornence of
which the Iilitery engineer hae need of ailitary knowledge. Thie includee Ch!
practical iepleaentetion of the require-cote eet forth in field nanuele end
reguletione during preperetione for end the conduct of coebet operatione by
unite end cub-unite, end the developeent of practical control docunente and
their one when preparing for and perforning coebet nieeione: eppreieel of

the redietion end cheeicel eituation. end the developeent of propoeele for
deciding whet ection the pereonnel ehould teke when there ie conteninetion
with radioactive or toxic eubetencee; the adoption of e decieion to reetore
the fighting capacity of unite end nub-unite following a nucleer etrike by

the eneny: the developeent of recon-endetione for the commander with reepect
to receiving probleee arieing during the couree of coebat operatione: the
develop-cot end perfornence of eeeeuree to increaee the oub-unite' ability

to eurvive end to prepare the pereonnel for the perfornence of coebat nieeione
in any eituetion; control of eubordinete nub-unite; the plenning end conduct

of coebet and political treining cleeeee in the unite and cub-unite, and
othere.

hilitery engineering pereonnel receive operetional-tectical treining both
while etudying in nilitery educationel inetitutione end during their practi-
cal work in the forcee. The knowledge. ebilitiee and ekille acquired by the
nilitery engineer ee e reeult of thin treining for. the foundetion which per-
nite hi. to perforn hie veet end coeplex dutiee well at practicelly eny poet
in the forcee.

Neturally. the depth of the operetionel-tecticel knowledge required by the
Iilitery engineer depends greatly on his functionel dutiee. Along with e
knowledge of general Iilitery effaire. for exeeple, it ie importent for the
engineer filling the poeition of eteff end erlelent eervice officer to heve
e deteiled knowledge of the principlee involved in orgenieing-end plennlng
coebet operetione end to know how to orgeniee preperetione for the. end to
conduct then under verioue conditione.

The ability to direct the work of eubordinatee in one of the Soviet Iilitery
engineer‘e inportent end eeeentiel qualitiee. regerdleee of bin poet in the
forces. Since all of the work perforued by the coenender end the engineer
in the forcee involvee edeinietretive work. we ehell diecuel thie eree of
the lilitery engineer'e operetionel-tecticel treining in greeter dereil.

27
!OR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

Scientific aupervieion of the troope requiree the noet accurate poaaible
account ing of all of the conditiona and circmetencea under which the unite
and nub-unite perforn the eaeigned conbet nisaion. "The co-ender’e art in
unifoated in hie ability to eelact fron the variety of neane at hie diepoeal
thoae which will produce the beat reaulta in a given aituation and at a
given tine."18

The coaplerity of the weapone and equip-ent with which the troopa are out-
fitted conaiderebly heightene the deaanda nade of all control agenciee and
officiala. They nuat detenine the coehat aiaaione for the troope proaptly
end accurately. in accordance with the troopa' capabilitiee end the conbet
cheracteriatica of the weapone. thoroughly plan iapending conbat operationa.
and direct then continuoualy and efficiently. The nan auet thoroughly green
the eaaigned conbet eiaaiona. have a clear picture of the aethoda to be uaed
for conducting conbat operation and denonatrate prudent initiative and per-
eiatence to eneure abaolute and tiaely execution of the conbat aiaaion.

None of thia can be achieved without a thorough underetanding of the tactice
of coebet operatione and the conbet enploynent of verioua typea of weapone
and of the different aapecta of troop control. and without a knowledge of
the field regulationa and inatructiona and their fulfill-ant by all ailitary
ongineera. A aolid underatanding of regulationa and the ability to apply
then in the practical troop control work given the Iilitery engineer the
neceaeary courage. detenination and pereiatence for the perfornance of any
niaeion.

The highly dynanic nature of conbet operatione today and the frequent and
ebrupt alteration of eituetiona reaulting fron the uae of nuclear weepona
require that the engineer. the eaae an the co-ander, be able to rapidly
conaider the changer. to efficiently ac-arite and thoroughly evaluate in-
fornetion on the aituation. to lake tactically conpetent decieiona beaed
on that infornation. to intorn the troopa of thoae deciaione without delay.
and to organize and nonitor their execution. All of thia ie achieved by
ehilful control and wall-conceived diatribution of functiona along the aub-
unite and the peraonnel.

The following groupe of iaauee. at leeat. nuat be decided by the Iilitery
engineer in charge of a aub-unit when organizing preparationa for the per-
forIance of a apecific nieaion and for ita execution.

In the firat place. he nuat deter-nine the level. degree and extent of hia
own participation in the performance of a given niaaion. "hen aeveral nia-
aiona are being perforned aiaultaneoualy. the nilitery engineer deter-inea
how ouch tine he ahould epend on each of the-.and. to acne degree. he detaile
the different eapecta of hie work. ’

in the eecond place, he deteninea the voice and nature of the infomtion
required.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the third plece. he ueee the infomtion obtained to deter-ine thoee
criticel nonente end pointe which require hie pereonel intervention end
decieione.

In the forth plece. he nuet heve e cleer concept of the connection between
the nieeione perforeed by hie eub-unit (or unit) end the eieeione to he
cerried out et higher echelone. ee well ee thoee being perforeed by inter-
ecting unite end euh-unite.

Reelity hee denonetreted thet the thorough preperetion of nilitery engi-
neere for the perforlence of precieely theee teeke of the couender ie e eub-
etentiel fector in the coebet efficiency of unite end nub-unite.

The following ie one exeeple of thie. An exerciee wee in full owing. when
the ”eneey" delivered e nucleer etrike egeinet one of the unite, deetroying
the co-end poet end eone of the pereonnel, weepone end conbet equipeent.
‘l'hie creeted en exceptionelly difficult eituetion. The deputy unit co-ender.
en engineer by treining, who wee loceted in one of the eub-unite et thet tine.
eeeueed co-end. lie eeeeebled ell of the other officere, eergeente end eol-
diere who were etill eble to fight. errenged for the wounded to receive eid.

end took etepe to reeetehlieh co-unicetione with higher heedquertere through
en edjecent unit.

An eppreieel of the redietion end chenicel eituetion ehowed high lewele of
redietion. Poeeeeeing e knowledge of the technicel epecificetione of the wee-
pone ueed by the ”cue-y" end ite tectice. the officer ueed e up to detereine
en eree to which the pereonnel could be renewed. errenged for engineer end
redietion reconneieeence of the routee of novenent end the terrein in the
eree eelected. evecueted the wounded end renewed the perer to e eefe
eree. conducted pertiel deconteeinetion of the equip-ent end decontelinetion
of the pereonnel. regietered redietion doeee received by the pereonnel. end
creeted e group to reetore the unit'e fighting efficiency.

After redietion lewele hed dropped in the eree occupied. the officer took
etepe to eliminete the effecte of the nucleer etrike. lie forned e eoepoeite
eub-unit of the re-eining pereonnel.

The officerbengineer knew the eieeione eeeigned the eub-unit, end he decided
to continue their execution. ueing the reetored conbet equip-mt.

Deepite the feet thet they were enheueted free neny deye of working under
etreee. the pereonnel in the eub-unit for-ed perforIed enoothly in the exer-
ciee end coped eucceeefully with the eeeigned eieeion.

In the critique of the exercise. the director of the exercise noted the depu-
ty unit co-ender'e good tecticel treining end expreeeed gretitude to hie end
to ell of the pereonnel.

Good tecticel-operetionel treining greetly helpe the eilitery engineer to de-
velop euch quelitiee ee courege. will-power. deter-inetion end initietiwe.end

29
roe MIC!“ USE ONLY
ferns the heels for his operetionel-tecticol thinking. The developeent end
self-inculcstion of these quelities requires that the Iilitery engineer hsve
s knowledge of the principles end the besic tenets of nilitery ert end of
for-s end eethods of conducting conhet operetions in verious eituetions. The
better inforned the nilitsry engineer is on these settere. the nore correctly
end thoroughly will he be ehle to understsnd the neture of the essignsd nie-
sion and to foresee the possible course of eVents end chenges occurring in
the situetion. end therefore. the nore focused end productive will be his
operstionel-tecticsl deliherstion.

As we have elresdy ststed. the future nilitery engineers receive operetionel-
tscticsl treining in the process of their study of the operetionel-tecticel
disciplines et vuz'e. The progrees for these disciplines cell for theoreti-
cel end precticel treining for the students end cedets in the fundenentels
of the preperetion for end the conduct of coehet operetions todey. of the
coebet ennloynent of the verious services of the Arned Torces. brenches of
troops end wespons. end of the study of the history of were end silitery ert.
nilitery edninistretion end other erees of Soviet nilitery science.

The officer-engineer's treining in the troops hes e precticel focus. In order
not to fell behind. in order to keep up with the developeent of science end
technology. individuel inprovenent of one's treining in nilitery science end
nilitery ert is highly inportent. elong with the plenned officer treining.

Deterninetion of the optilel sodel of the nilitsry engineer so both e nilitsry
end e technicel specielist is hecoeing highly i-portsnt st the present tins.
Thin problen cen be resolved not by contresting the two seperete espects of
the nilitery engineer. but by coehining then in order for eech of then to sup-
plenent end enrich the other. It is very inportent thet both especte of the
engineer's work receive edequete ettention in the treining process.

The nilitery engineer's operetionel-tecticel treining. like his technicel
treining. is inconceivehle without Isintsining strict reguletion order end
the high level of dessndingness expected of e coenender in ell types of trein-
ing end in the process of ell the service ectivities of engineering end tech-
nicel personnel. A thorough knowledge of the reguletions governing the Arned
Forces. e high level of drill treining. physicel conditioning end treining in
sethods ere essentiel to the eilitery engineer. es they ere to the coehined-
srls coenender-osuch is the dictete of the ere.

S. The hilitery Engineer es the Orgenieer end Indoctrinetor of the Men Under
Hin

Defining the quelities of e sodern supervisor. the 25th CPS" congress stressed
the following: “The nodern supervisor sust orgenicelly conbine perty-nindedness
with thorough coepetence. discipline with initietive end e crestive epproech
to the job. At the se-e time. the supervisor in eny sree is elso required to
consider socio-politicsl end indoctrinetionel fectors. to be sensitive to the
nen. to their needs end requests. end to serve es en exesple in his work end
deily lifeJ'l9 These require-eats fully epply to Soviet nilitery engineering
personnel.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bvery military engineer. whether it be the director of a military team or
sane other specialist. serves on a practical level as an organizer. an indoc-
trinator. a technical specialist and an adninistrator. One or another facet
of military engineering work unquestionably predoainates in each situation.
The organizational and indoctrinational work of nilitary engineers is organi-
cally nerged in each case. however.

He can differentiate three levels of organizational work performed by military
engineeraZO This designation of levels is arbitrary. since it is very dif-
ficult to define the work of nilitary engineers in the different specialties
within strict boundaries. but it per-its us to indicate the main groups of
Iilitary engineers and to indicate the degree to which they participate in
organizational work.

The first and highest level is the organizational work perforIed by the lili-
tery engineer serving in the position of engineer commander or hie deputy.

He organizes the work of individual people and the collectives. the work pro-
cesa and all conbat activities. and also handles the scientific organization
of his own work.

The second level of organizational work performed by the military engineer
involves arranging the process of the Ien's work and the scientific organiza-
tion of his own work. On this level. he directs the Ien and the collectives
only indirectly. As a rule. this is perforned by the chiefs of the various
engineering and technical services and engineers specializing in the various
areas. who are responsible for the complex and inportant areas of combat readi-
ness of the units and sub-units. for the training of technicians and specia-
lists. for monitoring the work of the aen and the operation of the coebat
equipnent and weapons. and for the care.- repair and periodic servicing

of equipment and weapons.

The third level of organizational work performed by the military engineer
involves the scientific organization of his own work and the work performed
at a specific action station or unit. or on a specific conbat vehicle. At
this level. the military engineer is mainly concerned with performing his
personal colbat task. inproving his professional skill. improving the tech-
niques and method enployed in the work. caring for the combat vehicles and
aechsnisms and maintaining them in a constant state of conbat readiness.

The requiresenta of the Leninist style of work as spelled out by Conrade

L. l. Brezhnev in the Accountability Report of the 0980 Central Cosmittee to
the 25th Party Congress fully cpply to all levels of the nilitary engineer's
organizational work which we have discussed. It states the following: “...
the Leninist style is a creative style. a style to which subjectivism is
alien and which is imbued with a scientific approach to all of the social pro-
cesses. It requires a highly deeanding attitude toward oneself and toward
others: it precludes willfulneas and resists bureaucracy and formalism."21
The Leninist manner of working means taking a critical approach to all areas
of one'a work. coabining trust in the personnel with a highly demanding atti-
tude. with thorough control end verification of the implementation of party

directives and of the decisions asde. The main element of the leninist style

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OfflClAL USE ONLY

of work on the part of military personnel is the! of attaching prise inpor-
tence to state interests and perforning the tasks involved in defending the
socialist honeland on the very highest level.

The general party line. which calla for quality and effectiveness in the work.
requires strict fulfill-ent of the requirenent for a high level of coebet read-
iness on the part of the troops and for a level of coebet and political train-
ing. order. organization. political attitudes and aorale ensuring that the
Arned Forces. which are outfitted with the very best equipnent available. are
in a position to cone to the inlediate defense of the honeland. if necessary.
The orny and navy's all-around prepsredness to perforn their historic nission
in n specific reflection of the quslity and efficiency of the work perforled

by our cadres.

The quality end effectiveness of the organizational work perforaed by nilitery
engineering personnel are manifested, in the first place. in the successful
perforeance of the duties with which they are charged by nilitary regulations.
orders and instructions; in the second place. in their utilisation of every
possibility for providing the personnel with good training in the area of wea-
pons nnd coebet equip-ant; in the third place, in the organization of axe-p-
iary servicing of the coebet equip-ant end in the quality perforsance of the
periodic servicing and repair work: in the fourth place. in the application

of all possible factors for successfully e-ploying the nilitary equip-ent in
the conduct of coebet operations; and in the fifth place. in the perfornanca
of indoctrinationel work with the personnel, together with coansnders. poli-
ticel workers. psrty and Konsoaol organisations. The nonitoring and verifi-
cation of perforlance is an extrelely ilportant part of the organisational
work perforeed by ailitary engineers. They provide essential coordination

in the work of the nilitary collectives and develop a feeling of responiabil-
ity and seriousness on the part of subordinates.

It is one of the ailitsry engineer's direct service duties to train the per-
sonnel. to provide the fighting-an with thorough knowledge and solid skills
and with a high level of technical sophistication. It should be noted that
the revolution in Iilitary affairs has node a significant work on this aspect
of engineering work: the training of the personnel is perforled differently.
since the quantity and coaplesity of the coebet equip-set have grown, the nul-
ber of technical specialties has increased. and the service terns of the sol-
diers end sergeants have been reduced. Since sole skill is lost when one does
not work with the equipsent for even a trivial period of tine. regular
training and periodic retraining is necessary in order to nsintain one's pro-
fessional skills at the proper level.

The training and indoc :instion of the sen are perforled by nilitary engineers
while the sub-units are being nsintained in a constant state of coebet readi-
ness. and this requires a cos-on effort and coordinated action on the part of
both the officer and the sen under bin.

The collective nature of Iodern weapons and eilitary equip-set has signifi-
cantly raised the role and the responsibility of every service-an. both with
respect to the preparation of coebet equip-ant for eeployssnt and to the ac-
tual perfornance of the sub-unit's coebet eission. The iaportence of

32
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical and technological discipline has increased considerably. The
trouble-free operation of the equipsent and the effectiveness of its coIbat
eaploylsent therefore depend greatly on the personnel's knowledge of the tech-
nology involved in servicing it and of aodern aethods of eonitoring its con-
dition. And it is the engineer's task to indoctrinate each specialist in s
spirit of strict and absolute fulfill-ant of all nor-s. rules and require-ants

set forth in the aanuels and instructions governing operation of the equip-
aent.

The scientific and technological revolution has been acconpanied by the cres-
tion of improved types of equipment with a high level of dependability and
durability. Space technology. in particular. represents the forward edge

of nodern scientific and technical progress. At the coepletion of a space
flight. Ger-en Titov expressed his faith in the reliability of his space ship
in the following asnner: "I hardly worried at all. Don't think that l as

an emotionless individual or that l have a will of iron. that l eurpressed ay
emotions. This is not the explanation. I had a great deal of faith. I had
studied the ship in subtle detail. I becaee one with it. as though with a
trustworthy friend. l had perhaps greater confidence in the ship than in
ayself. I had gone through the entire flight on the ground and knew what I
would be doing at any given aonent. The progroa was a coapliceted and diffi-

cultigne. but it did not frighten as. l was confident that I would coaplete
1‘.

The personnel have the sale sort of confidence in the eilitary equip-ant node by
the precious hands of Soviet workers. engineers and technicians.

The experienced engineer is able to asintain and develop in the personnel a
feeling of great respect for the allitery equip-eat. to reveal to the officers.
sergeants and soldiers the grandeur of the scientific and technical feet per-
foraed by the creators of this equip-cot. As a rule. a true eastery of the
equip-ant and confidence in it have a positive effect on the psychological
state of the fighting-en.

in describing the state of the crew on the atoeic-powered subaarine‘Leninskiy
loose-o1" during an i-portant assignment. its counsnder. Captain 2d Rank L. H.
Zhil'tsov. laid special stress on the fact that all of the personnel were in-
bued with ”the nest profound confidence in the eeuipeent created by Soviet
designers and vorkers. with infinite faith in the knowledge and egrerience of
their superiors. and with a feeling of great responsibility...."2

The high level of perfection of Soviet silitary equiplentonly creates the
possibility of successfully eeploying it in a war against an egressor. The
personnel aust possess thorough knowledge and solid skills. however. in order
for this possibility to be realised. and these are developed through exten-
sive work by the officers. including. first and fore-0st. the Iilitsry engi-
neers. focusing on the constant indoctrination of the soldiers. sergeants and
warrant officers (praporshchiki). and on training the. in the use and care of
the couple: eilitery equip-ant.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The work perforned by the nilitary engineer to indoctrinate the personnel
doe» not differ hnuirnlly from the indoctrinetionnl work perforeed by other
categories of officers. but it does have certain peculiarities.

in the first place. the revolution in military affairs has resulted in a
considerable increase in the role of moral-political and psychological con-
ditioning of the troops. especially for the fighting-en of those services of
the Armed Forces who perforn combat alert duty. Thet is. those with combat
sissions even in tine of peace. Accordingly, the indoctrinational work per-
formed by the officers. the najority of which are engineers. has also assumed
greater importance in those forces.

In the second place. the nilitary engineer. more than any other specialist.
must deal with the personnel of technical unite and sub-units. The work per—
formed by most of these personnel is individualized to e certain degree (they
serve as operators. progranmers. drivers. and so forth). There is a certain
degree of isolation of the personnel in their work. and there has therefore
been an increase in the proportion of individual work performed by military
engineers and it has become highly important to develop an awareness of col-
lectiviem. troop comradeship and a high level of military. technical and tech-
nologicnl discipline in the personnel.

in the third place, in the process of servicing the nilitsry equipment. the
nilitary engineer frequently has to be not only the organizer but also the
sctuol perforner of this or that operation. This places him into a specific
interrelationship with the personnel servicing the military equipment. The
range of his direct contacts with the men under him is expanding. and in a
certain sense. the substantive side of the work performed by engineering and
technical specialists is becoming similar to that perforned by other service-
mt

The military engineer's technical competence and industriousness, his capaci-
ty for creative investigation and his performance have an snoraous indoctri-
national effect on the personnel. In other words. indoctrination by personal
example is becoeing exceptionally important in the practical work of military
engineering personnel. No less important is their ability to establish unin-
hibited relationships with the man. a situation creating the necessary degree
of trust and good will in the collectives. All of this is ruined. however.
if the good relationships develop into familiarity and if. instead of being
highly demanding of his subordinates. the military engineer overlooks all
of their shortcomings.

in the fourth place. some nilitary engineers are not in charge of personnel.
This amplifies the importance of self-indoctrination for the officer-engineers
and also increases the responsibility of commanders and political organs for
involving this category of specialists in political-indoctrinationsl work in
the sub-units. caperience has shown that engineer operators. programmers.
designers and other categories of military engineers. who are not in charge

of personnel. take an active pert in the activities of lecture groups and
theoretical seeinars. in preparations for and the conduct of silitary-scientific
conferences and in the organization of rationslieation and invention work.
which performs an important indoctrinationsl function.

3‘
’0R OFFICIAL USS OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All categories of engineering and technical personnel thus have a part in the
indoctrination of the fightingmen and are responsible for it. and they must
therefore possess a good knowledge of the aethodological aspects of the theory
and practice of communist indoctrination.

In psychological-pedagogical literature. skill in working with people is
broken down primarily into three areas: pedagogical skill--the knowledge.
abilities. skills and personal qualities necessary to accomplish the tasks
involved in the training. indoctrination and psychological conditioning of
the fightingmen: skill in supervising the personnel in organizational work
(the art of supervision); the art of party-political work. particularly skill
as a propagandiat.

Considering the high level of specialisation of man's work in the contempo-
rary situation. it would be unrealistic to assune that man can assimilate
various types of professional skills simultaneously. within a practically
acceptable period of time. Experience has shown. however, that many techni-
cal specialists. relying on their knowledge as engineers and on their breed
cultural perspective. simultaneously achieve good results in the training and
indoctrination of the sen. in organizational work and in other areas directly
pertaining to their technical work. Consequently. with proper motivation.
the engineer is able. through self-indoctrination and self-education and
active. imaginative participation in public work. to develop those aspects
of professional skill which are essential for working with personnel. As a
result. he can effectively impart his own know-how to others. influence thee
and sotivate them in their work.

The main facet of the work performed by an officer--a commander, political
worker or military engineer. of course. is that of dealing with people. The
three above-nentioned areas of the work are linked together inseparably in

it. The general motives underlying the work of all categories of officers

are also the same. Alongside these, however, there is a group of more limited
motives characteristic of the specific military occupation.

The military engineer can develop a positive attitude toward working with
people on the basis of a generally concientious attitude toward his service
work as a whole, concern for all the areas and facilities for which he is
responsible and a desire to make his section of the work the best and most
progressive both with respect to the methods used and the results achieved.

If the engineer has such a desire. this will inevitably cause him to consider
it necessary to raise the level of activity of the personnel in general and
to work more vigorously himself to acomplish this.

Such factors as the engineer's awareness of his responsibility for the suc-
cess of the collective as a whole. his realization of his own contribution to
the indoctrinational work performed with personnel of the unit and sub-unit,

a highly developed feeling of social responsibility and public action, and

the need to take part in public work may also serve as motives of considerable
importance for the development of a disposition to work with people.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An interest in human factors engineering and in an extensive range of engi-
neering fields not pertaining directly to technical problems but embracing
the entire "man-machine" system. including all of its technical and human
elements. can serve as an important source of motivation in working with peo-
ple. The engineer experiences a desire to study the crucial element in the
system more thoroughly and to understand the husen condition. the conditions
necessary for him to work efficiently and dependably. the degree of coordina-
tion existing between his functions end those of the machine. and the extent
to which the joint work performed by the group of fightingmen servicing the
complex technical system is collectively performed.

An interest in husan factors engineering helps to reveal psychological pro-
blems encountered in the work of the technical specialists. to learn the in-
dividual peculiarities of the soldiers and the qualities of the military team.
and to make certain changes in their conciousness. conduct and working methods.

The engineer's desire for self-indoctrination and improvement of his profes-
sional training end his need to prepare himself for performing a broader range
of work in the future, work involving more extensive responsibility and new
duties. including supervisory. comand functions. haves definite role in moti-
vating the engineer in his work with the personnel.

The line engineer's work thus makes extensive demands of the individual's
motivation: on the one hand, he must have highly developed technical inter-
ests and inclinations. and on the other-s greet interest in people. a need
for contact with them. a desire to come to their assistance when necessary.
and the desire to give of his knowledge and experience.

A certain degree of passivity demonstrated by individual technical specialists
in their work with the personnel is due. in addition to a lack of the neces-
sary skills. to a shortage of time. to their heavy technical loed. Claiming
that they are too busy. some engineers and technicians request that they not
be required to work with the personnel. Each of these cases should be care-
fully investigated. It is well known, after all. that an overload of work
frequently results from a lack of experience. a low level of professional
skill. because of which it inevitably takes more time to perform the job. the
quality deteroriates. additional work is sometimes required. and the job some-
times has to be done over. The engineer's time is used inefficiently as a
result. andsome things are permitted to just drift along. Unfortunately. this
is sometimes the case with the training and indoctrination of personnel. Con-
sequently, a high level of professionalism is an important condition for over-
coming a negative service utilization factor.

Since pedagogical skill. the art of supervising and propaganda work are dis-
cussed in detail in the special literature. it is only necessary for us to
discuss certain general elements of pedagogical skill. those which are inher-
ent to one degree or another in all variations of the work performed by mili-
tary engineers with the men: primarily an understanding of people. their intel-
lectual characteristics. training and indoctrination and the process of making
their work-more efficient.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFPICIAL US! ONLY

in order to be eble to work with pereonnel. the Iilitery engineer nuet know
people and the peychologicel lewe governing the ectione of individuel eoldiere
end eilltery collectiVee. prinerily the peychologicel peculieritiee of collec-
tivee produced by the neture of their nilitery profeeeion. An educetion in
hueen ioctore engineering end en underetending of the peychologicel lewe func-
tioning within the "nen-nechine" eyetee end of eethode of coordineting the
equip-ent'e requirenente end the cepebilitiee of the individuel controlling

it ere eepecielly ieportent todey. Thin knowledge in ecquired by etudying
peychologicel litereture. through obeervetion end by coetenpleting one'e own
experience end the inpreeeione received froe direct contect with people. ll. 1.
Kolinin pointed out thet reeding in en inportent wey to gein en underetending
of people. "...if you went to be not juet en engineer-technicien but e «per-
vieor end orgenieer ee well. you euet know litereturm..." After ell. every
orgenieer nuet he eble to orgeniee people. not nechinee but living people....
A knowledge of different typee of people. the’ ebility to dietinguieh then end
to enelyee eech individuel end to know exectly whet he in like end whet 1' P03.
eible... to Ieke better better uee of thie or thet individuel in production--
ell of thie requiree e knowledge of litereture.”3‘

Since the Iodern technicel eyeteee ere run by increeeingly eneller groupe of
eoldiere. whoee interectione ere preecribed by reguletione end Job deecriptione.
end eince the lnterpereonel reletionehipe ere reeulting in new honde. it ie
ueeful for the engineer to underetend end tekeinto eccount the eociel-
peychologicnl petterne end the peychologicel peculieritiee of the nilitery
collectivee. end the verioue eocio-peychologicel phcnonene which heve e con-
eidereblc influence on the effectiveneee of the joint work perforned by the
eilitery epecieliete.25

ln eddition to en undereteodiog of people in generel end e knowledge of the
generel lewe governing their behevior. the work perforned with the eilitery
pereonnel in e given collective ie inpoeeihle without e knowledge of thet
group. thou epecific people. The epecific neture of thie knowledge lien in
the feet thet it cennot be ecquired in finiehed fore but euet be obteined in-
dependently. through the pereietent end eyetenetic etudy of the eoldiere. in
direct contect with then. by obeerving their octione end their co-unicetion
with eech other. by eeeigning the. control end verificetion eeeignlente. by
telking with then end by etudying the reeulte of their work end other infor-
eetion.

In order to under-tend len'e peychic Inke-up-hie thoughte. feelinge. eile
end ectione--it euet be regerded on e reeult of the develop-en: end the ecti-
vitiee of people in eociety. 'l'hie ie nede poeeible by en euellent underetend-
ing of the fund-entele of Herein-mini". the eocio-politicel end econonic
lewe of the Soviet eociety'e developuent. current circmtencee in eilitery
effeire. inportent political end eocio-econoeic Ieeeuree edvenced by the CPS"
end the Soviet Govern-ent. the eucceoeee echieved by our people in the build-
ing of countries. the loot inportent evente in the life of the Arned Porcee.
end internetionel evente. It would be difficult to find e co-on lenguege
for co-unicnting with en individuel without en underetending of current pro-
blcne of norel. culturel end eethetic indoctrinetion. of everything which in
being diecueeed with lively intereet in the eilitery collectives.

37
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The knowledge enployed by the engineer for developing end eubetentieting

the tneke eeelgned the pereonnel pleye en luportent role. Thie ie the ec-
tuel engineering end technicel knowledge. perticulerly exheuetive inforne-
tion on the epecific equipnent which the eub-unit ueee. Thie knowledge eleo
includee ell of the infornetion eeeentiel to the engineer for treining the
personnel.

All of thie diveree infornetion penite the engineer to get hie beeringe in
eituetione developing in the nilitery collective end in the interpereonel
reletione of the fighting-en. end eekee it poeeible for hin to eveluete unre-
eolved ieeuee properly. to outline goele end neke proper decieione.

Like eny other work perforned with people. which coneiete prinerily in exert-
ing en ective influence on the concioueneee of the fightingnen. notiveting
then to teke the neceeeery etepe or reetreining then fron teking undeeireble
ectione. thie work requiree certein ekille end ebilitiee on the pert of the
individuel perforning it. There ere developed by neene of erercieee end drille
end through nultiple repetition. The ekille end ebilitiee ueed in working
with pereonnel frequently coneiet in repeeting eolutione previouely ueed

end reeenbered.

There ere inetencee in which the engineer or technicien ie not ewere of the
need for the epeciel elenente of pedegogicel ekill. eince he worke only occe-
eionelly with pereonnel. And in feet. e certein neeeure ney be cerried out
on the beeie of one'e generel knowledge end co-on eenee end the edvice of
the experienced co-Iender or politicel worker. It in en error. however. not
to coneider the feet thet working with people. eupervieing. treining end in-
doctrineting then fern en integrel pert of the engineer'e work todey. Bork-
ing with people ie not juet e euperficiel pert of the engineer'e work. but
en intrineic elenent of thie work.

An officer nuet poeeeee neny nuelitiee in order to work ekilfully with the
pereonnel. Diepite their divereity. however. they heve e certein intrineic
unity: when the engineer conee into contect with other people in e eervice cepir
city. he deele with peychic end eocio-peychologicel phenonene. Succeee de-
pende greetly on how correctly end pronptly he in eble to enelyre theee phenoo-
one. to eveluete the degree of their influence on the perfornence of e conbet
or treining teek, to influence thie or thet peychic proceee end the dyn-ice
of the peychic etete ee e whole in the intereet of on objective. Thin neene
thet peychologicel fectore nuet be teken into eccount. thoroughly end in ell
the eubtletiee. for working with people. He ere therefore intereeted printi-
ly in coneidering thoee elenente of the nilitery engineer'e profeeeionel ekill
which neke it poeeible for his to ecconplieh thie.

The concept of coneidering peychologicel fectore in e nﬁurel outgrowth of

the feet thet in order for e eeperete technical coupler to function effec-
tively end for the nilitery work ee e whole to be effective. there nuet be e
certain correspondence between the totel group of requirenente node of the
pereonnel by the equip-eat. by circuetencee end by the teeke being perforned.
end the totel cepecity of the fightingpen end their cepebilitiee for perforling

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
these tasks. This conformity is achieved both by changing the conditions

of the work and by nobiliring the efforts of each soldier and of the military
collective. Psychologivnl substantiation is provided in all cases. when the
supervisor's decision or its ieplementation requires that the above conformity
be retained or that it be achieved. In other words. the psychological factors

ere taken into account.

The process of substantiating the ailitary engineer's decision psychologically
includes two groups of actions: comprehension and evaluation for purposes of
reVeeling. studying and evaluating the influence of specific psychological
factors in a given situation (psychological snalysis). and utilisation of the
information provided by this analysis for purposes of adopting and inplement-
ing a decision and their inclusion in the productive service work to make it
sore effective.

The psychological analysis has a number of variations. which depend on the
tesks fecing the engineer and the circusstances under which they are to be
perforaed. Scientific studies have established the existance of at least

four such variations:

1. The primary study of new soldiers for purposes of determining their job
nptitudes (their area of work in the silitary end their abilities. and the
expediency of teaching the. one of the various military speciggties). This
work is called psychological nilitary-professional selection. thet is.
selection eased on psychological criteria;

2. Continuous. systematic and comprehensive study of the service conditions
of the fighting-en and the functioning of the nilitary collective for pur-
poses of obtaining inforaation necessary for subsequently improving those
conditions and for creating the preconditions necessary for the successful
training and indoctrination of the personnel, for uniting the collective and
strengthening discipline. and in the final analysis, for asking the troops'
work as a whole more effective;

3. A goal-oriented study of the soldiers from the standpoint of the require-
ments for a specific task. and evaluation of their psychological condition
and capabilities at a given time. This is essentially a forcast of how peo-
ple will function under the conditions of a future task comprehension of the
new task and the selection of soldiers suited to perform it. Consequently.
this is a specific psychological selection. which. unlike the job selection.
is carried out within the bounds of specialties chosen for and assigned to

the sen;

5. Diagnosis of the behavior of a specialist in a military collective (an
operator. for example) after the fact: an accident. an emergency or soae other
event of definite rtance. Determination and invegtigation of the psycho-
logical causes and e conditions.lesding.to the event being studied, determin-
ation of their specific importance within the total group or causes. ﬂ-ll’l-
eation of the work experience, clarification of the aotives behind a specific
action. investigation of the reasons for difficulties and lack of success in
indoctrinational work, and so forth--all of these are examples of psychologi-

calkdiagnosie. which has an important place in the military engineer's daily
wor .

10
'08 OFFICIAL 088 Oth

A atudy of poaitive experience in the work of nilitary engineera and techni-
cieno has ahown that the reaulte of the psychological atudy can be applied

for the utilization of the favorable peychologicel conditione created; for
creating the paychological conditiona required for the aucceeaful perfornance
oi the aaaigned niaeion: and for creating good neterial-technical. operational
and living conditiona for the fighting-an and the nilitary collective in the
course of their work and for their leieure-tiae ectivitiea.

Paychological conditiona are taken into account for proreaeional and opera-
tional eeiection. when the non ere aaaigned to johe in accordance with
their qualificationa and condition.

An engineer'a decieion tekee into account the fact that it ahould be perceived
by the non ea convincing. thoroughly conceived. reliable and inepired. lt
eonetiaee occura in the eervice that a decieion which ia eaeentielly a good
one it performed without proper enthuaiaen only beceuae the Inn regard it an

o ceauelly nade decieion. "hen pertorning the engineering atudy of thia or
that decieion. experienced apecialiata attenpt to ace that it ia convincing and
doea not creat doubta. Circulatancea peraitting, aany apecialiete aak their
aubordinatea to diecuee the technical iaauea. confer with then and work out.
together with then. a cannon opinion with reepect to the neceaaery etepa.

Another nethod of coneidering the paychologicel fectora ia that of organizing
the work of the fightingnen ao that it involvea then i-ediately. enaurea
that they achieve inapiring aucceaeea. even anall onea. in the initial atege
oi the job. and doee not involve unneceaeery conauaption of energy. The per-
aonnel have an agreaeive apirit. an intereat in the job and good activation
throughout their work ee e reeult or theae organizational aeeeuree.

An iaportant way to have highly efficient work in that of dietributing the
personnel according to the aocio-peychological love of joint. collective work
(an eaeily perceived. con-on collective goal, which in not overahadowed by
individual. not interrelated goala; interaction along the nelbera of the col-
lecrive in the courae of their work and good conditiona for their intercon-
nunication: the opportunity to conpete; retention of the atable atructure
cha"‘teriatic of a given collective. and no forth).

when working with peraonnel. it ia frequently neceaaary to aaaign tnaka which
the nen are not prepared to perforn ianediately (due to fatigue. nerviouaneaa.
n lack of confidence in their abilitiea, over-exitenent. tear, and no forth).
beceuae they lack experience. the required knowledge or abilitiea. or do not
underetand the inportance and reaponeibility oi the teak.. In euch caaea.
paychological iactore are taken into account by bringing the peychological
conditiona into confornity with the require-ante for the iorthcoaing work.
when he explaine the procedure and the aituation. the engineer euperviaor
helpa the non to aobilire their errorte. to overcoae paychological difficul-
ties and to concentrate their full attention on the eaaigned teak. Iocuaed
training. inatruction and clarification of poaaible difficultiea and waye to
overcone then. an well no the practical rehearael of nodes of operation. ea
extenaively practiced during the Great Patriotic her. are of great iaportence

#0
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
in preparing the peraonnel for a epccific teek. Peychological conditioning

in an eaaential elenent of the overall preparation of aoldiere for epecific
operatione. Thia ie a conhination of neaauree perforaed to bring the peychic
state of the nan into confornity with requirenente {or the teak (renewal of
atrength. pereonal rdjuatnent. activation and eaotional adaptation. etrength-
ening the nen'e confidence in their abilitiee. and putting then into a etate

of coabet readineae). All of thin work ia exceptionally iaportant and eeaen-
tially conetitutaa the aain aethod of taking peychologicel factore into account.

a aethod which requiree vigoroue action and ekill in ita perfornance on the
part of all officere.

Thia brief deacription of certain aathode of organizing engineering work.
taking paychological factore into account. in far fron exhauetive. In actu-
al arny work. the initiative and creativity denonatrated by the officera
conetantly reeult in new nethoda of actively influencing the paychological
etrengtha of the fighting-en for purpoeee of developing than and neking effi-
cient uee of then in the proceaa of perforning the conbat and training cache.
The creation of new work techniquee. taking paychological lawn into account.
and the enploynant of known lawn requirea a certain level of paychological
education. epecial akille and abilitiee. and a vital and eincere intereat in
working with eervicenen and nilitary collectivee.

6. Career Selection for Nilitary Engineering Pereonnel

The problen of chooeing a career for nilitary engineering peraonnel ie cen-
tral along the nuneroue problene created by ecientific and technological pro-
green and by the aodern revolution occurring in nilitary affeire. Thia ie

a large-acala. couple: and aultifaceted taek. In order to acconplieh the
tank. it ie neceaeary to thoroughly analyze the ranified necheniaa of inter-
action anong econnnic. eocial. political, ideological and other aocial rela-
tiona. both general and epocific. characterietic only of the ailitary organi-
zation. Thia in due to the fact that the individual ie aultifeceted and re-
flecta all aocial relatione.

The vigor. creativity and high level of profeaeionalien no characteriatic of
today'e ailitery engineering peraonnel in the Soviet Araed Porcee are all a
natural condition and e reault of their educational level and world outlook
and of the ecientific eubatantiation of their aelection and place-ant and their
expedient utilieation.

Pron the point of view of aodern ecience. job aelection for ailitary engineer-
ing pereonnel in a dual proceae. 0n the one hand. it in a neana of revealing
and realizing the pereonel aapiretione and deeiree of each ”youth planning
hie life.“ and the eelection of a profeeeion ie a coaplex and ilportent eo-
cial proceaa. leflecting on the aelection of a career. the young Hera wrote
the following: “...thie choice conetitutea an act which any g‘atroy the indi-

vidual'o entire life. upaet hie plane and lake hi. unhappy.” Extending :51.
thought. the reveree ie aleo true-it in capable of aaking a nan'e life bril-

liant and intereating. diepite thoueande of obataclee. adveraitiee end diffi-
cultiea. "becauee what in life. if it ie not activity?"29

61
'0‘ OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
'0! OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

0n the other hand. the tank of aelecting careere for nilitary engineering
peraonnel conaiata in neeting the require-ante of nilitary enginenring prac-
tice to the aaniaua degree poaaihle. l: ia not our goal to analyee the firat
eapect of the prohlen. which pertaine to the eelection of a career-thia haa
been dlecueeed with adequete thoroughneaa in philoaophicel-aociological lit-
erature. The aatter of revealing the individual'a ahilitiea and aptitude for
e nilitery career hee been diacuaeed far leaa thoroughly, both in the theo-
retical and the practical reapecta.

It in a difficult aatter to reveal an individual’a natural inclinatione.
Science hea etill not developed adequate nethode for doing ao. At the aaae
tine. we know that the intrineic pattern of developaent of nan'a qualitiee
ia conatantly changing under the influence of hie aocial environ-ant. Bach
tine. however. nan finda a unique node of accuatoaing hiaaelf to the work.
In the proceae. acne traita of occupational iaportance develop. othera are
aurpreaeed. and a third category-onautrel hut vitally iaportant in the work
proceaao-are preaerved.

There in no auch thing on a natural. predeatined pattern of develop-ant of
huaan qualitiea. and the develop-ant of aan'a nature ia deterained by her-
edity and environ-ant. the latter being the deciaive factor. In Iaking a
aelection. it ia therefore very inportant to eetehlieh not only the indivi-
dual'a natural ahilitiea. hut alao the poaaihility of developing than.

Thia conception of Ian and hie occupational ahilitiee ia incoapatihle with
the idealiatic interpretation of natural. occupational predeetination. 3o-
cialiat reality haa refuted the concept of nan'e natural occupational predec-
tinetion. which ie propagated in the capitaliat world. Thia concept to aci-
entifically unaound and in reactionary in the aocial reapect. he have a dif-
ferent concept. V. I. Lenin taught on to find and encourage talented indivi-
duale. of which tgare are aany along the people. to put then on their feet
and advance than. Thia poature for-a the aoral-philoaophical foundation
for the conatitutional right of the Soviet people to aelect their type of
work freely and guarda career aelection againat dog-atiaa hy atreaaing ita
relative nature.

It would he an error. however. to lake a heaty concluaion fro. the preceding
that people have equal capahilitiea and that there in no need to conaider
their individual characteriatica in labor and ailitary work. V. I. Lenin
noted that it would he ahaurd to expect people in the aocialiat aociety to
have 3 ual ahilitiea and capacitiea. that every job requirea apecial quali-
tiea.

The individual aide of career aelection for the Iilitary engineering apecial-
tiea. that in. the individual'a intereata, hie plane and aina in life, hegina
to he realized at that Ioaent when the nilitary coaliaaariat eenda hia to a
certain nilitary engineering inatitution. haaed on the youth'a aptitudea and
deairea. Another purpoee. however. that of deter-inlng the young individual'a
auitahility for Iilitary cervice in a given apecialty of thin or that branch

#2
FOR OFFICIAL US! Oil?
FOR OPPTCIAL USE ONLY

of troops. is partially acccospliahed even then. in a very general way. A
sore specific and thorough selection process takes place within the walls of
the educational institution.

This process essentially consists in foreasting the individual's suitability
for a Iilitary engineering career fros the personal traits revealed in the
candidates: aoral-political qualities. general education, physical develop-
Ient. individual psychological disposition and nedical history.

Attaching great isportance to the scientific organization of career selection
for ailitary personnel. H. V. Frunze wrote back in the 1920's: "If we send
youth into the navy. special technical troops or aviation. who are psycholo-
gically unsuitable for serving in those services we are thereby damaging the
coabet capabilities of those services severely.“52 The task posed by H. V.
frunce is still valid today. when we are dealing with the selection of people
who will have to work with couples conbat equipnent frequently requiring very
specific psychological qualities.

Many factors sake it necessary to consider individual psychological charac-
teristics in selecting the careers of future military engineers. These in-
clude objective conditionsstesning from the sodern division of labor (which

is also clearly sanifested in the Iilitsry field): the lisitations of peda-
gogical possibilities for perforling this task with lilitary career training
alone. while the individual is serving and training; and the extresely broad
range of nilitary engineering specialties. which sake specific and at the sane
tine. augsented. Iilitary occupational deoands,which absolutely oust be set
for the individual to be suitable for a career as a ailitary engineer.

Many procedures and aethods have now been developed in the forces and silitary
educational institutions. which sake it possible to successfully forecast sany
of the individual’s psychological traits. Specialists in the area of sili-
tary engineering psychology themselves. however. acknowledge that these leth-
ods are far fros always effective. Testing. for exanple. lay provide useful
inforsation for the selection of Junior specialists for schoolingo-telegraph.
radio and sonar operators, operators of various installations, and drivers of
cosbat and transport vehicles. that is. narrowly specialised oilitary-technical
workers. The possibilities of testing are sharply reduced. however. when it
is necessary to forecast an individual's suitability for a career as a sili-
tary engineer. the training for which is extresely broad and Iultifaceted.

The procedure for selecting candidates for silitary engineering schools in-
cludes an entire systes of measures, which, taken together. sake it possible
to determine the young individual's aptitude for a career as a uilitary engi-
neer. It is based on a dialectical-laterialistic interpretation of the pat-
terns of son's psychic side. an interpretation expressed in an individual
approach as the basic principle of career selection. In the broad sense of
the word. "the personal aspect of studying psychic processes consists in re-
garding the. as a fora of Ian's activity. stealing fros certain require-cuts
and sotives and focusing on the accosplishnent of tasks with definite impor-
tance to nan. The sotivation level of psychic activity is the prise expres-
sion of its personal aspect."3‘

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR 0P?ICIAL 088 ONLY

The paraonal approach conaiatc of an understanding of the individual and

hia oeparatc paychological foaturea no detected in hia activity. In accor-
dance with thlo principla. not a oinalo psychological ieaturo. whether it

be a proccaa. the individual'o fraao of nind or a feature aanifaatad in hia
activity. and conaoquontly. tho activity itaelf and ita olaaonta-oacta and
docda--cannot ho proporly undoratood without conaidoring tho poraonality fac-
tora dictating it.

Thin loana. firat of all. that in dotoraining tho individual'a auitability
for a caroor aa a oilitary anginoor. wo auot conaidor the individual iron

the atandpoint of hia original grovth and dovolopoont (botora antoring a oili-
tary VUZ and during hia training). Only on thia baaia can we predict hia
chancoo of ouccooo in a ailitary caraar.

Further-ore. tho poraonal approach aoaunaa that tho individual'a-own-confir-
nation in hio choaan caraar ropraaonto an active. croativo procoaa. roquiring
Ioro than the ai-plo utilization of tho individual'a paraonal abilitioa and
lore than tho aochanical adaptation to poculiaritioa of tho oilitary angi-
noor'a occupation. Profoaaional growth conaiota of awaro. tranaforling and
creativo work on tho part of tho paraonnol. both with roapoct to tho objoct
of tho labor and to tho individual'o attitude toward hinoolf aa a wholo and
to all of hio functiono individually.

The aoparato foaturoa and iuncriona rovaalad in tho procooa of dotorlining an
individual’t auitability for a given caroor are not aolf-aufficiont. Thoy
aro foaturoa and functiono of tho poraonality, rolatod to tho lattar not aa
part of n whole but rathor ao phonooona vith an oaaonco of choir own. Thoy
do not dovolop indopondontly, but depend on tho ganoral davolopnont of tho
individual in tho oourao of hia aocial and proioaaional activitioa.

The individual nature of tho functiono ia naniioatod in tho fact that they
conotituto that apocial and unique entity. tho poraonality. in vhich tho
coo-on oloaont ia Ianifoatod.

Take the oporator‘a apocialty. for oxaaplo. Ono individual hocoloa a okil-
ful oporator aa a roault of hia rapid aonaory-aotor roactiona and good alo-
tional atinulation and hia ability to rapidly oatablioh and rogiatar inotru-
cont roadingo. Anothor individual. who dooa not poaaoao tho abilitiaa of
tho for-or. naotera tho oporator'a art with equal aucceao by paying cloaor
attontion and applying hia capacity for prolonged. hoavy concantration and
by gaging and choching hia actiono.

Tho poroonal approach to an individual with who. a cortain rolationahip haa
boon oatabliohod or who io tho onocific object of atudy ia. according to tho
viowo hold by Soviot paychologiata. an approach to tho individual an a con-
plotc entity. which takoa into account tho full couploxity of tho poraonality,
tho hiotory of ita devolopoont and all of ita individual charactoriatico. In
other worda. it in an approach taking into account the ontiro, dynnlically
functioning individual atructuro of a apocific poraonality.35

56
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
Soviet ecientiet K. K. Platonov developed the neat thorough and couplete con-
cept of career eelection. baaed on e nodal of the dynamically functioning
structure of the pereonelity.36 According to thie concept. all of the indi-
vidual'e qualitiee and traite can be eeparated into four eub-etructuree.

The firet eub-etructure includee the individual‘e eocially conditioned fee-
turee: the varioue for-e of goal-oriented endeavor. aoral-political qualitiee
and feelinge of a higher order. Hotivation in the fore of propeneitiee. ae-
piratione. intereete and goale. the objective eource of which coneiate of
needa. for-a the foundation for the peychological aechaniea by which thia eub-
etructura iunctione in the individual'e activitiee.

Theee are the aotivee which evoke. direct and control the activitiee both of
individuele and of entire eocial groupe. Thie ie why the etudy of the indi-
vidual.fron the etendpoint of hie euitebility for a ailitary engineering ca-
reer in our caea. auat be initiated by revealing the nature and the level of
the individual'e notivation. The firet and chief taek of career eelection
ie one of eetabliehing the true aotivee behind the eelection of a ailitary

engineering career and the degree of ailitary-profeeeional goal orientation
involved.

Dedication to the principlee of coaauniea. an awareneee of the great eocial
iaportanca of the nilitary engineer'e work and hie reeponeibility for the
detenee of the aocialiet hoaeland. patriotiea and other feelinge of a higher
order. which characterize the enrol-political eepect of the officer'e pereon-
ality. produce a poeitive notivetiooal level at which the officer'e capabil-
itiae and hie functional reeourcee and energy are Ianifeeted and utilized to
the fulleet degree in hie nilitary work. For thie reaaon. good noral-political
qualitiee are an extrclely iaportant, decieive indicator of the individual'e
euitability for a nilitery engineering career. Convereely. inadequate ideo-
logical conviction. political apathy and the donination of pareonal also

create negative aotivation with reepect to eilitary careere and lake the indi-
vidual uneuitable for euch careere.

Many yeare of experience hae reeulted in the develop-ant of verioua for-a and
nethode of eelecting candidatea for echoole and acedaaiee. baeed on their ef-
ficiency and Intel-political qualitiee. Selection ie nade by eanpling and
etudying infornation contained in queetionairee on eocial origin. living con-
ditione and job hiatory prior to entering the arny. The following aethode
are need for inveetigating aoral-political qualitiee: faliliarieation with
inforlation ieeued by that organization of which the candidate wee a aeaber;
a peychological analyeia of hie pereonal hietory; and interviewe with the
individual to clear up epecific queetione.

An objective. peychologically efficient and thorough deecription (confiden-
tial report) ie the aain eource of inforaation on the individual. It containe
o euaaary of aany yeare of etudy by echool teachere. workere with ailitery_
coa-ieariate. and directore of public organicatione on the ideological-political
devalopaent of the teen-ager or young nan. hie public activitiee. indicatione
of an inclination toward a ailitary career. and hie peychologicel treite.

‘5
90! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPllCIAL 083 ONLY

Unfortunetely. fer froo ell of the deecriptione depict the cendidete'e per-
eonelity thoroughly end correctly froe the peychologicel etendpoint. They
frequently coneiet of e routine. euperficiel end depereonelieed ehetch. fro-
which it ie difficult to neke out enything et ell. Our teek ie one of improv-
ing the coepetence of thoee people cherged with the reeponeihility for evel-
ueting the individuel quelitiee of youth entering the Areed Porcee. relying
on the echieveeente of peychologicel ecience.

A peychologicel etudy of pereonel hietoriee ie en leportent tool for eeteh-
liehing the individuel cepehilitiee of cendidetee for eilitery engineering
vuz'a. The experienced officer-teecher cen derive extreeely ueeful conclu-
eione einply hy feeilieriring hileelf with the individuel'e pereonel hietoryi
inforletion on the neke-up of the feeily. eociel position. plece of reeidence
end environment.

An interview with the individuel hy neehere of the ecceptence collieeion end
the officer-inetructore ie en indiepeneihle end. experience hee ehown. extreee-
ly infornetive lethod of deter-ining e cendidetc'e pereonel quelificetione.
The interview. following I plen worked out in edvence. e plen eneuring thet
the neceeeery inforletion on the cendidete will he ohteined. not only expende
end edde to the thoroughneee of information ehout hie life. but eleo providee
e rich body of inforeetion for deciding on the cendidete'e pereonel quelifi-
cetione. The inforeetion ohteined in the interview ie of velue not only
with reepect to deter-ining the cendidete'e euitehility for the cereer. hut
eleo ee heeic inforeetion for euheequent individuel indoctrinetionel work with
his ee e cedet or etudent.

The eecond euh-group includee the knowledge, ekille. ehilitiee end hehite ec-
quired by the individuel in the treining proceee. The Ieke-up end neture of
the individuel quelitiee in thie euh-group ere eleo environ-entelly deternined.
Hie pereonel knowledge, beeed on esperience, in thie eree includee environ-
eentelly deter-ined eleeente, elthough the influence ofinnetecherecterietice
ie hegining to ehow. cherecterietice which eenifeet peculieritiee of the indi-
viduel'e peychologicel diepoeition. hie ehilitiee end occupetionel cepehilitiee.
Thie euh-etructure ie eoeetilee referred to en the individuel‘e level of deve-
lopeent or treining, but it cen ehhrevieted to "experience." It ie the tech
of cereer eelection for future Iilitery engineere with reepect to treining
level to reveel the eleeente for-ing thie eub-etructure. lxe-inetione ere

the treditionel eethod of perforeing thie type of eelection. Unfortunetely.
the reeulte of theee exeninetione ere only of reletive diegnoetic end. eepe-
cielly. foreceeting,velue, heceuee the exelinetion lethode ueed et beet.only
eetehlieh the level to which the individuel hee eeeieileted certein infer-e-
tion. but do not reveel the cendidete‘e occupetionelly ieportent. creetive
ehilitiee. Thie indicetee thet the treditionel lethode ehould he euple-ented
with new end lore effective eethode releted to the individuel epproech.

The third euh-etructurell for-ed of feeturee which depend on the individuel
peculiarities of thinking. perception. elotione. senory end will. Thie euh-
structure ie ordinerily referred to in ehort ee the individuel'e functionel
cherncterietice. The quelitiee included in thie eub-etructure ere influenced
coneiderehly hy innete feeturee. They cost he token into eccount for deter-
Iining euitehility for Ieny occupetione. It ie not enough to eveluete the

66
FOR OPYICIAL US! OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics contained in this sub-structure in the selection process.
lmever. since the personality is sade up of the sus-totsl of prisarily envi-
ron-entally deter-ined qualities and attitudes. and not only. and not so such.
of innate qualities.

Various tests are used to renal individual psychological traits. Tests are
aost cos-only used for selecting candidates for operator-type specialties.
that is. the specialties which prisarily consist of driving cosbat vehicles
or operating technical systens. These include the specialties of technician-
operator and pover plent operator. for exanple. Due to their narrowly specia-
lised nature. technical couplexity and uniqueness. and to the especially
great responsibility borne by the personnel. these jobs sake special require-
nents of the individual. vhich not everyone is able to seat. The operator
working a control panel of a sissile launching facility. for eunple. has to
follow the readings of various instrunents end the condition of various de-
vices. This requires a large amount of hnovledge and a well-developed abili-
ty to shift one's attention in order to novo rapidly free one operation to
another. Little can be done to lake up for a lack of these Abilities.

Psychological experimentation (testing) is a scene of revealing occupational
suitability. based on individual psychological characteristics. The standard-
for- "conpsss." "dial." "use." “black-and-red array.“ "adjustsent trial-and-
error." and "cosbination letter-and-nmber" tests. for exasple. can be used

to reveal (vith varying degrees of reliability) the attention span. the abili-
ty to svitch one's attention. visual senory. senory for nusbers. perceptual
range. renction tile. and so forth. There are nuserous other Isthods of ex-
perinental study not only of psycho-physiological functions. but also of the
specific features of the creative thought process. speech and sections. as
veil as such individual qualities as degree of ostentation. the indivi-
dual's position in the social structure. and the dyna-ic facets of the person-
ality.3

The fourth sub-structure of the personality consists of the couplets group

of organic feetures. or. representative features. as they are also referred

to. in which far sore is inherited than is acquired. In speaking of inher-
ited characteristics. K. liars used the tens "natural abilities” and ”the
natural being" of Ian. This is the genotype in the biological sense. te-pera-
aent in the psychological, and a type of higher nervous activity in the physio-
logical sense.

Using cononly known teninology. the inherited qualities are the foundation,
and the acquired characteristics for- the superstructure. Since these defini-
tions are entirely conditional. the ratio of base to superstructure can vary:
they any correspond. in which case ve have a veil-balanced individual. or they
say be out of proportion. resulting in conflicts or. frequently. even an un-
balanced personality.

The dependencies of abilities on the foundation are not always apparent. but
the geneticists are nov convinced that sental and creative abilities. artistic
and nusical talent depend on the coubination of genes. Hedical experts and
psychologists are convinced thet the physiological level of differentiation

‘7
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

between the first and second signal systens predeternines intellectual abili-
ties to a great degree: artistic talent is found aoet frequently in those in-
dividuals in who- the first signal aysten is sore highly developed. while

powers of abstraction predoeinate in those in when the second signal systes
dosinatas.

it is necessary to reveal the occupationally isportant features in each of
the four sub-structures in order to study the individual for purposes of pro.
dieting his talent for allitsry engineering work. This sakes it possible to
avoid the con-on error of reducing the selection process to a consideretion
of cheracteristics in the third sub-structure elone.

An analysis of nuserous descriptions of the nilitary engineer‘s personality
in books and works by various authors leads us to conclude that the personal-
ity ”nodal" which has taken shape in this process is the aost suitable for
use in selecting future nilitery engineers for the nest diverse areas of ope-
cialisetion. And although not all of the parts have an indisputable. logical
foundation. the dynanic. functional structure of the personality can be suc-
cessfully used as the theoretical basic for perforeing studies to detersine
an individual's suitability for ailitary engineering work.

The dialectical deaonstretion (both quentative and qualitative) of an indivi-
dual's talent for a certsin.specifically nilitary engineering. type of work
is extreasly iaportant in career selection practices.

It should be noted that not only is talent nsnifested and developed in
the process of perforling a certain type of activity. but without activity
it does not exist at all. The theory that there is no such thing as ”talent
for activity 'X"' has now becoae established in the sciences dealing with
the personality. Until activity ”X" assunes definition. the individual only
possesses inherent traits in the for. of potential capabilities. which becoas
real only in the process of the specific activity. Hhat specific abilities
are necessary for nilitary engineering work? He shall discuss only a few of
the thoroughly studied ones.

One of the first groups of abilities has to do with the fact that the nilitary
engineer's work is intellectual. Clarifying the nature of the ale-ants asking
up technical work. Soviet psychologist h. n. Levitov states that in the first
place. they primarily pertain to the thought processes. in the second place.
they denote.physiologically.that level of analytical-synthetic activity at
which the coaplex relationships and the non-static relationship between the
first and second signal systeas are systenatited; and in the third place. they
include primarily those qualities which are designated as ksennes of nind
(lental orientation speed). deliberative ability and criticelity.

hany scientists consider the first coaponent to be the intellectual level or

intellectual ability. or. and this aaounts to the ease thing. cognative abili-
ty. the ability to understand concepts and to express one's thoughts verbally:
the site of one'a vocabulary; the ability to solve problcas. to foresee and to

‘8
’0l OPPICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

create a plan of action: the ability to apply one's experience and senory;
the ability to asks cosputations rapidly and correctly; the possession of
spatial concepts and the ability to perceive spatial relationships and con-
nections; the ability to discern eiailarities and distinctions between ob-
jects and between phenosena. and so forth.

One of the lost specific abilities required for silitsry engineering work is
a capacity for creativity. Studies perforncd with engineering and technical
personnel have revealed a broad spectrum of ferns in which creativity is de-
sonstrated in the work. forss which at the ease tine constitute features of
the personality and eleaentsry abilities which are a part of the structure
of creative work: an interest in and a discrininating propensity for a cer-
tain type of work. self-sufficiency, initiative. the ability to think for
oneself in the perforssnce of specific tasks. the need to organise and plan
one‘s work in the best possible sanner. the establishaent of good interper-
sonal relationships ssong the workers. rationalization and invention work.

It is doubtful that anyone today would object to the assertion that modern
military engineering work is inconceivable without fundamental sathensticsl
training. The science of sathematics has made a considerable mark on the
most diverse types of silitary engineering work. The sathessticsl abilities

of the "potential engineer" is therefore one of the important career selection
criteria.

An analysis of statements sade by scientists on the nature of ssthenaticsl
abilities shows that the latter have a definite structure. According te-V. A.
Krutetskiy, for example. who is both a psychologist and a-Iathesatieian and
has spent asny years studying sathenstical ability. this structure includes
the following: a capacity for generalisation; logical reasoning; keenness of
nind and resourcefulness; a sathenatical memory; a capacity for abstraction;
nental flexibility; the possession of spatial conceptions; the ability to re-
verse one's train of thought; a desire to conserve one's sental effort; greet
endurance for dealing with nathessticsl problems. and so forth.39

Just how cosplete is this andotherunulerations of such qualities? In SOIGYCI.
is it possible to conpile an exhaustive list for any specific ability? And
there is yet another question related to these: Must every youth desiring to
becose a military engineer possess the "couplets set" of characteristics in-
cluded in the list?

with respect to providing an integral. personal evaluation of occupational
suitability. it mt be said that any such list and any detailed description
of the structures of specific abilities. which is so badly needed. will always
be only a general outline. and the individual abilities of this or that per-
son will rerely include all of then. One sust always be able to identify

the connection between the specific abilities and to consider their mutual
influence.

‘9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

History contains aoae eassing axe-plea of individuals who possessed both
lathe-sticnl and other talents. we know. for exasple. that A. 8. Oriboyedov,
N. V. Gogol'. H. Yu. Lernontov and L. N. Tolstoy (who actually worked on
methods of teaching Isthenatice) had good nsthenstical abilities and a Iarked
propensity for lathe-stical activities. At the ease tine. A. s. Pushkin
"shed aany tears“ at the lyceun but “did not achieve any notable success"

in mathematics, and D. I. Msndeleyev regularly received not only "D's" but
even "P's" is greener school.

Organisational skills,sade necessary by the present revolution in eilitsry
affairs, are no less essential and urgently needed by the nodern ailitnry
engineer. "If one of you were to read all of Lenin's works at one tine, vol-
une after volune." H. I. Kslinin wrote. "you could not avoid noticing the
enormous amount of attention Lenin devoted to organizational setters or how
he ends 3V°'7 possible effort to teach organization to the workers and cos-u-
nists."‘ Referring repeatedly to organizational skills, V. I. Lenin pointed
out: "...adninistration requires special qualities. One say be the very best
revolutionary and agitator. and be absolutely useful as an adninistrator."‘1

In our philosophical and psychological literature, the subject of organiza-
tional abilities has been lost thoroughly expounded in the works of L. l.
Unanskiy. who notes 18 typical features forning the structure of organizational
skill: the ability to infect and stilulate other people with one's enthusiaal;
the ability to understand and react correctly to psychological phenomena and the
Ientalities of people (psychological ingenuity); the ability to spot deficien-
cies in actions and deeds, or. criticality; psychological tact; initiative and
denandingness; self-sufficiency; a capacity for work, and others.‘

Every organizer needs all of these abilities. They are not specifically engi-
neering skills. however. since they are also essential in other fields of pro-
fessional endeavor.

Closely related to organizational skills and capacities for intellectual work
are the pedagogical skills. which are also essential to nilitary engineers.
the duties of which include training and indoctrinating the use. The pedagog-
ical skills required by the professional teacher naturally differ free these
needed by the military engineer, both with respect to volune and to the
extent of their utilization in the practical work. These have already been
discussed in detail, however. There is no doubt as to the fact that a posses-
sion of such skills is a guarantee of successful work on the part of the sili-
tary specialist.

He have enumerated certain. but for free all of the abilities required by the
person preparing to choose a nilitary engineering career. The lists can only
be recounended in part. because, in the first place, it is inpossible to pro-
vide the- for all of the situations occurring in life, and, in the second place.
because these require-ants are continuously being developed and inproved.

This in no way scene that it is not necessary to analyse abilities and to

50
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

select the most capable individuals for a career as silitery engineers.
According to the foreign press. for example. the drop-out rate for cadets

is reduced by sore than 50 percent and up to a nillion dollars is saved by
selecting candidates for Iilitary educational institutions on the basis of
ability. This sakes it highly isportant for every silitery engineering VUZ
to sccusulate and sue-arise experience in career selection based on specific
individual abilities.

Requiresents with respect to capacities for silitary engineering work are
thus being refined and continuously sodified. This is due to the fact that
career selection is a developing process. The scientific approach to the
organisation of career selection for silitery engineers. however, requires
the deter-ination of certain constants. or sore precisly. laws. inherent in
this process. The general principles of career selection reflect these laws.
end inpulsive actions and Iany errors can be avoided in this work by observ-
ing then.

The first such principle is that of social deternination of the basis for

the selection. that is. asking the selection on the basis of society's need
for a certain number of military-technical specialists of a certain caliber.
These requirements arctin turn. the result of specific historical conditions.
the silitary-political situation. and the level and the requiressnts of scien-
tific and technological progress. During the first years of Soviet power.

the efforts were seinly concentrated on selecting and training various spe-
cialista for the cavalry and artillery. It then becese necessary to initiate
the large-scale training of specialists for the air force. the subsarine fleet
and the tank troops. At the beginning of the 1960’s it becase necessary to
fill the ranks of the Strategic hissile Troops. and this required an enorlous
number of military-technical specialists.

The social detersination principle detersines the relative nature of the selec-
tion. The fact is that the selection criteria are not always the sane. The
general trend is toward deternination of suitability for a certein silitary
career based on the top criterion. that is. on those characteristics which can
ensure excellent fulfulllent of one's functional duties. The selection Isy be
sade on the basis of criteria at the middle of the list, or even lower. how-
ever. depending on the nilitary-political situation. the state's needs and the
level of prestige carried by the silitary-technical careers. The question of
how for military prepardness can safely be reduced by increasing the nusber

of specialists accepted becoses highly acute in the latter case.

The relative nature of this selection is also deter-ined by its dependency on
the level of career orientation and career consultation work. when the work
is well organized. it is possible to limit the task of selecting those to be
accepted et a V02 to an individual study of the candidates.

It should be noted that this selection is relative in yet another sense: it is
ilpoesible to ensure cosplete reliability with the use of any of the selection
lethods. Finally. the lisited and relative nature of this selection is deter-
Iined by trends in and the outlook for the develop-cut of nilitary work.

51
VOR 0F?ICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nature end the structure of the nilitnry-technicel epecielties ere under-
going further nodificetion in the procesu of the scientific end technologicel
revolution. The extensive use of eutosetic systees end devices is contribut-
to the creetion of specislties vith e broed renge of functions. Auto-etion
provides the neteriel beeie for coebining previously lieited operetione into
n single. process controlled end directed by sun.

The nature of the interection occurring within the "sen-sechins” syetee is
chenglng es the process of eutoeetion progresses. lien is incrsesingly reeoved
froe the direct coebet process end is increesingly perforeing preperetion.
supervision end eonitoring functions.

The require-snts eede of the ebilities. knovledge end skills of eilitsry-
technicel specielists hsve elso undergone considereble chenge. Abilities
other then concrete ones ere increesingly required: physicel strength. preci-
sion of sensory end Iotor coordinstion. end so forth. es well es such queli-
tiee es s lerge store of job infomtion. repid edeptebility for the perfore-
ence of constently chsnging essignlents. end e feeling of responsibility for
the equipeent in one's cherge. The role of politicel-eorsl quelitiee hes in-
creesed considerebly. quelities which, es we know. do not result fro- eny sort
of inherited cherecteristics but ere e product of the individu».l's sociel de-
velopeent. indoctrinetion end treining. All of this hes resulted in e generel
trend in the developeent of the required quelities. teking the focus euey free
netters of selection to the develop-eat of job skills.

The fect thet scientific end teclunologicel progress does not encourege the
long-range end lerge-scsle use of psychometric eethods of cereer selection
should not be tsken es en erguesnt egeinst the expediency end greet effective-
ness of selection besed on psycho-physiologicel cherecteristics for e lerge
group of specielists. The need for speciel selection of people for eeny
technicel-nilitery specielties, besed on individuel psychologicel quelities.
is still e precticel end inportent one. This is e velid fore of selection.
beceusc the group of individuels leerning e given specielty includes those
who ere not eble to leern it successfully vithin the ties ellotted; beceuse
of the speciel ieportence of the operetionel tesks perfoned end the greet
possible denger crested by errors; by the lerge nuebers of individuels
desiring to enter “We end the limited tine eveileble for the selec-
tion. end the lerge elounts of eoney spent by the state on their treining:
end by the need to select the eost suiteble individuels free e nuber of cendi-
dotes.

These conditions ere essentiel for the selection of future eilitery engineers
to serve es operetors. These nilitsry engineering specielties require such
specific quelities es the ebility to think cleerly. e good ee-ory. concentre-
tion end psycho-otor skills. which ere difficult to exercise. end little cen
be done to coepeneete for e leck of then. If the ebilitiee cen be eesily de-
veloped in the course of treining. however, or if they cen only be reveeled
end scquired in the process of prolonged eilitery engineering work. there is
no need for prelieinery selection. The ebove indicetions of the velidity of
selection neke it possible to define the list of Iilitery engineering speciel-
tion for which the deteninetion of individuel psychologicel cherecteristics

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP‘FlClAl. USE ONLY

in absolutely necessary. We have a practical need for such a list and for

an actual procedure for the selection. backed up by proper normative-legal
enactments.

The next principle of psychological selection is a logical outgrowth of the
personal approach to the study of the individual's dynamic functional struc-
ture. it is based on the study of military career suitability and its active
development in the first stage of training. at the end of the training and.
finally. throughout the entire period of service. In otherwords. psycholo-
gical selection is not an act but a lengthy process, the first significant
phase of which takes place at the first encounter.

Extended selection. like all contemporary work carried out with personnel in
general. requires that the command and political staff possess not just a
familiarity with psychology and social psychology, but a thorough knowledge
of them and proficiency in all of the forms and methods of career selection
and the training of specialists for the technical military fields.

Extended selection makes it possible to rely upon yet another principle of
military career aelection-the active selection principle. Active selection
implies organizing the selection in such a way that it is organically combined
with maximum adaptation of the machine's control elements to men's functional
characteristics. rational automation of a number of operations. the develop-
ment of algorithmic training systems. optimisation of training routines. and

the adoption of nonspecific means of improving the specialist's functional
characteristics.

From the standpoint of the active selection principle. we should stress the

need and the importance of developing the imperfect psychic qualities revealed

in the selection process. "Suitable." "not suitable" and "limited suitability"
are passive conclusions. Active conclusions should contain psychological. func-
tional. training and indoctrinational recommendations. with the focus on build-
ing up insufficiently developed occupationally important qualities. And in order
to issue such recommendations. it is necessary not only to describe the charac-
teristics revealed. but also to predict how they will develop in the training

and indoctrinational process (the rate of their development. their development-
al peculiarities and limitations).

The problem of predicting the military technical specialist's fighting effi-
ciency presents the greatest difficulty. After all. the concept "military
occupational suitability" primarily implies the ability to function success-
fully in a combat situation. Many researchers have rightly pointed out the
inadequacy of evaluating on the basis of training results. In a battle. the
individual must possess a large number of psychological combat qualities. in
addition to his occupational knowledge and skills: fighting spirit. emotional-
volitional stability. the ability to exert maximum effort. the ability to com-
mand sub-units in any situation. determination and a desire to execute the
combat mission no matter what. It is precisely these qualities which make an
officer highly active in combat. consequently. the methods used for selecting

53
FOR OFPICIAL USE OﬂLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

end training nilitsry specialists aust reveal and develop the qualities
required not only in the training. but in combat as well. This circusstance
gives rise to an extremely ieportant principle of eilitary cereer selection-
the principle of adequacy. The latter is at the seas tine the most important
principle and the east difficult to realize: it is a difficult setter to pre-
dict how an individual will behave in n battle. "Danger is an el t of var-
fare. In a war. one issurroundedby danger every single ainute." 3 Psycholo-
gical manifestations brought out by coabat are of an extreme and compelling
nature: lore rigid criteria of military professional suitability are in effect.
The difficulty of forecasting coabat efficiency is created by the fact that
different people behave differently in dangerous situations. The threat of
dying or being wounded can paralyze one individual, rendering hie helpless.
Another nay feel a surge of physical and emotional energy at a time of danger.
His iaegination suddenly creates a special world in which he feels capable of
destroying anything standing in his way. A classic example of the achieve-
aent of such a state by an individual was the feet performed by Captain Tuehin
at Shoengraben, which was described in L. I. Tolstoy's novel ”Her and Peace."
When he finds hi-self in danger. the lost timid officer. one who quails when
confronted by superiors. say feel strong and invulnerahle. master of the ar-
tillery's thunder and lightning.

Suddessful perforlance in a coebat situation can only be predicted in a situa-
tion approaching actual cosbat. The functional tests used in laboratories

are the least effective of all. Dispite this. it would not be correct to con-
clude that it is impossible to predict a soldier's behavior in coabat. Such

e conclusion can only be aade with a functional approach to the evaluation

of fighting qualities. when they are regarded as self-sufficient qualities
which do not depend on the individual's other characteristics. In fact.
however, fighting qualities do not exist in and of the-selves. They are deri-
vative qualities. always produced by other characteristice--soldiers are not
born, after all.

A Harxiet-Leninist outlook. ideological stability, devotion to the party
cause. patriotism and loyalty to one's ailitary duty determine the officer's
level of activation and constitute the decisive conditions for success. both
in the training and in colbat. This lotivation ensures the functioning of
the psychological aechanisss essential for success in coabat. In this sense.
ideals and feelings of a higher order inspire and motivate the fightingnan

to achieve victory over the enemy. One must first of all deter-inc the level
of develop-en: of precisely these qualities for forecasting an officer's coe-
bet efficiency. The so-called “physical-culture" methods developed by a teen
of researchers headed by T. G. Deheagarov are the most effective of the prac-
tical methods used for forecasting success in coubat. They include the fol-
lowing nethods: overconing obstacle fields with simulated elenenta of a com-
bat situetion, multi-kilometer cross-country races and military sports games.
when organized properly and in a well-conceived aanner. they can provide ex-
trenely useful information on the level of the officer’s emotional-volitional
stability. initiative, nilitancy, self-control and other qualities.

5‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most reliable way to know the cadet or student's moral-fighting qubli-
ties. however. is that of studying the individual during his training. Bx-
perienee which is being accumulated in the simulation of stress situations
during exercises and th practice of making training tasks resemble actual

combat as nearly as possible are creating increasingly better opportunities
for this.

It must be noted that. since the forecasting of cosbat efficiency is a natter
of probability. we should conclude that it is necessary. while continuing to
search persistently for good selection methods. to focus attention on matters
of improving moral-psychological conditioning. during the course of which the
psychological mechanisms required for combat are developed. The task is one
of improving the work of ideological-political indoctrination of the trainees
end improving training methods. on the one hand. and of seeking methods of
providing conditioning for performing in stress situations. on the other. The
psychological mechanism. by means of which moral-political qualities and the
training of the fighting-en are objectively developed in combat action, are
only formed in the process of such practical training.

In conclusion. we would like to stress once again the need for persistent.
continuous work to develop a military-professional orientation in the cadets
and students at military engineering VUZ's and departments.

A fairly broad range of specialists are trained at the schools and academies.
Profound and thorough theoretical knowledge make it possible for the graduates
to be used in various positions. both as engineers and as commanders. Some

of them see themselves in the future. however. as "purely engineers.” design-
ers and workers in research laboratories. And it is no secret that some young
graduates of military engineering departments turn out to be psychologically
unprepared to serve as commanders: at first. they avoid the personnel and de-
monstrate no special desire to learn to work with people. The situation some-
times takes a dramatic turn-the young officer experiences s feeling of dis-
appointment in his career.

Consequently. the development of a military-professional orientation end a
psychological readiness to command sub-units is an extremely important task

of the training and indoctrinational process. Experienced officer-instructors
see to it that each cadet receives good military training during his school
years. masters the forms and methods of party-political work. acquires solid
skills in commanding a formation. and learns how to conduct classes not only
on technical military subjects. but in all of the other types of combat and
political trainign as well.

It must be said that problems of career selection for military engineering
work are still not being properly covered in military literature and that the
level of their development. especially in the methodological sense. still do
not meet the requirements with respect to providing students for schools and
academies. The concept of career selection for military engineers which we
have described naturally requires further refinement and thorough elaboration
as applicable to specific specialties.

55
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

The silitory engineering iield is. in a way. the "highest wave" of scientific
and technological progress: specialties are becoaing sore coeplicated. nev
and unheard-oi specialties are coaing into being. and greater deaands are
being node of the level of professional training for engineers. It is pre-
cisely for this reason that investigations into probieas of career selection
are becoaing an essential eleaent of the scientific organisation of ailitary
work and a subject of concern for the co-anders and chiefs involved. The
scientifically substantiated selection of military-technical specialists and
its isproveaett are asking it possible to structure training progress sore
efficiently and to train specialists for the Soviet Arlee Forces in a sore
goal-oriented sanner and on a higher level.

56
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPNICIAL US! ONLY
CONCLUSION

Soviet eilitery engineering personnel embody the developed feetures of the
Soviet engineering end technicelintelligentsieend the beeic feetures of the
officer corps of the Soviet Arned forces. The role of eilitery engineers

end their influence on the coebet reedinese of the Soviet Areed Forces hes
never been so greet. This is due. in the first plece, to the lerge nueber

of eilitery engineerexevery second officer in our erly end nevy is en engi-
neer or technicien; in the second plece. to the high level of technicel equip-
eent of the erey. vhich hes turned prscticelly all services of the Areed Forces
end branches of troops into technicel troops; in the third plece. to the eueli-
tstive chsnges vhich heve occurred in erey end nsvy personnel. vhogstodey. es
never before. need good nilitery-technicel training end the ebility to success-
fully use end operete exceptionelly coeplex eilitery equipsent end weapons;
end in the fourth plece. to the neture of eodern verfere. which cen begin
sbselutely unexpectedly, involve lerge erees of the plenet. be extreeely bit-
ter end devesteting. end be conducted in the fore of repid. highly mobile end
end intense coebet operetione.

it is necessery to eehe eexinue use of the eilitery potentiel, including the
eilitery-technicel potentiel. in order to repel en unexpected etteck by en
egreseor. to respond with e devesteting strike. end to successfully reeliee
the greet poser inherent in the eocieliet systee to defend the USSR end the
entire eocieliet censonueelth Victoriously. The successful eccosplisheent
of this test depends greetly on the ekilful work of eilitery end technicel
personnel of the Soviet Army and Navy. Modern unrfnre requires thet the engi-
neer be not just e technicel epecielist. responsible for the coebet eeploy-
eent end operetion of the silitery eeuipeent. but also e profound expert in
eilitery effeirs. e good orgenieer end indoctrinetor of subordinetee end en
ideologicelly neture end thoroughly developed individuel.

The Soviet Arly hes reesrkeble cedree of engineering eed tschnicel personnel.
This is prieerily due to the sociel environ-cut. which nurtures our Areed
Forces end their officer cedres free en inexheusteble source. The building
of e developed eocieliet eociety in the USSR end the successful reelizstion
of the perty'e econoeic. scientific end technological, sociel, culturel end
ideologicel progress heve effected the quelity of the officer corps. includ-
ing the Iilitery engineers.

ln s clees sense. Soviet eilitery engineers ere representetivee of the vork-

ing clese. the holkho: pessentry end the eocieliet intelligentsia. end ere
linked to the. by their origins. interests end espiretione. The populer

neture of the Soviet Arly creetes en indeetructeble unity of fightingnsn of
ell rsnks end et ell levels.

In the political respect. Soviet eilitery engineers ere ective perticipsnte
in ell ereee of our public-politicel life. perforIing the responsible teske
of strengthening the conbet eight of the Areed forces. Perforeing in e single
for-scion with ell of the other divisions of the officer corps end guided by
the Con-uniet Perty. the eilitery engineers ere Ieking e lerge contribution

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the ceuse of defending our hoeelend. The reel threet of s new world wer
being unleeshed by the ilperielists end the need to defend socieliss ere
reising the politicel responsibility of Soviet silitery engineers to en un-
precedented height.

In the scientific end technologicel respect. Soviet nilitery engineers ere
highly skilled specieliste leesuring up to eodern eilitery-technicel thought.

A profound knowledge of Hersiet-Leninist doctrine. the besic sciences. sodern
technical sciences end the principles end lethods of scientific control sske
the eilitery engineer en intellectuel in the true sense of the word. Our
outstsnding successes in the developeent of Iilitery equipsent end its success-
ful operetion ere en indicetor of the high scientific end technicel sophisti-
cetion of our Iilitery engineering personnel.

In the Iilitery respect. engineering end technicel personnel ere egents of
Iodern eilitery stenderds. They possess the required knowledge of Soviet
Iilitery science end Iilitery ert. silitery reguletions end senuels. end set
on exp-pie of discipline. perforeence end orgenisetion. The treining syste-
fnr eilitery engineering personnel provides then with operetionsl-tecticel
knowledge end skills end the ebility to reelise these on e precticel level.
The developeent of operetionel-tecticel thought coeprises en extreeely impor-
tant precondition for the developeent of col-end end other coebet quelities
in the Soviet nilitery engineer. without this. he cennot perforl his func-
tional duties.

in the culturel end ideologicel respect. Soviet silitery engineers ere men
of greet sophisticetion end erudition. end egents of the Herxist-Leninist
outlook end of the hotel end esthetic ideels of the builders of coeeunise.

Our party. es convincingly demonstreted by the 25th CPS” Congress. is focus-
ing ell of the sein efforts end resources of the developed socielist society
on the achievement of thet lost noble end hu-ene goel-the building of con-
nunisn. for the seke of this goel. the Soviet Stete is etteepting to strength-
en pesce end security for ell netions. At the sees tine. es'docueents fro.
the 25th CPSU Congress stete. "our security end the peeceful lebor of the
Soviet people eust be reliebly ensured end defended. since there ere forces
in the world which ere hostile to detente end which reject the principle of
peaceful coexistence es the foundetion for reletions between stetee with e
developed socielist structure. He shell therefore continue to concern our-
selves for our glorious Arled Porces-the pride of the Soviet people."“

Responding to the perty's concern for the Soviet Arled Forces. Soviet mili-
tary engineering personnel ere increesing their politicel vigilence. i-prov~
ing the coebet treining quality end neinteining s stete of constent coebet
reediness. There is no doubt thet the continued development of the indivi-
dusl quelities of Soviet eilitery engineers will eeke e lergs contribution
to the work of strengthening the eocielist hoeelend’s defense cepebility.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
lo.

11.

12.

13.

16.

IS.

16.

17.

18.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OO‘INO‘I'BS

"ﬂaterialy XXV s'yceds ”38"[Hsteriels of the 25th crsu Congreos). Moscow.
1976. p 83.

N. V. Hatkov. "ﬂauchno-technichoskaye revolyutoiyauanalis. perspektivy.
posledstviya“[1'he Scientific and Technological Revolution-«n Anslysis.
Prospects. Consequenceo]. Hoscov. 1973, pp 180. 20‘.

”$88!! v tsifrskh v 1975 3odu"[1'he USSR in Figures for 1975], Hoscov. 1976.
p 17.

SOTSIALIS'I‘ICII'BSKAYA INDUSTRIYA. 9 June 1969.
"$88!! v tsifrekh v 1975." p 186.
1. S. Hagutov. "Inshener"['l‘he Engineer]. Hoocou. 1973. p 50.

S. A. Kusel' and 0. H. Nikandrov. "Nolodyye inzhenery"['l‘he Young Engineers].
Roscov. 1971. p 75.

VESTNIK W881!!! SEIKO“. No 12. 1972. p 6; No 4. 1970. p 71. .
KRASNAYA MBA. 25 April 1976.

"Zakon 888R 0 vseobohchey voinskoy ohysunnooti”['l'he Lev of the‘ USSR on
Universsl Hendetory Ililitery Duty]. Floocov. 1967. p 35.

N. V. Kitichenluo, ”Tekhnicheskaya kul'turo oovetskogo voina”[‘l'he Technicel
Sophistication of the Soviet Pishtingusn], Moscow. 1971. p 31.

I. V. Duel-sun. "Iooledovaniye trudovykh reoursov v 85M”[A Study of
Labor Resources in the U.8.A.]. Moscow. 1967, pp 165-167.

Yu. H. Sheynin. "ltsuks i Iilitsriu v $8M"[8cience and Hilitarisl in the
U.8.A.]. Moscow. 1963. pp 81. 82.

N. V. Kirichenko. "Tekhnicheskeye kul‘ture eovetskogo veins." 9 31.

c. uekhanik. ”The Scientific and Techno1ogico1 Revolution and its Affect
on the Copitslilt Scone-y" in MIROVAYA BKOIIGIIKA I HBZIIDUNARODNYYB
OTNOSIIBI'IYA, No 12. 1966, p 70.

K. Kent and 1'. Bagels, "Soch."lﬂotksl, Vol 15. p 23‘.

Yu. G. Pokin. ”lodezhnoot' pri eksplustatsii tekhnicheokikh sredstv"[lleli-
abi1ity in the Operation of Technical Bquip-ent]. Moscow. 1970. 28.

“Voyennsys inzhenemaya psikholosiys’ﬂﬂilitary III-an Factors Engineering].
Moscow, 1970, p 24.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I9.

20.

21.

22.
23.
26.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
3b.
35.

36.

37.

M. V. Prunxo. "Inhrnnnyyc proizvodcniyn"lSolected Horkal. Moacov. 1965.
p 70.

"Haterioly XXV a"ye:da KPSS." p 70.

Yu. I. Rachev. "Voinekiy kollektiv i yego rol' v ukreplenii boyevoy Ioehchi
Sovetakikh Vooruehennykh 8i1”[The Military Collective and ite Role in
Strengthening the Coahat Might of the Soviet Armed Iorcee]. Moacov. 1972.
“Materiely XXV a“yeada KPSS." p 68.

N. A. Mel'nikov. "Na koalodroaa"[At the Spaceport]. Moscow. 1965. p 35.
KRASNAYA ZVEZDA.27 January 1963.

M. I. Kalinin. "0 kolnuniaticheakon voapitanii i voinakoo dolge"[0n Con-
auniet Indoctrination and Military Duty]. Moacou. $967. pp 255-256.

"Voyennaya inxhenernaya peikhologiye." pp 205-217.
I. P. Lonov. "Chelovek i tekhnika." Mnacov. 1966. pp 22—25. 32.
A lore detailed diacuaaion of thin follows.

K. Marx and P. Engeln, "I: rannihh proizvedeniy"[Proa Their Early Horka].
Moscow. 1956. p 1.

Ibid., p 566.

V. I. Lenin. "Poln. eobr. eoch."[Cooplete Collected Mortal. Vol 36. p 193.
lbid.. Vol 26, p 361: Vol 60. p 215.

M. P. Pronto. “Izhrannyye proizvedeniya." p 651.

"Voyenneya inzhenernaya paikholosiye." pp 229-250.‘

K. V. Shorokhov. "Certain Methodological Aapecta of Paraonality Paychology.“
in the collection "Prohleay lichnoati“[Problele of the Peraonalityl. aya-
poaiun uaterinla, Vol 1. Moacov. 1969. p 30.

K. K. Platonov, "The Personal Approach aa a Principle of Paychology" in
the book "Matodologicheekiye i teoreticheakiye probleay peikhologii"
[Methodological and Theoretical Problena of Paycholosyl. Moscow. 1969.

p 198.

K. K. Platonov. "The Concept of Structure in the Study of the Peraonality.”
in the collection "Proble-y lichnoeti." Vol 1, Moacov. pp 51-62.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
38.

39.

‘0.

61.

62.

‘3.
64.

"Proktlkun po polkhologn"[An Experimental Study in Psychology]. Moscow,
1972.

N. D. uvltov, "0n the Psychological lilo-onto of Technical Work" in
VOPROSY PSIKIIOLOGII. No 6. 1958. p 36.

K. K. Plotonov. ”Problem npooobnootey"l1‘he Probln of Abllltleol.
Mom. 1972. p 175.

H. I. tollnln. ”0 ko-unlotlchukol voopltonll l volnokou dolgc."
pp 255-256.

L. 1. Molly. "M10 Con loco-e on Organizer" In meOY KWIST. No 9.
1966. p 60.

V. I. Lenin. "Poln. solar. ooch..“ Vol ‘6. p 210.

”ﬂuently XXV 0"yezdn KP88." 9 154.

COPYRIGIIT: Voyontldat . 1977 .

11499
cso: 1801 m

61
NR OFFICIAL US! OILY