FOR ornmx. USS ONI.\

JPRS L/10177
10 December 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 70/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts.. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/1017

10 December

JAPAN REPORT
(2000 70/81)

CONTENTS

MILITARY

Moves Toward Creating Combat-Ready Organi sation Discussed
(Takashi Two; “WWW, 27 wt 81) eeeeeeoeeeeeeee e..-

BCGKMIC

U.S. Seeks End to Tariffs on 29 Cormodities
(JAPAN BCONmIc men’ 2h Nov 81) OOUOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOIOIII

Discussion on Cutting Discount Rates
(Masahiko Ishizuka; JAPAI! WC JOURNAL, 2!; Nov 81) .....

SCIENCE AND TECHNOWY

Fujitsu's Strategy To Surpass In! Discussed
(SHUKAN mu TOSHI’ 16 Jul 81) 00.0.0.0...OIOIIOOQIOOOOO0O...

Discussion Held on 16 Conflict With United States
(mm m0 mm, 19 *p 81) C...OIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIICOO...

11.3. Demand on Removing Tariffs Considered Unreasonable
(JAPAN Emmc JOURNAL, 21‘ NOV 81) OOOOOOOOOIOIOICOOOOOIUO.

Steel Industry Sees Financial Crisis Danger in 1990
(JAPAN BCONmIc JW’ zhxov 81) OOOOOOCOOOOOOOCIIOOOIUOO

Seamless Steel Pipes Export Prices Rise
(JAPAN Emmc JW, 2hﬂov 81) OOOCOOIOOOCOOICOIIQOOOOO

General Electric Machinery Makers Boost Expenditure
(JAPM ECONMC Jam“, 21‘ NOV 81) eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

New Minute Metal Particles Production Discovered
(JAPAN mmc Jam“, 2h Nov 81) DOOIOOOOU0000000000000’0

-s- [III-ASIA-lll?

FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Sterp To Produce Visible Light Semiconductor Laser
(JAPAN mmc Jm‘ll, 21‘ Nov 81) COOIOIOOOOOOOOOIOIOOOODO

Reagent Made for Measuring Molecular Weights
(um: acmmc meuL, 2h nov 81)

Potential of Defence Industry Examined '
(NIKKBI SANGYO Sim, Various dates) oooeoooeoooeueooeeooo

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

WVES TOWARD CREATING COMBAT-READY ORGANIZATION DISCUSSED
Tokyo EKONOHISUTO in Japanese 27 Oct 81 pp 26-31
[Article by Takashi Takano]

[Text] Hhile unrealistic defense discussions dazzle the public,
uniformed officers of the Defense Agency are steadily marching
toward the "conbat-ready military," that is. "Japanese Armed
Forces." What sakes this nove possible?

"Combat-Ready" Organization

News that a consortium of three companies, ZenitakrGuni, Tokyu Construction and
Old Construction, was the successful bidder for the main construction work for
the ”Central Com-and and Control" of the Defense Agency held on 22 Septuber was
very casually reported. It say have been the "everyday sensitivity” of the press
club at the Defense Agency that allowed this indifference in reporting the news--
the View which regards as rather unnatural the lack of a Joint comnd and
control center uniting the three branches of the Self Defense Forces, when the
Self Defense Forces are about to co-it themselves to accept a military share

in Asia in line with the "Japan-0.8. Alliance" fomlated by Suzuki's visit to
the United States. However, this issue is deeply related to the qualitative
changes associated with the postwar history of the Security Treaty and the Self
Defense Forces. which will probably confront a decisive turn in the aid-1980's.

The purpose of the Central Count! and Control is none other than unilateral
information gathering and servicing operations and transnission of orders by
means of linking "Defense Hicrocircuits," that is. the co-anications network
of the Ground Self Defense Force, the "Self Defense Fleet Cos-end and Support
(SP) System" with the Self Defense Fleet Cot-sand in YoItosulta as its center, and
the "BADGE System" of the air Self Defense Force. The control roon. equipped with
a large screen that displays movements in the three forces, is of course
connected by a hot line to the operations and count] room of the Yokots
Comand of the 0.8. Armed Forces Japan. If necessary, it will request the
presence of American generals and function as the Joint operations center in
cooperation with the 0.5. Armed Forces in the Far East.

In short, only after the coepletion of the construction of this small building
of two floors aboveground and three floors below ground, to be built at a noninsl

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR 0511(1AI. "SE "NIX

cost of 9 billion yen in the compound of (the Defense Agency) in Hinoki-machi. will
"really combat ready" Self Defense Forces be born for the first time.

It is quite outside the common sense of military practice to enter into combat
actions that influence the destiny of a nation without having any setup for the
joint use of three military forces. In reality, the Self Defense Forces, which
started as the National Peace Forces, or more frankly, forces to guard the bases
after the U.S. Armed Forces Japan left for the Korean front, do not have a function
or a system to join these three forces.

For example, taking a look at one of the exercises, the tank division of the
Ground Self Defense Force, which courageously runs through the wasteland of
Hokkaido, repeats exercises that only scratch the surface with the utmost effort,
without being linked to the command of the air and ground cover by the Air Self
Defense Force fighters. 0r, similarly, air cover cannot be hoped for when the
Marine Self Defense Force trains for antisubmarine attack.

The reason is simple. The training areas of the Ground, Marine and Air Defense
Forces are too far apart to conduct a joint exercise. However, essentially it
proves that the Self Defense Forces are "junior" military which lack a joint
system for the three forces.

However, the Self Defense Forces greatly overcame that disadvantage in the exer-
cises last July. That commendable event was the joint maneuver staged on northern
Kyushu, which commanded a forced landing of a 10,000-man Ground Self Defense
Force unit on Tsushima Island by sea and air to counter an air raid on Sasebo

Port and on cargo ships by enemy aircraft. supposedly an "Emergency on Tsushima"
--actually an emergency in Korea.

It is not only because this was the largest full-scale joint manuever to date
that attracted our attention. we must acknowledge that it was the first maneuver
in history "directly commanded by the chairman of the Joint Staff Council" and at
the a me time it was actually conducted in concert with the exercise held in the
Sea of Japan by the American and Korean navies and the drill to seal Tsugaru and
the Soya Straits held by the 0.8. Armed Forces.

These deployments of units and cooperative operations with both American and
Korean armed forces are precisely programs that can be facilitated on a full
scale only after the inception of the Central Command and Control in 1983.

If that is how things are shaping up, a critical obstacle will emerge. who is
the commander to be charged with unilateral power to manipulate the joint Self
Defense Forces in conformity with a real war? In other words, who sits i~ front
of the operations board at Central Command and Control?

Man to Fill the "Vessel"

From the standpoint of common sense. none other than the chairman of the Joint
Staff Council, standing above the chiefs of staffs of the Ground, Marine and
Air Self Defense Forces, should be the appropriate candidate. In fact, Chairman

2
FOR\JFHKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Yada of the Joint Staff COuncil took "command" in the Tsushima maneuver. However,
a delicate nuance is woven into the wording "command." Actually, the chairman of
the Joint Staff Council is not entrusted with authority to command and order.

In other countries, usually the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff or the
chief of the Joint General Staff is at the top of the uniformed officers and is
authorized to take the great responsibility of leading the actual command of
the three forces immediately under the commander in chief.

The Self Defense Force Law, however, provides: 1) the prime minister has the
supreme command and control power of the Self Defense Forces (Article 7); 2) under
that authority, the minister of state for defense has general control of the
duties of the Self Defense Forces (Article 8); and 3) the three chiefs of staff of
the Ground, Marine and Air Self Defense Forces execute orders given to the
respective forces by the minister of state for defense (Article 9). It does not
mention the chairman of the Joint Staff Council anywhere. It is only in Title 3,
Paragraph 2. Section 1 of the Defense Agency Law that the chairman of the Joint
Staff Council is for the first time provided for. The content of the provision,
in one word. is no more than "coordination" for the three chiefs of staff.

That can be interpreted, although it is rash to go so far, that the chairman

of the Joint Staff Council can Only "coordinate" when, in a time of emergency,

the three chiefs of staff authorized to execute the respective orders given to the
Ground. Marine and Air Self Defense Forces are engaging in a fist fight over the
deployment of operations and transfer of units in front of the helpless minister
of state for defense, who does not have a military background. The authority to
command all forces directly, jumping over the heads of the three chiefs of

staff. is not necessarily clearly delegated to the chairman.

It is natural that the uniformed officers consider it impossible to engage in

a war in this circumstance. After the "vessel" celled Central Command and
Control is created as an accomplished fact without any serious debate in the Diet,
the inevitable problem will be: what shall be in that vessel? Chairman Yads
himself said to the press at the time of the previous Tsushima manuever: "A
question regarding the authority of the chairman of the Joint Staff Council will
cone up sooner or later."

In other words, this is a question of establishing a military command system.

In the military of any country, usually the two systems, military administration
and military command. are set up inparalle. However, in the case of the Self
Defense Forces, 5 military administration headed by an administrative vice
minister has been established, but the position of the chairman of the Joint
Staff Council, the supreme post of the uniformed officers, is ambiguous as
described above. The chairman locks power and authority to the extent that there
may be some cases where only the three chiefs, but not the chairman, are invited
to parties given by foreign embassies and consulates, but not the reverse.

That suggests that the military command system is "incomplete." The complaint
often voiced against "civilian control," i.e., against domination of the Self
Defense Forces by the bureaucrats in mufti in the intra-ministerial bureaus of
the Defense Agency, after ail. comes down to a demand for designing the

IN3R'OFIICi;I.USI:(MVLY
Hill (”TRIM | S“ "\l \

establishment of a military comand system headed by the chairman of the Joint
Staff Council through upgrading the position of the chairman in parallel with the
administrative vice minister.

That means that they demand a complete system which upgrades the Self Defense
Forces so they may be suitably called "Japanese Armed Forces."

Reform of 1w Defense Laws?

To this effect uniformed officers are reportedly anxiously devising the first
major reform of the two fundamental defense laws, the Self Defense Force Law and
the Defense Agency Law, since the laws became effective. with the reform to be
completed before next fall so as to be in time for the initiation of the Central
Comand and Control scheduled for September 1983. Or, prior to that, there is a
possibility that even the Second Special Investigation Col-ittee may make a
radical proposal for upgrading the Defense Agency to a Defense or a Ministry of
National Defense.

At the meeting of the second subcomaittee of the Special Investigation Conittee
held on 6 October, former director Osami Hayashi of the Bureau of Legislation, who
is also one of the nine members of the Special Investigation Co-ittee, attracted
attention by stating: "The Defense Agency is heterogenous as an external bureau
of the prime minister's office. It should be established as an independent
ministry." Member Ryuzo Sejima and consultant Chu Ito, also of the Special
Investigation Comittee, stood out for a study on the creation of a ministry

of national defense in their article supporting the proposition. Ways to Defend
Japan" by the "Japan Strategy Research Center," to which they serve as advisers.

Recalling that the director of the Administrative Management Agency is Yasuhiro
Nakasone. who once defended the same issue in the Diet when he was serving as
minister of state for defense, it is considered quite possible that the report

of the Special Investigation Conittee to be submitted in the middle of next year
will dish it out once again.

There is no doubt that the "Ministry of National Defense" to be established in
that case would not be the current Defense Agency with a new title, but that a
new dimension would be added to its qualities, including the establishment of
military cell-and.

Look how the pursuit of military consolidation by the career military officers
originated from a simple and naive apprehension-we cannot fight a war in this
condition~-often builds up to an endless ambition.

Indeed, there are some grounds behind the complaint from the uniformed officers
that there is no such thing as "civilian control" in Japan. but only an infes-
tation by politicians who are after the defense concessions and by ignorant
bureaucrats inmufti sent to "serve for 2 years" against their will from other
first-class government offices.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then, the question to be raised is how to establish "civilian control," which
serves as an institutional guarantee to subordinate military matters to politics
and diplomacy. “hat is at issue is. of course, not to demolish “the civilian
control" itself by the consolidation of the uniformed officers' power.

Uniformed officers of the Self Defense Forces now appear to be stealthily starting
to challenge the "civilian control" itself by creating a small "vessel" called
Central Command and Control with the admixture of a mild sense of antagonism
likely to be seen in any government officials disguised as discontent with the
internal high-handedness and ignorance, and an endless desire for “consolidation“
as military technocrats.

This movement seems to be a more serious matter that affects the future course
of our nation than the anxiety over a small increase or decrease in the defense
budget. but the 'kivilians" themselves who will be directly affected are hardly
award of the problems that are being posed. This "mild coup d'etat," contrary
to expectations. may succeed smartly in the political climate of Japan, where
nobody wants to take responsibility for the defense policy in its true sense.

This process which fits the description of a "mild coup d'etat" is going on
parallel to the process of "mild reform ofthaSecurity Treaty" started by
mutual consent in November 1978 with the "Japan-0.8. Defense Cooperation Guide-
lines“ for discussion of details of the Japan-0.8. Joint Operational setup in
case of an emergency in the Far East.

It is still fresh in Our memory that Kurisu, then chairman of the Joint Staff
Council, was in effect dismissed from duty because of his statement in July 1978
that "the Self Defense Forces will go beyond the rules and regulations in enunter-
ing a surprise attack." when it had already been disclosed that these guidelines
requested that the self defense forces play the role of a ready war potential
force in case of an emergency in the Far East beyond the duties of the Self Defe
Defense Forces prescribed in Article 3 of the Self Defense Law. "defend our
country against direct or indirect invasion"; beyond the provision for Japan to
share "exclusively defensive defense" in Articles 5 and 6 of the Security Treaty
of 1960; and of course far beyond the concept of Article 9 of the constitution.

KuriSu's Fully Calculated Statement

That statement meant the start of psychological operations with the effect of
shock treatment to appeal to public recognition that the conventional setup of
the Self Defense Forces "is no longer workable," seeing that the direction shown
by the guidelines is finally about to be realized. Simultaneously. on the other
side of the coin. it waatheigniter of open rebellion by the uniformed officers
against the intra-ministerial bureaus. In the era of Director General Osamu
Kaihara of the Secretariat of Minister of State for Defense, who was called
Emperor Kaihara, (he later served as chairman of the Fational Defense COumcil),
the lntra-ministerial bureaus literally had absolute control (allow me to inter-
ject that this and civilian control are not the same). However, the uniformed
officers' power, especially those of the Ground Self Defense Force, has been
slowly but steadily creeping upward since then.

F08‘0FFHiil.USE(NNLY
me (”Hi Ml. LN}; US!)

In any case, because the Ground Self Defense Force has lotsOf men, it can send its
men to many posts. The Ground Self Defense Force holds responsibility for
administering practically all of the Self Defense Pbrces' prefectural liaison
offices, which carry out recruiting--which is the greatest headache of the Self
Defense Forces. Therefore, it has even become the course to success in the Ground
Self Defense Force to be appointed to the post of the director, particularly at
the Fukuoka Prefectural Liaison Office. which achieves the top score every year.
The big household of the Ground Self Defense Force always talks, for instance,
when mobilizing for events and when shuffling the number of members due to a
budget cut.

Moreover. the Ground Self Defense Force assigns old sergeants without a place to

go to the "supportive part" of the Self Defense Forces, such as patrol units within
the Self Defense Forces. investigation units and auxiliary organizations. by a
method that "transrends rules and regulations" called "action" in their term.

It is said that the existence of the Special Section of the Second Division of the
Ground Self Defense Force, which was sought by AKAHATA as a "shadow military," was
not known until reported in AKAHATA to the intra-ministerial bureaus of the
Defense Agency or even to the Marine and Air Self Defense Forces.

with the ballooning of such a "supportive role" controlled by the Ground Self
Defense Force. it would be easy for an investigator to follow an elite bureaucrat
and take a picture of him with his arm around the shoulders of women in a
cabaret. I do not know whether there has ever been an incident where the Ground
Self Defense Force threatened the bureaus of the Defense Agency actually using
that kind of Photograph. However, such a capability of the Ground Self Defense
Force already known to the Defense Agency and the Self Defense Forces is undoubt-
edly at work as a kind of intimidating pressure on the intra-miniaterial bureaus

Of course. the inside of the big household of the Ground Self Defense Force is
not at all consolidated into a single interest group, as seen in the speckled
patterns of people from the former Ministry of Home Affairs. particularly those
from the National Policy Agency, former Imperial Army officers, and former
Imperial Navy officers in addition to an independent power from the Defense
Academy, which produced major generals from its first graduates. 0n the contrary.
they must pass through fierce competition just to be selected for the "Command
Staff Course," equivalent to the ”graduates of the Military Staff College" of the
old days. In the present condition, they must be ready for more relentless
string-pulling in order to finish the course and get a higher post. However. it
is a fact that the weight of the Ground Self Defense Force as a whole is steadily
consolidating its power of speech.

Chairman Kurisu, who appeared on the stage in front of such a backdrop, expressed
unabashed hostility to (then) Vice Minister Maruyama from the National Police
Academy who belonged to Kaihara's group, perhaps tinged with a superiority complex
unique in the bureaucratic world because he himself was a graduate of the Law
School of the University of Tokyo. while he was in that office, he often went
"beyond the rules and regulations" by offering his opinions directly to the
minister of state for defense, bypassing the vice minister. Well, that could

6
FOR OFTHCJAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be interpreted that he carried out his belief in the balance between military
administration and military command. Kurisu's "explosive" utterance was issued
rather on the basis of a thorough calculation as the grand finale of these
esoteric struggles.

The intra-ministerial bureaus successfully dismissed Kurisu, giving an inadequate
reason of "challenge to civilian control," but they had to recognise the necessity
of studying legislation regarding emergencies as advocated by Kurisu. The case
was closed giving uniformed officers the substance while taking away the honor.

It was 2 days after Kurisu was dismissed that then Prime Minister Fukuda instructed
that a study on emergency legislation be conducted.

Infestation of Phantom Defense Argument

Since then. as everyone knows. campaigns for emergency legislation and a boom in
arguing about threats from the Soviet Union crying. "the Soviets are coming to
Hokkaido tomorrow," were produced with Kurisu himself, who was put to pasture, as
convincing talent.

AlthOugr I do not have time and space to discuss the history point by point, the
"Hoddaido Defense" theory advocated by the Ground Self Defense Force is, in a
nutshell, nothing more than a strange mixture of the fantasy of science fiction
and the "Co North" theory of the former Imperial Armynthe Siberia Advance theory.
The "Sea Lane Defense" theory loudly proclaimed by the Marine Self Defense Force
in competition to the “Hokkaido Defense" theory is also only a deformed relic of
the antiquated combined squadron concept of the former Imperial Navy. I wander
why such a "Defense Argument," which nobody seriously believes in when personally
discussing it with executive officers of the Ground and Marine Defense Forces, is
amplified by the irresponsible mass media and is prevalent with a haughty air.

Hell. speaking from the side of the uniformed officers, they must be letting it go,
considering it a plus for getting a better defense budget, to see the campaign
druming or the boom rampaging. whatever it my be, as long as it helps the Self
Defense Forces themelves to be widely recognized.

However. when one asks the opinion of the executive officers who graduated from
the Defense Academy, they all criticize the Kurisu style, idea and method as
"romanticism of the old generation from the former Imperial Military." That

does not mean that they have the capacity and spirit to turn the defense policy
discussion into something more substantial and practical. All the "real" soldiers
who have actual combat experience are already gone, even among those from the
former Imperial Hilitary in the Self Defense Porces. In 5 years, none of the
remaining nominal soldiers from the former Imperial Military will remain. Some
may think optimistically that the manner of discussion will be more practical
after that, but I am afraid that is too optimistic.

The recent phantom "Defense Argument" is destined to be gone before long. How-
ever, the program for making the ”Japanese Armed Forces" out of the Self Defense
Forces—the main track installed by the generations of the former Iwerial

Military exerting the last drop of their energy-will surely be continued in the

7
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hands of the postwar uniformed executives led by those who graduated from the
Defense Academy, because this program has its own flavor of "military consolida-
tion." ‘

The problem is the "civilian" side which should control it. Even now there are
a group of anachronistic people who would shed tears in front of others saying,
"the constitution was imposed upon us by America." who holds the central power
among the group for national defense and the group for reform of the constitution.

Also. there are a group of people called the "Security Treaty Mafia" among groups
of people traditionally friendly to the United States in the Foreign Ministry.
Immediately after the mutual agreement was reached on the guidelines in 1978,
they organized a "Security Treaty Policy Planning Committee," placing current
Ambassador to the Soviet Union Takashima. then defense counsellor, at its axis,
which continues to study the security treaty policy of.the eighties in communica-
tion with the executives at the Defense Agency.

Furthermore. the Japan Socialist Party. which is allegedly even more to the
"right" than the Liberal Democratic Party, including the executives of United
Labor which cry for "realization of weapons exports for higher wages," forms a
hawkish bloc of "civilians." The conservative mainstream of today stems from
the Suzuki and Miyazawa line, and the majority of the business and financial
world still do not choose the road to a military superpower through reckless
expansion of the military. Rather they are fully aware that the greatest factor
contributing to Japan's growth and remaining power for innovation in a time when
the world is in recession. is the very fact that after the war Japan was lucky
enouth to have been able to adhere consistently to a relatively conservative
military expense burden. even though America calls us a "free rider" or whatever
it wants to call us. for that matter. For example, Director General Kiichi
Miyazawa of the Secretariat of Minister of State for Defense. who is considered
to have best inherited the Yoshida-Ikede lineage, asserted the following in a
lecture he gave this past January.

"There is a background of its own in the creation of a constitution such as

this. Furthermore. the number of people who have been raised under the
cunstitution has already reached more than half of the population of our country.
In view of this, there are matters that cannot be reversed. In the history of
mankind, there is no country which has survived upholding such a constitution.
This is the first such great experiment, so to speak, of human history." (Yomiuri
International Economic Roundtable Conference]

In additiOn. Miyazawa clearly acknowledged the presence of a split over this

point in the Liberal Democratic Party, and affirmed that Prime Minister Suzuki
definitcly stands for the protection of the canstitution. Nonetheless, when

Prime Minister Suzuki, who maintains this stand, visited the United States, he

was easily taken on a ride. He agreed to the "Japan-U.S. Alliance" proclamation
prepared by the "Security Treaty Mafia" of the Foreign Ministry conspiring with

the Defense Agency and promised to share a military role in the Par Bast based upon
the proclamation.

8
FORlonﬁKJALlEEZONLY
I-OR OFFICIAL l'SE 0NI.\'

Problematic Civilian Side

In sumation, the "civilian" side which should control the trend of defense policy
and the uniformed officers is divided into a hawkish ‘oloc which is distantly
dissociated from reality, a mderate but vulnurable conservative mainstream, and,
in addition, absolutely powerless opposition parties. A discussion, no matter
where it might take place, relating to the strategic choice about to be pressed

upon Japan in the eighties whether it likes it or not, will never be honestly
pursued.

In this sense, it is indeed none other than "civilians" who demolish "civilian
control." Since it is as it is, we can easily envisage the civilians getting on
their knees in front of the mighty "military consolidation" sought by the uniforaed
officers. who are closing in on them with piles of established facts.

Director Nakasone of the Administrative Management Agency once described his
resolution for an administrative reform as follows:

"According to the encouragement by the leading notional policy planner (Razuo)
Yatsugi, we mast consider the Meiji Restoration as the first renovation and the
loss of the war as the second renovation, and we met succeed in forging the
present administrative reform into the third renovatioa. Former Prime Minister
Shinsuke Kishi also inspired me the other day, when he said: 'Administrative
reforms are almost impossible. They are achieved, it is said, Only by a caup
d'etat or an internal uprising. Please brace yourself in doing so.‘ Administra-
tive reform sins at attaining a structural reform and a functional improvement

in all areas of national defense, education. welfare and finances" (lecture
presented at the meeting of the Society for the Study of National Policies held on
27 July).

The administrative reform extending over the political and financial worlds can
be considered to have veered from its original purpose, but it has begun to take
on the color of a plan to remodel our nation from above in the direction of a

"combat-ready national structure" entailing the creation of a Ministry of National
Defense.

If this national remodeling plan handed down from above succeeds in docking with
the making of "Japanese Armed Porces"--a program pursued by the mild coup
d'etat--the combined force will surely insure "the third renovation." It is
because of this possibility that we should not overlook the quiet article
concerning the bidding for the construction of the Central Conand and Control.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shilbunsha 1981

8940
C80: 4105/ 20

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC

FOR (ll-‘l-‘K‘IM. USE ONLY

U.S. SEEKS BID TO TARIFPS ON 29 OOMDITIES

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 982, 24 Nov 81 pp 1, 19

[Text]

The US. Government last
week submitted a request in
Japan asking that it swiftly do
away with tariffs on as pod
ucts and rectify non-tariff bar-
riers. such as by simplifying
import procedures. The repre
agitation. in writing. was con-
veyed to the Japanese Foreign
Ministry by William Barra-
clough. minister at the Ameri-
can Embassy in Tdtyo.

in its latat remest. the 0.8.
is said to have urged Japan to
r duce its tariffs for computer
mainframe. peripheral equip
ment. auto parts. plywood.
lumber and grapefruit to nil.
and to have proposed incorpo
rating this in the otternal eco
nomic measure which the
Japanese GoVet-nment intends
to announce shortly.

Al the same time. the 0.5.

oposed having its request
5m to for discussion at the
twoday meeting of the Japan-
U S.1‘rade Group to be held in
Tokyo on December 9-10.

The u.s. Govertanent am
known to be strongly prastng
Japan to make concustons on
the poima tint it has enu
merated on the gamma that
the one-sided lmtnlance in
bilateral trade in favor of Ja-
pan was sorely straining Japa-
neseAmerioan relations in
general.

specific commodiliu.

on the maidrame ofcom

anda I1.5percenttariffon
peripheral emaiplnent The ctr
responding US. rates are only

5.5 per cent for both classifia-
tions. The US. warns Japan to

abolish its tariff directed at it.

Japanese compiler marina. -

however. are already
alarmed by the US.
stating. “if this is done. Japa-

nese'mahersanegoimtobe_

dealt a devastating blow."
These quarters cits, tint
fntermtional Bunions lla-
chines Corn. America's top
computer maker. now has the
second largest share of the
domestic computer marital

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aftu' mint. Ltd. sail-it's aul
aidiary in Japan. [BM Japa
Ltd. imports a eonsideeabl

.ammolfmbhd

and part from the US.

Actually. Japa'n has-been ruo
ning a deficit in computer had
with the U5. Accord"; ‘to th
Finance Ministry. Japan's in:
ports of computer mainframe
and peripherals from the US
last year totaled $152.0! mil
lion. The import value we
abottt five times hrgsr than Ja
pan's such exports to the US
(See relatedstoryonl’agoo.)

If tariffs in this area an
gently lowered or reduced in
zero. rem compstitlvsnsa
within Japan further is suing ti
incrnse, and this also is “In
gently to favor other lat-gt
American makers. ' at
SpenyUnivac. they .

in the Tokyo Round of multi
lateral trade negotiation. Ja

computer mainframe to 4.1
percentandtlntla- periphsra
equipmenttoaperoutbytm

it is believed tint the 0.8

now aims at getting Japan It
reduce the tariffs to are a‘
once or. if it cannot. to have i
advance the on. of its tarit
reduction.
819.5. :2...

_: :5 .982 ca. :63.
£82.58: :8 £2... .33:
8 39.8 8 a: 83:12. :3.
9383 89...: can. $8.3.
$8.. 8 .312... E. 33.7
Fm. £12.83 manna-Q
has 28' 8.53 p 352. 2
«8: $38. $8.. .8 $32.. an.
3:. = :9: .333 :5. 50
cm. t... 8.8 :9 :5. F28 2...
are 3812.... 325.33. 2
81:" a. 9a 038an in

9mm. 3.3“ .
Plinth)" [C

H”! (DI-'lr'll’lAl. “SI-3 ONLY

DISCUSSION ON CUTTING DISCOUNT RATES

Tokyo JAPAN aooumuc JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 982, 26 Nov 81 pp 1, 2

[Article by Masahtko Isliizulta:

[Text]

Argument tor a discount rate
cu: III the immediate future
somewhat suddenly gathered
momentum last week as the
yen“: value soared against the
U 5 dollar. while domestic
business recovery continued
tagging and trade surplus kept
swelling placing Japan under
increasirgly vocilcrous attacks
lrom Europe and the US. To
ward the end ol thcweek it ap
peared tint oliicials ol the
Bank ol Japan and the Ministry
oi Finance had started weigh
in: the timing of a discount
rotr- cut. which could come in
Ins-ember or Janrnry. (See
Mulls SIS rm Page IOJ

11rcrc laid been an unrit-rcur-
rent oi demand for lowering the
Bank ot Japan‘s discount rate.
at or: per cent since last
March. but it had been held
trick due to the pcrsistcnw at
high interest rates in the L‘.S.
that ltept the Japanese yen
ctr-alt tor months. With the
price lront continuing marked-
l_v calm at a trrne when domes-
tic demand recovery IS ex-
cruciatingly slow. thine who
lat-or an early discount rate cut
ctterl the level of 0.8. interest
rates and the resultant weak
yen as the only stumhling
block.

ltut as the us. interest rates
started tailing recently. the yen
rue sharply on the Tokyo tor-
eisn exchange market. tom to
the dollar on Friday. the him
since late May. and was viewed
likely to continue to smthen

A leading advocate ot a db
cwnt rate cut. Economic Plan-
ning Agency Director General
Toshio Komoto last week
reiterated the urgency at an
early action. saying. "it is do
sirable to stimulate the
economy thrwgh lower interest
rates."

Stimulation 0! domestic de
mod is being urged as a
moors of spa rrio; slowim mrtl-ts
caused by“ weak demo tor
materials and other (not.
lagging imports are held re
spomible tor the swelling trade
surplus as much as slum ex-
ports are. The mm account
surplus in fiscal 1931 is now
estimated to reach :10 billion or
more. compared with the :7 bil-
lion in the Government's two
month old revised outlook and a
deficit oi so billion in the origi-
nal projection

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Discount Rate Cut: Looms as Near-Term Possibility"]

According to government
economists the real ecorrornic
growth in the third quarter
mint likely ethled qr at an an
nual M per not rate and rot
Par cent from the preceding
(starter. The balm growth
rate is attributed to weakness
or domestic demand. particu-
lll’ly pasorral cormrmption and
trolling. while it is beinc made
lets": M Mt!) ln oversea

Rm”. thereare starts that
”'9 PIN of expnsion ot ex-
M and prlvate olitai in
vestment. the two tnalor toms
that have led the Will a the
Japanese ecorirlny in the past
9°“. M be losiru motheri-
tum. Some government om-
eials and balm are even
“UM to be concerned tilt
the business recovery underway
may taller.

People who are cautiots
about a discount rate cut warn
that a lower interest rate would
work to waken the yen and as
a ruult boost exports. adding
to the current account surplus
But whether dis turra out me
«pends on theestent d the tall
«1 Us. interest rates and, more
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400080031-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

asentlaliy. strengtheniru at
theJapenesecurreney.

Wla'le ol‘iicials ol the Bank of
Japan and the Ministry «1
Finance last week generally
voiced prudence, citing
necessity to watch the trend of
US. interest rates (or some
time. Finance Minister Hichio
Wannabe drew attention by.
saying Thursrhy that he would
like to see tax revenues gm
"thmui stimulation of the

. economy." His remark was
interpreted u implying that he
was leaning toward a discount
rate on. Bank at Janan Gov-
ernor Harm) Mayekava, mean
while. merely said that he
mid closely watch various
economic indium tor the
time being.

lnterrntioml 1hde I: Indu-
try Minister “We Tanks
and Japan Chamber at Corn-
meree a Industry President
Sligeo Nagano came up with
an mtright endorsemem at an
early discount rate cut Negano
made special relaenee to the
stagnam state at smaller enter-
prises. whose interest his or-
ganization regiments. With
business failures toppiru 1.500
in Center. theaitnallon rema'r-

- ed an immediate rellel. he as-
serted.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the “ﬁnal! Keizai Slit-bun. Inc.

C80: 4120/73

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400080031-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FUJITSU'S STRATEGY T0 SURPASS IBM DISCUSSED
Tokyo SHUKAN ORU TOSHI in Japanese No 65L 16 Jul 81 pp 56—59

[Text] He cannot discuss Fujitsu. the standard bearer of "Rising Sun" [i.e., Japanese]
computer. without mentioning IBM.

The super giant IBM. holding 60 percent share of the world's computer market. is
called the sun of the computer world. Repeatedly in the past, a number of planets
which surround it has challenged its authority only to retreat in defeat. But at
the head of the planets which continue to mature despite the glare of the sun and
whose existence can no longer be ridiculed, is the steadily rising Fujitsu.

In support of this is the symbolic "incident" when Fujitsu. confronting IBH directly,
won the bid to [install computers] for Australia's Bureau of Statistics. At one
point the bidding developed into a political issue, and despite the strenuous effort
by chairman Cary of IBM, Fujitsu finally_won the battle in November 1979.

At about the same time, Fujitsu succeeded in "replacing" IBM machines in Brazil.
Fujitsu's H-200 Series was installed for the savings and loan systems of the largest
bank in South America, the Bank of Bradesco. In 1980, both the National Bank of
Brazil and Bank Auxiliar introduced Fujitsu's machines, thus creating a kind of
avalanche effect. These successes are proof that Fujitsu's technology has caught

up with Ian's, that time has come when it can compete on equal terms with IBM, on
overall capability from "cost performance" to maintenance service.

New Super Large Computer, Faster Than IBM's

One condition which enabled Fujitsu to confront IBH directly is that its 08 (operation
system) is coterminous or interchangeable with IBM machines.

05 refers to the most basic software that drives the hardware. All the computer
manufacturers are developing their own 08. Based on OS, users are developing soft-
wares (application soft) that operate machines appropriate for their actual business
needs. When an old machine must be replaced. a different company's machine can be
introduced as long as the OS can utilize the new machine existing "application." This
is called “compatible machine."

Fujitsu chose to develop IBM compatibles. This choice was based on the view that,
"when one tries to enter the world market. one must concentrate on IBM users. This
is the ticket that allows him to enter into business negotiations overseas. Let the

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu (II- N( M!- I'SE 0NI-\

machines be compatible with IBM's. This will create choice and eliminate the un-
healthy effect of IMB's monopoly. All of this is good for the user." (Yukimaro
Kawatani, director of Sales Promotion Headquarters)

The turning point at which Fujitsu decided to move into [IBM compatible] development
came at the time of 1971 industry reorganization. In 1970, IBM introduced the large-
scale 370 Series and began the offensive. At the time the import of computers was
partially liberated (complete liberation came in 1975) and this put the future of
Japanese computers in doubt. It was then that MITI stepped in to reorganize the
computer industry, subsidizing half the capital needed to develop a counterpart to
IBM 8 370.

Nippon Electric - Toshiba and Mitsubishi-Oki groups chose not to develop IBM com-
patibles. Fujitsu, in tie-up with Hitachi, did. The project, requiring a total
investment of 160 billion yen, was indeed a gamble with Fujitsu's future at stake.

The person responsible for the entire project was Takuma Yamamoto who became president
this July.

In 1974, Fujitsu finally came out with the M Series, compatible with IBM's OS,
but superior to it. Thus began Fujitsu's offensive as Japan's all-purpose computer
specialist.

In the meantime, there was an encounter between Dr Amdahl and Toshio Ikeda, the late
computer specialist of Japan. Because of this meeting, Fujitsu participated in the
capital formation of the newly established Amdahl Corp. This cooperation led to a
joint development and manufacture of "plucon machines" (Operating by simple replace-
ment of plugs). This technology proved beneficial for Fujitsu in various ways.

With the introduction of M Series, Fujitsu's replacements of IBM machines followed
in succession. The M-200‘s cost performance is said to be 2-3 times higher than
IBM 370's.

Including this M Series, the share of compatible machines in the world's large scale
machine market has grown to 10 percent.

The super giant IBM's evaluation of Japanese computer manufacturers is high; in its
shareholders meetings it has made statements indicating its awareness of the rise of
Fujitsu.

In fact, it is said that with the appearance of compatible machines, IBM's service

has improved. It is also said that with the two bender system which can be used
alongside the IBM machines, competition is born and this has mitigated the ill-effects
of IBM monopoly.

0n the other hand, IBM failed to develop follow—up machines to its 370 Series which

it had planned to introduce in 1976-77. In order to stop the flow of users to

plucon machines, it introduced 303x Series. But this had nothing technologically

new. and only served to fill the gap prior to its B Series. Moreover, the performance
of H Series has not caught up with that of M-200 of 3 1/2 years ago.

Having shown the world its excellent hardware technology through the development of
IBM compatibles, this May, Fujitsu introduced the world's fastest ell-purpose large-
scale computers M—380 and M-382.

15
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The processing speed of H-380 is 24 HIPS (Million Instruction Per Second), a threefold
increase from the H-ZOO. It. moreover, surpasses 15 HIPS of Nippon Ekectric's A808
1000 and 10 HIPS of IHB's 3081 (per 1 processor).

Challenges World Market with Technological Strength

It is Fujitsu's semiconductor technology which makes this world's fastest computer
possible. According to Kawatani, "The greatest weapon for computer manufacturer is

logic semiconductor. In this area Fujitsu's technology is second to none." As these
words indicate, the speed of logic LSI for “-380 is 350 pico second (1 pico - 1/10 )
In comparison, the speed of Hitachi's M-280 is 650 pico second; that of IBM 3081,

1,000 pico second.

Furthermore. in the area of memory, Fujitsu led the world in developing 64x RAH
(64,000 pieces of data can be written in and read out). In comparison to IHB's model,
Fujitsu's is 20-30 percent smaller in size. and power consumption, 30 percent lower;
it is a high performance semiconductor.

The advanced technology developed in the area of LSI has blossomed in other areas as
well. For example, there is the new transistor BENT (Super High Speed Semiconductor
Element).

According to Kawatani, "It was the spirit of challenge which enabled Fujitsu to
develop the LSI first. No one thought it possible. We are now reaping the benefits

of that spirit."

In comparison to ordinary silicon transistors, [the BENT] enables electrons to move
10 times faster in normal temperatures, 50 times in terms of theoretical value when
cooled. The principle behind [the BENT] was originally discovered by the Bell
Laboratory of the United States. What Fujitsu did was to develop its application
which was believed impossible. Additionally, the technology for magnetic bubble
memory system was also one of the pioneering efforts of Fujitsu. There will be
others--the application of Josephson element circuit and fifth generation computers.
With government subsidies and through joint development of technologies, Fujitsu will
continue to be a pioneer in computer technology. '

As expected, Fujitsu's investment in R a D is extensive. In fiscal 1980, it invested
about 35 billion yen in hardware, equivalent of 6-7 percent of its sales. The per-
centage rises to 12 percent if software is included.

In terms of equipment investment, Fujitsu allocated 69 billion yen in 1980, of this,
29 billion yen was spent on semiconductor related equipment. High investment continues;
this year. 53 billion yen (27 billion for semiconductor equipment) will be invested.

For the computer industry which is at the head of all other industries in the so-
called age of computer and where technological renovations are radical and intense,
investments in R G D are the key to the survival of the enterprises. Because of
this, profits are enevitably reduced and more so because of intense price competition
among domestic and foreign manufacturers. Fujitsu's 1980 sales net profit rate was
3.2 percent; that of Japan IBM, one of the superior companies in Japan, was 10.7
percent, even higher than Fujitsu‘s 7.8 percent sales profit rate. The differences
will not be bridged for some time. But in fiscal 1979, Fujitsu's computer depart-
ment sales surpassed that of Japan IHB. In 1980, it grew by 17 percent, compared to

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI! 0511”.“ l'Sl'I ("“5

a percent growth rate for the latter. The difference in scale. in other words. is

growing in favor of Fujitsu. and there is no indication that a reversal of this
trend will occur in the future

Having surpassed Japan IBM in terms 0. ~‘3ﬁt, Fujitsu's next target is the overseas
market. The basic strategy for this is co engulf II! by ”starting from markets
other than the United States and then besieging it." The battlefronts will include
Australia and Brazil.

Fujitsu's base of operation in the United States. the largest market. is Amdahl
Corporation. Fujitsu has invested 24 percent of the capital of this company which.
with further help from the same. has survived and shown signs of recovery since
last year while other plucon manufacturers have succumbed. Fujitsu is responsible
for joint development and manufacture of large-scale computers. Amdahl for final
assembly and sale. Already the company has received orders for 300 units.

For manufacture of medium and smaller units and terminals. there is the TFC. a joint
company formed with TRH. The latter has 200 maintenance offices nationally; it is
a large conglomerate. Since last year, TFC has been marketing FOS terminals, fin-
ance terminals. small V Series; it plans to introduce units smaller than the medium
H-160.

America is too large to set up independent sales and maintenance networks. Fujitsu's
strategy is to take advantage of the networks of TR" and penetrate the market bit

by bit. The joint venture with TR" signifies the beginning of Fujitsu's serious
attempt to enter the American market.

As for Europe. Fujitsu has exported a large-scale H-200 to Siemens and is selling
OEM in all of the BC countries except Spain. In certain cases, it has beat IBM
in obtaining orders.

Fuji Electric. Fujitsu's parent compnay. was born of a joint venture between Siemens
and The Furukawa Electric Co Ltd. Fujitsu was also established when Siemens offered
assistance in communication technology. Since then, the roles have been reversed.
Siemens, however, has been long involved with computers and has a good track record
in manufacture of IMB compatibles. Its joint venture with Fujitsu is aiming at
expansion of its product line.

Excluding Great Britain. Europe is also Inn's fiefdom. Although the governments

of European countries are trying to develop their own manufacturers, IBM's presence
has brought their efforts to minimum. As such, it could be said that the Siemens-
Fujitsu venture represents a combined attack on IBM by Japanese and European forces.

Recently. reports of a move toward joint venture between Fujitus and ICL were pub-
licized. ICL is a powerful European computer manufacturer established with govern-
ment subsidy during the period when the Labor Party was in power in England; it has
a rather extensive track record. It succeeded. for the first time in the world, in
reducing IBM's share in England to below 50 percent. Recently. however. it is
slumping and is on the verge of laying off its employees.

It seemed that during the Minister of MIT! Rikusuke Tanaka's visit to England there
was a talk of joint rescue of ICL. but Fujitsu. it is said. was never informed of it.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ICL does not deal in IBM compatibles and therefore Fujitsu cannot offer any
technological assistance; moreover, Fujitsu's EC sales are handled through its agent,
Siemens. The talk. therefore, lacked any possibility of realization. One theory

has it that ICL. as an effective means of obtaining assistance from the British govern-
ment, fabricated the "G.B.—Japan Federation" and cited, the fastest-rising Fujitsu
among all other companies as its partner.

This theory cannot be substantiated; it is an incident which illustrates the worldwide
recognition of the name "Fujitsu," so much so that it was used without the knowledge
of Fujitsu.

Ceaseless Pursuit of IBM

Recently, simultaneously with the promotion of president Yamamoto, an extensive
company restructuring was conducted. Both the communications and electronics in-
dustry divisions were abolished, and combining their sales departments. a new sales
promotion division was established. The purpose of this reorganization is to stress
the development of communication equipment and systematization of computers, and, at
the same time, increase their sales. The intensity behind this move may be expressed
as follows: "Nippon Electric's 'c a C' is outdated; Fujitsu's is 'C to the second

power'."

Further changes include the establishment of a separate company, Fujitsu Office
Equipment, from the old 0A Equipment Sales Promotion Division. This initiates a more
mobile sales of 0A equipment. The on (office automation) is the most promising item
in the eighties. Yamamoto has pledged "to strengthen the development of 0A," and
cited it as one of the areas which Fujitsu must emphasize in the future.

"The key (according to Kasaburo Nakanishi, former director of 0A Sales Division) to
the future of 0A is how HP (word processor) is handled." Fujitsu's contribution is
the OASYS 100, based on the Rana [Japanese script]-Chinese character conversion
method. A full-scale shipment of this processor began last October; its demand is
excellent, averaging about 200 units a month.

The demand for Personal Computer FM-B, introduced in May, is also good. based on

the fact that it sells for 30-60 percent less than the previous model and is equipped
with the most advanced technologies such as the 6‘ K memory. Monthly production is
expccted to be 2.000-3,000 units. Fujitsu's 0A equipment line is comprehensive;
there are, in addition, office computers and facsimiles.

Fujitsu started with communications equipment. Its advances in OA equipment and
optical communication systems. fully incorporating the most advanced electronics
technology and its experience in cmunicstions, are highly evaluated. Its merchan-
disc is not limited to computers.

If former president Kanjiro Okada, who pushed for domestic production of computers
twenty years ago, can be called the second founder of Fujitsu, then the July reorgan-
ization instituted by Yamamoto can be seen as the beginning of a new era in which
Fujitsu of the eighties will confront the world's super-giant IBM.

The road that Fujitsu had followed as a specialist in computer manufacture was
indeed like the expressway where there is no turning back. Its vitalix, as an

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enterprise was supported by a sense of urgency as a specialist in couputer manufac-
ture and its fate as the protector of the "Rising Sun" computers.

szatsni's confidence is growing: "In: is asking a series of mistakes and incon-

veniencing the users. Our job is to crunble the IE4 myth. we already have enough
strength to endure the race."

Fujitsu will probably maintain this strength in the future. It is also aware that
without this persistent strength it cannot confront III. Yams-eta speaks of [sales]
"of one trillion yen in several years, two trillion in less than ten." Even if it

gets to this scale, Fujitsu's technological develowent strength, with its flexibility
will not deteriorate.

Fujitsu's computer sales is seventh in the world. It is certain that it will junp
to the second place as early as 5 years free now. IBM is unstable; there are even
talks of division. Only Fujitsu is steadfast in its attack on the world monopoliaed
narltet. Its continuous challenge [of Fujitsu] is nothing other than a manifestation
of its sense of vitality.

COPYRIGHT: Shulun Oru Toahi 1981

9710
cso: 6105/262

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (Wﬂl‘lAL USE 0Nl.\

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DISCUSSION HELD ON IC CONFLICT "1‘11! UNITED STATES
Tokyo SHUKAN IOYO KEIZAI in Japanese 19 Sep 81 pp 32-37
[Article: "Discussion on the U.S.—Japan Conflict, the Approaching VLSI Age"]

[Roundtable discussion by Atsuyashi Ouchi, vice president, REC; Tadashi Sasak;
Executive Director Sharp; Yuko Shimura, director, Society for Industrial
Investigation]

[Text] Japan Leads in Memory

Moderator: It is said that Japan has surpassed the United States in one seg-
ment of the semiconductor industry, but there is a strong impression that the
United States is far ahead in the matter of overall developmental strength.

I would like to analyze the U.s.-Japan confrontation situation in the area of
semiconductors focused on VLSI, and I would like to discuss, first of all,
just where the Japanese semiconductor industry stands today.

Shimura: If we compare the market scale of semiconductors and production
strength. the United States accounts for 50 percent of the world's market

while the remainder is divided between Japan and Europe. There is an even
greater difference in production strength, where the United States has about a
65-percent share of the uorld's capacity, Japan about 25 percent, and Europe
slightly less than 10 percent. Assuming that the United States is the grand
champion, Japan has the role of a lesser group member at best, and Europe stands
in the midst of the leading apprentices.

Japan is also putting its strength into leading technology areas. For example,
up to about last year the 16 K (16.000 bit) random access memory (RAM, reading
and writing memory) was the big market target that all the makers were aiming
at, and Japan was able to garner a bOopercent share of the market from the
United States, thereby invoking claims from the American side that large volume
exports were disrupting the market.

There is a possibility that the performance with the 16 K will continue with
the 64 K element, which is the entry product to the VLSI market, and this could
well become a seed for friction between these countries.

Moderator: The basic technological development is supposed to have been com-
plcted in the case of the 64 K, and there is some feeling that Japan may be
ahead of some of the remaining areas such as mass production or in minor im-
provement type technological area problems.

20
FOR OI'TICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ouchi: This is not something that can be dealt with in a simple manner. 1c is
influenced by scale merit and learning curve (mastery curve). It is expected
from here on that the various Japanese and American companies will start in on
6!. K production, and this learning curve will come into play, and now is a

time when all of these companies are putting forth all efforts to start.

Certainly, Japan was stronger in the area of 16 X memory. This is because Japan
had the superior technology to produce a high-quality product cheaply and in
great volume. The Americans are superior where basic development is concerned,
and they produce far more papers and patents. Since superiority is determined
on the basis of a mixture of this basic development strength and mass production
technology. it is not a simple thing to say: "we will also win Out on the 64 K."

In addition, Japan has become considerably stronger in the area of IC production
facilities due to the research efforts of the 1.81 Technology Research Associa-
tion, but the United States still has greater strength in areas such as diffu-
sion process facilities, and we cannot rest easy.

Sasaki: Putting everything together. the question of whether Japan can really
put forth its real strength will be determined by the 66 K situation. From the
viewpoint of the Japanese user, even though a similar product is involved, the
service strengths are completely different. They choose the Japanese product
of better quality and service strength. The appearance of 64 X will bring with
it application in many items, and we need to make preparations for that time.

Moderator: The production systems of the Japanese makers for the 64 K are in
the process of some astonishing expansions....

Ouchi: Some very large figures are being tossed about. and if we add them up,
the supply will be several times the world's demand. (laughter) Idlink all we
can say here is that every company has a strong desire to increase its produc-
tion. When Japan managed to capture 40 percent of the 16 K memory market. one
factor was that American production had not come into full-scale operation. and
it is risky to say unconditionally that Japan has the strength to take over half
of the world's market.

Shimura: Aren't you, Mr Ouchi, being modest in your statements because you are
under full American pressure? (laughter) Japan accounts for 40 percent of the
world's share of 66 K as of this year, and even the various surveys made in the
United States show that Japan will account for 40 to 50 percent in the future,
and there are many who make this prediction.

Ouchi: I was not trying to be particularly modest.... Certainly, I think that
Japan is fairly strong where 66 K alone is concerned. The technology for 66 K
is established, and Japan is in a somewhat better position in a race where better
yield and quality are concerned.

0n the other hand. there are more microprocessors developed in the United States.
If we look at VLSI in a much wider sense, the Americans are stronger. They have
twice the number of research and academic personnel, and they keep getting funds
from NASA and the Pentagon.

21
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Inferior in Logic Circuit Development

Moderator: The pattern for RAM is set, and it will decide the fate of the pro-
duction technology. Is this not where Japan is strong?

Ouchi: If the race is to be decided on the premise that pin connections can be
made at a maximum rate of 15 nanosecond speed, then Japan is stronger. This is
because the situation is the same as with the automobile industry and the TV
industry where quality of labor and automation are concerned. 0n the other
hand, IC is not limited to 64 K, and various types of memory may appear. "hen

logic (logic circuits) is included in an all-round race, the problems become
multiplied.

Moderator: The United States also seems to be moving in a direction to improve
production technology.

Ouchi: Where the Pentagon and NASL are concerned, no matter what poor perform-
ances such as yield are involved, all costs are borne by the country. That is

different from an environment such as ours where we are in free competition and
have to devise means from the outset to avoid wasteful use of materials and so

forth. But it is extremely dangerous to say that this is the reason the Ameri-
cans have no capability of producing IC of good quality.

Shimura: Where memory is concerned, Japan has cana so far with the 64 K, and
Nippon Electric, Toshiba Information System, and .he Communications Laboratory
of Nippon Tel and Tel are pushing research on the 256 K. Now, the United States
is not up to Japan. That is to say, once Japan has a clearly defined target, it
is very good at arriving at its goal.

in another direction, unlike memory, random logic or microprocessors require sys-
tem development capability and creativity. This is an area where the United

States already has appeared with minibit microprocessors at the 18566 in February,
where both Hewlett Packard and Intel displayed their products, and there was none

from Japan. Japan is stifl way behind in the matter of searching the virgin
wilderness for ideas.

Development Somewhat Different From Military-Oriented United States

Hoderator: American IC makers are fighting the quality control problem by build-
ing their own plants in Japan. It is said that the TI plant in Japan is running
very smoothly at the present time, and they seem to be aiming at VSLI mass
production.

Shimura: Japan TI has three plants, while Japan IBM has built a plant at Yashu
(Shiga Prefecture) where it is targeting IC production in 1983. There is also
talk that Fairchild, Motorola, and Analog Devices are considering locating in
Japan. Behind this is the high quality of Japanese labor, in addition to which
they seem to think that Japanese technology can be utilized. The world is pay-
ing close attention to the results put out by the FLSI Research Association.

what bothers me is the time to make this move, and when one considers mass pro-
duction of 16 K or 64 K class memory, 1983 or later may be somewhat late.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hoderator: 0n the other hand, the Japanese makers are pushing production sites
in the United States and Europe. Won't there be problem such as maintaining
product quality and yield?

User Service Will Be Deciding Issue

Ouchi: "here our company is concerned, we purchased one of the Silicon Valley
companies, and we also hope to build a plant in Sacramento. He have a plant in
Ireland and are now constructing one in Scotland. Since automation has progressed
so well, we have no worry about quality. The yield is still somewhat lower than
in Japan, but improvement is possible. Both plants are showing profits.

One of the major points in locating plants in the Western world is to get away
from trade friction, but there is an even greater objective. Just as with cus-
tom IC, service is an important adjunct of IC, and if we have the plant within
the customer's country, the technologists can hear the requests of the customers
or be able to go instantly on the day they are notified by telephone that trou-
ble has occurred, and such capabilities are a must. If we are to carpets in the
world market. there is no escaping the fact that we must put up plants in the
Western world.

Noderator: Hr Sasaki said before that Japan provides better service, but where
the American users are concerned, service for Japanese 16 is not necessarily the
best.

Ouchi: The problem of distance is a little steep.

Sasaki: The problem of service, which means a quick response on the part of the
maker, is even more important in the case of gate array (half-finished IC which
is completed according to the wishes of the user).

Ouchi: The installment of distribution lines in accordance with the customer's
orders is what gate array involves, but the present one-touchmicrm is also one
in which we listen to the customer's wishes for the R04 section (read out memory).

Moderator: Such being the case, mutual entry on the part of the Japanese and
American makers will become vital.

Sasaki: It is management which has to turn the key for mutual entry. No matter
what kinds of agreements are bandied about, there is the Japanese type manage-
ment, which believes that the custoner must not be put to any inconvenience, and
a management which follows the terms of. an agreement strictly to the letter,

and there is a wide gulf in between.

Moderator: 10 at its foremost technology is deeply involved with military use.
Because there are so few military projects in Japan, does this not constitute an
obstacle?

Ouchi: This is certainly a major handicap, but there is a tendency for some
advantage taking in the United States. We work to the utmost to keep going.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This situation may he tough from the monetary standpoint, but it is a plus

spiritual factor. To be sure, the Nippon Tel and Tel Public Corporation takes
over the role of the military in Japan.

Shimura: The Uni ted States at present is working on the VHSIC (very high speed
It) on orders from the Pentagon, and this is a major project which is expected
to cost 300 million dollars between 1980 and 1986. This project involves the
development of a super high speed signal processor to be loaded on a radar
guided type missile. This will require a pattern on the order of 0.5 micron
and the introduction of 250,000 gates per chip to enable speed of severan tens.
of millions to several hundreds of millions of computations per second. There

is no such need in Japan. This is a turn in the direction of reinforcing the
American semiconductor industry.

Survive Because of Being "Poor"

Sssaki: Now, on the basis of our contacts on desk calcuator-use 16 with the
American makers, the line of thinking of a designer with respect to a desk cal-
culator is completely different from that of a maker who has been nurtured by
the military. This is something heroic. Because they had been nurtured so far,
they finally began to understand what was needed in the line of military calcu-
lators, and they were able to come out with such units. this is why I consider
that it was the military calculator which developed 1.51.

If one had the time, ample funds, and good material to work with, a number of
ideas would come forth, but when one attempts to manufacture practical goods out
of it, he cannot because he has been too pampered. This is why I believe that
we poor people have been able to achieve what we have through our hard efforts.
The Americans come out with some very fine ideas on microprocessors, but if the
Japanese can come up with good software, the poor man Japan will be even stronger
on hardware.

Moderator: The Japanese Ic industry up to now has been led by desk calculators,
but what will lend the high density memory and logic of the future? What are the
prospects for its use in the private market?

Sasaki. Whether it is a weal thy man or a maker of large computers, he values
reliability so greatly that cost cannot help but be high. When we perform the
functions, we probably will discard anything which involves considerable risk.
Although there can be some failures, we will try to the utmost. As long as there
is the feeling that any item for private use has to be low in cost, there will be
differences between the Americans and Japanese regarding LSI.

Moderator: Ordinary comercial use does not require too great speed. 0n the
other hand, the most recent Kanji treatment seems to require a large capacity
and extremely fast CPU (central computing and treating facility) and a memory
device.

Ouchi: High-speed elements are becoming necessary even in word processors for
private use, and it has become difficult to differentiate from industrial—use
computers in the matter of machine performance of the private-use units.

2).;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shimura: Research and development of VSLI in Japan include Nippon Tel and Tel's
project in the communications area and the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry's next-generation computer project, and hausehold electrical makers are

not participatingin either program. This does not mean that there is no tie-in
with VSLI.

One point I want to make is that VLSI looks toward not only high capacity and
high speed but high density as well. That is to say, a single wafer can pro-
vide the equivalent of three or four times the number of chips, and this makes
possible improvement in the economics. One other item is the trend to digitali-
zation even in the private-use area, and as the frequency of use of digital cir-
cuits increases, the significance of VLSI is becoming increasingly more important.

Sasaki: The VLSI we handle is considerably different from that used by the com-
puter makers. We consider cost, first of all, as we try to reduce the size of

the chip while we strive for a higher degree of integration. It has been adequate
thus far, but treatment of Kanji characters is slow, and the belief arises that
there will be some congestion emerging within a few years.

The price of the American VHSIC is too high. "hat to do? Eventually a non-Newman
approach using parallel treatment and development of suitable software should
provide a pathway to the solution of this problem. It is with this intent that
we are trying to develop a Japanese VLSI for which we are presently drawing up

the design, and we expect that some extremely interesting software will become
available to the consumers.

Ouchi: When we talk about VLSI, the first things that come to mind are that this
is an item of super high degree of integration and that a single chip incorporates
100,000 to 1 billion bits, and this definition seems to stand foremost in our
minds. 0n the other hand, I emphasize to my staff that "VLSI represents a super
precise and fine pattern technology, the first objective of this technology is to
reduce cost, and other considerations include very high reliability and faster
speed."

High-Speed and High-Capacity Ic for Kanji Treatment

Moderator: It seems that other than silicon, attention is being directed to
gallium arsenide as possible material for study.

Ouchi: It is a fact that gallium arsenide and the Josephson element will become
important items in the next generation. 0n the other hand, these units place
great emphasis on speed, so they probably will make up one sector of a wide
array of 10. It would be a big mistake to assume the end of the age of silicon

is in sight.

Shimura: Although silicon may be somewhat limited in its market potential with
the appearance of the gallium arsenide type compound semiconductor, gallium
arsenide is a semiconductor after all, and the semiconductor age will continue.

Ouchi: No matter what is said, there is no need to use gallium arsenide in large
volume items such as desk calculators and watches.

25
Iron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sasaki: Several years ago. about the time 10 was announced, the parts makers
said, "our business will disappear" thereby voicing their concern. but the parts
industry still remains. The same situation also applies here.

Moderator: I see where the VLSI for private use not only will have the caps-
bility of handling Japanese characters but graphics as well.

Sasaki: Graphic capability will be incorporated as well as voice and sound
synthesis capability; this unit will be very versatile.

Snimura: I apologize for saying this in front of Mr Sasaki, but the language and
number of phrases entered into an electronic translationmachine are very limited.
Even including voice and sound synthesis, the use of several R0“ of several mega

(million) bit capacity will be able to provide the capability. This is why VLSI

memory has such important significance.

Ouchi: Kanji treatment is an important area for exploiting the speed and large
capacity memory of VLSI. The IC presently in use is adequate for use in watches,
but should the cost of VLSI come way down. there are sufficient grounds to use
it in watches. In this manner, VLSI probably will infiltrate all semiconductor
areas.

Sasaki: Not only semiconductors but VLSI technology must be applied, because
the potential is unlimited. There are any number of applications, including
printed circuits. distribution line technology, or finishing technology.

What Will Be the Direction of Japanese-American Semiconductor Friction

Sasaki: Among the problems facing the industry is the gradually increasing cost
of investment in facilities. The ratio of investment in facilities with respect
to sales total is increasing. This is a truly vexing problem.

Ouchi: A few years ago it was necessary to invest 100 million yen in facilities
in order to increase annual sales by 200 million yen, while today 140 million
yen investment is required to achieve the same sales volume, and it is said that
it won't be long until 200 million yen investment will be required to realize
the same return.

Moderator: In other words, you are saying that there is no way but an oligopolis-
tic approach.

Ouchi: This is why it is difficult to invest in business ventures on the West
Coast of the United States. There are also the cries that "Japanese IC makers
have added to the situation“ with regard to the irritation to construction
depression. '

Shimura: While this is the situation with the medium and small makers in
Silicon Valley, large makers such as IBM and TI are making investments such
that certainly we in Japan cannot ignore such moves.

26
FOR‘0FFH3AL.USEZONLX
FOR (WHOM. USE ONLY

Moderator: Finally. let us discuss the direction Japanese-American relations
will take. Just what will be the future problems of the research and develop-
ment system of Japanese private industry or what directions will the SIA (Amer-
ican Semiconductor Industry Association) take in the future, and will the trade
friction be rekindled....

Sasaki: Is it not the case that there is no longer friction? why, even the
import duties have been lowered.

Ouchi: The Americans have from the start kept proposing their own selfish views.
Although Japan lowered duties on IC to bring them to the same level as the Amer-
isns, duties are higher on all other areas where export to the United States is
concerned.

while the VLSI Technology Research Association calls it inpertinent. it itself
is receiving funds from the Department of Defense (Boeisho). In the final analy-
sis, it is saying to Washington. "lend us money Just as Japan does."

- Sasaki: It will become more and nore difficult to voice complaints against

Japan, and they will gradually direct their complaints to their own government.

Ouchi: If on top of all this there is an advance in mutual extension. the sig-
nificance of export figures will be lost.

Shimura: 0n the other hand, it cannot be said that the customs problem may not
reappear. Looking at the Jones report of last fall or the statement of Brock
representing USTR to Congress or still further to the statement of the assistant
secretary of commerce, they all indicate that after the automobile the subject
will be the semiconductor and computer, and information equipment is expected

to be the focal point of Japanese-American trade problems in the eighties. In
any event. the sparks are there as before. and any opening wedge such as mass
export of 66 K has great potential of rekindling the problem.

Ouchi: This is what the Combined Defense Authority (lokubo Sosho) is saying.
1c is important from a military standpoint, and it is only because the United
States has technology which is absolutely superior that the present ordered
situation is maintained where the West is concerned, and should Japan or Europe
approach this level, militaqyproblems will arise. If these words were actually
said. surely a conflict is in the offing.

Shimura: Just as the free ride on defense thesis, there are a number of tech-
nology free ride theses in the history of semiconductors. To be sure, Japan has
promptly paid for the technology it introduced. but that is ignored in their
statements. As Japan becomes stronger, this technology free ride thesis will
appear more and more.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1981

2267
C50: 6106/3

2'!
l1)R‘0FIﬂC1AI.lﬂﬂE(MVLY
FOR (WFK‘MI. I'SF. ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S DMD 0N REPOVIM TARIPPS CONSIDERED UNREASONABLE

Tokyo JAPAN RONOHIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 982, 210 Nov 81 p 9

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

0502

4120/73

The computer in- JapanUACaapaterTr-ade
dustry strongly mung-uni 1w
‘7“?in II“ M awn-0.x twee-nus. ale-a
"W latest US- ‘9 me .1!” auto Me
mad that Japan ml .mm—m) Mina» ma
cum-me tan-us on 3;: ---:r..'::'::: mm: as:
29 items. includilg nee summon mama.» mm
computer main-
tmmesand peripher- ”"" 2m m‘°’”'".v".:1:‘."m"‘ :23
at equipment. for manned-I-

cuirmtim the swell-

m- ﬁnance mm.

in: trade imbalance tnm‘l’arltteeaCeiapeten

in favor of Japan t'eleentl

5 led . nee

$53.1"? “W :r :2 3.1.”...
Taituma \‘ama- Maurine-no m as ea u 4.9

mm prrsident o! :z’mu .. ms nu in m ea

Fttiltsu lad. aaid maueﬂee. .m M m in u

that the demand on _

the grounds- at trade imbalance A'ra‘l'coatractior a {Monies

was totally uueasonable as the
hlhll‘l’ﬂl computer trade has
hut-n against Japan.

According to the custom
clearance statistic d the
l-‘imnco Ministry. Japan'a ex-
ports at computer mainiramee
and peripherals to the US. last
your reached a value 0! ”4.921
million. menely oneflfth at such
imports [men the use

industry-men believe that the
U5. now is trying to redress its
massive trade imbalance by
pmmuting uxporta of catnpeti-
tive productn such as com.
palm and related sooth.

"WNW. the Japanese com-
puter industry is sorely perplex-
ed with the American "political
pressure" followingon the heels
oi Fujitsu's lailure to win ea

communications system.
Executives at ieadim Japa-
nese computer builders hope
that the Japanese Government
will elicit to the ma agreement
at the Tohyo Round of multi-
lateral trade negotiation which
all: tor a MI redaction of
will: on unattramea and
peripherals down to“ per cent

ends percent. rapectively. by
ll?

tneentraat. imponmdcom-
putenwelcemedthells. move.
Butatraderaaid that it tree to
years too late ae Japanue
makes-a already have become
um ermeh to compete
epitat their America rivals
partiailat-ly la the fielﬁ at
minicanputen and dettop
eunpaten'.

1981, the Nilton Keizai Shimbun. Inc.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIEMIB AND TECRNOLOGY

STEEL INDUSTRY SEES FINANCIAL CRISIS DANGER IN 1990

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 1n Bxglish Vol 19 No 982, 26 Nov 81 p 6

[Tut] Apesunistic newhasartaen ateetmakera into ﬁnancial
in steel industry circlea here straits and weaken their inter-
Ll'urt their [ind'ustm titan nation! cornpetitivaneaa.

ulslmﬂ 0 tie wor 'a
sir-mum canpetitivenaa. will “Jim “W a“.
law a (imncial crisis around " ”m to (eel tha '9'“ to
I950 as it will need a tremen- rnap out ”3"” "up”
dousamoimtotrnnneyto 'Wmmm
replace the increasing rumba eqtapmt altmtion '0 m
at superannuated PM lemtaken tntoacconntwhile
“cum“ their inveaunent Men are
Steel industry analysts stillreiauvetylight.
estimate that the ratio at rela- American and European
lively new production lacilt- ateelmakars are said to have
ties (in operations torleasthan loat their international corn.
to years) willdecliaeio SJper patiuveneu tron: delay in
«mi in 1990 tram thnpraelﬂo replacing their production
per cent. tacilitioa. The number o!
This means that Japan'aatnal operatlr' years for Japaneae
industry will have to make a ateelmaklnglacilltlea averaged
large-scale replacement inveat- on van It the and o! ﬁscal
man in the latter part a the In. mparnd to America's
mo: in order to immin its Esperanto-ml!!!”-
preset" internal corn-
petitiveness. It in causally Mm; m"°&" 9""
“W" "I” . “Mn: N “'ml “I?
llctltly mm be m w all! um um “um" w.
replace-d utter it has operated is the .m actually
tor more thanByears. and: “W' m to '
The industry's average an- mm m to. its
nun! plant and enuip'nent in at mt ”a “*6
vestment is eatimatnd to avail 2:“ ’2” by the
ioabmivmobiutonlnme “N“ “W“
latter part at the 1m and veatmmtlntheluln.

lurthcr to VLGI) billim in the
town. with inﬂation taken into
art-mint. compared to "no
billion at present.

Such bin investment hm
are expected to drive Japanean

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Keizai Shinbun. Inc.

(:80: [0120/73

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

SEAMLESS STEEL PIPES HPORT PRICES RISE

Tokyo JAPAN acouomc JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 982, 24 mm 81 p 6

[Text]

COPY RICR‘I‘:

t:120/73

Export prices for
seamless steel pipe and
tubes are go"; up sharply.
reflecting the continued oil
exploration spree. partl-
cularly intheUS.

The average price in the
ﬁrst half (April-September)
of fiscal ml roe 213 per
cent over the second half
(October. mil-March. ml)
at ﬁscal mo to ".113 ton

As u.s. Steel Corp. the
[rice leader. elevated its
lamina pipe prices by an
average at more than to per
cent lastinorthheaveraua
price will likely he hiked to
around $1.300 per ton in
even popular type: oi

1981, the Nihon Keizai

. . _

such pipe. ' '

In order to also: as
swelling demadd. [our

major Japanese steel-
maker: - Nippon Steel
Corp. Nippon Kokan le.
Sumitnrno Metal Mimic.
all and Kawasaki Steel

-are now operating
their aearnlaaa lipe rnllhat
upecity.

Their emhinod amnion-
plpe export in the tint Ill!
41 the can-rent fiscal year
amounted to ”00.118 ton.
min the second half
m y to pin mainly
over the tint MN. m
Kawasaki Steel' b ta-
creaaed its aeamlea:

Motion capacity.

Shimbun, Inc.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFHCIAI. US}? ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

GENERAL ELECTRIC MACHINERY MAKERS BOOST MEDITURE

 

‘ PsorOsnenlEleeirtc
Muslsctnnn' manual
Prom-s Icrl-‘bcnl Ill
(“Mind ml

IVMI
, . ,.
, (“I'll M w

Four moi electric Inn-
chinery mnulsctuters —
Hitachi. Ltd. Toshiba Com.
Mitsubishi Electric Corp. and
Fuji Electric Co. - lisvs been
aggressively expanding their
production cspscities and
gm '8 MM 0130

raisin tows r ’-
nsl l'lscnl lﬂl plant and equip
mentimatmontplsns.

Thole combined capital
spending in fiscsl test is now
atlmsted to rise ml per cent
from the precedim term to

ed. W (or
thc electronics
field account (at no
pet out o! unsti- ,

W's total capital um ........ n! 0
WW“ '1'“ L.“m"'::t:: :1 ii

- Iv" iu_ is
Jamar-in mi in

MO .......... ‘0 D
'-lm has! mwmm

balm: -

‘dioJum
"NO

:0 n
08.0
‘34
. o...
, +Il

0”

i

n Inna:

Vallbillin Computes.“
conductorssnd videotape»
corwdassrcmsioc tstcctslor
rcsﬂlnlspendin‘.
Am the four. Toshiba

ecu new putt in-
stead. Monmouth»
in

nis I so
pls «aluminum

mm.m

I
7

seems to be the most on
sivc. It has revised its initial
iiscsl ml capital spending
Wm» “cumulus-I
billion tJEJ-Nov. 3 issue).
Mitsubishi Ins ennui-ted W
billion um funds tllsn tho
otialnslly planed v41 billion
lorsuchitmstmmtsintlncu- logo
nnt ”.11.an
is V10 billion lone: thou the
pecedlngyesr’speﬂmnce.

Hit-chi revised tho origin-l
ﬁmdvsobiuiaitovuhil
lion. Tho incensed portion is
relotivclystnsllbsosuseitput
thewicinslpromm Italian
level

Most ot the summed (unit
on {or facilities to Mon
electrodfos ‘prodiicls. such as
semiconductors. computers
and V'I‘Rs In thccsseoillitso
hisli. Unbillionoltlie'leliil

“00!”me

Mm.
tot/comm dvisiai. I! in

Shrpslsohssrsbsditslbal

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon Keizai Shinbun. Inc.

0802 6120/73
31

FOR 0510“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHN '.OGY

NEH MINUTE METAL PARTICLES PRODUCTION DISCOVER-

Tokyo JAPAN ECOMHIC JOURNAL in English V01 19 No 982, 24 Nov 81 p 16

[Text]

COPYR IGIIT :

CSO:

A method to pro-ﬂee excep-
tionally line particles of

metals. rang‘ug in diameter
tram l/lomlllh to Slimmmh d
a millimeter. at an extremely
low cost. has been developed by
the National Research lrltitute
for Metals d the Science and
Tam AW-

Accerding to the White. the
method. leaturing utilization a!
electric arc discharges. thatch
still experimental. is without
precedent anywhere [or its
etlicacy in creating such ultra-
line particles ot variom metals.
Moreover. it is lit for maes-
prodtction 0! such particles (or
its surprisingly low coat.
pouihly only about 1 cent
of the heat conventi method
of making such metal particles.

The institute said the method
was accidentally discovered Is'
a by-pmduct at its research on
reactions between molten

4120/73

metal and.” lttlau
still has to uplah
clearly theprineﬁilaol
how such extremely

line metal particles
are created by the

method. But it Me

presmnedthatitauae
dahydrogennswim
an electric are dis
charge results in in-
drcirc the gas into
metalepecim and
forcing very tiny

metal particles out w

WW-
. The method consists in

placingalnetalsamplelna'

mixtureolaraenaral byte
yen in an electric are dis»
dwuechamberaweolhcm
verynnepertielaolthemetal
earning «1th
whentheapecimenlaltlt the
arcdlediareeJ'he as
wootmriaed

1981. the Nihon Keizni Shlmbun, Inc.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

SHARP T0 PRODUCE VISIBLE LIGHT SD‘IICONDUC’I‘OR LASER

Tokyo JAPAN ELIOHOHIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 982, 210 Nov 81 p 16

 

"9th Sharp Corp. has announced The corporation had earlier
developirxaliigli-«itput visible W a rimlhr auninonv
null-generating sernloonraictrr dictor laser ol 5 millivatta or
laser hitherto considered dim- hall inoutput (or application to
cult toprodicein an applicable making a dig Ital audio
term. reoordnccreproducimdirc.

The Oraka electric-electronic ‘ The carpal-am the amt":
'prnent producer plans to tupw a
mmspomotionoltne hetterveraionbyrurlinev
new laser in February. next methodaatotlanouttneactive
year. It stands greatlytorpeed layer vim the anger «1
up recording and reprometial destruction! itacryataliaation
of the optomagneuc audio even by doubling the unit. to
«listsnndtnelaserprlnten relormtneau'ucttre'oltlle
munder development in medlayutortabiliaetlu
Japan beam adllatial. and “Lilli:
Sharp'snewpromctisa WWW
gallium-aluminum-arunlde ”‘4‘“ (reactive) cm.

micmluctor laser having an The new semiconductor.
optical niaput o! to niIlIiwatll measuring 0.25 nllﬂlnelﬂ'a
and emitting a visible red lid" lull. 0.3 wide and 0.12 deep.
«0.78 microns In wavelenalt atarta lull temperature oodl-
ll [alum '11 “Pm“ v“. ht“ Wmumm‘
aion d the cornpany'a own a ‘0 ”WWII”. 0"
semiconductor laser atnicuu'e i'- "’3 ‘W “am
known as me VSIS (vol-o W08) "”0 0' W 5'
nelled Substrate Inner Stripe) ‘W'kd- "‘3 M I“ h”
MI The W“ atruetue in constant activityoyrendiruan
characterized by . M operating current ot 10
layer at Valnpe in cream WWW“
tiaibeneatlitlielaaeroeani Toualongwltlithenevr
shooting active layer ﬂat to laeer. the amputation alao
pen uptheucillated beamin threlopedamoptolnagnatic
tlieyoovesothata lidit nearly audio disc-main min at ten
circular In «assertion will be biurn-diproalutn-Iron-larntly
emitted. arnor-pnmlnhatanoetype.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, the Nihon [(21281 Shh-bun, Inc.

650: 4120/73

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H llt "I‘ Hi 1

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

AI “5" UNIX

REAGENT MADE FOR MEASURING DOLECULAR WEIGHTS

Tokyo JAPAN WNOHIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 982, 25 Nov 81 p 16

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO :

4120/ 73

A reaaent to precisely
measure the molecular Wm
oi all sorts ot sum be
tween 5.000 and ”.000 has
been commercially developed
by Hayastibara Biochemical
laboratories. Inc. (Bayesi-
bara Co.) 0! Okayama. andelll
soon be exclusively marketed
by Slma Denlto K.K.ol1'dyo.

Accwding to source clmeto
the Okayama manulactnnr.
the new product is a redevel-
oped version at its ”edbld'
plastic. a sort 0! polysac-
charoid. named "Pulhhn".
developed back in mm

Hitherto used as molecular
weight-measuring reagents
are various brands. ineladlu
"llrxtian." a Swedish-[radioed
pulysaccharoid. But they have
invariably been imprecise or
limited in applicability.
lit-mm at its great range oi ap
plicability. it is expected to be
usable even in lays-oped in
dustrial or other mud
rhrometographs and high-
precision biochemical and
innit-clinical research. A
Inochrmical expert ol 0‘

University :1 Tokyo Faculty d
Science expected the new
prodict to be an innovation!
regent in biochemical or
biotecteiiul eludes became
there has no tar been no good
renal capable oi noun-etely
messianic or nucleic
scit d 500.00 «I has: in
molecular welds.

ilayasldbara will shall!
start m the new
ream! at its Okaymlactu'y
and euptyiu the entire outpm
to Show Dodo. Shoes Deito
was ehaen out at mot-
sales anticnts. bothdotnestle
and lonely; became. beeid.
being Japan's top-level
chemical and lertilieer MC.
ithesalonueearloiresearcb.
development. intorntatlon
gathering and eels To be
marketed under Shove Dento's
own mdenaine d "M
Sl'ANDARD P-u." the new
mount will be en apeuive
eornmodty prloedat more then
"00.00 a [I‘ll Still Shove
Dentin expects to eel! several
kilograms annually to reeeereh
imitations throughout the
world.

1981, the Nihor. Kauai. Shmbun. Inc.

3h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me NW1“. I'SF 0"!)

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

POTENTIAL OF DEFENSE INDUSTRY WED
Tokyo "mm smcto sumuu in English 25-30 Sep, 2-3 Oct 81
[25 Sep 81 pp 10-12]

[Text]

Potentialit of is en's Defense Industry (Part 1) - Time for Its Becoming
Independent Not Too Far in the Future

Our country's defense industry is on the verge of becoming a full-fledged
independent industry. Occasioned by the US request for the strengthening of
defense power, voices are also mounting within our country, centering on the LDP,
for the "accelerating of the consolidation of defense power," and the defense
budget is starting to increase steadily. Expectations for its quantitative
expansion are mounting,on the one hand, while on the other, the development of
our country's own independent defense equipment, through the application of
our country's advanced electronic and communications technology, is also
becoming conspicuous. The US is asking to be supplied with military technology
and for joint development, and there areeven appearing arguments for the re-
studying of the Defense Plan General Outline. There is no possibility that
our country's defense industry, which is limited to the fields of conventional
weapons and which abides by the principle of not exporting weapons, based on
the basic defense policy of adhering strictly to defense, will suddenly grow
into a mammoth industry at one stroke, as seen in the US. However, the time
for its becoming independent, as a defense industry suited to the actual
situation in our country, is not too far away. In this series, the possibility
for its growth, its technological potentialities, its enterprise management,
and its effects on our country's industries, as a whole, will be explored.

-- One-Trillion-Yen Market Very Near at Hand; Autonomous Development,
after Quantitative Expansion; Aiming at Extrication from Licensed
Domestic Production --

Orders, Based on Medium-Term 92erations EstimateI Being Placed at Past Pace

"There is the standard that defense expenditures will be within one
percent of the GNP. Therefore, there is no possibility of the defense
industry becoming big, all of a sudden. It may he a different story if

35
ms omcm. use ONLY
H“! OH'N'IM l‘SF 0N! \‘

it is said that it is alright to exceed the one-percent level ..." The
statements by Keidanren's (Federation of Economic Organizations) Defense
Production Commdttee Chairman Gakuji MORIYA (Adviser to Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries) are always cautious, unaffected by the generally prevailing

mood for the strengthening of defense power. There is no sense of urgency
in the defense industry circles, desiring even a small increase in the amount
of work. This is because the situation is now appearing that, even without
their saying anything, orders from the JDn will steadily increase.

Orders for main equipment under the Medium-Term Operations Estimate
(the 1978 Medium-Term Operations Estimate for the period from fiscal 1980
to fiscal 198a), which is the JDA's plan for equipment and organization,
and the early attainment of which was requested by former US President CARTER,
are now being placed, at a fast pace. If the budget request for fiscal 1982-
for the f-lS's (licensed domestic production by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries)
(M3 planes) is approved. the target of 77 planes set under the Medium-Term
Operations Estimate will be achieved. The rate of attainment of the Medium-
Term Operations Estimate for all main equipment, such as the PSC anti-submarine
patrol planes (licensed domestic production by Kawasaki Heavy Industries) and
the 7u-model tanks, will also exceed 70 percent. -

The Keidanren's Defense Production Committee, which is the general
controller of our country's defense industry has been requesting that
"capital expenditures," which include the expenses for the purchase of equipment,
such as planes, research and development expenses and facilities consolida-
tion expenses, will be increased to account for at least 30 percent of the
defense budget as a whole.

However, if the placing of orders for a large number of E-lS's and
?3C's under the fiscal 1982 budget is approved, the expenditures even just
to pay :zr :1e equipment for which orders have been placed before and in fiscal
1332, will exceed one trillion yen in the fiscal 1983 budget, and there is even
the possibility that the amount will account for nearly uo percent of the

defense budget. The defense industry circles view that "our requests in the
past will come to be realized, even if we do nothing about them" (Chief of

the Defense Production Committee Secretariat Hiroshi HORIKAHA), and they are
now on the point of starting moves to formulate new requests more in keeping
with the rapid development of equipment. This shows how great the changes

in the environment surrounding the defense industry are. The Jon is aiming

at the attainment of the equipment level prescribed in the Defense Plan
General Outline, even during the period of the next-term ﬂedium-Term Operations
Estimate (from fiscal 1983 to fiscal 1987),_which is slated to be formulated,

even as early as next spring, with the early attainment of the 1978 Medium-
Term Operations Estimate as a foothold.

Even Possibility of Re-Studying General Outline, in Compliance with US Request

However, the requests for the strengthening of defense power, presented
by the US side at the Japan-US administrative-level consultations on security
in June and elsewhere, largely exceed the level given in the General Outline.

36
FOR OFFlClAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this reason, there are even starting to appear arguments for the re-studying
of the General Outline (revising it in an upward direction), in coepliance with
the wishes of the US, in the LDP Security Research Council, etc. This stems
from the awareness that the General Outline, which was decided in October,

1976, no longer provides a guideline for the equipment program.

The defense industry circles are already waiting eagerly, observing
that "if the General Outline is revised, the facilities which we now have
will certainly not be sufficient" (Kawasaki Heavy Industries Vice President
Renzo NIHEI). After all, if the interceptor-fighter groups, consisting of
such planes as the F-15, were to be increased by four groups (one flight
group is organized with 18 planes), as requested by the us, it will mean
that nearly 100 F-lS's, including the reserve planes, which will cost about
11 billion yen per plane. will come to be needed. The expenses for the
purchase of this number of planes alone will exceed one trillion yen.

The monetary amount of the JDA's contracts in fiscal 1980 is 953.1
billion yen (of which 12 percent is for imports, etc.) This amount includes
the expenses for the purchase of fuel, textile products, etc., and it is not
all for frontline equipment. Even so, the scale of the defense industry
exceeding the big line of one trillion yen is now a matter of time.

However, the main-stream of our country's defense production is
licensed domestic production, as in the case of the P-lS's and the' Pac's.
Even if the sales amount increases, there will remain the dissatisfaction
as expressed by President Taiji UBUKATA of Ishikawajima-Harimaﬁeavy In-
dustries, which manufactures the engines for these two types of planes by
licensed production, that "licensed domestic production alone, is a problem."
Their aim is autonomous development, after quantitative expansion. Defense
Production Committee Chairman MGRIYA and others are already launching PR
campaigns, saying that "if a preparation period is given us, it will be
possible to develop frontline fighters, which can succeed to the f-lS's."

Different from the case of the aircraft sector: in which the main-stream
is licensed production, domestic production is the core for ground equipment.
There is, for example, the 7u-model tank, which the 630? says with conviction
that "it is one of the highest quality products, even in the world, as a tank
of the 1970's." Even in the midst of the mood for laying emphasis on air and
sea equipment, orders for these tanks have been steadily increasing, from 60
tanks in fiscal 1980, to 72 tanks in fiscal 1981 and to 80 tanks in the request
for fiscal 1982. It has reached the point where Special Vehicles Department
Director Iwao HAYASHI, who has been in charge of the designing of tanks since
the first half of the 1950's, in Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, can now make
a dec laration of independence, saying that "in the past, we were a 'family
member, supported by other sectors' of the firm, but we have now reached the
stage where we can manage on our own, somehow or other."

The next-term Base Air Defense Ground Environment (BADGE-X), which will
become tire keystone for our country's air-defense, will also be manufactured

dinestitaily. Influential American firms approached the JDA, but computers

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and :omrunisations technology, which are needed for BADGE-X, can be fully
taken care of domestically. In regard to the software for the air-defense
sysrem alone, Japan Slectric, Fujitsu and Hitachi Works are aiming at

receiving orcers, using aughes Aircraft. General Dynamics and SDC, respectivel ,
as their "sob-contractors."

Some Missiles Are First-Grade Products “--

Essentially, the strength of the defense industry reflects the level
of the industrial ability of that country. Some missiles, such as the air-to-
ship ASH-l missiles, developed by Mitsubishi heavy Industries, and Tokyo
Shibaura Electric's short SAH's are rated very highly as top-quality products.
This is because our country's electronics technology can be utilized fully in
the guidancesystem, etc., of these products. Our country has now reached the
level where the US is asking for the supply of military technology, such as

our country‘s high-precision electronic parts, saying that "it is a problem.
for the offering of technology to be one-way traffic."

The defense industry is now starting to show signs of quantitative
expansion. Even so, however, the ratio of the defense industry to the
industrial circles as a whole is so small as to be almost negligible. The
production of defense equipment (including foodstuffs, textiles, etc.),

accounts for only 0.38 percent (in fiscal 1978) of all the industrial pro-
duction amount.

The US Defense Department placed orders to the munitions industry,
amounting to 76.8 billion dollars in fiscal 1980. The amount is roughly
16 times that of the orders placed by our country's JDA. As the defense
expenditures of Japan and the US in the same fiscal year was also about
the ratio of l to 16, this difference is quite natural. Furthermore, in
the case of our country, it does not have strategic weapons. such as the
ICBH, and exports of weapons are also virtually banned, under the three
principles concerning weapons exports. Furthermore, a ceiling of less
than one percent of the GNP is placed on defense expenditures, at the present
time. Therefore, there is no likelihood of mammoth military enterprises,
as seen in the US, being created. However, it is certain that a defense
industry. which is suited to the actual situation in our country, is coming
to take root steadily.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL PS}: ONLY

Changes in Ratios of Personnel and Food §§pendituresz and Capital Eigenditures
to De ense u get, as a H ole
FY1978 FY1979 H1980 FY1981 FY1982 (reguest)

Ratio of personnel
and food expenses su.u% Sl.u% ' “9.3t 47.7% Mu.8%

Capital expendi- 20.5 22.6 2n.u 25.7 ' 26.7
tures (total of

expenses for buy-

ing equipment,

research and

development, and

consolidation of
facilities)

[26 Sea 81 pp 11-13]

[Text]

 

-- Electronic Firms Fired with Enthusiasm; Japan Steel Tube in
Hot Pursuit in Construction of Escort Ships; Escort Ships
for which There Hill be Demand for Repair Are Attractive --

The Japan Shipbuilding Industry Association's Naval Ships Committee
is a gathering of eight companies which receive orders from the JDA for the
building and repair of naval ships, including escort ships, mine-sweepers
and submarines. of these eight firms, five firms, namely Hitsubishi Heavy
Industries, Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries, Sumitomo Heavy Machine
Industry, Mitsui Shipbuilding and Hitachi Shipbuilding are in charge of
building escort ships, while Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Kawasaki Heavy
Industries build submarines. Japan Steel Tube, which has so far been
excluded from taking part in the production of the two major equipmentitensfor
sea defense, among the influential companies, has recently started to show
moves for securing orders for the construction of escort ships and is causing
a flutter among other companies. The five firms are trying to check the
entry of a new competitor, saying that "even if the orders were to become
twice that at present, we can fully meet the demand with the facilities which
we now have."

Japan Steel Tube Managing Director and concurrently head of the
Ship Division Tsuneo SEKIKAHA is showing a low posture, saying that "access
(by a new entrant) is difficult, under the present shipbuilding pace; the
first thing for us is to accumulate the know-howforbuilding naval ships,
and we are not thinking of joining them immediately." However, he does not
hide the fact that preparations are already being made for that purpose.

39
FORIDFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR ()FI‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

The reason why Japan Steel Tube has decided to enter the field of
defense production, even knowing fully well that it will be met with strong
resistance from other shipbuilding companies, lies in the fact that "the
management of the various companies building escort ships is in a stable
state" (SEKIKAHA). Different from ships for exports and merchant ships,
which will directly be affected by business fluctuations, escort ships are
very attractive, as the placing of orders for them goes according to the
planned schedule, as the monetary amount per ship is also big, and also as
it is possible to expect demand for repairs. The ratio of defense orders
for Japan Steel Tube's Shipbuilding Division is only 2.5 percent, while in
the case of hitsubishi Heavy Industries, which it regards as the target to
emulate, the ratio has already exceeded the lO-percent mark (as of fiscal
1980, for both cases).

Another factor which has led Japan Steel Tube to seek access into
this sector is that the spread merit of the know-how for the building of
escort ships to the building of merchant ships is not small. Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries' Naval Ship Division Director Kiyotaka HATSUNO testifies
that “the reducing of vibration and noise is becoming a technological task
in regard to merchant ships, and the parts which are common to both naval
ship and merchant ship technology are big."

Electronic-itaticn of Equipment Is Being Further Accelerated

 

 

Electronic equipment is showing a remarkable increase, recently, in
e ense demand. According to an estimate made by a certain influential
electronic instruments manufacturer, electronic equipment, including missiles,
is considered to have accounted for about 200 billion yen, of the total
amount of orders placed by the JDA in the last fiscal year (about 950
billion yen) (five years ago, the amount was 70 billion yen, in the total
amount of orders of #50 billion yen). Electronics technology has made
inroads into all fields of defense, ranging from missiles, aircraft, naval
ships, to various types of ground air-defense systems. The next-term P3C
anti—sutnarine patrol planes will cost about 10 billion yen per plane, but
of this amount, more than no percent will be accounted for by electronic
equipment and instruments to be placed on board the plane.

It is certain that “this kind of 'electrcnic-ization of equipment' will
be further accelerated in the future" (JDA Technological Research and Develop-
ment Institute Director Yukie OHORI). The Ncmure Overall Research Institute
has formulated an outlook for defense—related expenditures, up to fiscal 198a.
It estimates the annual increase rate of expenditures for equipment at 19 per-
cent, but it expects that the increase rate, if limited to electronics equip-
ment alone. will far exceed 20 percent.

0-
I

All the more for this reason, the posture of electronic equipment
manufacturers toward defense production has become very positive, beyond com-
parison with their attitudes in the past. Hitachi Works, which had so far
been lagging behind hitsubishi Electric hachinery,Tokyo Shibaura Electric
and Japan Electric, established a defense technology promotion headquarters
in August of last year. Fujitsu is also shifting to a roll-back, newly

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1OFINC1Al.USI2(ﬂﬂLY

establishing the Fujitsu System Overall—Research Institute in January of
this year.

This is because they view that "the increased degree of the combination
of defense technology, centering on electronics, will enable the full utiliza-
tion of technology developed for civilian use" (Hitachi). fujitsu Vice
President Taichiro ATARASHI says bluntly and boldly, "It would be absurd if
we were to overlook the defense market, which is about to attain rapid growth.
In two or three years, we will increase the amount of orders we receive to
twice the present amount, or to 10 billion yen." Hitachi assigns 60 staff
members to the Defense Technology Promotion Headquarters on a standing basis,
while Fujitsu has 130 staff members in its Research Institute, and they are
both showing very strong enthusiasm.

Partly a Place for Studying and Acquiring Know-How

It is not only because they took note of the growth potential that
these two companies consolidated their structure for defense production and
for the acceptance of such orders, roughly around the same time. It is not
unconnected with the fact that such large-scale systems as the BADGE system
and Hawk and Nike surface-to-air missiles, which cost from 200 to 300 billion
yen and even as much as one trillion yen, are approaching the time for renewal.
"If we miss this chance, a decisive difference will appear with the manufacturers
who entered this field earlier" (Hitachi). It will not only mean the missing
of a business opportunity, but it will also lead to the losing of a place for
"studies," for the acquiring of know-how forsystemsdesigning, which is incom-
parably bigger in scale and which requires far greater degress of precision,
than on-line systems, adopted by banks, etc. The defense market from now on
is becoming an arena where comprehensive electronic manufacturers will com-
pete with one another in theirsystemsconstruction ability and in the performance
of their products.

This is most symbolically shown in the BADGE-X sales competition.
Such early-comer manufacturers as Mitsubishi Electric Hachinery,Toshiba and
Oki Electric are planning to present a proposal jointly, forming a team.
However, Hitachi and Fujitsu will put their real strength to test, independently,
apart from what the outcome will be.

At the same time, manufacturers other than major companies are also
making frantic efforts to strengthen their defense sectors. Hokushin Electric
Machine Manufacturing Works, which is a manufacturer of aviation instruments
and systems, will carry out a large-scale facilities investment, in prepara-
tion for the production of auxiliary instruments for the F-lS's and the PSC's.
It is already making preparations for an age of intensified competition,
saying that when the weight of electronic equipment increases, "competition
in performance, costs and quality will become severer, and this will affect
the share of orders received" (Managing Director Sumio UEHATA). This kind
of response is seen commonly among all electronic equipment manufacturers,
irrespective of their size.

hi
roe 0mm]. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l‘SE ONI.\

It is said that defense production, though having a high growth
potentiality, "does not bring such big profits as is generally thought."
However, it has the merit of "broadening the scope of application of tech-
nology u ich has been refined through the production of goods for civilian

use, and :F enabling the acquisition of know-how and techniques, which cannot
be 1earne:; in civilian demand sectors" (Toshiba President Shoichi SABA and
Ja;ar. Electric President Tadahiro SEKIMOTO). All the more for this reason,

various related enterprises are aiming at strengthening their defense sectors,

even if it means "the paying of tuition, for the time being" (Fujitsu Vice

President ATARASHI).

Research and development investments, in a different

form -- this is one aspect of defense production in enterprises.

29 Tog-Ranking Companies, Based on Amount of Defense Contracts
(For fiscal 1980)

Order Enterprise Name Monetary Amount
1. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries ¥230,5u0 million
2. Ishikauajima-Harima Heavy Industries 108,470 million
3. Kawasaki Heavy Industries 81,190 million
u. Mitsubishi Electric Machinery 72,380 million
5. Tokyo Shibaura Electric 32,900 million
6. Japan Electric 22,310 million
7. Ito-Chu Aviation lu,0u0 million
8. Japan Petroleum 12,900 million
9. Japan Steel Works 12,270 million

10. Sumitomo Heavy Hachine Industry 12,080 million

11. Komatsu Horks 12,020 million

12. Hitachi Shipbuilding ll,u10 million

13. Tokyo Instruments 9,390 million

19. Hitachi Work: 8,920 million

15. Haruzen Petroleum 7,930 million

16. Oki Electric Industry 7,750 million

17. Shinmeiua Industry 7,290 million

16. Mitsubishi Shoji Trading Company 6,9»0 million

19. Daikin Industry 6,760 million

20. Shimazu Works 6,710 million

(For fiscal 1979)

1. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries 396,930 million
2. Mitsubishi Electric Machinery 53,960 million
3. Kawasaki Heavy Industries “9,550 million
u. Ishikauajima-Harima Heavy Industries 39,900 million
5. Tokyo Shibaura Electric 18,190 million
6. Japan Electric 16,6u0 million
7. Japan Steel Tube 16,580 million
8. Mitsui Shipbuilding l3,670 million
9. Komatsu Horks 10,290 million
10. Japan Petroleum 8,860 million
11. 0ki Electric Industry 8,560 million

ha
FOR omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Japan Steel works ' 8 .150 million
13. Fujitsu 7,660 million
10. Ito-Chu Aviation 7,300 million
15. Sumitomo Heavy Machine Industry 7,150 million
16. Fuji Heavy Industry 6,710 million
17. Shinmeiwa Industry 6,701 million
18. Hitachi Shipbuilding 6,700 million
19. Fuji Electric Machinery 5,850 million
20. Nissan Motors 5,790 million

[28 Sep 81 pp 7-9]

[Text]

Potentialitz of Japan's Defense Industry (Part 3) -- Potential Ability for

Development of Conventional Weapons

 

-- Production of Missiles at Low Cost; Heading in Direction of
Breaking Through the "Hall of Quantity" with Autonomous Equipment ~-

"If we are permitted to use 100 billion you as development funds, we
will autonomously develop the next-term surface-to-air missiles (SAM-X) to
follow Nikos and Hawks." -- This is what a JDA official in charge of develop-
ment says, with confidence.

Research Budget Reguest of Less than 20 Million Yen

The most likely candidate for SAM-X, the purchasing funds for which
will exceed one trillion yen, is the Patriot, manufactured by the Raytheon
Corporation of the US. This is a missile on which research and development
have been continuing for more than ten years. According to our country's
industry circles concerned, which are aiming at its'licensed domestic pro-
duction, the development expenditures to be disbursed by the US Government
up to the time of the full-scale production of Patriots, slated for the
autumn of 1982, will amount to about MOO billion yen, calculated in terms
of the Japanese yen.

As an alternative plan for this Patriot, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
and others have presented an autonomous development plan for Nike-Phoenix,
to the Technology Research and Development Institute, which is the main JDA
body for defense equipment development. however, the JDA, in its rough-
estimate budget requests for fiscal 1982, is asking for only a little less
than 20 million yen as the research expenses for the Nike-Phoenix, when it
is requesting 500 million yen as survey costs for the introduction of the
Patriot.

There has been no change in the JDA's basic policy for "deciding on
the succeeding model, after checking into the performances of both models."
However, it does not seem likely that it will decide on the autonomous

h3
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
Hm OFFICIAL l'SF ONLY

development of the Nike-Phoenix. After all, the budget for the Technology
Research and Development Institute in fiscal 1981 was only 31.7 billion yen.
Even if the development of SAM-X were to be possible, with research funds of
100 billion yen, it means that it will need development funds, which are more
than three times the total annual budget of the Institute itself. The shortage
of a large amount of development funds is posing an obstacle to autonomous
development. However, autonomous development is achieving results steadily

in the sector of short-range small—size missiles.

For example, the short SAM, which Tokyo Shibaura Electric jointly
developed with the Technology Research and Development Institute. It had
a difficult start, such as the arising of arguments concerning its per-
hmwudnﬂeﬁﬂ,thauwnﬁlutnu,mﬂbﬁwemeﬂuﬁm
of the compilation of the fiscal 1981 budget, which included its ft 1-scale
introduction, on the grounds that it was inferior in performance, compared
with Roland (jointly developed by France and west Germany), which was the
rival model. However, the evaluation now commonly shared both within and
outside the country is that "there are good points and bad points, depending
on the guidance formula, and this is only natural. It is may not be given
the perfect grade of 100, but it is a fully satisfactory missile."

Surpasses American Products in the Cost Fieldz Too

The air-tc-ship aSMI missile, which was developed by Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries and others. is another missile, which the JDA is proud of. It says
that it is better than America's "ﬂarpoon" missile, which is the same type of
missile, not only in performance alone, but also in the cost field. This is
”the producing of results through thoroughgoing cost control, from the stage
of designing, in order to produce them at low cost" (Technology Research and
Development Institute Director Yukie OHORI).

when autononous development of several missiles is placed on the right
rack, the notes of private enterprises also become active. It has been
eciced that Toshiba, which developed the short SAM's, will next take charge
of the development of "portable SAH's," which will be surface-to-air missiles,
which can be carried by $0? personnel. This missile adopts the homing formula,
xhich uiLi catch the invading airplanes as an image, through the adaptation of
:he charge-coupled device (CCD) technology, used for image-sensers in the
cameras for Ezusehold-use video-tape recorders (VTR).

fl

)0

J93 started to import portable SAM's, called Stingers, from the US,
from fiscal 1981. However, even the US has not yet developed missiles which
use the new guidance formula, using CCD. Toshiba says, with deep confidence,
that "in the next portable SAM's, the Us will also probably use CCD, but our
country is ahead of the US in this field” (Specific Development Division
Adviser Hirohide HAKAO of the Electric Wave Instruments Project Department).

The view that "in the missile field, technology developed for civilian-
use goods, such as electronics, can be adopted, in order to make the size
smaller and to raise the precision degree, and Japan is more advanced in this
kind of improved technology" (Japan weapons Industry Association Chairman

hh
roe omcm. us: ONLY
FOR(N4“HALIE%ZONIN

ﬂankichi TATENO), is becoming the generally accepted view. Still further,
the obtaining cf prospects for becoming able to develop products at a low.
cost, even when the production amount is small, as in the case of ASHl, even
in the midst of the restrictions on weapons exports, has a big significance.

According to the JDA Technology Research and Development Institute, the
technological level of products in the electronics field, such as missiles,
radar, and firearms control systems (PCS), is high, but there is a tendency
to lag behind in the fields of under-water weapons, firearms and ammunition.
In other words, the pattern is that in fields where technology developed to
meet civilian demand can be adapted, Japan is strong, but in fields where
demand, other than that of the JDA, cannot be expected, weaknesses remain,
reflecting the smallness of the market for such equipment.

In the aircraft field, where there is an overwhelming quantitative
difference with the US, it is the earnest desire of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries,
which developed the F-1 support fighters, and which is now engaging in the
development of a CCV (control configurated vehicle), which will become the
basis for future fighter-plane development, to link this with the development
of the most modern and high-performance mainstay fighters. However, in the
case of the F-u fighter of the US HacDonnell Douglas Corporation, the
production amount is about 5,000 planes, including those being produced
domestically by the West European countries, on a license-production basis.
That is why it is said that it is completely paying, even if it uses 2.1
billion dollars as funds for the development of the F-15. In the case
of the production of 100 planes or 200 planes, as in our country, it can be
said that it will be extremely difficult to break through the wall of amount,
no matter how thoroughgoingly cost control is carried out.

"Three-Legged Race“ by the JDA and Private Enterprises

The development of new defense equipment is determined by strategic
concepts for coping with the threat of aggression. There are cases where
it is more necessary to strengthen surface-to-air missiles, than to increase
fighter planes, or where it is necessary to improve and increase anti-tank
missiles. than to increase the number of tanks themselves. However, our
country's ground, sea and air equipment tends to be scattered around widely,
covering various fields. Some military experts point out that "even while
saying that Japan will abide strictly by defense, the strategic principle
is not quite clear."

The :urfacc-to-ship missile, uh‘th the JDA will start developing on a
full-scale, with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, etc., from fiscal 1982. is one
of the weapons which are suited to the actual situation in Japan. This is a
missile, designed to have a range of 100 to 200 kilometers, and it will be for
the purpose of attacking enemy ships, which aim at carrying out landings,
from the central part of Hokkaido. If this type of equipment, which is suited
for Japan, is created, one after another, the Japanese-type defense industry will
come to take root firmly, overcoming the wall of quantity. The actual situation

1:5
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY

of the defense iL6u~;ry of our country, where peace has been Laintained con-
:“nw :rly iv: LVCr :3 ,.4rs, since the end of the War. and which does not
.t::i: wc;:.:s ezy;rts. is that "it has never tested the performance of the
rt.;:uc on the battle’itld in actual reality" (Mitsubishi Heavy Industries
rannging Director chhic SESAKI). Even in the future, the structure of a
"three-legged race," under which the JDA chooses the subject matters for
develﬁpmcn: and private enterprises supply the technology, will continue to
be indispensable.

 

[29 Sen 81 pp 10-12]

[Text]

Jasan's Defense Industrv (Fart u) -- Potential Ca abili of

   

Companies have Capability for Manufacturing Atomic Bombs;
ar Distant from Manufacturing Guided Missiles --

a
~n—o

;;sposing that our country were to possess "strategic weapons,"
:cgrcccntad by atomic and hydrogen bombs and ICBH's as the means of delivery,
what will be total cost?

200 to 300 Hillion Yen Per Atomic Bomb, Ten Years Ego

It is said that, ten years ago, a ten-member team of the JDA's National
:efense College, drew up a report, titled "Japan's Capability for Developing
Nuclear Weapons and Strategic Weapons." The cover of the report was pure white,
and only the mark "secret" stood out conspicuously. A certain politician,
who says that he read that report, at the time, recalls that "the cost of
manufacturing atomic bombs was 200 to 300 million yen, per bomb."

It is said that this was a report, formulated on the basis of the
:remise of "what Japan can do, in the case of Japan and the United States
helping India's nuclear armament," based on instructions given by an
influential LDP politician, who had served as JDA Director General.

There is another book which gives one answer to the difficult problem
of "what the costs will be, in the case of actually possessing strategic
weanons." ?hat is the book, written by US Air Force General ENDICOTT, in
1975, son titled "Japan‘s Nuclear Option -- The Political, Technological
and Strategic Factors."

This book, even though saying that "in conclusion, Japan will not
choose the road to possessing nuclear weapons," reaches the conclusion that
in the case of Japan's acquiring the minimum, but effective nuclear weapons,
"it will be sufficient if it were to have ten submarines which can carry
ten one-megaton-class SLBM's (submarine-launched ballistic missiles), which
have a range of 2,500 nautical miles."

1:6
FOR OFFICEAL.USEI)NLY
FIHI|)FFICL\L USIZCMVLY

In this case, the number of missiles needed would be 192 missiles,
including those for reserve, and the costs for them will be 1,556 million
dollars. The ten submarines will cost u,750 million dollars. In short,
the costs for the acquisition of ten submarines, equipped with SIBM's,
will total 6,610 million dollars, or_about 1,520 billion yen. ENDICOTT
writes that these equipment costs can be disbursed over a period of ten
years, with the largest amount disbursed in the sixth year.

The consumer price index, with 1975 as 100, is luu, as of July of
this year. In other words, if Japan were to acquire what ENDICOTT says
is the "optimum nuclear war potential" at the present time, the costs will
be about 2.2 trillion yen.

UN Secretary General U THANT (at the time) said that "Japan can
acquire nuclear armaments at about the same defense expenditures as for
conventional weapons." Defense-related expenditures for the current fiscal
year, including personnel costs, are 2.u trillion yen. The view expressed
by Secretary General U THAN? and the calculations made by a US Air Force
General show the same results, coincidentally.

Apart from whether it is actually possible to manufacture an "atomic
bomb at the cost of 200 to 300 million yen," there is no doubt at all that
there exist enterprises in Japan, which have the'capability of manufacturing
atomic bombs.

Even Mass-Production of Plutonium Bombs

 

It is said that "Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Hitachi Works, Tokyo
Shibaura Electric and Mitsubishi Electric Machinery,which engage in the work
of constructing nuclear reactors for power generation use, have potential

capability for manufacturing atomic bombs" (National Defense Council
Counselor).

Atomic bombs are classified into uranium bombs and plutonium bombs,
according to the nuclear fission material which is used. It is said that
the manufacturing of plutonium bombs is easier. It is said that various
electric power companies, such as Tokyo Electric Power Company, which have
nuclear power generation facilities, can produce high-quality plutonium for
making plutonium bombs, even today, if they operate the nuclear reactors
for power generation in a special way. There is even the view, overseas,
that Japan is even capable of a mass-production of plutonium bombs, if the
engineering technology, which is at the highest level, even in the world,
of Japan's represent\tive shipbuilding and heavy electric machinery manu-
facturing companies, such as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Hitachi Works,
is used, with the plutonium thus produced as the "raw material."

The names of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Hitachi and Toshiba rise
to the surface not only because they have full knowledge of the structure
of nuclear reactors for power generation purposes,but probably also because
they are outstanding in the fields of production technology and quality

h?
roe omcm. use ONLY
Hill "“1".“ NSF ONLY

control. as the top-ranking shipbuilding companies and manufacturers of
heavy electric machinery.

Meanwhile, what is its latent capability ‘or the manufacturing of
ICBM's? Nippon Electric Mitsubishi Electric Machinery and Toshiba have
actual experience in technology for communications satellites for peaceful
use. As for rocket technology, using solid fuel, it is said that Nissan
Motors has a complete monopoly. In the case of rockets, using liquid fuel,
the technological ability of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and Ishikawajime-
Harima Heavy Industries is highly viewed.

It is said that the three-stage "H-l" rocket, which the National
Space Development Agency (NASDA) is planning to put to practical use in
the second half of the 1980's, will be a "new-generation rocket, even
capable of launching planet exploration ships and manned space-ships"
(Counselor Yukihiko TAKEMAKA), which adopts liquid-oxygen and liquid-
hydrogen engines and inertial guidance systems.

The first stage (propulsion rocket) of this "H-l" is the United States'
Thor-Delta rocket, which was developed for the launching of IBM's. It is
the commonly accepted view among military technology experts of the world
that "if a country has the technology to launch stationary satellites, it
can deliver missiles to any place in the world."

Severer than Competition for Development of Products for Civilian Use

Even so, it is also a fact that for the converting of "rockets for
peaceful use" to those for ICBM's and IRBM's, "there still remain big
problems in the technological field, such as the developing of control
techniques at the time of re-entry, and the developing of high-temperature
resistant materials" (Space Division Director Masaaki IRATA of the Japan
Aeronautics and Space Industry Association's Technology Department).

The general current of military missiles has already entered the age
of precision guided missiles (POM). which use the most advanced electronics
technology. The nuclear missiles of the US and the Soviet Union have reached
the third-generation stage, where "there is no need to aim at the enemy."
They are now hastening the development of IGM (intelligence guided missiles)
which, if launched in the general direction of where the enemy is expected
to be, will differentiate between the enemy and the ally, and than distinguish
whether it is the target for'attack or not. As against this, our country
is still at the stage of domestically manufacturing the second-generation
missiles, in which the finding of the target and the pushing of the button
lust still be handled by human beings. and only the part of pursuing the
target and hitting it is taken over by the missile itself.

Apart from whether our country's influential enterprises will "take
part in a war," under the present Constitution, in the competition of
developing strategic weapons, which competition is said "to be even severer
than the competition for the development of technology for civilian-use
products" (Japan Electric President Tadahiro SEKIMOTO), or not, there also

he
ron omcm. use ONLY
INJR‘OFF1C1A1.1EHE(MVLY

remains some doubt as to whether the technology (and technicians) of our
country will be able to bear the tension cf developing strategic Heacons,
which shoulders the fate of "always having to be half a step ahead 0? the
enemy, without fail."

Our Country's Missiles and Manufacturers

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries: Nike-J (surface-to-air). licensed domestic
production
ASH—l (air-to-ship), slated for equipment in
fiscal 1982; domestic product

Mitsubishi Electric Machinery: Hawk (surface-to-air), licensed domestic
production
Sea-sparrow (ship-to-air), licensed domestic
' production
Sparrow (air-to-air), licensed domestic production

Toshiba: Hawk (surface-to-air), licensed domestic production
Short SAM (short-range surfsce-to-air), decided
for equipment from 1981, domestic product

Kawasaki Heavy Industries: Heavy HAT (anti-ship and anti-tank), domestic
product

Besides the above missiles, there are the following imported missiles:

Tartar (ship-to-air)

Sidewinder (air-to-air)

Falcon (air-to-air)

Portable SAM Stinger (portable surface-to-air), decided for equipment from 1981.

[30 Sep 81 pp 5-7]

[Text]

Potentiality of Japan's Defense Industry (Part 5) -- Chorus of "Increase
Development Expenses"

-- Spread of Technology to Private Sector Is Proceeding; Key Lies
in Improving Payability and Productivity --

This year, in the us, a development project for very high speed integrated
circuits, called "VHSIC," was started on a full-scale, centering on the Defense
Department. VHSIC is a high-density 10, which will carry out calculations at
100 to 1,000 times the speed of the present Ic'a. Furthermore, it is said to
be strong toward the changes in temperature and changes in the environment,

Such as radioactivity, and that it can be applied in a broad range of fields.
including super-sonic detectors, radar, artificial satellites, communications,
electronic and optical data processing, etc.

h?
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development funds are 225 million dollars for a six-year period.
Six groups, centering on IBM, Texas Instruments (TI) and Hughes Aircraft,
have succeeded in concluding contracts with the Defense Department, and
have already started research and development. The immediate purpose of
this development project is to develop high-efficiency IC's for military
use. however. our country's industrial circles concerned observe that
it will become linked with the improvement of the "capability" of the US
IC industry. which is tending to be hard-pressed by Japan, saying that
"through the development of VHSIC, American IC manufacturers, which had
tended to specialize exclusively in IC's, will come to acquire systems-
development ability" (Mitsubishi Electric Machinerytlectronics 1st Business
Department Chief Takeshi ABE).

Military Technology Leading,1ndustrial Circles in US

In the US. military industries developed new, revolutionary technology,
and this helped to upgrade the technological level of private industries.
Atomic honhsbecame the basis for nuclear power generation, and the vacuum
tubes and computers, which were developed for calculating ballistic courses.
became the foundation of today's computer industry. Aeronautics and the space
industry and the computer industry. which are said to be the "strong in-
dustries" of the US today. are also supported on a large scale by the tech-
nological development capability of the military sector.

It is estimated that Us military research and development expenses
account For about 10 percent of its national defense budget, which is lu2.7
billion dollars (35.5 trillion yen; 1980). As compared with this. the JDA's
research and development expenses are 31.7 billion yen (fiscal 1981). It is
on a scale which "is even less than our company's research and development
expenses" (Japan Electric President Tadahiro SEKIHOTO). The ratio of research
and development expenses to the military budget, as a whole, is also extremely
low for our cauntry, which is 1.3 percent, in comparison to other nations,
such as about 30 percent in the case of the Soviet Union, about 10 percent
in the US. Britain and France, and about 5 percent in West Germany.

EffeCtive for Development of Aircraft Industry

Recently, internal and external "pressure“ for the increasing of the
defense budget is increasing. However, in the industrial circles, voices
desiring an increasa in reseavzh and development expenditures, in the defense
budget. are strong. Keidanren's (Federation of Economic Organizations)
Defense Production Committee. which is formed by the top leaders of about
20 representative enterprises in our country's defense industry circles. is
now tormulating the industrial circles' requests toward the 1981 Medium-Term
Operations Estimate (for the period from fiscal 1983 to fiscal 1987). The
situaticn in the said Committee is that "every member says that research and
development expenditures should be increased" (Secretariat Chief Hiroshi
MORIKANA) .

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL (SE ONLY

As regards the aircraft industry, it is said that there is a technological
gap of about ten years between our country and the US. Mitsubishi heavy
lnéuStries has actual sales records of nearly 100 billion yen (esritate for
fiscal 1980) toward the JDA, through the development and production of the 1-2
advanced trainers and the licensed production of the mainstay f-lS fighters.
The research and development expenses for the development of these aircraft
which Mitsubishi Heavy InduStries itself shoulders a year are about Several
hundred million yen, and it relies on the JDA's development budget for a
large part of the remainder. It desires an increase in the defense research
and development expenditures in the future, saying that "as a tremendous
number of technical engineers and funds and time are needed for the develop-
ment of aircraft, the work is not possible without State help" (Managing

DireCtor Yoshio SASAKI, who heads a sub-group under the aircraft and special
vehicles department).

Technology acquired in this way. is also spreading to various fields for
civilian use. The quality control technique used for the production of air-
craft is also utilized effectively in the automobile and nuclear energy
industries. The air dynamics technelOgy is applied for the designing of
bridges and high-rise buildings. The brakes used on the new super-express
trains and turbo-engines for automobiles were also born from aircraft
technology. However, even more than that, the merit of "what we can learn

from the way of thinking and the way of approach" (Managing Director SASAKI)
is emphasized.

Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries, which started with the development
of jet-engines in 1953 and grew up to become the biggest engine manufacturer
in our country, also says that "the JDA's research and development expenditures
were indispensable for improving technology to the present level" (Vice Chief
of the Aeronautics and Space Project headquarters Masami HAMANAKA). The most
advanced processing technology is needed for the development of jet-engines,
and HAMANAKA emphasizes the big spread effects to goods for civilian use,
saying that "this processing technology can also be used effectively in
shipbuilding, plants and nuclear energy."

Foundation of "Electronics" Is Technology of Private Sector

However, the aircraft industry is the representative industry which
"ban-fitted" from the JDA's research and development expenditures. As for
electric machinery and electronics industry, there are far more cases where
technology developed by the private sector, centering on the development of
semi-conductors and manufacturing technology, is adapted for defense equip-
ment, even though there are expectations on the transfer of technology from
the wilitary to private sector in some parts of large-scale software,
represented by BADCII-X. The fact that "Japan's defense technology is
propped up by the electronics technology of the private sector" is an

awareness held not only by the JDA alone, but shared comonly by all persons
connected with the defense industry.

51
ron omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Jim has made hardly any investments in electronics research and
development. This technology was developed and improved by the private
enterprises' own independent efforts and by projects for the development
of technology for civilian use, centering on HITI. In this respect, too,
it shows a sharp contrast to the aircraft industry, which is largely
dependent on the JDA's research and development budget. In the industry
circles concerned, it is often pointed out that "Japan's electronics
technology has come to rank first in the world because it made good use
of the vitality of the private sector, without relying on defense" (MITI
Industrial Science and Technology Institute Technology Research Division
Director Norikazu HATSUDA). There are also some persons who say that
"military technology only gives thought to performance and does not give
thought to cost and productivity, and for this reason, the minus factor
is bigger, when viewed economically" (EPA Adviser Isamu MIYAZAKI).

In connection with the US VHSIC project, Tokyo Shibaura Electrics
:resident Shoichi SARA says as follows: "In the case of developing semi-
conductors in our country, such a form as the VLSI development project,
which was pushed at the initiative of MITI, is far more effective.“ This
is because, "in the case of military technology, it is important to develop
technology secretly and ahead of other cOuntries, and it takes time for the
technology to spread tv civilian use" (SEKIHOTO).

However, it goes without saying that the industrial circles are
interezted in research and development expenditures. which can be obtained.
free of charge, even though the technology spread effects are small. One
also hears their real View, at times, that "it is better to have (the JDA's
aid in development expenses) than not have it" (a top leader of a big
electric r.a:iu'nery manufacturer), The industry circles are raising their
voice in a chorus. calling for "an increase in the JDA's research and

development budget." However, reflecting the situation in the industry
circles concerned, what they aim at is not the same.

[2 Oct 81 pp 3, 4]

[Text]
Po:e:~.:i-;i:v of JazicJ's Defense Indusczir (Part 6) -- Hill Become Influential
———_——— _——_________E

Z: ;' ., If Sen 1:. ENC-:“IS Is Lifted
—_—.___———_—_

 

-- Tanks and Ship: Are of Highes: Quality; 03 is Also highly
Svaiaating Electronics-Related Technology --
":5- :he ban or. weapons exports is Lifted, we think that we will not
be beaten by the US and European nations in regard to ground equipment
and Ré'lol saips and other vessels, apart from aircraft. Of course, it
will give rise to tremendous friction over the markets of the developing
nations." -- Chairman Rankichi TATENO (Japan Steel Works President) of the
Japan lieapons Industry Association views that if eur country's defense
industr were to launch into exports in full earnest, it will be able to
congete fully well, even in the world's weapons market.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our country's enterprises have shown to the world the excellence of
their mass-production technology, through the exports of automobiles and
electronic products. Today, their potentiality even in the field of defense
equipment is coming to he recognized. A person in charge of defense produc-
tion of a certain electric machine manufacturing firm confidentially disclosed
as follows: “We are now coming to receive offers of concrete business nego-
tiations in regard to defense equipment from high-ranking officials of several
nations in Japan. Furthermore, these offers are made after they conduct
detailed checks into the contents in advance."

US Reguests for Technology and Joint Develoment

Recently, US military-connected persons are calling.on our country's
industrial circles, especially on electronic and electric machine manufacturers,
one after another. A JDA official in charge of technology revealed that
"perhaps, it may Le that the US Forces know the real ability of our country's
defense-related enterprises more than we do." A JDA official concerned, who
accompanied former US Under Secretary of Defense PERRY, as 'guide, when he
visited our countr', 's enterprises. including Fujitsu, last year, 3130 admits that
he was Surprised at the high level of production technology.

The US House Armed. Services Committee drew up a report concerning the
foundation of defense industries, toward the end of last year. It brings
to the surface the State of the "ailing US defense industry," such as that
(1) it lacks the capability for mass production, in times of emergency, (2)
the delay in the time of delivery is conspicuous, (3) the shortage of skilled
workers will continue for another ten years, (u) the degree of dependence on
other countries for some components of equipment and for raw materials is
rising, and (5) the rise in productivity is slow. Voices expressing anxiety
as to "whether it is possible to maintain our position as a first-rate
military pcwer, standing on the basis of a second-rate industry or not"
(statement by a military leader at the said Connittee seating) are spreading.

This US made requests to our country, seeking our country's offering
of military technology to the US and joint development, at the Japan-US
administrative-level consultations on security in June and on other occasions.
JDA Equipment Bureau Director General Yutaka HAM, who visited the US around
the middle of September and held talks with US Under Secretary of Defense
DELAUER or. Japan-US co-operation on military technology, says that "the US
highly evaluates our country's electronics and photo-fiber technology."

Can Even Mane inroads into the ‘a'orld tiarket in Two or Three Years

     

Sven :heugh call-e5 co-oyeration in military technology, it seems that
it will sewer on the offering :' general-use technology, such as IC's,
which are used in missile guidance equipment and robots which are used in-
the sectors manufacturing varicus types of weapons, for the time being.
Equipment Bureau Director General HADA transmitted to the US side, in regard
to this kin: of technology possessed by private enterprises, that “general-
use technology. which :5: '11 used for both civilian goods and for military
goods, car. he suppliei '3. the US, without being restriCted by the Three
Principles Cc-icez‘niuu imagine Ext-0N9." 7-" views are ﬁnally co-orrlluated

5 3
non omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within Celernmcnt circles, it seems tr at exprnsion of the exports of "weapons
which are not weapons," such as radar and :ocmunications systems, «ill be
realized in the future, without bei :13 limited to tec.nology alone.

Since our country's production of defense e; uipmsnt is suppo rtea by its
high industrial level, which is even envied by the “S, including electronic.
it is only natural that defense equipment in fields where this high industrial
level can be fully utilized will approach the foremost level. The air-to-
ShiF ASK-l missile is one such example. not a few persons connected with the
defense industry hold the v -ew that, if the ban on weapons exports were to
be lifted, "it will become possibn to secure full-scale access into the
world market, if there is a two or three-year preparation period."

.or example, there is the case of tanks. "There are only about six
countries, including the US, the Soviet Union and Rest Germany, which can
domestically manufacture full- -fledged tanks“ (650?). However, our country
has constantly developed first-rate tanks, such as the 74-Model tank.

From fiscal 1982, it will start full-scale development of the Hodel- 88
tank, aiming at their completion six years in the future. This Model-88
tank will be equipped witha 120- -:m gun, and a 1,500 hP engine, which is
twice as powerful as that used in the Model- 7w tank. It will aim at the
develc pment of a tank which is of the highest level in the world in the
1980's. Even the Model-7H tank co-t .bines together electronics technology
for Such equipment as the computer for the calculation of the trajectory.
ﬁt the time of its completion, it attracted the attenldon of US military
personnel concerned. what will happen if Japan's defense industry were to
take the same export strategy as it takes for general products for civilian
use, such as to conduct thoroughgoing market research in various nations
and were to carry out improvements?

Even in the aircraft field, too, it is steadily acquiring real strength
in t..e small-size passenger plane field, as can be seen by the fact that
orders for the ”0- 300 business-jet, which was developed by Mitsubishi Heavy
.ndustries. exceeded 120 planes, even before it obtained a type certificate
(TC). Mitsubishi heavy Industries also calculates, in regard to its T2
advanced trainers, that "if we could produce 1,000 planes, we could lower
tn~ production cosr by about no percent, compared with the time of pro-
ducing only 100 planes.‘ If that is true, it will acquire export competitive
pow.r, too. in regard to HTX (next-term medium-level trainer), which is
being developed, with Kawasaki Heavy Industries as the main contractor, too,
there is appearing the self-confidence that "the performance demanded by
the Jon is high to begin with, and if we succeed in the development of its

engine, it will become an outstanding product, even in the world" (Standing
Director of Kawasaki Heavy Industries Teruaki YAHADA).

Cautious Arguments about Exports Prevail, at Present Time

However, the actual situation, at the present time, is that, even if they
were training planes, "the Government will say 'no,' if we were to propose
exports :f those which we deliver to the Joe" (Kawasaki heavy Industries

5!:
roe omcm. use ONLY
90R OFTHCJAL USELCMHLY

Board Chairman Zenfi UHEDA). The Heapons Industry Association deletEd—the
item "weapons exports" from its by-laws, aiming at the promotion of the
defense industry, at its general meeting toward the end of May. This was
for the :urpose of showing, both within and outside the country, that "we
are not thinking of weapons exports, in any way at all" (Chairman TATENO).

"In regard to shipbuilding, for example, there is already the problem
of trade friction, and there is no need to venture even into the exports of
escort ships" (Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries President Taiji UBUKATA),
and this kind of cautious view is the prevailing trend. -

At the same time, Keidanren's Defense Production Committee confirmed
that ”we will.give due co-operation toward the US request for co-operation
in military technology," at a meeting on the Standing Directors' level, held
in early September. Depending on the talks at the Government level between
Japan and the US, there is a possibility of its "developing" into joint
research and joint development of defense equipment, in the future, going
beyond the simple offering of technology. Occasioned by co-operation with

the US, the time may come. unexpectedly quickly, for our country's defense
indus:ry to ioin the world's weapons marketin an indirect form.

[3 Oct 81 pp 5. 6]

[Text]

Potentiality of Japan's Defense .Industgz (Part 7 '- Conclusion) -- Problems
for Stable Growth

-- Growth of 10 Percent Is Certain, But Equipment Plan, Which Has
the People's Consensus, Is Needed --

"Until about ten years ago, the top-grade technical engineers of our
company openly showed distaste, if we were to propose to them that they
join the defense sector. Today, however, there are not a few persons
who volunteer from their side, in a positive way." -- So saying, the chief
of the defense production department of a certain all-round electric
machine manufacturer emphasized the big change in the awareness of the
technical engineers of his company.

Hitachi Horks set up its Defense Technology Promotion Headquarters,
and electronics and electric machine manufacturers openly put up "defense"
signboards. In the past, there was even an all-round electric machine
manufacturer who was nervous about its becoming known that it was involved
in defense equipment, saying that "it may even affect the sales of household
a;pliances." Today, however, these manufacturers advertise the defense
production technology which their companies have, in a positive way.

55
roe omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One Percent of the GNP 1s a Matter of Time

 

One reason for this change in awareness lies in the point that the
merits in the technology field, such as that "research and development can
be carried out in the field of advance technology, disregarding costs, to
some extent" (leader of an electric machine manufacturing company) have come
to be recognized. However, the main reason, after all, lies in the point '
that the expansion of the market for the defense industry can now be expected.

In the defense budget for fiscal 1981, which amounts to 2.u trillion
yen, capital expenditures, including equipment expenses and research and
development expenses, which directly affect the "market" for the defense
industry, amounted to 670.5 billion yen. Defense expenditures in fiscal
1981 accounted for 0.91 pocrcent of the GNP. However, if a budget amounting
to "exactly one percent of the GNP" were to be realized, there will be an
increase of 2&8 billion yen. Personnel’costs will not increase so greatly,
and therefore, if this increased amount were to be added to the capital
expenditures, capital expenditures would exceed 860 billion yen.

These are calculations, based on a hypothesis, to the last. However,
if thought is given to the fact that payments to be made in later years,
from fiscal 1983 and after, will amount to as much as 2,260 billion yen,
as a result of placing orders for a large number of next-term mainstay
F-ES fighters, with the defense budget for fiscal 1982, it is only a matter
of time for the defense budget to reach the maximum level of one percent of
the GNP. Under the 1981 Medium-Term Operations Estimate (from fiscal 1983
to fiscal 1987), which the JDA is slated to formulate next spring, there is
even the possibility Of the defense budget exceeding this framework.

{rang the basic frameworks for our country's defense policy, such as
exclusive adherence to defense, the Three Non-Nuclear Principles, etc.,
this argument for one percent of the GNP has the biggest possibility of
being "revised,“ to begin with. There are even examples of Government
leaders saying in the Diet to the effect that this is not necessarily on
the same level as other basic policies.

Even if the principle of one percent is not changed, the defense budget

can expect a rate of growth which would generally be about the same as the
growth rate of the nominal GNP, which is viewed to be around lo percent.

The JDA's policy is to promote the autonomous development of equipment, and
to raise the percentage of domestic production, even in the case of licensed

production. Therefore, the "market" for our country's defense industry is
certain to grow at a rate which will far exceed 10 percent.

Speed of Becoming Out-Dated Is Fastland Outcome Hill Be Determined by
Comprehensive Capability

Our country's defense industry "has reached the technological level
which can compete with the US, in fields which are needed to meet the
country's requirements for exclusive adherence to defense" (Nippon Electric
President Tadahiro SEKIHOTO). However, if autonomously developed equipment

56
ron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFF-“1“. USE ONLY

is pushed, competition within the defense industry itself over the develop-
ment and production of equipment will become fiercer. To begin with, this
is an industry which has the special nature where "the pace of technological
renovation is fast. and by the time an introduction plan is completed, that
equipment itself may even become out-dated" (Kawasaki Heavy Industries Board
Chairman Zenji UHEDA). for this very reason, the outcome will be determined

by the comprehensive capability, including technical engineers, facilities,
funds, etc.

Furthermore, it takes a long time to develop defense equipment. Tokyo
Shibaura Electric's short SAH's have entered the stage of mass-production
from this year. However, it took as long as 12 years, from the time it first
started its development officially. Of course. a large part of the develop-

ment expenses was shouldered by the JDA, but it is said that the expenses
shouldered by Toshiba itself were far from small.

Even though defense demand will increase steadily, when viewed from a
medium- or long-range standpoint, it is unavoidable that, when limited to
the next several years. the burden of these development investments will
increase at a rate exceeding that for the increase in orders. Furthermore,
the actual fact is also that, different from investments in civilian demand
sectors, it takes time to recover the investments. Except in the case of .
some specific enterprises, the ratio accounted for by defense orders in
the total sales amount was extremely small, up until now, and it was possible
to take the position that the diverting of able personnel and funds to the
defense sector was the paying of tuition. '

Even if an enterprise were to succeed in development, there is no
guarantee that it will be able to obtain as many orders for it, as had been

expected by the enterprise. If there,were to develop such a situation as a
large-scale slashing of defense expenditures, due to changes in the inter-
national situation, the management of an enterprise, as a whole, may even
come to be affected. in the case of its relying heavily on defense. In the
past, there was the case of equipment expenditures being slashed, toward the
end of the nth Defense Power Consolidation Plan (from fiscal 1972 to fiscal
1976), and there was seen a slight decrease. At that time, Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries, for example, "managed to tide over the situation by re-assigning

surplus personnel to other sectors" (Advisor Gakuji HORIYA). However, will
this kind of measui. :: applicable, in the future, too?

No Assurance of Stable Demand

 

It is said that, as a part of President RBAGAN's plan for the slashing
of the national defnnse budget, the cancellation of orders for eight KC-lO's,
which are mid-air refueling plane, which can also serve as cargo transport
planes, produced by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, is being planned. As
a side-effect of this, there is appearing the anxiety as to whether the pro-
duction of DC-lO's, which are planes for civilian use and which are of the
same type as the KC-lO's, can be continued or not. This fact can be said to
be showing that the stable nature of demand, which is said to be the merit of
defense production, is not necessarily absolute.

57
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when the scsle of an industry becomes big, it is the logic of industry
to seek demand, which will be sufficient to fill its "stomach." When the

weight of "defense" within an industry or in an enterprise rises, the defense
industry itself, instead of the US, may come to press for the "strengthening
of defense power," or show moves for seeking a way out through exports.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizsi Shiubunshs 1981

C80: 6106/15 END

58
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY