APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100010013-5
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010013-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE (IILY

JPRS L/OZOG
5 January 1979

TRANSLATIINS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT MUCATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE MLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010013-5
NOTE

JPRS publicationa contain information primarily fro. foreign
newapapera. periodicala and booka. but alao from newa agency
tranaoiaaiona and broadcaata. Hateriela fro. foreign-language
aourcea are tranalated; thoae from Bngliah-language aourtea
are tranacribed or reprinted. with the original phreaing and
other characteriatica retained.

lleadlinea. editorial reporta. and material encloaed in bracketa
[] are aupplied by JPRS. Proceaaing indicatora auch aa [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the firat line of each 12..., or following the
laat line of a brief. indicate how the original information waa
proeeaaed. Where no proceaaing indicator ia given, the infor-
nation waa aualaarized or extracted.

Unfuiliar nanea rendered phonetically or tranaliterated are
encloaed in parentheaea. Uorda or nauea preceded by a quea-
tion oath and encloaed in parenthaaea were not clear in the
original but have been aupplied aa appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notea within the body of an
itel originate with the aource. Tiuea within itela are aa
given by aource.

The contenta of thia publication in no way repreaent the poli-
ciea, viewa or ettitudea of the 0.5. Government.

COPYING” “US AND REGULM'IONS MINING owmsmr 0?
MATERIALS "PRODUCED HEREIN mums 11M! DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIW 3! RESTRICTED MUFFICIAL USE ONLY.
you «a

5 Janna 197'

—_-
man ”as LI 8206
" ti

TWSMTIONS 0N JAPAN , (P000 1/79)

__
Ne.

vole. One-antic. Naoe no Mateo. ' Helen/1' act/Veal Unit No.

Joint Publications Research Service ,
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

Ia. tweed“. Ola-ammo Nan and Mann

    

     

  
  

 

       
      
 
   
  

Ae above

   

emcee

   

The report containa pron and radio coverage on political. econo-ic. unitary.
eociolosical. ecicntific and technological devolopnento.

  
 

  

Political and Sociological
Hilitary
mono-i:
Science end homology

    
    
 

m “cumin/Ono!“ fem

 
    
 

lh- C0011 "WC-n SC. 50. SK. 150. 160. 181. 19?. 223
' vei on“, Smeoeet '
for official the Only.
Limited Number of Copice Available Ron JPlis. '

IN.“ “O D

  
   
      

0K0.“ econ-v I 0
tun ottiUiAL USS ONLY

JPRs 3/9206
5 January 19 79

TRANSLATIONS ON JAPAN

(r000 1/79)
Courturs

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

Pukuda Pnction Needs New Candidate for Prenierahip
(Takehoko Takahaahi: HAINICHI DAILY "89$, 16 Dec 78) ....

'SHUKAN satncao' Chidee Boone-iota for Their Paeeive Role
(SIIUKAN SIIINCHO. 26 Nov 78) .............................

Ohira the Lent of ‘Yoehida Family Offapring' in LDP
(“Inlmt DAILY "as. 9°.c 78) 000.00.00.0000.06.0000...

tcoumm

Japanese Government Stepa Up Aid to Africa
(NIHON Kenn! satnwn, 6 Oct 78)

SCIENCE AND mm

Hhite Paper on Science Placee More Height on Government Role
(mum: KOOYO salmon. 28 Oct 78).

Technology Transfer Center To Be Zetabliehed
(Editorial; NIKKAN KOGYO sutunuu, 31 0c: 78) ............

Problene in Foreign Patent Applications Baa-ined
(DNA SHINBUN. 1 "0V ’8) eaeeeaeeeeaeeeeeeeaeeoeeeeeee-e

Net Cutting Tine 80 Percent for Unmanned Machine Tool
(RIM KOGYO SBIIBUN, 25 Oct 78) .......................

Intelligent Unnanned NC Lathe; Self-Diagnosis. Autorecovery
(HIM KOGYO samwu. 27 Oct 78) .......................

Patty Pooda Reduce Rink of Cerebral Apoplexy
(MATRICHI DAILY RIBS. 15 Dec 78) ........................

Briefa
Satellite Launchingn

Past

11

13
19
21
25

27

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SGCIOLOGICAL

l-‘UKUOA [MOTION NEEDS NP}! CANDIQATE FOR PREMIERSHIP

Tokyo MAINICIII DAILY was in English ‘6 Dec 78 p lo

[Nngntncho Doings Colulm by Tnkchoko Toknhaohi: "Moneuvering To Build
Up New 3099"]

[Text]

The was goal at a
Liberal-Democratic Pony
{action Is to have I: has on
we: the rah: oi Wo-

MIIWMMMW

m 3! MI. even
one l': W Ina:
the him III!
who ”In N million"
with nut-on
[mummIoNve
mm One m In
muwmuma
Immumuw
tmalouwlllcalcm.
ummmmm
Mulwmuﬂeuumhhh
Inﬂuence as Don I:
probleanuul. In the
WWW!“
MWWMMI.
Kmumdumuthe
LOP pulley malls march
Mus .
Fmﬂy am a h-
wummwry.
mum-mum
M at the witty
malnmchomluol

”lulu In the out;
mm “In. M:
m Its-c “Nit
Know also in My
ma! lunch! nuts.
Undeﬁned-mambo
y «his at II. III

“R
MWOWID

i

E

2
i

W

E

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0

FUN UVVICIAL USE ONLY

whose tupohsthlltty was

Poeelgn tlthlstet Suneo
Suede. the only minister
canted ever (an the We
Cabinet. «ammo»
election and this h enhanced
to have been one reason why
rum. lost to Ohm tn
Kumauete Prelectnro
(Swan'smumyb.

It I: that heated

«MWL
Ame; tho-e vho have cw
tend the cabinet thb the.
mum
um NW Shtnhm
and State tllhtster Shim
Nakmtdtmtwmmhe
Namath-hammmuhh
their 10:. In. a m a the
WW ts war.
to “More“: a

WHMWW

tended m the whim
uetetery general.
smitten Aha who am

mummamuui

u the tecttoo't has: as rapid!
«Manitoulin»
Mote eeudtdete (or the

IQ

MINICIII DAILY NEUS. 1978

2

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
_POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL m socmwcxwl

'SHUKAN SHINCID' CIIIDES mm FOR MIR PASSIVE ”LE
'roltyo SRUKAN 3mm in Japanese 26 Nov 78 pp 36-100
[Articlez "Abilities of Our 'Econonists' Displaced by Galbraith illirlvind"]

[Text] A Galbraith uhirlwind, indeed. mis tine, he
has cone to Japan with the catchphrase, "‘ro surmount
the era of uncertainty." As if in hot pursuit, hernan
Kahn also arrived with the slogan, "Japan nevertheless
will grow." If the fort-er can be co-pared to a sane-
vhat concerned knight of the roundtable, the latter is
a genial, hyperbolical Arabian sorcerer. Hhat are our
capable, influential acononists doing said this once-
lar boon fro. abroad? On second thought, do such
scholars exist?

Prof Sadaichi chikaraishi of Hosei University, who considers hinself a
minority, influential economist of Japan, co-ented, ”Whenever I visit
outlying regions to give lectures, posters appear, reading, 'chikaraishi
is coning.’ lt rese-bles the emotion over Galbraith and Ber-an Kahn.
Japanese are country folks in that respect. In short, it is tents-cunt
to Japanese lacking a 'Geleatial concept' and having a high regard for
imports. And their acadenic theories and contentions do not necessarily
influence Japan's econo-ic policy."

But is it so? No one believes that contentions of Hessra Galbraith and
Kahn will have a direct impact on Japan's econonic policy. Likewise, the
academic theories of Japan's econonists, including Mr Oiikaraishi, have
failed to DOV. Japan. But it is a fact that the acad-ic theories of
Messrs Galbraith and Kahn have had a considerable impact on scholars con-
aidered to be the brains of the ruling Liberal-Mocratic Party. thus,
we la-ent and at the same tine are astonished at the night of the concept
introduced from abroad.

‘mo scholars have wielded a considerable influence over the LDP since the
days of the Ikeda Cabinet. One is Osau shine-are, nov a critic on eco-
nonic affairs, and the other is liiseo Kan-ori, chief director of the Japan
Econasic Research Center.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Both were economists who espoused the Ikeda Cabinet's "income doubling
theory" and growth above everything else, as if they were pro-inflation-

ists. Today, however, diverse theoretical views separate these two former
growrh proponents. '

Hr Shimomura has become a rather pessimistic, low growth advocate and is
currently actively promoting the controversial "general consueption tax."
Hr Kanemori. on the other hand, leans toward a "rose-colored growth theory ,"
optimistically advocating lower taxes, issuance of additional red ink
national bonds and greater public investments.

The split between these two men attests to the arrival of an ”era of un-

certainty" as described by Mr Galbraith. Obviously, Hr Kenmori has been
possessed by Hr Hernan Kahn.

Mr Kahn is a recent visitor to Japan, uttering magical words to the effect
that "Japan nevertheless will grow."

Previously, he pleased the late Prime Minister Sato with his remarks that
"the 21st century will be Japan's,” and now he again demonstrates the
magic of pleasant remarks.

Although Prime Minister Pukuda was assailed in the Diet for "promising to
the world an economic growth of 7 percent, considered unachievable," Hr
Kahn, stroking his beard, calmly stated that "Japan can achieve about a
12 percent growth, rather than 7 percent." A cautious probe of the sub-
stance of such a fervent oracle proved to be even were astonishing.

Briefly, a new, small city will be developed throughout the Japanese archi-
pelago, characterised by a consumption culture like those of major cities.

In other words, through an unlimited internal development, Japan will cer-
tainly undergo growth, he explains.

Hr Kanamori concurs with Mr Kahn's growth theory. At a council meeting
held on 10 October in the presence of Mr Galbraith. he expounded on a
growth theory similar to Kahn's.

Needless to say. he was instantly rebutted by Mr Galbraith:

"I wish to say to Mr Ksnamori that growth alone is futile. Pursuit of
growth only would precipitate an anti-growth move. Consideration should
be given to the issue of zero growth previously advocated by the Rome club.
(Note: An international organ on issues of huenity established in 1968
by Orerio Bettchui, an Italian businessman. Japanese scholars are par-
ticipants. In 1972, it issued an appeal on the noted "limits of growth")

"Stress on growth does not mean we can afford to lose the beauty of rural
life...the limits of growth must be considered."

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Covernment 8ervice Scholars Attending Council Meetings

It must be said in defense of Dir Galbraith that he definitely is not a
proponent of zero growth. According to him, today's economy differs from
the previous era. For example, supply and demand in the market is not
necessarily created by price competition. And there is no assurance it
would be. Consequently, recessioa does not read like a school textbook,
and growth, obviously, must be achieved to surmount it. But a tempo such
as observed in the past cannot be anticipated. It is the thinking along
these lines that overlaps that of Mr Ossmu shimomura's. Although Mr
Chiltaraishi stated previously that "Galbraith and Kahn represented the
international version of Shimomura and Kanamori,""in our eyes, Shimomura
and Kanamori are the Japanese version of Galbraith and Kahn. Both Messrs
Shimomura and Kanamori merely vividly reflect the pessimism and optimism
of Japan's political and financial circles in the Galbraith and Kahn style
of thinking, and it is virtually inconceivable for either to have a deci-

aiva role in Japan's economic policy. why is this? A certain goverrment
economist explained:

"In Japan. a very strong bureaucratic structure exists, with a collection
of fairly outstanding human resources. And because of Japan's unique
slivered society wherein no personnel interchange exists among academic,
bureaucratic, political and economic quarters, there actually is no room
for scholars in the economic policy formulating bureaucratic quarter. Even
when contacted for their views. Japan‘s scholars do not possess any infor-
mation or data. In such a situation, it is inconceivable in Japan for

scholars to play a role in policy formulation. Ultimately, goveruent
officials are the ones who asst-e such a role."

Incidentally, both Shimomura and Kanamori ‘are former goverment officials
and are not true scholars. For this reason. they do wield some influence
over political and bureaucratic quarters, but do not play any major role.
But what are other true scholars doing?

Scholars of some fame do take part in government council meetings as mem-
bers and are in a position to influence Japan's economic policy. But a
revelation of true conditions makes one despair. Said the s-e goverment
economist: "Prominent scholars may participate in goverment council meet-
inga, but they are virtually ignorant of the practical side of economics.
No matter how wise, they cannot have their say in economic policy unless
they are f-iliar with the practical aspects. Their purpose in attending
council meetings is to obtain information and data belonging to goveruent

agencies. They use such information and data in their own researches,
lectures and writings.

"Normally, data are gathered and submitted to council meetings by govern-
ment officials who also prepare the draft, include the opinions of scholars,
and make some changes. In reality, that is just a formality, for the ab-
sence of scholars has no impact on Japan's economic policy."

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂow disgraceful. Rather than being in a position to influence economic
policy, the scholars themselves thv difficulty in keeping up with the
times. They represent thv ordinary gOVernmcnt service scholars. According
to Prof Chiaki Niahiynmn of Rikkyo University, one-half of such scholars
are Marxist economists.

"Marxist economists have deviated from realities and long criticized the
structure, while scholars of modern economy have taken shelter in the
world of pure theory to avoid criticisms by remaining silent on realities."

Since both are extremely remote from realities, they are unable to speak

out on the living economy which confronts them. Their creativity, also,
does not function.

"Indebted to the United States for Growth"

The Marxist economists enjoy the support of the press and magazines in
general.

A person remarked that "two-thirds of economic editorials in newspapers

are by Marxist economists." Hhile the accuracy of such a statement is un-
known, it is probably true that Marxist economists in opposition to author-
ity and structure are engaged in writing difficult, abstract theories to

please a small segment of citizen power, new leftists, opposition parties
and labor unions.

The subject of Marxist economists brings to our mind the case of Tokyo
Governor Minobe, Kanagawa Prefectural Governor Magasu and Osaka Governor
Kuroda, all of whom were against the structure. Mowcver, they all suffered
setbacks in the actual economy called local government. To them, economy
represents a hatred of major enterprises and widespread allocation of the

welfare budget. we do not mean that major enterprises are invariably right
and that welfare is wrong. Says Mr Galbraith:

"The development of capitalistic industry (condensed) is not what Marx
envisioned. Enterprises deprived capitalists of power and gave it to its
own organization or bureaucracy-~which I call technostructure (Note: A
decision-making organisation of technicians' groups with knowledge, ability
and experience). Partly for that reason, confrontation with labor was not
so serious as Marx had thought. Also, labor unions did not become so revo-
lutionary. And labor unions and the welfare state shed the roughness of

capitalism beyond Marx's imagination." ("Introduction to Modern Economy,"
published by 138 Britannica)

Now, capitalism itself is paving the way for some type of socialism for
preservation of freedom and social order, eliminating the need for any
thinking within the anti-structural concept.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMLY
mu nmcw. use num ‘

Nevertheless, it is indeed surprising‘ that Japan's economists have so far
failed to contribute to the state and to the people for preservation of
freedom and social order.

For example, in the United States, there are Nobel prize winners such as
Friedman and Samuelson who influenced that country's economic policy,
while in the West German gayernment, there. exists a “Five wise Men's Com-
mittee" composed of five outstanding economists.

Last year, the United States proposed, in view of global economic reces-
sion and imbalances, that Japan, the United States and Germany assume the
role of a locomot'vv. But the West German government. at the insistence

of its "MW "in: Men's Coamittce" and five private economic research in-
stitutes in Berlin, Munich, Kiel, hamburg and Bonn opposed the proposal,
preferring instead to focus on its own nation's price stabilization and
anti-inflationary measures. The power exercised by scholars is unimaginable
in Japan.

But how did Japan, without any outstanding scholars with leadership, achieve
a postwar economic growth which amazed the world?

"We owe that to efforts of each individual, Japan's bureaucratic structure
fostered since the Meiji period, and capable government officials," said

a veteran member of the Ministry of Finance. proudly. The statement
stemed from a sense of self-conceit. Opposing views were made by a former
diplomat:

"while it is true that there are no capable scholars, it probably is a lie
that we are indebted to government agencies and outstanding government
officials for Japan's postwar growth.

"Precisely speaking, it is due to 0.8. aid. It lent us funds, taught us
technology and offered us vast markets. It was an ellout service. Govern-
ment officials merely made available such services to the public. Subse-
quently, they yielded to the pressures of politicians, labor unions, agri-
cultural organizations and medical associations and, while with a straight
face, they continued their illogical, contradictory economic policy until
today.

"l-‘orlunately, through the efforts of private enterprises, the nation pros-
pered and along with it the policy, while containing cantradictions, was
implemented. As a result, wages were boosted and welfare assumed the shape
of that of a major country. But now, the inefficiency of those goverment
officials who bowed to pressures of politicians and lobbying organizations
has begun to show up as a major blunder. The pressures of agriculture,
especially on the rice issue, the National Railway deficit, and finance...
the stupidity of constructing three connecting bridges between llonshu and
Shikoku at a time of financial deficit can be attributed to government

officials bending under pressure. Who is going to assume responsibility
for it now?"

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An Enterprise Can Be Compared to a Nation

Said a certain bank executive:

‘”niat the government officials are the motive force behind Japan's growth
is a joke. It is a fact that America furnished aid. but in the E1081
analysis, it was the enterprises. Vith many °“PI°Y°°9 0“ the Payt°llt
enterprises must somehow carry on. Mr Galbraith P°1ht5 th19 out. BUt
many Japanese industries deprived capitalists of power shortly after the
war and established a technostructure. In °th°t "°td'» they gathered
human resources, decided on the directiOn of business prudently but boldly,
and established a cooperativo setup with labor unions. Without relyihs
on the state, enterprises themselves became involved in helPihs the "90k
and administering public welfare. Through their 0'0 survey ‘hd t°0¢|t¢h
organs, they were able to study the domestic as well as world econonic
trend. In short, an enterprise can be couplred ‘0 a State. with its own
'sehoiars' for policy formulation.

"Thus, there is no need to listen to what JaP‘ml' oconanic scholars h'V'

to say; time would be better spent in hearing the academic theories of
Messrs Galbraith and Kahn. Also, government officials have been aPP°1nted

to other positions by favoritism as required. The POV°Y 0‘ GhtOFPti'GI 1'
the motive force behind the growth."

It is true that Japan's enterprises, without lendins an 90? t0 "IGCtute'"
'of Japan's scholars, are looking for a way. throush t°°hh°5ttu¢tutet t°
sustain the growth or status quo. Even small and medium size ceramic
dealers in the export field having suffered a heavy h1°9 tt°¢ the hish
yen do not go into bankruptcy so easily. Th1! 18 58°."12 8 Imlll number
of technostructures had collected their "it! to overcame the crisis by
coming forth with a program of rationalization and development of a new
domestic market. Said Hr Akio Watanabe, owner Of Haruhachi Hatanabe
Pottery works of Tajimi, Oifu Prefecture; emphatically:

"Rather than listen to irresponsible scholars. I prefer t° he't '06 10!?“
from Mr Konoauke Matsushita of Natsushita and Mr Eiji Toyota of Toyota.
They do not make mistakes. With several tens of thousands of employees,
their responsibilities are heavier in certain respects than those of the
prime minister. The task remaining is to scrutinize indePendentlY and
rffectivvly the trend of the world econOIy as its effects Japan."

in short. Japan's scholars are virtually isolated. Will this do?

In View of such a situation, it is hoped that. rather than as researchers.
they serve as capable instructors of students. This could be more important.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Shinchosha 1978

9097
080: 4105

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm (H'PICIAI. "23h UNLV

POLITICAL AND SOCIUIAXPICAL

OIIIRA TIIB LAST 0!" 'YOSIIIDA mgm OFFSPRING' IN LDP
Tokyn MINICIII DAILY rams In English 9 Dec 78 p 1

[Article by "l'ollticnl Comentntorz" "Ohm Facing llard The. in Future?"]

In". mmmmwm
mummuumm. ‘33:?“'m‘”’

cm Met amid
“mm” m: Imwrmwnwma
cmmmmnyu ameuh
the mlywud 0th “MWDWMW
cabinet was created In M M

M: [action my beam aunt.
01mm [mmww This m b.
mulm'mthwl'nd whet m and less

lama cp- the mullet! “mama
It. W" m
mandamus-mu. m Wu and m.

5
z
E
E
E
i

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR m-‘PIC I M.

tuttmltsttc.
A typlul amok II m In

"much; Japanese Cone
ammmmmtmme
scalemeathmn.
This “mum” policy has
ban the root 0!
withln the LDP In It: patty.
mmthtMmue
mely while u had a um
km on tho but: 0‘ I
untenable unity tn the
Nattmmtet.

Uncut-us

‘I'M nnttonalltt (or
mdttlonal) conututltta.
homechavcmtokdthe
"mum-tummy”
and at having the who come
under the Inﬂuence 01
man MIC unto.
11th me at m B In
the mum at the m

MlNlCﬂl DAILY NEUS. 1978

10

"Si-2 ONLY

.Iudo by smut: 1.0? m-
bcn to check oum':
dalmatian a with. manta
httIeDIet.

Under the» drum
cum w“ b dther to
yield to men I m nut to

mummhma

wtummummu
mhuuuctalmtot
chotu. ”may to our
mmmmmwm
Imustttlmtoumwty
mum-mama.
WWW.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

soomc .

JAPANESE (13W STEPS II? All) T0 AFRICA
Tokyo much KBIZAI 8!!!me in Jepeneee 6 Oct 78 p 2

[Text] Ae an integral part of ite unidirectional foreign econoaic policy.
the governnent hee decided to etep up aid to Africe. to which thie country
had not until recently aade a good ehowing. The govern-eat ie therefore
diepetching ”an econoaic cooperation inepection teen." comeed of foreign
aid epecieliete priurily free the Foreign Hinietry end International Co-
operation Agency. to eight Africen countriee including Niger end Burmdi
eterting late thie nonth. The inepection teen will epend epproxieately 2
weeke inveetigating underground water developaant. end conetruction plene
for hoepitale and echoole. end will diecuee how econoaic grante end techno-
logical cooperetion cen be arranged with the perepective govern-cote.
putting thie plan into practice. the goel ie to double 00A (Official De-
velopnent Aaeietence) in 3 yeere. end increeee recipiente of Japaneee eid--
which had tended to concentrate in Ania-win Africa. It in eeid that thie
ie the firet tine the govern-eat hae eent an inepection teen to eny comtry
before renueete were eade by would-he aid recipiente.

ly extending aid to Africa. where eany countriee are late developing nationa
with leee then $100 in groee doeeetic production per pereon, the Poreip
hiniotry hopee that Jepen'e diploaatic tiea with African uetione. woee
voicee ere increeeingly heard on the international ecene including in the
UK. can be etrengthened.

Leet July. prior to the eu-it telhe of advanced netione held in Ionn. the
government announced ite plan of ”doubling the om appropriation in 3 yeare
on a dollar baeie baeed on the 1977 record." The record for laet year ahowe
that an euch ee 60 percent of the 00A went to Aeia. In light of thet record
end of Japan'e oanidirectional forein policy which ie to Iaintein friendly
reletiona with all countriee. Jepan hee decided it ie neceeeary to gradually
eid recipiente in other perte of the world an well. with reference to Africa
in particular. in light of ite growing political influence in international
effeire. Foreign Hinieter Sonode hee ehown hie intereet and hae gone eo far
no to expreee hie intention of ”vieiting Africa within thie yeer if poaeible.”

The inepection tea ia eade up of three groupe: The firet group. echeduled
to leave October 20. will vieit four countriee. liger. Upper Volte. lumdi

11
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE out!

and Rwanda; the second. scheduled to leave late next month. will visit four
countries of the Central African Republic. Benin. Tongo and Guinea. Though
the applications for sending the inspection teaas to these eight countries
yet to be officially sent as early as this week. the Yoreign Ministry feels
confident that permission will be granted through asre prior consultation.

A plan has also been made to send a third inspection teas next January. with
the details. such as recipient countries to be worked out in the near future.

Due in pert to the fact that this country's aid had been concentrated in
Asian countries close by. sending an inspection teen to a would-be recipient
country was done only after requests had been received free that country.
“hat is unique in this case is the fact that the positive step of sending

a teas before a request had been received from wouldwbe recipients. has been
taken. Very little is clearly known about Africa-~whare there are a nuaber
of newly created countries-~ss concerns dosestic situations and the types

of aid needed. The Foreign Ministry explains that. by dispatching an in-
spection tees coaposed of specialists and by fully investigating the econoadc
conditions in recipient countries. effective use of Japan's aid can be ex-
pected. In addition. the Hinistry intends to draaatically increase next-
years budget appropriation for develop-ant and research in the less-developed

nations: consequently. it is believed the number of such inspection teams
will increase in the future. .

Japan‘s track record for providing aid to Africa is poor. In FY 1977 it
alounted to only $56.25 aillion or 6.3 percent of Don. Except for a few
instances. very little eid had been given to the late developing nations of

Africa and the uses. the developing countries aost severely affected by the
oil crisis. '

 

figure
(1) Countries to which Japan is dispatching inspection teaas
(2) Upper Volta (3) Guinea
(6) Togo (S) Niger
(6) Benin (7) Central African Republic
(8) Rwanda (9) Burundi

OOPYIIGNT: Nihou Kcizai Shinbunshl. 1978

12
9171 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
080: 6105
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

SOIBNCS AND TBCIBOOLOGY ,

UNITE PAPER 0N SCIENCE PLACES MORE "RIGHT ON GOVBWBNT ROLE
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO 3mm in Japanese 28 Oct 78 p 3

[Text] Director Iiumagai of the Science and Technology Agency disclosed the
science and technology white paper for J?! 1977 at the cabinet meeting on
the 27th and received cabinet approval. This white paper, which could also
be titled “The government's increasing importance in research activities."
places emphasis on the increasing role of the goverment in research activi-
ties to resolve the energy problem. and greatly advance the living standards
of its people while paving the way for a period of low economic growth. It
disongages itself from the civilian leadership type activity of the past
and will involve the chment in increased research and dovelopent fund-
ing to emphasise promotion of basic scientific research. At the same time.
it will assure the nation of researchers of superior caliber and place
emphasis on promoting planned and efficient research and developant.

This white paper is the l6th of its kind, and it is comprised of three sec-
tions. The first section is concerned primarily with the importance of
the government’s research activities, while the second and third sections
introduce respectively the Science and Technology Agency’s activities cen-
tered on J?! 1977 and the government's policies.

The first section serves as an introduction to describe the goverrment's
role in research activities and introduces some specific examples of fruit-
ful reaearch results in various areas such as vaccines. pendqu electric
vehicles, nuerical controlled tool machinery. and electric automobiles.
Next the governments' roles in research activities in the leading countries
of the western world are compared with that of Japan, and the features of
the Japanese setup are enuerated. According to this account. the fraction
of the total research funds taken up by government organs including local
public corporations is about 30 percent. In contrast. this figure is 50
percent in the United States and France and (.0 percent in "est Germany and
the United Kingdom. In this mamer. the goveruents' roles in research are
much greater in most of these western countries compared to Japan.

At the sac time. this section reveal: that the fraction of the research
funds allocated to basic research, including applied research, is more than

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the large level of 30 percent of the governmental funds for different
types of research. The mein recipients of these funds are universities.
great emphasis is placed on nuclear power and space developments. the
fraction allotted to national de ense research is very snall compared to
the leading countries of the western world, and the funds assigned to co-
operative research efforts with developing countries are not always very
high. These are some of the features that are listed. In addition, there
is the aspect that nearly all of the goverment's funds are channeled to
universities, governmental research organs , and special corporations. while
funds transfers to the industrial world are Very snall. Technological
transfer of the results of basic and applied research on the part of uni-
veraities to private areas and "acadenic-private" cooperation are areas
that are particularly deficient. Among these, there is some question as
to the effectiveness of subsidies where no specific results are requested.

In view of this situation, this white paper treats the following as emergency
neasures: 1) response to the energy problem, '2) improvement of the quality

of the people‘s living. 3) pronotion of independent development of industrial
technology. and l.) pronotion of research cooperation with developing countries.
This paper also stateo that the government should target at least 2.5 percent
of the gross national product to be assigned to research and development in
line with the results show by the Science and Technology Agency survey and
plan further increase to 3 percent for the long tern. This is necessary to
reinforce and expand research and development.

The following is the gist of the Science and Technology Agency white paper.

(Section 1. The Increasing Importance in the Govermsnt's Research Activio
ties)

Chapter l: The coverment‘s Role in Research Activities

The advance in science and technology can he cited as having supported this
country's social and economic development during the postwar years. ﬂithin
this framework the government has taken varied steps in teeny different areas
to lend direction to research and development, providing and expanding eduo
catiml facilities to train researchers and technologists, and to provide
a preferential taxing system in a manner quite apart fro. private efforts.
Among the developments that have served to raise the quality of living are
the encephalitis vaccine, improved super short wave all directional radio
beacon that is presently inatelled on the airways, the construction of the
Shinkansen (bullet express train), the developent of the pendqu electric
car capable of increased speeds around curves present on existing tracks
and reduction in passenger unpleasantness resulting from excessive centri.
fugal force, and the development of the pulse signal uodulation mode (PC!!-
26 mode) Ivy the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation. These
are all the results of the goverment's activities in research and developo
not“.

In another direction, industrial developmental items include nuaerically
controlled tool machinery. carbon fibers, electric automobiles, and sea

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orncm. USE ONLY

water desalination and byproduct utilization. which are research and de-
velopment efforts requiring great length of time and large fiscal outlays.
There are also analytical, naterial. and electronic technology, which in-
volve research and development in leading and basic areas. Furthermore.
the government is playing a leading role in the large industrial techno.
logical developments of a leading nature that are considered urgently neces-
sary for improving the national economy. At the same time, the government
is also promoting research and development in nuclear power, space explora-
tion, ocean exploration, and the life sciences which all have some specific
applications in the future. The advantage of governmental activity in re-
search is the ability to regiment governmental organs with their high
capabilities in the basic areas with the private organs who have high in-
dustrialisation capabilities and resolve very difficult problems.

Chapter 2. Features of the Government's Research Activities Trends in
Government Research Funding According to Objectives The government of
each country plays a considerable role in research funds, which are the
prime moving force behind research activities. The Japanese Government is
no exception. and the research funds advanced by the government have in-
creased tremendOusly during recent years. On the other hand, the fraction
in research funds of the total research funds expended in this country
accounted for by goverment funds, including those for local public groups,
is but 30 percent. and there are many countries of the western world whose
governments' contributions are substantially greater than those of the
Japanese Government. when the research trends according to objectives for
the different countries are compared and analysed, it can be seen that the
United States places emphasis on research in practical areas as represented
by the development of the space shuttle along with research in response to
social needs such as that in the carcinogenic field as well as in the energy
and environmental areas. The united Kingdom supports the fostering of a
private aircraft production industry, while Heat Germany promotes the steel
industry, which also takes in private aircraft development.

In this respect Japan 1) puts out the same ratio of research funds for basic
research in the scientific area with respect to the total research funds,
which is of the same level as that of Rest Germany. 2) lets out all possible
funds for nuclear power development, 3) will sharply increase its funds
allocated to space development at the turn of the 1970 decade, b) puts in
very little toward defense research compared to the leading countries of

the western world, and 5) provides a subsidy fund for promoting large-scale
research such as that given to the electronic computer industry.

Nature of Research Funds and Status of the Research Implementing Organiza-
tion Japan and the United States follow the same trend in that the govern-
ment appropriates more than half of the total funds for basic research. 0n
the other hand, where the government of the United States is responsible for
about 50 percent of the funds for applied and developmental research, the
Japanese Government puts out but very little, and its load of developmental
research is but 10 percent or so. In addition, government research organs

15
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the United States take the central role in the research implementing
organisation in the area of applied research, while private industry uses
60 percent-of government funds for dovelopental research. In contrast ,
applied research in Japan is assigned to universities while the fraction
of developmental research funds assigned to private nonprofit research
organs is the largest.

0n the other hand, in the area of industrial activities where development
is a prime objective, the United ,States ellocates 50 percent of goverment
funds (30 percent of the total industrial research funds), the united
Kingdom (.0 percent (30 percent of the total. industrial reseurch funds),
France 20 percent (30 percent), and Heat Germany 20 percent (20 percent)
while , in contrast, the Japanese Goveruent puts out essentially no funds
for use in the industrial area. The govarment's research outlay for J?!
1977 provided 40 percent for subsidies, and the main recipients were nuclear
pover and space development along with special research corporate organs to
which about half the subsidies were allocated. Of these subsidies. only

6 percent of the funds directed to the special corporations found its way
to private research activities during JP! 1976.

Mode of Promoting Research Activities as Judged From the Distribution
Pattern of Goverment Research Funds 1he national research organs and
related organs account for about 60 percent of ordinary research funds for
basic research, At the same tine, there is roughly a l to 2 ratio between
subsidies and consigned funds that make up the goverment's monetary allo-
cation to private industry, and the major portion of the subsidies goes to
promoting the electronic computer industry and development of inportant
technology. Judging from the trends in disbursement of goverment research
subsidies, there is major emphasis placed on promoting basic scientific
research, and it may be said that this course activates the market structure
in a growing economy and takes in the most basic areas of activating pri-
vate research in a most effective manner.

‘l‘rend in Fraction of Goverment Budget Taken Up by Research Funds and Plan-
ning of Research Activities The fraction of the national budget of the
United States taken up by research funds increased from 8 percent in fiscal

year 1960 to about 12 percent during the middle of the she decade and then
decreased to about 6 percent in 1975. The major factors responsible for

these sharp increases and decreases are the changing emphasis placed on re-
search on space, nuclear power, and national defense. This fraction of
Japan's budget was increased from the 3.0 percent in 1960 to 3.5 percent,
and the main beneficiaries of this increase have been national schools,
nuclear power, and space development. Looking now at the status of planned
science and technology activities in the different countries, I) the western
countries including Japan are planning the develop-ant of important research
subjects in the form of projects, 2) research and development plans on
energy have been formulated in Heat Germany, Japan, and the United States,
and 3) trance has incorporated a plan to activate research throughout the
entire country into its economic plan. In Japan the reports of the Science
and Technology Council reflect these directions.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Changes in Domestic and Foreign Situations That Influence Research Activi-
ties .

The technological level of the facilities that industries presently hold

in the midst of stagnated funding of facilities in Japan's private indus-
trial area when viewed from an international level is such that the present
production facilities are still relatively new compared to production indus-
tries in general, and it does not seem conceivable that any worsening in

the industrial environment will directly influence recovery in industrial
activities in an adverse manner as seen from the production technology that
will give rise to funds for new facilities before the present facilities
deteriorate and allow lowered costs, increased production, and production
of national economic struggle. At the same time, about 60 percent of indus-
try is placing emphasis on premating technological development, however,
they are faced with the present situation of insufficient recovery in the
profit picture that the capacity for technological development by industry,
particularly along the lines of developments requiring large sums of money
and carrying great risk, and how to reinforce technological development
capabilities in those areas is presenting a number of problems.

Development of Governmental Research Activities The thing to consider,
first of all, is the reaction to the energy problem. It is necessary to
consider the assurance of the necessary funds and manpower for promoting
nuclear power an d the Sunshine and Moonlight projects. 0n the other hand,
the accumulation of independent technology along the lines of energy tech-
nology will not only serve to provide Japan, whose resources are so poor,
with stabilised energy resources and enable the amassing of technology in
the safety assurance area, which is the principal premise for the utilisa-
tion of nuclear energy, but will provide a technological base by which
Japan can participate in international cooperative efforts on new energy
developments and research and developments that require vast capital and
much time as well as provide bargaining power to counter proposals from
resources rich countries when negotiating for their resources. This is a
must approach for a country that plans stable growth. ‘

In another direction along the lines of promotion of industrial technology,
balance in technology exchange unlike balance in trade exchange is a one
way street with the four leading countries of the western world, such that
imports dominate overwhelmingly. And looking further at the fraction of
this balance with respect to the research funds used, between 10 and 30
percent of the available research funds is paid out to these four countries
just by the transport machinery industry, excluding the general machine
tool, electrical equipment and tool, and automobile industries. 0n the
other hand, it will be difficult to continue this active import as in the
past in view of the reduction in innovative technology generated in these
four countries and the backlash generated in this country to this import.

In this manner, there is need to promote more independent technological
development on our part.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SR ONLY

In thie eituation, electronic conputera have developed to the etage that
today it poeeeeaea technological capability to aerioualy challenge Ill in
the area of new typea of computera at the reeult of energetic private re-
eearch aetivitiee, plenned production and utilization, and aaaiatance in
iunda provided by govermental policiee. It ie of note that the doneetic-
ally produced unite now take up 55.1 percent of ell the conputere in Japan.
indicating the growth in the hardware area by the doneatic producere. 0n
the other hand, the total reeearch tunda, including thoea allocated to the
etill inferior eoitware area. for the eix large colpaniee of Jepen do not
cone up to even one-fifth of what Ill! ependa. 1n thie manner, it iea
prohla- juet how to combat thia eituation through private cooperation and
clearly define a counter etrategy.

There ie need to atrengthen independent development of induatrial technology
in thia country. that it needed in thie eituation ia the promotion of re-
eearch and davelopent through very cloae liaieon between production.
government, and academic circlee under the pramiae oi etrengthening the
technological development capability of private induatry together with in-
creaaed goverment eubeidiea. (Sectione 2 and 3 are omitted.)

Coven-ant Beeearch Funds and Fraction ‘i'hey Take Up of Total Research Fonda
namm
( ,canerm

; 3§(3§._5 -) 5:22;:
(1 '4,
o g “ '(3)\4 [\3’67)

(9‘1'31’ '33)
°)a:;..,yf )’ do
Q

l N hang“)
m (15)

a) am.maeeoeeeee.
'en‘eauaﬁm 15)

 
   
 

 

Key:

1. goverment reaearch iunde 10. Switzerland

2. (billion yen) 11. Italy

3. (log acale) 12. Rolland

lo. United Statee 13. Canada

5. Heat Genany llo. Auatralia

6. France 15. Note) the Jepaneae data include

7. United Kingdom funda for local public group:

8. Japan l6. fraction of total reeearch funda

9. Sweden accounted for by goverment re-
. aearch iunda

comm: llikkan Kogyo Shinbuneha 1978

2267

cso: (0105 18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND melanoma!

’
recmmcr TRANSFER CENTER ‘10 IE ESTABLISHED

Toltyo NIKKAN KOGYO mum in Japanese 31 Oct 78 p 2
[editorials "Technology Transfer Center and Research and Developnent"]

[Text] The Research Developnent Corporation of Japan will establish the
"Technology Transfer Center" starting this Japanese fiscal year. The func-
tion of this center will be to survey and analyze the technology that the
production world has at hand at the present time as well as to seek out
technology that is possessed by other industries or individuals (such as
patents and ltnowhow) in order to transfer or popularise it to requesting
parties. Since one role of this center is to collect infornation of super-
ior technology beforehand, this center will incorporate a technological
data bunk capability that it is thought will pave the way for a smooth flow
of technology. Japan with its neager resources nust rely on its research
and developent strength and its technological capability. and it should
regard this technological policy as one that is strictly in a positive
direction.

Japan's industrial world has developed through the introduction of overseas
technology, but it can be said that there is presently little in the for:
of new technology that can be found in these overseas sources. This is why
there are a number of researchers who lament the fact that innovative tech-
nology has hit rock bottom on a world-wide scale. llow should Japan handle
new technology developent in the light of this situation? With but very
llnited resources coupled with an economic situation that has hit the dol-
dams, the industrial world is inextricably involved in a state where it
met be extrenely conservative in doling out research funds.

One counteneasure to this present situation is to popularize technology
that has already been developed and effectively utilize the information.

In addition, these can be combined to offer entirely new technology. The
Research Develop-ant Corporation of Japan and the Japsn Industrial Technology
Pronotional Society (external group of the Agency of Industrial Science and
Technology) together with other groups have banded together to serve to
disseminate the technological fruits of Japan's research organs to date to
the industrial world.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

In order to reinforce this technology dissemination operation further. the
Research Development Corporation of Japan decided to establish this center.
This center will also serve as the bridge to transfer and diseainate tech-
nology possessed by individual industries to other industries with the in-
tent or raising the technology level or the entire industrial world. In
addition. it is planned to export leading technology, and cooperative ties
with research and developnent public corporations in the United Kingden
and France are being strengthened. Unlike the export or goods, the export
or technology is seldom enctnhered with international prohlens. Since

introduction of new technology promotes technology in the inporting country.
it is usueally welconed.

It is needless to say that patents and knowhow represent "goods" whose values
diner from the nonal line or goods. ‘Ihese are goods but with large dis-
trihution pipes. and they are never in excess. In 1970 llitachi, Limited
initiated an sll out disclosure of its proprietary industrial rights centered
on its patents, and this was followed by participation fro- a sealant of
industry, howaver, the situation at present is one in which technology
transfer between industries is not ell that was hoped tor.

Consequently, it is expected that the esteblisl-ent of this center will
help activate superior interflow of technology. In line with this center's
activities, the industrial world met revise its closed type technology

transfer of the pest and adopt a mood for smooth technology transfer between
industries.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinhuneha 1978

2267
080: 6105

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
O
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OCIHCB AND TBCIINOLOGY

PROBLEMS IN FORBIOIIJATENT APPLICATIONS EXAMINBD
Tokyo DENIM sum in Japanese 1 Nov 78 p 1
("Article: Patent Application Rights in Peril"]

[Text] Foreign Enterprises have Advantage: Various Special Consideration
Given for Custons Clearance Outside of Bonded Areas

At a tine when the inbalancr. in Japen-U.S. trade is an issue, sunny conplaints -
are reportedly brought through the Japanese govern-eat agencies concerned
against Japanese lav fir-e (applying agents for the enterprises). The
coeplaints point out that. in the case of 0.3. companies submitting patent
applications to the Japan Patent Agency. inadequate custoss procedures cause
the effective deadline (in the United States. it is 1 year after the
application is subsitted) to run but despite clains for priority treat-ant,
with the result that they lose out to Japanese fine in the cospetition for
patent rights. Actually, however, it is custoeary for Japanese custom
authorities to give special consideration to the strong requests fro- the
kserican shippers and their Japanese custons respreeentatives, or applying
agents. and to provide customs clearence inediately prior to the shipaent
of their goods free the airport to the bonded area. The interests
concerned thereforu interpret such coeplaints as being one-sided criticisms
by 0.5. enterprises, which are not fully aware of the actual situetion. 0n
the other hand. some industrial circles (in Japan) sharply asesil the
conpetition over prior handling of patent applications as resulting fro-
the govern-ent'e naive administrative policy, and are urging the govern-eat
to cone up with sone solution for the future.

Industry Points Out "Naive Adsinistration"

Hany of the goods passing through Japanese custou are accoepanied hy
docuents of application for patent rights.

In 1975. there were 25.703 cases of potent application by foreigners
(15.5 percent of total cases). In 1976. there was a slight increase of
25,256 cases (15.7 percent), and 25,015 cases (15.5 percent) in 1977.
Thus the ratio of foreign applications to total cases has been fairly
constant. Also. foreign applications concerning new and practical

. 21
roe omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

innovations have totaled less than 1 percent, and are therefore trivial in
relation to the total nuaber of applications (according to the General Affairs
Division of the Patent Agency).

Thus, when a person in a foreign country seeks to acquire patent rights in
Japan. he nay apply to the Patent Agency through his agent residing in Japan.
Also. it is stipulated in Article 6 of the Paris treaty on the protection

of industrial patent rights, that decisions on custons clearance are

(l) linited to goods for which the person has subaitted an application in
his own country (the principal country); (2) provided he completes
application procedures in the secondary country within a year after sub-
mitting his application in the principal country. and the newness of the
patent is detersined on the basis of the period retroactive to the date of
application in the principal country.

Problen Lies Hith Drafter

There are sons docuents of application which are sent without claining
priority treataent. and in such cases the priority treatment period of .
1 year does not apply. The right of priority treatnent is easily acquired
by Ierely attaching a signed request. however, there are any cares where
the applicant receives his papers after coapleting inport procedures, only
to find that in reality his right to priority treatment has been lost. In
such cases, the draftar of the application is to blue (according to a law
firm which acts as applying agent for foreign enterprises).

In other words, although the docunents are subaitted to the Patent Agency
and the Japanese courts under a given deadline, the applicant is unable to
acquire the patent right he seeks, because the doct-ents are not processed
within the deadline. As a result, the client (foreign manufacturer, et al)
files a coaplaint against his legal agent. however, proper procedures are
to send the pertinent documents of application by air parcel post, and these
are released to the client's customs representative or applying agent by

a tale: cable sent by the client. The agent sub-its then personally to the
Patent Agency, to be processed according to the principle of "priority
tresteent."

Docueents Facing 1-inent Deadline

The problem lies with documents which are sent in close to the deadline.
It is easy to visualise a client who claims priority treat-eat and orders
his customs representative and applying agent in Japan to take energency
erasures. There are reportedly any cases where the agent, who has
received advance notice, negotiates with the Tokyo customs official
stationed at Narita Airport to provide. custons clearance at Narita, in
order to expedite the processing of the docuaents which have been sent to
the ﬂaraki office in Punabashi City like regular air parcels. The custoas
officials adeit that they have no alternative except to recognize these
urgent requests.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFPICIAI. USE ONLY

however. genaraily speaking. ship-ants arriving at the llaraki office are
cleared with at most 1 or 2 days' delay. The shipper (receiver and applying
agent in Japan) is notified by the carrier airline. and it is a violation of
the rules to clear customs at a location other than the bonded area (according
to Toshio Kata. assistant section chief. lsport Section. Custoss Bureau.
Finance hinistry).

Violation of Rules

Custoss procedures for foreign goods in bonded areas are stipulated by
custoss laws (Article 21 of the Fixed Custoos Rates Law). in the case of
Japan. the stipulated area is principally haraki. Therefore. the ensrgency
seasures taken by Tokyo custoss officials are clearly inappropriate.

As for the time involved fron the submission of an isport declaration until
the goods clear custoas. custoss officials explain that a delay of sore than
2 days for "on-line" processing with the client's representative is
unthinkable. Also. sole cases are cleared vithin several seconds. depending
on the contents (according to assistant section chief Kato).

As a rule. goods arriving at Narita Airport are all cleared at hareki.
homwer. custoss officials do adsit that there are urgent cases which are
- cleared at Narita. based on the judgnent of the custols officials involved.

Heater Handling in the United States

if the goods are shipped through heraki and the deadline is “linear. it is
of no avail to rush to the Patent Agency (according to the aforeeentioaed
lav fire). The only alternative is to give "top agent treatsent“ to the
goods shipped free s foreign country to Japan. In other words. they are
designated as “top urgency goods." Reportedly. the custoss officials will
then be able to expedite clearance on request by the custoes representative
or applying agent. In the United States. such procedures are called
"naster handling." This is one advantage foreign enterprises have in
shipping their goods as individual ship-eats instead of aimed shipoents.

In any case. "sons clients suddenly appear before us vith goods whose
sarketability in Japan is doubtful. and they cannot blasts us if they fail
to receive priority treatnent despite their claims for such.” (fir Akabsne
of the Yuasa a flare lav fire of Tokyo).

Even though a client is successful in receiving custoes clearance at liaraki.
the translation of docmeata seeetiaes takes long and does not leave such
leeway for his application to be subeittcd to the Patent Agency. It see.
to be the consensus of the lav firsts that recently an increasing nuder of
cosplaints have been filed unilaterally. without full understanding of the
conditions in Japan. Also. adsinistrstive inadequacies have coee under
increasing criticise fro- industrial circles. who point out the uneven
custoes procedures and denand that the govern-eat take a stricter position

23
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPPIC!AL 083 ONLY

regarding ch. probin- vhich aricc iron coapcticion based on the pcincipic
of prior traacunc for patent applicationa (according to a curtain aiccuic
applianca nah“).

commum Dcnpa Shinbunaha i978

3886
cm: 6105

26
M ONION 082 OIL?
VON OVPICMI. mm ONLY

861MB AND TECHNOLOGY

mcumhornuoomaurmmmmmoi
Tokyo MW x0010 sumw in Japnn... 25 Oct 78 p 12

[Tout] Shin Nippon Kohi (2-H. Kyuhoji-cho. Kita-Itu. Otalta-ahi, pruidont
uiookichi Yanguchi) hu dovalop.d a law typo unannad nachin. tool
muting oyoton. 'l'h. not cutting tina for thin nachin. cool i. 00 p.rc.nt.
and thin .ucc... wu rcalitnd through th. dovolopnant of p.riph.ral .quip-
ant that or. adnptcd to th. condition. for unaanncd op.r.tion. m. i. th.
firtt .xanplo of manhod oporation in Japan.

‘l'hia «many at to th. following condition. for acttin; out to ..t.hli.h
thi. cyotu: l) reliability of nachinu that can oporat. in .tobl. nann.r.
2) mini-icing indiroct ti- othor than put. working tin including ouch
it... on work uttins. tool “chm... and attach-Int catch-1... .nd 3) tuit-
ahl. nuuru to comtcract nachin. ti. off rcoultinp fro. cutting tool
attrition and ov.rlo.din;. ‘l'h. initinl work no dir.ct.d .t thi. coqany'a
.ain lin. nodal no: vorticol boring .nd nillin; nachin. .nd it. tar-sou
aachinin; antor. and . pool of incr..ain3 th. not muting tin. fro. th.

65 p.rc.nt nation“ in th. past to m pcrunt n. tnrptod for th. unannod
onto. that wa. toatcd.

1h. ruult. of thin v.ntur. rooultod in the d.v.lop..nt of a syn.- that ful-
fillod th. varioua n.o....ry condition. to malit. th. originnl goal. .nd

thi. .ucc... won .chi.v.d uinly by th. devolop-nt of .uitabl. p.riph.ral
.quip-tnt.

Ann; th. poriphorol .quipunt i. th. auto-atod att.chn.nt .xchana. faci-
lity (MC) thnt .nnhlu fivc-oidod nachining on . vortical typ. nachin.

tool. ‘Ihia unit in providtd with .n auto-atic inducing dcvio. that op.-
ratu according to th. llc directing. Mothcr p.riph.ral .quipntnt i. th.
auto-tod work .xchanp. facility (me) in which larp. and null typ. nachinu
placod on polattu can b. .xchanpd and th. cornaopondin; control not...
this control .y.t.. i. capabl. of d.t.ctin; tool .ttrition that in difficult
to pr.dict and ovorlocdin; a. woll .a douctin; tool don... In .ddition.

it can .l.o d.t.ct tru. cutting u. an! to «and an alar- whon . tool in
worn out through th. tool cxchanu indicator.

25
POI OFFICIAL 05! MY
POI OWICIM. US! ONLY

Thin oyoten aleo hae e therul dioplaoe-nt correction facility and o cut-
ting ocrepe treat-ant device uoins high preeeore Jet elm vith autonoted
diapnootic capability to prevent dovn tine and erratic voth febrication.
‘lhio ie eone of the peripheral equip-tot that nlte thie manned eyeten
poeeihle.

'lhie cowany feele that the devolopnent oi thio nochine hat reoolted in

the practical realization of the otap for unmanned operation of large
uchinoe. In particular. the domlins of the not working tine ovor what van
attained in the pant io enacted to contribute greatly to inrovina produc-
t on.

OOPYRIOIIT: ﬂikkon Kogyo Shiohuoho 1978

2267
030: £105

16
P0! OHICML USE OILY
POI OPPICMI. 088 ONLY

SCIBNCB AND TECHNOLOGY

Immmr W at um; SBU-DWOSIS. AUTOISOOVBRY
Tokyo RIM KOOYO still!!!” in Jepenoee 27 Oct 78 p 16

[text] lkegei Iron Works. Ltd. (preeident ﬂeeeburo Yeeeeoto) hen perfected
a tent eodel of en eutoeeted. eeli’ diemoetic. intelligent meenned nunri-
celly controlled (he) lethe (photogreph). ‘l‘hie memned NC lethe noreelly
overeeee the operetionel etete of eechine iebricetion end in cepeble oi
reecting to ebnoreel eituetione by introducting eutoeeted repeir of tools
or tel! recovery through on eutouted end intelligent control device in-
corporeting eicrocoqutere developed by the coweny. 'rhie control m1-
lity incorporatee e opeciel robot to etert end terninete work. he e re-
eult. our production of e product oi given ehepe ie poeeihle through coe-
pletcly manned operetion. end this coqeny plate to enter into production
of thin fecility thie coeing tiny.

The NC eechinc mit ie prieerily and et eutooeted operetion. Hhen e
lethe in being ueed in tebricetion proceeeee requiring e lerge nmr of
iebricetion operetionn. there it perticulerly heewy weer oi toole ouch ee
cutting toole end drille on well u e high incidence of bredtege. At the
em tin. cowlexity in ehepe of producte neceeoitetce freqmnt exchnge
of toole. thereby elowing down tool exchenge. end there incidente here been
eejor hinderencee to manned operetion.

lkegei Iron Uorhe developed en eutoeeted ueeureeent correction fecility
(FIG) eerlier this ycer thet eutoeeticelly secures product diuneione end
detecte eny dewietion iron epecified veluee md eekeo eutoeeted correction
to the contente of e tool correction negieter. It then expended on euto—
utcd technology to develop the NC lethe incorporeting oeid m to toqlete
teet production of thin intelligent control fecility thet in e etep for-
werd to prertlcel meenned operetion.

Hicrocoqutere ere utilised in thin intelligent control fecility. end eight
cepebilitiee ere exploited in eddition to FIG including cepehilitiee ouch
ee faricetion control cepebility, fined otreu cutting force control
cepebility. eechinc operetion overueing cepebility. eutoneted correction
end recovery cepebility. eutonetcd retrection tcruinetion cepehility. work

27
FOR OFFICML US! ONLY
FOR OHIOIAL USB ONLY

control. copobility. ond doto looping copohility. ‘lhooo oro connoctod to
tho opociol NO iocility for ununnod oporotion provided with opociol oolt-
uoro ond to o opociol robot with totrooxiol control conoioting of dotoction
oyotoo for loin cooponont ond thruot cutting Jorooo. outoootod oooourooont
oyotoo in both It ond 2 diroctiono. ond voriouo oonooro for oboorving oporo-
tionol ototoo to ooko up tho unoonnod NC lotho.

Ao o rooult. vhonovor o tool hoo ito voor ond toor oxcood ito limit or
bocoooo dougod in ony of tho procooooo otortins fro. oountin; of tho itoo
to bo uorkod on through tho cutting prooooo. ond up through tho roloooo of
tho finiohod product. it io i-odiotoly orchomd with o frooh tool in
outoootod Ionnor. In oddition. procioion io uintoinod. inotfoct producto
or unouitoblo utoriolo oro outoooticolly rojoctod. no oll typoo of oituo-
tiono con bo outoooticolly countonctod. All tho copobilitioo thot con bo
prosro-od into thio intolliunt control focility con bo conductod outo-o-
ticolly within tho sivon ronooo to provide unnonod oporotion.

In addition. tho focility con bo uood oo tho uouol typo of NC lothc uhon-
ovor oovorol oooll volu- job ordoro oro boing fulfillod. Por omlo. tho
focility con bo uocd in tho uouol manor during tho doy ond in muonnod
oporotion during tho night to onloy o "Ion io firot lino. uchino io
oocond lino" production oyotou. 'rhorc io oloo tho poooibility of oponins
tho voy for o oinglo son to oporoto oovorol ouch facilities. 'lhio conony
io opplyiu; tor fivo potonto nd utility modulo oontorod on o potont tor

o oyotou involving thio intolligont control focility. It io uoin; tho
“Ix-20“ oo booo (or thio toot nit. but it io ooid thot tho ontiro lino of
tho rx oorioo con bo uood.

confluent: Nikkon Keno Shinbmho 1978

2267
650: £105

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FATTY l’OODS REDUCE RISK ()P‘CBREBML M’OPLEXY

Tnltyo HMNIClll DAILY NEWS In English 15 Dec 78 p 12

[Text I

cm Way. the No. I
tiller dam mu: (or
about enema-ll deaths
tun In Japan. can be My
lessened by tam mm “to
magma.

This In a norm dawn
In. M oxtouln survey
mwmum
National Institute 0! Nutrition.
the Nation! Institute tor
Genetta no other tantalum
ummammm
WW.

their match. Mud
mowuthtuytmmu
mamnmhemuu.
the m at «Mn!
why.

Sane people an mote likely
than othen to Met In.
hypettetuloa or cerebral
My. but the Incident at
thaduoaacuhenaadlt

mmnlnwm

speaking. hypoteauou ls
dominant mlmtlym

It was

a. i 3
31253:;
sf§§§§§ . E
'_ E fag?
,E $§5E§z§é

E
i
g

2%
2‘;
3%

3;:
E

E

i

g?
2
won omcm. us: om

SCIENCE AND mmmov

BRIEFS

SA‘rmtﬂ LAMINGSnSpace engineers will launch Jepen'e firat experi-
eentel co-mication eatellite ae well aa e ecience reeearch eatellite
next February. the two eeperete projecte, one of the National Space
Developnent Agency and the other of Tokyo Univereity. were epproved by the
Space Developaent Couittee of the prile einiater'e office Hedneadey.
According to the plen. the agency will launch its initial co-unicetion
eetellite (rcs) fro. the kegoehina epece center. at ‘l’enegaehiee Ieland.
on Yehruery 5 next yeer. In the world’e firet experinent of its kind.
the eetellite will try to co-unicate with ice ground tracking etetione
over aillinetric wevea. the agency aaid. Meanwhile. the Univereity of
Tokyo will launch its eatellite "Coree" ueing e Hu-3 type rocket tro-
ite epace center at Uchinoura. aleo in Kagoahiae Prefecture. on February
16. The utilite will probe euch ayatetiom phenom of the univaree
as block holes or neutron etere which eend X~raye fro- the epece far
beyond, e univereity epokeeean aaid. [text] {Tokyo MIC!!! DAILY news
in anglioh 15 Dec 78 p 12]

050: 6120 m

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY