APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-00850R000100020007-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020007-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE [NLY

JPRS L/8262
2 February 1979

TRPNSLATIONS ON TELECOHM/NICATIONS POLICY,

RESEARCH MD DEVELOP/EMT
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020007-1
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation wms summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or tranaliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itema~are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no why represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGiT HHS AND RRGUMTIOﬂS GMRNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROPPICIAL USE ONLY.
3. Recipient's Aeeeeelen Ne.

      
 

 

8M“? JPRS L/ 82 2

TRANSLATIONS 0N TELECOWICATIONS POLICY, RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPHENT, (P000 3/79)

  
     
     

O. genial-leg Olgeaiaeueo lest.
9e

   
 

analog chaeieeeee ‘ neeedA--

Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

la. Sooaeeuag cheelaeclea Nan eed Mime

‘0. Pleisei/‘l’eek/Iolk Uele No.

   
 
     
  

  

u. 'r a new a a la
cm.“ "

     
  

  

This serial report contains translations from the world press and radio
relating to worldwide political, economic and technical developments in
telecommunications. computers. and satellite communications. Coverage will

be worldwide with focus on France, Federal Republic of Germany. United Kingdom.
Italy. Japan. the 0851!. People's Republic of China. Sweden. and the Netherlands.

 
     
   
 

yore

worldwide
Computera .

Satellite Commication

Electronics and Electrical Engineering
Telecommunications

Tale-atry

 
  
 

    
   
     
    
 

lh. linemen/Oneida Teas

   

m. coam ﬁeld/Creep 093, c. P. 173. 223
sultry State-coo

For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available From ”RS.

”on “'00-“ "O”.

      
   
       

ueeouoe «see-n e
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/OZ

2 Pebrua:

TRANSLATIONS ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY;
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(r000 3/79)

Cameras
ASIA

JAPAN

NBC-Honeywell Technolnny Tie-Up. NBC Computer Strategy
Discussed
(NIW KmYo SKINBU“. 00°C 78) .OOCOOOOCOOODOOOODCOO

Conputcr Makers Prepare To Cope with IBM 2-Series
(Nlmn KOGYO satunuN. ‘1 Nov ,8) O'OOOOOOOOI'OO..OOOI

Nippon Electric Sets Up Overseas Integrated Circuit Plants
(NIKKRN KOCYO SIIINBUN. 26 "CV 78) oooossa-ooaossooasos

Nippon Electric To Produce Digital Exchanges in Dallas
(RIM KOGVO SHINBUN, 21 M 78) .ooaasaaaasooaaoases

LATIN AMERICA
CUBA

'PRELA' Reports on Upcoming Nonslined Radio Meeting in
Havana

(Leopoldo For-080; PRELA. 24 Jan 79) .................

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

JAPAN

nac-uomwnu. mower TIE-UP, NBC COHPUTBR STRATEGY DISCUSSED
Tokyo NIW KOGYO SHINBUN in Japanese lo Dec 78 p 12

ﬂat] Nippon Electric Conpany (NBC) (President: Tadao Tenake) has begun
negotiating with the United States' lioneywell Corporation. the world's
third ranked conputer coapnny. regarding a conuter technology assistance
contract. The tine limit for this negotiation is until the end of 1979.
whereupon "if there is no declaration of intention by the two. the current
contract will expire in 1982." As the negotietion per se significantly
effects “30's comuter strategy. meticulous preparations and decision-
neking skills are required.

In referring to this matter. NBC characterizes the current state as "re-
toeing the nark and calculating the timing for rising-wetting ready to
grapple /_euno synbolissg” (Executive Director Akire Koike). They are in
the midst of forsuleting secret strategies with Chairman of the Board Koji
Konatsu at the hels.

The basic policy of the NBC toward the said negotiation is quite firm. with
respect to computer hardware, NBC holds that. "in ter- of technology level.
NBC has an upper hand; and there is nc.hing to he learned from the other side.
Speaking in particulars. NBC hes developed the world's largest smer-conputer
"mos-900." while Honeywell Corporation does not have a ccwerahle machine.

lbreover. last spring NBC had nent sanples or cosputer logic element cir-
cuitry to ell-Ill! Corporation. France's lergeot computer nsnufacturer. in
which Iloneywell is e cepita1 participant. In terms of technology including
LS! element. no is superior to honeywell.

But the fact that use is paying several billion yen in technological assis-

tance contract royalty each year is regarded as a contributing reason for
the firm's bullish position.

Judging from these cos-rents. one would think that the relationship between
the two firms is about to he severed. but that is not really the case. Be-
ferring to "90's long-tern capital cooperation with western Blectronic as
an exanple. m Board Chairman Kohayashi elaborates on the coqany's enha-
sis on long-term relationships: "One of the essential factors in our firm's

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development has been induction of overseas technology and nurturing of the
sane as our own. Once we decide on a tie-up, we want the other side to
reap benefits from the union as well." Board Chairman Kobayeshi argues
that the acne holds true for the NBC-Honeywell relationship.

Actually, Honeywell technology is euployed liberally throughout NBC's

me and acos series. The basic technology used in use producing the first
doassticelly manufactured ”one-nachine," "Mac-2200" parsnetron forest lini-
counter owes a great deal to Honeywell.

In the neantiae. Honcvwell asteblirhed "Nippon Ills" (capital; 1 billion on)
this sumer as one aspect of strengthening its conpetitivs [against mfstra-
tegy. It has begun independent business activities which center around sasll
conputers. NBC and Honeywell established "NBC-Honeywell Informtion System"
in October 1972, and was marketing such data processing related equipaent as
key tape and so forth in concert. Thus, the "Bellindhand Overseas Big Capital"
Honeywell's direct participation in the Japanese conputer aarhst has led to
speculations regarding the inpaired relationship between NBC and Honeywell.

At the tine of inauguration of Nippon BIS, Uillian R. Smart. first vice pres-
ident of lloneywell (ms president) who cans to Japan for that occasion, pre-
sented quite a low profile on the issue of the technological assistance con-
tract rev.sion: "we expect the cooperative relationship to continue, but I
wonder what “we thinking is?"

The prevailing tuner regarding the current negotiation is that N80 has the
upper hand. but there are factors which are not conducive to throwing over
ﬂoneywell altogether.

[At m look at the overseas strategies of the top three donestic counter
asnufacturars to find out why. The top-ranking Fujitsu, Limited, signed an
operational/sales contract with the Sic-ens A.G. of West Ger-any this spring
in a aove to gain a foothold in the European market. Bitschi. Ltd., also
signed a technological exchange contract with a national policy corporation
of England-4:11. Colpanyu-and has forned a Japan-Europe league for conbating
the IBM offensive.

NBC appears to be a bit behind in this respect. though it any clain that
there is little to learn from lioneywell's coaputsr technology. it is attracted
to lioneywell's vast software accmlation and its worldwide sales network.

Consequently. it would be a tug of war between on the one hand NBC super-

large nachine technology (including co-unicstion) and the royalty question.
and on the other. Boneywell's sales and software strength. with regard to
royalty, as Honeywell would not agree to rescind the entire snout. a suggestion
has been nade to apply half the anount toward the sale of NBC super-large ne-
chines. The NIC executives regard this as ”one possible solution." they do
not appear to be unreceptive to the idea. .

2
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One more thing, NEG must make a decision regarding its computer architecture
(basic design concept) soon. This sumsr. Mitsubishi Electric announced

its intention to develop IBM comatible machines. As a result, NBC and
Toshiba are the only two domestic firm to go for non-compatible format.
Currently NBC (1) does not intend to make a transition to eoepatible machines
in so far as the host coeputere--the nest inortent of which is the CPU unit--

are concerned:(2)terninals and peripheral equipment for distributed proces-
sing. however. will be comatible. .

To the degree that NBC strengthens its tie with honeywsll. non-compatible
orientation will he stressed. But in the world market place where tau hes

a decisive edge. it is certain that IBM coepatible machines will continue to
doeinate. In order for the doeestic manufacturers to grow. there is no other
way but to shift the emphasis from the saturated Japanese market to the over-
sees erena. Rance, the current negotiation's aim is a cmlex one end not
just a matter of royalty. NBC Computer Division's highest authority. Execu-
tive Director Koike, moved away from his soeewhet bullish stance at the begin-
ning of spring. to a more flexible attitude: "we would like to decide after
carefully weighing the merits as well as the densrits of the question."

This is nothing more than a speculation. but in place of the existing tech-
nological assistance contract, a stronger tie-up in the operations/sales
sectors could result. Board Chairman Kobeyashi. well known as the bulldozing
entrepreneur and the nunber one power, is currently visiting Europe. New he

cultivates the European market and faces the negotiation with Honeywell next
year will be of great interest.

COPYRIGIIT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunshe 1978

111.60
030: 5500

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

COMPUTER MAKERS PREPARE TO COPE WITH IBM B-SBRIBS
Tokyo um KOGYO mm in Jdpsneoe 21 Nov 78 p 15

[Text] In order to cope with Inn's offensive canpaign and stiff competition
on the donestic scene, the various computer firns all plan to reinforce their
88 (sales engineer) staffs and business operations. This is an attenpt to
compete with the strong probability that am will announce in January, or
February at least. its B—seriee conputer system, which is its Future System
(PS) machine, by developing a oonpetitive new systen end the redistribution
of sanpower from the business point of view.

Actually, Fujitsu (Fuji ‘l‘sushin, Fuji Comicstionl) (President. Daisuke
Kobaysshi) has a three-year plan in the blueprint stage to reinforce their 83
organisation. while Nippon Univac (president, Jiro Pukunaga) hopes to rein-
force its progran by retraining its first-line salesmen. Elsewhere. Hitachi
Ltd. NBC. Hitsubishi Denki (nitsubishi Electrical Hechinery), and tokyo Shi-
beure are seriously considering preferential reinforce-eat of their sales

staff in the oonputer sales field end the expansion of their sales agency net-
works. The reasons for the decision by the various co-puter fires to reinforce
their sales staff are: (l) The growing trend in cut-rate oonpetition with
20—30 percent discounts on computer systems; (2) The 8100 Intonation Systen
and Systen 38 announced by m in October have a two-fold gain in cost-perforn-
ants. and in addition, 13!! is increasingly stressing cost-effectiveness; (3)
The doneatic narket for large nachines is saturated. and future sales will

be mostly in replacenents.

Yurthernore in view of 1311‘s plan to announce in January or at least in feb-
ruary. its Bvseries, which reportedly has a four-fold gain in oost-perfornsnce
and which night precipitate open warfare on the donsstic market. a reorganisa-
tion of business operations at this tine seens warranted.

Reinforce-ant of its 53 staff is also the cornerstone of rujitsu‘s business
strategy. but its plan, which calls for a threefold increase of its 82 staff.
is still in a prelininery stage. Japan Univac plans a gradual but effective
redistribution of its sales staff, and it intends to push sales of ensll
nachinee such as the 307 as well as the sale of large nadnines.

comrm: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1978

5576
650: 5500
4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

NIPPON ELECTRIC SETS UP OVERSEAS INTEGRATED CIRCUIT PLANTS
Tokyo RIM K0610 SUINBUN in Japanese 26 Nov 78 p 15

[Text] NBC (Nippon Electric) (president, Tadao Tenake) has
revealed that in order to pronote the development of overseas
markets for their eeniconductor devices. nainly Ic'e, they
plan to reinforce their manufacturing bases in the European
theater during 1’! 1979, and also to dispatch Neoshi Nakanura,
attached to the chief of NBC‘s 10 Department. as vice-
preaident to operate as a subsidiary of the Electronic Arrays
Conpany in the United States, folléwing the already agreed
upon purchase of the conpany. With this series of loves to
reinforce their operations. NBC hopes to establish nanufac-
curing capability in the United States. and in European and
Southeast Asian areas.

In April 1976 NRC established NBC-Ireland in Ballaibe outside Dublin. Ireland,
to aesed>le I'Il’s. 4K W's, and this year. 16!! W's to supply ICU countries
through their local distributors. Its current annual production level is

1.5 billion yen.

Since eaploynent at this plant has reached 150, which is approaching the 200
hiring limit for this district, NBC has had to consider alternative plans to
enlarge their operation. Currently the following three neasures are under
consideration: (I) The expansion of the present plant and procurenent of
additional manpower by offering bus transportation, etc.; (2) Establish new
plants in other parts of Ireland; and (3) Establish new manufacturing facil-
ities in other EC“ countries. In any event. NEG contemplates large-scale
introduction of auto-ated equipment.

In the United States. negotiations were conpleted in June with Electronic
Arrays (IA) of Mountain View. California (president, C I. hood). with which
there had already been a basic understanding to buy their fire. The purchase
was recorded on 6 Deceaber at the California Justice Department, which for-
nalized the company's status as a subsidiary.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subsequently. Mr Nemura. foraerly chief of the 1c Business Department, was
left attached to the chief of the departnent but appointed vice-president in
charge of technology or PA. Several of the technical staff are also expected
to sake the new: to 8A. Production of PROH's and other existing products at
as are to be continued initially, but as soon as tool-up is completed. NBC-
brsnd products vill be made and sold through both of its distributors. NBC-

Anerica and NBC-Microconputers. Scheduled target date is sonstine after the
suer of 1979.

Oversees production is being aggressively pursued by NBC with the establish-
nent of NBC-Ireland in 1976, followed by the establishment of other subsid-
iaries such as NBC-Malaysia in June of the same year and NBC-Singapore in
August, and NBC-liong Kong (partly manurecturing) in May 1977.

In addition. NBC plane to augment its local production facility in the United
States because of the trade situation, furthermore to reinforce its European
operations and linear 1c manufacturing by NBC-dc Brazil in Brazil. Conbining
this with reinforce-ant of its regional distributorship netvork, it hopes to
achieve a stable supply position.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1978

5576
680: 5500

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

NIPPON ELECTRIC To PRODUCE DIGITAL EXCHANGES IN DALLAS
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUN in Japanese 21 Nov 78 p 15

[Text] According to information from industry sources,
NEC (Nippon Electric Co) has finalized its plan to pro-
duce in the United States. with a target date of 1980,
a time-sharing systen digital exchange equipment for
central office use. This is in response not only to
recently increasing inquiries free: independent American
telephone companies concerning digital telephone ex-
change equipment, which has resulted so far in suc-
cessfully obtaining orders for equipment for 15 ex-
changes worth 15 billion yen, but also in consideration
of the fact that. as a result of the increased co-on
interest by American and Canadian coununicetion equip-
ment makers in digital exchange equipment, competition
has intensified to the point where only local production
can offer the advantages of cost reduction as well as
better maintenance service. Among Japanese exchange
equipment makers. Oki Denki (Oki Electric), Fuji
Tsushin (Fuji Contmications) , and NE have already
been producing EPBX's in the United States, and Hitachi
Ltd reportedly may join their ranks in a year or tvo.
however. revelation of the fact that REC will be making
exchange equipment other than PEX's for central offices,
which will be among the most advanced available. in the
United States, is expected to arouse considerable reac-
tion in industry circles.

Although the four major Japanese makers of exchange equipment have been
pushing with considerable success the export of EPEx'a to the United States,
there is now a movement to switch to local production all of the production
now exported to the United States, particularly ir. view of the introduction
of low cost EPEx's on the market by Hestern Electric, the manufacturing

arm of ATT, and also taking into consideration the trend towards a stronger
yen.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oki Denki'a subsidiary, Oki Electronics of America, had already switched
production from its cross-bar type ”it's to BPBX‘s in 1975. and American
Telecom Inc, a joint enterprise with Fuji Tsushin, converted last year.

Per local manufacture of EPBx‘s and electronic button telephones, i.e..

key telephones, for the 0.3. market, NBC built a plant in Irving near Dallas,
Texas, which started production in July. This represents NEC's first manu-
facturing plant venture in the United States. It is rumored that Ilitachi
Ltd is also seriously considering full-scale production of rum in Atlanta
in a year or two. '

As can be seen, the four major Japanese companies are accelerating their
EPBX production in the United States, and they have also launched vigorous
sales campaigns. Of these firm, NBC, although its first priority is to get
production running smoothly at its Dallas plant, has also finalized its plan
to manufacture digital exchange equipment here with a target date of 1980.
and they have now embarked on concrete studies.

According to private sources, NBC has had many inquiries from independent
American telephone companies. This has resulted so far in successfully obtain~-
ing orders for equipment for 15 central offices. One recent order, worth

1.3 billion yen, was from a telephone company in Florida for digital exchange
equipment for urban and suburban installation, and reportedly the recruitment
of technicians has already started. It is also reported that exchanges which
have already received delivery of equipment could probably be in operation by
the spring of next year.

In, western Electric, and GT8 in the United States and Northern Teleco- in
Canada are reportedly putting consumable effort into time-sharing digital
exchange equipment, and the competition to sell to the independent telephone
companies is keen. Prom NBC's standpoint, more orders means more users, such
that improving maintenance service on their equipment becomes increasingly
important. It feels therefore that its competitive position can be imroved
by both local production and consolidation of its local maintenance service
organization.

In any case at a time when four major Japanese firms are realizing EPBX pro-
duction in the United States, mac's plan for local production of digital ex-
change equipmant. which is considered to be the equipment of the future, is

expected to arouse reaction in related as well as inediate industry circles.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1978

5576
080: 5500

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSli ONLY

CUBA

'PRELA' REPORTS ON UPCOMING NONALINED RADIO MEETING 1“ HAVANA
Havann FRI-ILA in Spanish 1355 ONT 2!. Jan 79 PA
[Article by Leopoldo Pomeo)

[Text] Havana. 24 Jan (PL)-'l'he representatives of 11 nonalined countries
will meet here in early February-oonly 7 nonths away free their sixth suit

neeting--to discuss important aattera connected with the field of radio-
connotations.

Two groups of experts free the cooperation committee of the nonalined countries
radiobroadceeting organization will participate in theee discussions and.

aaong other things. will discuss the rediatribution of radio frequencies at

the international level.

This and other topics will be analyzed by the world adeinistrative radio
conference. which is elated to be held in Geneva. Switzerland in October.

The first of the two groups will be presided over by representatives of
Algerian Radio and Television Service and the second by representatives of
"All-India Radio." which specializes in radio broadcasting by satellite.

The sessions will be held free 2 to 6 February at the "Havana Libra" hotel
in this capital. Delegations fro- the Deeocratic People's Republic of
Korea. Cuba. Guyana. Iraq. Kenys‘. Nigeria. Tunisia. Yugoslavia and Zeabia
will also participate in the event.

The nonalined countries' first radiobroedcesting conference was held in
Sarajevo. Yugoslavia. free 27 to 30 October 1977. end was attended by
5!. neebcr countries.

On that occasion. an action progra- for the world radio conference. which
is to be held in Geneva. was outlined and a coordinating co-ittee presided
over by Yugoslavia organized.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_POR OVI'ICML USE ONLY

That cemlttee included Tunisia, Algeria, Guinea, Nigeria, Togo, Tanzania,

Zaire. Kenya, Zanbia, indie, Afghanistan, Democratic Korea, Jordan, Iraq,
Malaysia, Cuba, Peru. Panama and Yugoslavia.

Last year in Algiers. the group of exports held their first meeting. This
same group will now neat in this capital to begin a joint. coordinated
effort in connection with the aforenentioned Geneva conference.

The final declaration of the Algiers meeting condesned the idea of for-er
colonial power maintaining radio stations in the territories of nonalined

countries and. because of their interventionist nature. likened these stations
to the presence of noocoloninl nilitary bases.

The ”pirate" work carried out by the radio stations of certain Western
countries. which produce interference on the nonslinsd ceuntries' local
frequencies. was also denounced.

0n the other hand, the docuent expressed solidarity and support for the

radio programs broadcast froa various parts of the uorld by the national
liberation novcnents.

One topic that was broadly discussed and which will be debated once again
here concerns the adoption of neasures aimed at gusranteeing a non
equitable distribution of the frequencies at the international level.

Both in the nonalined countries novenent and in UNESCO. the unjust distribu-
tion of radio frequencies and the monopolization of the infornstion and
comnications services by the large centers of econouic pousr. particularly
the transnational conpanics. has been denounced.

The participants at these meetings will also take part in activities.
including a visit to the Palace of Congresses, which is currently under
construction and will be used as seat of the sixth nonalined emit next
Septenber.

080: 5500

10
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

KENYA. TANZANIA MlCRWAVB--Pujitsu Ltd. announced liondsy that it hss won
two orders for microwave networks fro- Kcnya snd Tsnunic through c. Itoh
& Co. Fij itsu said the orders were placed by Posts and Tslccouunicstions
Corporations of the two African countries. They are worth sou 2,000 nil-
lion yen in all which covers equipment. installation, uintonsnco and
personnel training. [Text] [Tokyo HAINICIII DAILY NEHS in English 9 Jan 79
n 5|

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY