FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

JPRS L/10487

30 April 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 26/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]

or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was

processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND RcGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
HATERIALS RBPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS

30 A;

JAPAN REPORT

(2000 26/82)
CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOINICAL

Lockheed Verdicts Expected To Affect Suzuki
(Kenji “Mara; THE KEY Imm, 2 Apr 82)....000000

Heinberger's Reply on USSR Role Questioned
(Two "Washi; MINICHI DAILY NM, ’1 Apr 82) eeooeeeo

Trade Union Unification Monument Explained
(Tadanobu “semi; OETSUYOKAI HEW, 7 mo 81) e 0.. o o. e co

Reform of Upper House Election System
(Takehiko Takahashi; MAINICHI DAILY NM, 7 Apr 82) ...

MILITARY

JDA To Make Tank Parts Interchangeable With “-1
("IHw KEIZAI 8mm, 10 Apr 82) ......COIIIOOI'OOOOOO

Japan-U.3. Military Technology Cooperation Issue Discussed
(Various sources, various dates) ......................

Federation of Economic Organization's View

Defense Industry's Activities in U.S.

Pros, Cons on Technology Cooperation
800N041

'HAINICHI' Views 'Drade Friction, Market Opening
(Editorial; WICHI DAILY m, 29 ”a" 82) oeoeooooeoe

Partners Lobby Against Import mots Lifting
(m JAPAN Tms, 29m82) ......OOOOOOIOOO0.00......

-.- [III-ASIA-ll]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Budget Criticized for Lack of Euphesis on Expansion of
Domestic Demand
(Editorial; HAIRICHI BAIL! m, 8 Apr 82).............

SCIENCE AND TBCHNOIDGY
Briers
Supercomputer Development

Conputer Logic Device
Satellite Press Trencnieeion Test

MWWONLY
IDCKHEED VERDICTS DIPEC‘I‘ED 70 ”PM SJZUKI

Tokyo ms DAILY vacuum in English 2 Apr 82 p 3

[Political Beat column by Kenji Kitahara:

[Text]

COPYRIGRT:

CSO:

l’rime Minister Susukl‘s political luck
remains good with yet another advantage-
ous development which can only bolster
the belief that there is no other leader
at the moment who could replace him as
premier and president of the Liberal-

Dcmocratic Party (LDP).
This is the announcement that verdicts

on 'l‘omlseburo Hashlmoto. former trans-
port minister. and Takayuki auto. former
transport vice-minister. will be handed
down June s. behind schedule.

On this date, Suzuki will not be in Je-
pen and the Diet will not be in session.
preventing the opposition from using the
verdicts against the government and ﬂu-
suki himself.

The premier is scheduled to depart Ja-
pan on June 3 on a long Journey. He will
attend the Versailles summit, the UN spe-
cial General Assembly session on disarma-
ment and then visit Brasil and other
Latin American countries. He will receive
news of the verdict in New York.

it seems highly unlikely that the cur-
rent normal Diet session will be extended
pest ﬂay iii, since there will be few im-
portant hills after passage of the fiscal

1903 budget.
The enti-Susuki camp in the LDP end

the opposition parties expected the ver-
dicts on Hashimoto and Bato in the Dock-

heed trials to have a serious impact on
the political situation and reduce Busuki's
chances for reelection.

The Daily Yomiuri. 1982

4120/22?

1

"Premier Suzuki ' s Luck']

They anticipated that these verdicts
would foretell the fate of former premier
Kakuei 'l'anaka in his own Lockheed trial
which is expected to end around next
February. Therefore. they believed that
’siiiuki's cabinet would suffer a severe
0

His enemies within the LDP and the
opposition hope to force Suzuki to quit as
premier. if LOP Secretary-General Busurnu
Nikaido'a name is referred to in the :udg-
ments. Nikaido is a reputed "grey oin-
cial." end he is intimate with both Suzuki
and Taneke.

But things are not working out quite
the way Susuki's enemies would like them
to. a young Dietman says.

We can only agree with a remark by
a high ranking oflicial of the Foreign
Ministry who said that Jane would be a
goodtimeforSumutobeoutofthe
country.

But why did the Tokyobutrict Court
set this date for handing down its ver-
diets?

Was It by chance. If so. it certainly
worked out very well for the premier and
faction leaders close to him.

The scheduling of the first two verdicts
in June and Tank“ in Flebruary next
year. after the LDP election. are fortunate
developments for Suzuki. -

Suzuki is a very lucky politician, despite
his shortcomings in diplomacy and in
security and domestic affairs.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL All) socmmc ICAL

NEINBERGER'S REPLY ON USSR ROLE WESTION'

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY news in English 4 Apr 82 p 2

[Political Periscope column by Takuo Hayashi:

[Text]

u.s. Deiense Secretary
Casper Weinberger met some
300 Japanese and ioreign
corr ts at a press

conierenoe held at the Japan
National Press Chili on Friday
twoweeitsago.Attlieoutset.ltc
read a considerably long
statement. One at its major
contents was to emphasize the
need to ensurethesaicty oi the
Paciﬁc-Indian Ocean sea-lanes
and urge the Japanese
government to realize the
pledge Prime Minister Zenlto
Suzuki made to the United
States to “deiend Japan's ses-
lanes to a distance oi Loon
miles." Weinberger then an-
swered the questions irom the
reporters present.

The press conterence was
covered at length by the
newspapers and televison
networks at that time. but some
oi the important questions and
answers were not reported in
detail. A case in point was the
initial stage oi the question and
asnwer session. The tirst
questionwasasioilows:

"in your statement you
stressed the necessitytosoeure
the Paciiic~lndian Ocean sea-
lanes. Now. regardhg the tree
passage oi the Japanese
tankersandothervesselsinthis
region. there are two opposing
views among the Japanese

people.

“According to the tint view.
it is wing to the protection
extended by the US. 7th Fleet
that the Japanese vessels are
enjoying the iree passage oi this
region. Without it. theJapanese
sea-lanes would he Interrupted
hy theSoviet Union

Second View

“The second view denies the
iirst view. it says that the tree
passage oi the Japanese vessels
does not owe anything to the
etiorts made by the 7th Fleet. it
tsduetotheiact thattheSoviet
Union does not have any intent
to interrupt the sea-lanes. They
iurthcr say. took at China’s
vessels.‘ China does not have a
strong navy and its relationship
with the Soviet Union is even
worse than Japan's relationship
with the Soviets. Nonetheless.
its vasels can freely move in
this region And. it has nothing
to do with the ettorts made by
the'ith Fleet

“i teel thissecoodviewmore
convincing then the tint view.
Thereiorerotddilitetotnvite

yourviewregardlngthissecnnd
view.”

iwastheonetvhoraiaedthts
question. The iirst part oi
Wetnherger's reply to my
questionwasastoliows:

“Although I hope the question

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Weinberger' 5 Reply"]

wouldheonethaticananswer
hist'iio.'iaeethlslsitutnot
quiteaostmpte.‘ihtsisoneoi
those hypotheses and

propositions that are esttemety
diiiicult to test out.”

tits reply wasratherenntrary
totheeapectationsoithosewho
thought he would say in a
etearcut manner that “the
second view is hormone.”
Later. the deiense secretary
added that “i have the ieeling
that the iirst view tsesurrtially
correct." pointing out the
"increased Soviet threat" as
thereason iorlhndhcon-
cluslon. he declared "the
second view" was

"(loamy short-W."

Frankly speaking. my im-
pression was that his reply was
not very convincing. For in-
stance. he did not reply to my
question as to why Chinese
vessels can ireely move it the
Pacific and lndian Oceans
without the protection oi the 7th
Fleet. As one oi the reasons tor
the "increased Soviet threat."
the deiense secretary pointed
out that “the Soviet

weapons it they are only tor the
purpose oi deiendlng the
\ zeta pomp.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

TRADE UNION UNIPICATION MOVEMENT EXPLAINED
Tokyo GBTSUYOKAI REPOTO in Japanese No 10510, 7 Dec 81 pp 10-15

[Excerpt from a lecture given by the president of Dani, the Japanese Con-
federation of Labor, Tadanobu Uaani: "Labor Front Unification, Political

Progress. Spring Offensive and Donei"]
[Text] Unification With a View To Realization of Political Program

With regard to the issue of political alignment. I believe that this unifica-
tion is not a unification of political fronts, but a unification at the labor

union level--that is, it calls for solidarity among various organizations:
organizations in support of the Socialist Party. a group in support of the
Democratic Socialist Party. yet another supporting Shakonin [Shakaito
(Socialist Party), Koneito (Clean Government Party) and Hinshato (Denocratic

Socialist Party)]. Thus we must avoid destroying the mity by an obvious
display of political colors. Our unification goal is the realization of

political programs, so we must boil down the political topics that we as a
civilian union care about into policies at the union level. Then we must
sell these policies to different political parties. Unless we do this,
there will be no resolution of political issues. He nust do this construc-
tively.

If the political programs we seek are :ncorporated into the tenets of the
Socialist Party, Koneito, the Denocrati: Socialist Party and others, and the

respective parties work toward their realization, then the cumulative effect
will be unification of policies among the political parties. Such solidarity
would' give growth to a healthy political force which I believe would be a
fine thing. But the prerequisite for us is not to get deeply involved in

the issues surrounding party level reorganization. Therefore unification
and the question of a political front are not directly connected.

But if we are to speak about the result...I do not like the word "reform."
but we are hopeful that as a result of the reorganization, the opposition
force's structure will becone more organized.

Donei's Support for Middle-of—the-Road Force Is Clear

However. with regard to the current issue of Donei [Alliance], considerable
debate has taken place over the political questions and the issues have been

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
boiled down to a meeting point. The Domei itself has been rather extensively

active in political issues in the past, and I believe it should continue to
engage in such activities hereafter as well.

He ourselves have supported the Japan Democratic Socialist Party. It is

unfortunate that Japan does not have a healthy political force that can pose
an alternative to the Liberal Denocratic Party. This is nost unfortunate in

terms of cleaning up Japanese politics and setting up a functioning parlia-
mentary democracy. thus, it is very inortant that we build up an alterna-
tive political force.

But when I think about the socialist/commist forces in their present state
seizing political power, I an concerned that the outcon would be a "minus."

That being the case, perhaps the best solution would be to build up the so-
called niddle-of-the-road political force. If the Deeocratic Socialist Party
would get bigger, that would be the best thing; but realistically, we are not
in a situation where we can put up a candidate for each of the election
districts. That being the case, the ultiute choice that is open is to
support Konei, the Shinjiyu Club [New Freedon Club] and/or the Shaninren
[Shakai Hinshu Rengo (Social Democratic Federation”.

The other day I met with President Akitani of the Soka Gakkai. As we
approach the final stages of the 1983 election, the issue of election support
is bound to surface.

No matter how much discussion there is along the political parties, the ques-
tion of election support is never satisfactorily settled. Though there my

be statenents to the effect that Romeito will reconnd a certain Demcratic
Socialist Party candidate or vice versa, or that such and such a faction will

support a given Shaminren candidate, the nost inortant thing is how the sup-
port orgenizations in the background will behave. Although an endorsenent nay

be said to come from the Denocratic Socialist Party, unless the union takes
action, the Democratic Socialist Party's support will be an ewty one. In

the same vein, Koneito's support without the actual participation of Soka
Gakkai would be meaningless. That being the case, there seens to ac to be a

need for the supporting organization to deepen its mutual understanding. I
spoke forthrightly about my opinion that it is inortant that we somehow
change the current political situation and that the election should be
approached with the above detailed prenise as a prerequisite.

Gakkai Gives Prominence to Human Rights, Peace Hovenents Over Elections

President Akitani's response was that, although he understood ny point of
view, it would be preferable that we seek further mutual understanding prior
to those steps. We talked in detail about promoting nutual understanding

between the two mass organizations-wne religious and the other labor, and
different in character, yet alike in that they are populist bodies--on such

topics as peace and human rights issues.

During this time. however, the question was raised at the Donei central
deliberative council meeting: "Although we pay great heed to Gakkai, what

FOROFl-‘léALUSEONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USEZONL¥

about the organizational agreement? How is that to be evaluated?“ For
instance, take the peace question. As a religious body, respect for human

life is of primary importance. In that context, we [Soka Gakkai] seek
peace. But heretofore, the Japanese peace movements have been somewhat

leftist-oriented. Gskkai would not want to subscribe to that leaning. It
wishes to continue its own unique peace movement without any political lean-
ings, one that is a UN-based peace movement. President Akitsni commented
that various efforts-inc1uding a large UN exhibit in Pnhushima-are being
made toward this end.

In the same context, although there has not been any clear organizational
decision on the topic, the League for Construction of world Federation

[sekai renpo kinsetsu domei], to which Tetsuo Katayama was the first dele-
gate, is a highly idealistic entity. we recognize it as an important ideal
and support the movement actively. Thus, regarding direction-in terms of
aims--we are not so different. President Akitani and I talked in this vein.

But I did feel strongly that if that is the case. the organizational agree-
ment has really been mislaid.

At the meeting with the president of the Soka Gakkai we discussed many things,
but we did not intend to concentrate on any specific religious body. There
is an organization called Shin shuren [Federation of New Religious Organiza-

tions?] led by Rissei Koseikai. we were planning to talk to its president.
Hr Niwano, too. But his schedule did not permit a meeting before the year-

end, and they requested that the meeting be scheduled after the new year.
we had their full understanding with regard to our meeting with President

Akitani. After the new year, we sincerely hope that we can achieve closer
contacts with the support organizations in general-not only the religious

organizations but others as well; for example, the Shinjiyu Club's support
force and Shaminren's parent body...though there are not so many of them-so
that we can sound out those having goals similar to Our own.

Defense Policy of Domei Remains Unchanged Since 1969

A word or two about the political front. In the case of the Domei, there
will be a general meeting beginning on 26 January. Deliberations are under

way now on the movement's policy. One of the topics being discussed is the
defense strength consolidation. This has drawn a lot of attention, but this

is not the first year that this topic has been taken up. The policy regard-
ing peace and safety was clearly stated in the 1969 policy statement of the

movement. But a lot of time has elapsed since then, and in January of this
year a delegate to the Domei general meeting raised the point that, despite

the fact that self-defense is a very important question, there has been no
written statement by the Domei on this subject.

Although we can say that we have published a statement once before. not

everyone remembers it, so we decided to take this opportunity to reconfirm
our thinking on peace and safety. This constitutes a portion of the move-

ment's policy statement.

6
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE¢MVLY
As a result, we are receiving lots of criticisn, for example that this is
militaristic thinking, or that it tends toward military aggrandirenent. It

is none of these. Although we debate a great deal on taxes and welfare, all
that is predicated on a peaceful existence. He must value peace and safety

first of all. Everyone is very much aware that Japan has a peaceful consti-
tution and that we subscribe to the three antinuclear principles. Ihe ques-
tion is what can Japan do while adhering to those tenets.

In view of the three antinuclear principles, the Japan-0.8. Security Treaty
should be evaluated in the context of nuclear-related issues. As for the

Self-Defense Forces, insofar as there exists a nation, it should have the
right to defend itself fron attack. and if there is that right, there should

be a self-defense capability backing it. But adlitary strength that night he
used to settle international disputes, resulting in warlike acts, is pro-

hibited in the constitution. Thus we should not maintain such a military
capability. However, in the event of aggression by another state, we should

have sufficient self-defense strength to repel it. It is important that we
use our strength for defensive purposes only.

In addition, there is a potential for military takeover; thus it is important
to reinforce civilian control.

COPYRIGHT: Kokumin Seiji Kenkyukai 1981

11b60
C80: 4105/63

nontollﬂcgkl.lﬂﬂﬁ(ﬂVLY
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAI.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REFORM 0P UPPER HOUSE ELECTION SYSTEM

Tokyo HAINICIII DAILY ms 111 English 7 Apr 82 p 2

[Article by Takehtko Takahaoht]

[Text]

A political problem
rernainingin theatrrent Diet
aeaalonBihepropooedreiortn

the Home ol miller:
election system. The

criticized as being an in-
lrtngem ot lheConatitutioo.
Today such criticism has

mppeared. The reason why
theLDPdrattedandaohrnitted
thlshillisthatahugeamnlot
tuidsiIrequtrediorthetpper
ﬂottse'a national constituency
election'l‘heMalwlodaed
that thenewsyatemmldhe
more advantageous in ob-

votea tor partlea
constituency.

necesarytorttnalarue

nornhorotcaadidatahlocal'

WUptonw.even
tnlocaleleetoraldistrictsvltha
quotaolmorethantvoaeals.
the LDP entered only one
candidate and obtained an
assuredDietaeat.

MCandmw

“Butlnordertogahvotaator
the party. two candidates will
probably he «ﬂared wherever
there is a quota ot more than
two Diet aeaia. In and! a can;

8
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAI

advantageous it the natlooal
constituency. hat in local
electoral dlatrlcts. the
poulhllity exists that the votes
will become dlspexaed and Diet
seatswlllhelost.

"llthlshapoensdtvlllmean
in the
lerence ln method tron: the
LDPconoept

The mtddle-loe-road
Kometto and Democratic
Socialist Party oppose the
reform plan. The Japan
Communist Party. which runs
candidates tn all local electoral
districts. Is also opposed. The
JSP's decision will he lormally
reached at a central committee
meeting to beheld April 12.

A relorm ol the electton
system will have a'eructal et-
lectonallpollttcalpartles.llan
adjustment on method can be
reached between the L0? and

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050063-2

Dlet seats they possess
together. the passage ot the hlll

Underanhadtmﬂntherels
a strong poeslbltly ot the
election retonn htll hetng

J8? and the retortn plan is shelvedazatn
approved. the other politkal (The writer ts an adviser to
parties are likely to raise it» the nah-w Newspapers and
tense objectlons. Imerchleledm writer).
Even it the [DP and JSP
attempt to rallroad the relorm
plan through the committee and
. the plenary session on the hast:
ottheoverwhelmtngmtmherol
COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News 1982

C80: 6120/237

FOR CPI-1&1“. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050063-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIL ITARY

JDA 1'0 MAKE TANK PARTS INTERCHANGWLE um! H-l

OHI10113 Tokyo NIHOI'. KBIZAI SHINBUN in Japanese 10 Apr 82 Morning Edition
p l

[Excerpts] The defense agency has firmed up a plan to make the mounted gun
barrel of its next generation tank (88-type tank), which is currently under
development, interchangeable with that of the gun for America's next
generation minstay tank (H-l). Similarly, it will also make shells used
by the 88—type tank interchangeable. This interchangeability is aimed at
maintaining Japan's ability to continue war in an emergency—even if it

runs short of ammition-wby receiving supplies from the United States.

This is the first time Japan has ever developed a weapon whose parts are
interchangeable with those of another nation's min piece of military
hardware. The United States is to build gun barrels for M—l tanks by

using the technology of a West German gun barrel maker through a license.
That is why the defense agency is :ounding out the PR6 Government on whether
it will furnish technical data to Japan. Inasmuch as the realization of

the defense agency plan will mean the de facto establishment of a trilateral
joint arms development system among Japan, the United States and West Germany,
it is bound to attract attention from all nations as a concrete entangle of
the use of interchangeable weapons by Western nations under their joint
strategy toward the Soviet thion.

The 88-type tank which the defense agency is developing will be used by the
ground self-defense force as one of its major pieces of equipment. With a
view toward completing the development of the 88—type tank in fiscal 1988,
the agency will undertake the development of the gun tarret and shells

in fiscal 1982. Japan's present mainstay tank, the 74-type, has a lOS-mm
gun, while lZO-mm guns are mounted on the latest West German tank,
Leopard-II, and Britain's Chieftain-type tank. America's H—l tanks can
fire both lOS—m and lZO-m guns. The Soviet mainstay tank, 7-72, has a
lZS-mn mounted gun. Thus, the general global trend is toward introducing
larger calibers. For this reason, the defense agency has decided to mount
a 1204:: gun on the 88-type tank.

Previously, the defense agency sounded out the 0.5. Defense Department on
whether it could provide technical data on the gun barrel for the 11-1 tank.
However, the reply was that the United States planned to license-produce the

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
barrel by introducing technology from the Heat German barrel maker
(Rhinemetal). Acting on the 0.8. suggestion, the defense agency has sounded
out the West German Government on whether it will furnish technical data to
Japan on the shape, size and other aspects of the gun barrel in question.

A defense agency source has eXpresaed the strong hope that the plan will
materialize.

If the plan materializes, the use of interchangeable parts of major ailitary
equipment between Japan and the United States, with West Germany acting as

a middleman. will become a reality for the first time. This raises the
possibility that a system of military cooperation between the United States,
NATO and Japan will be established in the future. When the issue of Japan-
U.S. cooperation in military technology was raised during the current
session of the lower house budget committee, the government expressed the
view that "the joint research and development of arms and military technology
by Japan and the United States is not subject to the three principles banning
arms exports.“ (lamenting on the 88-type tank development plan, the defense
agency source said: "In this case, we will build it at home by merely
introducing technology from outside. Therefore, it has nothing to do with
cooperation in military technology." However, it is expected that opposition
parties will make an issue in the Diet of the plan to develop the 88-type
tank-which will use shells interchangeable with those for America 's H-l tank--

contending that "this plan is virtually tantamount to joint arms research and
development by a plural number of countries."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

C50: [420/239

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

JAPAN-0.5. MILITAR! TECHNOLOGY COOPERATION ISSUE DISCUSSED

Federation of Economic Organization's View

Tokoyo NIHON KDGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Feb 82 p 1

[Text] In the economic world, concerning President Reagan's 1983 budget
message, there is the generally positive evaluation that "The aim is to
control adjusted inflation by reducing welfare and wages so that the public
will economize" (Yoshihiro Inayama, Chairman of the Federation of Economic
Organizations [Keidanren].) In particular. concerning the budgetary emphasis
on national defense. there is a cannon recognition that "Benceforth. the
pressures on Japan to increase its defense capabilities will get stronger“
(Kawamata Katsuji. Chairman of Nissan Motor Company). and even concerning
Japanese-American military technology cooperation which has become a focal
point. Mr Inayama stresses the necessity for relaxing the policy of
y-ahibiting arms exports and declares that "If world conditions change. it
will be acceptable to change the Three-Point Principles of Prohibiting the
Exports of weapons." Further. regarding Japanese defense capabilities,
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries adyisor Gakuji Mariya, while stating. "Fundamental
policy must be determined by the government," indicates. "we must consider
national defense based on Japan‘s independent judgement (and not based on
American pressure)," and appeals, "Effective management of a budget which
emphasizes that the consolidation of equipment strength is important."

While annual expenditures in the 1983 0.8. budget stopped at the low growth
rate of 4.5 percent over last year's, the military expenditures actually rose
17.9 percent and are approaching wartime levels. Concerning this increase the
U.s. Government has explained that "This is to re-vitalize the western
alliances and U.S. naval superiority," but in the Japanese economic world
there is agreement on the perspective that "the Uhited States, not only wishes
to fill the military gap with the Soviet Union in 1985, but also wishes to
establish superiority over the Soviets. and defense demands made of Japan will
get stronger" (Hr Inayama).

But concerning the way in which Japan should respond to 0.8. demands. there are
slight differences in nuance: "If Japan were a member of the Hestern alliance,
cooperation would be proper" (Hr Inayama); "To simply follow in the wake of
U.S. demands would be dangerous; we must seek American understanding of Japan's
internal conditions regarding this point" (Mr Kawamata); and "Fundamentally,
Japan's defense policy must be determined by its own judgement" (Hr Horiya).

12
FOI.0FF1CLA1.USEtONLY
Concerning nilitary technology cooperation with the United States, even
though the government is enthusiastic from the standpoint of resolving
Japanese-American trade friction, it is leaning towards the judgement that
"from the standpoint of the J.s.-Japan Security Treaty, technological
cooperation cones before the Three-Point Principle of Prohibiting the Exports
of weapons which are our domestic policy." The economic world has heretofore
consistently maintained a cautious posture regarding this problem, but if we
take Hr Inayama's pronouncement that "He must obtain the public's
understanding" as a premise, it is showing a fairly positive attitude toward
technological cooperation.

In response to the viewpoint that American deficits will invite high interest
rates and create difficulties for Japanese economic management. there is the
perspective that "The most important point is that high interest rates will
control inflation. and even if the Japanese Government will have few choices,
there is no other way" (Mr Inayams). Further, concerning Japanese-American
econonic friction, there is a hint that there are limits to Japanese-American
couercial cooperation in Mr Kawamata's remarks, "Friction may-not be resolved
even if there is an improvement in the non-tariff trade barrier situation.
There is no other means but furthering the opening of the market for
agricultural goods and the service industries."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokoyo Eonsha 1982

1

Defense Industry's Activities in 0.8.
Tokoyo SENTAKU in Japanese Vol 8, No 2 Feb 82 p 87

[Text] Japanese government officials and business leaders are very busy in
making connections with the u.s. Department of Defense (the Pentagon). Leading
manufacturers dealing in the so—called advanced technologies such as
electronics. electrical machinery, precision machinery, and optical

machinery, etc., are establishing offices in Washington as if they were
competing with eath other. Their primary job is to gather reports on American
economic and trade policy. but from last year to this year, the content and
activities have changed entirely.

"hat they are doing now is competing against each other in establishing contact
with consultants who were former Pentagon officials and have connections with
the Pentagon. Among these consultants are former high Pentagon officials who
worked in positions as high as Assistant Under-secretary of Defense. "They will
not deal with you if you suddenly go out to the Pentagon and say you want to
sell them something. Therefore you have to ask a consultant and have him get
you into Pentagon circles," explains an executive of a certain electric
machinery manufacturer.

The first step in the procedures for supplying materials to the Pentagon is
using the consultant as an intermediary, and next is tendering the samples
when you are "called in.” Once a year the Pentagon holds a sample fair in
which the products of outside producers are all gathered together. It is
reported that the number of Japanese manufacturers who displayed products in

13
FIN!(HNWC1AI.US£GDNLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in last year's product fair increased to close to ten companies. Because of
the denials of those involved this is an unconfirmed report. but it is said
that among the participants were Nippon Electric Company, Ltd., Fujitsu Ltd.,
Hinebea, Nitsubishi Electric Corporation, Omron Tateishi Electronics Company,
and Hitachi Construction Equipment.

Of note is Nippon Electric's achievement in 1980 in exporting short range
optical cmmmunications equipment for the American air defense system. The
direct supplier was a subsidiary of A31, but the Pentagon ispected the
technology and the specifications and granted its permission. Compared to
Nippon Electric. Mitsubishi Electric Company and Kyoto Ceramics, etc. are
late entries, but they have invited high Pentagon officials to inspect their
factories and are trying to establish some kind of connection.

Further, far-sighted manufacturers are planning to make inroads at the Pentagon
using American manufactureres as a front. Hinebea has purchased Pacific
Propeller (Seattle). America's leading propeller manufacturing and repair
company, and Japan Airlines Electric Manufacturing has succeeded, through

a long—term contract. in supplying aircraft control equipment to America's
Smith Industries and to Honeywell.

Efforts are not limited to the level of parts subcontracting; recently a
number of Japanese-American military equipment joint ventures have also bee
advancing. Toshiba Corporation has received a proposal from Hughes Aircraft
Company for the cooperative development of a "piggy—back" missile using a
charge—coupled device employed in video tape recorders. Mitsubishi Electric,
which has succeeded in adapting the mass production techniques of household
electronics to the production of military equipment. and Hitachi Ltd.. which
has strength in the application of semi-conductor technology, have been
approached respectively by Westinghouse and Rockwell International regarding
joint development and other projects.

Compared to these industries' activities to seek connections to the Pentagon,
official government activities are less intense, but the ground work done by
HITI. which possesses the gift of foresight is the most advanced. Regarding
the problem of the aluminum customs duty rate, HIT! has sought to contact
Defense Secretary Weinberger instead of 0.8. trade representative Brock and
told Heinberger, "The continued Japanese production of aluminum is vital to
Japan's security." By doing so it checked the arguments within the 0.3.
Government over the opening of the Japanese market to aluminum imports.

In the 0.8. Government which changes organization with each change in
administration. only in the Pentagon is there no change in administrative
channels or fundamental policy even if there is a change at the top. It appears
that this is why Japanese officials and businessmen are most desirous of

making connections here.

1b
FOI.OFIWC1AL.USEi)NLY
Pros. Cons on Technology Cooperation

Tokoyo NIKKEI KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 19 Feb 82 p 3

[Text] In the midst of rising strong demands for increased Japanese

defense capability the problems of joint development of arms and Japanese-
American exchange of military technology which are the basis of defense
strength have risen anew as issues. The Reagan administration in the lhited
States, attempting a policy of huge arms increases in order to restore a
balance with the Soviet military and in order to build up the Western weapons
systems is aiming at the advanced technology fields of new materials (fine
ceramics. carbon fibers), fiber-optical co-unications. and Japanese
electronics. and has come to work for the joint development of arms and the
procurement of military technology for America. In response to this the
government of Japan and the U)? have postured and indicated a straightforward
response. "In order to effectively and harmoniously manage the Japanese-

American Security Treaty system it is necessary to respond to American desires
and demands regarding exchange of military technology."

However. the matter is becoming a political problam as there has been a strong
negative response toward intimate involvement in the 0.8. leadership's road

to arms expansion even through military technology and development, and there
is also the counter-argument that the supply of military technology touches

on the Three-Point Principle of Prohibiting the Exports of Weapons. Just as
the prominence of defense expenditures has been made much of, our country's
expenditures for defense preparations purchases have been pushed to the high
level of 1 trillion yen and we have begun to grow into a large arm market.

Under these circumstances the picture is complex: 0n the one side there are
in domestic defense industry circles voices saying that exchange of arms
technology and cooperation in joint development are essential under the
Japanese-American security system; and on the other side there is the fear
that as there is close involvement as a subcontracting base for American arm
producers, future development of advanced techmlogy industries will be
controlled by that relationship. Should we move toward lessening friction
with the United States? Should we stick to the route of peaceful economic
relations? Various thoughts are mixed is confusion and we try here to put
the spotlight on the flaring problems of cooperation in military technology.
[Defense Problem Information Group]

The Three Principle of Arms Export (April 1967, Prime Minister Sato's response
in the Diet)

Our nation's arms exports are especially restricted under the Export Trade
Control orders and such exports require the consent of the HITI cabinet
minister; however, in the following cases arms exports will not be recognized
as a matter of principle: 1) arms exports to countries leaning toward the
communist bloc; 2) arms exports to countries under UN-imposed arms embargo:
3) arms exports to countries involved in international disputes or where
there is fear of such involvement.

15
roe omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The New Three—Point Principle of Prohibiting the Export of weapons (February
1976. Prime Minister Hiki‘s response in the Diet)

From the standpoint of a peaceful nation and in order to avoid promoting
international conflict. arms exports have hitherto been dealt with
cautiously. and henceforth. based on the following policy, such exports

will not be pronoted: 1) arms exports in those areas covered by the Three-
Point Principle of Prohibiting the Export of Weapons will not be recognized;
2) even outside the areas covered by the Three-Point Principle. based on the
spirit of the constitution and other relevant laws. we will be cautious in
the export of arms; 3) export of facilities related to the construction

of armaments will be dealth with in the same manner as arms exports.

Desirable Electronic Optical Technology; Japan Aims at its Own Weapons System;
Consciousness of the "Penalties of Greatness" in America?

It is said that in the coarse of the next 10 to 15 years overwhelming military
superiority will stand on developments in advanced military technology.

The occurrence of fierce military competition between military superpowers.
the United States and the Soviet Union. even in the realm of space development
and not stopping with purely military technology such as neutron bombs.
battlefield nuclear weapons. and missiles. relates advanced technology and
military technology; and the connection between the two can only become more
profound at all points.

In the fields of electronics and fiber-optical electronics. etc.. Japan has
acquired and developed technology of the most advanced level. The accuracy
of domestically produced missiles is conspicuously high. and even in the new
materials fields of fine ceramics and carbon threads. no other nation is
Japan's peer. Even in space. we have begun to launch stationary satellites;
the advances of domestic production technology are eye-catching; and in the
Defense Agenzy and industrial circles the call for the establishment of our
own weapons system is rising.

What must be noted is that Japanese-American mutual exchange of military
technology is suddenly appearing as an issue just as though it were to control
the movement towards establishment of Japan's own weapons system.

At a staff conference on Japanese-American security held in Hawaii last summer,
the United States strongly pressed for the exchange of military technology

and cooperative arms development on the one hand, while on the other hand
demanding Japanese military preparation efforts. The American analysis of
developments in Japan. including the argument that Japan was getting a free
ride in its security arrangements. chiefly centered on four points:

1) expenditures for the development of advanced technology had piled up so
that no one country. not even the United States. could bear the burden;

2) a policy to oppose CDHBCDN which, with the Soviet Union at its center.
accepts an international regional economic specialization; 3) the Reagan
administration has declared advanced technology to be a resource; 4) the
desire to incorporate Japanese defense industries. which have extended periods
of payment. as essential subcontractors or "pinch-hitters“ for American
enterprises.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Although there is an apparent contradiction in that, from the perspective of
the 18 billion dollar U.S. trade deficit with Japan which is largely tied to
the American economic slump. the United States can not insist too strongly that
Japan supply her with.aras, there is nonetheless an attempt to make nutual
ailitary technology exchange and cooperative development of nilitary technology
a starting point in greater military cooperation.

The viewpoint which lies a little deeper is that which suggests that perhaps
the United States has begun to take steps, indirectly, toward Japan in the
same way the Soviet Union in Poland faced the laborers who comprised
”Solidarity" with an unbending posture and also suppressed the Czech
liberalization of the well-hows "Prague Spring."

At exactly the same time that Japan had begun to study the introduction of the
world's most powerful interceptor. the P-15 Eagle. as successor to the F-lo
Phantom. Japan's nutter one defense manufacturer. Mitsubishi heavy Industries.
secretly gathered technicians and cot-sensed planning a doustically produced
fighter to oppose the F—15. The intricacies of the P-lS's introduction and
the msuccessful birth of the domestically produced n are explained as the

result of a decisive defeat of five domestically produced fighters by three
Y-lS's in a mock battle.

Not liaited to aircraft, tanks, various missiles, and other characteristically
Japanese weapons have been born. In particular, naval vessels, with the
exception of the "llarpoon" and the "Asrock," are completely domestically
produced. Japanese naval vessel construction capability has reached so far

as to match that of the United States and the Soviet Union, even to the extent

of conceiving, in the 45th defense build-up plan, of a mini-aircraft carrier (DBL).

Even the United States, in strengthening its navy. has alluded to col-aissioning
construction in Japan.

It appears that it is in the supply of naval vessels to the United States

that the potential for arms exports is greatest. and this is the point where
special attention must be given to treatment of the Three-Point Principle of
Prohibiting the Exports of Weapons. However, because the arms standard
gradually is changing to Japan's own system, America will lose technical
control and it is reported that ill feelings are harbored in the United States.

Japan was re-armed during the Korean War. but militarily it has relied
entirely on the 0.5. unbrella based on the United States-Japan Security Treaty.
Siuilarly, even concerning uilitary technology, with the exception of the
"buddy system" and the flying rescue boat. the PS-l, one-way imports have
continued. According to someone connected with Ishikawajina Barima Heavy
Industries, "American technology introduced from 1955-1965 was extraordinary.
But prior to its introduction during the next decade. we were generally able
to grasp what was coming, and in the mid-1970's. we had reached the point of
being able to think. 'Our guess was right. that's what is was after all."'

In the field of electronics Japan has already begun to distinguish itself
here and there relative to the United States. The Japanese are developing
ingeniously unique arms with these technologies. Defense agency chief Ito
consents. "lumen Japan butts in. foreign countries want to construct a defense
net like a 'hedgehog' which draws back in injured paw."

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In these words, we must perceive the thoughts toward the development of arms
which are appropriate to Japan.

If we ask what will now happen to the movuent to "guard the nation with
domestic arms" which was hidden in the shadow of the Japanese-American

military technology exchange which developed so spectacularly. we are forced
to notice Japanese-Inerican competition.

Military Technology Exchange Rising as the Trump Card in Resolving Trade
Friction; "We're in the Midst of a Cautious Investigation"—ml

HITI has not greatly altered its attitude of "being in the midst of a
cautious investigation" of the problem of Japanese-American joint
development of military technology and the export of military technology to
the United States. As the ministry which manages the Export Trade Control
Council which implements the Three-Point Principle of Prohibiting the Exports
of weapons and places the concrete checks on exports. and as the ministry
which must answer to the government when it takes an active interest, it

is necessary to add caution to a cautious investigation.

In finding a way to deal with this problem and to Edodge the opposition of

public opinion and the opposition parties. it is necessary to solidify a

policy which is agreed upon by both the government and the LDP. and the ministry,
wanting to look to the point where both government and party opinion have
finally settled. appears to have been forced into a cautious posture. They are
in particular focusing their attention on the kind of judgement of this

problem that the government's highest brains will make and speculate on when

a decision will be made.

In the midst of all this, Prime Minister Suzuki, in a lower house budget
comittee meeting related a perspective which was perceived as a step forward
when compared to previous policy. "In the harmonious manageunt of the
United States-Japan security system which is the main pillar of Japan's
defense, both Japan and the United States have responsibilities. From this
perspective we are giving this problem serious consideration." After this
statement KIT! seemed to waiver. but later a clarification that "The Prime
Minister's remarks do not greatly cross the boundaries of the government's
thinking that, in regard to this problem, we are, as heretofore. in the midst
of an investigation." was made within the government and once again the
ministry took its "cautious" position.

However, it is a fact that within HITI various positions have emerged in
regard to this problem.

One of these positions was expressed by an administrative official. "It looks
like HIT! is taking a passive attitude toward this problem. That is not so."
He explains, "By no means are they just leaving matters to themselves, but it
is troublesome that HIT! has made the judgement that at least in this problem
with the United States, it is not a matter in which they must be involved."

He warns that the scheme which sees the Defense Agency and the Foreign Ministry
as the activist faction and MITI as the cautious faction. begins to make it

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

appear that "HITI'a methods of seriously considering relations with the
United States are soft-headed."

HITI is now caught up in the whirlpool of trade frictions with the United
States. Resolution of these frictions is its most urgent theme. However,
there is no effective trump card in this matter. There are no good ideas to
resolve trade frictions with the United States and the sense of irritation
within the ministry is getting stronger. It is into this setting that the
problem of exporting military technology enters. One administrative official
ewhasized. "He want to step into the problem of arms technology exports if it
will be useful in resolving trade frictions." This same official states "It

is absured to think that HITI regards the United States lightly. We are
thinking about it very seriously."

That there might be a facet of the immanent export of military technology to
the United States which can be used as a trump card in the resolution of trade
frictions is one of the realities of HITI's cautious investigation.

0n the other hand, there is also the view that extreme caution must be
exercised in exporting military technology to the United States because based
on our nation's guarantees of peaceful economic policy we import atomic fuel
from various countries and have commercial ties to various nations. The
promotion of a peacetime economy's industrial structure is the direction
which our country must also take in the future. "In this context. the
Three-Point Principle of Prohibiting the Report of Weapons in a principle

of very high value. It will not now be destroyed," says a certain
administrative official.

Taking the example of the various points of view shown by Western European
nations in response to the Reagan administration's new cold war structure.
the same official ewhasizes that Japan too. from its own standpoint. can attain
an autonomous policy direction. HITI Minister Abe, who is one of the foci of
the policy debate, does not really alter the posture of "being in the midst
of investigation" but he emphasizes again the size of the canon sipificance
which Japanese-American security and the Japanese-American alliance hold.
Furthermore there is the reality that the United States holds a great
influence in our national economy and, according to Mr Abe, it is a fact that
pains must be taken to harmonize Japanese-American economic relationships.

As the government and the U)? are in the midst of formulating a consensus.
this is perhaps a possible stage on which the minister might play a role.

At such a Juncture, Hr Ametani. former HITI advisor who trotted out the name
"merchant nation" (because Japan lives by its economic power, and not by
military power it keeps a low profile to minimise frictions and must be active
in bearing the burdens of economic cooperation) was subjected to sarcastic
remarks at a recent European financial conference when he showed indications
of concern that protectionism would come to the fore, "Hhat kind of country

is it that complains of protectionism even though its own defense in
inadequate?" The defense burden and the export of military technology are not
directly tied together but there is a feeling that KIT! must seek an answer

to such criticism overseas.

1
FOR OFFICIZL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"If it is Necessary, it Won't be a Problem"--Council of Economic Organisations'
Bead Yoshihiro Inayama

Japan and the United States are both bound by the Security Treaty and if , in
the course of making mutual efforts to protect themelves it becomes
necessary. I think that there will not be the slightest problem in cooperative
arms development and the exchange of military technology.

World conditions are changing greatly. If the Three-Point Principle (proclaimed
under the Niki cabinet) hinders Japanese-American military technology
cooperation. I think that. based on securing the understanding of the public,

it will be all right for the Prime Minister to alter them.

Today, when technology is making steady advances, even in the area of military
technology. I think it is necessary to import advanced American knowledge; if
Japanese technology is useful, we should provide it to the United States or
open the road to cooperative development.

Science and Technology Have Military Potential; "Peaceful and Military Uses
Can't be Separated;" Profound Dissatisfaction in the LDP

There are many in the LDP who have doubts about the Three-Point Principle.
This is because they were simply policy trends put forth from the standpoint
of parliamentary tactics at the time of the Hiki cabinet (1976). In a
dissatisfied voice it is argued, "He must not make a serious decision from
the perspective of a simple parliamentary tsctis" (Zentaro Kosaka, member of
the lower house, head of the LDP Foreign Policy Investigation Com-ittee;
Hotoharu Arima, member of the lower house, LDP National Defense Section's
Chairman's Representative; Biroshi Oki, member of the House of Councilors,
Chief, LDP Foreign Affairs Business Section).

However, there are various perspectives on the significance of the Three-Point
Principle. There is, on the one hand, the perspective that "the situation
when Japan must absolutely not export arms is when it would endanger vorld
peact" (Representative Kosaka), and, on the other hand "He must certainly
project a good image to the nations of the world" (Councilor Oki). Between
these two there is also the perpective of Representative Arima, "From the
perspective of the Japanese-American Security Treaty the export of arts is
inevitable becoming necessary."

Representative Ari-a asserts, "He cannot have defense strength which is
separated from science and technology," and says, "He met clearly understand
that today military power is a matter of scientific and technological brains."

In any event, there is strong dissatisfaction that a matter of such importance
as arms exports and the supply of technology will have been determined by

a parliamentary tactic and there are strong voices that the government must
determine a clear policy based on reason.

Diversion to Military Use is Dangerous-«Socialist Party

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Socialist Party's position has been smarized by Yokoyama Toshiaki.
Chairman of the Special Comittee for the Investigation of the Arms Export
Problem. "Japan. from its government and diplomatic posture. Inst not export
arms. Needless to say, the constitution reflects the fact that we were at
one time aggressors against other nations. Today, if Japm wanted to, it has
the technology to build a hydrogen bomb. Therefore, if we divert even a
little of the technology which forms the basis for the people's livelihood
to military use, we will enter a realm where there are no limits at all.

Thus diversion of such technology to military use is a matter which entails
a large element of danger. In just these times the government must be

strong minded and it is important to prevent arms and arms technology
exports."

Military Technology: The Plaring Problem in Japanese-American Cooperation;
Will it Become a Window for Breaking the Prohibition of Arms Exports?
Industrial Circles say "The Wind Is Blowing in the Direction we Want;" A
"Technology Transition" Is Essential; Drawing the Roped-for Clear Line.

In the midst of the Suzuki cabinet's sudden shift to the right in the
prominence of the defense budget. the perspectives and thinking of industrial
circles are confused and we are unable to view them as clearly defined. It
would be expected that in industrial circles they would see merit in attitudes
such as that of the Hawk faction within the 1.0? that modification of the
Three-Point Principle is natural. but in the Arms Construction Industry
Association, in the Federation of Economic Organization's Defense Production
Comittee, and in other related groups, policy debates have not even been held.

Even if they are not boldly raising their voices calling for the modification
of arms export conditions, as industrialists alert to their own interests

the severe change in international conditions brought about by the Soviet-
American confrontation and the American demands in relation to Japan's defense
efforts probably have them thinking that this situation lust necessarily

lead to opening the road to arms exports.

In fact. at the time large-scale plants were being exported to the oil
producing countries of the Arab world and to China. our country's industrial
circles looked with envious eyes at the figures of France, West Germany and
other European nations winning business deals which included fighters. tanks,
and other collateral military exports.

However, in public HITI takes the stance toward the Three-Point Principle
which it has heretofore, but industrial leadership explains. "Beginning with
cabinet ministers. the managerial class in the government is beginning to
indicate an understanding of the new situation." That is. it appears that
conditions will with difficulty bring a wind which blows in the direction
which the industrial circles desire. But wyen there are actually attempst
to export items which appear to contradict the Three-Point Principle, at
HITI's window, where they must deal with the requests, it is reported that
there is a negative response.

This is because in the ministry responsible there is an extreme dislike of
having to consider items which appear to conflict with the Three-Point

21
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Principle and there is fear of pursuit by the opposition parties as HIT!
operates without clear guideliJes in deciding to what extent a list of
export goods conflicts with the Three-Point Principle. This kind of
attitude is explained as being similar to that behind nonutariff barriers.

0n the one hand, there are increasing examples of American defense-related
departments and others seeking demands of Japanese industries for cooperative
development and technology exchanges.

At present, the American demands are frequently in the fields which stand in
relative prominence such as optical cousunications and semi-conductors, but
when we consider the points in which Japanese industries in general commonly
excel-~production, quality, period of payment. atc.--it appears that
henceforth demands will extend to broader fields such as naval vessels. etc.

In one sense, just as prior to Uorld War II. trade frictions between the
United States and Japan are filled with strain; but it is thought that
negotiations for cooperation in the realm of military technology will provide
material for some mitigation of these trade difficulties. In fact, because
trade frictions are the responsibility of the 0.8. Department of Gummrce it
is not thought that the demands made of Japan regarding commercial frictions
will be withdrawn if Japan cooperates in the military sphere, but such
cooperation is seen as a way to influence the attitude of the emotionally
aroused American public in the direction of recognizing that "Japan and the
United States are bound by strong ties."

Will cooperation in advanced fields likely be realized? "It will be fine. if
it happens gradually," says Daisuke Kobayashi. Chairman of Fujitsu.

Advancing the transfer of technology to developing nations, and not just to
the United States is the path along which Japan's livelihood rests. But in
reality. the government‘s stance is not clear even regarding this problem.
Since the Japanese companies involved are worried that technology and
knowhow provided by Japan under the guise of joint development of military
technology will flow to American companies. it appears that HIT! must deal with
this problem In the United States. the military is aiding and aiming at the
development of very high speed integrated circuits based on a plan similar

to our country's super-large scale integration devices, but it is also said
that they are not making good progress. There is a perspective which says
that this is the reason why arms producers in the United States are
universally demanding Japanese cooperation.

In the opinion of Mr Kobayashi. Chairman of Fujitsu, and a host of others in
electronics circles. "That perspective is a Japanese conceit. American
technology is not lagging to that extent. But if there is a demand, we would
like to participate actively."

It is unmistakable that the time has come for the government to take a clear
position on the export of arms and technology transfer. We must listen
attentively for the voices saying, "It is necessary to debate the issues fairly
in the Diet. laying a foundation for national prosperity."

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunaha 1982

9940
cs0: élOS/67

FOR OFFICiEL USE ONLY
'HAINICHI'VIEWS TRADE FRICTION, MARKET OPENING
0W310232 Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 29 Mar 82 p 2
(Editorial: "Nature of Japanese Economy"]

[Text] The Japanese Government led by Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki is now
being called upon to make an important decision in the face of the ever-
growing trade friction between Japan and Western countries. It is also high
time that we once again delve into the claims of the Western countries and
the contention of this country.

The Western countries are urging Japan to open its markets claiming that

the closed nature of the markets is directly responsible for their large-
scale deficits in trade with Japan. Japan, on the other hand, contends that
the core of the problem lies in the Western countries; their lack of effort
to exploit the market and their slow-tempoed growth of productivity. There
is some truth in what both sides say.

0n the other hand, the problem is at once complex and puzzling. Even if

the Japanese markets are completely opened, it does not necessarily mean

that their trade deficits will disappear or that their problems of depression
and unemployment will be solved. The opening of Japan's markets will not
prove to be a simple panacea.

Thus, we hope that the Western countries will cool off and stop trying to
make Japan a scapegoat.

The Reagan administration should revise its economic policy which has caused
great confusion in the world economy. At the root of this confusion are
the fiscal deficit in general and military spending in particular. It is
reported that the Japanese Government in concert with European countries is
prepared to call this to the attention of the U.S. Government at the summit
conference scheduled for June. On this score, we are in accord with the
government and it is hoped that Japan will push forward its contention.

Since we believe that we should discuss the matter in a cool-headed manner,
we welcome the report that it was decided at the European community foreign
ministers' meeting to bring the question of Japan's closed market to a forum
of the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). It is extremely

2
Ffﬂl()FIICJA3.IJSE|DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

significant to discuss which market is more closed, the BC or Japan, and
what to do to improve the situation, in a multilateral forum instead of just
bilateral discussions.

President Reagan reportedly told visiting Japanese Foreign Minister Yoshio
Sakurauchi that the trade friction is a problem involving all Western
countries and that the door should be opened to all trading partners. In
concrete terms, the president pointed out that the restrictions on 14 items

such as plywood, tobacco and certain agricultural produce including oranges
should be lifted.

Frankly speaking, it is highly difficult to pinpoint which country, Japan

or the United States, is more open in its trade practices. Japanese tariffs
are. in a way, as low as those of the United States. It appears that the
United States has intentionally made an example of Japan's remaining import

restrictions on agricultural products in an attempt to Selonstrate the closed
nature of the Japanese market.

One high-ranking U.S. official was quoted as saying that no country has an
agricultural policy perfectly commensurate with economic rationalism, and

that the U.S. Government itself has a restrictive policy toward the import
of beef.

The actual situation the world over may be as this American official depicted,
but still we cannot but conclude that the Japanese market which has such
nontariff barriers as import inspections and customs procedures is more
closed than others. As the U.S. side has pointed out. the government's
administrative guidance has often taken on the nature of industry protection.

The opening of the Japanese market will not be realized unless the structure
of the Japanese economy is improved as soon as possible. Prime Minister
Suzuki is reportedly determined to map out a policy of opening the Japanese

market by the time the summit conference opens in June. It seems that he
is sincere this time in taking the lead in formulating the measures, but

it must be stressed at the same time that any temporary patchwork for opening
the market will not satisfy our Western trade partners.

CSO: #120/236

21;
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

EOONCHIC

FARMERS LOBBY AGAINST IMPORT QUOTA LIFTING
"0310422 Tokyo TEE JAPAN TIMES in English 29 Mar 82 p 2

[Text] Japanese farmers are mounting a fierce campaign to prevent their
government giving in to American pressure for removal of import quotas on
agricultural products.

The United States is already Japan's Iain supplier but it wants even more
to help reduce a massive bilateral trade deficit that last year ballooned
to an estimated $18 billion (using a different calculation. Japan puts the
figure at $13.4 billion). of Japan's 27 remaining import quotes, 22 are
for agricultural products, now the focus of the increasing trade friction
between the two countries.

But to members of the ruling Liberal-Democratic Party (LDP) giving in to
American demands would be tantamount to political suicide.

The party has remained in power for the past 30 years because of the farm
bloc vote, and 60 percent of its parliamentary members currently represent
rural districts.

These include Prime Minister Zanko Suzuki and some of the men who are seeking
to succeed him in the future.

Two of the rising contenders for premiership, international trade and industry
minister Shintaro Abe and chief cabinet secretary Kiicbi Miyazsva, represent
one of the key mandarin organge growing areas.

Ichiro Nakagaua, director general of the Science and Technology Agency, comes
from Hokkaido, an important beef and dairy products area.

Finance Minister Hichio Hstansbe's constituency is one of the country's main
tomato producing areas.

American liberalisation demands cover most major agricultural products for
human and animal consumption. But beef, oranges and other citrus fruit
appear to be regarded in Hashington as the most important.

25
son omcm. use ONLY
The Central Union of Agricultural Cooperatives (ZENCHU), which has formed a
special headquarters to lobby against succumbing to the 0.5. pressure, says
import liberalization would have "a devastating impact" on individual farmers
and would rock the very foundations of Japanese agriculture.

Japanese cattle breeders and dairy farmers cannot possibly compete with their
American and Australian counterparts, who have the benefit of wide open spaces,
it said.

Japanese beef demand is now running at around 620,000 tons a year, about a
third of which is imported, primarily from Australia. Prime beef used in
luxury hotels, hawever, comes from the 0.8. where cattle are fattened on
expensive grain.

Agricultural Ministry officials argue that increased beef imports would lead

to less demand for feedstuff imports, which would greatly work to the disad-
vantage of American grain producers.

But, on the other side of the ledger, continued import restrictions mean
the Japanese public will have to continue paying a prohibitive price for
domestic beef--more than twice as much as in New York, for example.

ZENCHU says orange growers are also at a disadvantage because they cannot
lower their costs through large-scale mechanization due to the fact at least
half of annual production comes from mountainous areas.

Current restrictions inflate the price of imported fruit in the shops. But
imported citrus juice costs about half the domestic product, leading to
excessive stocks of the latter according to a ZENCHU spokesman.

Ironically, fruit importers also oppose liberalization. Imported oranges,

for example, represent only 2 to 3 percent of the 3 million tons coming on
the market each year.

Imports are handled by 96 government-designated companies. A leading trading
house reckons its profit margin on an imported orange at some 50 percent-
which would naturally decline if all the barriers were lowered.

Japan's monopoly system in tobacco is also under fire from the 0.8. and
Western Europe.

Japan lifted import ceilings on tobacco in 1972 and in November 1980 cut its
import tariff from 90 to 35 percent, and allowed 20,000 of Japan's estimated
260,000 tobacco retail shops to handle imports (compared to 14,200 previously).

But with a market share of only 1.4 percent currently, the Americans are
pressing for additional steps, including an increase in the number of retailers

allowed to sell imports and a 30 percent raise in import prices without hiking
retail prices.

These, the Tokyo government argues, would seriously hurt 104,000 Japanese

tobacco leaf growers, whose product is twice as expensive as the American
one and falls far behind in quality.

030: 6120/233

26
FOI.OFTWC1AI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

ECONOMIC

nuncz'r cruncrzeo ron LACK or EHPHASIS 0N expansrou or normsuc pm
Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY news in English 8 Apr 82 p 2

[Editorial: "Expand Domestic Demand"]

[Text] Although the iiscal 1982 budget has been iinally
approved in the Diet. the nation's economy is saddled
with a raft oi knotty problems. The budget lacks
consideration concerning domestic business
recovery. weliare. and overseas economic iriction.
and its execution is no easy task in the “all oi the
grfun economic and political environment both at
home and abroad.

Business at home recorded a minus growth
during the three«month period oi October through
December last year. The number oi unemployed in
the United States and Europe was about it) million
r'eipectiveiy. htany countries are scared by the
nightmare oi a possible great panic resulting irum the
stagnation now in progress at a rapid tempo. Trade
nation between Japan and the Western nations has
been escalated to an alarming degree.

«t- While the world economy is in the doldrums.
Japan is laced with severe criticism _ior its poor
cohtributions as an economic power occupying 10
percent oi world's GNP. it is high time (or this
country to play an eiiectlve role to help the world
economy recover irom the current severe conditions.

,:; in this regard. we believe that Japan's economic
management irom now on should place emphasis on
the easing of iriction and preventing iurther business
recessionbothathomeandabroadJaotherwords.
preparations should be hastened to Inplement a

whamgget that wiilnelnahleaheometas
1.. a M. Irena-am. .. ‘

~"l'heJapanese governmentispla-hgtoeon-
centrateisperceatoitheschedmedpwicvorhsin
thirsthalioitheyearandtoioverthelongoterm
inurest rate as part oi its businus recovery

27
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

measures. This however. is not enough. it may be
ng‘cesaary tor the government to introduce another
powerful measure trom this autumn to keep the
eqhnomygoing. It issai'dthatameamtocopewith
the economic iriction will he completed sometime in
May. but a patchup measure ior opening the market
teioreigneonntriesvill have littleeiiectineasiuthe
aiichm. lthehoovesthe-governmenttomakeeibrts
tor continued expansion oi domestic demand.
Moreover. the envimnment oi the people’s

lifelihood. which is tar inierior to that oi Western
countries. must be improved qualitatively. The
uiotingeeonomicstructurethatistoodependenton
ainrtsshouldheshiitedtoonecenterlngosdomestic
demand. The existing pattern oi public enterprises
characterised by the construction oi bridges. high-
way: and new Shinkansen lines should he wanted
iromthegroundtm.Anevvistashonldheopened
with emphasis placed on “national build-up" plans
such as the redevelopment oi cities. .

" Anineometaxctduillnotheeiiectiveunlmthe

cutiscarriedoutiorstieaattvoyearathatimior

iiscaliaozsndtmjhetaxeutsheuldhedesiped
notonlytoincreaaeindividualapendinghottoeorrect
theinequalityremltlnsiromtheiaetthsttherehaa
heennonductiondurinsthepastiiveyesrs. linearly
ta:cutannotmcementvlilhsvesueatpsycholo¢ical
eiect
.. Revennesourcammthesecwedtocarryout
hoththetaxcutand mereaaedaocaispenduu
aeeuretherevenuesoureesathoronpim em
wasteful upendltiresahonldhecarriedent
ministrative return Mtheperiodsetior ilscal
menstruation by discontinuing the notation oi
deiicitcoverh‘ national bonds hy use should he
uwndediitthsr.
Oniysiterallposslhlemeansaretaheniorthe
apansionoidomesticdemandmanwedemsndthe
Unitedstatestsio'eritshidibterestrstsﬁl'hehi‘

Qniothemnstedmilitaryspendinp‘l'hsitmericas
polleyassuchJovevenhassteppedmroesssionthe
worldeverandmadeuorldeurreuiesqsitemstahle.
‘l'heysn’sdspreeistlonisscsseinpoint.‘l'heyes's
appreciationiseesentisliortheispanesseeonomyto
expand imports. decrease isdintrisl cost and
stabilisecommodityprices. Wemustcallsnthelw.
tostopltsarmsexpansionracenhichhthevery
moithehighinterestrateintheus.
lnshortJortheheneiitoithet-upsMhothihe
government and hunaucrats should abide by the

ﬂinchhoiiisealdemocracy.

COPYRIGHT: Halnichi Daily News 1982

050:

4120/232

28
FOR arr-1cm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIEICB AND 1330!!!”ch

BRIEFS

80?!!!me DEVELOPMENT-Aha Ministry of International Trade and Industry
(MITI) Wednesday authorized the inauguration of a foundation to develop a
"supercomuter" by the 1990s. HIT! gave the go-shesd to an application by
six Japanese conputer nakers and two electrical unufacturers to set up

the research and development institute jointly. The ninistry will entrust
the fomdation with the task of developing a "fifth-generation" computer,
and will provide it with 423 million yen ($1.7 million) in research and
develop-ant funds for fiscal 1982. Foreign enterprises are invited to join
the foundation-0fficially naned the Institute for New Generation Computer
Technology to be headed by Takuna Yamanoto, president of Fujitsu. Ltd.

The US Government has asked the Japanese Governaent to open the door of

the institute to foreign enterprises wishing to join it, according to HITI.
However, no American enterprises have yet expressed any wish to join the

foundation, um said. [rm] [M71049 Tokyo um um mum in English
16 Apr 82 p 41

COMPUTER LOGIC DEVICE-Nippon Electric Co. (NBC) has announced the develop-
ment of a new conputer logic device with the world's fastest conputing
speed, paving the way for development of the next-generation of "super
computers." NBC said the new logic gate had a coaputing speed of 10 pics-
seconds, surpassing the 13 picoseconds achieved by International Business
Machines Corp (IBM) of the United States in 1979. One picosecond is one-
trillionth of a second. The capacity of the NBC logic device, based on the
so-called Josephson elaaent, which is expected to take the place of silicon-
based semiconductors in the future as the basic element of computers, also
exceeds that of a similar Josephson conputer logic gate developed recently
by the electrotechnical laboratory of the Ministry of International Trade

and Industry's Industrial Science and Technology Agency. [Text] [011121141
Tokyo MINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 11 Apr 82 p 5]

SATELLITE PRESS TRANSMISSION TEST—The experinental wireless transnission
of newspaper pages using the experimental commications satellite, Sakura,
was successfully carried out by the Posts and Teleconunications Ministry
Tuesday [13 April] at the ASAHI SHIMBUN's head office in Tsukiji, Tokyo.
The very clear negative filn received is shown in the photograph. The
wireless trans-lesion of the test pattern. which was computer-edited by
the ASAHI, was repeated, and the test results were very good. The test

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

started out with an output of 100 watts and output was gradually lowered
to 10 watts. There were no errors. The tests were carried out by the
ministry with the cooperation of the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone [m]
Public Corporation. and others. A vehicle-counted relay station of the
NT! parked in the ASAHI's parking area was used to send the transmission
from the newspaper's page transnission device to Sakure. The sipsls
received back fro. the satellite were relayed by the station to the
Asahi's receiving device to produce the negative film. Sinilar tests were
to be carried out Wednesday [16 April] using the pages of 13 naspapers.
including the HAINICHI SHIHBUN, YOHIURI SHIMBUN. TOKYO SHDIBUN and

NIHON KEIZAI SHDIBUN. [Text] [W170200 Tokyo ASAHI EWING ms
in English 15 Apr 82 p 3]

C80: 4120/2100 m

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY