APPROVID FOR NIL-AOI: 2007/02100: CIA-RDPOS-OOOGoﬂoooi 0003001 3-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030013-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8310
6 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030013-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-axe as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT LANS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFPICIAL USE ONLY.
7. Author“)

 

.- 3¢!“th Quotation Rep:
9.

  
   
  
 
 
 

    
 
 

9. I'Qllullllll Mannie-Hoe Nome and Mduu
Joint rublicationo Reoeorch Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

10. onnrt/Tooilink Co“ So.

u. Type ol lope" h Period
Covered

  

la. Spa-cation chuinuoa Nun Md Mao“

  

A. above

 
 

  

 

 

  

The serial report contains translations from the world press of articles
and press commentary on environmental pollution and its effects and pollution
control technology. organizations, and programs.

 
   
     
  

   

  

. cy oc-oo

Worldwide
Pollution
Environmental Control
Meteorology

Ecology

ocuuu Aulyou.

   

.- ' octlptou

  
 
   
      
   
 
   

lib. Mountkto/Opcmﬁndod Tune

 
 
 
  

17c.COSAT|ﬂo|l/Gtup l” 6. 186, 188

. AvaI ability scan-oat
For Official Use Only.

Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

 
 
 
  

3 . ‘o. ai Pun
‘ . , 10

run you an or nenoouceo ”MW“ ““""'

  
 
    

pennant-u colt. . ID
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L
6 Marc
TRANSLATIONS ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
(rouo 2/79) '
CONTENTS
ASIA

JAPAN

65 Percent Polled Fear Increasing Pollution
(THE JAPAN TIMES. 1 Feb 79) .........................

HITI Presses Environmental Guidelines for Overseas Projects
(NIHON KEIZAI SNINBUN. 30 Dec 78) ...................

Comprehensive Research Group To Study Pollution
(THE JAPAN TIMES, 7 Jan 79) .........................

New Hater Pollution Standards May Increase Pollution
(HAINICHI DAILY NEWS. 16 Jan 79) ....................

Chiba Prefecture Adopts Stiff NOx Limit
(HAINICHI DAILY NEWS. 15 Feb 79) ....................

\
WESTERN EUROPE
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

65 PERCENT POLLED FEAR INCREASING POLLUTIOS

'l'nkyu 'l'lll". JAPAN TIMES in Eng]. lab 1 Feb 79 p 2

ITcxtl

A poll taunted hy the En-
vtmnment Agency mowed tnoi
as many on G5 petcunt oi those
polled tear that pollution In
Jmnwlllwomninthetuturo.

The poll. the malt ot which
was unnamed My. alto
showed thot revvto; up oi car
engine: touted the list oi
complaint: about noiu
pdlmionlnmldmttaloms.

in the lit oi the walled
"netﬂbot'hood mm" the
nobeotautomohtioenglnesm
tailored by that ol loud-
speakers used by vendon oi
toiletpoperutdothcilm.

Othet meet ot wants
m noisy pets. TV. um
neighbou' voices. coolen and
nolae tmm hunt and pochlnlto
parlors.

But 70 W ot than who
were med hy ouch noise!
took no action to avoid dllputen
wllhthctrnolutbon.

l-‘lity~nlx petcent oi tho.
mcyed aid that they were
victimized by m toms ol
pollution one time or am in
theoutyeu.

increasing numbers oi
mtdentx In the Maxine
icur tutttutton Mil incmec.

COPYRIGHT:

(ISO: 5000

They believe 3min; num-
hemotouomoblieowtltmmt
pollute the air Ind ﬂue tho

WW.
They also think "it! the

atmmuﬂthehuchawtlihe
turther conlominatod by
househoidwutc.

The Environment Agency
sold to) monitor: “meted
throughout the country
mponded to tho "polhttlon
ilrst at it: kind since 1m.

ottlcloloottthMs-idon
opinion survey tpecIttcotiy on
automobiles would he held in
March hecuuse the latest
ourvoy pointed to the
seriousness ot automobile
pollution.

The mutt: at much my:
on taken into mat to
moving out environment-I
policies.

in ciltenndthecomtrynlde.
not" you cttod u the
mmamym. It
we: then tolioved hy ot-
ntoophettc pollution. odon.
water contomtnatton.
worm oetl pollute. ad
”mutant”.

The Japan Times 1979

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030013-3

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000300134
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

HIT]: PRESSBS WIROWTAL GUIDELINES FOR ovsasaas PROJECTS
Tokyo NIKON KBIZAI SHINBUN in Japanese 30 Dec 78 p 23

[Text] anironnental pollution problens caused by Japanese conpanies in
Third world countries have recently attracted attention. In addition to
such cases as one now in litigation where a Japanese conpany was ordered
by the goverment (Brazil-Ajinonoto Coapany) to temporarily halt operations
because of plant waste water, and another where a conpany was ordered to
make indemity paysents of approximately 1.2 billion yen for nining pollu-
tion (Halaysis-"Hamuto" nine), according to studies by MIT! and others
there are said to be sore than 10 cases of "pollution trouble." Therefore,
in an effort to prevent this free becoaing a stimulus for anti-Japanese

feelings in those areas, HIT! is strengthening guidelines for Japanese
coapanies operating overseas.

The case between Brazil and Ajinoooto (the local corporate nane is "Aj inonoto
lnter-Anericana Conpany) first ease up in October 1977. The waste water fron
the company's plant producing aonosodiun glutamate was fouling the river,
polluting the water supply for Americans City. without warning, Ajinoaoto
received an order to halt operations for 69 days from the Sao Paulo State
Industrial Pollution Bureau. They were able to rescue operations again in
Decal-bar, but in February 1978 they were indicted by city authorities. and
even now hearings are continuing.

As night be expected. in view of increasing local enployaent and raising the
people's standard of living. the plant had hoped that the people would not
overly worry about pollution. however, there was a strong reaction. Also
in Sao Paulo state, another 100 percent Japanese-owned subsidiary named
"Atoranchiks." one of the five largest tanning factories in Brazil. has
also repeatedly received warning notices from local authorities for factory
discharge and bad odor probless.

According to Assistant (stair-an ﬂaku Nakano of the Brazil Air Pollution Pre-
vention Asabciation. "Brazilian air pollution is much worse than you night
i-agine. Even though Brazil's land area is large, nature's purification
process does not necessarily save us free the effacts of environnental pol-
lution." he also points out that in the Ajinonoto case. "One Inst suspect

2
FOR OHICIAI. 083 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

them of coming to Brazil because it does not have as strict standards as
Japan and because the people have little power."

As a result of the Malaysian people's increased awareness of pollution
problems. recently there have been at least three cases of pollution
problems involving Japanese firms. One is the "Mamuuto" copper mine,
financed by seven Japanese copper producing companies including the
Mitsubishi Metal Mining Company as well so the Overseas Economic Coopera-
tion Fund. and managed by OHRD Sabah Company. which was set up in a joint
venture with local capital. Earth and sand displaced in extracting the

copper was washed into adjoining fields by torrential rains in February
1977. completely burying them.

In response to the incident. the company has already paid the farmers ap-
proximately 70 million yen as compensation for lost production. but in
July 1978 the Sabah state government requested approximately 1.2 billion
yen for relocation expenses for the afflicted farmers. This was not only
for the damage caused by the runoff of earth and send. but also in response
to the residents' complaints of copper poisoning. Despite the company's
objections that "there is no copper poisoning." according to the results
of analysis of the soil surrounding the mine by the Anti-Pollution Export
Information Center (Tokyo. Bunkyo-ku) in a recent on-tha-spot investiga-
tion, the injurious heavy metal chrome was detected at the high level of
2560 PPM. and a high concentration of copper was present at 1170 PPM.

Also. it has been pointed out that at the fishing village of Kuala "Juru"
in northern Halaysia. the fishermen have been deprived of their livelihood
by the factory discharge from the ploywood industrial development estab-
lished by 20-odd Japanese companies, including Toray Industries. It is
also claimed that residents at the Penang International Airport were af-
flicted by "earth and sand pollution" left by Japanese companies (Maeda
Construction Company) in the process of extending the runways.

In connection with the litigation banning pollution at its Chiba plant,
Kawasaki Steel Corporation decided to build the sintering furnaces it

had originally planned on locating domestically on Mindanao Island in the
Philippines instead. Since 1976. such tactics of "exporting pollution"
have caused quite a bit of commotion. The plant ceased operations in
May 1977. but according to a study released last month by Tatemi Yamads.
a lecturer at Sophia University involved in this issue, four workers at
the plant have become asthmatic. Kawasaki Steel denies such criticism
saying. "The concentrations of sulphur oxides (80:) and nitrogen oxides
(ﬂex) are a whole figure lower than plants in Japan, and electric dust
collectors are used against dust and other particles. Hater used for
cooling is recycled. and so pollution countermeasures are complete (En-
vironmental Supervision Department)." However. the pollution issue is
tangled up with a human rights issue of compulsory transfers of the local
people involved in the plant construction. Although it is not clear whe-
ther pollution exists or not, this is a good example where agreement with

3
’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the local civic authorities was not necessarily agreement with the local
people.

In addition to these cases. the same kinds of pollution problems are occur-
ring in other Asian nations. Japanese chemical industry inroads into
Korea, the Asahi Caustic Soda [Company] mercury pollution problem in
Thailand. and the destructive logging practices of Honshu Paper Company
operations in Papua New Guinea are examples. Even on the list of inci-
dents of friction between local societies and Japanese companies compiled
by MITI last year. there have been 10 cases of "environmental (pollution)
problems" since 1976. second only to "labor problems" (15 cases).

HIT! says. "Among these 10 cases. even if there is not actually any pollu-
tion damage. the result is trouble from misunderstandings and anti-Japanese
feelings. however. because each country's views on pollution differ. the
solution is not simply a matter of drawing up a physical pollution preven-
tion policy. it will also require a policy towards the local people to im-
prove their understanding of Japanese firms."

Concerning this problem. Jun Nishikawa. professor (international economics)
at Heseda University. points out. "Japanese companies' methods of going
into other countries present problems. They usually do not consult with
the local people. only with the government. Also. as far as company at-
titudes are concerned. there seems to be a phenomenon of a distinct dif-
ference between Japanese colpanies. who are mostly concerned about their
stockholders. and American companies. who are highly aware of making a
contribution to the local society. Japanese companies should become more

inclined towards learning a lesson from the pollution problems they caused
in Japan.“

COPYRICRT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1979

9180
050: 6105

a
l0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pollution and its ettecte on the
environment appear to hove
become nul-ticdgcd with the
establishment ot a com-
prchcnaive research group in
lharaitl Prefecture alter people
alerted complaining til en-
vtronmrniolhnznm.

'lhe group — the Nationnl
institute tor Environmental
studies - to now Iraclnn the
proccea generating nllrnmn
dioxide. a motor alr polhlent
said to be causing
pintochemical arnog In many
cttlultbdotngaowithlndoor
nlmﬂatioh teats claim to he
ottheworld'ahiﬂcatquality.

The Institute m tended to
October Mt at the ram
research and academic town
located at ihc toot ot Mt.
TmmbaJomcttlkmaoulm
ot Milo.

The town to deaimed to ac-
cept t3 etaterun rear-arch
grumevenluaily.

Thealmotthelmtihaeiato
dotlne the impact pollution hae
on the environment andhtunan
health tint and then tied at!
waya ot creating an en-
vironment tnvoreole to human
living.

Deapltette attiitationvliththe

:nvlrunment Money. the to

5000

reaearchera and university
proteeaora on the payroll are
given wide optiona In perm
amiccta ot lntereat to them
without political uuervention.

One ot the teaturee ot the
htetttute also to that apecialteta
trorn many tlelda. including
natural sciences aueh as
physical acience. engineering.
biology and agriculture and
also the hunanities ouch an
economics and aoctolm. are
Joining haode tor apeetttc
rcecarchpvotecte.

The Minute has reeearch
tactlttiee tor plant experiments
tphytotroni. tor animal ex-
periments taootroni and tor
water environment ex-
pertmente taouatronl. aa well
no its photochemical smog
chamber tor atmoaphertc
chemical reactionatudiea.

In addition. it hae en el-
moephertcdlthuiontvtndttmet
to atmulate actual physical
phenomena In the atnioophere.
anhaathetlowanddlthnionot

polltnnla

Other tactlittea are tor eotl
environment eaperlmenta.
radiotaotope upertmettte and
waatetreatmcnt.

tn the oootron nectar. two-
yearatudieearemmdervvay

COPYRIGHT: THE JAPAN TIMES 1979

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN
COMPREHENSIVE RESEARCH GROUP TO STUDY POLLUTION
Tokyo TilE JAPAN TIMES in English 7 Jan 79 p 2
[Text] mmmmnem'utueem atitute'a more than too anllmdmwmﬂis

the health at rota. 'l'he tivoycar
chronic toxicity tcal wnn
Iatnichedlastyoar.

Atter nitrogen dioaide atudica
are completed. prohea Into the
composite pollution ot the at-
moephere by none and the
ettecte on the human body oi
heavymetaleaeepiannod.

The photochemical smog
chamber to a horizontal
cylindrical device with an in-
mzeaeteret'memanda
length cm. tteeoutpped
with a eoiar simulator. an air
puritier and a chemical
analyzer.

With the t. ed the device.
ruearehca any they have
tound that WI meg
increaeea tn denatty In
proportion to the arm or
nitrogen dioxide. not
hydmcarhninthealr.

it to eaid that photochemical
aniog is developed when
hydrocarbon and nitrogen
“idea react Milt alone It the
air and the ultra-violet raye ot
thematat.

t. the actual pron. oi
thictioa haa yet to he
clartlied.

Il‘he atmoqherie dithteton
wind tine! haa than that the
diaperity in temperatures
”in the day at at“ along
aeaahorea cauaea air

pollutantatocirwlateandrtee
Itcoooentrattoo.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030013a3

I’OII OI'PICIAL 088 ONLY

NW "A“!!! POLLUTION STANDARDS HAY INCREASE POLLUTION

Tokyu HAIRICIII DAILY NW8 In English 110 Jan 79 p 12

[Text] Thaw Am, Muhammad
”mauled form uncut-awn

E
E
E
5??
,5
5

izgéézgéi
3‘ E3 %
:1: gin;
'3
3;: 5
i'céﬁ

g
5
E
g
I
E
E

I
E
s
E
E
E
§
52

g!
3%;
s:
3;;
i’

3

§

%§
5
E:
“E

s
i
I
g

COPYRIGHT: Munich! Daily News, 1979

C50: 5000

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030013-3
CilllM PREFECTURE ADOPTS STIFP NOX LIMIT

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'I‘okyo MINICHI DAILY NEWS In English 15 Feb 78 p 12

I Text; I

(IUI’YR l (HIT:

(ISO:

5000

CHI!“ —Chiha Preiecturo
east oi 'i'oltyo hss daimsted
Mt parts per-million (ppm). or
the lower limit oi the tsmet
zone set by the Environment
Agency owning nitrogen
oxides man. s the tsraet oi
ttsNOrcontmt.

Chihn has thus become the
tint preiecture in tin its own
tsraetstnceJutylsstyesi-when
the snency ahottshv ' its esriier
sndmuchsevererk ,etottm
ppm and instesd uttered a new
target w;- rannine. 'romo. us to
003mm. the decision by the
central. mvcr oent invited
shsrp cr'ilcn’m irom er.-
vironmentstizts all over the
country.

it was suspected at that time
that the government had suc-
cumbed to complaints tiled by
industrisi circles against its
esrlieromiipmtsmet.

Muiniclrl Daily News, 1979

7

Observers say that the
decision by Chiba Prefecture
may exert sn inﬂuence on other
prefectures which have been
unable to [ix their own targets
withthemvernmcnt'uone.

Chlhs st tint wanted to it:
the same target together with
the three other southern Kanto
preicctures of Tokyo.
Ksnawva snd Ssitsms. But.
various isctors prevail such s
iotntaction.

The lower limit oi the
government'stsmetmnewua
natural choice ior Chibs which
has tor some time concluded sn
sntipoitution agreement with”
major industries in the
pretectm'e on N08. which is
most responsible tor sir
pollution. According to the
agreement. these industries
must cooperste in keeping the
dslty avenge ot NOX within
o. Oi ppm.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son orrtcm. use ONLY

NEST GERMANY

ESCAPED CHEMICALS POLLUTE AIR IN BAVARIA
Hamburg STERN in German 18 Jan 79 pp 166-168
[Article by Gerhard Tomkowitz: "The Big Part"]

[Text] For a whole day, half of Upper Bavaria
suffered under an ominous stinking cloud, with
no one admitting responsibility.

0n the morning of the Day of Epiphany, a holiday in Bavaria, the telephones
rang at the police stations in Burghausen on the Salzach and in Huehldorf

on the lan, the caller complaining about an "infernal smell penetrating a11
cracks of the houses." One inhabitant of Burghausen reported the "smell

of rotten eggs," another the "disgusting smell of old white cabbage--1ike an
enormous fart."

The invisible stinking cloud spread from east to west and finally, toward
noon, reached Augsburg.

As early as 0630 hours. a measuring vehicle of the Bavarian Office for the
Protection of the Environment had made the first pollution measurements.
The result: The air contained methane and hydrogen sulfide. But the
Bavarians were in luck. While methane is explosive and hydrogen sulfide
highly toxic, in the established quantities of 1.5 and 0.0016 parts of
methane and hydrogen sulfide, respectively, per 1 million parts of air,
neither substance was dangerous.

wit these questions remained: Night the concentration be greater elsewhere,
and where did the smell come from? The emergency service at the Office
for the Protection of the Environment first suspected that the source was

the huge natural gas stores at Assling, Holfersberg and Biervang east of
Munich. But the stores were intact.

The other measuring vehicles and one laboratory caravan drove further east.
Telephone enquiries about possible operational breakdowns were made at all
industrial enterprises each pf Munich that might have been responsible for
the pollution with methane and hydrogen sulfide. These included

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Oil OPPICIM. USE ONLY

lkmtm-he Marathon l'elroleun (ll-lull. which hae a petrochenlcal plant in the
m-eal led chenieal trianne near Burnhaunen. The sanngesent of the plant uald
toward 0200 hours a condensate pusp had been stopped because of a fault. and
”a few drops" of condensate and hydrogen sulfide had escaped.

lint this was only a mall part of the truth. because toward 1000 hours an
anoaysous caller told the people at the environ-eat protection office:

"You had better take a close look at Deutsche Marathon: there was a his
breakdown there last night.“ llow. questioned by the en'virorasent protection
officials with painful severity. the fir- soved away a little free the "mu
drop." saylnp. that a thin "spurt of liquid" had escaped. but certainly no
sore than 50 liters. cheniats of the environnent office, on the other hand.
figured that it had to be at least 500 liters. The fire stanchly disputed
any connection between the null and its chenicals. The Ministry of the
Mavironsent. however, regards the enterprise as responsible. on the basis
of ”clear evidence."

lie that as it nay. the cane once more revealed a gap in the law. Obligatory
reporting is defined so ispreelsely in the antipollutioa law that fires
find it easy to clanell’y a breakdown as a "trivial incident" not subject

to reporting and. if nonethlng happens. sinply to say nothing.

11m. happened. for instance. .in February 1978. At that time about 2 tons
of radioactive stems escaped for 6 hours from the OIIU Nuclear Power Plant
operated by Bayernwerlt AG and lsar-Anperwerke. The sanagenent of the plant
considered this trivial and did not inform the authorities until 29 hours
had passed. '

According: to officials in the Munich Ministry for the Protection of the
Environ-eat. "incidents happen daily in the chemical industry throughout
the Federal Republic." Many f irns. however. do not report the incidents.
apparently in the hope that the pollution connected with it will not becone
known in the first place.

Thus Bavarian Minister for the Environment Alfred chIt considers it fortunate
that his offirialn were able to track down the Deutsche Marathon Petroleu-
Cnbil. The firm is now threatened with a fine of Ml05.000. Probably it

will also have to bear the cost of the investigative action.

in the seantine fir-s offending against the envirennent probably will continue
to no unscathed. Actually people at the Federal Ministry of the Interior have
been working for sore than a year on a ”breakdown ordinance" intended to
remove the gaps and shortconings of existing regulations. But there is no
way of telllnp, when the ordinance will be able to so into force. for the
Industry. according to the Ministry of the interior. "sees a danger to its
trade secrets and is already conplaining about too ouch bureaucracy." And

the Inender too keep snaking new suggestions for changes. Until the next
ntlnkinp. elond.

COI'YRICIIT: I979 Cruner + Jahr as & Co

END
8790 9

($0: 5000 m omcm. use ONLY