FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10470

20 April 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 23/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language

sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the

last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfhmiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAOS Ahu REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS Ito/10470

20 April 198

JAPAN REPORT
(2000 23/32)

Coureuts

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

'ASAHI' on Possible Abe Presidential Csndidscy
(Michisada Birose; ASAIII EVENING news, 26 Her 82)........... 1

Suzdri, Ito (bunt on Defense Spending
(JIJI’ SAP! 82)O.O3.0.00.0....0...IOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO a

Premier Suzuki's Military winking Analyzed
(Tstsuto Nehejins; ”All JANARU, 5 Feb 82).................. 5

MIL ITARY

Missiles Proposed ss Care of Self Defense Forces
(Kstsuichi ‘Dsuksnoto; KOKUBO, Jen 82).................'..... 11

ECONOHIC

Jspsn' s Aircraft Industry 1!: Enjoy Buoyancy in Business
(union Koﬂo sumo“, 6‘8“82)....0.'COIOOQOOIOOOOOOOCOO 22

SCIENCE AND ECHNOIDCY

Semiconductor Trade Friction with United States Discussed,

Part I
(NEON KEIZAI SHIBUN, various dates, ENSRI 61.111311.

Jan 82)oosssosssoo-sssosssosssosossssssssossosssosssosossss 29

u.s. Import Regulation quusst
Stsndsrdiution of 256 K Issue

Effect of u.s. Recession
Reciprocal Plsnt Construction
Comparison of Industries, by Hiroshi Semi

- s - [III - ASIA - 111 F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e we. so. 0Q~Q.A-e -. .- g. a...

Semiconductor Trade Friction With United States Discussed,
Part 11

(snow KOGYO $3131.“. 26 Feb 82, WA SHDOUN,
6’ 10 hr 82)....0....0...0..0.0.0.0...ODOIOOCOOOOOOO..0...

Japanese 1c Industry's View
NBC President's View
MI‘l'l's View

trade Activities With Bulgaria. Bast Ger-any Reported
(Various sources. various dates)..........................

Bulgarian Magnetic Grinding lechnology
Bast Gerun lbchine 1bols

Robot Exhibit at Leipzig Pair
Bid on East Gemn Plant

Military Technology Cooperation Hith united States Discussed
(Show IIDCD; mnxl BuSIms, 8 kb 82)esoaeoaeseeeeaesse

'NIHON KBIZAI' ﬂail: Toyota-General lbtors Tie-up
(Editorial; NEON IBIZAI saneuu, 10 hr 82)..............

Japan 1).) Propose Joint Research Projects
(“I“Icnl MILY ms, 31 hr 82)..IOOOOIIOOOCOOOOOOOOOOIOO

Japan Eyes Satellite Broadcasting in 1990's
(““1 EWING m. 22 mt 82).OOOOOOOOO0.000.000.0000...

Electronics Fir-s To Boost Plant Expenditures
(“ILYYWURI’ 26 hr 82)....OOOIOOOIOO00.000.000.000...‘

Division of Super Oonputer RSI) Bfﬁort Decided
(NIKON K0620 smwm, 9 Feb 82)

Researchers Develop Mtineutron Fiber
(““1 Emma ms. 3 Apr 82)eooeeeoeesacesseeeeeaeeeeoeo

New stelopunts in Various Kinds of Sensors macribed
(Various sources, various dates)..........................

Intelligent Sensor
Thermal Sensor
Visual Sensor

Recent Activities of Kontsu Forklift. Kontsu Ltd Reported
(NM KOGYO 83mm, vsriom dates)....................

Development of New Forklift
Strong Buineas Performance
Expansion of Machinery Production

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'ASAHI' Oﬂ POSSIILB ABE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDACY
09271225 Tokyo ASARI E?3RING BEES in Bnglieh 26 Her 82 p 3

[Column by ASAHI SHIHBUN editorial uriter Hichiaada Eiroae under the rubric
"Politics and Politicians": "Next LDP Preeidential Poll-Should Abe Run or

Not?"]

[Text] Last week's articles about an ASABI SIIHBUI public opinion poll, which
found that the popularity of Priae Hinieter Suzuki had dropped, uere preeuer

ably read with the keeneat interest by the younger leaders of the ruling
Liberal-neaocratic Party. who aspire after the poet of prime minieter.

The finding. of the eurvey have given the eo-called "new leadere" a new fac-
tor to coneider in analyzing the eituation and deciding whether or not they
ahould run in the LDP preaidential election in November.

The things that have to be taken into account are extreeely coupler. Even if

a few of then decide to run, it doee not neceeearily mean that they are con-
fident of muetering aufficient intraperty eupport to defeat Suzuki in the

election. They nay run just to eatabliah a lead over their rivala. Let's
look at the calculationa being made by Minister of International Trade and

Industry Shintaro Abe and hie aidea in their attempt to chart Abe‘a future
course .

Abe and his aidee naturally regard Suzuki's movee an the moat important ele-
ment in their calculatione. Suzuki hea two alternativea-(l) eeeking reelec-
tion in November and (2) reeigning from office without running for reelection

--and he ia generally believed certain to chooee the former. Nevertheleaa,
Abe and hie aidee feel that the odde are 50-50.

Hhat are the grounda for expecting that Suzuki may reaign? Abe and hie
aides give two reaeona. Pirat. they eay, ae hie political difficultiee
mount fron summer to fall. Suzuki may have to announce hie intention of

resigning «e a last reeort eo that he can eecure intra-LDP cooperation.
The difficultiea he facee are a revenue ahortfall. the uoreening trade fric-

tion with the United Statea and Europe. and the Lockheed acandal trial.

Secondly, they auapect that Suzuki may have no intention of running for
reelection. "Hr. Suzuki goea golfing every Sunday." an aide to Abe pointe

ETHICHHNCIAI.USE(NVLY
I‘Vsa urrauuaa. usua— va‘LI

out. "but he always goes to the same course. the Narashino Country Club
course in Chiba Prefecture. and he always plays with the same partners.”
“As for his partying at night. no desire to widen his circle of friends in
the business community is in evidence," he adds. 'Hhis is completely dif-
ferent from what his predecessors did. They tried to consolidate their
position by widening their circle of friends."

The aides to Abe have other things to consider. ﬂow will other aspirants,
particularly Yasuhiro Nakasone. director-general of the Administrative
Management Agency, and Toshio Komoto, director-general of the Economic Plan-
ning Agency. act if Suzuki runs in the presidential election? In their view,
Komoto will run, but Nakasone is not likely to run.

By helping Suzuki's reelection. they feel, Nakaaone will try to assure him-
self of the support of the factions led by Suzuki and former Prime Minister

Kakuei Tanaka in the 1985 LDP presidential contest.

If he is pitted against Komoto and Abe in the coming election. Suzuki would
win an overwhelming victory.

But if he runs in the election, Abe would have the advantage of becoming
known to the public as 2 presidential figure ahead of such rivals as: Chief
Cabinet Secretary Kiichi Miyazawa; Rokusuke Tanaka, the party's chief policy
maker: acting Secretary-General Noboru Takeshite; Masumi Esaki. chairman of
the special LDP committee on international economic affairs; and Ichiro
Nakagawa, director-general of the Science and Technology Agency.

There would also be a drawback. since running against Suzuki could help
Nakasone secure the support of the Suzuki and Tanaka factions, which are
numerically of crucial iuportance. Views are split among Abe's strategists

as to whether he has more to gain or more to lose from running in the coming
election.

What would happen if Suzuki does not run? In that case, Nakasone. Komoto and
Abe would all join in the contest. Abe's aides expected that his toughest

opponent would be a candidate from the Tanaka faction, which is by far the
largest LDP group.

Hhon would that group put up? Abe's strategists feel that since Secretary-
General Susumu Nikaido, who would be the natural choice, bears the stigma of
a "gray official" in the Lockheed scandal (a politician who allegedly took
money of Lockheed origin. but was spared prosecution because of technical
difficulties), Esaki would probably be chosen. They suspect that the dis-
patch of Eaaki to the United States and Western Europe as the head of an LDP
trade mission to see President Ronald Reagan. Prime Minister Margaret

Thatcher and other western leaders say be a move to groom him as a presi-
dential candidate.

They feel that Abe can afford to wait until after this summer to make the
final decision on whether or not to run. At the same time. they feel that

FOI‘OFFHJA1.USEGMVLY
preparations for his candidacy should be started at an early date. The
question for then is the wishes of Abe's boss. former Prime Minister Muda.

Fukuda says to Abe: "For the tine being, you should not sake a sove (for the

presidential contest). If you don't make a love. others will. You should
wait for that."

"For a long tine, you have been called the crown prince of the Fukuda fac-

tion," he also says. "but you have cone to be known as the crown prince of
the LDP. Don't let haste bring you down."

Does Fukuds really feel this way? a. say be afraid that if Abe runs for the
presidency. he will lose control of the Fukuda faction and lose his political
power rapidly, just as the faction led by for-er Prine Hinister Takeo Niki

cane to be known as the Konoto faction after Konoto ran in a presidential
race.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982
C80: 4120/225

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CV“ Utfiblﬂh UJL UI“4.

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAI.

SUZUKI, ITO com 0" DEFENSE SPB'DIRG

“051343 Tokyo .11.]! in English 1310 GKI 5 Apr 82

[Text] Tokyo, April 5 (JIJI PRESS)--Prine Minister Zenko Suzuki and Defense
Agency Director-General Soichiro Ito Monday kept away iron naking any speci-
fic co—itnent to hold defeme spending down to one pet or less of gross
national product (GNP) during the fiscal 1983-87 period for a new defense
prograa.

Question at the House of Councillors Budget Couittee by socialist Osasu
Yatabe, Suzuki said Japan need not change its current policy of liaiting

defense spending to one pct of CHIP. However, he refused to make any speci-
fic co-itnent because he said GNP itself will change.

lto said the government is asking utnost efforts in line with the current
policy for the i-ediate future. But he declined to forecast whether defense
expenditure will be kept below one pot of GNP during the five—year period.

Asked by Yatabe to assess nuclear arsenals of the United States and the

Soviet Union, Suzuki supported the 0.8. view that the Soviets now have a
nuclear superiority over the Americans.

But Director-General Akita Shioda of the Defense Agency's Defense Policy
Bureau put forward a slightly different view.

He said the two auperpowers' nuclear arsenals are believed to be balanced
in terns of the number of nuclear warheads and their carriers. Sons doubt

has been cast on the United States' superiority because Soviet aissiles'
accuracy has recently been inroved, he said.

CSO: 6120/2210

MWWONLY
MIR]! SUNRI'S MILITARY 111mm ANALYZED
Tokyo ASAHI 31mm in Japanese 5 tab 82 pp 12-16

[Article by Asshi News Political Reporter ‘ratsuro Iakajima: ”The Military
Thinking of Mr Zenko Suzuki"]

[Text] One associates Prime Minister Zenlno Suzuki's grappling with the
defense question with the kind of toy that stands back up as soon as it is
pushed dowu. while we are wondering if he permitted a "boost" to defense
spending, he would suddenly give "dove-like instructions" to the head of the
Defense Agency. and [then at another time] strengthen efforts for disarmament.
Even at the Japanese-American su‘it conference last year, this "rig-sag
movement" was already revealed. what is the Prime Minister's basic line of
thought and policy on nilitary affairs? Pointing to new developments in the
defense question, such as Japanese—American Joint Study on Far East
emergencies and Japanese-American military technology cooperation. now that
parlianentary debate has started. we are trying to elucidate the Prime
Minister's military thinking and its context. (The utters)

Prine Minister Suzuki can be called a dove. a pacifist. Be hinself wishes

to be seen as such. But. to find the right label we ought not forget the
fact that his is an "enotional" pacifist. At times the Prime Minister's dove
feelings come to the surface. "hen these feelings have clashed with harsh
reality, severe friction has resulted. But, the feeling one now gets. looking
at the treatnent of defense spending in the 1982 budget, sakes all the more
obvious the distance between the Prime Minister's feelings and what they
actually correspond to ..

The Prime Hinister's roots as a politician are in post-war democracy. At
the height of "war weariness," he ran as a Socialist Party candidate in the
general election of April 1957 and won. He was born into the not-too—
prosperous family of a fisherman on the Sanribu Coast in Iwate Prefecture.
After graduating from the Agriculture and Forestry Hinistry's Fisher
Institute (currently. the Tokyo College of Fisheries). he joined the fishing
cooperative movement. Thus, it is not strange that he ran for election from
the Socialist Party.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UI’I‘ILIAL bat. UNLV

Moreover, for 3 months, starting at the end of 1962, he underwent military
experience. Once speaking about the difficulties of those times end of his
training as a corporal in Akita prefecture: "We were made to run along the
Omono [liver carrying heavy machine guns. It was very hard for an 'old soldier'
past 30.

Even though he did not actually have any combat experience, he was one of the
war victim. In addition to forming his dove nature, it is an essential part
of him that he cannot ignore.

Until becoming Prime Minister, he served ten terms, a total of 6 years and

7 months, as the Chairman of the Executive Board of the LDP. After having
been through the Innagement of domestic politics, he had no experience when
he was thrust into the rough waters of international politics. One could only
count the painful Japanese-Soviet fishing negotiations (in Moscow) which were
entangled with the problem of northern territory when he was Minister of
Agriculture and Fisheries. All through he preserved his dove nature, never
losing it. Of course, he was perhaps also influenced by former Prime Minister
Ikede, of whom it was said that he only had economics on his mind.

In the sumaer of 1980 Prime Minister Ohira's sudden death brought Suzuki to
power. with the Soviet invasion of Afganistan at the end of the previous year
and the takeover of the American embassy in Iran, Japan's foreign policy was
already showing strong signs of pro-American support, such as it had not

shown up until then. For example, at the Japanese-American su-it conference
in May 1980, President Carter said, "He went early implementation of plans
already in the Japanese government," and he demanded the mving up of the 1978
mid-term operation esti-te (plans to procure equipment). Prime Minister
Ohire also promised "earnest efforts."

Prime Minister Suzuki, who had just assured political power, said, "I

inherit the policies of Ohira." But, actually, it seems there had been much
resistance to following the pro-American line that Ohira took. Probably he
had a need to assert his independence from Ohira. In compiling the budget for
1981, he confounded the expectations of many cabinet mesbers and LDP defense-
related legislators, and cut to 7.6 percent their demand for a 9.7 percent
increase in defense spending. He calculated that "this much [of a cut] should
not worsen Japanese-American relations." However. voices on the American
side said "we have been betrayed"--and there arose discord between Japan and
the 0.5.

At the May 1981 Japanese-American su-it conference, the Prime Minister hit
President Reagan with such statements as "the peace constitution that
renounced war" "the pledge of the people that they will not become a major
military power" ”difficult economic conditions." The difference between what
he said and the Japanese-American joint statement that promised "greater
efforts for defense" became a problem, which in turn caused the resignation
of Foreign Minister Ito. Even afterwards, the Prime Minister did not hesitate
to say "I have related everything to President Reagan.” This can be described
as a phenomenon in which the Prime Minister's dove-nature was reflected,

though in a twisted way, in politics.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
however. as the Prise Minister increased his experience in the international
arena with a visit to Europe. follownd by one to America. and attending the
Ottawa and North-South Summits. The Prime Minister's dove-posture gradually
began to retreat into the shadows especially in cases of western international
politice--whers President Reagan takes the lead raising the idea of a serious
threat toward the Soviet Union. At last year's budget planning session.

going along with the general trend in the LDP the Prise Minister increased
defense spending 7.8 percent. instead of cutting the 7.3 percent budget
increase proposed. while the finance Ministry was frantically trying to
preserve a 7.5 percent ceilins. [he] played up to the LDP'a request for an
increase in defense spending by drumming up the idea of "the usual 7.61 percent
percent increase as was done before" on comesrcial TV. In contrast with 2
years ago. the 0.5. side expressed its "thanks for the effort." In the final
anelyeis, it cannot but be said that the Prise Minister put sephasis on the
Joint-statement he made rather than on the words that he threw at President
Reagan.

The Prise Minister decided that if he drove down defense spending like a year
ago. it would be like pouring gas on the fire of anti-Japanese criticism in the
U.s.--which is the product of economic discord. As that indicates. it must

not be overlooked that the prime sinister is bringing hie position around from
a domestic orientation to a foreign orientation. "Taking the reins of
political power for one and a half years, the Prime Minister greatly deepened
hie consciousness of the international situation." wns the praise of soneone
close to the Prime Minister. Wouldn't this be the same as getting mired in
international politics, especially in America's global strategy? In other
words. it ie tantamount to being swept away by the loud cries of insistence.

However, giving a boost to defense spending as he did this time does not neen
that the Prise Minister has the intention of abandoning the economic supremacy
of the conservative mainstream which has continued since the days of Yoshida.
It is an outlook that calls for a gradual increase in defense spending

always within the limits of the Japanese-American Security Treaty. Even if
independent defense efforts are sued for. indefinite expansion of defense
spending is unthinkable. And. the position of an independent defense theory
tied to "bilaterialiestion of the Security Treaty" and a "theory of nuclear
arms" in untenable. It is probably all right to distinguish those points

from the defense hawks who are firmly rooted in the LDP.

Sympathetic Ears to the Refutetion of "Domestic Battlefield Proposal"

what is most an the Prime Minister's mind now is the course of the 1981
mid-term operation Estimate (forecasting the period from 1983 to 1987). The
Defense Agency is going ahead with operations based on e fundasental aim of
achieving in the 1981 mid-term a level of defense strength envisioned in "the
broad outline of defense plans." But. according to prelieinery calculations.
it will cost a total of nearly 6 trillion yen. because equipment spending
will be about 25 percent of total costs, the total amount of defense spending
in the 1981 forecasted mid-term period will expand 20 trillion yen. In that
case. defense spending will break through the l percent-of-the-GNP framework

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ave. veo.~soeo. .. .....

and will necessarily become approximately 1.3 percent of the GNP. It is said
that the Prime Minister was surprised when the report came out.

After the January 12 cabinet meeting, the Prime Minister called back Defense
Minister Ito. Even Chief Secretary of the Cabinet Miyazawa had no previous
notice and at the point of meeting with reporters was called back. Facing
the two men. the Prime Minister broached the matter. "I will hereby instruct

you in the whole picture of my basic thoughts concerning the maintenance of
defense power.

At this point he clearly rejected the threat-response theory which believes
in increasing defense strength to counterbalance the increased military
strength of neighboring countries. Also. he unprecedentedly ventured to go
into the particulars of defense theory and made a series of statements such
as "a defense system suitable to a maritime nation," "obstruct landing at
water's edge“ "'hedgehog-ization' relying on air-defense missiles." He
also talked about a balance of the three self-defense forces--land, sea, and
air. Together with what the Prime Minister has said up to the time, these
statements were received by everyone as his instruction to set out in the
direction of "emphasizing Air and Maritime defense" during the 1981 mid-term
operation estimate period. This is understandable.

Closetohalf of defense spending (which in 1982 is 2.5861 trillion yen) is
personnel costs; moreover. the greater half is taken up by the grOund
self-defense force. Balancing the land-sea-air forces in this way, if we

are to achieve the proposed level of defense strength by 1987 (the end of the
1981 forecasted mid-term period), it will be as large a defense expenditure
as the Defense Agency predicts. Therefore. the Prime Minister's real
intention must be to cut army expenses more. One can conjecture that with
[the strategy of] vanquishing enemies at water's edge and not allowing the
mainland to become a battlefield one does not need that many tanks, and thus
it is unnecessary to increase the amount of army personnel.

January 7 this year. There was a contribution by a former major of the
ground self-defense forces on the editorial page of the ASAHI SHIMBUN. His
idea was that the 1981 forecasted mid-term period is based on "the home
battleground proposition" and, criticizing the army-emphasis corps organiza-
tion, proposed that in order to attain defense capability navy and air force
personnel be strengthened and army personnel be reduced by a third. The
Prime Minister, seemingly impressed by the article, showed a clipping to an
associate and was reported to have said "if only the Defense Ministry saw
things this way." Perhaps the article's emphasis corresponded exactly to the
Prime Minister's ideas. This is a story of a few days before he sent
instructions to the Defense Minister.

1 am not an expert; thus, an expert thinks...
However, the Prime Minister's instructions met a "counter-attack" from the

Defense Agency and defense specialists. A conference with the Defense
Ministry bureaucracy January 18th ended with terrible results. [The Prime

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Minister] was told that his outright rejection of the threat-response theory
contradicted his answer to Diet interpellation which stated: considering

the harsh interna:ional situation, the level proposed in the Outline will be
achieved as rapidly as possible." Also. [He was obliged] to acknowledge the
connection between the strains of the international situation and defense-
strength preparations. when the Prime Minister's remark, "a defense
organization suitable to a maritime nation." was construed as his intention to
strengthen the defenses of the sea lane (the sea transportation route) which
he emphasized in America last May. the Prime Minister could not help but to
say "that is another story."

Concerning the "hedgehog defense" theory, a counter-argument was made saying
that "our country, surrounded by ocean on all sides and having a large shore
line, will have to spend more on making a defense plan that will prevent a
land invasion." Thereupon, the Prime Minister retreated from the question.
saying "I am not an expert. The question of what exactly is to be done is

for the experts to think abOut." Those around the Prime Minister defended the
"hedgehog" approach as one used as an analogy of a thorough defense-only
position without giving a military threat to its neighbors.

In addition. inviting the backlash of the ground Self-Defense Force which
may view the Prime Minister's "emphasis on sea and air" as ”neglect of the
ground force," the Prime Minister obscured the danger by saying, "I have

no recollection of emphasizing maritime and air self-defense forces." There
was criticism that the Prime Minister's instructions lacked a viewpoint that
tied defense preparations to the Security Treaty. All of these lead to a
dubious conclusion that one does not know for what purpose the Prime Minister
instructed Defense Minister Ito. It is a very awkward position for the Prime
Minister to be in.

Thus. people are saying "The Prime Minister's defense thinking is very
rudimentary. If he does not prepare a more theoretical system..." No

matter how such he tries to check the Defense Agency's independence, apprehen-
sion increases that without a well-constructed defense theory, the pressure
to increase defense strength projected for the 1981 forecasted mid-term period
cannot be resisted.

The fear that the Prime Minister has begun to cross a dangerous bridge.

Closely tied in with this is the policy of the "Comprehensive Security."
After the Prime Minister assumed power. he inediately enunciated the
establishment of this policy. It is a line of thought that tries to ensure
our country's security not just by defense strength but thrOugh the power
of diplomatic efforts. economic and technical aid. and so forth--the
implementation of policies that emphasize coordination. At the end of last
year he started the Comprehensive Security Cabinet Meeting. However. what
position does defense strength hold in this policy? Discussions or
theoretical arguments in the government, beginning with those around the

Prime Minister. are getting almost nowhere.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL oar. ONE!

The term "Comprehensive Security" comes up first at the special session of the
Diet in August 1980. Although the Prime Minister touched on the Comprehensive
Security again in a speech on his administration's policy a year later, no
significant meaning could be found about the term. One was left with the
impression that the term Comprehensive Security was simply dancing around.

Because the position of defense strength remains unclear. boosting defense
spending or venturing on the particulars of defense may be possible. The
Prime Minister, unlike the late Prime Minister Ohira, does not have his own
"brain trust" around him. That may be one reason why the Prime Minister's
thinking does not have theoretical systemization.

Comprehensive Seourity was originally viewed as ”a covering cloak that did not
allow the burning smell of the expansion of defense strength to be revealed."
If so, there is no necessity to rush a conclusion regarding what position
defense strength will take. But the way it became bogged down arouses one's
suspicion. At any rate, as time goes on the "banner" of Comprehensive Security
will fade away, if it stands as it is.

The speech and actions of the Prime Minister with regard to the defense
question are difficult to understand and are confused by mixing his official
stance with real motives--a pattern is about to be set, in which the dove-like
words and actions are withdrawn under pressure. Apprehension is surrounding
the government regarding 1982 defense spending projections--the fear that "the
Prime Minister has begun to cross a dangerous bridge." In an economic
situation where the incurring of additional national debt became unavoidable
due to economic doldrums, why did he approve a 7.8 percent increase in defense
spending? The 1981 rate of expansion was in line with welfare budget, but
this time it greatly exceeds the 2.8 percent increase of the welfare budget.
From 1983, which is the first year of the implementation of the 1981 mid-term
estimate, will defense spending continue increasing, no matter what economic
conditions are? Uncertainty weighs heavily for the future.

The Prime Minister has for some time past given as s yardstick of defense
preparation "painful economic conditions" "the peace constitution“ "a
national consensus." How were these taken in deciding the defense spending
of this time? what kind of international conditions will speed up the
achieving of the outlined level of defense strength, and will the Prime
Minister stick hereafter to the framework of a level of 1 percent of the GNP?
In the debates at the reopening of the Diet, a satisfactory explanation for
each of the questionable points will probably be called for. If the Prime
Minister, fearing the overtaking by the opposition party, confines himself

to the safe official answer prepared by bureaucrats for the Diet, what the
Prime Minister is thinking and what he aims to do will become more blurred to
the eyes of the people.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shimbunsha 1982

9391
C50: 6105/57

10

FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£(MVLY
HISSILES PROPOSED AS CORE 0? SELF DEFENSE FORCES

Tokyo KOKUBO in Japanese Jan 82 pp 68-80

[Article by Katsuichi Tsukanoto: "A Proposal for Defense Power Buildup”)
[ﬁxcerpts] Introduction

When I expressed ny opinion on the consolidation of defense power in an
article entitled "Direction of the Consolidation of Japan's Defense Power--
Antiaircraft and Antiwarship Missiles Should Be the Core of the Self
Defense Forces" in the October issue of MODERH SECURITY, published by the
Comprehensive National Security Research Institute, unexpectedly, it
seemed to arouse some interest. I do not know whether it was positive

or negative, but evidently the article offered convenient material for
srgunent. However, as I have the disadvantage of lacking technical know-
ledge of missiles, I an aware that my view is actually just an opinion.

It is undeniable, however. that the way in which the present consolidation
of defense power is being carried out tends to be a nannerisn, and the
situation is such that breaking away from convention by adopting new ideas
is difficult. Military nen (self defense officials) tend to be conserva-
tive. Error is never allowed for those engaged in defense-~a grave re-
sponsibility concerning the existence of a nation. For this reason, they
value the precedents set in the past and extend then to the future as they
are. Because they believe this is the most reliable and safe direction,
such a trend may be inevitable.

An orthodox consolidation of defense power is, of course, inportsnt. At
the sane time, we must not ignore the cases in which strategy surprised

the eneny, or technology superior to the eneny's acconplished its goal.

It is especially inportant that only that side which has developed superior
technology can expect success.

My personal proposal for this new "consolidation of defense power" was
created by breaking from convention, based on the above viewpoints, and
through groping toward a system of consolidation most adequate for Japan's
defense.

I have used the word "new," but this does not mean to fundamentally reform
the direction of the present consolidation of defense power. Rather, I

ll

FOI.OF11C]AI.lEﬂE(HVLY
[UK UII'ILIAI. U3; UNLI

would attempt to make some improvements based on the direction presently
being taken. The consolidation promoted by the Self Defense Agency has
been regarded as reasonable up to now, while it has been in the basic
stage of construction. At the present stage. however, it is for the first
time necessary to begin reformation toward a new direction.

Let me first give a summary of my personal proposal which appeared in
MODERN SECURITY, and then I would like to explain two or three major points
more specifically.

2. Characteristics of Japan's Security

Japan's characteristic of being an island surrounded by the sea has a great
impact on its defense. If Japan secures dominance of the air and couands
the sea, invasion by a foreign enemy would be almost impossible, and only
small-scale invasions from the Korean Peninsula and the Karafuto-Chishima
archipelagoes would be considered. 0n the contrary, however, if invading
forces command the sea and air, the invasion would be easily executed.

For this reason, the basic principle of Japan's defense lies in the pri-
ority given to the reinforcement of the maritime and air forces. (This
does not mean to reduce the importance of ground troops, which are the core
of the national defense.)

Since an invading force must rely either on air transport (airborne troops)
or on sea transport, and the -reatest weakness exists during this trans-

portation. Japan's defense must first be directed at attacking this weak
point.

Japan's characteristics of having a high population density and scarce
resources which depend on supply from overseas show that it is not equipped
for a prolonged war and also that combat in Japan is difficult. Protec-
tion of the sea lane is crucial.

The policy of the "Japanese Self Defense Forces" designed exclusively for
defensive posture has an advantage in simplifying the consolidation of
defense power. Japan does not recognize counterattack against an enemy
base by ground forces because such an attack is considered outside the
fraaework of the “defense only policy." This will in effect sanctify

the enemy's invasion base and is thus unreasonable in terms of a theory
of strategy; however, in terms of the consolidation of defense power, it
has the advantage of concentrating Japan's efforts on the area of defense
alone. since offensive troops are not needed.

3. Direction of the Consolidation of Japan's Defense Power

The requisites in the direction of the consolidation of Japan's defense
power are consolidation of the various characteristics of Japan's defense
as mentioned above. utilization of its advantages, and supplementation
where it has disadvantages.

It is indicated that the "Outline of the Defense Plan" assumes the pattern
of invasion against Japan to be based on combat during World War II. 0f

12

FINI¢HWHC1AL USE1DNLY
course we cannot say that such coinat will not take place in the future.
It is possible that a repetition may occur in local coinat.

But disputes that have broken out in various areas after World liar 11

show that the pattern of war has unndergone radical change. This is be-
cause war is greatly restricted by politics. Every war has taken the form
of limited warfare, and political forces have greatly controlled colbat
activities. In the future, war will take place under complex conditions
as a political tool and will be settled by means of comprehensive politics,

including diplomacy and the like. This is the way of thinking in "Compre-
hensive Security."

Moreover, progress in scientific technology has changed war strategies

and methods so that technological superiority has begun to control leader-
ship on the battlefield.

We must deeply discern the condition of future warfare and consolidate
our defense power in compliance with it, or our efforts for consolidation
will be meaningless. here we strongly sense the importance of drastic
tactics and their foundation, technological development.

A basic principle of war guidance in order to win a battle (achieve a goal)
in the future will be, first of all, to devise the means to achieve a goal
before involvement in an actual battle (deternnent) and, should a fight

be unavoidable for the sake of self defense. to make the most of one's
advantages; that is, to place the invader under the influence of its own
weakness and disadvantages alone.

When Japan's defense is considered from this basic principle, we can see
that the following should be considered: defeat invading forces while
they are being transported via air or sea when they are vulnerable; try
to avoid combat in Japan; and stand in a superior position technologically
through the use of scientific technology. Of course, it would be ideal
for us to secure a superior air force and con-land the sea; hope for this,
however, is dim for the time being, in Japan's present circumstances.

If we consider all this in a comprehensive manner and seek out the direc-
tion of Japan's consolidation of defense power, we will focus on a defense
plan with antiwarship and antiaircraft missiles at its core. The objec-
tive of this strategy is to destroy an aggressive enemy by antiaircraft
and antiwarship missiles before they land in our country. The history

of war indicates that progress in science and technology makes such a
defense plan feasible. The war in the Middle East is one example. In
that war, invasion by aircraft in the areas where antiaircraft missiles
were installed was most difficult.

Since the task given to the missile unit can be simplified, this strategy
is snore advantageous for Japan, which euploys the strategy of Self Defense
Forces designed exclusively for taking a defensive posture.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILMI. use URL!

The essence of this proposal is an extensive buildup of antiaircraft and
antiwarship missile units. With respect to antiaircraft missiles, the
Nike-Hawk unit cited in the "Outline of the Defense Plan" will be remodeled
and extensively reinforced at the same time. Antiwarship missiles, on

the other hand, must be utilized and made into the core unit (major force)
of the Ground Self Defense Force.

Through its buildup, the antiaircraft missile unit will become independent
of Ground and Air' Self Defense Forces and an "Antiaircraft Self Defense
Force"-a fourth self defense force-"will be newly created. This measure
will be taken in order to facilitate both the development of this unit
and emergency expansion.

Up to this point I have amused by "personal proposal." Now, let me
discuss more specifically the major problematic points of this conception.

l. Cot-land of Sea and Air

I have already stated that the genere‘. rule in defending Japan, which is
an island country, is to maintain a superior position in the air and sea,
and to destroy the invading enemy on the sea (during transportation).

At present, the Soviet Union is the only country which is capable of in-
vading Japan. and its invasion routes are via the Sea of Japan and its
adjacent sea areas. He must judge that to secure comand of the air
(dominance of air at the necessary occasion and period) over the Sea of
Japan. etc, is difficult for now. This is because the Sea of Japan, etc,
are located within a distance which can he backed up by the Soviet Union's
Far East ground and air bases. Therefore, the Japanese air forces must
confront the Soviet Far East Air Force under nearly equal conditions.

As a result, it is necessary to upgrade our standards regarding the per-
formance and awe: of aircraft and the conditions of the air bases to
levels equivalent to those of the Soviet Union's Far East troops.

This. however, would necessitate an extensive buildup of the Air Self
Defense Force, and the defense budget would probably be several times
greater than the present one. Practically speaking, therefore. Japan
cannot do this for the time being. Since an increase in the numer of
aircraft involves not only maintenance and operation but also consolida-

tion of air bases, it is accmmied by difficulty in term of expenses
and other aspects (public welfare).

It has been proven in the history of war that control of the air can
never be attained unless air superiority is anticipated.

It would be difficult for Japan to accomplish destruction of invading
troops on the sea by contending the sea and the air, which is most desir-
able strategically.

The strategy expressed in this proposal places antiaircraft and antiwar-
ship missiles at its core, and is aimed at destroying an enemy atteapting
to invade in the sea area in the vicinity of Japan, replacing the above
measure as an alternate choice.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2. Missiles Versus Conventional weapons

Missiles have many advantages compared to conventional weapons. The major
points of advantage are as follows:

1) The manufacturing facilities are relatively simple. The production
technology of the missile itself is not simple, but the facilities to
manufacture it are simpler than those of tanks and aircraft. This is
because it does not require large machine tools and facilities.

It is possible for the majority of parts for missiles to be produced in
small and mediimrsize factories if the knowhow is present. Needless to
say, sophisticated technology and an efficiently arranged facility are
needed in order to combine these parts and complete a missile. but for-
tunately, Japan has excellent automobile plants, etc, so locating a
facility is not a difficult problem to be solved.

The fact thet a large facility is not needed and that many small and medium
size industries can be mobilized indicates the suitability for mass-pro-
duction in case of emergency. In the future, when technology progresses
further, this characteristic will increasingly be encouraged.

2) The operation is simple and easy. The missile as a weapon is complex
and sophisticated, but its operation is simple. and in the future, tech-
nology will advance to the extent where a missile will hit a target by a
pushbutton operation. For this reason, the operation of missiles can be
handled by anyone once he has been trained, and in case of emergency, by
reviewing the training for a short period. By taking advantage of this
through consolidating self-defense officials, in combination with the

mass-production mentioned above, a certain degree of rapid expansion is
feasible.

Such hardware as warships, aircraft, tanks, and cannons, which are today's
major weapons, require facilities and time for production; therefore,

only those we possess in peacetime can meet an emergency. Inevitably,

we must be prepared for emergency by possessing and storing a great number
of them in peacetime. And, after a certain time has elapsed, all of them
will become obsolete and scrap iron. This is why armaments are referred
to as a mass consumption item.

Missiles can eliminate this disadvantage.

3) Antiaircraft and sntiwarship missiles are purely defensive weapons.
Because of this, there will be less fear of criticism from neighboring
countries that Japan is planning to become a "great military nation,"

or is creating the rebirth of militarism. etc. Since Japan must pay
maximum attention to these accusations, this characteristic is significant.

4) There is less trouble with residents. This proposal refers to a missile
of small scale, so the location of its deployment is less restricted and
there will be no fear of noise pollution. As technology advances, the
mobility of missiles increases, so it will become possible to keep them

at an army post or training location ordinarily. For these reasons there
would be far less trouble with residents than there would be in the case

of aircraft and tanks. 15

FOI.0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
I'UK UH'ILIAL USE. ONLY

5) In addition. another characteristic of the missile is that it can take
advantage of the volunteer enlistment system. and an increase in the
number of self defense force officials is not so greatly needed.

0n the other hand, there are also disadvantages and problematic points.

1) R60 must be thorough and substantial. This could be the largest issue
of all. Small-scale missiles have many technological problems yet to be
resolved. There are missile parts for which the supply depends on tech-

nology imports from foreign countries. Initially. imports of missiles
themselves or licensed production may be necessary.

Further-ore, since the technological progress of missiles is rapid, constant
R60 will he demanded.

For this reason, R60 expenditure must be increased steeply. At present.
the sap budget of the Defense Agency is 31.7 billion yen for FY 81. This
is one-eighth that of west Germany. one-fifteenth that of England and
France. and in comparison with that of the United States. it is less than
1/100. under these circumstances the development of excellent missiles
is inconceivable.

It is essential to increase R&D expenditure to a level equivalent to, or
greater than, that of the west European countries by increasing the amount
to at least 10 times more than the present scale. But a sudden increase
in R80 expenditure will cause problems in the payment of researchers'
salaries and consolidation of facilities; it should be done step-by-atep.
but as soon as possible.

The lack of R&D expenditure is causing the defense technology of Japan to
fall notably behind that of private concerns. Even among the parts used
for missiles, there are some which have similar tendencies. Thus. if

we take advantage of private technology by increasing 8&0 expenditure,
the improvement of missile technology is feasible.

2) Information collecting ability must be improved. Another crucial factor
is to make c I, in which an information collecting ability is indispensable.
This is even more important since the invading forces would attempt a
surprise attack with technology superior to the defenseés. Improvements

in ECU and BCCH are also important. The repletion of c l is one of the

keys to realizing this proposal.

The control of target quote is another bottleneck in terms of technology.

An equal distribution of missiles to the entirety of enexy fighters, which
will assault in several tens or several hundreds, requires a high level

of fire control technology, and this is an issue to be resolved in the future.

3. Size of a Missile Unit

The size of a missile unit will be calculated by future research. The
budget and the number of personnel are restrictive requirements which
must be examined carefully.

16

IOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
The Soviet Union is equipped with more than 10.000 launcher units for

fixed missiles alone, in addition to a number of mobile antiaircraft
missiles. Although it is difficult to compare Japan with the Soviet

Union. since the air defense area is far smaller, obtaining a comparable
ratio of launcher units would be one of the criteria. In order to meet
this, we must expand the scale to a level which would be considerably
larger than the present Nike-Hawk unit, but it is not altogether impossible.

Although the mobile antiaircraft missiles are used for self defense combat.
along with the technological progress. they can be used for strategic
purposes in the future.

The antiwarship missile unit will be organized in accordance with the
water's edge defense operation for the predicted landing spot of the in-
vading troops. but along with the improvement in the range of a missile.
the area of fire control can be expanded, and thereby the number of troops
needed can be proportionately reduced.

6. Changes in the Present Structure

The antiwarship missile unit is the original responsibility of the Ground

Self Defense Force for the purpose of mainland defense, and it will be
embodied by this division through reorganization.

The antiaircraft missile unit will be organized with the present Nike-
Hawk at its core.

The role of the Ground Self Defense Force as a core of national defense
will not change even in a defense based primarily on missiles. The founda-
tion of national defense lies in the spirit of the Japanese people, who
want to protect their country. and its core consists of the Ground Self
Defense Force which will organize resistance together with the people.

In addition, the ground troops are also the final resistance organization
in the national defense.

The Maritime and Self Defense Forces do not need a great deal of change
in the direction of the present consolidation of defense power. Rather.
they will be directed in conformity with the defense of the Japanese land
and sea lanes.

1) Security of Personnel Requirement

The security of personnel for antiwarship and antiaircraft missile units
is one of the most critical issues.

An antiwarship missile unit is designed to achieve the original tasks

of the Ground Self Defense Force. Naturally, it is most desirable to in-
crease the number of personnel by breaking through the regular complement
of 180.000 which has been restricting the increase of the Ground Self
Defense Force for many years. But since this is difficult in the present
circumstances, it must be worked out by reorganizing the troops.

l7

FKHICHHNCJAI.USE(MVLY
The antiaircraft nissile unit will be extensively expanded with the per—
sonnel requirement of the present Nike-Hawk unit at its core. The security
in having a shortage of personnel of several thousand will be the major
problem.

It appears that an increase in the regular complement of Self Defense
Forces would resolve the problem easily; this, however, would involve
not only an increase in personnel expenses but also a great difficulty
in recruiting. Naturally, as a measure of convenience, we can consider
taking sone personnel from the regular melbership of the Ground Self
Defense Force. But a further cutback in the Ground Self Defense Force's
180,000 regular complelent does not seen appropriate since that is the
minimun requirement.

however, at present, due to the fact that there are vacancies of more than
20.000 (limit of sufficiency rate), and personnel and provisions expense
rates are nearly 80 percent (this means the condition of a gradual decline
in equipment). we lust introduce a new idea in regard to the organization
of the Ground Self Defense Force. For example, one idea would be the
formation of different organizations by dividing the present divisions.
which take a miform organization, into a division for mobile strike and
a division mainly for defense, training, and recruiting. In this way,

we can create some personnel.

Of course this measure :Zone cannot meet the requirement of the antiair-
craft missile unit. Therefore, a partial increase of the regular comple-
ment by recruiting froa outside is inevitable.

2) Haritime and Air Self Defense Forces

Although I have stated above that the Maritime and Air Self Defense Forces
require little change in the direction of their present consolidation of
defense power, in order to unite the defensive strategies of the Ground,
Maritime, and Air Self Defense Forces, the direction of consolidation will
naturally be concentrated on strategies for the land of Japan and its
vicinity.

The Maritime Self Defense Force should concentrate greater effort on the
defense of the sea lane; at the same time, it should not neglect a defense
power buildup inshore. The major target of the inshore defense is not
enemy warships but a convoy transporting landing troops. In this respect,
the current condition must be corrected, since there is no base to speak
of in front of the Sea of Japan. with the exception of Haisuru.

In order to secure air dominance in strategic places by defeating the
superior enemy air forces, we must have a concept guiding an air strategy
behind the antiaircraft missile screen. Such an operation is difficult
for Japan, in which the vertical depth is poor, but if we fight under
equal conditions. we cannot make up for our inferiority in terms of numr
bers. Therefore, we must adopt the strategy of destroying enemy aircraft
after they have broken through the antiaircraft missile screen.

18

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
3) Air Defense (to-sand

It is desirable to unify the air defense m6. It say be a general
rule to unify air defense colbat fighters and antiaircraft missiles also
(except surface-to-air missiles for self defense).

This proposal suggests an organization of the "Antiaircraft Self Defense
Force" separating the antiaircraft missile units fron both Air and Ground
Self Defense Forces. Althouﬂi this deviates fron the general rule, in

my judo-ant it is better to do so in order to expand and develop the anti-
aircraft missile units. Manned aircraft and missiles are weapons of dif-
ferent qualities, and their control in peacetime requires different system.
The establishment of such units within the same Self Defense Porce night
cause a hindrance to the development of one by the other.

This can be seen by looking at the statm of the present Nike mit within
the Air Self Defense Force. The result would be the sane if the unit were
placed under the Ground Self Defense Force. and since there is a problem
of unified couand in case of energency, this measure is macceptable.

Consequently, it is desirable to orgmize an independent, fourth self
defense force. In this case, however. it lust be done on the condition
that a clear policy be established on the unification of co-and organisa-
tion in the event of an emergency. Otherwise, it cannot function effec-
tively should an emergency arise. Unity in peacetime training is also
needed.

lo) Points of Change

Expansion of R&D must take place at once. This is an urgent issue.
Developnent of an excellent nisaile. SCH and BCCM. are all pressing issues.

With respect to reorganisation, we will engage in research and examination
of effective units during the period of 1981 lid-tern operation. and it

will be made concrete in the next nid-tern operation period (1986 nid-

tern operation). Research prior to reorganization and the stage of examina-
tion of effective units are critical. In line with the progress in the
aforementioned development of missiles. cautious programing will be planned.

At present, the Defense Agency has begun modernization of the BADGE systsn;
parallel with this. it nay be necessary to plan a radical expansion of C 1.

Putting all the above-mentioned accounts together. the conception of this
proposal will be realised in the 1990's.

5. Japanese Self Defense torces Designed Exclusively for Defensive Posture
that we lust consider next is whether a defensive operation alone can
defend our nation. A defense based on niesiles is designed to appropriate

lost of the major force for defense of the Iainland, and because of this,
the strength of a counterattack on the eneuy's base will be restricted.

l9

POI OFIIGAI. USE ONLY
But the sen weak point is found in the present defense conception; in
accordance with the Japan-11.8. Security Treaty, Japan expects an attack
on eneny bases from the U.S. military's war potential.

As already mentioned above. there has been a marked trend toward increased
restriction of war through politics as a political tool. Unless the
united States and the Soviet Union, the two powers, confront one another
directly with armed forces, it is most likely that a political resolution
will end a war in the future by striking a simificant blow to the enemy.
The novenent of world opinion will greatly influence this. In the case
of Japan, we can expect a modern version of the Mongolian invasions.

But of course, once war has broken out. the fundamental tendency of war.
that is, an appeal to unnecessary violent action, would be unavoidable,
and it is likely that this night dininieh the political power to terminate
war. Here arises the necessity of a final resistant organization with
ground troops in its core, and the people's firm resolution to defend
their country can break an enemy invasion and deter a war.

6. Relationship With the United States

The relationship with the United States is the key factor in Japan's
defense. Recently, however, the Japan-11.5. relationship has not been
altogether smooth. The United States' denand for Japan's defense power
buildup is severe. and the situation is such that it can develop into
defense frictions.

One area of 11.8. discontent with Japan lies in Japan's insufficient efforts
to build up its defensive power. This is neaaured by a low defense ex-
penditure rate compared to GNP. Japan should imdiately abolish such an
mreasonable restriction on defense expenditure as a maxim of 1 percent
of GNP, and should nake an effort to contribute its due share with regard
to the country Japan is allied with.

Another concern of the United States in regard to the direction of the con-
solidation of defense power is that when the U.S. Far Eastern war potential
swings to another front. especially the Middle East, Japan lacks the
ability to compensate for a gap created in the Far Best. For this reason,
Japan should elininate anxiety about its security by reinforcing its
autonomous defensive power. It is also necessary to provide stability

in the surrounding see areas by reinforcing antiaircraft and antisubssrine
capabilities.

Of these, the latter is critical. that is. not to create anxiety about
Japan's defense when the U.S. nilitary in the Far East shifts. Us nuat
establish a foundation wherein the 0.8. nilitary is able to shift; this
in itself indicates that Japan's defense must be conducted autonomously
by Japan.

It is a general principle that a country nust be defended by itself. A
collective security supplements an autonomous defense power, and the latter
in turn renders service to a collective security.

20

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
From this view also, this proposal attespta to achieve the goal of having
an autonomous national defense with nissiles at its core by Issue of firsly

protecting the country. and will effectively contribute to the U.8.-Japan
security relationship.

7. Resolution To Protect Our Country

This proposal aqhasises the aspect of atteapting to achieve a goal of
national defense by supple-eating a personnel shortage with the power

of technology and aoney. this is became the proposal ails not at falling
behind the condition of a war which is predicted in the future, but rather
at taking the initiative.

I would like to stress that this proposal does not alter the hard fact
that the foundation of national defense lies in the resolution of the
Japanese people who wish to protect their comtry. This ate-s fro. the
realization that this operation will be carried out elaevhsra under almost
the seas conditions as those of a decisive battle taking place in our
homeland. Without a defense foundation based on the Japanese people.

this kind of operation cannot be realized. The Japanese people's resolu-
tion to protect their own nation is the essential requirement.

COPYRIGHT: Asagulo Shinbunsha 1982

9711
650: 6105/50

21

MWUSONLY
JAPAN'S AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY T0 ENJOY BUOYANCY IN BUSINESS
Tokyo "IRON KOGYO 8m in Japanese 6. 7, 8 Jan 82

[6 Jan 82 p 5]

[Text] Kawasaki Heavy Industries

The aircraft industry is about to take a very inortant leap forward. First
of all, in terns of private sector. production of the ”Boeing 767," headed by
Kawasaki Beavy Industries Co. Ltd. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Co, Ltd. and
Fuji Heavy Industries Co, Ltd, is a step in the right direction. And the
"BKll7" helicopter, jointly developed by Kawasaki and West Germany's MB!
Caspany. is one step from acquiring nodel certification. Meanwhile there have
been orders for 120 of Mitsubishi's business jet, the "H0300." and full-scale
sass productiOn has finally started. As for defense orders. production has
begun on the "P15 fighter" and the "93c sub-spotting planeg" further. the
design and production of the HT! (second generation aid-sized trainer),
produced by Kawasaki, the Iain contractor, in cooperation with Mitsubishi
will follow. Since these various projects will all bloon together and
full-scale nass production will continue progressing favorably in PYl982,
there are nany cases contributing to business results. Japan's aircraft
industry sales of 280 billion yen in P!l980 will reach 328 billion yen in
FY1981, and sales of nearly 600 billion yen are forecast for 911982. Each
manufacturer is expecting this year to be one of great steps forward.

Total of 52 "767's"

Since 1978 Kawasaki heavy Industries Co, Ltd has continued with plant and
equip-ant investnants amounting to 17 billion yen in order to prosote the
Boeing 767, P3c sub-spotting plane. P15 fighter and nKll7 helicopter. and will
finally couplets its invest-ants in IYI981. Since a sass production systes
is in place and a project teas for the MIX development has also been set up
and has started on the basic design. 1982 is the year in which the entire
aircraft depart-ant will wrestle with these five sajor projects.

the allotted production of the 767 of Kawasaki heavy Industrie is for the nose
and aid-sections; 27 plane sections were produced in FYI981 and finally total
sales of 6 billion yen in total contributed to business gains. The pace
during the first half of 1982 will be a Ionthly production of 4 aircraft and

22
n

FOR (mm use our
1n the latter half. the pace will be a monthly production of 8 aircraft; so
the schedule shows favorable progress as anticipated at the time of
development. A total production of 52 aircraft sections has been scheduled
in 1982 and a sales total of nearly 10 billion yen will add greatly to
business achievements.

It is reported that szasaki's technology team participated with Boeing from
the design state of the 767 and studied what could not be studied in Japan.
As stated by Hasahiko Iwata, director, Kawasaki Heavy Industries Co, Ltd.
"what we did was only the designing of one section, the fuselage. but we were
exposed to the idea for designing an energy conserving jumbo aircraft which
has become a great asset in the design of future aircraft." So such was
gained from their study abroad in terms of technology and it seems that
confidence was gained in rearing a technology staff for the future.

hodel Certification This Suner

Even though the “117 helicopter, another civilian airplane project, is a
joint development, it is a full-fledged twin engine helicopter first developed
by Japan. At present. tests are continuing for acquisition of PAA model
certification; and acquisition of certification is targeted for the sun-er

of 1982. Together with H33 Cowany. there are already orders for 130
(Kawasaki has orders for 20). A use production system has been started with
a monthly production of 6 aircraft. There are “(117 bodies lined up in the
Gifu plant, and a production of 80 is expected in FY1982; furthermore. the
target for ”1983 is 90 aircraft. Due to changes in PM inspection standards.
each manufacturer's model certification acquisition for new models has been
delayed. It is forecast that the BKll7 certification will be delayed for not
more than a year later than anticipated. Although it will be acquired in

the su-er. nonetheless it is said that deliveries are expected by the end of
the year. This is because of the desire to complete supplementary items.
such as examination of operation manuals and pilot training; the attitude of
wanting to spend sufficient time and deal carefully with the project can

be inferred from this.

Corresponding to improvement in nuclear powered submarines. Kawasaki, the main
contractor. started production of the P30 sub-spotting plane which is expected
to give a high level detection capability to Japan's coastal patrol. The
first plane came out of the hanger at the end of 1981. The first flight and
tests of this plane will run from February through March; and it will be
delivered to the Defense Agency in May.

The first order in FY1981 for 5 aircraft to a total of 20 billion yen are in
the midst of production; these will be delivered during PYl982. The first
aircraft is Kn productiOn, almost completely from American made parts. but
domestic parts will gradually be used starting with the second aircraft, and
with the fifth aircraft. production will be almost entirely domestic. This

is an opportunity to show Japan's aircraft industry's high level technological
power. Moreover, the decision has already been made for orders of 10 aircraft
in the second phase. Production of a total 52 aircraft (besides these,
another 3 from FMS). will proceed in accordance with the defense plan until
the mid-80's.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Technology Accumulated with the ”F15"

In the area of allotted production, wings and rear sections of the P15
fighter for 12 aircraft were produced and delivered in FY1981. and in PY1982.
15 of the 30 aircraft in the second contract and the 1 remaining aircraft
from the first contract, for a total of 16. will be produced and a monthly
production rate of 2 aircrafts will progress favorably. In the design which
also puts importance on air war capability in addition to the top speed of
2.6 mach. composite materials and titanium alloy were much used; and it is
said that this technology has advanced greatly in the production plants.

The construction of the main wings is of four rods of titanium alloy and the
upper outer surface is made from a thick sheet of aluminum alloy and the
underside outer surface is made from a braid of titanium alloy: the major part
of the fuselage is one solid machined piece of titanium alloy. 50 this
construction can be called the acme of a modern fighter plane: and perhaps it
will greatly influence the design of the HTX, a decision having been made for
its development.

Last fall, the development of the HT! was decided with Kawasaki as the main
contractor; a project team was set up within the company at the same time the
decision was made; and basic planning started with a 96 member project team
led by Masahiko Iwata as the project manager, 46 members from Kawasaki and

50 members participating from Mitsubishi and Fuji.

Targeted Sales of 100 Billion Yen

Kawasaki has a past record of producing 210 T33 jet trainers. and inasmuch as
Kawasaki was hoping to make the moat of this experience someday, the design
group. saying "our hope has been fulfilled." is putting its spirit into it
all the more trying to show its ability. The trainer is said to have the
most difficult fuselage of all aircraft, and even more so because it is the
link between the beginner trainer and the newest F15. The shape of the plane
is a dihedral angled main wing, tandem two-seater, horizontal tail plane;

and it will use the domestic XP3 twin engine (with a 1.6 ton thrust),
presently in the midst of development, and a maximum speed of 0.6 mach is
anticipated. It is hoped that the weight can be held down to under 5.5

tons, using boron composite materials as the major material. Basic design
will end in one year and it is expected that partial production will begin

in FY1983. Total orders of 200 are expected. It is a project attracting
attention as a development with the dual character of accumulation of
technology and stability of operations.

Kawasaki has almost completed its plant and equipment investments, and all is
ready in all areas, such as mastery of the design with computers, new

technology and the like. PYl982 is the year to finally demonstrate the
past accumulation of technology in the aircraft division. A sales target of
100 billion yen has been set for the division.

26
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
[7 Jan 82 p 7]
[Text] Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. Beginning with the 767

"It is the first time since the resumption of aircraft production to have such
a large project at one time." says Shinichi Aizawa, managing director of
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Co. Ltd. Nagoya plant.

Twenty-five years until the end of the war and 30 years since the end of the

war have passed since Mitsubishi's Nagoya plant started as a manufacturer of

internal combustion engines; but it seems F11982 will be the busiest post-war
year in this history.

Hot to mention production of the 767, projects which Mitsubishi has lined up
are as follows: its own development, the M0300 business jet, final assembly
of the P15 fighter, allotted production of the P30. production of the T1
trainer and the P2 fighter. furthermore. remodeling plans for the P6 fighter,
participation in the MTX development and. although a small part. production
of helicopters.

In terms of civilian requests. the same as other manufacturers. it is handling
allotted production of fuselage parts for the 767; it is producing the

rear section of the fuselage and doors. In FY1981, it produced 34 longeron
for fuselage, and it is expected that with a monthly production rate of

A or 5, it will produce 56 in PY1982. It is certain that production of the
767 will have a monthly production pace of 8, beginning at the end of PY1982
through FY1983. It seems that the rear fuselage section of one aircraft alone
is 200 million yen. So it seems that greater weight is being given by
civilian orders to Mitsubishi which has many government centracts.

Monthly Production of 8

However, when all is said and done, it is the Mitsubishi developed M0300 jet
in which the company places its greatest hOpes from PY1982 and on. It

passed the same strict FAA inspection as the jumbo jet on 6 November last
year. and this aircraft which successfully acquired model certification has
already had orders for 120, mainly from the 0.8. The first plane was
delivered early this year. Since it will start mass production at a monthly
production rate of 8 aircraft in F71982. fuselages are lined up at the Komski-
minami plant. The FY1982 production target is 90 aircraft; delivery of orders
received new is expected in May 1983; so production will not catch up with
orders.

The reason orders have increased so much, primarily in the U.s. market, is
because this is the only newly developed plane in the field of business jets
in the last 10 years, and there has been great improvement in its capability;
and because Mitsubishi has a foundation for this because it manufactured

700 or so MUZ turbo prop planes. the predecessor of MUJOO. However, because
of technoloy with its supercritical wings, improved spoiler and full span
flaps. and decrease in fuselage resistance. it achieved a 13 percent increase
in fuel efficiency and cruising speed over other manufacturers' planes. The

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fact is that it can reach a speed of 803 kim per hour. Furthermore, it
achieved the widening of interior space and building a more comfortable
passenger cabin. One cannot miss the fact that it was highly praised

because of the high design technology power which resolved these
technologically contradictory conditions. high efficiency and comfort. There
will be a profit in terms of business results starting in 1982 at 2.25 million
dollars (March quarter 1981 price) per unit. Managing Director Shinichi
Aizawa comments. "Money will really come in six years after development."
Expectations are great with this aircraft.

The F15, Pillar of Defense Orders

0n the other hand. the F15 fighter is the pillar of defense orders.
Preparation of this plane is being expedited not just because this company
wanted it but because it is the core of the defense of Japan's airspace. The
first plane was delivered by Mitsubishi to the Defense Agency on 11 December
last year. A contract has been concluded for Mitsubishi Heavy Industries as
the main contractor to produce 86 of the planes from now until FY1986 in
accordance with the Defense Agency's plan setting up an air defense system.
It is anticipated that in FY1981 four planes will be produced and delivered;
11 planes in FY1982. Subsequently with 13 planes in FY1983 and 7 in FY1984.
the monthly production rate will be about one plane per month, and like the
P36. use of domestic parts in this plane will increase from the ninth plane.
This will be a great asset in absorbing new technology and production know-how.

"We have become used to construction with titanium alloy. a difficult process.
In actually making the fuselage there are many instances where we understand
the reason for such things as why one wire must be so thin." (Managing
Director Shinichi Aizawa) It can be called an important aircraft as a move
to the next generation airplane (fighter) to be developed. anticipated in

the aid 1980's.

Besides these. Mitsubishi has the allotted production of the front and rear
fuselage sections of the sac. and although few in number. it has the production
of the H852 helicopter (civilian name is $61); and sales in Mitsubishi's
aviation/aerospace division were 120-130 billion yen in FYI981. and are
targeted to exceed 200 billion yen in FY1983. It is hoped that 150 billion
yen will be achieved in PY1982 as the basis for that target. This year will

be the year which gives vitality to all plants.

[8 Jan 82 p 7]
[Text] Fuji Heavy Industries. Advanced FRP Process Technology

In contrast to Kawasaki Heavy Industries Co. Ltd and Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries Co. Ltd, the aircraft division of Fuji Heavy Industries Co. Ltd,
which descended from the former Makajima Airplane Company achieved sales and
its share of the company's total sales of no more than 4 percent or 20
billion yen out of 520 billion yen. This is because Fuji stopped developing
its own planes for a while, and also its allotted production on the Boeing

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMB?
767 was limited to parts manufactured from fiber reinforced plastics, such as
the fairing of the main wing joint and the landing gear cover. Its high level
technology maintained a standard second to no other manufacturer, such as in
the licensed production of the multi-use emu helicopter, its greatest
masterpiece, and also assembly of the F3C wing.

Its allotted production on the 767 is for production of about 20 aircraft in
FY1981. Total sales of 1.8 billion yen camot help but be low with only

FR? process products. It expects to produce about 3 times that in 1982;

it will produce parts for 53 aircraft. Fuji also will have a monthly
production of 6, which is in step with the other nnufacturers. Its intent
is to extend FR? process technology to other products. Fuji's view is that
the fairing runs a length of 20 meters in jusbo aircraft and when divided up
has 13 parts. In order to manufacture it with minimal distortion and error
in the parts. manufacture of a precise master model and inspection with a
coaputerized automated measuring instrument are required. .‘l'hese have great
merit in terms of production control and improvement of the technology level.
In the future when the time comes to produce m automobile parts, this will
bring a major innovation." (Yoshio Alriyama, director)

Large-scale Hing Facilities, Fuji's Forte

Fuji, which produces helicopters in a technology tie-up with Bell Company,

the largest U.S. manufacturer of helicopters, has produced and delivered 138
Ulll helicopters ordered by the Defense Agency until now; in “1981 it produced
5 and has decided to produce 5 in FY1982 also. The year before last it
considered a licensed production of Bell's large scale 214$? helicopter, but
that was shelved because the demand for it in Japan is small and the investment
risk would be too great. however, Fuji's great hope for ”1982 is the A111
anti-tank helicopter; it is supposed to produce and deliver 5!. of then by
FY1986. And if orders come in smoothly. it is expected that there will be
orders for 22 as a first phase over the three year period beginning FY1982.

Because this helicopter is the design development which makes the mst of a
power system of the Hill helicopter which Fuji handled, producing this kind of
aircraft fits Fuji perfectly. In addition to the high speed and
maneuverability, this is seen as a chance to accumlate technology in terms
of its own future development, such as with sights and heavy armaments, such
as the 7.62 millimeter machine gun, 60 millimeter grenades, rocket bombs and
missiles. Fuji is currently continuing its investigation of preparing for
licensed production with Bell, and intends to make plant and equipment
investments of about 5 billion yen.

Besides these, it will also have allotted production of the ”C and the F15.
it will produce 3 of the P36 wings in “1981 at 500 million yen. and 3 in
FY1982; since the parts processed will double. sales will amount to 1 billion
yen. F15 production uses titanium alloy sheet process and many hot press
parts. Although sales in FY1982 will be low at 300 million yen, the technology
they will acquire will be great.

Hany of Fuji's projects are other companies' allotments; so FY1982 will be
limited to a slight increase over the previous year at about 2k billion yen.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
but since Fuji's strength. not f0und in other companies, is that it has
facilities for assembly of large scale wings, it seems Puji has great hope
for the Yxx wings for which a tie-up has been nearly concluded.

FY1982. in which numerous projects will become full-scale is the year in
which a large step forward is promised not only for the manufacturers in
charge of fuselage construction and final assembly. but also for cooperative

manufacturers which make working instruments. struts. propellers and the
like.

Favorable production has become full-scale in various fields such as Teijin
Limited's spoiler power control parts. Sumitomo Seimitsu's struts and prop
propellers. Shimadsu Seisakusho, Limited's angle gear box, and Shin Heiwa
Industry Co, Ltd and Nippon Iikoki Co, Ltd, which directly cooperate on
fuselage production. The Aeronautics/Aerospace Industry Association sees

a firm production amount of 350 billion yen. Even in the engine field which
is far behind the fuselage field, Rolls Royce Company of the UK, Ishikawaji-
ma-Harima Heavy Industries Co, Ltd, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Co. Ltd.

and Kawasaki Heavy Industries Co, Ltd set up a joint venture company, and
development of a new model jet engine has started. Planning is advancing
favorably and some parts have already been completed; tests will start on the

first plane in England in February 1982 and on the second plane in Japan in
March.

Likewise, this year is the year when the Yxx tie-up will be concluded. The
aircraft industry will tie-up with foreign manufacturers as equal partners,
unlike the situation with the rx. So this year will be the year in which the
aircraft industry's real ability will be queatioaed on all points of design
development, production and sales.

COPYRIGBT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo ﬂonsha 1982

9400
050: 4105/56

28
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
smoouwcroa TRADE FRICTION WITH UNITED suns 018008880. PART I
0.8. Inport Regulation Request

Tokyo NIKON IBIZA! sum in Japanese 5 hb 82 p 5
(Article: "SIA's Hove"]

[Text] The Japanese-Aurican seaiconductor friction situation. which had been
in a sonwhat tranquil state. has once lore batons shrouded in dark clouds.
This is nanifested by the haricn Saaiconductor Industry Association's

(SIA) aove toward regulation of ilports of Japanese lads semiconductors

which it asked the United States Departunt of (Io-arcs for "governent
handling" of the situation. The objective of this regulation is the Japanese
64 kilobit RAH (rsndoa access write-in and read-out usury). which has
captured about 70 percent of the Anerican aarket. and it is anticipated that
Jspanese-Anerican coqetition in leading products, including VLSI (large

type integrated circuits). will becoaa even none fierce.

with regard to this present nova on the part of the SIA. the Japan Blectronic
Equip-sot Industry Association said: "He do not know why it chose the
present tins to nova to regulate inorts" as it probes its coapetitor's
motives. This is because Ic (integrated circuit) trade going to the United
States during the period January through Novanber 1981 showed a decrease of
5.5 percent over the seas period of the previous year. to 63.8 billion yen.
while inports for the seas period decreased only 1.3 percent. to 63.3 billion
yen, and the favorable balance was only $00 nillion yen (this balance was
plus 3.1: billion yen the previous year). so the export-iaport ratio was
roughly equal.

At the sane tine. the long-standing issue of IC custoas duties was alleviated
by agreeaent between the two govern-ants to lower than. and the u.s. duties
were lowered to 6.2 percent in January this year (they were previously

5.6 percent) while the Japanese duties were lowered to 4.2 percent in April
fornerly 10.1 percent). and the duties are now roughly the sac. The

Japanese sec to be saying: "We are doing our utnost to avoid this trade
friction."

On the other hand, the Japanese industrial world is showing signs of enhanced
alertness with the stateaent: "l'haae novenents are rather deep-rooted."
"the SIA is not looking for a balance between inports and exports but is

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
planning to make an issue of leading technology" (executive of Toshiba
Corporation) is the Japanese view. Japan has already secured about a 40-
percent share of the American aarket in the matter of the 16 K RAM and it
presently accounts for about 70 percent of the 6k K RAM, and 51A believes that
if this situation continues, the next generation 256 K W will be completely
dominated by the Japanese, so this is the situation which is responsible for
its attitude.

Purthernore. the American semiconductor industry recently has been severely
affected by the current depressed economic situation. and all companies are
reflecting poor business conditions. One of the top nicon naker mediate of
SIA, Intel, showed a decrease in net profits for 1981 to 70 percent below that
of the previous year. National Seaiconductor showed a roughly equal balance
between incone and expenditures, and Hostec reported a net loss.

This is why the American conpanies are unable to foot the bill for the vast
expenditures required for new facilities; they have been forced to suspend
their production of the 66 K RAM or pull out of the field altogether. The
situation has deterioratedto the point that it has even been said that the
only two cupanies which can cospete toe to toe with the Japanese makers are
Texas Instrt-ents and Motorola.

Plant construction costs have increased sharply and large research funds have
to be expended for a company to get into the 256 K era. and this is creating
the fear that the Japanese-American gap will becone even wider. It scene to
be the belief on the part of the SIA that now is the tins to beat down the
Japanese influence.

In view of this situation. the Japanese nakers are on guard. saying: "We

don't know what further unreasonable demands will be forthconing." At the
same time, they are making every effort to avoid frictional confrontations.
saying: "He will put more strength into new plant construction in the United
States and increase the output of our presently operating facilities there."
There are also many who say: "He would like to put more effort into developing
leading technology."

"Where the issue of the 66 K RAM is concerned, it is obvious that the American
makers should show more resolve" (Vice President Jungi Ouchi. Nippon Electric).
and there are some who even seek to send lore encouregenent to their competi-
tors. In any event, the friction revolving around leading technology alone is
expected to involve high-level goverment decisions and cospetition is ex-

pected to become more fierce. with possible snotional opposition free the
American side.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizei Shiwunsha 1982
Standardization of 256 K Issue
Tokyo RIM KOGYO sum in Japanese 10 Feb 82 p 13

[Article: "256 K Production")

[Test] The initiation of production (s-ple ship-ent) of the 256 K nanory
(256 kilobit randon access n-ory) has because a topic of discussion, and at

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
present the Japanese nakere are taking the basic attitude of "looking at
patterns." All of the conpanies have already completed their 256 K develop-
nent end have the technological capability to cone out with sanples at any
tine. but so far there has been no international standardization of the

256 K itself. so these co-panies are refraining fron all production and
shipnent until the standards are set. To be sure, there is sues feeling that
the 66 K narket has only just developed. end there should be an effort to

avoid nipping such a development in the bud by the early introduction of the
next-generation product.

The reason the various IC coupanies are attaching greet inportance to their
sample shipaents is their bitter experience with the 64 K. Fujitsu was the
first to announce a conercial 66 K in the spring of 1978, but this unit

required two power sources, so it received poor acceptance. Since then. TI,
13H. end Motorola successively announced their develop-ant of the 66 K, and

it was only after five rounds taking over 2 years that standardization was
established.

This experience has taught the nekers that taking the lead and announcing
product developaent end production nay result in the need to redesign s
nodified product if standardization requires a sonewhet different iten. and
any such redesign will require at least a year to complete. while plans for
uses production will be greatly delayed as a result. leaving the conpeny fer
behind its coqetitora. This is why the nakars are quietly waiting this tine;

"It may be said that the Japanese industry has because that such tougher"
(Nippon Electric top executive).

It is believed that standardisation of the 256 I will not see such basic
change in pin arrengenent end power source because of the need for flexibility
to enable interchange with the 61. K. On the other hand, the top people at
Hitachi Limited say: "There is the one point that requires study regarding
the user's prerogatives." At the sane tine. the sane people said that the
standardization "market place" will be the International Solid State Circuit
Conference (ISSCC) which will be convened on the 10th (local tine) in San
Francisco.

The industry considers that the problsn points in standardization include:
"Inclusion of redundancy (it is difficult to build a unit in which all
500,000 elenents are constructed flawlessly. and backup circuits are employed
in the event fnulty slenents are for-ed); "large users such as IBM and DEC
have not decided what their needs are": and "what d>out the tining problem."
In addition. it is said in some quarters that even though standarization may
be decided by the ISSCC. this conference is ”purely a conference to present
research results and not the organ to establish the standardization. This is
a meeting where top technologists of the world's IC industries will gather
under one roof . and their lobbying efforts will have a strong influence on
the standardization decided upon," sens to be the general attitude. The
industry is looking on in the belief that. while not included on the agenda,
Hitachi plans to introduce a new develop-ant proposal for the 256 K at this
conference, and reaction to this announce-ant will lead to the energence of
a consensus for standardization.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
There is concern that Japanese-American semiconductor conflict will begin anew
with the 66 K problem, and what American industry is irritated over is that
where it concedes “defeat" in the 6‘ K at the present stage. it finds it
almost impossible to reverse the situation for the next-generation 256 K.

In other words. it has become evident that rounds I and 2 of standardization-
which is instrumental in advantageous guiding of the market-«were captured by

Nippon Electric, and round 3 will again be controlled by Japanese industry,
so the future for American industry does not seem too bright.

The two organs which decide on 10 specifications and standardization are
JBDEC (Joint Electron Device Engineering Council) and In: (International
Electron Committee). JEDBC is composed of more than 30 companies headed by
powerful American makers such as Valos. GE. and DEC. and has more'than 10
couittees such as the package cousittee. each of which studies and decides
on specifications for various themes under its jurisdiction.

There are no legal restrictions attached to the items that are decided upon,
but marketing of any product which does not meet specifications is very

disadvantageous, and every company makes every effort to come out with pro-
ducts which meet specifications. Inc has a similar function, but it points

toward systematizing specifications on a worldwide level. Compared to JEDBC,
it is comprised more of academic people. and it lacks clout.

In any event. standardization of the 256 I will be determined by “3036. and
announcements of saqle shipments will not be forthcoming until standardiza-
tion is accaplished. JEDBC says it is presently receiving proposals from
the different companies, and it will be about half a year before any decision
is made. As a result, it is said that "sample shipments will have to wait
until the latter half of this year at the earliest; any earlier date is out of
the question" (Fujitsu executive).

COPYRIGHT: Nikksn Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

Effect of 0.8. Recession
Tokyo NIKON KBIZAI samxm in Japanese 13 Feb 82 p 5
[Article: "Increasing 0.8. Irritation"]

[Text] There is increasing irritation on the Anerican side in the Japanese-
American semiconductor friction. This is indicated by the recent move on the
part of the American Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) to regulate
import of Japanese the 66 K RAH (random read-in and read-out memory) through
the United States Trade Representative (USTR) followed by the criticism by

Commerce Secretary Baldridge of the Japanese semiconductor industry and trade
policies at a public hearing.

The Ministry of International Trade and Industry at present is saying out-
wardly that "there is currently no Japanese-American semiconductor friction"
(headquarters of Bureau of Machine Information Industry) and seems to be down-

playing any statements on the part of the American side, but it is anticipating

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a further increase in friction and is secretly providing administrative

guidance to the large seniconductor nakere. About the end of last week, the
top echelon of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry even passed
on the unusual statement: "Be discreet about dumping type exports which can
lead to criticism" to the vice president and director level of the six large
semiconductor nakers. Nippon Electric, hitachi Linited, fujitsu, Mitsubishi
Electric. Olti Electric. and Toshiba Corporation. At the sure ties, the

ministry is encouraging foreign capital seniconductor makers to set up plants
in Japan and proeote nutual interchanges between Japan and the United States.

In the background of this present rekindling of the Japanese-American seni-
conductor friction are: l) the fear on the American side that there will be
a reversal in the Japanese-American relationship in the develop-ant of leading
technology. and 2) the Aeerican seniconductor industry is in deep recession.

The VLSI (very large-scale integrated circuit) is not only the mainstay of the
electronics revolution. but in the United States it is a vital technological
product in the nilitary and space develop-ant areas. The VHS! (very high-ape
speed integrated circuit) develop-eat plan initiated in the United States in
1979 was designated a prinary goal by the defense departeent, and the govern-
aent allotted $200 million for its develop-ant. At the ease tine. military
and sense related funds are increasing for the American seniconductor
industry in the nidst of the entire industry being faced with a recession:

it is estimated that the 1981 funds from this source increased 23 percent
over the previous year. to $600 rdllion; the dependence of the industry on
ailitary and space fmds is increasing with the years.

Despite this situation. the first salvo in the VLSI conflict involving the

66K RAM saw the Japanese forces take over 70 percent of the U.S. market; the
irritation of the U.S. Government and industry is very great, and there have
been increasing warnings that "if this situation continues. we will also lose
out to the Japanese in the natter of the 256 K RAH." At the sale time. there

are active movements agath Japanese regulations. "Re have no means to
counter trade friction that involves military and national defense" (Ministry

of International Trade and Industry official). and the present situation is
that this ministry has already begun to sorry about the situation.

At the same tine. the most recent industrial performance of the American semi-
conductor industry has been anything but good. The 1981 profit performance
of Intel. which is a central member of the SIA. dropped more than 70 percent
below the previous year's level; even Texas Instrument (TI), which professes
to support a free trade systa. has seen a sharp decline in profits. to about
half that of the previous year during 1981. There is increasing peril that

continuation of the present situation will make it difficult to assure
development funds for the next generation VLSI.

The IC (integrated circuit) custons duties. which had been a problem, were
lowered as the result of agreement on the part of both goverments. and this
year's American duties are pegged at 10.21. percent (compared to 5.6 percent the
previous year) while the Japanese duties are 4.2 (from 10.1 percent the previous
year). so the two countries are about the suns where custom duties are concerned.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'U. va's'syens. UML UI‘LI

At the same time, there was a large decrease in Japanese 16 exports to the
United States during 1981: the cumulative total for January-November was
500 million yen (3.4 billion yen for the same period the previous year),
and the export-import balance is in a state of equilibrium.

In addition, four companies. Nippon Electric, Hitachi. Fujitsu and Toshiba,
have been building plants in the United States, while the American coapanies
TI and Motorola have built plants in Japan, and it is to be expected that
there will be other foreign capital ventures which will establish plants in
Japan. It may be stated that where semiconductors are concerned, there is a
Japanese-American mutual exchange environment. The statements fro. the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry and the Japan Electronic
Equipment Association to the effect that "Japanese-American friction in the
semiconductor area does not seem likely" stem from such a background.

Be that as it may, Japanese-American semiconductor friction is heating up
despite what some Japanese quarters say. "We do not know what demands will
be coming up next" (a t0p industrial figure) is typical of the increasing
anxiety. Industrial people are saying: "He must put greater effort into
onsite plants and increasing onsite production volume" and "If there is any
leading technology that needs to be obtained, we will not spare anything to
acquire it," thereby displaying their countermeasures, but the actual situa-
tion is that neither measure possesses decisive clout.

“The fastest way to avoid friction is, above all, for the American makers
to come out with a leading product" (Hitachi executive) is also a typical
comment heard. On the other hand, it is expected that semiconductor
friction between Japan and the United States will become even sore fierce.
to the extent that developeent in leading technology will develop to the

stage of assuring national security and even to involvement in high-level
administrative problems.

In suth a situation, Vice Minister Fujiwara of the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry said on the 12th: "This is a problem that will be resolved
only with semiconductors," as he put his finger on the real difficulty in

resolving this problem.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Reciprocal Plant Construction
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 17 Feb 82 p 8
[Article: "Solution for Trade Priction"]
[Text] Efforts on the part of American semiconductor makers to locate plants
in Japan have become more active. rairchild, which is the seventh ranking

semiconductor company in the world, for-ally announced its plans to construct
an 1c (integrated circuit) plant in Toso city, Nagasaki Prefecture. and this

34

FOR1OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
was followed by the announcement on the part of America's number two maker,
Motorola, that it too will begin construction of a new plant. In addition,
Intel, which is the largest micon maker, heads a list of several companies
which are planning to set up plants in Japan and together with the world's
leading semiconductor company, Texas Instruments (TI), will make up a list
of large semiconductor makers which over the course of the next few years
will be putting up production strongholds in Japan. In the other direction,
Japan's semiconductor makers have already seen five of their ranks producing
IC on American soil, plans for construction of second plants are rapidly
developing, and Japanese-American production is accelerating. The Ministry
of International Trade and Industry considers that "this mutual advance in

plant construction plays an important role in easing semiconductor friction"

(Machine Industry Information Bureau) and is welcoming these most recent
developments.

The reason American semiconductor makers have become anxiously involved in
setting up plants in Japan is to be able to utilize to the fullest the
superior business practices of Japan, including productivity and quality
control. TI, which initiated semiconductor production in Japan in 1968,

has already put up three semiconductor plants in this country. Among these,
the Hiura plant in Ibaraki Prefecture which was completed near the end of
1980, has been designated the production plant for the 66 K RAH (random
access memory), which is the first-round product in the area of VLSI (very
large scale integrated circuits), from among the many TI plants distributed

around the world, and a considerable volume of this plant's products are being
exported back to the United States.

It is said that this decision was based on the high evaluation of the pro-
ductivity and strict quality control exercised in Japanese plants. Even the
American makers that are planning to put up plants in Japan say: 'The
success II has enjoyed in Japan has been a major stimulus." Motorola plans
to start production of the 6‘ K RAM at its new plant, and there is very great

possibility that the Japanese plants of these various companies will be their
VLSI production plants.

At the same time, there is an appealing factor in the Japanese semiconductor
market for the American semiconductor makers. The market scale for 1981 was
estimated at about $6.5 billion, which is greater than the $4 billion for

all Europe combined and is right next to the $7 billion for the United States,
making the Japanese market the second largest in the world. Furthermore,

the rate of growth of the Japanese market for the first part of the 1980

decade is expected to continue at about a 20-percent pace, contrasting sharply
with the American rate of growth, which has leveled out.

These are the reasons why the American semiconductor makers are spotlighting
production and sales in the Japanese market, to take the strain off the
American market which is still suffering from recession.

3S

FOI‘OFFKJAI.US£(NVLY
s-vas vrrsbsns. was. UI‘LI

President R. Shake of the loo-percent Peirchild-financed Pairchild Japan
(main office in Shibuya in Tokyo, capital mre than 450 million yen)
stressed the advantages of this company's move by saying: "Not only have
production and supply times been reduced, but products to nest the user's
requests can be developed and produced." revealing a policy of reinforced
sales efforts in Japan.

In the midst of rekindled Japanese-American semiconductor friction. there
has been increasing criticims on the part of the SIA (American Semiconductor
Industry Association) with regard to the closed nature of the Japanese
market. On the other hand. these entries of American makers into Japan have
the effect of negating these criticisms, and the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry welcomes these moves. At the same time, Japanese makers

are more active in putting up plants in the United States. and some casing
in the saiconductor friction may be forthcoming.

Mutual Advances in Plant Construction on the Part
of Japanese-American Semiconductor Makers

American Side Japanese Side

TI Tsurugadani, Saitam-kan, Roms (formerly Sunnyvale,
ﬂinode. Cite-ken, Toyo Dengu California
Hiura, Ibarhki-ken Seisskusho)

Motorola Kaizu, Fukushima-ken Hitachi Limited Dallas, Texas
(jointfwith To“? Ni 21 i in Vi
P1 t n ectr c un a ev

ans or new p an ppo 5211:0111“

Fairchild Toso, Nagasaki-ken Fujitsu San Diego.
(expected to start California
operation Aug 1983)

Intel Plans to construct mass Toshiba Corpora- Sunnyvale,
production plant tion California

Advanced Plans to construct mesa

Micro production plant

Devices

(AND)

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shilﬁunsha 1982

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Conparison of Industries
Tokyo DENSHI GIJUTSU in Japanese Vol 210, No 1, Jan 82 pp 94-96

[Article by Biroshi Susi. Conclusion of article published in JPRS L/10332,
18 February 1982, of this series]

[Text] Production: The American semiconductor industry was originally
nurtured under the mission of responding to the challenges of the military
and space related industries. As a result, it may be said that "selective
awareness" was the controlling factor during the 1970's before the 10
production process was stabilized. In other words, it was only necessary

to select those items fron the total number of 10 produced which met the
specifications. Otherwise, there was the situation that no other Pr°du¢t1°n
process was available.

The interest of technologists working in the sanieonduotor industry was
initially directed at innovations or improvnenta to the production process.
The American. with his pioneer spirit, loves to work at the frontier, which
in a spirit shared nationally has his interest naturally drawn in the
direction of development of new types of 1c, for example, the "design area."

As the comercial market demand for Ic's increased with the 1970 decade, the

top interest of the American seniconductor industry was divided between two
points.

The first point was to come out on the market with an imovative Ic design
one step ahead of the competitors as early as possible. The second point was
to put sass production of this IC on track as early as possible. The estab-
lislnent of mass-production technology even 1 day ahead of the competitors
would enable a cost superiority. The introduction of new products backed up
by an innovative feature strengthened the power to control the market.

These two points were the basic strategies of Anericsn industry. Any company
with these two points which entered the field with reasonable timing could
not be driven from the market. Proper tining meant that these two item
should not be too early or too late. There are many examples of businesses
which failed because of being on the scene too early. The Koger Conpany,
which cornered a number of IBM graduates and made an attempt to start off

as a menory speciality maker, is a good example.

"here Japan is concerned, it was the practice in the past that basic technology
including knowhow was introduced from American industry. Those products which

were manufactured with the use of imported technology were first of all incor-
porated into the company's own systen products to be used within the plant.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
00K UPPILIAL UM ONLY

In other words, there was a market for the minimum quantity required for
startup. As a result, the completion of the built up technology, that is,

the problem of how to achieve a good product rate from a single wafer.
became the focus of attention.

It was the high quality of Japanese labor that supported the plan to improve
yield at the lowest levels, and the small variation in quality is also a

measure of this quality. This superiority in quality over the United States
is manifested in the stabilization of a manufacturing process in a compara-

tively short time. Once a process is stabilized, the introduction of
automation is not too difficult.

This historical difference on the part of Japanese industry is manifested

in the form of a memory which may be considered in the light of a built-in
technology crystal. The production of ms memory by American industry during
the June-Auguat quarter of last yar was an average of lo million units per
month, or roughly 2.3 times the Japanese production.

On the other hand, if we look at the most advanced 66 K DRAM, three companies--
Hitachi, Fujitsu and Nippon Electric--can stand up with the best five in the
world. Fujitsu and Nippon Electric also occupy the top ranks in the area of
the 16 K DRAM, which again is booming (according to information from the
Dataquest Company).

Quality: It may be said that the superiority of this built-in technology that
is distinctive of Japan is founded on this difference in the basic concept of
quality.

The Japanese consular is known the world over for subjecting not only semi-
conductor products but all purchase itus to a rigorous examination.

Semiconductor products are required to go through not only mechanical strength
tests but various deterioration tests under varying temperature conditions,
and the electrical properties tests are rigorous. An American industry
representative has dubbed these "tests to declare goods unacceptable."

The basic concept of a producer in Japan is the perfection principle, in
which he makes every effort to come out with a product more perfect than his
competitors. There are many instances in which products with specifications
that are better than those indicated by the customer are produced due to
competition with other makers.

The United States is in a different world. The United States is a country of
contract companies, and seller and buyer are in a sort of antagonistic
relationship. Were the seller is at the borderline of the customer's
specifications, he pushes the contract to the limit as long as the specifica-
tions are met. To be sure, importance is placed on how low costs can be
lowered. Greater weight is placed on price competition than on quality

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
competition. This was one of the points of dissatisfaction a certain top
executive of one of Silicon Valley's top semiconductor makers displayed

when he saw the severity of the inspection on receipt of goods by Japanese
industries.

The product his company produced deviated slightly below the specifications.
As a result, the customer, which was a Japanese company, rejected the entire
lot. Another supplier will only ship products all of which meet specifica-
tions, so why should only this American industry member ask for "special
treatment." This is how the Japanese industry countered.

when seen from the eyes of American industry. such an emphasis is beyond
comprehension. This practice is the product of a function principle which
is the relationship between the acceptance principle and the frontside-
backside unity principle. The American view is that as long as the IC
product fulfills its role as an IC, then it is a beautiful product and even

though it deviates slightly below specifications, that really should not
matter.

Competition: This difference in attitude toward quality on the part of
Japanese industry is the result of the early perfection of a production
system which came out with products of high reliability. American industry,
which until about the middle of the seventies regarded Japanese production
strength lightly, finally came to realise the high reliability of Japanese IC
products and began to draw a protective well about itself.

President Spock of National Semiconductors heads those who believe that "the

battle involving technology, productivity and quality with the Japanese forces"
has started, and he is spurring his fellow workers on.

Japan's monthly 10 production volume last year was about 220 million units per
month. compared to the 500 million per month of the United States. There was
a rapid increase in Japan's linear IC production this past year. The average
monthly production from January through August was about 450 million units for
the United States, while Japan showed a rapid increase to 260 million.

It is clear that Japan is fast catching up on the numbers. Looking at the
price factor, the per-unit price of the Japanese product dropped almost

10 percent over the previous year, while the cost of the American product

is holding steady. That is why the specter of Japanese industry catching up

in the matter of numbers can be somewhat discounted. The source of this
lumbers boom in Japan is the so-called private use items in the home enter-

tainment area. When seen from the standpoint of expansion rate, VTR type
products are the mainstay along with facsimiles reflecting the 0A age and
office equipment including cameras, voice and audio equipment.

In the area of MOS memory which American industry is pushing, the overall
picture is one in which Japanese industry is not falling behind. while these

39

[WHICHNRCIAI.US£1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

data are limited to June-August of last year, American companies shipped
1.0 million units per month. The competing Japanese industry was able to
come up to slightly less than 20 million units per month. If we look into

the individual Illusory production as well, it seems that Japanese industry
holds a greater share in the leading product area.

The trends of Japanese industry include moving from manory to logic in the
area of single IC, and from hardware to software in the systems area.
American industry is also rolling back to meet this challenge.

Products: The pattern of this rollback on the part of American industry seems
to be to avoid memory in which the built-in teclmology is the basic item

and to go into micon-related and custom-related IC where software service

and design capability are required. The very high speed 1c is associated

with advances in the W510 (very high speed integrated circuit) plan under

the direction of the Pentagon, and this may turn out to be an area where
Japanese industry will not be able to contend.

Great effort is being put into the large bit micon series, which involves
development of products close to systematizstion.

Hicon products bedecked with software represent an area where American
industry has taken over the world market. The American forces are moving
toward establishing an even more secure foothold on the world market taking
advantage of this controlling power. Intel and All) recently entered into a

10-year technological cooperative program. Intel will provide the
technology.

There are grounds to think that there will be even more moves toward joint
efforts between industries in the valley. This is because the top people

of the various companies in the valley have the common background of being
"Fairchild graduates."

Industry Strategy: Semiconductor products are superior worldwide products.
They possess wide applicability to all types of items in all countries of the
world. At the same time, these are superministurized items making it
feasible to transport them to any part of the world in short order.

On the other hand, if the share of any country's mrket is to be increased and
service commensurate with the purchase price is to be provided, the production
base alone cannot keep up. This is the role of multinational corporations.
This will involve Japanese companies setting up bases in the United States

and in European countries not only as sasiconductor device makers but also as
peripheral equipment industries.

where multinatiomlization is concerned, the Americans have already taken seine
steps in that direction. For example, the representative semiconductor
industry of the United States, Texas Instruments (TI), already has production

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
plants in more than 10 countries throughout the world and has long had
multinational status. It has four production plants in Japan. The competing
Japanese industries are only now beginning to go international. Along the
Japanese companies, aultinationalization on the part of Nippon Electric

seems to be the most advanced.

Role of the country: Up till now the Japanese Goverment has ranked seni-
conductors and coeputer industries as strategic industries in via: of their
importance and large impact. and has protected and nurtured these industries.

0n the other hand, there will be a wide reduction in 1c import duties starting
in the spring of 1982 as the result of pressure from the United States to
even precede the lowering by the Alerican side, and the present situation is
that outside elements will be allowed to participate even in the area of
national projects. The United States is remaining its leading industries
froa the viewpoint of national defense. It is very possible that this will

be followed by efforts to prop up some industries.

There are many situations in which high-level technology and leading

industries are closely interwoven with a nation's security. Private industries
in the United States have raced into technological cooperation with other
industries in the interest of preservation, and they are screening for the
removal of Japan's so-called noncustons barrier. Should the governnents get
involved, Japaneseqinerican relations will probably become note complex.

The protective trade mod which prevails in the United States will probably
strengthen this trend considerably.

The electronics industry centered on the semiconductor industries of the
United States and Japan will become the power to "control the world"
(President Sanders of AMI) Conpsny).

COPYRIGHT: Electronic Engineering 1982

2267
C50: l0106/ 70

41

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ UFHLIAL 03¢. ONLY

SCIENCE AND W

SMNN‘DUCTOR TRADE FRICTION WITH UNITED STATES DISCUSSED, PART 11
Japanese 1c Industry's View
Tokyo RIM KOGYO summon in Japanese 26 Feb 82 p 15

[Text] There are signs that semicoaductor trade friction between Japan and
the United States will be rekindled in a connection with 64 K memories, but at
a press conference in the Ksidanren Building (Otemachi, Tokyo) on the 23d,
managing Director Toshio Takai of the Electronic Industries Association of
Japan countered U.S. criticise of Japan by saying: "IC [integrated circuit]
trade between Japan and the United States is in balance at present. and the
two countries are in a complementary relationship with an active exchange of
technology and capital investment; there are no real problem." He stressed
mutual prosperity in a state-ant on the argunent over the 70 percent share of
the 66 K BAH market held by Japanese companies: ”Demand has only begun; this
is no tine to discuss market shares. U.S. companies with their ovm production
facilities, such as IBM and Western Electric (HE). are already fully involved
in quantity production, and other major eeniconductor companies are improving
their production facilities; it will not be possible for Japanese companies

to take over the entire market. We hope, in fact, that quantity production in
the United States will be established quickly."

me association press conference on TC trade with the United States featured
Takai and, as a company representative, Nippon Electric Corp Vice President
Tadayoshi Ouchi. Saying that it is first necessary to know the facts
regarding the balance of 1c trade between Japan and the United States, Takai
explained that the balance of 1C trade differs from trade in television sets
and autonobiles in that Japanese iaports exceeded exports throughout the
1970's, and although this changed to an export surplus in 1980. even that
surplus was a mere 700 nillion yea; trade is quite evenly balanced.

With regard to capital inveatnent and exchange of technology. Takai stressed
that u.s. IC manufacturers like Texas Instruments, Hotorola. Tairchild,

Intel and Analog Devices are locating production facilities in Japan. and
Japanese companies like REC, hitachi Ltd, Toshiba Corp, Fujitsu Ltd and ROOHA
have moved into the United States; production is being utended actively in
both directions, and the seaniconductor industries of the two c0untries are

in a complementary relationship. lie went on to say that last September the

42

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
governments of Japan and the United States agreed to accelerate implementation
of the tariff cut to 6.2 percent, the rate that is the final goal of the
Multilateral Trade Negotiations. At that tile both countries came to share
the perception that free trade in e-iconductors should be uintained and
supported, and the basic judgment was made that eaaicOnductor trade between
Japan and the United States is not a problem.

with regard to inorts of Japanese 6‘ K dynamic RAH's. the object of
increasing criticism in the 0.5.. it was said that: "If we compare demand

to a marathon race, the runners have started but they have only gone 200 or
300 meters; this is not the time to argue about the sire of market shares.

The world market will grow2.90 fold. from $63 million in 1981 to $181 milliOn
in 1982. then up b.8-fold to $880 million by 1985. This is a sector of rapid
growth.” he explained that this market cannot be monopolized by Japanese
companies; the United States has great latent dynamism in the sector of
advanced technology and can catch up in a single spurt of enthusiasm, so Japan
is hoping for a relationship of coexistence.

NBC Vice President Ouchi said: "Trade in 10's is cowletely free. but trade
friction cannot be eliminated as long as overall trade is out of balance. The
need for 66 K W's is quite strong in the United States, and we have sold
them at a fair price. It is the 0.8. user who would suffer if Japan stopped
exporting now. He can only await the beginning of quantity production in the
United States. Our position was explained by the Bsaki mission." He thus
indicated that the industry does not want voluntary restraints on exports.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunahe 1982
NBC President's View
Tokyo DENPA SHIHBUN in Japanese 6 Her 82 p 1

[Text] Nippon Electric Corp Vice President Tadayoshi Ouchi recently said.
in regard to semiconductor trade friction between Japan and the United
States: "The criticism from the United States is abstract. Even the STA
(America's Suiconductor Industry Association) has found recent twee by the
administration and Congress to be harsh and hard to understand."

Ouchi also stated his views so a representative of the industry at a press
conference on "the Japanese understanding of semiconductor trade friction"
held at the end of Pebruary by the Electronic Industries Association of
Japan. Since then be repeated criticism of the United States while telling
a reporter of this newspaper of recent trends in the semiconductor industry
and the trade issue.

According to Ouchi, Japanese semiconductor sales grew 10 percent in 1981,
but U.S. sales fell lo percent. Japan experienced this strong growth because
of increased domestic demand for such things as home "It's [videotape
recorders]; global exports remained level, and exports to the United States
were down from the previous year. The poor state of the 0.3. semiconductor
industry was due to the general slowdown in business; even if exports from

763

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'NLIAI. U3]: ONLY

Japan had increased they would not have exceeded a 6 or 5 percent share of
the U.s. market, so they would not have hurt the business of U.S.
manuf ac turers .

Ouchi said that the sudden outpouring of criticism fron the United States
since the beginning of 1982 was nothing but the use of Japan as a scapegoat.
He stressed that the problem is a drop in overall demand within the United
States, and unless demand improves. criticizing Japan will not really change
anything.

The 66 K RAH's. however, are another matter. The reason Japanese coapanies
have such a high share of that 0.5. market is that Japan took the lead in
production technology and improved yield. But the 64 K W is a product for
which there is a growing market, and U.S. criticism of the size of the
Japanese share of the market is wide of the mark in that this is only the
beginning. According to Ouchi: "If we coware it to a nrathon race of over
60 kn. the runners have only gone a few hundred meters and are still in their
starting dash."

Ouchi said there will be a large anrket for 64 K W's from 1983 through
1985; the 256 1! RAM. about which Japanese newspaper accounts have excited
the United States, is expected to become dominant in 1986.

Reportedly there are those who consider the size of the Japanese share of the
0.5. market for 64 K W's to be a problem in terms of 0.3. defense and who
want to invoke national security (to have the President prohibit imports
which threaten security). Ouchi said: "They talk about the defense problem,
but at the same time they want Japan to buy their advanced technology. when
64 K W's are sold to the United States. it is impossible to know what
equipment they will be used in until the user installs them. There have been
cases in which 66 K W's sold for civilian use in teleco-unicationa
equipment have been used in military applications, but the particular

details cannot be learned." He complained that the narket for 64 K Rm's

is just getting started. and ”this is not the time to take up national
security provisions" in connection with defense.

A report of the Joint Economic Co-ittea of the 0.5. Congress entitled
"International Competition in Advanced Technology and Development of Trade
in the Semiconductor Industry." pointing to the issue of 66 K RAH prices,
said that with the support of the controlled domestic market, Japan was
quickly able to move into quantity production and export 64 K W's to the
United States. Although any experts did not expect the price to fall

below $10 until 1982, Japanese manufacturers cut the price to 85 even though
demand remained high. Ouchi denied this, saying: "I don't know about other
(Japanese) manufacturers, but dumping just isn't possible for us." He said
the price leaders in the 0.5. market are the U.S. manufacturers, and Japanese
products cost 17-18 percent more in the United States than in Japan because
of tariffs and merchandising costs.

Thus Ouchi said the criticism from the United States is abstract and not in
accordance with the facts. Criticism previously came prinarily from the

Mo.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SIA. but recently it has come, for unknown reasons, primarily from the
administration and Congress.

Ouchi reputedly stressed the status of the semiconductor industry: (1) the
equilibrium in semiconductor trade between Japan and the United States:

(2) Japan's accelerated reduction of its higher Ic tariffs to the same

level as those of the United States; and (3) the absence of nontariff barriers
and the resultant development of positive investment and sales activity in
Japan by U.S. manufacturers. He said that in order to avoid friction,
Japanese companies are mving in the direction of: (l) avoiding price
competition so there would be no suspicion at all of duqing. (2) increasing
the use of production facilities within the United States, and (3) persuading
the government that semiconductor trade friction is not a utter limited to
semiconductors. but part of a trend of criticism of Japan in connection with
the deficit in the U.S. trade balance.

COPYRIGHT: Denpa Shiimnsha 1982
HITI's View
Tokyo DENPA SBIHBUN in Japanese 10 liar 82 p 1

[Text] The Japanese Government's policies to aid high-technology industries
such as semiconductors and counters have been labelled by the United States
as unfair. a nontariff barrier, and an element in the economic friction
between Japan and the United States. But according to information revealed
by an informed source on the 9th, government aid to the computer and 10
industries is much higher in the United States. The view of HITI [Ministry
of International Trade and Industry] is that, "the scope of assistance is
larger in the United States; this runs counter to American criticism." The
U.S. misunderstanding of the facts in the trade problem is obvious, but
apparently government assistance will continue to be subjected to unreasonable
criticism.

The Japanese-U.S. Trade SuchI-ittee met at the Foreign Ministry in Tokyo 's
Kasumigaseki on the 9th and 10th. There were to be consultations on the
promotion of joint development projects and trade in high technology products.
but for some time the United States has criticized national assistance to the
computer and IC industries, and has pressed to have them participate in

these projects. At the hearings on trade held by the Joint Economic Co-Iittee
of the U.S. Congress on 10 February. Couerce Secretary Baldridge complained
that exports to the United States had increased rapidly because of a nontariff
barrier in the form of government research and development aid to the
Japanese semiconductor industry. On the 12th. Minister of International Trade
and Industry Abe countered that such criticism is contradictory.

The central question is whether the U.S. complaints that government assistance
is higher on the Japanese side are indeed correct. Information from an
informed source on the 9th confirmed that government assistance to the
computer and IC industries in 1981 and 1982 is much higher on the U.S. side.

(05

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I V“ VI 0 sauna. Vell- Js‘la.

This infatuation shows that the United States provides abundant assistance
through government organs like the N8! (the National Science Foundation), NASA
(the National Aeronautics and Space Administration) and the Defense Department;
in both years the total assistance was larger than Japan's by a factor of 10.

In the 6 fiscal years beginning in 1976. Japan completed a VLSI [very large
scale integrated circuit] development program (total research cost about

70 billion yen) which has been criticized by some quarters in the U.S.
semiconductor industry. but the United States is carrying out a VHSIC [very
high speed integrated circuit] program (1980 to 1986; $225 million
committed). Even if Japan's VLSI development had been continued through 1980
and 1981, the various 0.8. efforts would still have a higher total.

HITI has recognised that the 0.5. Government's research and development
budget for high technology industries is much higher than Japan's. and it
intends to refute the one-sided criticism from the United States.

Government assistance in this field is not limited just to the United States
and Japan; there are also strong assistance programs in European countries-
over 10 million yen per year in Britain. some 12 billion yen in France, and
over 30 billion yen in Heat Germany.

Japanese assistance policies focus on establishing basic technology which
can be expected to become ilportant in the future and which must be handled
over a longer period than 1 year. Government assistance is considered
indispensable in all cases covered.

The dominant View in Japan is that the balance of government assistance to
high technology industries is tipped very such toward the United States. which

has developed its defense and aerospace industries. This is clear from
recent government budgets; u.s. criticism on the point is simply inaccurate.

£6

FINI¢HNHCJAI.USE¢DNLY
>n of

ROMC

rote-
Itse-

lithin

3f yen
3113::

[982

1981
6,200

15

30

673

6,918

9.12

5,616

626

813

1,128

7.983

Categggx

RLD budget-1n 10 f
(including VHSIC p
for “SP. NASA, DOD

85D budget in coup
for “8?, NASA. DOD

Tbtll
FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND mm

TRADE ACTIVITIES Hm BULGARIA, EAST Gm REPORTED
Bulgarian Magnetic Grinding Technology
Tokyo NIHON KDGYO SBIHBUN in Japanese 2 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Toyo Kenmsaai Kogyo To Engage in a Joint Venture with Bulgaria Concerning
Magnetic Grinding Technology Imports

0n the lat. Toyo Kenmazai Kogyo (president, Ghikare Takahata; headquartered at

1-2 Nita, Hinato-ku. Tokyo; telephone, 03-653-2351) announced the establishment of
a join: concern, "To-Bu HM," which will import magnetic grinding technology (HR)
jointly developed by the Bulgarian Government and its Industrial Laboratory. It
has already completed the procedures for obtaining a license to establish a company
in Japan; the company will be officially established after a license is obtained
from the Bulgarian Government, which is expected to be granted in the middle of
this month. This is the first time industrial technology will be imported from
Bulgaria. '

Toyo Kenmasai logyo, a comprehensive grinding machines trading firm. has imported
grinding technology fron the United States and has engaged in sales of grinding
machines. It considers the ax manufacturing technology developed by the Bulgarian
Industrial Laboratory a remarkable one, and since last year it has been negotiat-
ing with the Bulgarian public corporation. The capital of the joint concern is

20 million yen; the proportion of investment is 51 percent by Toyo Kenmarai Kogyo
and 49 percent by Bulgaria; the president will be Hr Takahata.

The ﬁx technology uses a magnetic field between electronagnetic poles to create

a powerful grinding brush condition between the magnetic grinding material, a mix-
ture of ceramics and iron powder. and the grinding objects; the grinding takes
place either by vibrating or rotating the two. Conventional grinding technology
uses only nonmagnetic grinding material. not magnetic material. The secret of
this method lies in the magnetic grinding, by which the surface of odd shapes can
be ground freely. It will be used for grinding auto parts, parts for home elec-
tric appliances, and precision parts such as those used for sewing machines and
watches.

As of March next year, the joint concern will begin sales of magnetic grinding
machines and magnetic grinding materials; the sales target for the first year is

200 billion yen. Sales territories will include Japan, Taiwan, Korea. Southeast
Asia, the United States, Canada. and Australia.

#8
FOQ‘OFFKJALIIHEONlY
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Bonsha 1981
East German Machine Tools
Tokyo NIBON KOGYO SHINE]!!! in Japanese 7 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] Toyo Kogyo and Sumitomo Corporation To Imort Machine Tools From East Ger-
many; Reciprocal Import for "Familia"

Reportedly, Sumitoso Corporation (president. Hitsuo Uemura) and Toyo Kogyo Co Ltd
(president, Yoshiki Yamaraki) have decided to import machine tools for engines
from East Germany aiming at next fall. This is the first concrete measure of the
barter trade on the basis of which Sumitomo Corporation will import goods from
East Germany as a reciprocal measure for Toyo logyo'a 10,000 comact "Fanilia"
automobiles, for which an export contract with East Germany was concluded by
Sumitomo in May of this year.

In addition to Toyo Kogyo. Sumdtomo Corporation plans to export annually an average
of some $5 million worth of East German-made machine tools to Third ﬂorid countries.

The machine tools which will be imported from East Germany jointly by Sumitono
Corporation and Toyo Kogyo are a portal plane grinding machine by Uscher Sreiben
[phonetic] Corporation and a horizontal boring grinding machine by Union Corpora-
tion; a total of two units worth approximately 200 million yen. Toyo Kogyo will
install these grinding machines in its main plant in Hiroshima and use them for
cylinder type engines.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1981
Robot Exhibit at Leipzig Fair
Tokyo NIKRAN KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 23 Jan 82 p 4

[Text] The First Japanese Robot Exhibition in Eastern Europe; Five Japanese Com-
panies Including Fujitsu To Exhibit at East German Trade Fair in March

At the spring trade fair in Leipzig. East Germany, which will last a week begin-
ning 14 March, for the first time five Japanese companies will exhibit industrial
robots and robot technology. The Leipzig Fair will be the first in the East
European bloc to include a Japanese robot exhibition. and since East Germany and
other countries are eager to import robots. this fair may be a turning point for
creating a Japanese-made robot boom.

There are five participating robot-related companies. including Fujitsu and Kawa-
saki Heavy Industries. which are participating for the first time. and Toshiba.
Dainichi Kiko. and 0a Tsuki. Fujitsu and Toshiba intend to exhibit robots and
demonstrate operations. Kawasaki heavy Industries plans to exhibit video. and
Dainichi Kiko and 0a Tsuki plan to introduce robot technology for a plasma cutting

machine which was jointly developed by the two.

In spite of high standards at research institutes, the actual condition of robot
technology in East European countries is such that their robots have only single

49

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operational capability at actual production sites, and their production volume is
also very small. But each country is anxious to import; particularly East Germany,
where the trade fair will take place. East Germany has announced a policy to re-
solve its labor shortage by introducing 65,000 robots by 1985 in line with its
5-year plan. However, it is obvious that East Germany's robot plan cannot be
achiev.‘ through domestic production capacity alone; therefore, it is strongly
predicted that the majority of robots will be imported from Japan and the advanced
western countries. Aside from East Germany. an interest in robots is growing in
Czechoslovakia and Romania, and their own developments are underway: however, it
is an undeniable fact that they lag behind in technology.

with this background, Japan has become the center of attention for the world's
highest robot technology, production capacity, and the number of robots at work.
Many East European countries in addition to East Germany will visit the Leipzig
trade fair, and it is most likely that this first exhibithnabyJapanese companies
will encourage exports to the countries of Eastern Europe.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982
Bid on East German Plant
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 26 Jan 82 p 8

[Text] Nisshin Steel To Engage in Technological Cooperation With East Germany by
Offering Bid on Polished Band Steel Plant

0n the 25th, Nisahin Steel Co Ltd disclosed that it plans to make a bid on the
polished band steel cool rolling plant plan by East Germany's Oranienburg [pho-
netic] public corporation including both software and hardware. In May of last
year when Chairman Honecker of East Germany's Council of State visited Japan, he
asked Nippon Steel Corporation to cooperate in this plan. However. since the plan
concerns the area which is Nisshin Steel's specialty, the latter took over and has
since been negotiating. Nisshin Steel will submit an estimate to the East German
industrial plant import public corporation by mid-February. It is likely that
Heat European steel manufacturers will also bid, but Nisshin Steel seems to offer
the greatest advantage in terms of its accumulation of software, etc. Nisshin
intends to make its effort in the present negotiations with a view to making this
the first step toward cultivating the East German market.

The Oranienburg [phonetic] public corporation is a polished band steel plant lo-
cated northwest of Berlin which presently owns a French-made cold rolling facility
(annual production capacity, 60,000 tons). It imports hot rolling coils from the
Soviet Union and manufactures polished band steel by the cool rolling method. Its
actual production appears to be about 20,000 tons per annum. The demand for
polished band steel, which is used for a wide range of industrial products such

as precision machines, is growing in last Germany; therefore, it is planning to
install a set of rolling mills with an annual production of 36,000 tons. a cutting
machine, a packaging line, etc.

In cooperation with Iahikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries (rolling mill) and Toshiba
Corporation (electric and instrumentation-related), Niashin Steel is aiming at a

50

FOI!0FFKJAL.US£(NVLY
blanket contract for designing, machinery, and operational guidance. The total
estimated sun is approximately 6 billion yen. The plant aanager and others from
the Oranienburg [phonetic] public corporation case to Japan laat week and are
presently visiting Niaahin Steal, taking a tour of in ﬂanahin plant.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunaha 1982

9711
C50: 5106/50

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IV. U. Q I‘nlﬂu Ulse— UI‘LI

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MILITARY TECHNOLOGY COOPERAIION W111! UNITED SW88 DISCUSSED
Tokyo mm: BUSINESS in Japanese 8 Feb 82 pp 66-71
[Article by Shogo Into]

[Text] The United States Has Its Eyes on Japan: 'He
went Japanese Technology'; Idea of creating Subcontractor
Bases for Conversion to Military Applications

---The United States is eeking Japan to provide ailitary
technology.

«The nsjor objective is U.S.-Menus joint developusnt
of military products such as electronic products, rather
than scouring existing technology. There is a pattern
of etteaptiu to sake Japan a "subcontractor base" for
nilitary technology. There is even an idea of creating
subcontractors for actual weapons.

—The reason for this is the lack :; enough technicians
in the United States to has; up with nilitary expansion
and the inprovuent in technical ability of Japanese
industry.

Bulging Defense Budget; the United States Is Still Dissatisfied

"When it cones to silitary technology, Japan takes no attapt to supply
any to America. This is strange. We want to see the restrictions rnoved."

In the niddle of Decesber last year, Undersecretary of the U.S. Departaent
of Defense (in charge of technolog) nade this statnsnt, strongly requesting
that the Defense Agency clear the way for provision of Japanese nilitary
technology to the United States and nake structural inprov-sents. This

occurred in the third round of the regular U.S.-Japsn aria-sat technology
conferences.

It began with talks in June of last year between Director General caure of
the Defense Agency (his position at that tins) and U.S. Secretary of Defense
Heinberger. The srguent at the err-sat conference was an extension of this.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The United Stetes is pursuing e chenge in Jepen's three principles egeinst
erns export which neintein the position : "We will not export em
(technology) to eny country." The hericens ere seying: "It is neturel
not to export to the co-inist bloc or to werring nstions, but why cen you
not give nilitery cooperation to en elly like the United Stetes'!"

In response to this, the goveruent, principelly the Ministry of Foreign
Affsirs, the Defense Agency, end my ere working out e unified goverment
position. The Ministry of: breign Affeirs end the Defesne Agency ere
consolideting their views elong the line thet "on the besis of the 0.8.-
Jepen Hutul Security Treety, export of erss (technology) to the United
Stetes cen be hendled seperetely fro. the three principles." However,

HI‘I'I sees difficulty in this end the discussions ere not progressing

toward e conclusion.

The government hes been stronthening defense, for: instsnce by edopting e
budget with s bulging defense ellotnsnt in 1982. However, there is no
end to chergee by the United Ststes thet Jepen is getting s "free ride
in security." The Defense Agency end the Ministry of Foreign Affeirs ere
both reedy to go elong, eeying: "If we do not epprove even of weepons
technology exports, we cennot evoid 0.8. criticin.”

So, whet sort of Jepneese nilitsry tecmlogy is the United Stetes seeking?
This is e question thet erises beceuse the Defense Agency's ectuel reseerch
and development expenditures in 1981 were only 31.7 billion yen. Nippon
Electric President Isdehiro Selinoto eeys: "Thet is not even es such es

our conpeny elone spends on reseerch end developeentn In coeperison,

the 0.8. expenditures for nilitery reseerch end develop-mt in 1980,
converted to yen, were 3.3 trillion yen (et e rete of 230 yen to the doller).
Thet is sore then 100 tines the enount of Jepenese spending, e greet
difference.

"They ere fer eheed of Jepen in besic technology, edvenced technology, end
systess technology for eircreft, specs exploretion, end nucleer power." The
people involved in defense st companies like Mitsubishi neevy Industries,
Mitsubishi Electric, end Nippon Electric ell sey the one thing in
different weys. There does not seen to be eny reeson for Arteries to go

out of its vey to net Jepen for technology.

However, the focus of concern is not this very eilitery type of techno ogy.
It is consuner technology. A greet desl of technology hes been developed

in Jspen which cen very reedily be converted to eilitery epplicstions. This
is whet Anerice hes its eyes on.

So whet sort of technology is this? no or three specific maples ere
given below.

0.8. Interest in TDK, Hit-chi, NBC
-l-‘errite, e Heteriel 'Ihst Absorbs Electric Heves
"He would like to senple of the peint conteining ferrite developed by your

conpeny . "

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rust ”tribune. vac UIVLI

In December last year, this desire was expressed to TDK Electronics by the
U.S. Messy in Japan. Ferrite is an oxide of alloys including iron, and

it is superior to other materials as e radio-veve-ebsorbing materiel. TDK
is preeminent in the world in ferrite development. It almost monopolises
the field. It already sells doctric-smve-leekage-prevention material for
electronic ranges, material for preventing television veve harm, and materiel
to prevent unnecessary electric me radiation for use in ships' radar.

However, the technology for absorbing electric waves has great significance
for military purposes. If it were painted on missiles, they could hit their
targets without being discovered by enemy radar. If it were used on self-
defense ships and fighter planes, there would be no worry about being
discovered by the enemy. For this reason, TD! hes been carrying our joint
development of paint containing ferrite with Mitsubishi heavy Industries
nissile development division.

It is not surprising that the United States is interested. The development
of the "invisible bomber Stealth" was ennomced in the plan for strengthening
nuclear capability presented by U.S. President Reagan last fall. "If we
apply TDK's ferrite, we can succeed in developeent." We get the impression
that this is what the Americans are thinking.

TDK hes little to say. "The patent related to joint development with the
Defense Agency is held by the Defense Agency. end ve are not in a position

to decide on supplying a semple." The Defense Agency also appears embarrassed.
The Equipment Bureau says: "What we are doing now is painting the self-
defense ships with paint containing ferrite. This is still at the basic
research stage. It is not a substitute material that can be applied
inedietely. The United States is probably thinking of studying it litterelly
es a sample."

However, informed sources in the industry point out: "Right now, there is
no material superior to ferrite as an electric-luavs-ebsorbiag material. It
is certain that the Units-1 States is highly interested." of course, this
is a matter related to mi. itery technology export, and there is no
conclusion yet on a supply of samples.

Plenar-Poleriution-ﬁainteining Optical Fibers

This optial fiber with the difficult name was developed by the liitachi Ltd
Central Research Laboratory. Optical fibers provide a path for optical
co-sunication using a galss thread the size of a huun hair. Compared to
conventional copper lines, they can handle a greet deal more transmitted
information. The planar-polerieation-nainteining optical fiber maintains
a set direction of the plane of liﬂit oscillation. Not only does it have
a greater volume of transmission capacity then existing optical fiber, it
can be used in the gyroscope, which measures the position of airplanes and
missiles, and reportedly quadruples the precision of conventional gyros.

510

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
this optical fiber was developed in the fall of 1980 by the Hitachi Central
Research Laboratory as a world first. Usually, it attracted the attention
ofnanyco‘mtriosendthorewsssmshof inquiries, includingonefronthe
0.5. Naval Laboratory. Ssnehiro Kudo, second depart-mt meager at the
Hitachi laboratory, says with pride: "Our njor objective is applications
for optical co-mication and optical lc's. Our technical standards are
second to none."

Infrared Charge-Coupled Device (n—ccn)

m-ocn's combine the charge-coupled devices (080's) used as tho "eyes" in
video centres with infrared detection devices (R's). kpectod applications
for consular use include nedioal diagnosis of the Inna body and detection
of defects in ovens or kilns. If they are applied to ailitary equipent,
they would exert power as the "eyes" of nissiles. the MCI) installed in
a nissile would discrilinste the infrared rays uitted fre- aircraft, ships
or tanks as an inage and accurately detersine the target so that it would
be difficult for the enny to escape iron the lissile.

the Defense Agency started develop-ent of this IR-CCD in 1981, co-issioning
three conpanios, toshibe Corp, Hitsubishi Electric, and tujitsu, to do the
research. CCD's have already been introduced in video cansras. the Japanese
technical level in this field is high and has attracted the notice of the
United States and Europe.

these are just a few emples. there are nany other maples, although
scattered, of advanced Japanese technology which is at the highest world
level. these include VLSI's (very large-scale integrated circuits),
coaputers, optical co-inications equip-ant, industrial robots, core-ics,
carbon fibers, and sensors.

For example, in optical co-mications, there was an "incident" sensation-
sliced in the newspapers in aid-January: "Optical co-Inicstions equipnent
node by Nippon Electric was used by 0.8. tray for military purposes." this
dsnonstrated the ercellonce of this technology in an extrene fashion.

This was a case in which the optical co-unications equip-ant delivered to
a subsidiary of am (Anerican telephone and telegraph) by m in the fall

of 1980 was used for the purely nilitary comications network of tho 0.8.
Any.

N‘Bc's senior executive nanaginz director, Iiyoshi lakita, says: "that optical
conmnications equipeent was not ”nilspec" (ailitary specifications). It

was node according to specifications for ordinary public lines. we had no
idea it would be used for nilitary purposes.” Sons sources in the industry
say: "It is not possible that use did not know sonething like that."
However, the problen is that even equipment nda for ordinary public lines
could be used for nilitary purposes.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CUR UI'I’ILIRL 09hr Vl‘l—I

Ordinarily, it is necessary to nest military specifications for resistance
to strong shocks and sharp fluctuations in humidity and tapersture when
asking ailitsry equip-eat. The reason that m's optical col-snicstions
equipnent, lads according to specification for private lines, could be
used for military purposes is that it had sufficiently high reliability.

In addition, it is reported that the 0.8. large military equip-ant company,
Rockwell International, is carrying out joint develop-cut on rocket engines
and electronic data analysis technology with Mitsubishi heavy Industries
and Hitachi.

Three Principles of Ares Export: Shackles on Joint Developnent

In the past, it was a come pattern for advanced technolog to flow fro-
nilitary to civilian applications. However, recently, ens-plea of a reverse
flow, froa civilian to nilitary, are growing. The dividing line between
civilian and nilitsry has becone very vague. Sons reasons for this are the
expansion of the constant aarket and the duand of users for high quality
and iaproved performance. Progress in cover-er technology is fastest in
Japan.

As shown in the accoapanying table, there are my instances of Japan taking
the lead in recent exchanges of advanced technology. In terns of paymts
and receipts of cospensation for technology in technology «changes, receipts
in 1980 were 26.3, with paynents set at 100, so the anomt of peynents was
Iuch greater. However, the aunt of receipts in growing year by year. (See
graph) Therefore, it is natural for the 0.8. Defense Depertasnt to take an
interest in Japanese conaunar technology.

Another reason the United States is asking Japan to provide nilitary
technology is a shortage of technicians. with the end of the Vietnam war
and the Carter adninistration's cutbacks in the defense budget, the number
of engineers and technicians in the 0.8. nilitary supply industry has fallen
dramatically in the last 10 years. Subcontractors have especially decreased
in number. The 6,000 co-panies which subcontracted with the aerospace
industry have shrunk to 3,500. Those related to the navy have decreased

by 25 percent.

Therefore, it is hard to cope with President Reagan's great military
expansion policy. The production of one extra 9-15 or P-16 fighter would
require a year and a half. No natter how many technicians were hired, it
would not be enough.

Anid this noisy debate over nilitary technology experts, HITI is behaving
cautiously. KITI has previously nintained that "exports of multipurpose
technology which can be used for either civilian or military purposes is
approved even under the present three principles for am." It see-s to
think that if that is the case, there is no need to handle it separately
fron the three principles or for Anerica to push for revision of the three
principles.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Indeed, there ere slreedy seversl ems-pies, such es Hitsuhishi Usevy
Industries, Bitechi end Rochell Internstionel cerrying out ”ectusl"
nilitery technological collsborstion under the rubric of mltipurpose
technology. Therefore, the 111131 position is solahet understendeble.

However, elthough the United Stetes well understends Ian's intentions,
it hes not withdrewn its dnsnds for provision of weepons end technology.
And the Ministry of foreign Affsirs end the Defense Agency ere ettnpting
in some wey to snswer the d-end. th hes this situetion occurred?

Militery enslyst lhseteru Techibene uphins this difference es follows:
"It is difficult to use coast-er technology for nilitery purposes es is.
Perforlence eust he greetly inprovved so thet it will withstend operetion
under difficult conditions end not breek down. If we go thet fer, it
becomes purely eilitery technology end this violetes the three principles."
In other words, Anerice is efter more then existing technology. It vents
joint develop-eat or shered develop-sot of inproved end new technology
hesed on estisting technology.

Jspen is week in systole technology such es thst required for rockets end
the BADGE systen (eutonstic eri defense werning control systen). Therefore,
even in joint developuent or shered development, Jepen would neinly handle
subsystems such es electronic perts end electronic control devices or
peripherel devices for rockets. In eny cese, there would be no eupectetion
of greet edventeges for Anerice with only existing technology under the
linitetions of the three principles.

This fect coincides with the tremendous drop in 0.8. nilitery subcontrectors.
"Creation of e subcontrsctor bese for nilitery technology"-Anerice wents to
use Jepenese nsnufsctureres es subcontrectors through joint developuent end
shered development projects.

However, will the prohlee end with technology exports? Voices in the
Jepeneee defense industry ere esking: "Isn't Merice ssking for ectusl
product (srns) exports?"

Concept of Using Subcontrectors: ‘l‘he Jepenese Are "etching Developments

"It is essentisl to evoid dirt in the nenufecture of Ic's, so aployees

heve to chenge into senitery clothing before they enter the work eree.
However, in Americe there is e strong feeling thet women never teke off
their shoes except in bed, so it took e yeer just to get the f-sle employees
to renove their shoes." ‘I'his coapleint wes voiced by NBC President Sekinoto
concerning the Ic plsnt purchesed in the United Stetes.

The reduction in Anericen productivity end the decline of nodified technology
end production technology is spresding into ell fields. “the Americen nilitsry
journel NATIONAL DEFENSE discusses this subject in elleost every issue.
However, in Jepen there are neny maples of inproving the perfornence of
originsl Anericen products, such es eircreft nenufectured under license

fron the United Stetes, by replecing lost of the old perts. Also, it is
reported thet Anericen Ic's heve eissing wires or defects in wiring note

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI UPI'ILIAL U33. ONLY

often than in Japanese products. A reason for the desire to use Japanese
manufacturers as subcontractors is a scheme to obtain not just advanced
technology but production technology and production control technology.

stine Karateu, executive managing director of Hatsushita Comicationa
Industry Co Ltd and an expert on production technology, says: "Hhat is
truly lacking in the United States, rethern than advanced technology, is
production technology, mdified technology, and production central. Japan's
factories have plenty of this." This area sears to be vhat the United
States has its eye on.

However, this technology is inseparably linked with the training and
experience of workers in the factory. It is not easy to export technology
alone. In that case, we come to the conclusion that the simplest nethod
is to export products (eras) directly.

If this happens, there is a clearer conflict with the three principles.
As the United States presses for the provision of nilitary technology, it
nay be planning a future scenario in which Japan is s subcontracting base
for both softward (technology) and hardware (arms).

How is Japan going to deal with this? First, let us look at private
corporations. They are very cal: on the surface. They sea to be watching
developnents. knkichi reteno, chairaan of the Japan Arne Industry
Association and president of Nippon Steel Works ltd, cements as follows:

"I do not know what the United States is seeking. I cannot reply while the
government is undecided about the three principles on era. It goes without
saying that our duty is to follow government policy. Therefore, if arias
(technology) exports to America are allowed, we intend to cooperate
appropriately with the United States. Of course, we are business
corporations, so we cannot do anything that is not profitable."

The problea is the later stage of "business." Joint development of advanced
technology is attractive. Fro- the conpanies' point of view, whether they
are subcontractors or sonething else, there is no point in not going along
as long as the American arms industry is providing the development expenses.
Also, when it cause to export of products (area), such greater profits can
be expected than for technology eaports.

HITI vs Foreign Ministry and Defense Agency: that Hill the Nation Decide?

0n the other hand, there are also disadvantages. mere is a danger that
the United States night grab Japan's specialty technologies, such as
computers, optical conunications, and robots, in the pane of military
cooperatisns and use then for consuer products, thus reducing Japanese
compet it iveness .

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In addition, export of weepone (technolog) (oven for pests) would bring
with it cleerer distinctions heme. trinity countries end en-y countries.
If countries opposing the United Stetee decided thst ”the friendsUepen)

of our eneeies (the United Ststee) ere our en-iss.” end boycotted the
consuner goods thst m up the nsjority of Jepsnsee exports, there would
be serious problem.

Because conplicsted fectors of edventsge end dieedventege ere intertwined.
business eeys: "Nothing is decided, so let us weteh quietly."

So whet is the government going to do?

The position of the Jepenese covert-en: is not si-ple. When it cones to

one (technology) exports to the United Stetes, urn. unlike the Foreign
Kinistry or the Defense Agency, reportedly dislikes teking criticien in the
Diet end is unwilling to put exports to Anerics in e eeperete cetegory.
However, the eitustion ie not thet sinple. tan is the overseer of industrial
policy. It is sore swere even then industry itself of the dissdventeges
feered by industry which night ecooepeny the export of weepons(technology)
such es "s boycott of Jepeneee products by enenies of the United Stores."

In eddition, there is the problen of the position of the "netion." While

researching this etticle, I ren into this view fro. e nilitery-releted
source:

"The United Stetee is efreid of Jepen heconing e nejor nilitery power in
Leis. If it csn creete e euhcontrecting hese here for technology end erne.
it will know the level reached by Jepeneee nilitsry technology end cen
eeeily control it. hot is its ultinte sin."

Free the Anericen point of view. it would he eesier to control Jepen if it
nekes it into e suhcontrector.

However, Jepen is eleo e "netion", so while it continues to give inportence
to its ellience with the United Ststes, it elso hes e desire to retsin e
reletiwe degree of independence es en independent country. "‘l‘hst is why
H111 is dragging its feet. Even if the Defense Agency is willing to ellow
exports, it whould check eeeh iten of technology end erns for epproprieteness
so thet Jepen is not pleced totelly under 0.8. control."

The use nilitery eource su-ed it up this weyx The industrisl freedon of
Jepen es s nstiOn should he cerefully preserved. It “as thet ﬂirt, the
Ministry of Foreign Affeirs, end the Defense Agency e11 concur on this
point. If this in true, even '5 the three principles were revised, it is
difficllt to inegine thst erns (technology) exports would expend very
repidly. In eny csse, the issue of the export of ens (technology) presents
e difficult choice to the nstion.

There Are Heny Instences of Jspenese Leedership in Recent Bxchenges of
Advanced Technology w‘th Europe end the United Stetes

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI UI’PILIAI. vol. UNIJ

Exemplee o£ nejor technology enhance- (includinc it. under negotietion)

--V'rR joint venture between Jepen Victor. thorn m of Greet Britein, end
‘relefunken of ﬂeet GerIeny

-V‘1'R joint venture between Heteuebite Electric end loecb of ﬂeet Ger-coy

~Requeet to Hitsubiebi Electric iron ﬂeetinghouee for technologicel
eeeietence in robote for uee in the e-iconductor industry

-Joint developeent of new boiling weter nucleer reector between toebibe,
Hitecbi, Tokyo Electric. end G!

-Joint developnent of preeeurieed weter nucleer reector between Kiteubiehi
lieevy lnduetriee end Heetinghouee

—Jet engine developnent (m Project) between Iebikewejine-Eerine ﬂeevy
Induetriee end Rolle Royce of Greet Britein

-Jet peeeenger eircreft develop-ent (Yxx Project) between nejor Anericen
eircreft nenufecturere end liiteubiebi neevy Induetriee end other conneniee

-Joint develop-eat of cbercoel-fired boilere between leweeeki lieevy
Induetriee end Bebcock of ﬂeet Ger-my

-Cooperetion end couercieliretion of bot weter turbine between niteui
Shipbuilding end Bifuee [phonetic] of the United Stetee

“Infomtion eachenge on e enell m with built-in celere between Sony,
Hitechi, Heteuebite, etc, end Rode]:

-Hini£ex joint venture between untruehite Blectricel 'rrenenieeion
Equip-eat end the Britieb Government

-—ln£orution excbenge on coeputer end electron exchange technology between
rm end IBM

—Joint development of turbo-chaser for uee in ebipe between Iehikewejine-
Keri-e end BBC of Switrerlend

-Induetriel robOt technologicel eeeietence tron Pujiteu Frence to Six
Hundred of Greet Britein

—'recbnologice1 eeeietence for induetriel robote end euiconductor
technology fron ﬂitecbi to G!

—Lithiu bettery technologicel eeeietence iron luteuebite to Reyovec

-0CD. (opticel cherecter render) technologicel eeeietence iron Nippon
Electric to lerrowe oi the United Stetee

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
—ur;e coupon: and 0.1mm“: technological nuisance tron mum
to [CL of Great Britain

—‘rcchnologtc¢1 «nuance to: ship who-charger fro. manhunt navy
haunt-1e. to sac of Gran luau:

RIIIOOIIWIi SM

1.53%!!!

26)

 

Expanding fund of Export. bu to: Technology It“.

1. race not: Lo t
pay-acne t on ea

2. 1976, 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980
COPYRIGHT: NMt-ﬂcgrnv—Eﬂl, Inc 1982

9651
cso: 4106/60

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIﬂCE AND TECHNOIDGY

'NIHON KEIZAI'HAILS TOYOTAPGENERAL MOTORS TIE-UP
0W121623 Tokyo “IRON KIIZAI SIIHBUN in Japanese 10 Her 82 morning edition p 2

[Editorial: "The Strategic Significance of Toyota-GM Tie-Up"]

[Text] The trunp card Toyota Motor Company has been holding, just in case it
decided to move into the United States, was a business tie-up with General
Motors. the world's largest automaker and its foremost rival in the global
small-car war. The top leaders of Toyota and GM, namely Presidents Toyota

and Smith, have agreed to enter into negotiations on the possibility of jointly
manufacturing small cars. Details of the joint venture will be worked out in
the future. But, according to the general idea, the two automakers will set
up a joint company to produce as many as 500,000 small cars by using small car
technology developed by Toyota.

CH and Toyota rank first and second. respectively. in the world's auto industry.
Judging from their size, naturally the U.S. antitrust laws will be the greatest
hurdle the two auto giants have to surmount in effecting the proposed tie-up.
Nevertheless, Toyota's decision is most opportune in view of the present acute
economic friction between Japan and the United States. Since the decision will
go a long way towards defusing tension. we support it and hope that coming
negotiations will proceed smoothly.

when realized, the tie-up will be unprecedented in industrial history in its
scale and impact. It will pose a threat to all automakers at hone and abroad.
It will also have a crucial impact on the reorganization of the world's auto—
mobile industry currently under way in the middle of the small car war and on
the new auto industry nap which will emerge in the wake of that reorganization.

More importantly. the tie-up has great strategic significance in coping with
the Japan-U.S. automobile issue in the future. In retrospect, before Japan-U.S.
friction increased over the autonobile issue, the United States had strongly
urged Toyota to build a factory on her soil. Thus how fast Toyota would re-
spond to this call was regarded as the key to settling the complicated auto
issue. Once there was an idea of jointly producing cars with Ford. But Toyota
maintained a cautious approach to the question of building a plant in the United
States. But now it has opted to tie-up with GM. This decision has been partly
promoted by the fact that auto exports to the United States have dropped since
the imposition of self-restraints, making it clear that there is a lisit to car

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
exports. Aside from this background, Toyota's decision to respond to the re:
quest for building a plant in the United States is in itself of great signifi-
cance.

It is also important that the tie-up will practically take the form of techni-
cal assistance provided by Toyota, thus being in the nature of industrial
cooperation in reviving the U.S. auto industry. At present, negotiations are
under way to limit auto exports to the United States to approximately 1.68
million in the second year of self-imposed restraint beginning in April, or
the same level as this year. Despite this and other measures. the 0.3. auto
industry has not yet recovered fra its slump.

GM is no exception in this regard, despite being the first among the big three
to embark on small car development. J-car sales are not so good either--the
J-car made its debut last year as a full rival of Japanese small cars. This
indicates that it is not so easy. even for such a giant as GM, to complete a
production system in the small car field in which it has little experience. In
joint production with Toyota, 6H aims at that particular class of small car
which it has never undertaken to produce. Thus the projected joint production.
as a typical mode of industrial cooperation. will be helpful in hastening CH's

recovery .

Some time ago, on made capital-participation in Suzuki Motor Coupany in reversal
of its small car strategy and adopted a plan to receive small c1r supplies from
Suzuki. Joint auto production with Toyota is in addition to this. merging
from all this is a new division of labor, centering around GM. with Japanese
firms charged with the production of the class of cars smaller than the J-car.
Establishment of this kind of division points to the direction in which Japan-
U.S. auto trade will be stabilized in the future. Toyota's strategy to move
into the United States following that direction may well be said to be another
judicious decision.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shillmnaha. 1982

C80: 6 120/213

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ilﬂl()Fr1(1Al.IJSh.(NNLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

JAPAN TO PROPOSE JOINT RESEARCH PROJECTS
09011206 Tokyo HAINICBI DAILY NEWS in English 31 Mar 82 p 5

[Text] Minister of International Trade and Industry Shintaro Abe Tuesday
reported to Prime Minister Zenko Zusuki Miti's draft plan for the Japanese
delegation's proposal at the Versailles summit in early June.

Hiti's tentative plan, though broad, places the emphisis on a proposal for
nine joint research and development projects with other summit countries

in such high-technology areas as robotics, communications satellite launch-
ing, and integrated digital and fiber-optic communications networks.

By taking the initiative in such joint nan projects at the Versailles summit,
Hiti hopes that Japan will be able to make a positive contribution to the
alleviation of the persisting friction with other industrialized countries
and fend off harsh criticism from summitteers. as well as demonstrate that
Japan is playing the role of a powerhouse of the world economy.

Hiti is working on the plan so as to spare Japan from total isolation at
the Versailles meeting, since Japan alone has been running a lopsided surplus
in trade with most other summit member countries.

Minister Abe advanced a joint R50 proposal at the trilateral trade forum in
Key Biscayne, Florida. in January. The European economic community has been
asking Japan to take such initiatives for the past year or so.

Under the draft plan, participating countries are to pool a fund for 8-to-lo
year-long joint projects. Japan will, Hiti envisions, make a contribution
of 50-100 billion yen to each of the agreed-upon projects.

In the communications satellite area, a Japan-U.S.-Burope group or a Japan-
Europe group will launch satellites primarily for broadcasting educational
programming to developing countries: The launching itself will be undertaken
by the U.S. or Europe while Japan is to provide the needed ccemmnications
systems, especially receivers and programming.

In the communications network area, Hiti plans joint development of integrated
digital/fiber-optic networks which are similar to the information network
system (INS) being developed by the Japan Telegraph and Telephone Public

Corp (NTT).
COPYRIGHT: Heinichi Daily News, 1982

C80: 0120/210 64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JAPAN EYES SATELLITE BROADCASTING 18 1990's
0H2213OS Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEWS in English 22 Mar 82 p 3

[Text] In the report the study and research council on the diversification of
broadcasting submitted on Friday to Posts and Telecommunications Minister

Noboru Minowa, it says that people will be able to enjoy television broadcasts
using broadcasting satellites in the 1990's.

Broadcasting satellites will make it possible for people to enjoy TV programs
that are as clear as movies. the high-fidelity reproduction of music, and to
receive, by means of a facsmile machine, hundreds of thousands of pages in
just 30 seconds, as well as still images with sound.

The report called for studies on technical developments, the establishment
of technical standards, the benefits to listeners and the economic feasibility
of such broadcasts.

The council was established within the Poets and Telecommunications Ministry
in July 1980 and consists of 15 professors, journalists, researchers and critics.

They studied demand trends. technical developments and problems connected with
future broadcasting policy.

The report submitted Friday to Minowa consisted of three parts: (1) trends
toward diversification in the broadcasting field; (2) outlook for and problems
of broadcasting policy; and (3) proposals.

Symbolic of the whole is satellite broadcasting, which will begin with the
practical broadcasting satellite (BS-2) to be launched in March 1986. There
will be color broadcasts on two channels; both channels will be used for NHK
broadcasts to remote islands and mountainous areas, where the reception of
ordinary broadcasts is poor, and during disasters.

Later two satellites, 35-3 and 88-6, will be launched to make available eight
channels under an international agreement. Users can receive broadcasts any-
where in Japan if they turn a bowl antenna one meter in diameter toward the
point where longitude 110 degrees east crosses the equator.

The problem is economic feasi.Llity. If the advertising charge system is
adopted, the NHK channels will compete with commercial broadcasting stations.
The report proposes that the broadcasting waves be encoded and that listeners
huy magnetic cards each month at insert into decoders. The proposals are, in
effect, for pay television. The report says that such broadcasts will be
economically feasible if 10 million people buy the pay TV receiving cards.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1982

C50: 6120/210 65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

ELECTRONICS FIRMS T0 BOOST PLANT EXPENDITURES
0H271407 Tokyo the DAILY YOHIURI in English 26 Mar 82 p 4

.Text] According to latest investment forecasts made available to Kyodo news
service, six major semiconductor firms expected to spend at least record 160
billion yen ($653 million) in the new fiscal year starting 1 April.

That figure will bring to at least 630 billion yen ($1.7 billion) industry
expenditure on plant and equipment between fiscal 1980 and 1982.

"He will lose out to our rivals if we fail to make proper plant and equipment
investment," one senior company official said.

Nippon Electric Company, the industry leaders, will increase its investment
to 40 billion yen in the forthcoming fiscal year against 38 billion yen in

the current fiscal year 1981.

Hitachi, Ltd plans to raise investment by 7 billion yen to 35 billion yen
while Toshiba Corporation will increase investment by 50 percent to 30
billion yen.

Fujitsu, Ltd and Mitsubishi Electric Corporation have refused to disclose the
amount of investment this year, although it appears certain to be more than
current spending of 34 billion yen and 16.8 billion yen, respectively.

New investment by OKI Electric Industry Company in the new fiscal year will
be limited following the completion of a huge investment program in Hiyaraki,
Kyushu .

The ensuing battle over plant and investment in the Japanese semiconductor
industry is partly reflective of the country's dominance in the market of
64 kilobit ram (random access memory) components.

Current plans call for the six leading semiconductor makers to achieve a
monthly production of one million 66k rams to meet strong U.S. demand.

Nippon Electric and Toshiba however, are starting construction of plants cap-
able of producing a 256k ram which can store 5 times more information.

66

FIMICHﬂﬁCJAl.US£IDNL¥
Hitachi and Fujitsu are considering acquiring land for similar plants.

A major feature of their new investment programs is a shift of production
sites from Kyushu to Bonshu and Hokkaido.

Nippon Electric is now building a 27 billion yen plant in Ksnsgawa and plans
to build a 5 billion yen plant in Akita-ken starting this summer.

Toshiba also has plans to start work on a 10 billion yen plant in Kansgawa-
ken.

Fujitsu has secured a plant site in Hiyagi-ken, while Hitachi is discussing
construction plans with the city of Chitose in Hokkaido.

COPYRIGHT: Duty 102mm 190:
cso: 5120/210

67

FOR1OFFKJA1.USEZONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

SCI“! AND mimowcr

DIVISION 0? SUPER COMPUTER can WT DECIDED

Tokyo NIIDN KOGYO sum in Japanese 9 Feb 82 p 9
[Text] JJ by Fujitsu. Hitachi, and Nippon Electric
Parallel Processing System--To Be Decided in “-83

The technical research association of high-speed commutation system for
science and technology (director: T. Yananoto, president of Fujitsu)
recently set the ”-81 assignments for supercomputer technical research strong
the six menber corporations and began research. Bach corporation is focusing
on research in its respective specialised field, but the parallel processing
system was assigned as collaborative research for the six firm. According
to the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology. the policy. as a rule,

is to release the research results to foreign firms as well.

Supercomputer research is the assignment for the Bleetrorechnical Laboratory
and for the association. The ”-81 research project for the nectrotechnical
Laboratory includes the niobium Josephson junction (JJ) device, the galliu-
arsenide field effect transistor (GaAsPET). and the parallel processing
system; whereas the private sector association was assigned the lead JJ
device, the high-speed electron novement transistor device (Hm), mm
integration. and the parallel processing systen.

The assignments for the six firms are: the JJ device for Fujitsu, nitachi,
and Nippon Electric; Hm for Fujitsu and Oki Electric; Me for Toshiba,
Nippon Electric. Mitsubishi Electric, and Hitachi respectively; and the six
firms will work collaboratively on research on the parallel processing system
in which mltiple basic processors are simultaneously operated. These
research projects are expected to continue through FY-BZ (in :he govern-ent's
budget proposal, 117 million yen for the Electrotechnical Laboratory, and
696 million yen for the private sector, totalling 813 million yen) with the
same assign-ants. However. regarding GaAs, the Agency of Industrial Science
and Technology states that due to the high research level of the private
sector. the weight of the future research assignment may shift more heavily
onto the private sector.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in supercomputer development, the decision for a parallel processing system
is very important. along vith research on a high-speed logic device and a
high-speed memry device. However. the Agency of Industrial Science and
Technology expects that a decision on the processing system will not he made
until “-83. At that stage. the six firms will be assigned architecture
and software development.

The research results obtained in this project up to 1989 will all revert to
the government. however. the government believes it is important that these
industrial properties and lumhov he transferred to the private sector as
such as possible and plans to popularize them through the Association for the
Promtion of Industrial Technology. The Agency of Industrial Science and
Technology states that as a rule, foreign fires are not discriminated
against; however. in that case, whether or not to treat them on the ease
level as Japanese firm is an industrial policy issue.

A supercosputer is a system for large-scale, high-speed computation such as
high-speed processing of satellite inages, simulation of a nuclear fusion
reactor, meteorological analyses, etc. The goal is to develop a systen with
the capacity of above 10 sums (10 billion floating point arithmetic per
second). The duration of the research and development is 9 years, from “-81
(3 months) until 1989. and an nan fund of 31 billion yen is scheduled.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shiatunsha Tokyo Bonsha 1982

7722
cso: 6106/72

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
seven “seasons. vat-u emu--

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

RESEARCHERS 1)me ”NEUTRON FIBER
M51645 Tokyo ASA“! WING NEWS in English 3 Apr 82 p 3

[Text] An epoch-”king synthetic fiber which can effectively atop neutron
rays has been developed in joint research by Kyoto university' a Nuclear
Reactor Experinental Laboratory and Toray' a Fiber Research Institute.

This fiber is nade by enclosing a special powder that absorbs neutrons inside
the snsll fibers. Cloth made free this synthetic fiber can be used to pro-
text unaffected parts when a patient is undergoing neutron ray treatment.

Also, depending on the way it is used. it can be effective to some extent as
protective clothing against neutron rays fron nuclear bonbs.

There is the possibility of large orders for this new synthetic fiber fro-
countries which are worried about nuclear attacks.

This fiber was developed by Keiji Bands, assistant professor at Kyoto Univer-
sity. Shigehiro Ouchi. chief Toray researcher, and others in three years of

research and experinents. A patent has been applied for in connection with
its use in cancer therapy.

A report on the new fiber was nade by Toru Purubayashi of Kyoto University's
Nuclear Reactor Experimental Laboratory Friday at the annual meeting of the
Japan Nuclear Energy Society in the Engineering Departnent of Osaka Univer-

sity.

The cloths experisentally nade by Toray are a woven white cloth and a knitted
black cloth which contain lithium floride in powder form and boron carbide in

powder fora. respectively. The fact that both lithiun and boron absorb
neutrons was utilized.

The lithiun has been enriched so that the proportion of lithiun 6. which 1-

the isotope with the highest neutron absorption rate, contained in it has
been raised free the 7.5 percent in natural lithium to 95 or 96 percent.

The yarn used to unite the cloth is 0.03 nillineter in diameter, but 60 per-

cent of the weight of the yarn consists of neutron-absorbing powder. The
Iain naterial used in uniting the fiber is polyethylene. but other details

have not been revealed because they are trade secrets.

70

l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
Kands would like to use the cloth Inde from fiber containing lithiul to pro-
tect surrounding areas when conducting the neutron treatmnt of brsin tumors.

Became it can be easily woven into cloth. there is the possibility that it

cen be used for protective clothing against neutron rays from nuclear bobs.
Kandn believes that such protective clothing nsy not be too effective sgeinst
neutron rays from neutron bolts, but nay be effective to sane extent against
neutron rays from atomic bode.

But such protective clothing would he powerless against gens rays, so it
would have to be worn inside buildings and shelters.

COPYRIGHT: Asehi Evening News 1982

C50: 4120/222

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'D“ OP'I'ICIAL Dbl. ONLY

SCIENCE AND memos!

NEH nzvxwmms IN VARIOUS KINDS OF SENSORS DESCRIBED

Intelligent Sensor
Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI snnmm in Japanese 18 Feb 82 p 8

[Text] Sharp has incorporated a signal treatment circuit in one section of
the presently available optical sensor (sensor) to develop an intelligent
sensor. and this product has been designated "OPIC" and will be produced by
the cospany starting this spring. The optical sensor is a vital unit

widely used with industrial robots and various NC (numerical control)
nachinery, but the cospany, riding on the wave of the popularity of
nechatronics (electronization of uchines), is sensing a sharp rise in demand
for intelligent sensors to replace the forner sensors used in this area. It
is said that in the United States, GE (General Electric) and TI (Texas
Instruments) are pushing plans to develop and market intelligent sensors as
part of their coming strategic products, and Sharp's entry into this field
has spurred the development race among domestic and foreign conpanies.

The acronyn OPIC coined by Sharp is a synthesis of optics (science of light)
and Ic (integrated circuits). This is an instrument in which anplification
circuits and constant voltage circuits have been incorporated into the former
optical sensor to give it a signal treatment capability, and the various
functions have been integrated into a single product.

An "OPIC converted photocamera." which is s pairing of an already developed
light emitting section and a light receptor section and detects the presence
and transit of item. and an "OPIC converted photointerrupter" containing logic
circuits were developed, and saple shipmts to users have been initiated.
The production line at the Tenri plant (Nara Prefecture) is being expanded,
and the cowany plans to initiate monthly production of 50,000 units by the
middle of Hatch. The company further plans to double production by next year

to a pace of 100,000 units per month.
The co-pany also plans to convert multifunctional-type solid state relays,
sensors for optical fiber use. and color sensors to one form, and it plans

to introduce these products to the market successively during the next half
year.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Expansions are also being made into areas other than optical sensors including
tetmerature sensors "EH16" (provisional name) and gas sensors 'tusrc"
(provisional name) in a policy intended to apply intelligent capability to

all types of sensors presently sold under the name "...lc."

The intelligent sensor is a strategic product on which the large semiconductor
makers both domestic and foreign have just started research and development.
It is considered that for an industrial robot to acquire the degree of
intelligence it needs. it met be provided with sensors which have the
capability of duplicating the role of human nerves in sensing external stimuli
and transmitting the information to the brain. Where the present sensors can
only sense light or sound, the newer sensors will incorporate the capabilities
of a microcomputer and consolidate all of its functions on a single base
plate. according to present plans. In this sense. the Sharp OPIC is the first
step toward the intelligent sensor.

In Japan. Yamatske—Honeywell announced plans to engage in active development
of "intelligent sensors" together with the Honeywell company of the United
States. and there is good possibility that the frontline battles between the
various companies will quickly intensify.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha
Thermal Sensor
Tokyo NIKKBI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 6 Mar 82 p 1

[Text] Urawa-Shibaura Denshi Seisakusho (main plant. Urawa-shi. Saitams-ken;
president. Kenzo Kitsmura; capitalisation. 150 million yen) in cooperation
with Kyoto Ceramics has succeeded in the development of a temperature

sensor (sensor) which combines a fine (high densification) ceramic with a
semiconductor element. Mass production will be started soon. Great thermal
shock strength and a rapid thermosensitive response rate are some of its
features. and this company will continue joint research with Kyoto Ceramics to
couple this sensor with micons and engage in other application technology.

It plans to expand application to a wide market area. including industrial-use
air-conditioners. office equipment. and then response sensors for industrial-
use robots.

Development of Intelligent Robot Market

This new type sensor is called a "neothermy" sensor. which is a combination
of the thermister (variable thermal resistance semiconductor) element which
is Shibaura Denshi's forte and fine ceramics, and the highlight of this
development is the technology to match the thermal expansion coefficients of
the constitutent materials of the thermosensitive section. Since the
sensitive sections is sheathed in ceramic. there is great strength with regard
to both thermal and mechanical shocks. Its response speed as a sensor is
0.2-1 second. and its thermosensitive range is from -5 to d50°--far beyond
the capabilities of previous sensors. The company has applied for patents
in Japan, the United States, the United Kingdom, France. ltaly and
Switzerland.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time. a process has been developed to produce this sensor whereby
intrafurnace operations result in a quasifinished product. "here former
sensor production was plagued with lengthy finishing end assembly operations,
mass production advantages can be realized by this process for neothermy.

and it is said that Shibaura Denship plans to market the product at the low
price of 300-350 yen. Test production of the product is under way at the
company's main plant in Hachitani, Urawa-shi; production line expansion is
under way at its daughter company. Tohoku Shibaura Denshi (main office.
Tazawako-machi. Akita-ken; president, Kenzo Kitamurs; capitalization. 20
million yen); and production at the plant is expected to begin in earnest in
in April-Hay.

The policy will be for Shibaura Denshi to be in charge of running the business
and sales; sales of 200 million yen are anticipated for the next several

years. The patent rights with Kyoto Ceramics will be decided by coordination
between the two companies, and they plan to reinforce exchange in technological
areas from here on to develop applied technology and cater to customer's

needs. Kyoto Ceramics is a ceramic company and as such has been test
producing ceramic production engines, and Shibaura Denshi has been

complementing this by conducting research on sensors to be used with these
engines.

First Salvo in the Cooperative Battle

Shibaura Denshi is a master specialty maker which does a business of 3 billion
yen per year centered on temperature sensors. There is the uneasy situation
that the temperature sensor market is expected to grow at the rate of 30-40
percent each year, and this is prompting large makers such as ﬂitachi Limited.
Hatsushita Electronic Parts. and TDK Electronics to move into this field. In
order to cope with the entry of these large adversaries into this area.
Shibaura Denshi plans to "strengthen cooperative efforts with leading
industries in dissimilar areas" (President Kitamura), and the cooperative
effort with Kyoto Ceramics is the first salvo in this battle.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Visual Sensor
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Her 82 p 9

[Text] Fujitsu Panuc (Seizaemon Inaba, president) has developed a "position
adjustment sensor" with visual capabilities and will soon offer this sensor
as an option with its industrial-use robots. This unit is intended to serve
the role of "eyes" and accurately determine various work positions whose aim
is installation on machine parts assembly robots such as the "A series," or
the "S series" spray robot to prevent erratic operation of these robots. The
company is expected to use this unit for the assembly robot at the unmanned
motor plant which is expected to be completed this spring at its Yamanashiken
site and claims this will aid in completely unmanned operation at night.

76

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Since November last year, the company has been selling the "8 series" spray
robot. which can be used to renve the turnings and other waste formed during
machine finishing. apply paint. and apply sealing (joint painting). This unit
is a combination of a joint type and a cylindrical coordinate type, and the
positioning precision is a high 10.5 millimeter. Because of the need to spray
paint or oil on the intended surface or machinery with greater precision. the
company had been looking toward a robot endowed with visual capability.

In another direction. the company started sales last September of its "A
series" robot to be used for assembly purposes. This robot uses cylindrical
coordinates. and it can be coshined with the "M series" robot already in use
to form an "assembly cell" which is well suited for tightening screws and
fitting parts together. Fitting operations which are difficult to perform
manually or tightening of bolts can be performed at the very high precision
of 10.05 II. indicating the great esphasis placed on precision positioning.
However. on rare occasions when the work position may be very slightly offline
or the angle may be slightly off, a bolt cannot be started and this causes
the work to stop. During the day. working personnel can rectify the
situation, but at night it is necessary to provide the robot with "eyes" if
the work is to proceed in an unmanned operation, and the "position adjustment
sensor" was developed to fill this need. In other words, this is the same
as a so-called monitoring system for night-time use.

This sensor is made up of an ITV (industrial television canera) video sensor
installed on a robot; it accurately reads the work position as it detects

any deviation and corrects the position. The hardware for the sensor is
mostly supplied from other companies. but the software for the system was
developed independently by this company. The company plans to exhibit a robot
equipped with a "position adjustment sensor" at the international machine tool
exhibition to be held in Osaka about the end of October.

The company further plans to use sensor equipped assembly robots at the motor
plant presently under construction next to the Fuji plant in Yamanashi-ken.
This plant will "produce motors with robots from fabrication to assembly"
and will be solely for the production of controller motors. The assembly
will be handled by 67 robots, and an assembly call will consist of one "H
series" finishing robot and three "A series" assed>ly robots to which one
sensor will be provided. A "position adjustment sensor" will be provided

for each of the roughly 20 robots which will be used to perform the most
difficult task of passing through long bolts. It appears that the production
site will come one step closer to unmanned status with this sensor

development .

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

2267
650: 4106/75

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lUI:OIIIC1Al.llﬂE(NVLY

SCIENCE AND 1'1“:me

RECENT ACTIVITIES 0F KOHATSU FORKLIFT. KOHATSU LTD REPORTED

Development of New Forklift

Tokyo NIKKAN KDOYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 6 Feb 82 p 7

[Text] Transport Machinery and Transportation: Uncover Forklift Demand;
Komatsu Forklift To Mobilize the Entire Group

In order to uncover the overall demand for forklifts, Komstsu Forklift Co Ltd
(president, Takesaku Vada) has consolidated a structure to positively engage in
new operations while emphasizing the development of new types of forlifts and
attachments. This measure is intended to stop the trend of decline in domestic
demand for forklifts since the latter half of last year. As "the diversifica-
tion of forklifts is still lagging," (President Nada) the company will consoli-
date the "mechatro-forklift" and attachment, which is a blind spot. In order
to do this. the entire group. including its dealers and subcontractors, has
been developing a "roller" strategy to uncover new ideas. In addition. it has
newly established a Survey and Development Division which will be in charge of
launching into promising operations.

Development of New Products and Attaclments: A Survey and Development Division
Established to Invite New Ideas

Last year. the domestic demand for forklifts was about 46,000 units, a decline
of about 18 percent from the previous year. This reflected an inactive domes-
tic market; however. lomatsu thinks there is no use sighing over this sluggish
demand.

According to Komatsu Forklift. forklifts still fall behind in terms of taking
carefully thought out measures to meet the market demand. In other words,
"since the area of application of forklifts is broadening. we must supply prod-
ucts and attachments which are easily used in the respective areas" (President
Wade).

For this reason. during the month of February. Komatsu is conducting a campaign
to invite ideas involving not only its headquarters and branches but also its
dealers and subcontractors. This is a campaign in which each division will
submit opinions reflecting the normal standpoint of the division. The princi-
ple of this is to intensively incorporate all requests from the users into a
roller strategy.

76

IOIGDUFIIAI.UUI¢INLY
FOI1OFIICLII.UBI¢DNLY

The ideas span a wide range including improvement of forklifts, shovels. and
attachments and incorporation of new technologies and materials into the cur-
rent line of products. For example, a forklift will be equipped with a micro-
computer and sensor mechanism, thereby realizing a "mechatro-forklift" which is

capable of stacking high loads, which was formerly accomplished uncertainly by
the naked eye of an operator.

In addition. the company welcomes ideas unrelated to the concept of the fork-
lifts and shovels which the company handles. In connection with the move into
this promising area. the Survey and Development Division headed by Director
Yutaka Koizumi was newly created. The company is currently constructing a
clear system in terms of organisation.

This is the first attempt by the company to involve the entire Komatsu Forklift
in a project. The company says: "There is a great deal of potential demand.
such as the replacement of manual operation by forklifts. He can still in-

crease the nuber of users by uncovering areas which were formerly overlooked."
(President wads)

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982
Strong Business Performance
Tokyo NIKKAN KDGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 8 Feb 82 p 12

[Text] Indifferent to the "Construction Machinery Recession." Komatsu Demon-
strated Strong Business Performance. Again Recorded Increased Earnings and
Profits During the Previous Period, Outrivaling Pinched Fellow Companies.

There is a theory that "during recession. the top manufacturer of an industry
becomes strong." It seems that this has again been proven in the construction
machinery industry. Needless to say. this refers to Komatsu Ltd (president,
Ryoichi Kawai).

The company;s settlement month is December. Definite figures have not been
computed for the time being, but it appears that last year's (the 112th term)
figures are nearly firm at 567.4 billion yen for sales, 58.5 billion yen for
ordinary profits. and 27.2 billion yen for profits after tax. These figures.
of course, indicate an increase in earnings and profits by a great margin com-
pared with the business performance of FY-GO. again demonstrating the strength
of the company.

Even among the listed companies. those whose ordinary profit in proportion to
sales exceeds 10 percent are quite rare. Approximately 90 percent of Komatsu's
total sales belong to construction machinery, for which the demand has been
sluggish since the latter half of last year. The business is in such bad shape
that the oil pressure shovel. a representative piece of equipment, demonstrated
a double-digit decline in shipments last year.

Naturally. many construction machinery manufacturers have been driven to a de-
crease in profits even though they have managed to secure sales to some extent.

77

IOI‘OIIICIAI.UII¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Usually. with a slowdown in demand comes a fierce beating down of prices on the
sales front. In the case of oil pressure shovels, some sigh. "the price per
weight is lower than that of baked potatoes!“

With such a situation, the reason behind Komatsu's outstanding achievement is
found solely in the activities of its export department.

The details of sales are: domestic sales recorded about 261.5 billion yen, or
a decline of 10.4 billion yen from the previous year; exports, on the other
hand, increased by as much as some 76.9 billion yen, recording 305.9 billion
yen. It appears that the proportion of exports reached as high as 55 percent.
This has become the basis for realizing an increase in both earnings and prof-
its which is greatly envied by other companies of the industry.

It is true that exports and domestic demand are both wheels of the same vehicle.
Even if domestic demand has declined. such products as bulldozers, oil pressure
shovels. and motor graders are still strong, and even with respect to oil pres-
sure shovels, which have thus far been regarded as relatively weak. "we estab-
lished a lead of 2,000 units more than the second ranking manufacturer in Japan
last year." Concerning dump trucks, it can be said that they are a monoply of
Komatsu.

Accordingly, although a bad business environment exists, Komatsu has secured a
certain quantitative market share and increased production volume through an
export drive. Thus, it has realized a cost reduction; this. however, was pos-
sible due to the enormous strength of its sales force. In fact. Kosatsu has
long engaged in building up an overseas sales network in order to export bull-
dozers. It is unique in this respect because much of the construction machinery
industry has seriously begun to engage in exports only since sometime last year.
of course in terms of a domestic network, too, Komatsu is far ahead of other

companies.

0n the other hand. in terms of production, Kouatsu boasts that "if we manufac-
ture the same product, our company is capable of manufacturing it cheaper than
others." This is the primary factor in producing profits. Indeed, the com-
pany's passion for total quality control (T00) is tremendous; and this may be
the foundation of its confidence..

Komateu has been running smoothly, but it is taking aim at the Caterpillar Com-
pany of the United States. Recently. everywhere in the company opinions reflect-
ing consciousness of Caterpillar have been expressed. It is also true that the

Caterpillar Company is aware of Komatsu.

It is recently acknowledged that'Caterpillar is the king of world construction
machinery, and the fact that the latter regards Komateu as its rival in itself
speaks of the growth of Komatsu. Komateu has shown no sign of letting out the
reins; it is concentrating on challenge alone.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

78

FOIGMHHKIAI.USBGNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Expansion of Machinery Production
Tokyo NIKRAM KOGYO SMIMBUM in Japanese 16 Feb 82 p 12

[Text] Machinery and Tools: Romatsu Ltd To Expand Industrial Machinery Divi-
sion Extensively; Aiming at 100 Billion Yen or a 2.5-fold increase in 3 Years

Komnlsu Ltd (president. Ryoichi Kauai) intends to aim at an increase in the
sales of the Industrial Machinery Division from the present approximately 60
billion yen to the lOO-billion-yen mark in 3 years and, further. to 130 billion
yen in 5 years. This plan is part of the company's new policy to expand its
Nonconstruction Machinery Division in order to break away from the one-sided
emphasis on its Construction Machinery Division, which is responsible for ap-
proximately 90 percent of the total sales of 567.7 billion yen. The company's
operation planning room, which takes the initiative in launching into new opera-
tions, will make a maximum effort for smooth operations in industrial robots,
collection of sea sand, and an engine-driven air conditioning system, which have
been put on the market since last year. As a project of the entire Komatsu
group. it plans to expand those operations with high potential for use of amor—
phous technolosyy too.

Industrial Robots and Semiconductros To Be Nurtured in Order To Correct Dis-
torted Structure Stressing Construction Machinery

Last year, business was good for Komatsu Ltd, which reached the SéO-billion-yen
mark in sales, a lZ-percent increase, and which secured 58.5 billion yen in or-
dinary profits. Of these sales, about 90 percent pertained to construction ma-
chinery such as bulldozers. oil pressure shovels. motor graders and dump trucks.

In addition, the company has an Industrial Machinery Division which had sales
of approximately 40 billion yen last year. It also had annual sales of approx-
lmately 10 billion yen in shells and self-propelled artillery consigned to the
Defense Agency, and abOut a lO-billion-yen business performance in outside sales
of single-engine units. All these combined, however, amount to only about 60
billion yen, or a little over 10 percent of the total sales.

The expansion of the Industrial Machinery Division is intended to correct such
dxstorted stress on construction machinery. "We will of course aim at balanced

expansion while developing the Construction Machinery Division. For this rea-
son. the composition ratio of the Industrial Machinery Division, which accounts
for total sales, may not change drastically; we would like to actively engage
In this project as our policy to expand nonconstruction machinery." (Managing
Director Munemitsu Yamada)

More specifically, it plans to increase the sales of the Industrial Machinery
Division from the present approximately 50 billion yen to 100 billion yen in
FY-84, 3 years from now. In order to do so, along with realizing the current
major items such as the large automobile press, the medium and small-size gen-
eral press. and machine tools, it intends to achieve a smooth operation in in-
dustrial robots (arc welding). a sea sand collecting system, and a diesel engine-
driven air conditioning system. which were all put on the market since the end

of last year.

79

FOItOFFIJAl.USE¢HVLV
I'D“ Oil-ILIAI. 03f. ONLY

Furthermore. in 5 years the company plans to lore than triple the present scale
by achieving 130 billion yen in sales. "In order to do this, however, the en-
tire company vi11 be involved in the new operation."

This Nonconstruction Machinery Division is being expanded by the entire force
of the Komatsu group. It also intends to positively nurture amorphous technol-

ogy and metallic silicon, the development of which is underway by its affili-
ates.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1982

9711

cso: 6106/63 3"”

FIIRCIHﬂCIAL SGNVLY