FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10701

30 July 1982

Japan Report

(FCUO 47/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mm]. USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign‘language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicete how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT

(P000 47/82)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Paper Views Suzuki's Tanaka Connection
(Editorial; HAINICBI DAILY REVS. 29 Jun 82) .............

Nev Liberal Club's Maneuver Discussed
(Takebiko Takahashi; HAINICHI DAILY REVS. 30 Jun 82) ....

Possibility of JCP Chairman Hiya-otdo Retirement Reported
(THE DAILY YOHIURI, 26 Jun 82) ..........................

JCP International Theoretical Symposium Opens
(”Sp 7 Jul 82) Olmsooeosooesaooooeu0.0000000000000000...

Ueda's Address At JCP Theoretical Symposium
(Koichiro Ueda; JPS. 7 Jul 82) ..........................

JCP Statement Criticizes Prague Publishers
(AKAHATA. 8 Jul 82) .....................................

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Development of NBC Radiovave Absorbent Ferrite Discussed
(Toshiro Tsuji Interview; NIDON K0010 SEIHBUN.

7 Jun 82) ..............................................

0.8. - Japanese Computer Companies Joint Venture Reported
(NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN. 28 May 82; "180“ KBIZAI SBIHBUN,
30 May, 8 Jun 82) ......................................

18H - Tokyo Press
Hitachi - Burroughs
Mitsubishi Elective - Sperry

- a - [III - ASIA - 111

FOR‘OFFKJAI.IKW'ONIV
FOR WHCIAL USE (ELY

Agency To Set Up Technological Development Guidelines
(MIDI! KOGYO 53mm. 26 May 82)

no Activities in Biotechnology Reported
(MIDI! K0670 snmun. 13. 19 Hey, 2 Jun 82) ............

LDP Conittee on Bioacience

Industrial Sector
mu ' a Plane

Lighter. Stronger Materials for Autos of Future Reported
(“MAN KOGYO SHIHBUN. 12-16. 18-21. 25-26 May 82)

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE WU!
PAPER VIEWS SUZURI'S IANAKA CONNECTION

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 29 Jun 82 p 2

(Editorial:

[Text]

”Influence of Ianaka]

Diet interpellations are made up ol words without
substance. So goes criticism we oiten hear. Judging
iron the latest interpellatiohs. "deceptive" rather
than “empty" seems to be the right adjective. and we
see a coming political crisis because oi this trend.

Budget deliberations start in the House oi
Councillors this week. But. since the decision to ex.
tend the current Diet session at the end oi Iiay. what
have the Dietrnen done? They were supposed to hold
debates on the establishment oi political ethics. tax
revenue deiicits and related economic management.
and ioreign and deiense policies closely connected
with disarmament. but we have heard no serious
debates on these urgent issues. Question-snd-answer
sessions by robots - this might be a more accurate
description oi what has taken place.

Opposition questions lack punch and government
answers-are stereotyped. but apart iron: this their
low-key tone is apparently the result oi more basic
causes. in short. Diet members do not have enough
inoral liber. character. sense oi responsibility or
courage. which are the prerequisites oi a politician.

We anticipated that the locus oi Diet
deliberations lollowing Prime Iiinister Zenlto
Suzuki's return home iroin his two-week ioreign trip
would be on cleaning up politics. especially since
guilty verdicts were handed down on two politicians
in theLockheed scandal. Contrarytosuchex-
pectations. politicians did not react sharply. in tact.
theyhaveiailed totakeanyactlooconcerningthe

guilty politicians or even the “gray" ones nho
allegedly accepted money.
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The iact that Prime Minister Suzuki seems to
have leit themattertotheDietandpoiitical partiesis
intolerable. Suzuki earlier said that “the establish-
ment oi political ethics is the starting point oi
parliamentary politics and i am taking the guilty
verdicts seriously." but we do not see any serious
attitude in Suzuki.

His actions do not agree with his words and his
answers in the Diet are “deceptive." lie has ap-
parently iailed to distinguish right irom wrong
because he seems to have exerted his eiiorts to
protect Susumu Nikaido. secretary general oi the
Liberal-Democratic Party. regarded as one oi the
"gray"oiiicials.

ll Nikaido is driven into a corner. the Suzuki
Establishment would be adversely aiiected because
oi Nikaido’s importance in the ruling party. Suzuki
must remember that he himseli appointed Nikaido to
the past in deitanceoi public opinion.

li I Suzuki continues to wpport Nikaido. he
deserves the criticism that he has placed priority on
seliprotection over political ethics.

The problems related to Nikaido’s treatment

- contain deeper-rooted issues than the iate oi Suzuki's

government. ii they remain. nationality will be lost

damagingthe very basisoipartypolitics. We urge
Nikaidotoresigniromhispostandanswerthe

summons oi the Diet to cl iriiy his position.
At his meeting with Suzuki. iormer Prime

.Minister Taken Niki said: “The present-day Liberal»

Democratic Party is apparently under the inﬂuence
oi Iir. Kakuei Tanaka. You must try to make the
party cleaner and healthier. . ." Miki made a very
important observation which is shared by the public.
Ii the ruling party is controlled by a person who has
been criminally indicted, what can be more immoral?

We cannot expect the Liberal-Democratic Party
tobecleaned up iiTanaka isincontrol. Why. iorin-
stance. has the ruling party done its utmost to delay
the proposed revision oi the ‘Dietmen's testimony
law?

in the ruling party. iormer Prime Minister Takeo
Fukuda together with Niki mildly criticized Tanaka
and his inﬂuence. but other so-called “new leaders"
who are supposed to bear political responsibility in
the 1900s. have kept silent due to the heavy pressure
oi Tanaka's control and to protect then'uelves. Every
politician must give deep thouait to what Niki has

W.

COPYRIGHT: Hatnlchi. Daily News 1982

050:

4120/3233

2
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AAAAAA *

l

O

‘31]. 'Pl

dmmmmunm
mmmw m1-
-9..am.-i-n-t1n-dm

IOU)

toned 8.3m an :0 mums
sun can

mu m '(wmum
Mum mm mm
09m. audits “mm
m 04m 1me

amount M «W!
«Mm mus '(Imn

up“ w w u‘ "mu—w

OIJOI “PM“!

uomov
ZSElSSEo—bv.

mag

.35 22 :32... 98..
gag-pit
.9 9a a... 2:8. .93 5.8a
.chxpaoagqaa do»?
2:. 3.6» .3 32.8.:-
328.30.

no.3... doubt? zro
52:32:23? «3.?
.5589 3.. .3 .u :8 8.
98:8... to .85 :8 a...
98.38 a 33:3 .8 a.
5.23.3.3: an 2... 9: a
Bogaaaaszs

grass???
2:” =3 - 3.56 :8. a...
33258 = .33 3.2. 8.

v3.23 315.. 2589 3
988.? is” 5&8 .5
POSSIBILITY 017 .10? CHAIRMAN HIYAHO‘I'O'S RENEW? REPORTED

Tokyo THE DAILY YMURI in English 26 Jun 82 p 2

[Text]

“OI“W, "MMMMIﬂmCQQ

izmwmwhﬂywawnlmhlsmmdmmﬁspnym
mnhlmhr'womn.

The convention. which
um open July 2:. will In
bald lust mar the my
eelcbnm m com annlver-
my on July 13.

omen": um um-
‘Inoto'l retirement was de-
signed to rejuvenate an
my sine: the pnrty'c pop-
nltmy m on the decline.

The possibility of Illn-
mows retirement. m am
mum uncut Libel-u.

bomb lutspﬂiumd.

their My: an new!»
1y echoed by mum My
(J8?) acumen um Mu

«momma-mun

O‘l‘he puny needs on:
change In lung. to In-
cmu It. uunﬂh and to

dmhuonotmcwtyoc-
mfhem.

Impopuuymtm-
m not amused
to. nacho an. In: In

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

1
g
§
1‘
5'
1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080075-6

ﬁg
E2.
5:
a?

is
W
E?

255.35
is:
E

Inc convention. but tu re-
sults um m he know an-
m “to! am "_ b0
ten-rm.

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yonluri 1982

C50: 6120/335

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080075-8
JCP INTERNATIONAL mmmrcu. SYMPOSIUM OPENS
09071210 Tokyo JPS in English 0906 CHI 7 Jul 82

[Text] Tokyo, 7 Jul (JPs)--The International Theoretical Synposiun to
comenorate the 60th anniversary of tending the Japanese Columnist Party
opened at JCP headquarters on 7 July. The theme of the 3-day syQosiuI
is "on the struggle and task for world peace, defense of the right of
nations to self-determination. and social progress."

In the sylposim 12 representatives of the 11 parties of capitalist comtries
take part. They are representatives of the Commist Party of Great Britain.
Italian Communist Party. Counmist Party of Australia, Got-mist Party of
the Netherlands. Swiss Labor Party. Left Party-Commie“ of Sweden,
Couamist Party of Spain. French Columnist Party, Columnist Party of

Belgian. Socialist Unity Party of Mexico and the Japanese Commist Party.

At the beginning of the synposiln, JCP Secretariat mief Tetsuso Puts gave
an opening speech. In his speech Puts said. "This sywosit- is held in
seriom international situation—deepening historical crisis of world
capitalism in political, econonic and social fields; problens of present
stage of development of socialist system and its policies; nuclear ares
race md increasing threat of nuclear war; world-wide gauge of nova-ant
against nuclear weapons and for peace; increasing international role of the
nonaligned countries and tasks of developing comtries; and struggle to
defend the right of nations to self-determination...there are not a few
problems to be studied and solved in creative ways with the revolutionary
and scientific spirit of scientific socialism."

In the aunposium. neither keynote report is delivered to give a specific
direction to the discussion. nor joint decision or conclusion will he ends.
with equal right, every delegate freely expresses one's viewpoints, and
exchanges experiences and viewpoints with other parties through candid
discussions.

C50: [0120/3101

MWWOMY
FOR OfﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

UBDA'S ADDRESS AT JCP WRETICAL SYMPOSIUM
M71222 Tokyo JPS in English 0911 GMT 7 Jul 82

[Text] Tokyo, 7 Jul (JPS)-In the first-day session of the International
Theoretical Symposium held on 7 July, Koichiro Ueda, presidiua vice chairman
and Policy Cor-issicn chairman of the Japanese Commist Party, gave a
speech, excerpts of which follow:

"The greatest problem for international peace today is the real and increasing
threat of nuclear war, which could mean the end of human civilization.

"Why has the danger of nuclear war become the central issue of international
politics in these early 1980 years?

"The material base for this is the terrible accumulation and technological
development of nuclear weapons, a product of the arms race between two
opposing military blocs, one centering aromd the USA, and the other crowd
the USSR.

"The continuing development and accuulation of strategic and tactical
nuclear weapons have even produced two devilish new concepts in military
strategy: The strategy of a 'comterforce first strike,‘ and 'theatre'
nuclear war, both based on the assumption that a war with nuclear weapons
can be won.

"The Japanese Col-uniat Party places special euphasis on two problem
which lie at the root of these critical developments and involve the present
statw of the imperialist and socialist system.

"The first problem is the ever-deepening structural and historical crisis
of contelporary capitalism, on which discussions focused during the lost
aymposiu: here in 1979.

"The second problem is that a trend of big-powerism is gaining momentus
within the socialist countries, which should by nature be forces for peace
and socialism, and that this error, deriving from the doctrine of 'sphere
of influence,‘ which is contrary to the cause of scientific socialism,

is becoming more fined.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"naese things show that it is becoming more likely that the l9w's will
develop into a dangerous 'nuclear age.'

"At the same time in historical terms it is very significant that a dramatic
uprising of international movements is taking place, demanding that nuclear
weapons be eliminated.

"In the 1930's, the 7th Congress of the Comintern called for international
solidarity for the struggle against fascism and iaperialisa, but failed
to prevent world war 11.

"But relationship among the different world forces have since then mdergone
fundaue ntal changes, and botr. objective and subjective conditions now exist
that can indeed prevent nuclear war.

“Movements in each country are pursuing objectives in accordance with
respective conditions: The Japanese Commist Party is proposing that a
total ban on nuclear weapons must be placed at the center of our canon
international tasks.

"th do we assert that a total ban is the core of urgent international tasks?
First, this was the very starting point of the movement against nuclear
weapons. we have also learned free the experience of recent history that
partial measures adopted in the past, by-passing this aim, have had the
effect of promoting the arms race.

"Secondly, the danger and bankruptcy of the doctrines of nuclear deterrence
and equilibriun of military strength have become fully clear.

"The only conclision, drawn from the experiences of the past 37 years since
the first tragedies of nuclear war struck Hiroshima and Nagasaki, is that
the basic task of totally banning the use, production, storage, testing and
deployment of nuclear weapons must be undertaken unitedly at this very time
if humanity is to survive and the nuclear am race is to end.

"To make a total ban on nuclear weapons our urgent task never means that
partial measures are valueless, nor does it ignore the need for a phased
process based on parity once the total ban is agreed on.

"The Japanese Communist Party gives priority to three tasks as partial
measures: A ban on the use of nuclear weapons, the creation of nuclear
weapon-free zones and a conprehensive ban on nuclear tests, which all form
part of a total ban on nuclear weapons. The conclusion of a treaty banning
the use of nuclear weapons is extremely urgent.

"But the conclusion of an agreement banning the use of nuclear weapons
would not in itself be enough to rid the world of the threat of nuclear
war. ..our central task now is to strive for an international agreement
banning all nuclear weapons and abolishing them.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

"The Japanese Columnist Party has dec‘ared that central to donestic tasks
for prevention of nuclear war is opposition to and rejection of the Reagan
administration's plan for liaited nuclear war, which would turn Japan and
Asia into a nuclear battlefield. and the impeachment of the LDP governsent
for approving and collaborating in the plan.

"The policy of the LDP Suzuki cabinet is anti-people, and could lead Japan
into nuclear war. In replying to parliamentary interpellations, Prime
Minister Suzuki even tried to justify the Reagan statement about the
possibility of conducting a limited nuclear war, by saying that this
'shows the posture of deterrence of nuclear war.‘

"1he JCP considers this a critical problem that affects the whole future
of the Japanese people, and strongly calls on the people to reject the
Reagan concept of limited nuclear war, md oppose the LDP governsent' s
complicity in it.

"It is necessary for anti-nuclear movements in developed capitalist countries
to put up independent and specific demands appropriate to each respective
domestic situation, and to intensify the exposure of the contradictions of
the anti-people character of the nuclear policy of their respective govern-
nents. Only when this is done can there be progress in international
solidarity for the prohibition of nuclear weapons.

"Our analysis is that the national demand to abolish nuclear weapons, coming
from the majority of the people of A-bonbed Japan, involves factors that lead
inevitably to a denand for a nonaligned, neutral Japan.

"Unless the Japan-v.8. security pact is abrogated, it will not be possible
for Japm to becone a nuclearfree zone and to extend the acne to include
the Asian-Pacific region.

"In dealing with the prospect of banning nuclear weapons in the cause of
peace, we cannot of course fail to see the relationship of this with the
world-historic victory of the cause of socialism. But I believe that the
major emphasis should be on its inseparable relation with the national
liberation noveunt l have referred to. and therefore the self-determination
of nations in this perspective will be closely linked with the task of
averting nuclear war, although the two issues should not be regarded as
identical. 1he reason for this is that lasting peace does not mean simly
the status without a hot war, but a situation in which all people live on
equal terms, aid with the established right to self-determination, and in
which there is no oppression or aggression against other peoples.

"It is for this reason that the problem of military blocs becomes a focal
issue, related closely to the defense of world peace, against nuclear war,
and to the establishnent of the right of nations to self-determination.

"The reason for this is, first of all. that the present vicious circle of

the nuclear arms race derives from the distorted structure of international
politics, in which the confrontation of military blocs. led respectively

10

[’0' OFFICIAL USE ONLY
by the United States and the Soviet Union. is central. Nithout the struggle
for dissolution of the military alliances, it would be hard to end and

reverse the nuclear arm build-up, and the prohibition of nuclear weapons
will be hard to achieve.

"Secondly, the bringing in of nuclear weapons and the deployment of new
theater nuclear missiles in Western Europe and Japan are based on the
treaties of military alliances, viz.. the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and the Japan-11.8. Security Treaty.

"'Ihirdly, all military alliances are essentially accoqaanied by national
oppression md unjust intervention, as with NATO, the Japan-0.8. Security
Treaty and ANZUS are used es mi instrtsaent to force various countries into
subordination to 0.8. ilperialism; which the "area: Treaty Organization has
also done, although it was formed as a military alliance out of the necessity
for self-defense, but now has tdten on the aspect of a: instrusent of inter-
vention and oppression, over-riding the right of nations to self-determina-
tion, as demonstrated by the Czechoslovak and Polish events.

"Related to the demands for peace, the basic demand for self-determination
of nations by extension necessarily leads to the demavd for dissolution of

all military alliances regardless of where they are: East, West. North or
South.

"If the solidarity of the movement of nonalignmant in the Third Horld and
the movement against nuclear weapons and for nonalignmsnt in Western Europe,
Japan, Australia and other parts of the world, is consolidated: If this
solidarity is combined with the movesent in the United States against nuclear
weapons and with the people's movement on the move in socialist countries,
and with socialist comtries standing firm in defense of scientific
socialism: And if this solidarity develops into a world-wide movement for
the defense of peace and the self-determination of nations, it will be
possible to block nuclear war plans and achieve a total ban on nuclear
weapons. and achieve a world-historic transformation from the 'nuclear

age' to an 'anti-nuclear nge,’ a non-nuclear, nonalignnnt age.

"Today, when conditions for blocking nuclear war plans are being enhanced
by the significant advances made by the people's struggle, the increasingly
important task is to build true solidarity between the three main revolu-
tionary forces, vix., socialist countries, the revolutionary movement in
capitalist countries, and the national liberation aovesent. In carrying
out the most pressing task of today, vix., the defense of world peace, I
would like to reiterate the need for the three-main revolutionary forces
to overcome all forms of big-powerism and hegemonism, put an end to all
obstacles to the right of nations to self-determination, and take active
initiatives for a total ban on nuclear weapons and the dissolution of
military blocs, i.e. for non-nuclear nonalignment."

(‘50: 4120/3101

11

MOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

JCP a‘l'A‘l'mT CRITICIZES PRAGUE PUEISHERS
OHlOlOO9 Tokyo AKAIIA‘I'A in Japanese 8 Jul 82 p 1

[Text] A.P. Sachkov, director of the Peace and Socialian Mlishing Cowany
[PSPC] in Prague, turned down on 5 July the JCP request that INFORMATIM
BULLETIN. an international ptblication of the PSPC, carry a .16? rebuttal

to its article attacking the JCP. In this connection, Tonic nishisswa.
chairman of the JCP International Relations Con-ission, issued the following
statement on 6 July:

A. P. Sachkov, director of the PSPC in Prague, on 5 July rejected our party's
request that a .10? rebuttal of an article attacking the JCP which w.
carried by the PSPC's INTERNATIMAL JOURNAL INFORMATION BULLETIN be printed
in the sane journal. The JCP resolutely protests this negative attitude

of the PSPC leadership because it is an extremely untenable act which
outrightly infringes upon the universally recognized principle that each
party has equal date.

In an unsigned AKAliA'l‘A article on 25 May. the JCP had already pointed out
that INPORHATIG! BULLETIN shares with the jou aal problems of peace and
socialisn a role in lamching blatant attacks on independent-ninded columnist
parties. It also disclosed that the PSPC is playing a role as a center of
hegemonisn by having some representatives of foreign parties attached to

the PSPC editorial board publicize the suprenscy of the CPSU through these
two journals, nanely PROBLBHS OF PEACE AND SOCIALISM and IIIFORHATIGI
BULLETIN. The PSPC director's refusal to print a JCP rebuttal once again
proves that these claim by Our party are well fomded.

The JCP reiterates the urgent necessity of dissolving the PSPC's editorial
board and the publishing house itsllf, both of which have played a no less
haraful role than the defmct Ooninforn and which have greatly mderninad

the world con-mist novenent's foundations of solidarity. The JCP will
continue its positive activities to realize this dissolution.

£50: 6120/ 3101

12

MOMCIALIJSEONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND nemmocr

DEVEIDRIENT 0? NBC RADIWAVE ABSORBER]! mm DISCUSSED
Tokyo “IRON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 7 Jun 82 p 8

[Interview with toshiro Tsuji, Reswrces and Enviror-ental 'reclmology Research
Institute, NBC. by reporter ‘1'. nine; date and place not given]

[Text] Target—co-ercislization at Yearend

Question: First, what is the objective of the development of ferrite microwave
absorbers?

Tsuji: In the field of radar and microwave communications. radiousves in various
frequency bands are being used. Consequently, where various radiousves inter-

sect. such as aboard ships, at a radar base, or at a col-unications base, radio-
wave interference, such as false images on radar, occur, causing problems. There
is an international novuent to enforce, at the time of importation of electron-

ics equipment, some sort of regulations for equipment that generates unnecessary
rsdiowaves. I hear that, in the United States, the FCC (Federal Communications

Gum-ission) is studying specific regulatory measures.

Under such circumstances, it has become desirable to develop new types of micro-
wave absorbers that operate in as wide a frequency band as possible. We have

been advancing our uork toward that goal, but we had a feeling that it might
have been too late.

Question: But it is said that nicrowave absorbers that operate in such a wide
frequency band are already in practical application."

Tsuji: To be sure, there are some good products for television, etc., that use

low frequency bands. And it is not that there are no microwave absorbers at

all that can absorb in a high-frequency band of 1-20 gigahertz. However, in the
high-frequency band of 1—20 gigaherts, microwave absorption characteristics

have been demonstrated only at a specific frequency. In view of such problems,

these absorbers have not been for general use.

Also. among the absorbers used in nicrowave darkroons, there are some that can
work over a wide band, but they are only for indoor use. Since they cannot be
used outdoors, their usage is limited.

13

IIII‘OIIICIAI.IIBIICIILV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: How did you advance the developent?

Tsuji: There is a way of developing by modifying existing microwave absorbers.
However, we began with a fundamental elucidation of the mechanism of radiowave
absorption. By what mechani. does microwave absorption occur, and what struc-
tures and materials are required to meet the needs? In other words, we decided
to tackle the problem head-on. Such an attack was the first ever tried in the
world. 1'. Inui, chief investigator (Doctor of Engineering) of this laboratory,
who has been working on the relationship between microwaves and substances for
20 years, and a research staff member, K. aatakeysma, who has been conducting
research on the subject for lo or 5 years, decided to undertake the project. As
a result, they have managed to build a theoretical basis concerning microwave
absorption. This, I believe, say be called a discovery of worldwide importance.
Then, based upon detailed studies of microwave propagation characteristics in
materials, simulations were produced using a computer, and the construction of
absorbers and materials analyses were undertaken. In that sense, research is
greatly dependent upon individual efforts.

Composites Advanced

Question: In that case, are you saying that, as a result of the simulations, a
new absorber will be surfacing?

Tsuji: There are various research processes to go through yet, but stating the
conclusion, that is correct. Then [it was decided] a few years ago to take the
direction of working with composites.

Question: what sorts of things are the composites?

Tsuji: This composite is comprised of an “absorption layer," where ferrite
(particle-size distribution of 0.1-10 micrometers), short metal fibers (brass,
etc.). and an organic, high-molecular-vweight resin (epoxy, etc.). in a weight
ratio of approximately 7:2:3, were uniformely dispersed; and a "metamorphic
layer." where the same kind of ferrite and organic, high-molecular-weight resin
in a weight ratio of approximately 2:3 were uniformly dispersed. It was dis-
covered that formation of such a two-layer structure will allow the ready en-
trance of wide-frequency radiowaves when drastic changes in electrical charac-
teristics are effected between the two layers; moreover, microwaves of a wide
range can also be absorbed. Naturally, the two kinds of ferrite composite
materials most suited for the two respective layers were also developed. using
our own technology. However, as we are an electrical manufacturer, we had our
share of difficulties with regard to where we should [go to] procure the most
suitable c'naical substances.

question: I would like to hear what sort of effect the invention of ferrite
microwave absorbers has.

Tsuji: The 1-20 gigahertz frequency bands used for radar and microwave co-u-
nications can all be covered using only five kinds of absorbers with different
operational ranges. and radiowave interference can be prevented. Moreover,
absorbency is greater than 99 percent, and the absorbable frequency bandwidth
can be 7-10 times greater than that of the previous types.

14

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
Promising Use for Honshu-Shikokur Cross-link
Question: “hat is the outlook for future co-ercialisation?

Tsuji: I believe we can go into commercialisation by the end of the year.

Wide application is possible, such as in preventing false radar images from
buildings, steel bridges, steel towers, ships‘ masts, etc.; in improving co-u-
nications quality through use in the office housing the comnication base,
parabolic antennae, etc.; in preventing oscillation-scattering of unnecessary
radiowaves by providing shield cases for microwave darkrooms; and so forth.

For the present, however, a promising prospect probably is the Renew-Shikoku
cross-link bridge. Duands are estimated :0 be high, and so a mess-production
effect can be demonstrated. It currently costs 150,000-200,000 yen per square
meter, but we believe it can be sufficiently profitable even at 100,000 yen.

(Background note): The biggest feature of the ferrite microwave absorber which
was developed as the first in the world by Nippon Electric Co. [NBC] is that it
is applicable to a wide-frequency bandwidth. For example, in the vicinity of

9 gigahertz, the absorption bandwidth includes 2-2.5 gigahertz frequency both
before and after the 9-gigshert2 oand. Conventional microwave absorbers are
able to absorb microwaves over only a limited range. It may be said that the
new product is epochal in comparison to previous ones, in that it can absorb
high-frequency waves with great efficiency. By changing the thickness of the
absorber or the mixing ratio of the composite material, absorbers applicable to
different central frequencies can easily be made. Products in the form of

"paint." ”rubber sheets," and "plastics" have been developed as required in
applied fields.

COPYRIGHT: NIKON KOGYO SHM'JRSHA Tokyo Bomb: 1982

7722
(280: 4106/135

lS

”W151“?
roe omon. use our

3cm AD rmwcv

0.5. - JAPANESBW COMPANIES Jomvmn am
I!!! -Tokyo Press Iogyo
TokyolllmnKOGYOShDIIUIianpanesezalayBZpl

[Text] The Tokyo Press Iogyo, (President Kyohei Ishii). a nejor auto-obile
body natal pressing coqeny. is currently conducting cowrehennive business
cooperation negotiations with m of the 11.8. concerning coaputer peripheral
equip-ant. These talks center on furnishing ml the nsnufecturing
technology of an independently developed conputer relay keyboard and the
establish-ant of a joint nenufacturing and sales my in order to embark
on a diversified enamel enterprise. Although this venture is in an area
coepletely alien to their sphere of aapertese, by nving into the high
growth field of ”nechatronits,” they hope to rid the-selves of the stigna of
being tied exclusively to the deteriorating autonobile industry.

In order to further these talks. Masahide Furukeva, Senior Hanaging Director,
and Yaeuhiho lshii. lhnaging Director and Director of Planning and Develop-
nant. will visit the United States for about two weeks beginning in lid-June
to conduct full scale negotiations. On this trip they will also contact
Keytro 00.. the biggest Anerican keyboard usher, in order to conduct talks
for secondary level cooperation tied to the anticipated m cooperation
arrange-ant. 0n the other hand. they are prepared to even consider
negotiations for a coqletely separate cooperative agreement.

The keyboard developed by Tokyo Press Kogyo is firstly ultra thin (under
20-) and by, utilization of contactlese switches, has a good response
capability and is said to hsve a useful life sore than three tines that of
other stellar switches (it can function several tens of nillione of tines).

The con any had projected develop-ant of this product as the mat promising
non-auto related its: and had thus established a project case soar three
years as». This effort finally bore fruit in the beginning of this year
when it use deter-load that the product could be co-srcielired.

There is a brisk exchange nowadays over boundaries by auto parts and other
auto related nanufecturers with electronics sanufscturers. as in the case
of Aisin Seiki Co. Ltd, and Fujitsu Limited in the field of auto electronics.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The case of Tokyo Press Kogyo-IBH is characterised by the fact that it would
be more accurate to describe it as an entry into the pure electronics field
totally removed from the auto industry and not a auto-electronics venture.
This is a move responding to the policies of auto unufacturers who by
themselves have begun to increase the rate of production of auto parts in
the face of greater worldwide snail car competition.

COPYRIGIH': Nikkei) Kogyo Shilimnsha 1982

Hitachi - Burroughs
Tokyo NIBON KBIZAI semen 30 May 82 p 1

[Text] It became apparent on the 29th that the world's second largest
computer usher Burroughs (Chairnsn, Michael Blussnthel) and Bitachi, Ltd,
had entered into talks aimed at cooperation in the fields of counters and
comications. Burroughs' present objectives are to obtain Hitachi's
optical fiber co-unication network systu and seall coeputer technology
for worldwide distribution. Because Bitschi is showing a positive stance,
the possibility of this being realised is high and there is sose indication
that this can be expanded into a cooperative arnngeeent of such greater
amplitude. This cooperation. coming at a time when the likes of IBM and
Fujitsu and other nnufacturers are engaged in cutthroad cowetition in the
field of computers and comnications. as well as being one of the causes of
the trade friction between Japan and the 11.8., is likely to cause world-wide
ripples.

In the field of mainfrsse eonputera. Burroughs ranks next to m but is on a
downward trend in the computer market place because of its heavy reliance
on the large-size computer in a world that is rapidly being taken over by
miniature and nicro computers and terninals of office autontion.

As one effort to shore up the company, Burroughs last year acquired the
Hemorex company which manufacturers peripheral equipment cospatible with IBbi
software in order to make inroads into the tersinals and peripheral

equip-eat area. however, this alone cannot satisfy the multitude of needs

of the marketplace of today so they have cone to hitschi, one of our country's
top class cosputer and counmications eaters, for talks on cooperation.

Burroughs Vice-Chains!!! J. Jacobson recently visited Katsushige Hits,
President of Hitachi, Ltd, and explored the subject of cooperation with
him. In response to this overture, President Hits expressed the view that
in areas other than large mainframe computers, Hitachi could help Burroughs
in many ways. Thus a major forward mveeent for cooperation between these
firms has begun to take place.

According to officials of both cowanies, the reason it would be difficult
for cooperation in the area of large sainfraee computers is that Bitechi, as
a basic business strategy, is building its software based on the sale

design theory as IBH, whereas Burroughs is manufacturing under a different
design theory. As for as Burroughs is concerned, they are "tonal?
interested in cooperation not in the field of sainfrase cosputers but in

the field of small computers, data terninals and co-unicetions systess in

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the context of technology and marketing. Therefore, the Burroughs' interest
agreed with nitachi's position that "Cooperation between the two firms should

be in areas without cOnflict or competition ."

because of this. the products must likely to be provided by Hitachi to
Burroughs are communication network systen technology and data terminal
equipment which utilize optical fibers for increased efficiency to be used
in establishing office autonation systsns. Also on the list of possible
itens for provision to Burroughs are printers using semiconductor lasers
and snall cmuters.

Put thernore. Burroaghs is planning to namfacture Kanji character printers
and data terminals in Japan starting this year. They have already obtained
a aanufacturing facility site, and there is some indication that aitachi is
prepared to provide sons technical assistance to Burroughs in this endeavor.
Becarse of this, the possibility of expanding cooperation between these two
coapaniea in the future into a wider range of products is probable.

Japan is sore advanced in optical fiber technology.

Optical fiber comnication network. This is a cos-unicetions technology
that supports a more efficient intra—company information network system.

In this system, optical fiber cables that can transmit a massive volume

of data are set up in offices and factories within a cowany interconnecting

computers and terminals .

Office Auto-ation has been getting papular in recent tines and there is a
trend for personal conputers and facsimile devices heretofore introduced in
a tendon fashion without regard to uniformity or comatibility to now be
integrated into networks. In order to do so. a special co—mications
network is necessary to make these diverse pieces of equipment all
communicable when interconnected. when optical fibers are used for such a
network. the transmission loss due to radio wave interference is reduced.
and it is possible to transnit a great volume of data more accurately and
at higher speeds. It is said that the optical fiber network technology of
our country's cowuter and co-unications makers is more advanced than that

of the United States.

common: Nikon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Mitsubishi Electric - Sperry

Tokyo NI'ION IBIZA! summon in Japanese 8 June 82 p 8

[Text] Hitsubishi nectric Corporation and the American conputer nker
Sperry Co. (Read Office- New York; 6. G. Probst. Chairman) announced on the

7th that they had signed an agreement that day to cooperate in the

development. production and marketing of computers. Both companies will
develop close ties through the antual exchange of technology involving

nainfrane computers of Sperry and the medium and small conuters of
Hitsubishi and this will involve joint developnent and research in these
areas. Hitsubishi will provide semiconductors and peripheral and data
terninal equipment technology to Sperry for production and marketing.

18

21M. USE ONLY
Through this exchange. hitsubishi Electric Corporation will strengthen its
foothold in the world market while Sperry will increase its foothold in
Japan. Thus, Japanese and 0.5. cowuter makers have started to cooperate in
an anti-Inn strsgegy as well as office automation market strategies.

Agreement on "Anti IBM" Strategy

Nihachiro Katayama, President of Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, and

Probst, Chairman of Sperry. revealed at their news conference that the
contract they had signed that day was a basic agreement for mutual cooperation
valid for five years. If there are no objections from either company at

the end of five years, the agreaaent will automatically be extended for an
additional five years. Both firms will establish working groups,
respectively, to work out details of specific joint and cooperative work.

As a result of this agreement, Mitsubishi looks forward to (1) increasing
its sales through the provision of semiconductors and data terminal equipment
to Sperry and (2) strengthen its technological development capabilities
through the use of Sperry technology. 0n the other hand, Sperry is counting
on (1) obtaining Mitsubishi cooperation in the development of new products
centering on data terminals and medium and small computers and (2) gaining
Mitsubishi cooperation in the sales of products from its own computer
division, Sperry UNIVAC, in Japan.

Sperry already has a distribution cowany operating under the name Nippon
UNIVAC established in Japan under a joint capitalisation arrangement with
Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Hitaui Bussan and Oki Electric Industries,
Inc. (Sperry - 34.681, Mitsubishi Electric - 1.582), as well as a Japanese
production facility called Oki UNIV“ (Sperry - 45.082, Mitsubishi

Electric - 8:). Additionally, Sperry has been purchasing conductors from
Mitsubishi and, according to Chairman Probst. "Re have had very close
relations with Mitsubishi Electric for the past ten years." This agreement
was proposed last fall by Sperry with the; intent of making the relationship
even stronger and more comprehensive.

It can be assumed that in the future Sperry and Hitsubishi will jointly
develop peripheral equipment and smaller computers needed by Sperry to
round out its product line and that Mitsubishi will undertake their
production. The positions of Nippon UNIVAC and Oki UNIVAC are not expected
to change in the future, but in order to further assist in the sales of
Sperry - UNIVAC computers in Japan, "Hitsubishi will increase its holdings
of Nippon UNIVAC stock," according to President Katayama.

Because Sperry in the past stressed large mainframe computers, it is now in
critical need of smaller computers and peripheral equipment in its product
lines. Mitsubishi arrived at its decision that it is advantageous to form

a joint strategy front with Sperry by reinforcing each other because although
they are strong in the field of small computers and peripheral equipment,
they have been slow in getting into the field of medium and large computers.

COPYRIGHT: Nikon Keirai Shimbunsha 1982

9980
C50: 4106/120 l8-a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

AGENCY m 881' UP TECHNOLOGICAL 0mm GUIDELINES

Tokyo mm KOGYO savanna in Japanese 26 Hay 82 p 16

[Article: "Establish law Systen lest Year; 'Prsctical Use Hithin 5 Years'
Is Goal"]

[Text] Responding to recent demands for the technologies). buildup of Japan.
the Industrial Science and Technology Agency has decided to create a new
industry-governnent-university cooperation systes called the "technological
Develop-ent Systen ‘ro Revitalize Industry" (tesporary title). 'Ihe purpose
of the system will be to increase coepetitiveness in coping with structural
recessions. regional developmt lag or decline, inadequate develop-ant in
col-on areas, etc., which existing system are unable to cover. and to
achieve a general technological buildup of the nation. Ihe step was taken
in response to a proposal to "establish econonic national security" that was
submitted in late April by the special subconittee on econonic security
problens under the general subcomcil of the Industrial Structure emancil.
Goals in P! 83 will be boiled down to about 15 theses. and research and
develop-ant will be pronoted while granting subsidies to participating
enterprises. However. unlike the already started energy projects and
systens for the establishment of neat-generation industries. they will be
linited to thenes which can be brought to practical use within 3 to 5 years.

he proposal for the ”sstsblishnsnt of an econonic security systen" drafted
by the Industrial Structure (buncil focuses on the fact that, in clarifying
the future outlook, present conditions point to an increase in factors
such as oil shocks, public nuisances. and trade friction which weaken
econonic activity and obstruct sound develop-est of the econony. It is a
report on countermeasures that have been considered. Of course, great
expectations are placed on technological develop-ant, and in paragraph 3

of the report, where it refers to the plan for the technological buildup
of the Istion. with eqhasis on international contributions. it proposes

the pronotion of technological developnent to revitalize the industries.

In the n 83 budget. the Industrial Science and Technology Agency is taking
a cue fro- such ideas to revive industries which have fallen into struc-

tural recession. to raise the general level of technological develop-ht
areas which are low, and to activate industries in the regions which lag
behind nodsrn progress. With these as pillars, it has outlined a "policy
for the revival of industries through technology."

19
MOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first targets for the revival plan are expected to be petrochemical,

synthetic fibers, paper pulp, nonferrous metals. ceramics, precision
processing. and casting and forging; themes will be selected from them
which neet the required conditions.

Research and development are scheduled for themes other than industrial
cstegories--tor example, sensors and mterials which fall \mder common

element technology. The present plan calls for the selection of about 15
themes from various prospective areas of technology such as catalysis tech-

nology, heat-resistant enzymes technology and small-lot synthetic fiber
technology which can be put into practical use within 3 to 5 years, and
projects under joint research by industry, government. and academia.

As for subsidies, this will depend on future budget negotiations, but they
will be larger than the present maximum subsidy (50 percent).

Technological Development 'lhemes Selected by the Industrial Structure Council
for Review To Activate hterials Industries (Examples)

 

Category These Breakthrough Goals
Steel Continuous cold rolling 1) Develop a compact remval
process technology facility for surface oxide film

2) Develop an automatic scanning
system for scars on cold rolling

surface
Direct link technology 1) Develop a high-precision
for continuous casting rolling technology
and hot rolling process 2) Develop a technique for manu-

facture of \mblemished slab
3) Develop manufacturing tech-
nology for high purity steel

Petro- Technology for making 1) Extract high-efficiency
chemical petrified products microbes
using bioreactors 2) Develop heat-resistant enzymes
Develop new process with l) Clarify functions of new
new catalysts catalysts
2) Establish engineering tech-
nology
Synthetic Superspeed, multiple 1) Develop control technology for
fibers thread type sanufac- highly reliable operation at
turing process tech- super speeds
nology for new fibers 2) Develop process technology for

uniform fiber structure

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ca te gr!

Synthetic
fibers

(cont'd)

Paper pulp

Aluninun
refining

anlorine

COPYRIGHT:

5886

080: 6106/132

nae-e

 

Develop-ent of technology
for fibers with revolu-

tionary uses

mnufacturing technology
for various types of
snail-lot synthetic
fibers

Hydrogen dissolving
nethod for pulpnking

Pulp technology by
nicrobe processing

Past cultivation tech-
nology of pulp natariala

and direct conversion to
pulp

Blast furnace refining
technology for aluminu-

Soda nanufacturing tech-
nology by solid
electrolytic nethod

21

Breakthrough Goals

1) Develop technology for high
strength, nodular and tough
fibers

2) Develop fibers with new
physical and chenical qualities

1) Develop technology for auto-'
mtic switching of spinning

thread cap
2) Develop autonstic threading

technology
3) Develop auto-tic thread-
cutting technology

1) Search for catalysts
2) Develop control technology for
reaction of solids/ gases

1) Cultivation of nicrobes
2) Control microbe reaction

1) Separate and cultivate

protoplasts
2) Separate and cultivate
plasnide

1) Develop ultrahigh heat-
resistant nsterials for blast

furnaces
2) Establish control technology

for balance between heat and
naterials under ultrahigh heat

1) Develop long-life, high
electric current, efficient ion
exchange newrane

2) Develop electric battery and
electrode resistant to high

electric current operation

Nihon Kogyo Shidiunsha Tokyo Bonsha 1982

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIBRCB AND TECHNOZDGY

R6D ACTIVITIES IN BIOTECHNOLOGY REPORTED

LDP Comittee on Bioscience

Tokyo NIBON KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 13 My 82 p 19

[Text] The Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) Diet Couittee on Bioscience was
formally inaugurated at a general meeting on ll Day, for the purpose of
providing full support on policy matters pertaining to the prontion of
research and development of bioscience, which is considered the "star
industry" of the next generation. Former minister of agriculture and
fisheries and present Lower House neuter Takao Kamaoka, who was appointed
chief organizer, stated: "Research and development in bioscience in Japan
lags 10 years behind EurOpe and America. If things are left to their
present course, we may win the economic contest with them, but we will be

completely defeated in this field." Of special urgency is the study of
biomasses as a new source of energy substituting for oil, and the L0? is

planning speedy measures ranging from the drafting of policies to estab-
lishing new biomss curriculums in the various universities.

Among the oil-substitute energy sources contelplated are: nuclear power
generation, nuclear fusion, solar heat, and biomass. It is felt that bio-
masses involving extraction of energy fron flora my become the leading
substitute energy source in the future.

Countries in Europe and America have therefore stressed early research and
development in this field, but in Japan the Ministry of Agriculture and

Fisheries has appropriated only 226 million yen for "biomass development
expenditures“ in the FY 82 budget, and it has yet to edaark on any specific

research and development.

Moreover, there are absolutely no universities which presently conduct bio-
mass courses or, much less, regard even botany with any importance.

As an example, Mr Kameoka said: "You know, among the graduates of Tokyo
University in 1981, there were only 10 who majored in botany, and there
were fewer than 300 throughout Japan. In addition, there are no biomass

researchers; this is a hopeless situation."

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

0n the other hand. not only are thert. bionass curriculum in the universi-
ties in Europe and Aurica, but countries there are also devoting full
efforts toward nurturing researchers. Mr Kaneoka elphasized: ”In order
to further develop the study of bionasses. the United States has already
awarked on the protection of genes. ‘lhe principal countries of Europe are

also helping to protect biomass. secure seeds, and inrove seed cultiva-
tion in Africa."

In Japan and the other Asian countries, however. there continues to be a
lack of any research in such areas. In fact, biomasses are being sacri-
ficed because of the irresponsible development of farlland with the
increase in population.

Hr Kameoka laments: "To tell the truth, for more than 10 years I have
desperately tried to persuade the bureaucrats of the Ministry of Agriculture

and Fisheries to utilize biomass as an energy source, but no one has showed
any concern. The reason is that botany in Japan has been regarded as a
hobby of the aristocracy."

Despite such realities, an LDP Diet Comittee on Bioscience has been formed.
The Diet melbers supporting chief organizer Kameoka include such illustrious

personalities as Taro hakayana, former secretary general of the prine
minister's office and a present Upper House neuter; Tasaburo Kunagai,

foraer director of the Science and Technology Agency and also a present
Upper House med>er; and others.

With the forming of the Diet cossnittee as a backdrop. Hr Kaineoka is already
applying pressure on the government as he continues: "In any case, at the
present rate we will be at the urcy of the Hestern nations concerning not
only oil but substitute energy as well. Before the governnent talks about
the need to secure energy, it aust exert full efforts toward maintaining a

biomass research and development system and toward securing bionss
resources."

Furthermore, facing the drafting of the budget for the coming fiscal year,

he is bullish as he declares: "I will try to persuade the government to
actively promote the naintenanca of testing and research facilities. as well
as to cultivate researchers."

(DPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shisbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1982
Industrial Sector

Tokyo NLLKAN KOCYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 19 Hay 82 p 1

[Text] According to related sources. on 18 Hay five companies affiliated
with the Industrial Bank of Japan (IBJ)--Toyo Soda Manufacturing (Toto

Horishin, president). Nippon Soda (Yoshio Pbrisava. president), Nissan
Chemical Industries (Hisso Kusano, president). Central Glass (Saburo Ito,

president) and Hodogaya Chemicals (Toshio brinoti, president)--vill begin
interdisciplinary research and development in cooperation vith the

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OII (II-‘FIK'IAI. USE ONLY

similarly IBJ-affiliated research organization for high technology, the
Sagani Central Chemical Research Institute (4-6-1 Nishi—Onume, Sagamihara
City, Kanagaws Prefecture; Zenki Ninomiya. board chairman). As part of the
project, joint research will be conducted especially in such biotechnologi—
cal fields as genetic engineering, which is the center of attention as the
next-generation technology. The chemical industry, which is now in a
structural recession, has recently been increasing its efforts toward
technological development. and it is to be noted that this is the first
case in which a group of enterprises from the same capitalist interests are
getting together for research and develoth in next-generation technology.

The cooperation in joint research and development by the five IBJ affiliates
is based on the perception that the pursuit of biophysiology is indispensable

to the future direction of the chemical enterprises.

The five IBJ affiliates are therefore participating in the Welfare Minis-
try's research task force on development projects involving extraction,
analysis, and synthesis techniques for dioxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which
is necessary for the rearrangement of genes. Cooperative research is being
conducted by the Toyo Soda Manufacturing Company, which has accumulated
analysis techniques in high-speed liquid chromotography; Nippon Soda,

which boasts stockpiling techniques for agricultural and medical chemicals;
Nissan Chemical Industries; Hodogaya Chemicals; and Central Glass, which
specializes increasingly in fine chemicals.

The five companies have been joined by the Saga-i Central Chemical Research
Institute, which is participating in the Science and Technology Agency's

life science project involving basic research in organic synthesis,
synthesis technology based on enzymes, and research on bioreactors. They

will conduct research and development in so-called interdisciplinary areas,
which are border areas between physics and chemistry, between chemistry and

biology. etc. They intend especially to focus on biotechnology, which
includes techniques for genes rearrangement and bioreactors.

The five companies will send their researchers to the Sagami Research Insti-
tute. In preparation. the institute formed a research task force on bio-
technology in May. It plans to send its researchers to the 0.8. National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and to the Tokyo University Medical Research
Institute. it also plans to build research facilities for biotechnology
within the coupound of the institute. and to formalize the task force as a
unit of the institute as early as mid-October.

Interdisciplinary research and development of genetic engineering-related
technology constitute new areas which start from basic research and, since
there is great risk in individual cospaniea' attempting to cope with such
research and development, it was decided that the five IBJ affiliates
wuld participate in a joint system. The view is that future research and
development will be conducted under joint efforts by the universities and
national and public research organizations. and through a search for quali-
fied researchers.

CUPYRlC‘HT: Nikkan Kogyo Shidmnsha 1982
21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HITI's Plans
Tokyo NIW K0610 33mm in Japanese 2 Jun 82 p 1

[Text] As a link in the development of advanced industries, the Ministry
of International Trade and Industry (HITI) is going all out to cultivate
and promote the bioindustry. Concretely, it plans to establish a

"Bioindustry Promotion Co-ittee (tenorary title)" under joint
government-private sector efforts in July. For the time being, it plans

to review problem with which the conittee will deal, draft mediu-range

and long-range blueprints for the bioindustry, and work on necessary govern-
ment measures and proper environmental conditions. The HITI intends to open
a bioindustry office within the Basic Industries Bureau as of 1 July as a

core agency for the active promotion of its policy measures, to continue
research and development on biomass technology which it has promoted in the

past, and to nurture the bioinduatry through new policies as a aajor pillar
for the revival of the basic industries.

Formulation of hdium-llange and Long-Range Visions

The bioindustry is an advanced industry which seeks to bring about a tech-
nological revolution in broad areas such as the field of chemistry. radical
care. food production, agriculture. and energy. It is an industry which

has the potential, through the effective industrial utilisation of the
functions of organisms and cells, to achieve mss production, drastically

reduce the manufacturing processes. and economize on energy for goods that
in the past have been difficult to unufacture.

Representative activities of the bioindustry are: rearrangement of genes

in the medical and pharmaceutical fiel ls, mass cultivation of cells. and
production of biomass energy (oil-substitute energy) by utilizing alcoholic

crops. animal wastes. and rice straw. These are all necessary and indis-
pensable to Japan in terms of the effective use of its resources and the

progress of its industries. The nurture and promotion of the industry are
crucial to the revival of its chenical industry and its clearly declining
basic industries.

The HITI has decided to begin substantive efforts to nurture the bioindustry
from such a point of view. Especially regarding biomass technology, which

is basic to the industry, the HIT! (Basic Industries Bureau) has already
taken concrete steps such as establishing a biomass policy office which is
actively promoting measures. Also. the Industrial Science and Technology
Agency is considering biotechnology as a key theme for this fiscal year, in
connection with its research and development systen for the next-generation
industrial base. and much progress has been made concerning research in the
basic fields.

Having achieved such progress thus far, the HITI plans further expansion
and development in these projects to nurture and promote the bioindustry.

The rain thrust of future efforts will focus on continuous promotion of
basic research in the previous projects and their support through

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

administrative policies. Establishment of the Bioindustry Prentice Con-
nittee is a link in such efforts. The conittee will for-slate -diui-

rnnge and long-range plans for the bioinduetry and promote governmt
policies and environnental conditions accordingly.

Also. the bioinduatry office established on 1 July is en expended version
of the previous bio-ass policy office. It in a "directive office" esteb-
lished by direct-we, and on 1 October it will be elevated to an "ordinance
office" established by ninisteriel ordinance.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunshs 1982

5886
C50 : 6106/ 128

26

FOR OFl-TCIAI. USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCI-NIB 6 “almost

1.101118. STRGUGER MATERIALS FOR AUTOS 0P FUTURE REPORTED

Tokyo MM KOGYO sum in Japanese 12-14. 18-21. 25-26 Hay 82
May 82

[12 May 82 p 10]
[Text] Effective Reduction of Fuel Consuption

Automobile companies are now grappling with numerous technological issues

in order to gain a victory in the world automotive wars of the 1980's.

These tasks involve reducing fuel constmption. improving drivability, safety
and durability. and reducing weight. The technological approaches include
increased engine fuel efficiency, the use of electronics. and design changes,
but the most effective approach will be the use of alternative naterials.

"Reduction of fuel consumption involves a number of technological tasks. how
that it is no longer possible to achieve major reductions in fuel consuaption
through individual technological advances. we will have to adopt the strategy
of improving fuel consumption as a cunulative total of small technical
advances. But the use of alternative sateriale will have the advantage of
being more effective and simpler than the difficult and expensive development
of new technologies.“ (Director Kiyoshi Hatsunoto. chief product design
engineer of Toyota Motor Co) Considering that the autonobils is a very
couple: product that requires precision tecltnolosy. 1t nay not be proper to
label the switch to alternative eaterials as "technological development."

But it is an important topic for development that can produce better results
than the development of advanced technology.

Horeover. these materials are "often not advanced technology materials like
ceramics and carbon fiber, but rather popular eaterials like aluminum and
magnesium." (Director Shoichiro lrinajiri of Bonds Hotor Co) That is, the
switch t » alternative materials will usually mean inproving misting teclmology

rather than developing eye-opening new technology. And that is just where
Japanese techmlogy excels.

The Toyota Hark II shows the past direction of materials davelopnent by a
Japanese automobile nanufacturer. To start with. the steel which constitutes

60 percent of the total weight increased from 612 kg in the 190001. (l900-cc
diaplaceeent) in 1968 to 725 kg in the 2600 Grandee (2600 cc) of 1978.

27

MWLWONLV
Al the same time, castings went from 138 to 160 kg. plastics from 36 to 55
kg, abuse from 30 to 27 kg. aluminun from 30 to #3 kg. rubber from 50 to 63

kg, an; cloth and leather from 74 to 39 kg. while copper and zinc remained
unchanged at 30 kg.

The percentage changes for various materials were +53 percent for plastics.
+43 percent for aluminum and +26 percent for rubber, but 47 percent for

cloth and leather and ~10 percent for glass. Total vehicle weight went up
from 1 ton to 1.2 tons. but because of the increase in engine displacement.
this can essentially be considered a weight reduction. In other words, by

using large quantities of plastics and aluminaa. it was possible to hold
down the increase in weight.

when the Nissan Laurel underwent a full nodel change in 1980. total vehicle
weight dropped 85 kg below that of the old model. This included reductions
of 10 kg from the chassis. 55 kg from the body, and 30 kg elsewhere, for a
total reduction of 105 kg. However. there were increases of 20 kg to improve
comfort, reduce noise. and increase safety, so the net decrease in weight was

85 kg. Needless to say. the use of alternative materials played a large
part in achieving this decrease.

Since automobiles fill nsny needs, steps to reduce wieght are countered by
[actors that tend to increase weight. such as the desire for comfort. This
trend is seen in lightweight cars. as in the Mark II and the Bluebird. Fuji
Heavy Industries' small Rex. which went through a full model change last
September. becane more than 10 kg heavier because of 30 percent more window
glass and a heavier fuel tank. This was balanced by the use of plastics and
high-tension steel sheeting. so the total weight stayed about the same even

though the car grew larger. These results could not have been achieved
without the use of new saterials.

ﬁve" though popular materials are used. the switch to alternative materials
certainly cannot be made overnight. That is because there are pressing
problems of cost. processing technology. and safety to be overcome. The
extent to which these problems can be overcome will be a major topic of
research and development by automobile makers.

(See table on next page)

28

ﬁORlOFFKJAl.UBE(NVLV
NI OFTICIAI. USE ONLY

I9n~l919 l B*Iﬂﬂﬂﬂﬂ( M! II")

‘v-Ol men

 

Proportion of Materials (by weight) Used
in 1978-79 Japanese and Aaericsn Care

(a) Bluebird (1979) (b) Hark II (1978)
(c) CH average (1979) (d) Steel

(e) Sheet steel (f) Other steel
(8) Cast iron (h) Alulinul

(i) Plastics (3) Glass

(k) Rubber (1) Other

[13 Kay 82 p 11]
[Tut] Juap in Use of high-Tension Sheet Steel

As a part of the switch to alternative latex-isle. the use of high-tension
steel has lads rapid progress in recent years. High-tension steel is stronger
than ordinary steel sheets and can thus be nade 0.1 to 0.05 - thinner.

Thus the weight of the steel sheets used can be reduced by about 10 percent.

The price of high-tension steel is higher than that of ordinary steel sheets.
of course: according to a coaparison of 1981 aanufactursrs' invoice prices.
the cost is about 10 percent higher. But because the saomt used is just

10 percent lower. there is no change in the autoaobiie manufacturer's
production costs. In short, the adoption of high-tension steel conserves
resources to the extent that the voluae of steel used is reduced, and this is
a aajor factor in the autonobils unufacturers' efforts to reduce weight and
fuel consuption.

Nevertheless, it was rarely used in auto-obnes until the aid-1970's. That
is because difficulties in forning high-tension steel ends it useful only in
very siaple parts such as bupers. doorguard bars. and seatbelt buckles.

Accordin; to Japan Autosobile Manufacturers Association statistics for 1963
through 1980. in the i years ending in 1976 the mount of high-tension steel
used was only 0.2 kg per car. but the figure rose to 5.6 kg in 1977 and 6.4
kg in 1980. These are strictly average values; the anounts have juped
sharply for the new aodels after recent full nodal changes.

For maple, the Nissan Bluebird, which had -a full aodel change in Rove-bar
1979, uses #0 kg of high-tension steel. That was followed by a sharp growth

29

”WNW?
in its use. with 70 kg in the Leopard (1980). 55 kg in the Laurel (1980),
8" kg in the Violet Revelta (l981), and 55 kg in the Skyline (1981).

1he use of high—tension steel as a proportion of white metal body weight
(weight of sheet steel for the body) has reached 15 percent for the Bluebird.
20 percent for the Leopard. Laurel andSkyline,and 33 percent for the Violet
Revelta.

Large amounts of high-tension steel are used in Toyota cars as well. The
first was the Creasida. with 56.2 kg in March 1980. That fall the Hark II
had a model change which gave it 57 kg, and in 1981 the Carina and Celica
increased to 70 kg and 90 kg, respectively. The Japanese passenger car that
uses the most high-tension steel is the Soarer, newly developed in 1981,
which uses 133 kg. Before that. the world leader in the use of high-tension
steel was the Ford Escort. but the Soarer uses far more.

Toyota and Nissan cars are not alone; other cars which have undergone full
model changes have added from 20 to 50 kg high-tension steel per vehicle.

it is used in many parts. including hoods. front and rear bumpers. doors.
and trunk lids. In Toyo Kogyo'e popular Familia, for example. high-tension
steel is used at 61 points in 32 parts. including the front frame, the front
P-liner. the roof header. and hinge reinforcements. The total weight is 52
kg. And in the Soarer. which uses even more high-tension steel. it is found
in major components like the steering column and engine brackets.

Last year Nissan made a survey of the use of high-tension steel and found
tlmt only 1.000 tons were used in the first half of 1979. but this figure
rose quickly to 7,300 tons in the second half, to 7,600 tons in the first
half of 1980, to 11,000 tons in the second half of 1980, and to 30,000 tons
in the first half of 1981. It heads the list of high-growth materials.

The reason high-tension steel has become so widely used is that just when
automobile manufacturers want lighter cars. they and the steelmakers have
developed a technology to facilitate the shaping of the material: this had
been an obstacle to its widespread use. Rapid advances are made when
technology eliminates an obstacle. The widespread use of high-tension steel
is proof of this quality of technoi-gy. in that sense there is no question
thJL "high-tension steel will he used for no to 50 percent of white metal
nudy weight in the near future." (Nissan Vice President Hiroshi Takahaahi)

I15 M1y 82 p Ill
[Textj Puli Use of Plastics Still in Future

rhe use of plastics in automobiles has been increasing at a pace as rapid as

that or high-tension steel. There is nothing new. however. about the
assuciation of plastics with automobiles.

In 194l Henry Ford. the automobile king. developed a "plastic car" using body
panels of laminated phenol. And in 1953. America's General Motors (CH)

drvctoped its Corvette. which can be called the first real "plastic car" and
was surprisingly popular.

30

IDIHOIFIJAI.UGI(HVLV
FORIOFWKJAI.USE(ﬂVLV

Thus the use of plastics in automobiles began in the Unites States some 50
years ago. and practical applications are quite advanced. But this use had
declined because plastics were inferior to other materials like steel in terms
of workability and shock resistance; plastics did not return to the spotlight
until the first oil shock of the early 1970's.

For example, consumption of plastics in automobiles in the United States in
1970 was 816,000 tons, but in 1977 it reached 815,000 tons. Now consumption

is expected to be around 1 million tons per year. As can be seen from the

use of about 100 kg of plastic in each of the "K" cars that Chrysler introduced
into the market last year as a final save to overcome its management crisis.
the use of plastics in different automobile parts is certainly spreading.

Plastics have a short history in Japan, and annual usage cannot be determined

with accuracy. It is thought that usage has been similar to that in the
United States.

In the case of Toyo Kogyo's small passenger car Cosmo, which went through a
full model change last year, plastics are used in 18 parts: shock-absorbent
bumpers, headlight housings, front grill, radiator tank, air cleaner, turn
signals. battery case, outside mirrors, cowl grill, instruaent panel.
steering wheel. protective molding, seat trim, interior light, rear bumper,
and hubcaps.

The Cosmo is not alone; recently. plastic shock-absorbent bumpers have become
the most common application of plastics in small Japanese passenger cars.
Metal bumpers are expected to disappear completely from Japanese passenger
cars in the near future, and some manufacturers of metal bumpers have already
been forced to close down or convert their operations.

The next most common application is for interiors. Cowl grills and panels
are all being made of plastic, as are many P-rocker bars. seat covers, trim
iteas, consoles, and angle wings.

Plastics have also come to be used extensively under the hood. Uses include
windshield washer pumps, timing gear covers, transmission underpass, torque
converter covers. and actuator housings. The Japanese automobile industry
has lagged behind the United States in the use of plastics, but is undeniably
switching materials rapidly.

however, many in the industry point out that "full-scale use of plastics is
still a thing of the future." (Toyo Kogyo Director Takashi Hitsunari)
According to estimates by the Japan Autoaotive Institute, the use of plastics
is expec;ed to show more growth in the 6 years from 1985 to 1990 than in the
6 years from 1900 to 1985. (see chart on next page)

The reason is that present plastics are not used in lsrge-volumn applications.
Quantities used will jump sharply, once plastics are used for hoods, fenders,

doors. trunk lids, and soft facings. At present these parts are quickly
being converted from ordinary steel sheets to high-tension steel. but it is
possible they will be converted again from high-tension steel to plastics.

31

FOI1OIFIJAI.USIIMVLY
it cannot be said that moving parts now are being made of plastic. It is
true. however, that all car manufacturers are conducting extensive research
and devefopment in regard to such applications. According to those in the
industry, the parts in question include the drive shaft, transmission mount
members, outer handles, rock regulator mechanism. rocker cover, timing
sprocket, gas tank. seat frames, cab body, timing belt cover, and bumper
beams.

Replacement of glass with plastic may be another topic of study. From the
perspective of reducing the weight of a vehicle. a given area of glass

"eight even more than sheet steel. But because comfort is sought in passenger
cars now. the glass area has been expanded. and this naturally results in
heavier vehicles. Replacement of glass with plastic will be one of the
automobile industry's most important technological topics.

Estimated Use of Plastics in Passenger Cars
(Source: Japan Automotive Institute Survey)

P912255 Growth Rate Major Parts
1980-1985 1985-1990
Polyurethane/RIM 13.71 17.62 RRIH fenders. doors
Polypropylene (PP) 1.6 10.3 bumpers. air-conditioner
housing
Unsaturated 26.6 26.0 hood, wheels. doorsesls
polyester (PRP)
ABS (styrene) -42.1 -12.7
Polyethylene (PE) 40.1 44.8 gas tank, seat backs
PVC -9.5 -6.1
Nylon 10.4 -1.2 oil pan
Synthetic textiles -16.0 -6.3
Phenol -3.5 -0.8
Polycarbonate (PC) 62.5 17.9 glass substitute,
bumpers
Acryl 3.3 -6.5
Noryl (PPO) 116.6 18.2 instrument panel,
exterior trim
Ployacetal 27.3 0 window hardware
Thermoplastic 13.6 -24.0
polyester (PST/BET)
All polymers +2.51 +10.lZ
(Annual Growth 0.51 2.02)

[IS Hay 82 p 9]
[Text] Cost of Aluminum Is Problem
This year, Toyota finally concluded with GM Holden, the Australian arm of

America’s General Motor's. for the joint supply of aluminum cylinder heads.
Each year On Holden is to receive 12,000 aluminum cylinder heads produced

by Toyota's Australian subsidiary THA (Toyota Manufacturing Australia).

32

FIIIOFUKJA1.USI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aluminum shows promise as a lighter material, and fairly large quantities are
used in Japan in connection with engines. It is particularly popular for
cylmder heads.

Large quantities of aluminum are used in the United States for transaxle cases.
bupers. brake master cylinders. air cleaners, brackets etc. Ford used 91

kg of aluinun parts in the 1981 Lynx, nuch more than is used in Japanese
cars. Japanese cars, however, are far ahead in the use of aluminum cylinder
heads. Toyota lakes aluninu cylinder heads in Australia; it is these that
are to be supplied to an Holden. Nissan and Mitsubishi also plan to make
aluminum cylinder heads in Australia and import then into Japan.

Of course cylinder heads are not the only use for aluninum. In Toyo Kogyo's
popular Familia. for exanple, it is used in 16 areas: battery body parts,
rocker arms, intake manifold, cylinder head cover, cylinder head. pistons.
timing gear case cover, gearshift case, clutch housing, 011 mp housing,
transnission case. fuel punp body, automatic transnission control body,

room cover. steering gear cover, and wheels. 0f existing cars, it is
probably the one in which alminum is neat widely used.

Toyo Kogyo'a Cosmo and Lucie went through full model changes last year. and
the overall weight of each was reduced by 50 kg; 6.2 percent of that reduction
was achieved by replacing steel with aluninum

Of course, "to reduce much weight by using aluminun. it is necessary to sake
aluninun cylinder blocks." (Director Yoshio Nakamra of Fuji Heavy Industries'
Product Design Division 2) The engine in Fuji Heavy Industries' snall
passenger car Leone (1,300 to 1,800-cc displacement) is the only Japanese
alueinum cylinder block. Because the cylinder block is the central portion

of the engine, asking it of aluninua takes us one step nearer to a real
aluninun engine. Making the cylinder block or aluinum requires changing

the engine production line itself. so relatively little progress has actually

been nade. even by the Japanese automobile industry, which has the use of
aluninum as a goal.

Nevertheless. the number of small parts which have been converted to alt-inns:
is gradually acct-ulating, and the metal has come to play a significant role
in weight reduction. In the case of the Toyota Hark II passenger car, for
exanple. comparison of the 1968 model 190061. (1,900 cc) and the 1979 nodal
2600 Grandee (2.600 cc) shows an increase in aluminum from 30 kg in 1968 to
1.3 kg in 1979; this is a growth rate of 1.3 percent, second only to the 53
percent rate for plastics.

The prob Lens with switching over to aluninun are that production costs are
high. and also that the market price of aluninum ingots is not stable. To
start with. the cost of electricity to refine the alminua is unbelievably
high. According to Japan Automotive Institute figures on energy consumption
for materials used in autonobiles, production of a ton of steel requires

the energy equivalent of 0.45 kiloliters of petroleum. but aluninum requires
6.6 kiloliters. In other words, aluninum takes 10 tines more energy. To
cope with the high cost of aluminum produced in Japan, Toyota is considering

“OFFICIALUSIONLY
building an aluminum plant in Canada, where electricity is cheaper. and has
begun an on-site feasibility study.

Thus there is some progress in conversion to aluminum. In fact, as Nakamura
says, "Even though production costs are high. there are still advantages to
using aluminum." The aluminum project research done by one auto manufacturer
shows good results for many parts, including yokes, sprockets, shift cases,
radiators. hoods. extension bars. roller arms. control rods, brake pedals.
and master cylinders. The number is greater than for any of the other
alternative materials for automobiles.

[19 May 82 p 9]
[Text] Ceramics Best Suited for Engines

The "news" at the beginning of this year about "the world’s first car with

a ceramic engine" provided a bright topic for living room conversation.

As this was the dream engine which would greatly improve fuel economy, the
news attracted attention when Tokyo's Kabutocho stock market reopened, and
that day saw great advances for the stocks of Isuzu Motors and Tokyo Ceramics,
the joint developers of the engine.

It is certain that the two companies have been working together on development
of a ceramic engine. This research has been carried out with 200 million yen
grant for research and development of important technology; the ceramic
engine (three cylinders, 2800 cc) developed in Tokyo Ceramics' Kagoshima
integrated laboratories was put in laum's small Gemini passemger car and

test driven on the Yogan highway near Sakurajima. Running at a top speed

of 50 km/h, it achieved a fuel consumption 30 percent lower than existing
diesel engines. in addition to running much quieter.

Ceramics first gained considerable attention as a material for automobile
engines. The reason. as explained by Takeshi Nakatsuka, Isuzu director and
development chief , is that "combustion chamber temperatures in presmt cast
iron or aluminum alloy engines, whether water-cooled or air-cooled, have

to be kept below 800° C to prevent sintering. But if ceramics with their
superior heat resistance are used for cylinders and pistons. combustion
chamber temperatures can go up to 1,100 or l,200° C, which improves fuel
efficiency and allows more power. Moreover. a cooling system becomes
unnecessary. so there is no need for a radiator or fan. That means a
reduction in engine weight."

A metallic engine loses 33 percent of fuel energy in exhaust gases and
another 33 percent to the cooling system. so only the remaining 33 percent
can actually be used for motive power. In a ceramic engine, on the other
hand. the energy which would have been lost to cooling in a metal engine
run he put to use. yielding a 33-percent savings in fuel. A car with a
ceramic engine tested at Sakurajima did show theoretical fuel savings of
30 percent. That is the reason the ceramic engine is called the "dress
engine."

MWLWONLY
FOI<0FFKJAI.USE(N¥LV

This is not to say that the era of the ceramic engine is about to arrive.

The reason is that ceramics are basically a brittle material. Because safety
is a primary consideration in materials for automobiles, brittleness is a
grave defect.

Another reason is that the difficulty of processing ceramics is a bottleneck
in making cerasic engines practical. Uniform quality and the ability to be
mass-produced are absolute prerequisites for automobile parts. In that sense.
the true era of the ceramic engine is still well in the future.

Ceramic parts are, however, increasingly being used in automobiles. The "new
ceramics glow plug" jointly developed last September by Isuzu and Tokyo
Ceramics is the world's first. This ceramic glow plug, which has the brand
name "Ultra Q05." succeeded in reducing the warmup time for diesel engines
from the conventional 3.5 seconds to zero.

The temperature of the glow plug exposed to combustion in the combustion
chamber of a diesel engine can reach 2,000° C. Conventional glow plugs
made of magnesium oxide and alumina are not capable of high amperage heating
and thus require a warmup period. The "new ceramic glow plug," on the other
hand, has high thermal impulse resistance. and so the waiting period before
starting is eliminated campletely. This technology would not be possible
without ceramics. Isuzu already uses it in the Gemini, and its use will
spread to other cars as well.

Beyond lsuzu's glow plug, Japanese auto makers are now actively grappling
with the use of ceramics for moving parts peripheral to the engine.
Particularly promising candidates for conversion to ceramics are manifolds,
liners, pistons, auxilliary combustion chambers, camshafts, tappets, and
turbochargers; it appears ceramics will become practical for these major
parts in the near future.

There was a time when the ceramics used in automobiles were limited to a very
few items like window glass, headlights, and spark plug insulators, but now
ceramics are becoming practical for important applications. Although Isuzu
Motors says the use of ceramics for the engine itself is still in the future.
the use of ceramics in automobiles is making steady progress. Japan has a
long tradition of technical developments in ceramics in connection with

china and porcelain; to that extent there is a great hope for future
development.

[20 May 82 p 9]

[Text] Reduced Friction with Sintered Alloy

The new Laser 15 engine in Toyota's small Carina passenger car. which went
through a full model change last July, uses a variety of new technologies.
Notable features, in addition to the world's first electronic fuel-to-air

ratio control system and the world's first vibration-proof air cleaner, are
the hollow sinter alloy camshaft and the sinter forged connecting rods.

35

FOIIOFFK3A1.0851NNLY
The hollow sinter alloy camshaft is the world's first practical version;
the sinter forged connecting rod, although predated by that of Porsche, is
also on the leading edge of international technology. The most highly

praised feature of the Laser 18 is these sinter alloys being used where they
are needed.

The use of sintered alloy for automobile parts became common at the beginning
of the 1940's. While the use of high-tension steel, plastics, and aluminum
has the goal of reducing fuel consumption by reducing weight, the goal of
powder metallurgy is to reduce the cost and improve the quality of parts.

It is not accurate to speak of new materials in this case, but the use of
powder metallurgy is continuing to grow steadily. Cost competition in the
battle of the 1980's for world automobile supremacy has become more intense
in the past few years. and so the advantages of sintered alloy as a cost
strategy have come to be reevaluated.

Automobile parts account for over 60 percent of Japan's sintered alloy
products; each vehicle has 20 to 30 parts totaling about 3 kg.

These parts include valve seats, crankshaft bearings, torque converter clutch
plates. distributor points, camshaft thrust plates, shock absorber plates.
doorlock strikers. oil pump gears, timing pulleys. and transmission clutch
hubs.

The most commonly used sinter alloy parts are valve seats. These were
developed for use with unleaded gasoline, and are now used in most gasoline
engines and some diesel engines.

Earlier valve seats were cast-forged products, and friction between the seat
and the valve tended to be a problem. Sinter alloys, on the other hand,

use elements with high heat-resistant. friction-resistant elements that

are then impregnated with lead for enhanced lubrication. In other words,

it is the use of unleaded gasoline that has made sintered alloy most suitable
for valve seats.

Other parts to which sintered alloy is well suited include crankshaft
bearings, torqueconverter clutch plates. and distributor points. Sintered
alloy also makes possible lower costs for shock absorber parts, oil pump
gents, doc: lurk strikers. transmission clutch hubs. timing gears, etc.
Sinter metals differ greatly from high—tension steel, aluminum and plastics,
which have gained attention because of their goal of reducing engine weight.

There is a similarity. however. in that parts using sintered alloy have

become more numerous, larger, and more complex. In Europe, for example,

the crankshaft pulleys of the 2.300-ce Rover have the same weight. 2 kg,

as those in 2,600-cc cars. This is the largest single sinter alloy automobile
part in the world. The powder metallurgy camshaft pulley of the Volkswagen
(VW) Golf, Passart and Audi weighs only 0.63 kg, but its diameter is a full
135 mm. The sinter alloy connecting rod in Toyota's Laser 15 engine comes
right behind the V" product in deserving notice.

36

FOR‘OFFIJAI.USE(NULY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Europe and the United States. alum‘num-based sintered alloy products are
beginning to be noticed in addition to ferrous sintered alloy. Ferrous parts
have contributed to reductions in cost and improvements in quality for some
time; those made with aluminum have added significance because. in addition
to those merits, they respond to the demands of the era of lighter vehicles.

Italy's Fiat Co, for example, has built a rack-and-pinion pallet for steering
boxeausing aluminum powder metallurgy. and it intends to expand use of

that part. In the past, the sintering of aluinum alloys has been considered
a probla in terms of volume production because sintering was hindered by

the file of surface oxidation on the powdered aluinum. But recently there
have been improvements in production technology, including antifriction
agents and regulation of the sintering atmosphere; facilitation of Wit-O
production has further encouraged the adoption of sintered alloy.

It has thus become quite possible that sinter alloys. both ferrous and
alumnus-based, will come to be extensively used in automobiles.

[21 Play 82 p 9]
[Text] Light and Plentiful Magnesium

"It seems not to be generally known. but if there is going to be any big
switch in materials in the next few years. it will be to the use of magnesium.
There is an unlimited supply of magnesium on earth, and the move to magnesia
will spread quickly, once it begins." These are the words of the deputy
director of Honda Laboratories (and a director of Honda Motor Co), Shoichiro
Irimajiri. regarding the future of magnesium as material for automobiles.

Seawater has a magnesium content of about 0.1 percent. Considering the
vastness of the oceans, this is an unlimited supply. To illustrate, Japan
now uses 20,000 tons of magnesium per year-~an amount equivalent to that
contained in a cube of seawater measuring a mere 250 meters on an edge.
Moreover, minerals like dolomite contain magnesium in the form of magnesium
carbonate or magnesium oxide. produced in Japan in large quantities.

Magnesium has been noted as a material for automobiles because it has great
mechanical strength and a specific gravity of 1.74, lighter than that of
alumina. It is one quarter the weight of iron or lead, and a third the
weight of aluminum. The surprising thing is that the automobile industry.
which has taken great pains to reduce vehicle weight. has not been using
magnesium.

Magnesium has been used in automobiles in Europe and the United States for
over 50 years. W's famous Beetle used over 20 kg in magnesium parts.

These parts included the crankcase and the transmission housing, and it is
said a total of 38.000 tons of magnesium had been used by the time production
of the Beetle stopped in 1980. 614 used it in fuel pumps for about 20 years,
beginning in 1956.

37

MMIGAIJJSEWLV
This is not to say Japan has no experience in the use of magnesium. A good
deal was used in the 3360 Coupe that Toyo Kogyo developed around 1960, in

such parts as the clutch housing, cooling fan, front cover. valve rocker
cover, oilpan and transmission case.

Since that time, however, magnesium has come to be used only rarely in Europe

and not at all in Japan and the United States. The reason is that it is more
costly than aluminum.

Magnesium has come back into the spotlight because fuel costs have quickly
increased the need for lighter automobiles. GM used magnesium in the rocker
arm cover of its 1981 Chevrolet Corvette engine (5.700-cc V8), and Pbrd used
it in Lincoln steering housings. Industry sources say that Ford will adopt
two magnesium parts for its 1982 pickup trucks, and that GM will use magnesium
engine assembly brackets in cars to be introduced soon. In addition, GM is

going to use magnesium for EGR valve plates, and Ford for steering column
lock housings; its use in moving parts is being considered quite actively.

But Japanese automobile manufacturers, who are said to produce cars that
are the world's most advanced in terms of quality and capabilities, are
behind Europe and the United States in the use of magnesium. Its share has

gone to aluminum because (according to an aluminum manufacturer) "its cost
is from 1.6 to 2.0 times that of aluminum."

Now that the cost of aluminum is increasing year after year, there is a very
good chance for a rapid shift from aluminum to magnesium. The companies

are all rapidly carrying out research and development regarding the practical
use of magnesium.

According to technical personnel of one auto maker, parts which will one day
be made of magnesium include clutch housings, torque converter housings.
steering lock housings, alternator end plates, alternator brackets, steering
gear boxes, cylinder head covers, oilpans, starter end plates, wind
regulators, mission cases, mission support brackets, and disk wheels.

Irimajiri points out, "When you mention changing materials in automobiles,
people think of new materials like ceramics and carbon fiber, but actually
there is still a lot to be done in using more popular materials." Magnesium
is truly an illustrative example of popular materials in that sense.

[21 May 82 p 9]
[Text] Design Changes for Efficient Use of Materials

The central theme at the Swiss automotive parts show SiTEV '82, held in
Geneva from ll to 16 May, was the switch in automobile materials. SiTBV is
Europe's largest trade fair for automotive parts; this year about 1,700
producers from around the world took part and displayed numerous parts using

new materials. The most noteworthy feature was the expanded use of plastics
and aluminum.

FOI‘OFFKJII.UBEIMNLY
'0! 001-10“. USE ONLY

‘l'he plastics exhibited by DuPont Corp. the largest nanufacturer of plastics
in the United States. were a good illustration of how such is possible in
the use of plastics for autonotive parts. DuPont guides proudly showed "all
the parts that can be ude of plastic." tron bt-pers to expected iteas like
interior panels, and even body panels and engineering plastics in the engine
coeparuent.

Active application of plastics in seats, gasoline tanks, and a unit coebining
the bumper and air skirt was shown. The sane was true of eluninu. The lost
nunerous it-e were those in connection with wheels and cylinder heads.
Alunim- has been used for cylinder blocks end steering asst-bliss. It can

' be said that a worldwide tide of alternative aaterials for autonotive parts
could be seen.

Japanese auto and parts sanufacturere have ell been asking practical use of
plastics and aluaim- for these parts. Japan has actually taken the lead
in the use of aluaim- for cylinder heads. Japan's auto nekers could even
nake experinental plastic cars, like that of DuPont. without too ouch
difficulty. That is the reason neny of those free Japan's autonobile
industry who looked around at 31m '82 said there was alnost nothing to
learn there.

But is there really nothing to be learned? lianaging Director Hiroshi Yanada
of Chiyoda Seisaluusho (in Ote. Gil-a), which has a cooperative relationship
with Fuji Heavy Industries, says enphatically. ”It nay be true that there

is little to learn about alternative eateriels thnselves. but there is a
great deal to learn about planning and desin changes to ecoonpsny alternative
aaterials. Europe and the United States are still ahead on this point.”

As Yaeada says. the aaximn effect of alternative eateriale cannot be
developed by just substituting plastics or aluinun for sheet steel.

A greater effect can be obtained by changing plans and designs. In a sense,
there are tines when the affect of the planning and design changes ecoospsnying
the use of alternative naterials is greater than the contribution of the
naterials thaselves. In other words. it is no exaggeration to say that
without planning and design changes, the advantages of alternative aaterials
are cut in half.

For maple, the world's first hollow sinter alloy canshaft developed by
Toyota last year for the Laser 18 engine, is epoch-asking teclmology which
added a design change to an alternative material. Stsndard censhafte are
forged (and partially cast). but that for the Laser 18 is made of hollow
steel. It is nade by setting conponent parts like sinter alloy can pieces
and steel journals and gear pieces into the hollow shaft in order and bonding
the assenbly at high teaperatures. In addition to allowing a reduction of
0.9 kg fron the weight of standard caaehafts. the hollow design has drawn
out such advantages as (1) allowing use of the hollow portion as a route for
oil pressure, and (2) enabling selection of the lost suitable materials for
conponents like cans and journals. This is truly a skillful nsshing of
alternative asterials with design changes.

39

mementos“
FINICHWHCJAI.US£1DNLY

In general, many shafts are used in automotive parts. These shafts often need
lubricating and lightening holes. It would be logical, therefore. to make
these shafts of hollow pipe. In practice, however, pipe is hard to work, and
it is hard to bond the related components to the pipe, and so only limited

use is made of pipe. In the case of camshafts, especially, no other
manufacturer had succeeded in using a hollow shaft.

Many planning and design changes to accompany alternative materials were
found at SiTEV. Although there was no technology of epochal significance.
one can say future automotive technology was forecast by plane and designs
which differed greatly from the present situation in Japan. Although the
alternative materials technology of the Japanese automobile industry is

advancing. it is still in the beginning stage in this regard. It will be
necessary to step forward into the second stage.

[26 May 82 p 12]
[Text] Future Topics

The switch to alternative materials in automobiles has gone forward with
unprecedented speed in the past few years. Societal demands for improved
fuel consumption, comfort, drivability, economy, cost. and safety have
provided the setting for technological development. These societal demands
are going to increase. not slacken. If responding to these societal needs

is to be the mission of the automobile industry, the use of alternative
materials must continue to be an important topic of techn._ogical development.

It is certain, however, that there are many tasks involved in the use of
alternative materials. One aspect of these is the technical task involved
in conversion, including the problems of cost, forming and processing. and
safety. Another aspect is the social effects accompanying conversion to
alternative materials. Manufacturers of steel bumpers, primarily plating
companies, have already been forced to abandon or change their line of
business. It cannot be assumed that there will be no other industries
which will have completed their role in society like this.

Aside from this second aspect, the technical tasks are not limited to the
automobile manufacturers; makers and processors of materials will have to
ioin in r‘;borate research projects. In addition to the joint research on
ceramic engines by Isuzu and Tokyo Ceramics. other major manufacturers have
b .n putting effort into joint research and development.

One particular problem in the case of ceramics is to increase workability and
somehow overcome the problem of brittleness. As long as automobile parts
must be produced in large quantities, materials which are hard to process
will not be appropriate. First of all, poor workability means high costs,
and costly parts cannot be adopted by the automobile industry, whose first
promise is the ability to compete internationally.

This first point--high cost-~has become a bottleneck for increased utilization
of aluminum. when aluminum is refined in Japan. where power costs are high,

40

IND! OIIICJAl.lliE(HULY
FOR WHOM. USE ONLY

the cost of snterials is nearly double that in foreign countries. To avoid
this cost. Toyota, Nissan, and Hitsubishi Rotors have decided to establish
local subsidiaries in Australia and inport aluninue parts into Japan; this
say be one note approach to the increased use of alternative naterials.

Other technical tasks in regard to switching over to aluninu are inprovcsent
of surface processing nethods and techniques for bonding aluninu to other
metals.

Upgrading workability is as such a task for hollow pipe as it is for ceranics.
It is necessary to salve holes by drilling, and unless sons radically new
nethod with an inpact on quality and cost can be found, it will be difficult
to use hollow pipe in large quantities.

It is said that ssgnesiun "could be used in large quantities if only it were
cheaper." At present, nagneuus costs fro- l.6 to 2.0 tines as web as
aluainua. If this cost difference grows saaller and the need for lighter
vehicles grows nore urgent, ”a coeplete switch to nsgnesina will bees-e
possible." (Ronda Director lrinajiri)

The proble- with plastics is the switch free one plastic to another: free PP
(polypropylene) to PE (polyethylene). or fron ABS (a styrene) to RIP
(reinforced plastic). There say be little future change in plastics for
interior and exterior trin, but there will be conversion fron other plastics
to engineering plastics when resistance to heat and vibration is needed.

One of the heaviest asterials used in auto-obiles is glass. A larger area of
glass results in a heavier car. There has been a tendency. nevertheless. to
increase the glass area in recent cars in the pursuit of contort. That is.
there is nova-ant in a direction opposite to the current need to reduce
vehicle weight. Replacing this window glass with plastic would certainly
mean a great reduction in weight. Toyota switched to plastic headlights in
its sasll passenger car Carina. which went through a full nodal change last
year. This is a nodest change, but one of great significance for the current
trend. But even Toyota says that "changing the windshield and everything to
plastic would be difficult because of the noble. of visibility." This nay
be the largest renaining point for use of alternative netsrials.

Toyo Kogyo Director Tskashi liitsunari says, "One thing we esnufacturers have
to pay more attention to is that in switching to alternative naterials, we
say start on the road to self-destruction by losing the leadership in
developing and applying new naterials ourselves." In other words, it is
possible that the initiative in developing new netsrials. now held by the
auto-obi le nanufactursrs. will be snatched away by the nanufacturers of new
materials. Such a trend is already apparent in Europe, and it has weakened
the developlsent abilities of the car nanufacturers. Hill the leadership in
use of alternative naterials be held by the sanufacturers of cars or of raw
materials? This is the rasining big problem facing the autonobile industry
as it switches to alternative ssterials.

COPYRIGHT: hikkan Kogyo Shi-bunsha 1982

9601
C80: 6106/ 12!. IND

bl
”WM-MONEY