APPROVID FOR NIL-AOI: 2007/02100: cuA-Ropoa-ooosonoooioooaoooo-o
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030008-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8305

2 March 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030008-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items~are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
IllLlOﬁlA'NlC OAtA |- NM No. 3. Recipient’s Men-ion No.
man JPRS L/ 8305
. - n n

n e a
u a C ' '

.- Pnlu-ing Organization Rep.
No.

I0. Hokrt/Taak/I'odl Uan No.

II. Contract/Gnu Na.

l3. Ty oi Re (a Period
05:.“ W

4.

O. Abwarta

   
 
 
   
 

 

TMNSLATlONS 0N JAPAN. (Fouo 5/79)

9. Pellet-ii; ngaalmloa Nan and Address

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clebc Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

12. Spoauvlag Otgaalauloa Nana aad Mamas

    
       
         
    
 

As above

    
  
    

The report contains press and radio coverage on political. economic. military.
sociological. scientific and technological developments.

    
       

a and Dora-rat Aaalyaia.

JAPAN
Political and Sociological

Military
Economic
Science and Technology

e. Deuripuu

   

 
 
       
   
 

I18, ueuuac..lo,...£.m Tet-e

 
    

  

m. cosﬁﬁmsmw SC. SD. SK, 15c. 16!). 131, 19v, 223
II. Availability Scare-eat

For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

 
   
    

'0" ”VI... “0'70. VICMOC 00..."? '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS]

2 Man

TRANSLATIOﬂS 0N JAPAN
(rouo 5/79).

CONTENTS
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASAﬂI JANARU' Presents Grin View of Asia
(Hines Nskajiaa; ASAIII JANARU, 29 Dec 78) ...........

'ASARI' Analyzes Revolution in Iran
(Editorial; ASA!!! EVENIRG NW3. 15 Feb 79) ..........

'AKAHATA': 'SHIGA QUBSTION' Obstacle to JCP-CPSU Relations
(JPS. 19 Feb 79) assess.one...olooosaooonosssosooaooa

‘YOHIURI SHINBUN' Comments on Japanv-U.S. Nuclear Energy
Talks

(Editorial; YOHIURI SHINBUN, 13 Feb 79) .............

'CHUO KORON' Discusses Major Issues Related to Security
Policy ,
(CWO KORON, Jan 79)

Diet Speaker Nadao Favorably Reacts to Deng'a Invitation
(YOHIURI SHINBUN, 13 Feb 79)

'HAINICHI" Cements on Soviet—Japan Eccnonic Meeting
(Editorial; MINICHI DAILY NEWS. 15 Feb 79) .........

Soviet Ambassador Gives Views on Japan-USSR Relation;
(YOHIURI SHINBUN. 18 Feb 79) .

'ASAHI' Discusses Japan-USSR Economic Cooperation
(Editorial; ASAI'II EVENING NEWS, 20 Feb 79) .... ......

'YOHIURI' Editorial Views Japan-USSR Economic Talks
(Editorial: THE DAILY YOHIURI, 17 Feb 79) . . . . . . . . . . .

'ASAHI': Japan Gets INFCB Approval for Plutonium Use
(ASA!!! EVENING NEHS, ll. Feb 79) .....................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Briefs
Vietnam Relief Fund Drive

MILITARY

CSDF 7th Division To Rococo Arnor Division in 1980
(Mnsanori Tabata; TNF JAPAN TIMES. 27 Jan 79) ......

Foreign Ministry Source Says Northern Islands have No
Military Value
(TOKYO 881mm. 10 Feb 79) O....IOOIIOCOIOOOOOIOIOO.

ECONOMIC

'ASANI' Japan Coverth to 'Fully Support' Mitsui Project
in Iran

(ASAMI EVENING NEWS, 16 Feb 79) ....................

PRC To Supply Gulf of Dohai Oil to Japan
(THE DAILY YOMIURI, 16 Feb 79) .....................

Japanese Fir: To Assist PRC in Agriculture. Industry
(NIKON KBIZAI SNINDUN, 17 Feb 79) ..................

Keidanren Unveils Economic Revitalization Plan
(MAINICNI DAILY NEWS, 23 Jan 79) ...................

Government's Unprofesaional Employment Measures Criticized
(ASAHI JANARU. 26 Jan 79) ..........................

Japan Lesaens Restrictions on Foreign Banks
(MAINICWI SHINBUN, 4 Feb 79) .......................

North Korea To Sign Fishery Contract With Japanese Fir-
(NIBON KBIZAI SNINBUN. 16 Feb 79) ..................

'MAINICHI' Comments on Pan Am Withdrawal Fron Iata
(Editorial; MAINICHI SNINDUN, 5 Feb 79) ............

Trade and Industry Minister Wits NTT's Closed-Door
Procurement Policy
(ASAHI SMINBUN, 15 Feb 79) .........................

Electronics Industry Weighs U.S. Criticism, Changes
(Toshio Takai; MAINICMI DAILY NEWS, various dates)..

- b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Tokyo Economy Shifting Pros Secondary to Tertiary Industry
(HAINICNI DAILY NEHS, 28 Jan 79) ...................

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Equipment Quality in Elementary Particle Physics Labs
Decried
(Shogo Hizoe; KAGAKU AJAHI, Nov 78) ................

Age of Intelligent Robot ls Upon Us
(NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUN. 11 Doc 78) ..................

'YOHIURI' Editorial Calls for STOL Development
(Editorial; TNB DAILY YOMIURI, 7 Feb 79) ...........

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOWICAL

'ASARI JANARU' PRESENTS GRIH VIEW OF ASIA
Tokyo ASAHI JANARU in Japanese 29 Dec 78 pp 14-16

[Special report by Professor Hineo Nakajima. an authority on contemporary
China and international affairs. Tokyo Foreign Language University:
"Establishment of Diplomatic Relations Between the United States and China
and the New Situation in Asia; Asia in a Deepening 'Cool Har'")

[Text] The United States and [the People's Republic of] China will estab-
lish diploeatic relations this coming 1 January. Thus has a serious question
pending since the end of the war and into the 1970's been settled at one
stroke. It is already seven years since the "Nixon shock" of 1971 and
Rixon's subsequent visit to China the following year. and along with the
feeling that it was a matter that had to come about sooner or later. one
cannot deny the impression that it has been. after all, a long journey.

This establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States and
China has extremely symbolic historical meaning in the following two
respects.

First. Sino-American relations have finally arrived at this destination
after a tortuous road through Asian hot and cold war. just at a time when we
are at last going to see the final demise in 1980 of the so-called Yalta-
Potsdam system which has prescribed the world order in Asia since the end

of World War II. The relationship between the United States and China has
been a colossal misunderstanding of modern history which was inherent in
this Yalta-Potsdam system.

When one thinks of it. the 1955 Sino-Soviet treaty of friendship and alliance
formed (secretly) in the Yalta agreement, was eventually passed on to the
People's Republic of China and was [formally] concluded as the Sino-Soviet
Treaty of Friendship, Alliance and Mutual Assistance in 1950. and with the
transfer of this treaty. the Americans were ultimately taken in by the myth
of what was openly rumored to be a "monolithic union of China and the USSR."
They concluded that it meant the "loss of China," and moreover. the "loss of
a Tito-ified China.” and thus from the Korean war on through the war in
Vietnam. the schema for the well known Sins-American confrontation eventually
took shape.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE UﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this very reason, the rapprochement between the United States and China
since the beginning of the 1970's has brought about extremely great changes

in the international situation in Asia. but with the expiration of the above-
mentioned 30-year old Sine-Soviet treaty in 1980 will come the demise of the
actual Yalta system, and this moment will represent a turning point in history
that appears likely to produce a strong bond between the United States and
China.

The Priority of the Taiwan [Issue] Has Fallen

Second. having passed through the wake of such a history as this, we have
arrived at a day when diplomatic relations are finally about to be established
between the United States and China. but wherein the international situation
in Asia has changed even further since the period of rapprochement between

the two countries began in the early 1970's. with a new cold war in the form
of a "cool war" on the verge of expanding on a global scale, the [new] Sino-
American relationship will at a stroke increase the intense rivalry or
antagonism of each toward the Soviet Union.

At one time, the rapprochement between the United States and China was regarded
as a symbolic drama for the ao-called easing of tension, but when the next
stage in the rapprochement is the forthcoming establishment of diplomatic
relations. it has become impossible to view the situation as a scheme to ease
tension.

That is the extent to which today's international politics are colored by
strategic rivalries and contention among the major powers. While the coming
establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States and China in
itself disposes of a historical problem between the two countries, it cannot
but transcend that kind of framework and have a decisive influence on the
international political situation.

United States presidential [National Security] Adviser [zbigniew] Brzezinski,
who played a major role in the establishment of diplomatic relations between
the two countries. said at the time of his visit to China last May, "Both

the United States and China can contribute to the peace in every part of the
world, and can moreover stave off social-imperialist designs (20 May in his
greetings at a welcome banquet in Peking)," leaving us agape. In short. from
this quotation, not only can America not be an imperialist, but for the
United States and China, imperialists can be no other than the USSR. It

goes without saying then that present-day China understanding of the world

is completely in agreement with the views represented by [Hr.] Brzezinski.

Granting this. one might cite Gang Biao, head of foreign liaisons in the
Chinese Communist Party, as a maker of policy on China's side who could be
said to rank with Mr Brzezinski's position in the Carter administration. A
veteran career diplomat who rose to the Politburo in August 1977 and who in
March 1978 became vice-minister of state, there has been soaething noteworthy
in his activities in recent Chinese foreign relations. In a talk at a

closed meeting in China concerning the United States and China in August

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFKCIAI. USE ONLY

1976. this Gang Biao made clear that at present the Taiwan problem is of
low priority in Sino-American relations. Furthermore in this speech. which
may be considered as laying the foundation of the present Sino-American
diplomatic relations. he said. "Faced with today's world situation. we must
first deal with the number one enemy. revised Soviet social imperialism.
The other problems come after this one. Going with the general trend. the
United States will as a matter of course consider this problem carefully.
and will probably make a change in her policies" (Geng hind. "A Complete
Tarnabout in Sine-American Relations," 26 August 1976.) It can actually be
said that the establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States
and China is an extension of this speech by Geng Biao.

"Normalization between the 0.5. and china before Announcing Sino-Soviet
Treaty Abrogation"

Even so. what can be the background of this flamboyantly achieved establishing
of relations between the United States and China that was contrary to general
expectations as well as to the views of the American Congress and the Depart-

ment of State. and which was surely the result of the leadership from the
Hhite House?

Of course from the advent of the Carter administration. everyone regarded
United States-China diplomatic relations as a question which must eventually
come up. and at the start of the new administration. at a time when there
was even talk of taking another look at an early normalization. I speculated
that it might occur after the off-year elections.

Certainly, within the Carter administration. there were a number of people
who were eager for normalization of Sino-American relations. including the
aforementioned [presidential] adviser Brzezinski. as well as Energy Secretary
Schlesinger. Oksanberg, a traff member of the National Security Council. and
Holbrooke. Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs.
as were numerous American China researchers who in cooperation with these
staff members all contributed to the making of policy. Thus. it was pre-
dicted that for the Carter administration. the task would be scrupulously
prepared for after settling domestic affairs with the off-year elections.
However. according to what we hear. this process of preparation was hastily
boiled down between the United States and China in the last 10 days. and at
one stroke. this kind of joint communique was arrived at.

Of course. in back of such a decision. in the face of the difficult going
SALT negotiations. there must have been careful consideration of how the
last remaining "China card" could be played most effectively. Consideration
of the pro-Taiwan group within the United States must also have come into
play. Since [this group] is at the same time both anti-Communist and anti-
Soviet. the decision might be ridden through domestically by focusing on its
position with regard to the Soviet Union. Plus. it can be thought that the
necessity of dealing with the growing Soviet presence. due to the changing
situation in Iran and the Soviet-Vietnamese treaty of friendship and
cooperation. resulted in a hastened resolution of the schedule for United
States-China normalization.

3
IFOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand. on the Chinese side. it goes without saying the most
urgent treble. after Sine-Japanese relations was the strengthening of the
Sino-American relationship. as is obvious from the recent movement toward
de-Haoification to achieve their national goal of the "four modernizations"
as well as to strengthen their world strategy of anti-"hegemonisn."

In addition to this general state of affairs, the problem we should find
noteworthy here is that China, if it is to comply with its recent promise

to Japan made at the time of the negotiations for the Sine-Japanese peace
and friendship pact. is under pressure to make an announcement abrogating
the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance, and Hutual Assistance by
April of this year. The Sine-Soviet treaty [states that] "if neither of the
treaty powers makes known its desire to cancel by one year before expiration,
[the treaty] is extended for 5 years; moreover. by this means shall be
successively extended." sine-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance. and
Mutual Assistance. Article VI. Since the treaty was ratified 16 February
1950 and ratified by both countries on 11 April of the ease year, April of
this year, either way it goes. will prove a great turning point in history.

As China has emphasized in the past. if this Sino-Soviet treaty were to be
abrogated under the conditions of today's cold war. China and the USSR

would literally become enemies. since the restrictions of international law
concerning Soviet attack against China would be entirely lifted. and China's
security would become t :eatened. [Thus] there was an extremely strong need
to establish diplomatic relations with the United States before abrogating
the Sine-Soviet treaty.

If we observe this strategy in the light of China's present domestic and
foreign policies, we can probably say that Taiwan and the management of that
problem, hitherto the particular issue that has occupied the gulf between
the United States and China, has already become a problea of the second or
third rank.

of course even after the severance of diplonatic relations between the United
States and Taiwan. "commercial, cultural. and other areas" of the United
States - Taiwan relationship will be maintained. and however viewed, it is
unrealistic to think that China will release military force against Taiwan.
Thus Taiwan will most likely continue to exist as before, "as Taiwan." In
the light of present day Sine-Soviet relations. it can be said that even

the export of American arms to Taiwan is becoming a problem of no concern to
China, which welcomes the American military presence in Asia.

On the other hand. one can naturally imagine rapprochement between the USSR
and Taiwan, but in consideration of the trend toward de-Haoification in
Chinese policy and the news of the recent rehabilitation of even the pro-
Soviet P'eng Te-huai. the USSR must proceed cautiously on any tie with
Taiwan which might spoil the possibility of future improvements in relations
with China. the Soviet Union's greatest strategic target.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A Danger of a Deteriorating Balance in the Post-Her World

If we venture to apply a syllogism. we can say that the "hegemony" clause in
the conclusion of the Sine-Japanese treaty provoked the Soviet Union and gave
rise to the recent Soviet-Vietnamese treaty. and that the USSR'a notable expan-
sion in Indochina hastened diplomatic relations between the United States and
China. The historical option for a Sino-Japanese treaty was not taken with a
sufficient view to today's international situation. but rather was diplomacy
chiefly for the purpose of dealing with standing issues within the traditional
framework peculiar to the two nations. 1 have frequently tried to point out
the dangerous consequences of this in the past (cf. my "The International
Climate Under the Sine-Japanese Treaty--An Option for Peace or a Risky
Alliance?" in SEKAI Oct 1978 and "Japan's Diplomacy as Defense Strategy" in
CHUO KURON. New Year's issue 1979).

Thus the establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States and
China will probably further activate Soviet Asian strategy. with the promised
result a trend toward significant modification of America's "withdrawal from
Asia." The tensions in Asia will be thereby potentially heightened.

The United States-Japan security structure stands between the sino-Japanese and
sine-American relationships, necessitating the formation of an anti-"hegemony“
coalition in Asia and the Pacific. China is leaning towards the formation of
a "new Eastern NATO," and has already placed the Japanese-American security
setup within the framework of Sine-American relations. Chinese propaganda
directed toward strengthening our country's defense strength and China's recent
shift towards approval of the Japanese-American security treaty are the natural
results of this allignment of relationships. In other words. the options for
a Sion-Japanese agreemen' are. whether we like it or not, engulfed in today's
worldwide "cool war," a new cold war in which one could say we are forced to
fight for 'citizen's rights.’

In this context, it must be said that it is an extremely dangerOus tendency
that among the supporters of Sino-Japanese cooperation in our cOuntry. there
are those who, accepting the above mentioned Chinese rhetoric, have even started
to come out with opinions advocating building up our own country's power of
resistance toward the Soviet Union. Of course the powers that be in our gov-
ernment. as can be seen in their repeated chanting of the phrase "omni direc-
tional foreign diplomacy" have not gone so far as to make a decision to shift
our country in such a direction. However. the problem lies in our continued
apathy. our [feeling] that china and Japan will remain China and Japan, that
Japan and America will remain Japan and America [just as they are now]. in
this allow-things-to-take-their-nstural-course sort of inertia.

The establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the United States
may mark an important epoch in modern history, but at the same time, the
[value] of the Yalta-Potsdam system aside. one cannot help but have the
ominous feeling that one important balance that has helped to maintain peace
in the post-war world will crumble.

Copyright: Asahi Shinbunsha 1978

9010

C80: £105 5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASMII' ANALYZBS RBVOLUTIG' IN IRAN
Tokyo ASAHI WING NW8 in English 15 Feb 79 p 3 W
[Editoriah "Iranian Revolution")

[Text] Iran took the first step forward as s reborn nation several days ago
when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeyni appointed Dr Hehdi Bazargan as the provi-
sional prime minister of an Islamic Republic, and Dr Bazargan accepted the
post respectfully in Tehran. Now that the revolution has become a reality,
Ayatollah Khomeyni say be regarded as the virtml head of state of Iran.

The elderly Ayatollah with the "will of iron," who rejected compromise with
Huhamad Reza Shah Pahlavi and the Shah's establishment in his 15-year strug-
gle, has finally succeeded in seating himself at the top of ecclesiastical
and secular authority through peaceful scene by mobilizing the masses. Al-
though he is saying that hs will withdraw from politics and remain as a
spiritual leader, such a phenomonon is airaculoua in the latter half of the
20th century. It appears that we have to reevaluate the effects of Islam on
the present age.

The confusion that has continued in Iran for the past year may perhaps be
called a new kind of religious war, coming in an age when technology rules
the world. On one side was the "faith of the white revolution" which be-
lieved. in technology as the basis of its doctrine, and the "founder" of this
faith was Shah Pahlavi. Opposing this were the Shiite Hoslems who prized
tradition. Ayatollah Khomeyni, the head of these Hoslems, resisted the white
revolution which. on the strength of authority, tried to destroy the founda-
tion of religious authority. In the course of this war, the Iranian masses.
who had also become victims of the white revolution, rose in response to
Khomeyni calls.

The policy of modernizing Iran was based on the Shah's awn idealism, and we
believe that his ideals shoqu not be criticized. However, the reason why
the white revolution now appears "evil" and traditionalism "good" is that
the white revolution, we believe, was overstretched. Originally, the white
revolution was a "revolution by the Shah and the people," but the peopie were
cut off tron it and left behind in the stage of its enforcement.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Than. the "new religious war" ended in the victory of the ultra-nationalists.
Thane involved in the white revolution merely ended up in making a large
showcase with a whiff of Heutern civilization. Tradition was revived as
"something old but good." He believe that the new government will push
modernization policies reflecting the will of the Iranian people.

Yet. when the earth has become so small as at present. the revolution. an a
matter of course. is expected to affect other countries. Iran. an anti-
communist nation sharing a 2.000-kilometcr border with the Soviet Union.

had close ties with the 0.3. as the world's second-ranking petroleum-exporting
country. Now that the Pahlnvi system has col-speed. the u.s. appears as a
symbol of "evil modernization" in the eyes of the masses who have partici-
pated in the revolution.

Since the hazargan government is supposed to push policies reflecting the
popular will. the Iranian revolution means a big loss for v.5. President
(hrter's administration. 0n the other hand. the Soviet Union. without making
a stir. has found a situation favorable to it. Moscow's decision to give
early recognition to the new Iranian Government. which in aiming to remain
anti-communist. apparently stems from considerations that above all else

it does not want to have Iran for an enemy.

The iranian revolution is expected to greatly affect not only the monarchic
Arab oil-producing states across the Gulf but also peace in the Middle East.
This is because the loss by the 0.5. is linkcd with the position of Egyptian
President Anwar al-Sadat who has been reiterating that the "0.8. has 99 per-
cent of the trump cards for peace in the Mideast." The Bazargan government's
posture of "not selling petroleum to Israel" is favoring the Arab die-hards.
Peace in the Middle East under the leadership of the U.S.--the materialization
of the spirit of Camp David--appears to be receding still farther.

of course as shown by the history of revolutions. the new Iranian Government
is expected to experience repeated internal troubles and crises until a firm
system in established. however. on the basis of the trend so far. we feel
that the lranian revolution is past the point of turning back. The world
must face up to and cope with what is coming after this upheaval.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo “onsha 1979

C50: 6120

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

hKAHATA': 'SHICA QUESTION' OBSTACLE TO JCP-CPSU RELATIONS
Tokyo JPS in English 0921 GMT 19 Feb 79 0"

[Text] Tokyo. 19 Feb (JPS)--AKAHATA gave half of the space on page two of
its February 18 issue to a long unsigned article entitled "New Maneuver by
the Shiga Clique." The gist of the article follows:

The tiny splittist group of Yoshio Shiga. which oppose the Japanese Communist
Party, has maneuvered for a prolongation of its existence at every turn of
event in which a move for normalization of relations between the JCP and the
Soviet Communist Party was sensed to be in the air.

In recent years,from the end of 1976 to the spring of 1977, when preliminary
talks were being held between the JCP and the C?80 for the normalization of
bilateral relations. they quickly changed the title of their newspaper and
organization from the "Voice of Japan" to "Peace and Socialism." anticipating
a new round of JCP-CPSU talks.

In the past several months since last year, the CPSU Central Committee sent

a congratulatory message to JCP Presidium Chairman Kenji Hiyamoto on his 70th
birthday, and its central organ PRAVDA carried an article supporting the
struggles of the JCP, including the struggle against various groups of anti-
JCP elements. Seeing this. they were rattled. and began to make a new move.

By issuing a "statement" and giving a "lecture.“ all that this tiny group of
splittist elements of Shiga and his followers was able to do was nothing but
to make groundless denunciation of the JCP along a line already completely
refuted before.

But the most recent "argument" by the Shiga clique needs a refutation. First.
internationally. the Shiga clique is a queer entity, being a trend still
blindly believing that it is a "cornerstone" of internationalism following

unconditionally a policy line set by-a specific foreign communist party.

Secondly, they describe the situation as if the relationship between the two
parties was ruptured because the JCP leadership including Chairman Hiya-oto

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

had stand against the 6980 by speaking for the Chinese policy line. They
are thus trying to "justify" their anti-JCP factionsl activities supported
by the late Khrushchev. This is entirely a fabrication falsifying history.

Thirdly. Shiga and his clique praised the partial nuclear test ban treaty.
and made a false statement saying "we were expelled from the JC? because we
approved of the partial nuclear test ban treaty in 196a."

Fourthly. Shiga and his clique mix the question of holding differing views
on the question of "Japanese territory" ecetera with the "Shiga question."
which is incompatible with the principles of independence. equal rights and
noninterference in each other's internal affairs. and are maneuvering to
manage to save their own skin. But such maneuvers will be useless.

in a New Year interview carried by AKAHATA. Chairman Hiyamnto admitted that
there are some questions. including the territorial question. lying between
the JCP and the CPSU. each holding differing views. But he said "If there
is no interference from outside in the JCP." the JCP is willing "to develop
friendly relations with all communist parties."

At that tine. Chairman Hiyamoto evaluated the PRAVDA article as being "at

the forefront of the ranks." saying "I hope this will becoae one step to

open good conditions for the advance of friendly relations between the two
parties." But at the same time he said "as the Shiga clique is still claim-
ing itself to be genuine internationalists supported by PRAVDA and is attack-
ing the JCP, the condition is needed that the possibility that such s pre-
text will be used by the Shiga clique be eliminated."

The new maneuver of the Shiga clique indicates that the so-called "Shiga
question" is the obstacle which should be surmounted to normalize and develop
the relations between the JCP and the CPSU based on the working rules of
independence. equal rights and noninterference in each other's internal af-

fairs.

CSO: 6120

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'YOHIURI SNINBUN' COMMENTS ON JAPAN-U.S. NUCLEAR ENERGY TALKS

Tokyo YONIURI SHINBUN in Japanese 13 Feb 79 Morning Edition p h 0"

(Editorial: "Japan-0.8. Talks for Revision of Bilateral Nuclear Energy
Agreencnt"]

[Excerpts] Talks on a revision of the Japan-U.S. nuclear energy agree-eat
are scheduled to begin today. The revision was proposed by the United States
in accordance with its nuclear nonproliferation bill.

In its nuclear policy the United States has changed its previous position of
pronoting worldwide use of nuclear energy and introduced strict regulatory
measures, imposing than unilaterally upon other countries. This has

aroused the opposition of eany countries.

This new policy caused Japan great eebarrassnent last year because it could
not obtain Washington's consent to the shipment of spent nuclear fuel to
Britain and France for reprocessing.

‘Prevention of nuclear proliferation is indispensable to the security of our
country and is an isportant foreign policy task. It is Japan's own proble-
to lake prevention of nuclear proliferation compatible with peaceful use of
nuclear energy.

The international trend with regard to regulating the use of nuclear energy
is extrenely fluid. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE)
Conference is still in session. hence. no hasty conclusions should be made
at the Japan-U.S. talks. However, the two countries need to make efforts
to find a reasonable solution between themselves.

The nain goal of the 0.5. nuclear nonproliferation bill probably is to
regulate reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel. Under the current sgreeeent.
Japan agrees to get the prior concurrence of the United States in reprocess-
ing its spent nuclear fuel. however. European nations are strongly opposed

to this for fear of the wssibility of a similar provision being incorporated
into the U. S. ~£UROTOH (European Atomic Energy Coununity) agreement.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan should closely follow trends in the U.S.-Enropean negotiations and try
in udluut the Japan-".8. talks to those between the United States and Europe.
However, care should be taken that the negotiations between Japan and the
United States and between the United States and the European nations will

not adversely affect the U.S. negotiations with developing countries and
result in weakening the nuclear nonproliferation system. That would not be
in Japan's interests. In this connection. prudence should be exercised.

The 0.8. nuclear nonproliferation bill calls for the 0.8. right of prior
concurrence even on uranium enrichment and storage of nuclear matter. Its
draft agreement reportedly includes a provision that once an atomic reactor
uses U.S.-supplied nuclear fuel. it should not use fuel supplied by other
countries. It is feared that this stipulation will impede the use of

nuclear energy.

In response to the U.S. proposal. Japan should not merely respond passively
but work out a desirable nuclear nonproliferation plan. get the U.S. consent
to it and insure ways for using nuclear energy. The government often
stresses its policy of making the peaceful use of nuclear energy compatible
with prevention of nuclear proliferation, but the problem is what concrete
measures it will take. The government should not neglect its duty to work
out concrete measures. nor should it simply mark time while doing nothing.
using the excuse of Japan beingnn [atomic bomb] "victim."

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shinbunsha 1979

C80: 6105

11
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'CHUO KORON' DISCUSSES MAJOR ISSUES RELATED TO SECURITY POLICY

Tokyo CHUO KORON in Japanese Jan 79 pp 118-127

[Special Report: "Post Japan-China Friendship Treaty--'Question of De-
fense'"]

[Text] "hat is necessary to guarantee safety for Japan
now? The author was in an axial position in the Defense
sector. He presents four concrete requisites from the
issues we face and discusses the direction we should take.

Unlike other foreign states. Japan has not achieved mature consensus re-
garding its security policy. The reason for this is. in part, lack of
understanding and insufficient examination of the following issues:

(1) attitude toward the constitution, (2) differentiating security idesla/
objectives and reality. (3) whether or not to seek Japan's defense func-
tion in military intimidation or in international relationships, (4) re-
lationship between Japan's security and international responsibility.

I wish that the various political factions and the people would come to a
consensus regarding Japan’s national security policy. In the hope that my
opinion can be of some service toward this end. I decided to organize my
thoughts for presentation. Discusson of Japan's national security ought
to include a discourse on the Japan-0.8. Security Pact. but as I have al-
ready given full treatment to this topic elsewhere, I will omit it in the

present treatise.

l. Constitutional Issnm

The Constitutional issue is the "alpha" and "omega" of Japan's defense
question. Socialists and communists often exclsim that in discussing the
defense policy, one must refer to its origin, which is the Constitution.
So. let us deal first of all with this topic.

In the National Diet. in academic circles and among the citizenry, there
have been limitless discussions regarding whether or not we can have arma-
ments under our Constitution; and if so, to what extent. Some argue that
in view of the peaceful tenet of the Preamble to the Constitution and the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wording of Article 9. we cannot have defense power even for self-defense.
Some insist that maintenance of a war potential as a collateral for exer-
cise of self-defense rights is not denied by the Constitution. Between
these two views there are many interpretative variations. Views of the po-
litical parties. public opinion of the citizenry are divided; and there is
no consensus. it demonstrates a rather unique national character among

the countries of the world.

According to public opinion poll surveys made by ASABI SHINBUN (1968) and
the Prime-Minister's Office (1976), 40 percent considered the Self-Defense
Force to be constitutional and 17 percent thought it unconstitutional.
Various kinds of surveys revealed that with regard to revision of Article
9 of the Constitution, prior to the establishment of the Self-Defense
Force in 1956, those supportive of the revision exceeded those opposed to
it; but since 1955. the opposition has gained in strength; and generally
speaking, the difference between the two has widened. (Sec "Post-war
Public Opinion Chronicle." edited by NHK Broadcasting Public Opinion In-
stitute) According to ASA“! SRINBUN's survey of October 1978, 15 percent
registered support and 71 percent were opposed. Hith regard to the main-
tenance of the Self-Defense Force. regardless of the type of survey. those
conducted after 1963 registered over 70 percent in support. According to
the neat recent survey by ASAHI SRINEUN mentioned above, 70 percent were for
maintaining the Self-Defense Force at the current level or else strengthen

it; 11 percent, for curtailment of its size; and 5 percent for its aboli-
tion.

Judging from the above noted trend. though there are quite a few who feel
that the Self-Defense Force does violate the Constitution. even they seem
to regard it as a necessity.

In relation to political affiliations, socialists and communists regard the
Self-Defense Force as a violation of the Constitution. The Komeito Party
considers that there is doubt as to the constitutionality of the Self-
Defense Force. I believe that this kind of confusion is traceable to the
attitude toward the constitutional interpretation. A certain famous Keio
University political scientist states that over 90 percent of Constitu-
tional Law scholars hold that the Self-Defense Force is unconstitutional;
but when the entire spectrum of Public Law scholars is surveyed. over half
the number consider it unconstitutional. The problem appears to lie with
this kind of situation. Unless a precise and appropriate position regard-
ing the constitutional question is established, consensus among the citizenry
regarding defensive power and the Self-Defense Force cannot be achieved.
The state merely repeats that in view of the reality of the international
situation. "the maintenance of minimum necessary defensive power is not
forbidden in the Constitution." This surely will not convince all the
citizens. I would like. therefore, to comment on the technical problems-
ticnl points regarding the constitutional issue.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Changes in Interpretation of Article 9

There are two types of Constitutions: the moderate Constitution and the
hard Constitution. Primarily they denote the fact that the procedure for
revision of the Constitution is simple or difficult; but at the same time.
the difference is related to the attitude of the citizens. with the years,
political and administrative requirements do change, and there arises a
need to reconsider the basic laws of a state-~its Constitution--in response
to the changes that occur. Therefore. many countries do revise their Con-
stitutions quite easily. I think many Japanese, in a period imaediately
following the war (a decade following 1955) thought t. t the Constitution
established during the occupation would be revised eventually. There is
also a viewpoint that though the changes brought about by passage of time
do give rise to inadequacies in the Constitution, constitutional revision
should be avoided so as to preserve the spirit in which the Constitution
was originally conceived. The opinion of Japanese people after 1955
probably belongs to the latter category. From this standpoint, in order
for the Constitution to have fresh vitality in tune with the current en-
vironment, dynamic interpretation/application must be sought.

Though there be no formal revision of the Constitution, there are instances
in which through enacted laws, decisions of the Supreme Court or by means

of change in objective circumstances, the meaning of specific articles of
the Constitution undergoes a change. in theory. this is termed "hensen"
[Constitutional transition]. This perspective is held by many shcolars
today both abroad and in Japan. Professor Tatsukichi Hinobe was an exponent
of this view in prewar Japan. (For summary of explanations of "Constitu-
tional transition or change," see Professor Kosen Hashimoto'a treatise in
"Japanese Constitution-~Its JO-Year History and Outlook" JURIST) Once,

at the Constitutional Assembly, Prime-Minister Yoshids commented with re-
gard to Article 9 as follows: "He have renounced war as a self-defense
right set in motion." (This was later corrected. however.) With the
inauguration of a Police Reserve Force, the government's interpretation of
Article 9 became as follows: "war potential forbidden by the Constitu-

tion refers to the ability to effectively conduce modern warfare." Since
the National Diet's explanation in 1955 that "the minimum amount of self-
defense capacity necessary for defending ourselves does not constitute

war potential forbidden in Article 9 of the Constitution.” This then become
the standard interpretation until today. There have been subtle changes in
the meantime, however, and though the government's official position is that
there has been no change in the interpretation of Article 9. an observer
must sense that this view is rather labored. I think it would be far bet-
ter to recognize the change of meaning and to adopt the less strained
"Constitutional transition” viewpoint.

it goes without saying that even if one does not adopt the theory of "Con-
stitutionol transition." interpretation/application of the Constitution must
be carried out dynamically to fit the current environment. For example,

the wording of Article 89 of the Constitution forbids national and regional

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

public bodies to give financial aid to "educational enterprises not subject
to public control (private schools)." But if we look at the national hud-
ncl fur I978, 254.0 hllllon yen in aid is given to private schools. This
Is made possible by a “cart before the horse" application of the law which
states that private schools which receive state assistance under the private
school statute must submit to state supervision within the limits circum-
scribed by the law. Dynamic interpretation/application, however, cannot

be arbitrary; and the spirit of the Constitution and its wording provide
restraints. But interpretation of wording does have leeways and in ex-
treme cases legal interpretation can be made unfettered by the wording.

by relying on the intent of the law as s whole. A same term may have dif-
ferent meanings in different legal context. Moreover. the term "senryoku"
[war potential) employed in Article 9 may have a meaning different from
”senryoku" as used in the context of conversational Japanese. Law is like
that. Whatever the circumstance. the standard for interpretation of a
legal text is social justice and social pertinence. In regard to Article
9, the crux of the matter is national safety and people's well-being. If
a high school student reading Article 9 can readily understand its content
to mean simple de-militarisation. then we would not need legal scholars
nor judges.

Even among the Constitutional Law scholars the interpretation of Article 9
varies sidely from complete abandonment of war to a view that maintenance
of war potential for self-defense is justified. That is to say. even when
judged by scholars. several interpretations are possible. In as much as
Article 9 concerns the existence of a nation and its people, which inter-
pretation to adopt should be decided by the people. If from a procedu:\l
standpoint it is difficult for the people to decide, then the National

Diet should decide. The decision-maker in a situation like this is not the
judges. who are not directly responsible to the populace nor the scholars.
In the instance of a Diet decision, though there is the format of a joint
resolution. a better decision-making method would be legal enactment. That
is to say, in as much as the present Self-Defense Force exists by means

of a statute establishing the Defense Agency. the Self-Defense Force
statute. and the yearly budget supporting the same, the National Diet is
recognizing the Self-Defense Force as a constitutional entity. The Social-
ist and Communist Parties are adamant that the Self-Defense Force is un-
constitutional but that perspective denies the authority and function of the
Diet under the Constitution. and it cannot be described as an opinion based
on constitutionalism and democratic principles.

Errors in State Interpretation

By the by. all the political parties do recognize the right of self-de-
fense under Article 9. But in order to assert the right of self-defense.
we need to have an intention and method for maintaining and defending it.
For the demilitarized, neutral position, the method is peaceful diplomacy.
For all the political parties. diplomacy is the basis of national security.
The problem arises when peaceful diplomacy is not successful and Japan's

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

right to self—defense is about to be infringed. What type of protective
action should be taken than? The demilitarized, neutral position must pro-
vide an answer to this question. Unless ready answer is available to un-
foreseen circumstances (if........instances), then it is no longer politics.
The so-called Naganuma Decision of 1973 cited abatement by police, popular
uprising with people bearing arms, confiscation of property of the citizens
of an aggressor nation and their deportation. But these are not even
worth commenting upon. Rights of self-defense exist in the context of
mutual agreement between our country and the other party. Saying we will
do this in disregard of the other party does not constitute defending the
rights of self-defense. The argument that a foreign power could not possi-
bly invade pacifist Japan or that peaceful diplomacy should take care of
every situation are nothing more than off-shoots of s pre-war vintage
providential wind theory.

The Preamble to the Constitution expresses the purpose of constitutionalism
and is regarded as the basis of interpreting the body and each article of
the Constitution. Many things can be said regarding the Preamble, but I
believe there is a passage that is often overlooked. That is to say, the
second clause advocates pacifism and the third clause, the rule of politi-
cal morality and finally in the fourth clause, it states that "we, the
Japanese people, ........will accomplish these high ideals and purposes
with all our resources.“ In other words, the pacifism referred to in the
Preamble is not something that we hope is already established today. 1e~rs
an ideal and an objective which the citizens must aspire to through the

Constitution.

From this standpoint, an interpretation of faithful reading of Article 9
to the effect that all wars and war potentials must be abandoned can be
understood to represent the ideal toward which the Japanese people should
strive. Such thinking may be akin to Constitutional Research Council
Chief Kenzo Takayanagi’s manifesto (political declaration) theory. To fill
the text of the Constitution with political and administrative ideals and
goals is a common practice, and many foreign Constitutions follow this
pattern. The Japanese Constitution does this, too. For example, Article
25 provides that, "all people should have the right and obligation to
work." but there are unemployed people and they certainly are not violat-
ing the Constitution by their condition. Declaration of these rights of
the people signifies that the state and local public bodies ought to make
every effort to realize the full exercise of these rights. Professor
Shinkichi Era of Tokyo University characterized it as a "wishful Consti-

tution."

If the Japanese people's ideal and goal is to "preserve our security and
existence, trusting in the justice and faith of the peace-loving peoples

of the world" (Preamble) and to abandon all fighting and war potentials,
how Japan should maintain her peace and her self-defense rights becomes a
question of political policy contingent on various international and domes-

tic situations of a given time.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIY

The state. by the way. does not interpret Article 9 as described above but
regards it as a normative prescription'to the effect that. "nininun self-
dcfcnsc capability is not denied by the Constitution." But even if Article
9 is regarded as a political declaration and abandonment of all wars and
war potentials on the popular ideal, I think that in the interim stages.

it would be possible to conclude that maintaining the Iininun necessary
self-defense power does not negate the Constitution. The state's interpre-
tation per se, unlike the kind if interpretation described above, is merely
static and passive and it cannot give life to the direct and active pacifist
ideal contained in Article 9 and the Preamble to the Constitution.

2. Goals and Processes

Ideal and reality are topics that always accoapany politics. They become
an issue especially in the context of international relations and national
security questions. Political ideal consists of what domestic and inter-
national conditions ought to be in the far distant future presented in the
form of political goals. Reality refers to temporary policies for dealing
with the various inlediste domestic and international conditions we face.
Japanese are fond of labeling today's International Political Scientists
as idealist or realist. Actually this labeling refers to the area of in-
terest a given scholar demonstrates, and I do not think that the two are
heterogeneous. Basically, ideal and reality are coexistent. They ought
to be synthesized and should not be presented as one or the other choice.

Ideals are necessary in politics, but simply hoisting an ideal is not
enough. An ideal cannot always be realized. but the important thing is
the effort and performance record to achieve that ideal. They ought to
become the index of actual policies. Treating ideals alone and avoiding
realities may be excusable as a scholarly pursuit, but it is not politics.
Conversely, consideration of reality exclusively and forgetting ideals
cannot be described as pertinent politics.

With regard to the national security policy, one of the necessary things
is to analyze and evaluate the various doaestic and international condi-
tions at hand and to draw out a realistic policy fro. the said analysis]
evaluation. There should not be such wide divergence in recognizing the
objective conditions. Thus there should not be a significant gulf between
the national security policies advanced by various political parties.

(In reality, the survey of the security policies of various states of the
world indicate that there is very little difference among the various
political factions.) Secondly. it should be recognized that the ideals or
goals of security policy is set forth in the Constitution in an abstract
sense. and the various political parties ought to pursue plans for their
concrete ilplenentation. Thirdly, real effort should be made to seek
steps-processes that would bridge reality and ideal plans-objectives.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Would It Be Possible To Draw Various Security Polities closer Together?

Let us examine the state's security policy and those of the various poli-
tical parties. First of all, the State/Liberal-Democratic Party advocates
peace diplomacy, adherence to the Japan-0.8. Mutual Security Pact, and main-
tenance of a minimum necessary self-defense capability. I believe that these
are quite realistic and wise selections, but it lacks projection into the
future. There is little indication of where to go from here. Unless such
projection is present. it would be difficult to obtain sufficient popular
support for the state's security policy. Moreover, repeated public state-
ments to the effect that we will not become a military power cannot elicit
sufficient trust from foreign states. The Democratic Socialist Party has

a clear, realistic policy and their political objective is the deletion

of the Japan-0.8. Mutual Security Pact'a Far East Clause and security without
stationing of troops. however, the party's overall objective has not been
formulated fully as yet. The Koacito Party is attempting to construct

both the ideal picture and realistic policy; but in terms of content, both
are ambiguous. The Communist Party has declared a somewhat middle ground
objective; on the other hand, its long-range ideals appear to me to be left
vague on purpose.

It is not clear if the Socialist Party regards demilitarized, neutral
theory as its goal or as its realistic policy, but I cannot regard it as a
realistic position in the current international context. The results of
several actual surveys demonstrate that among the Socialist Party supporters,
72 percent (1972 Prime-Minister's Office Survey) to 78 percent (1977 De-
fense Agency Survey) recognize the necessity of the Self-Defense Force.
From these figures, the popular understanding appears to be more advanced
than that of the Socialist Party. If we look upon the demilitarization/
neutrality argument as a goal, the State/Liberal-Deaocratic Party and the
Socialist Party appear to be completely at odds with one another. But in
actuality, the dimension of their claim is different.

At the beginning of the decade after world War II (1965-1955) when the
Ishibashi Plan was published, it received the tentative attention of the mass
communications media because it was believed that the plan stipulated de-
militarization and neutrality as its goal and elaborated on the process

to achieve those ends. Toward the end of 1955, the then Socialist Diet
members [Den7], Hats, Narszaki disclosed a plan for three-step dissolution
of the Self-Defense Force and the Japan-0.8. Hutual Security Pact. The
Socialist Party's Special Council for Alternative to Security Pact/Self-
Defense Force hammered out a security policy based on a similar dissolution-
by-stages formula. These are indications that they realized the importance
of "process." however, when we are discoursing on such process, it is not
enough to simply list the steps that Japan should take; it must be related
to the international relations environment which is the indivisible part

of that process. what type of international relations situation enables

a given process to take place; or what to do in case of adopting a given

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

policy if the international relations scene does not move as anticipated.
lntcrnntional relations are not subject to our desires and they are very
volatile. it is dangerous to hypothesize international relations hastily
ur wistfully, and such hypotheses cannot be regarded as realistic po-
licies.

As mentioned above, constitutional interpretations can be varied, but so
long as we recognize that pacifism is its ideal, if the various political
parties would differentiate ideal fron reality and the process--the connect-
ing force between them--in conducting their debate, I believe that the
security policies of respective parties could find considerable rapproache-
sent.

3. Theory of Threat and Theory of International Relations

Because military threat exists among countries or else because such a
menace is a possibility in the future, one must have defense power. If
we have defensive power, then even if there is aggression, we can meet it
(or protect ourselves from it). Rather the fact that defensive power is
established during normal times acts as a deterrent to aggression. This
is the accepted viewpoint. Among modern civilized states, once there is
outbreak of war, the damage would be tremendous. The current thinking
regards defensive power. not as a war waging potential (ability to meet
force with force) but as an ability to check war. Ordinarily it is thought
that having sufficient ability to meet force with force is equivalent to
sufficient ability to checkmata. For a long time I questioned whether or
not this ability to meet force with force and ability to check-ate are

of identical content. I have not as yet arrived at a satisfactory answer.

Threat is made up of the opponent state's (or states') intent and military
capability. But intention of another state(s) is unclear and even if we
understood it. it is subject to change. Therefore, regardless of the in-
tent of the other state(s), defense potential must be established with the
military capability of the other state(s) in mind. This is the accepted
view in foreign countries. Then the concept of military balance comes
into play. That is to say. if there is balance in terms of military
strength between two or more opposing states, war becomes less likely.

The preceding paragraphs dealt with what might be termed military common
sense regarding the maintenance of defense power. Let us call this the
threat theory. Though no particular conclusion was reached by the state
nor the Defense Agency, the backdrop of Japan‘s defense plan up until
l976--the year the Fourth Defense Power Consolidation Plan expired--was
this kind of threat theory. Based on this perspective, one's defensive
potential necessarily becomes large-scale. Moreover, I think it is doubt-
ful that the resulting sense of security is satisfactory. (Military ex-
perts will probably claim that if necessary, a large-scale build-up must
be countenanced.)

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Generally speaking. it is true that this threat theory does contain the
above described aspect. But would it be appropriate to apply this theory
to our country?

The thinking in the "Basic Defense Power Plan" which provided the back-
ground for the 1976 "Outline for the Defense Plan" is as follows: The
intentions of surrounding states are unknown or are subject to change;

but there are objective conditions which restrict the exercise of their
military power. By pursuing these conditions and in so far as these condi-
tions do not significantly change, we can satisfy ourselves that a large-
scale military aggression toward Japan will not arise. But there is a
possibility of error in analyzing these conditions or a sudden change in
the international situation. Thus the defensive power that we should con-
solidate must be dynamic. And we should define the content and size

of minimum defensive power thct we must always maintain as an independent
nation without special reference to the military capabilities of the sur-
rounding states. In this nsnner. a concrpt of "peacetime" (period in which
afore-mentioned conditions are present) defense power was born. (For
details, see "Defense White Paper for 1976. 77 and 78) This is a somewhat
modified threat theory. '

Hhat Is Appropriate Defense Power?

I would like to stress. at this point, a fact that the role of defensive
power goes beyond the ability to meet force with force and/or ability to
check--threat based functions-and that it is capable of maintaining in-
ternational peace. ( I have touched on this topic in "The Plan for Basic
Defense Potential.") At least among the principal countries of the world
today, there is a network of security pacts both in the East and the Heat.
A military shock on a segment of it would reverberste throughout the
entire network structure. There is then a system wherein such an act is
not easily initiated.

But in order for the network as a whole to function in this manner, the
United States and the Soviet Union which form its core must have sufficient
military strength; and in addition, the respective countries that make up
the network must perform their assigned parts (defense roles). I believe
that an individual state in fulfilling its role as a participant in the
global strategy--rather than countering a specific threat-~is contributing
to that country's, as well as the regional and finally world~wide stability
and peace.

To create a weak spot. a vulnerable point in this network not only en-
dangers the safety of one's own country but will harm other states and
other regions as well. In considering the Japanese problem, in order for
Japan to assume the role described above. she does not have to have an
extensive military power. I think it is sufficient if we can fully realize
the content of "The Outline of the Defense Plan" formulated by the state.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore. in order for a country to maintain its safety. regional ten-
sion must not he aroused. Though Japan is a thoroughgolng pacifist since
the war. other countries are not fully convinced of our paciiisn because
of our military actions overseas prior to World War ll. Based on this
perspective. for Japan to possess extensive military power predicated on
the threat theory would instill uneasiness and fear in the fellow Asian
states and might possibly add to the regional tension. 0n the other hand.
if Japan's defensiVe power becomes weak and there is no JapannU.S. Mutual
Security Pact. then the store-mentioned global network cannot be effective
and the situation will cause great anxiety in various Asian states outside
the network. Therefore. the Japanese defense potential that can be con-
sidered desirable within the context of Asian international relutiunu is
the appropriate one for us. Though this is certainly not concrete. or
can conclude that a significant departure or junp away from the status quo
in not desirable.

in order to maintain national security. a country oust indeed possess

power; but if such power is lacking. it is wise to borrow it from an ally.
But to enlarge one's own power in response to the opponent's power can

lend to interminable competition. Therefore. though having power is in-
deed important. we must strive to lessen the antagonism and threat of an
opponent at the same tine. This then is peace diplomacy whereby a structure
for maintaining peace with the neighboring states is built up; and in the
military sector. it takes the for: of arms control or arms reduction.

Considering consolidation of defensive power from this kind of perspective.
then. is called the international relations theory of defensive notentisi.
Traditionally. the military experts' demand for enlarging defense potential
was based on the threat argument. The United States house of Represents-
tives members who visited Japan in November 1978 wanted to increase Japan's
defense fund in response to the Soviet Union's move to strengthen its
military potential. Their urging was based on the international comparison
of defense budgets and was also related to their wish to correct the u.s.-
Japan trade imbalance. But under the current international situation
surrounding Japan. we need to examine our defense potential from above-noted
international relations data and to consider the construction of an appro-
priate system.

4. international Responsibility

Japan's defense budget seen in ratio to the GNP was at its peak in 1952

at 2.78 percent. Thereafter. it was severely curtailed and dropped to
below 1 percent in 1967. Since then. it has been 0.8 to 0.9 percent until
now. The ratio of snjor items in the General Annual Estimated Expenditures
for the past 12 years reveals that the defense spending has decreased from
7.7 percent to 5.5 percent. while Social Security related expenditures

rose from 16 percent to 19-20 percent. Education and science promotion
expenditures have resained the same at 11-12 percent and public works
related expenditures was 15-20 percent. fluctuating from year to year.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us look at the international comparison. in 1977. Japan's defense
fund of 1.690 trillion yen was the ninth largest in the world. But in
terms of GNP ratio. Japan's 0.9 percent is the lowest figure for the 30
majur countries. western states are said to spend 3-5 percent and "e
Soviet Union. 11-13 percent for defense. Per capita defense cost is 5h
dollars for Japan. 523 dollars for the Unites States. and the 200 dollar
level for major NATO countries. in neutral Sweden, it is 363 dollars.
having cited these figures in detail. the aforementioned United States
House of Representatives members visiting Japan focused on Japan's lack of
defense effort.

With regard to Japan's defense fund. when the government formulated "The
Outline of Defense Plan" in 1976. it was decided that "the defense spend-
ing will not go beyond 1 percent of GNP." The state probably wanted to
establish a temporary defense budget and as at that time 0.8-0.9 percent
was the norm for the preceding 10 years. the amount not in excess of 1
percent was thought to be adequate for the time being. Actually. bringing
the figure close to 1 percent would yield approximately 200 billion yen
leeway. As the major portion of this amount is applied to things other
than labor cost. it is not a mean margin. But there is a criticism both
within and outside the country to the effect that fundamentally. the
defense budget should be decided by comparing the need with source of
revenue: and it is inappropriate to establish a defense budget framework
from a fiscal standpoint alone without examining the need.

A certain‘powerful United States senator made a strong speech at the Senate's
plenary session year before last that. "Japan should increase its defense
budget to l.i5 percent within a 5-year period. Implementation of the State
Plan alone should bring the figure up to 1.5 percent."

The recent tendency in the United States is to great significance to the
change in the Japanese defense environment in the past 2. 3 years and to
allude to the possibility that Japan would increase its defense budget and
defensive capability by a wide margin in the near future. He ought to in-
terpret Ambassador Hensfield'a judicious comments of November 1978 made in
the United States as an attempt to quell this new wave of thinking within
the United States. His comments were not primarily directed toward the
Japanese.

As demonstrated in the "Basic Policy for National Defense." the state has
always considered the question of security in the context of gradual in-
crease of defense capability and other policies. But the relationship be-
tween defense potential and other measures is vague. and with the exception
of the diplomatic areas. we cannot say that the state has adopted measures
with due reference to the security question. Then came the "oil shock"
[petroleum crisis]. Resources are scarce and the concept of economic se-
curity again became the dominant concern. A feeling that Japan is quite
fragile in emergency situations and that we need a comprehensive security

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OhFIClAL USE ONLY

policy increased. A cry for strengthening the National Defense Council
by means of reorganization along with strengthening of civilian control
has its origin in such a demand.

how Much is Needed for Defense?

As an argument for comprehensiVe security policy grows stronger. moves to
pin it down on the cost (ront have emerged. For example. Nomurs Comprehen-
sive Research Institute's research--"Changes in International Environment
and Japanese Response-~Suggestions for the Twenty-First Century"~-of Decem-
ber 1977 suggests as follows: Hith regard to the following six categories-~
(1) energy. major mineral resource and agricultural products stockpile;

(2) development of energy, raw material resources: (3) large-scale techno-
logical development of new sources of energy; (4) defense budget; (5) state
aid for development: and (6) cultural exchange--GNP ratio of 1.66 percent
for 1975 should be upgraded to 3-3.5 percent by 1985. Mr Yasuhiro Nakasone
of the Liberal-Desocrstic Party also advances a simplified version of the
same idea.

i would like to consider this matter in conjunction with Japan's interna-
tional responsibility. The fact that we are beginning to possess real power
as an economic giant means that we are ready to assume respondlbility for
world stability and prosperity. Various countries of the world are de-
manding it of us and unless we can respond. we will not be able to have
world trust nor cooperation; and there will be no progress in a long-term
sense. Nevertheless, in view of our Constitution. we cannot offer mili-
tary cooperation to other states in acts involving use of arms: and in view
of our svewai of pacifism. we have avoided contributing to military tech-
nology.

Thus, 1 would like to carry the discussion from the standpoint of perfor-
mance of international responsibility and not merely from the perspective
of comprehensive security budget solely for national safety; and I would
like to select the items pertinent to Japan's security which at the same time.
contribute to regional stability and development and regard these as the
security related budget items. In today's world. the major European coun-
tries are spending 3-5 percent of their GNP for the military budget alone;
therefore. it would seem fair to allocate 3 percent of Japan's Oh? to-
ward national security related expenses (in a broad sense). Otherwise.

we would not be able to escape criticism that Japan is merely getting a
free ride on the 0.8. coattsil in regard to the Japan-0.8. Mutual Security
Pact. and also that she is stealing a ride on world peace which is the key
to Japanese development.

The national security related .xpense items 1 refer to are self-defense cost.
international cooperation cost, and technical development cost. The ratio
of government spending vis-a-wis GNP for these categories are 0.9 percent.
0.2 percent and 0.5 percent respectively--a total of 1.6 to 1.7 percent.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

My suggestion is to increase this ratio to 3 percent by an appropriate
rise sometime in the 1980's. it would be difficult not to determine the
respective shares these items are to have. as they night vary according to
circumstance.

The international cooperation cost here refers to the government‘s overseas
development aid. The state has promised to double the expenditure in this
category in several years. The once Development Aid Cosmittee in which
Japan is a participant has advised that ODA (Overseas Development Aid)

be raised to 0.7 percent of GNP by 1985. This is approximately three

times the current Japanese liability.

Moreover. the ratio of govern-eat research expenditure in the context of
total research cost is about 30 percent for Japan. and that includes funds
of local public bodies. in contrast. the Heaters powers expend 60-60 per-
cent. quite a high figure when compared to Japan's (1978 "Science and Tech-
nology Hhite Paper"). The defense budget's international comparison is as
stated above. I believe that its ratio of growth ought to be held down

and that would be sufficient.

Relationship Between the Heat and Asian Countries

Japan's international responsibility refers to her contribution not only

to regional but to a broader perspective of world stability and prosperity.
Now. in the Asian context. the said national security refers primarily to
political. social and economic stability within a given state. rather than
var between countries. This is true not only of the Southeast Asian states
but Korea as well. From this standpoint. to enlarge Japanese economic aid
and increase the stability of these states and thus to reinforce stability
in that region would ultisately result in promoting Japanese national
security.

Moreover. from the standpoint of our own national security. we need to
invest heavily in technological development in the anerav field. Interna-
tional cooperation in this sector is also needed. 0n the other hand. various
Asian countries are encroaching upon the domains of the sajority of

Japanese manufacturing interest. But. Japan with interest in stability and
prosperity for the rest of Asian states, and Japan that is attespting to
establish co-existence and co-proaperity. ought not to place itself in a
competitive relationship with other Asian states with identical manufactur-
ing interest. Therefore. we should concede the high labor industries to
then gradually. and Japan must shift its esphasis onto intensive information
industries. But then. it would lead to a competitive relationship with

the west. This makes investsent in technological development more neces-
sary than ever. Advancement of Japan's technological capability may lead

to enlargement of the area of cooperation between Japan and the west. The
Soviet Union and China would probably increase their reliance on Japan.

and this. too. would contribute significantly in favor of Japanese national
security.

26
POR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l have already stated that defensive capability does not only provide mili-
tary defense of our country but contributes to stable international rela-

tions. In considering a comprehensiVe security plan. the 1 percent defense
budget propriety question is not too meaningful.

He night also include petroleum stockpiling in this national security re-
lated expenses. Enlargement of the petroleum stockpile is diplonatic
strength; and in case of energency, facilitates international cooperativ«
action. it means improvement of stockpiling methods--anong then transi-
tion to underground storage tanks--which in turn will strengthen the na-
tional security capability of Japan. The traditional forlat. however. has
been a foruula whereby stockpiling was the responsibility of the civilian
sector; government spending in this category has been neagre--as stated
before. less than 3 percent. But. it with increased stockpile volume and/or
inproved method of stockpiling. the government spending in this classifi-
cation should mushroom. we say have to tsbulste it as another expenditure
category. On this point. I shall await future governnental examination.

COPYRIGRT: Chuo Koronsha 1979

11660
C50: 6105

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

DIET SPEAKER NADAO FAVORABLY REACTS TO DENG'S INVITATION
Tokyo YOHIURI SHINDUN in Japanese 13 Feb 79 Morning Edition p 2 0H

[Excerpts] House of Representatives Speaker Nadao. who has only recently
assumed the speakership. appears to be trying to take a flexible attitude
toward China in his capacity as speaker. Although he appeared embarrassed
by Deijing's "warn overtures." which include an invitation to visit china
extended by Vice PreeierDcngXiaoping during the latter's recent visit

to Japan. Nadao said. "china is Japan's treaty-bound friend; it should be
good to be friendly toward a friend."

Nadae. one of the core leaders of the pro-Taiwan forces. has heretofore
been "at odds" with China. cautioning against the noraalization of relations
with China and the signing of the peace and friendship treaty with Beijing.

0n 9 February he resigned as chairman of the Liberal Democratic Party's [LDP]
Dietnen'a Consultative Council of Japan-China (Taiwan) Relations and Asian
Affairs Research Council. His new job coupelled his to resign the two

posts. However. he said. "as a private politician warnly sympathizing with
Taiwan. I have not changed my way of thinking." Now he is the Diet speaker.
a public post which sakes it incumbent upon his to be friendly to all in

the world. Showing an unvacillating attitude. he said that he would have

no reason to turn down an invitation if China sent him an official invita-
tion.

At the 7 February banquet hosted by Prime Minister Ohira in honor of
Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Naduo net Deng for the first tine.

"Congratulations on your inauguration. Hr Nadao." the Chinese Vice Premier
said.

"Thank you. and welcome to Tokyo." said Nadso.
As a matter of fact. everyone was curious to see how the first encounter

between the pro-Taiwanese speaker and the Beijing leader would turn out.
To everyoae's surprise. the two shook hands and started out their encounter

26
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

beaming with "miles. in the thick of the party the two exchanged animated
converuation on their age and suddenly Deng asked Nadao. "how about visiting
China at your convenience?“

Analyzing the “smiling tactics" launched by the Chinese side toward speaker
Nadao. an official associated with Japan-China relations has said. “probably.
they are hoping that Mr Nadao. a close friend of Taiwan leader Chiang Chins-kun.
will assume a nediator'n role in achieving Taiwan's peaceful unification

with the uninland."

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shinbunsha 1979

850: 4105

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'MAINICIII' CW8 0N SOVIET-JAPAN ECNWIC MEETING
Tokyo HMNICHI mm news in English 15 Peb 79 p 2 on
lﬁditoriai: "Soviet-Japanese Economic Neetr]

[Text] The fourth joint meeting of the directors of the Soviet-Japanese
Economic Cooperation Committee opened in Tokyo Hedncsday for three days.

In September 1977. the seventh cooperation committee meeting was held under
political tension resulting from the Mic-25 incident. in which a Soviet Air
Force pilot defected by flying his top secret aircraft to Japan.

This time again. the directors meet at a tine of political tension. caused

by the conclusion of the Sino-Japaneae peace and friendship treaty. He can
see a positive attitude on the part of the directors, who apparently vant to
steadily promote economic cooperation even in the politically cool atmosphere.
We attach importance to this meeting because any opportunity to iaprove re-
lations between Japan and the Soviet Union oust be taken under the present
circumstances.

All the participants in the meeting are men of importance. Especially. the
Soviet Union took into account both "quality and quantity” in selecting its
representatives. indicating that hoscov is hoping for positive achievements
from the meeting.

we do not expect such gigantic projects as Tyumen oilfield development or
construction of a second Trans-Siberian railway to be among the current
economic cooperation projects. The Soviet Union vents to discuss the de-
velopment of practical projects.

The participants are discussing construction of a paper-pulp industrial com-
plex in the For Best; modernization of a paper-pulp plant in Sakhalin; ex-
pansion of a container terminal at the Voatochnyy port in Sakhalin and four
other projects.

At first glance. the Soviet Union seems to have given priority to such proj-
ects as say be in its ovn interest. Another look at the five projects new

28
’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPfICIAL USE ONLY

under development. however. will show that they closely concern Japan he-
canse Japan will be able to import natural resources--coal. natural gas.
Hood. and chips for pulp--vhen the projects are completed.

It is a fact that "Siberian fever" is no longer prevalent within Japanese
economic circles; and judging from the present relationship betveen Tokyo and
Beijing or Tokyo and Moscow. the Japanese and Soviet representatives may

not enjoy mutual good-will. He believe. however. that. apart from political
relations. the Soviet Union and Japan must improve their economic relations.
He find significance in the meeting of the Soviet-Japanese economic coopera-
tion committee under the principle of "separation of economic matters from
political affairs."

He take note of the Soviet way of thinking-~to skillfully utilize the prin-
ciple by dispatching a high-power delegation. It must be remembered that
the Soviet delegates are "purely government officials" due to the Soviet
political system; while the Japanese representatives are ordinary business-
men. although the Japanese Government is in close contact with them as an
observer. He wonder if this is the best available format for promoting eco-
nomic relations between the tvo countries.

it cannot be helped that Japanese economic circles' attitudes are influenced
by the current cool political relations. the future of which is obscure. The
Soviet delegates. even though they rank as first deputy premiers. do not have
free hands in various aspects.

In opening this type of meeting. both the Soviet and Japanese representatives
need as much information as possible on each other. In this sense. we con-
sider the Japanese proposal calling for regular economic ministerial meetings
worth studying. The proposal was made by then Japanese Labor Hinister
Hirohide lshida, during his visit to Hoscow in June 1977.

He believe that such regular ministerial meetings would enable the two coun-
tries to have talks of economic frictions. including Soviet "dumping" as re-
gards freight charges. and pave the vsy for closer economic cooperation.

The Japanese Government must do its utmost to restore political relations be-
tween the tan countries. We hope that the inseparably close economic rela-
tionship betveen Tokyo and Moscow will provide a breakthrough in this re-

spect.

COPYRIGRT: Hainichi Daily Neva 1978

050: 6120

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

SOVIET AMBASSADOR GIVES VIENS 0N JAPAN-USSR RELATIONS
Tokyo YOMIURI SNINDUN in Japanese 18 Feb 79 Morning Edition p 9 00

[Text] In an interview on 17 February with SHUKAN YONIURI. Soviet
Ambassador Polyanskiy gave his views on the Japan-USSR relations and the
present international situation. During this interview. the Soviet envoy
referred to the recent release of tshkov as Soviet fish industry sinister
and said: "Mr lshkov retired and began a newlifeon pension because of his
advanced age-~7b-oand poor health in the recent period." he thus indirectly
denied earlier reports attributing lshkov's release to a slump in the Soviet
fishing industry.

Polyanskiy node clear that there will be no change in the Soviet policy
regarding its fishing relations with Japan under the new sinister by
emphasizing that "Soviet policies on fishing are deternined by the govern-
ment, not by a ninister. The USSR will continue its efforts for a satis-
factory settlement of the Japan-Soviet fishing problems."

Meanwhile, in connection with a Diet resolution demanding the renoval of
Soviet nilitary bases from northern territories. which the Diet is expected
to adopt an 20 February, the aabaasador reaffirned the Soviet position that
”Japan and the USSR have no unresolved issues between then." he again showed
the firm attitude of the Soviet Union in this respect. saying that affairs

involving the two islands (Btorofu and Kunaahiri) are part of the dosastic
affairs of the USSR, and whatever we build on than. no one is allowed to

interfere."

COPYRIGHT: Yoeiuri Shinhunshs 1979

C50: bios

30
'OR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

'ASANI' DISCUSSBS JAPAN-USSR ECONOMIC COOPERATION
Tokyo ASA"! EVENING news in English 20 Feb 79 p 2 0"

(Editorial: "Japan-USSR Cooperation")

[Text] The fourth joint seeting of the directors of the Japan-Soviet Union
and Soviet Union-Japan econoaic committees was held last week in Tokyo to
discuss Japan-USSR economic cooperation centered on developsent of Siberia.
The purpose was to lay the groundwork for resolving probleas in preparation
for the eighth joint meeting of the two committees which will be held in
Moscow in Septesber or October this year.

Although it was s joint aeeting of directors. the Soviet Union sent a big
teas of 17 aembers. in the discussions. the Soviet Union showed great en-
thusiasm by proposing three new long-tern. large-scale projects. One was
the construction of an integrated steel nill in the Far East. Another was
the develop-oer of the Udokan copper sine and construction of a copper saelt-
ing plant. The third one was construction of an asbestos factory in Holode-

zhnaya.

This is noteworthy as having clarified the Soviet stand of aggressively pro-
aoting Japan-USSR economic cooperation in the future. Prior to the signing
of the Japan-China treaty of peace and friendship, the Soviet Union warned
Japan free time to tine and in some cases even hinted at "retaliatory steps"
in order to place rest )ints on the Japan-china treaty. Two theories were
naturally born within Japan concerning what actions the Soviet Union would
take. There was a confrontation between cautious observers who sorried that
Japan-USSR relations would deteriorate and the opinions of the Foreign Nin-
lstry and others that there would be no major difference.

But the events after the signing of the Japan-China treaty showed that the
latter opinion was correct. at least as far as working-level relations were
concerned. and up to now no adverse effects have appeared. The three govern-
mental discussions--the Japan-USSR coastal trade conference in September 1978.
the annual trade conference in October and the Japan-USSR fishery agreement
discussion in Novenber--were all carried out as scheduled. It can be said

that this trend becaae clearer with the latest Tokyo aeeting.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son orstcm. use ONLY

This is a welcome phenomenon for the development of Japan-USSR relations.

But in order to promote economic cooperation. enthusiasm alone is not enough.
The problem is the economic feasibility of individual projects. but as long
as the Soviet Union sticks to the system of paying with resources or goods
to be developed or produced. it will be difficult to speedily implement

the new projects. Taking this into consideration. the memorandum used the
subtle expression that the new proposals will be "carefully studied." Among
the three proposals. it can be considered that the asbestos factory is the
only one with the possibility of becoming a project in the near future.

Japan-USSR economic cooperation welled up from the latter half of the 1960's
to the first half of the 1970's. and up to now Japan has extended loans for
seven projects totalling $1.670 million. Practically all the projects tied
the superior industrial ability of anan to the the rich buried resources
of Siberia. and they were mutually complementary. But today when economic
cooperation has entered the second stage. difficult conditions have increased.

In the background of the fact that the Soviet Union is hoping that Japan will
accept the goods produced by the industrial plants exported by Japan as pay-
ment for the plants. there is the urgent situation that the accumulated

debts to the Western nations have increased suddenly. But it is difficult
for trade to be profitable unless there is a mutually complementary relation-
ship. We feel that if the Soviet Union really wants Japanese cooperation for
the development of Siberia. there is need for the Soviet Union to be more
flexible in its payment method.

It should be recalled that the long-term Japan-China trade agreement. which
is the nucleus of Japan-China trade, places great emphasis on helping each
other. It follows the payment formula of individual payments for exports
and imports. Since the key to whether there will be any big increase in
Japan-USSR economic cooperation is this point. we would like to ask for
greater efforts on this issue by those concerned.

In Japan many people think that Japan should sign a long-term economic co-
operation agreement. as long as Japan is not placed in a disadvantageous
position. as a step to overcome the statemate in Japan-USSR economic coopera-
tion. But the Japanese Government is taking a cautious stand on signing such
an agreement. judging that there are not a few problematical points in con-
nection with joint enterprises and conditions for loans by government agen-
cies. He also support this policy of caution. He feel that Japan-USSR
economic cooperation should stress realistic solutions and should be pro-
moted step by step.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Honsha l979

080: 5120

32 .
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'YMIURI' EDITORIAL VIBVS JAPAN-USSR ECWOHIC TALKS
Tokyo TIIF DAILY YOHIURI in English 17 Feb 79 p 2 0‘"
(Editorial: "Siberian Projects”)

[Text] The Soviet Union has big but doubtful projects for development of
Siberian resources and Japan is the country it wants to help them. The
Soviets think it should be possible for Japan to sink billions of dollars if
econosic matters are separated from political difficulties. That it is not
that simple was proved by the result of the three-day Japan-Soviet economic
talks that ended in Tokyo Friday. Not such really was expected of them

even though the Soviets case with gigantic projects—steel nill, copper nine,
and asbestos developnent.

Soviet expectation was high regardless of difficult political relations be-
tween the two countries. They apparently thought prospects of econoeic gains
should be enough for the Japanese side to ignore the diplomatic difficulties
the two countries have in their relations.

As the two sides were sitting to talks, the Japanese Diet's Okinawa and
northern territory comittee set and adopted a resolutionasking for removal
of the Soviet military bases on Kunashiri and Btorofu islands. But the
Soviets see-ed colpletely oblivious of the difficulties the territorial
probles has been causing the Japan-Russia relations.

It must be clearly realized that separation of economics from politics in
this case will simply not work. This is not to say the two countries should
not economically cooperate. "hat is to be stressed is that the Soviets must
recognize the existence of political difficulties. After all. econoeic re-
lations do depend greatly on diplomatic relations.

Economic Difficulties

Diplomatic problems apart. there are some very serious econowic considerations
too. All the projects the Soviets have in their nind are not going to prove
gold lines to Japan.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Just two points should be enough to explain. First, undeniably the Siberian
region itself has a lot of problems of physical nature such as lack of coa-
nunication and transportation. The other point is the Soviet inability to
find enough funds needed for their projects. They want Japan to rpovide all
that is needed now and propose to repay with future products free the proj-
ects. As long as there is dessnd for these products there should be no
objection to this proposal.-

But Japan cannot let itself to be bound to a long—tern purchase coumituent.
This is not economics. The Soviets, we hope. will talk what makes econosic
sense. Any project of economic cooperation must be mutually beneficial.

Needless to say, Japanese enthusiasm about the Siberian projects, first pro-
posed 10 years ago. has considerably cooled not only because of deteriorae

tion in our diplomatic relations but also because the projects the-selves have

not been sufficiently convincing. Projects should be reasonable and smaller
in size to be financially manageable.

COPYRIGHT: Youiuri Shinbunsha 1979

C50: #120

3a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASAHI': JAPAN GETS INFCE APPROVAI FOR PLUTONIUM USE

Tokyo ASANI EVENING NEHS in English 14 Feb 79 p l 0"

[Excerpts] Japan's desire to burn plutonium obtained by reprocessing spent
nuclear fuel in a lightwater reactor has been approved by the International

Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INPCB). according to government sources on
Tuesday [13 February].

Japan will accordingly push for the revision or the Japan-0.8. nuclear energy
agreement in the negotiation that get under way in Tokyo on Tuesday. the
sources said.

The sources said that a report on the combustion in the light-water reactor

of plutonium obtained by reprocessing spent nuclear fuel would be compiled
soon.

The some sources said that Japan would continue trying to persuade the United
States to agree, and would give stronger assurances that such technology would
not be used for the manufacture of nuclear weapons. Through this process,
Japan will be able to economize greatly on enriched uranium.

Japan is planning to burn plutonium on a trial basis at the Hihama nuclear
power generation plant of the Kansai Power Co. and introduce the technology
on a full scale after 1990.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Renee 1979

C80: 6120

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

BRIEFS

VIETNAM RBLIEP FUND DRIVE--The Japan-Vietnam Priendship Association announced
on ll February that the fund drive called by the association to relieve the
dosage caused by big floods in Vietnaa last year, reached 6,180,000 yen in
the past 3 sonthe. In the fund drive conducted at the sane tile for the
movenent to send textbooks of the Japanese language. the association said,
1.690.000 yen uere collected so far. The widening of support for the fund
drive at the tile when the border dispute between China and Vietnam has as-
gravated. and the anticommunist, anti-Vietnmaand sntisocialist countries
propaganda has multiplied on the Ca-bodian issue, reflects the strong sense
of solidarity with the Vietnamese people, said the association leadership,

of the Japanese people. who alertly grasped the seriousness of the situation.
[Text] [Tokyo JPS in English 0922 GMT 12 Feb 79 OH]

080: 6120

36
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
'HIJ'I‘MlY

GSDF 7'!“ DIVISION TO moons ARM}! DIVISION IN 1980

Tokyo 1m: mm mass In august. 22 Jan 79 p 2

FOR OFFICIAL “SI-2 UNLY

[Article by Hnsnnorl Tabato: "Impressive Revtuu Mat-ks New Era in lltutory

0E GSDF's 7th Division

[Text]

ﬁlm

Oenrl Yemuhlte. who

Menu

The 1th mvmon we:
mmwwtomue
an“ manhunt-Hie
dlvtdotl when It was trek

tint-medium:

truth 0 mixed Drum tn

Penman mm.

H]

mmﬂwdmnl

Inn mdvmmepﬂdeotthe

Willi 080?. h HIM 6 CM“...

400 Mly tread vehicle! -
tanks. ”"le enlttet'y
places. and emote-d
carriemM’Cn.

The dMuon'e thm infantry
«utmunhemntpoﬂed to
e battleﬁeld eon-M vehletea
under dlmt «mm-l eon:-
nund vtthout when tron
m. e dlvtlon amt otﬂcef
sud. .

The "mete-cameo tn
tentrynmmnwrtdwm
new mum, nument.
W huh (whom.
men 0‘ not nun. and as: mm-
cumwmtmmend
one tent battalion at m 00
tanks.

- The Gleason. We let
theddenltottheeoutmm
07W. It one at the lot!
[toot-nu 6mm uncet the
command at the Matthew
Anny. W In 899-

«mum at the mutual
type In mum en the 0M
ummmooumuh.“
mono-um; mn wanna the
notthen. eaten! end eentrd
seem at W. mec-
tlvciy. ,

Under the 1th Dlvttlon'e
mm pm. ttl troops.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

minus one tntmtry mom.
wtll he vtth the
«than: let Tank Bum.

mutton-d II Kite-8mm. noun

0‘ Chltou. "lhe new tank
dlvlstou. to be called the 7th
Toni 0|le will that hate
[our tent mm and ho
mechenlted Inllntty
mm.

The thin! ttltnntry mm
ethnnted w the 1th Division's
units mu he teneotoyed tn-

, ltt «yum. the
mthetnmet main island.
muted by the see m
Chloe and Sash Rome. to
W the hltheno Wed
Memdveﬂetnhpan.

This meneute. however.
Inlght lob the QM" at
W I
uctlcel WM. 0 mu
either at the Nathan Anny
hemakt

Since the [Injected 1th Tent:
Dlvlstonwtllmlstottouttmu
eegltnentt and two tally
mecheolted lnlenuy
regiments. the nth ct tents to
Intentrymcn - whenwnd
wtth that at other mum at
the manual type - mo

WJheuﬂdMuttt.
A new count» at enacted
vet-late emerged In" the
wunatlonal deteal ot laraell
tank tori‘ea in an ambuah by
Egyptian toot aoldiero armed
with soviet-applied anti-tank
mlruilen at the oulaet ot the |97J
Arablnraell ware

Since then It has been held
that a tank unit should be ac-
companied by a aulilclenl
number ol lnlantrymen aboard
armored personnel cnrﬂera
rAl’Calaaesoor-talorthelanka

The protected 7th Tank
Dlvlalon will be weak In terms
or manpower. t'l‘here will be no
increase In the preaenl 1.000
man 7th dlvlalon as the OSDF
has been chronically un-
dentatled.)

So lrom a tactical viewpoint.
the projected formation ol the
armored unit is hardly ideal.
lheolﬂcet'aaid.

Meanwhile equipment
throughout lloltltaldo in being
modernlted. The talent

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japaneae designed Type-7t
main battle lanlu IMll'l‘si have
been delivered to the tour
nivlalona on Iloltltaldo. in-
cluding the 7th Dlvlaion and the
lat Tank Brigade.

So tar about no Type-74
MBTa have been aent lo
Hokkaido. Thu model is
generally regarded to be more
than a match tor most ot It:
contemporarlea. men II the
Sovlel molnalay lanlt Tm. ii
is equipped with a laaennuided.
computer-controlled too mm
gun.

Thl' Korean War vintage M-ll
"Walker Bulldog" laal
reconnallaante tank with a 76
mm gun baa been phaaed out.
There are only aeven American
lit-Ala among acme 70 tank! in
the 7th Divinion'a 7th Tana
Battalion. The rest Include
aoma so W74 and to hype-61
lanlta.

The malnatay Wmm-nun
Tweet Mlih. also ouapaneae
dealgn. are being gradually
replaced by the new and more
powertul wpem. (They are to
remain in the inventory of
dlvlalona In other parts 0!
Japan.)

Some military experts doubl
the wisdom ol lotmlnu a alnnle
tank divlalon by almply mm-
blnlng the 7th Division and the
lal‘l'anlt brigade.

‘ihere are many arguments
over whether Hokkaido unuld
become a maior battleground
should Japan be attacked by a
lorelgn power in the future. liut
moat OSDI' lcadera tlrmly
believe that a largeacale battle
between armored lorces would
ultimately be loughl on
lloltlrakio in the event ot a war
because 0! the generally llal
andopenterratg. ’ '

Armored personnel carriers of the 7th Division, the nation's only fully
mechanized unit, soon to be reorganized into an armored division, rumble

across the snow-covered drill grounds on Hokkaido.

The troops are cora-

mandcd by the Northern Amy, which is responsible for the defenae of the
north.

(DWIGHT:

cso:

(4120

The Japan Times 1979

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

MILITARY

FOREIGN MINISTRY SOURCE SAYS NORTHERN ISLANDS NAME NO MILITARY VALUE
Tokyo TOKYO SHINBUN in Japanese 10 Feb 79 Morning Edition p 2 ON

[Text] A Foreign Ministry source said on 9 February that "Kunashiri and
Ftorofu have no military value." 0n 5 February the Foreign Ministry had
filed a protest with the Soviet Government against Soviet troops deployed
and airbases built on these two islands. demanding their reaoval. Since
then the ministry has been analysing Soviet intentions behind their moves.

The bold 9 February statement by this Foreign Ministry source may be inter-
preted as an interim report on this analysis. As a reason for the two
islands having no ailitary value, the ease source pointed to the develop-ant
of reconnaissance satellites and missiles. He thus denied the inportance

of the islands as airbaaes. Concerning the report that the Soviet Union

was trying to make the sea of Okhotsk an inland sea to facilitate movenents
of aisaile-cerrying submarines. the source expressed a negative opinion,
pointing out that the United States and the Soviet Union shadow each other's
submarine movesents, rendering it difficult to keep these aoveasnts secret.

In the recent protest to the Soviet Union. the Foreign Ministry nade no
mention of a possible military threat to our country but criticised the
USSR from the point of view of the territorial issue. At that time. the
sane source said this was because the Soviet bases on the two islands were
not regarded as a current threat to Japan. The 9 February statement was an
elaboration of this view.

However. only 20 kilometers separate Kunashiri free ﬂokkaido at the narrowest
point-~Neauro Strait-- and no one can totally rule out the possibility of
the Soviet Union's reinforcing its combat troops on Kunashiri and using the
island as a stronghold for surprise landing operations on eastern Hokkaido.
Thus the controversy over the military value of the two islands is liable

to drag on.

COPYRIGMT: Tokyo Shinbunsha I979

650: 6105
39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USB ONLY

ECONOMIC

'ASAIII' JAPAN GOVERNMENT TO 'PULLY SUPPORT‘ HITS!!! PROJECT IN IN
Tokyo ASANI EVENING NEWS in English 16 Pab 79 p I ON

[Text] The guvernnent will fully support the large pctrochenicsl project
undertaken in Iran by the Hisui group of conpaniea. the fate of which is
jeopardized by the political turnoil in that country. a govern-ant source
disclosed Tuesday [13 Pebruary].

The govern-ent believes that. once the new government of Frasier Mahdi Basargan
has becone firnly established. the production of oil nay be resuned earlier
than expected. the source said.

The govern-ant intends to help the Mitsui group go ahead with the petrochemi-
cal project. a joint plan with Iran. so that Japan can secure a stable sup-
ply of oil from that country. Talks will be started on Japan's econanic
cooperation as soon as Tokyo has extended diploestic recognition to the new
Tehran regine, the source added.

The Hinistry of International Trade and Industry is fairly optinistic about
the new Iranian Goverment's attitude toward Japan. NIT! officials point

out: (1) That Japan's Ideniteu Kosan, defying opposition from international
oil eajors, once bought crude free Iran's national oil coepany when Bsurgan
was its president and lasergan is believed to haVe relatively strong relations
with the oil industry here; and (2) That an influential econonic adviser

to Ayatollah Ruhollah Kinneyni has approved the construction of the petro-
chesical cosplex since it will result in the production of consular goods

needed by the people.

However. if the new Iranian regile rejects Japanese support for the project,
the damage to Japan will be great.

The issue for the nonent is the additional 100 billion yen funds needed for
the project after April. If the Nitaui group requests it, the govermsnt
is ready to extend financial support. using funds of the Export-Inert Bank
of Japan and also loans from the Overseas Econonic Cooperation Pund. Terns
for 036? loans are less strict than those for credits free the h-ls Bank.
It also reportedly considers upgrading the private-level project to a na-
tional undertaking.

£0
POI! OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

Meanwhile. although most of the circles concerned feel that. despite the
cutoff of Iranian oil, Japan is assured of supplies for the tile being,
Iany private and public circles here are worrying about posnible price in-

creases. They fear that any price increase would deal a serious blow to
the vvuunuloa of Japan and other industrial nationn.

Oil industry sources revealed that Iraq has already notified Japan that the
price of oil bought in government-to-governnent deals will be increased.

The Foreign Ministry. which is concerned about supplies after autumn. warned
against too easily drawing on the nation's oil stocks. It called for the
expansion of stockpiles and stricter saving.

President Toshino Doko of the Federation of Econolic Organizations also asked

that a viable long-term energy plan. involving the development of new sources
and increased energy conservation. be worked out.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Honsha 1979

680: 4120

41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

acouontc

PRC TO SUPPLY GULF 0P nouAt OIL TO JAPAN
Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 16 Feb 79 p A 0"

[Text] After a aonth of negotiations. Japan has won a Chinese pronise to
supply sane 2 nillion kiloliters of oil a year tron undersea all deposits to
be developed with Japanese cooperation in the Gulf of Bohai, near Beijing.

A consortium of Japanese oil developers will have exclusive responsibility
for developing the southern Bohei pool. which is estimated to yield 160 ail-
lion kiloliters. according to a ststenent Hednesday by the Japan National
Oil Corporation of Tokyo. a senigovernnental. nonprofit oil development
agency representing various Japanese coumercial oil interests.

The corporation has been negotiating since January 16 vith Li Jingxin, deputy
nanager of China's National Oil and Gas Exploration and Development Corporation.

The Chinese and Japanese negotiators are also discussing the possibility of
Japanese cooperation in developing still undetermined oil deposits off the
estuary of the Pearl River near Guang-ahou. Japan has proposed a tripartite
development deal. including American or European oil interests.

The cost of developing the lohai fields has been estimated at 600 billion
yen. Details still to be settled include the amount of Japanese loans,
Japanese Govern-ant credits. the currency in vhich the loans are to be ex-
tended. repayment terms. and the number of years Japan will be alloved to
share in the output of the Bohai fields.

COPYRICRT: Yoaiuri Shinbunsha 1979

080: 5120

‘2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

BCONONIC

JAPANESE FIRH To ASSIST PRC IN AGRICULTURE. INDUSTRY
Tokyo utnon KBIZAI SNINBUN in Japanese 17 Feb 79 Horning Edition p 6 09

[Text] Yen-er Diesel (eain office: Osaka City: president: Toshio Yasaoka:
capital: [.2 billion yen) disclosed on 16 February that it has recently
been asked by the Chinese Government to cooperate in nodernising the
"Chine-Japan Friendship People's Coanune" on the outskirts of Beijing.

This request for cooperation was made by high-ranking officials of China's
Agriculture and Forestry Ministry to President Yanaokn end other leaders of
Yanner Diesel when the letter visited China at the ministry's invitation
fron S to 16 February. This is the first request for agricultural coopera-
tion aade by a Chinese central government agency. Yanasr Diesel has decided
to give active cooperation response to this request. To this and, it will
hastily work out a concrete plan for cooperation.

The "Chins-Japan Friendship People's Counune” was created in October last
year by renaming a people's toluene in the western suburbs of Beijing to
sark the conclusion of the Japan-Chins Peace and Friendship Treaty. The
commune covers an area of 55 square kilometers and has a population of
31,000. It is believed that the Chinese Governaent's request was activated
by a desire to develop the co-aune into a sodsl for China's agricultural
noderniaetion through full utilisation of sachines and increased food
production. It is also believed that by so doing. the Chinese Government
wants to use the coenune's schisveaents as a sejor reason for continued
agricultural cooperation between Japan and China.

To render help to this cossune's modernisation program in a really effective
and cooperative senner, Yannar Diesel will first conduct an egronosical
survey of the co-nune and, based on this survey. to this request by the
Agriculture and Forestry Ministry. the stnar delegation was asked by the
First Hinistry of Hschine Building to help China turn out better diesel
engines and establish a system for their mass production. The Sixth
Ministry of Machine Building also tsportsdly asked the delegation to to-
operate in China's progress to develop marine engines and increase its
shipping tonnage.

COPYRICUT: Nihon Keizsi Shinbunsha 1979

050: 6105
63

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
BCONOH I c

HM Urrlblnb War. \I. m

KEIMNREN UNVEILS ECONOMIC REVITMJZATIOS PLAN

Tokyo MINICIII DAILY NEHS in English 23 Jan 79 p 6

[Text]

mrmuammlc

nu. pm to tutor.

mammal»
IMJmmylnan

whole Mann. and m
avenues! to ptovm
ado um lllcnlmoulnty

a

W W M.
contlnued. The dinner
“mama

I‘m-om: mmnuy. the
u the

W

mm Manhunt!“ 0!
mama-nub
the Intonation! «no;
deﬁcit. The, In I) the od-
mlnmmm. mama. one a:
0mm um booed on the on!
mmm m and tho m.

l

°pﬂoudolethm

FOR OFFICIAL "8?. ONLY

E

§

23%
§%
i
g

g i;
ii;
5

s
E

ii

Winch.

Bu Koldnuo on It'

imumamwwt

«mammwﬂum'n

"I“ magma ”132,0“;
1

Walnut: Io Jw'o

«mm

1» mm a. yarn "he.
mmmmmuu
mama-mu
opoo older the domllc
mm M lawn ll ohould
u I: mun um Jun oo-
opmlo will Intel-Mum!
not In Ibo III?

but old to
«whom man... no
mo ob m

to “can“. om“ I!»
m» m
and outﬂow o! Ionian
anmm

5

COPYRIGHT: Halnlchl Dally Xmas. 1979

050: I. IZO

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

BCONO‘rllC

GOVERNMENT'S UNPROPBSSIONAL EMPLOYMENT MEASURES CRITICIZED

Tokyo ASA"! JANARU in Japanese 26 Jan 79 p 3

[Text] This year. they say. will be the year of the employment problem. There
in no prospect that the economy will expand rapidly. and one can only expect
efforts toward rationalisation and reduced volume management to continue. If
nothing is done about the enployment situation it can only get worse. Projects
to develop employment have become a major showcase iten in the government's
1979 budget. This undertaking. they say. aims to create employment for 100,000
persons. Although it looks as though the number of the unemployed will leap

to 1.35 million this year. the government aims to hold the figure to 1978

levels with this policy.

It is all right to appreciate the government's enthusiasm for employment
policies but. frankly. it is a fact that there has been quite a bit of trial
and error claptrap in the government’s policies. Many of the policies have
been ineffective. merely adding complexity by building up the stack of piece-
meal policies. whether the unemployment adjustment benefits or the incentives
for raising the retirement age. the policies so deliberately implemented by
the government have led to misealculations which will leave 90 percent of
appropriations unused.

There is n hypotheses that future growth in employment will only be in the
tertiary industries: that it actually had grown in these industries, and will
grow in the future. There are even figures calculated by computer for the
different types of industry. There has. however. been no follow up investi-
gation on who is to leave the secondary industries. for what reasons they are
to leave. through what process are they to find work in current jobs in
tertiary industries. and what is the actual situation as far as work and wages
are concerned. It seems safe to say there will be no such investigation.
Merely to talk about tertiary industries without clearing up these questions
is only to create a limbo for the latently unemployed where there is employ-
ment on poor terms. The labor unions are interviewing union members one by
one and asking them how they were separated from their jobs. and what jobs
they have now. The unions are investigating in detail how much the members
relied on government measures. and whether the measures were useful. In this
way the unions are trying to clarify the strengths and weaknesses of official
policy in order to establish revised policies or new measures. This exercise
will be worth watching. Real life human emotions and the raw principles of
corporate action will come out of it.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example. corporations unable to reach the hiring rate for handicapped
peruunu make a payment according to the amount they fall short. For some
industries. it is said. the average penalty is 20 million yen. Do they feel
that it is more advantageous to the corporation to pay the equivalent of re-
lirenent pay for two persons than to reach the hiring rate? Ihe workingman's
life will not he saved by raising the retirement age to age 60 unless this
can be linked to the age for payment of welfare pensions. Mandatory retire-
ment at age 60 in large companies will not cover even 20 percent of the
workers. Can compulsory measures be gotten evon with a law on the retirement
age?

Neither the corporations. nor the government nor third parties will be con-
vinced by a labor struggle without policy. Up to now labor has relied upon
its officials and upon scholars for its policy. This case is different.
Taking the actual situation in the working place and industry as the point wf
departure. labor unions will first use the resources of the union meubers
themselves to confirm what kind of jobs are to be found in what industries.
and what is the outlook on how much employment will be possible in the future.
Than they will borrow from the knowledge of the scholars and third parties.
11ﬂs is a new facet of the labor movement.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbunsha 1979

9111
650: 6105

#7
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

JAPAN LESSENS RESTRICTIONS ON FOREIGN BANKS
Tokyo HAINICRI SHINBUN in Japanese 4 Feb 79 morning edition p 7 ON

[Excerpt] There is a growing international criticise of Japan because of
its "discriminatory treatment of foreign banks." To lessen this criticism,
the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan on 3 February decided to
gradually ease various restrictions on foreign banks in Japan. As a first
step, foreign banks will be allowed to issue certificates of deposit. This
is a revision of an earlier decision to allow only Japanese banks-~effec-
tive April this yesr--the right to issue such certificates. Another author-
ization permits foreign banks to extend loans to foreign-owned companies in
Japan.

In addition, the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan are studying the
possible raising of the foreign banks' yen conversion ceilings (ceilings
on the amount of foreign currencies allowed to be converted into yen after
the foreign currencies are brought into Japan), liberalising the discount-
ing of bills system to enable foreign banks to participate, and easing
various restrictions imposed on the Bank of Japan on the foreign banks'
short-term money market activities.

This move by the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan to ease various
restrictions against foreign banks was instigated by the decision of the
0.8. Treasury Department to send a team to Japan and other major countries
to investigate whether or not the countries are discruninating against
foreign banks.

COPYRIGHT: HAINICHI SHINBUN, 1979
680: 5105

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL "SB ONLY

I-zcouon l C

NORTH KOREA TO SIGN FISNERY CONTRACT WITH JAPANESE FiRN
Tokyo NlﬂON KEIZAI SNINBUN in Japanese 16 Feb 79 Horning Edition p 7 ON

[Excerpts] A private fishery company in Japan is likely to import large
quantities of fish and fish products from the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea (North Korea). Nilgata Puma (main office: Niigata City;
president: Koichiro Puma: capital: 32.5 million yen)--one of the leading
marine products dealers in Niigata Prefecture--discloscd on 15 February
that the company will shortly conclude a long-term trade contract with
North Korea to import aquatic products and offer technical guidance.

Under this contract Niigata Puma will import poliacks. crabs and other
seafood valued at some 20 billion yen per year. For pertinent fishing

operations. North Korea is now working on importing two mother ships from
Japan.

The contract is expected to be signed in Tokyo late in February through the
mediation of Nichiryu Shoji (main office: Tokyo; president: Shigemitsu
Yoshinaga; capital: 51 million yen). a company promoting friendship between
Japan and North Korea. In addition to this contract. Niigata Puma and

North Korea's Ministry of Fisheries delegation are expected to exchange
notes covering the following: 1) Niigsta Puma will import from North Korea
pollacks. crabs. sea trout. other netted fish and shellfish valued at

around 20 billion yen per year and North Korea will be represented in this
deal by its state-run Korean overseas trade company; 2) payments will be
made in the German mark and in cash remittances: 3) experts will be dis-
patched to North Korea after March to give fishery-related technical guidance
aboard two mother ships; and 6) refrigerator ships will transport seafood
from the two mother ships to Japan and their ports of discharge will be
Niigata and Tokyo. Should things go as scheduled, the first refrigerator
ship is expected to arrive ianigataport sometime in mid-March. To
establish imported seafood markets. Niigota Puma has already begun negotiat-
ing with the Hokkaido Fish Cooperatives Federation and a formal sale-on-
coaslgmeut contract will soon be signed.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1979

C80: 4l05

69
Ink OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

'MINICNI‘ (”HINTS ON PAN AM HITIIDRAHAL FRW IA'EA
Tokyo HAINICNI SHINBUN in Japanese 5 Feb 79 morning edition p 5 0H
[ﬁditoriah "IA'i‘A's Turning Point and JAL‘s Response"]

[Excerpts] Pan American world Airways, the world's largest airline, has
announced that it will withdraw from the International Air Transport Associa-
tion (IATA) at the end of March. Pan Al's withdrawal will rock IATA from
its foundation, for the airline has been the virtual leader of IATA. Thus,
IATA is faced with a serious turning point.

Pan An's withdrawal has long been anticipated in view of IATA's main func-
tion as an international fare cartel. Since its inception the Carter admin-
istration has advocated liberalisation of air transport. In line with this
policy, the American Civil Aviation Board (CAB) has moved to radically de-
regulate air transport. The striking feature of this policy is the virtually
unrestricted granting of route permits to airlines. Pan Am's withdrawal is
in line with this "open sky" policy, and it can be interpreted as a move
ained primarily at freeing itself from IATA's fare structure.

In his 23 January State of the Union message, the American President particu-
larly pointed out the contributions made by the deregulation of air trans-
port to the fight against inflation. The nessage stressed that regulation
on the railway, bus, and truck industries would be reviewed. All this indi-
cates that America's air transport liberalisation policy is past the point

of no return.

As a matter of fact, we cannot necessarily say that the cheaper the air
fare the better. Safety must be insured. On the other hand, if low fares
result in underlining the business foundation, it would not benefit passen-
gers in the long run. From the point of view of energy conservation and
air pollution and noise control, the wisdom of unlimited flights should be
carefully considered.

There is an elasent of truth in some of these criticisms of 0.3. policy.
which in essence seeks to impose a one-sided argument of the strong on the
week. As far as Japan Airlines is concerned, we can hardly say it has

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pursued n fare policy centered on the interests ol the passengers. As of

l February. JAL lowered the round-trip fare on its European routes by 10
percent. This will be followed by a lS-percent cut on Australian routes
later this month. Yet the fares on some routes are still too high compared
with the current exchange rate.

In reality. on age of low air fares on international routes is caning. JAL
is pressed by n need to severely rationalise its efforts to consolidate its
business foundation. Only recently JAB proposed to its union a plan to re-
duce the size of cabin crews to the level of 0.8. airlines. JAL's response
has been slow in eyery aspect. All JAP personnel should seriously heed the
warning that the airline may become "another national railway.“

COPYRIGHT: HMNICRI SHINBUN. 1979

050: 6105

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

TRADE AND INDUSTRY HINISTBR HITS NTT'S CLOSED-DOOR PROCUREMENT POLICY
Tokyo ASA“! SNINBUN in Japanese 15 Feb 79 Morning Edition p 9 0H

[Excerpt] Testifying before the Lower House Commerce and Industry Committee
on 16 February on the 0.3. demand for opening up the Telegraph and Telephone
Public Corporation's [NTT's] procurement program to foreign firms. Inter-
national Trade and Industry Minister Esaki criticized the NTT's closed-door
policy and urged it to procure foreign as well as domestic products. He
said: ”He do understand why the NTT is opposed to procurement of foreign
equipment. but we want it to cooperate with the government in implementing
a free economy policy based on the open market principle." This was the
first time a top government official had ever criticized the NTT on the
procurement issue.

The NIT! sinister made the aforementioned remark in answer to new liberal
club member Hasao Onari's questions. Onari first took up the "advertise-
ment on the opinion of communication equipment and electric-wire firms
against the 0.3. demand for open doors" carried in the 13 February editions
of newspapers with national circulation. he asked Needs. the NTT engineer-
ing bureau chief: "Hhat does this advertisement mean? Does it have anything
to do with your corporation?"

Haeda replied: "The corporation has nothing to do with the advertisement
because the firms placed it on their own initiative. however, the corpora-
.tion feels that if the door is opened to foreign products. it will result
in a deterioration of communication services and inefficiency." Thus the
NTT official reiterated the NTT'e reluctance to comply with the 0.8. demand.

Onari then directed his questions at MIT! Minister Esaki. Answering Onari'a
questions. the MIT! minister expressed his disapproval of the advertisement
saying: "Placing such an advertisement when Japan-0.8. relations are at a
serious stage will only exacerbate the relations." He pointed out: “Our
communication equipment producers have an internationally recognized high
level of technology and considerable international competitiveness." he
called on the NTT to open its doors saying: "He went the NT? to cooperate
in the implementation of the government's policy because this is the time
when international cooperation is important."

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Nonehs 1979

52
080: 6105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-ZCONOH [CS

ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY HBICHS 0.8. CRITICISM. CHANGES

FOR OFFlClAL USP. ONLY

Tokyo HMNICIII DAILY NEWS in English 26. 27. 28. 30. 31 Jon, 1 Feb 79

[Article by 'l'oohio Tokni. executive vice president of the Eiccttonic
Industrial: Association of Japan]

[26 Jan 79 pp 1. 6]

[Text]

11» mtmntattoo Mm
tho Japan: and Atom
cloctmntc Mutt-tea ta tut
cacalattn; Into that looks
almostltkaanokctmtavan

Min fatal. may: via

mumm‘

lnduatrloa Association o!
Japan. may m a moat
u-tthtncalatotdtDaIvato
counter m mm antl~
Jananex now In no
Unttcdsata.

Taknt unto his tenor! “Can
Japan'astcctnoklotanm
Ammmmr'wuw
acttrc pattlctpatton In tho
«mom was and umﬂar
pastexnctmalmthanta
mu. He has baa tn Na
«mat pat [or nearly our:
year: and baa "Man other
"PM! on tntuuattmat trada

EIAJ comprtaoa vartooa
electronic mm In Japan
won a: tdevtatna recum-
naanotactm mun out-It
MU, MW at [a
andLSla. Misfit-fol".

m apart “Can Japan's
Electronic Ind; Survive
Atom my" will bo
«auto out-ta on Page 5.
Ito-om, tho 11w Dotty
Hm one: M may

“communication
Win taaatttctat-
saw.

F53

The year ma can
man: and. an
early 1m. h
uonal [u a:
mumm-
tn: min m
tlonal diplo-
matic and da-
teaao lama to
International

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
;*=>* 2§%5;'"§
=§§§§§§§§g§§§g
f8;'”3g §§§§ g
Eégégggéii 3%;
§§%§;5§§§§ 35;
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030008-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thuelote. Ibo comm

mm

well u acnwlhmlmrd
lallum h mm mm-

:giié E
5555
gEEEE

5:
if

55
$55
1:32

5
5
S;

52
5
3;

nluodouundln

pull-Illa. an Illecl

km he mm“...
a
WWW...“
ham.
[27 Jan 79. p 5]
[Text]

m . "It 1m IW um Illl
0%“ Hail". u been 0‘ IN J m “- yQ'
Mumummlm. ”walnut-aw “m
ell-m. m m the lam o! the decimal: I!"
W W m Immmm. an
d. m mutated ﬂuent. tho Amtlun a:
M M have been al ”'9‘” m

mmmugm Wyhmnm nu
alone. we wllumed the my arm ”ml": a
on Wumm

dul locum «mm on
adm'ﬂwlmlﬂﬂﬁ mmuvmmatmuul a
“M“. and lands on em mwmw nu
“dalmwu momma“ «-
“Hm: Jmmuo‘ WWI!“ a.
alwmumnmcunn ﬁ““““”“¥”“”" “"
‘ ”Imam... Jmeu u.
will" m m m M a“ “I!
0.3.”.(lu ) m
Wm www"u M the mmmmdulluﬂ. an:
J w M mummpmmm not
nuwmsummmmw- “"*“"mwh°“" q
:2 of null. Eleclmlc “MM”. M‘ that
man “ﬁh‘hm, ammumnuunun an
Wumusuhu'wmlcﬂ! «mayhem: at!!! m:
’ n W W M
W. It was 0* ﬁgmwmammm- love

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030008-9
«on an mm
n h It pur-
. Ill nurlnce
m ot trade
ltd Stats and
. cm Iltdttty
“Japan;

ml Jmme
turn the olltet
t I It». nettle
mputvolmtm
m In ow to
o Unlted States
not! MIR. But
melmllo
emand: are
that A. beta:
'devtwt.‘ One
mum.
eucammmtty.
In at wattlme
tantalum:
mm tnde ts
anlme
' (Shetl- K.
rte» Attttuttu
mm.
W W.

2.. 161:)

Mt

“3%‘Wmmum "m ".3 335::
Ptled to l
Tdevtutonltmtcolumim altar. no but
Wound! alumna M
mum allot. no %
Mn all-v.1” m
Copactton mm. 108 but
refutation. alt-Into. mm
1mm": Doc. 1!» Antltnlt

DollectloaYorhtx‘l'Vm .
Colot'l‘etcvtutool’tctmm um. um Mm

Mum-rem - um um mm
Gmnmmcvnuct bloa- mm. m: Mm
mm 809M110 Antltnut
ummm 3000:. Mt mm
Ptud'nnulun Myth

Cantata! ”Sept!” Dump!
ACMhpton ”Sept. ms 0mm

Tmtoo Recetm talennm 125m.

cam

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cemlnty. tt ts mttomlly

htlatml tndedmunlnlmed
or when u ttmctml newton
ovettalumottltewtnen.

The elm to the Unttcd
sum that the lumen
electtonlc tnduttty I:
threatening m not land on
Wmmtttonottheutul
mutton but on emotloul
exaggeration.

.
%

me My. muse

'2Am. tm Deana-mo

MBWM

Badman and mu
ltutcol Wt:

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

E

am. an alumina
Annual Report
The annual report ot Bill's
Cormer Electronlea Group

sums up the “W 0‘
lotlooo:

"Many American eott'etnner
eteetmleuldmmﬂm
have established Win
and assembly operation in
other countries. and MIN
owned manolacturers are in
ereasinaly becoming part ot the
Amerlean tndquy by butldhll
orbuylnaplantshere. ‘

"lthlielorclptcountrlesheve
ollered siren: eompetltion.
they have also prevlded new
sources ot supply to domestle
manulaeturers. Virtually all
Amerlcan-rntde consumer
electronic products contain

:orthebestzlue War:
.mportlott componen

American-made. otherseotne
trons Japan. 1'alwan. HM
KWMKNHW
Europeandelsewben- lull!
American component tlrms.

are also made abroad to the
speciﬁcations ol American
manutaetum"

As described. the demonic
lndustrylsatrulyhleroaltoual
industry with strong orien-
tations in vertical and
hortzontal dlvtslbns ot labor
tproduetlontonauobalbasls.
Close interdependence extsta
between the partletaar else.
tronlctndmtryotaeouryand
thccotmterpartolanotherlnall
aspects Including markets.
components. the apply ot
semitlnlsbed pods. ad the
tlowotteehnologiesandcapltal.

tn this way. mourns are
distributed optimally and
protlts are maximized world-
wlde. A cloned electronte in.
Matry cam exist as an in-
”try. 57

Ivan arr-we‘ve! "or nt'lV

Dlversltled Nature

So it would be a ﬂagrant in-
stance ot ignoring the diver-
silted nature ot the electronic
industry to launch an exclusive.
import restrtctlon drive by
separating and exaggerating to
the extreme certain aspects --
lnternational - lrornothers.

Certain electronlc equipment
manutacturera and labor
organizations have been
alleuna tor years that the US.
electronic industry would be
enrolled tomorrow by imports
ot electronle protectstrom

apatrytsthetlstaht that
lraalle to: to be threatened by
Japanese Imports)? The an-
swerlsdellnltelyoo.

Elh'shruutallteportlortm
speaksotthe“atreutb”otthe
Amertcan electronlc Ina-try
aalollows:

“Electronles to one ot the
stronpeot US. “ties in
world trade. and continues to
matntahalavorablebalanoeet
trade.‘lhetradebalaneeottm
texportsoyertmportslwasna
btllion. whlch is almost trlple
last year's M rollloa trade
surplus.

“Though laced wlth ln~
commune-nodal”
lroro electronlc tadutrtes tn
Aala.thell.s.tnutrytsabteto
remaln in a domhant posttion
mm and the development
otbtvrievetsotteehnolouare
Important tactors' la the
maintenance ot U. s.
promlnenee.”

These tools can be in»
medtately pereetved lront the
toliwtnptahle.

Ea: 0.3.39.8 a... a
8.855.235.5333...
as . ------ _ ....... ..
2.2.6.3 «.852: 5.89
>. 9o 85. :39 53. 33
588.8%..8
2. as" 3.3 35.338
3339.338}.
ggggigia
33...... :2: 3 2...
8232.38. .3358 .83
.83 3.3-3.8»: 93
52.33.9533;
.5 =8. 3.8.. Eisiw.
3.8.3.. c 38.23. .3338
8.2. .2 3.8.8.5: 33
82.8 1 =8...- 5. ca.
352 ﬁeiqus.
2 :5 32.28.. 333..
333... :3 .3... .2
38.33 53.5. 3 88-.
329.153. 2.5.9. :5
can: 3.. 5. 35:3
to: 833:: E...
Egan? 939.2. 5..
>352: , 3523252..
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

saving. it ia a W lndica
tlvant titre trend: and one
that eatneti iia “climb"
.WMW
. u'atiinr U. s. annlianca
maheradldnotmmin
the CB traaaceim 0n the
other hand. entering the
- Ametican mathet mile: either
OEM or ptivate band name.
Japaneae titanium ex.
nlotedthonotentialandhuiltw .
themarketiotmiiationoi today. .
The CD transceiver heath
atariedintiielaiiet hali oi Mt.
lmpntta inm Japan mile:
08M mt: soared by
iupamdmmatmme
U. s. indtItry with racont- .
limiting aaleaand mitt». and ,
increasing Inplnylnant. Eva
with stepped up dom‘aatic
Induction anti limit“. my -.
iarhaitlndtlenmtl
twain point came in July
me when the Patient Con
municationa Commtaaion
(we) decided to apand the
CB chamel availability and to
attengthen the technical
requliementa on CD tuna»
ceiveutoanlnthaptohlenuot
lamina and radio tummy
03. m
'8 W M m we W
mm It: I“ 8.0 m 3.0 I:
mace-m 4 .IO 67.7 8.3 80.7 :u 33
WW .
meow I11 17.1 m m we at

1m We: ll cot-tun: I. Germany. Prune. than. haly.
mmmmmummum..

relled heavily an Won:
government procurement.
notably the Delano Depart-
ment and NASA. (m that
to. known an the mlllary~
tnduetrlaleemplu.
Ontheo'herhMtherehave
been no each ht; projects tn
Japan as seen In the us. The

Japaneee elerhonlc Matty.
torthhnamewdnotoulay

muchcaplta'l htheraearch'

and develwmeu ol Mutt-la!
equipment. which usually
realm heavy lnttlal capltal

themeleematcstleld:
WI‘hlrdly. the Japanese
economy expertenced a

phenomenal (moth tn the
1980'. mehleh [name

succesalully pursued the
economy of auanttta‘lve
prodtlctlouoatlleonehamm

country. Importing large
mummnm
mmmmm
w Japan also
has J Med work
force. .,

-‘l'heee ‘ " en-
ema“ ol the
m . mulch ts
huly htemlve h .
anﬂaharandaealeehcreased

valultlaalaoane‘urgy-am
lovpollﬂlom aspectaot
them areheumten to
tneJapaneeeenvtouaent.
In the vale oi the Arab oil
crunch. however. consumer
spending uttered a setback the
lilies oi which had never been
teen hetero. And since then.
mumer heshccome'
much more re to the ups
and doiyns oi the economy.
ilorne electronic appliances.
aheaoincomcetaatle iehigh.
alaosutteredemajor owirom
to”; aluuieh W spend-

1'he globol reoeem com-
pelled the Japanese consumer
electronic industry to con-
centrste its MD on producing
appliances he: suited to the
changed needs or consumers
whohedhecememoreselective
such as pomeﬂrg color
We. and to iurther Improve
coat performance and mess
produciionteehnoiogtes.

Such continuous technolo
gieai innovation rewarded the
Japanese manuiacturera with
increased litereational com-
petitiveness on the well-nigh
reiterated color TV markets
arotndtheworidfhieisatact
thetnoonecenoveriooh.

U.8.4apan8emlnar

A seminar was held in Palo
Alto In the mun-he oi San
Francteeowon ttov. it. rm.
attended mum
Many were We to iind a
place to alt. 1'he U.S.Japan
Semiconductor Seminar was
prepared by Japanese Semi-
conductor Manuiaciurers In
resporne to the strong anti-
Japaneeecernpaiuaenhlchhad
been pushed persistently by
American manuiecturera
there

'l'heeui-Japan campaign

FOR OFFICIAL USE thl.V

abound“ In aenseitonallsm anti
acre at their height shen the
uminer opened. A local paper.
tor instance. Elmira; him
photoneph wh a -
bended Japanese was standing
with a Jar-um sword in hunt
oiaiine computers.
Unlntimldoteti. the Japanese
semiconductor industry
delegates pointed «it with
coniidcncc and calmness that
the charges oi the us.
. momiacturers were oil the
point..not based on an ecctnate
perception ot reality. and tar
too emotional. Their speeches
gained support irom the many
Americansettending
As are how. there have been
ten occasions when Japanese
and American industry people
have sat down together to that
solutions to meet problems
belore they become too eerioue
and too late. For in Japanese
who are traditionally ec-
customoti to prohiernooiving
through consensus. the
American approach-to tstte
thematiertotheiawcourtand
iirdit it than to the end—is
somewheiatrange.
'i'heAmerlcans are. however.
patntully aware that court
stnrwes are costly in money.
time. and enemy. and i believe
that basically they, ton. think it
better to solve problems
through dialogue. But the
existing US amitrurt lava
comeinthoveyevenitthetvo
lndtntrtesdoslrothleeaneenn

approach.

Even under the cir-
cumstances. however. it is still
possible tor the two Marries
to discus seriouly desirable

by bolder wen
seminars similar to the

semiconductoraemioerhl'alo
Alto. instead oi clued-door

session

'i'itiilll‘l‘: .‘iainicitt Daily News, 1979

l: 1:120

6')
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I have. so tar. described telly
trade problems have arisen and
what the Jepaneae position ie.
The criticism directed at Japan
irom its trading partners—the
us. and European curries--
canbceumroedtmaeioiioes:

'I‘hai Japanese practices are
nearer:

n «ports: That Japanese
undersea reunites oi the
importing country‘s treemei
situates; iorrn cartels: and
are on expanding their
marletaharea:

0n imports: That the
goyernment and industry
collaborate to pursue
nationalistic policies: ltd are
toshut Wm prudticis.

on 0 go

We have «altered these
amnentsttmeandsgahthat
our nieces-hit exports were
achieved became or dunand
andreaultediromourstrem
etiorte. Or that the Japanese
meraetiereallynoteloaedﬂev
American .or European
herslneaemen

American and European
mattresses are.not making as
muchettortastheJapaoese.

MMexdtamotnrch
FOR ()l-‘I-‘lCl/tl. USP. ONLY

ECONOMIC

TOKYO ECONOMY SIIIPTING FROM SECONDARY T0 TERTIARY INDUSTRY

Tokyo MINIC’HI EMILY NEWS in English 28 32:: 1’9 9 7

[Econoscopc column by Econobaervcr:

[Text]

COPYRIGNT :

080:

The loos ot economic new
to Osaka and Nev-Yeah has
lwlheuouohlen.mlmllor
oheoomeooo the hem to,hu¢
Tokyoteoeotly.

Tokyo's ”W to the teal
nonnatlooantodmt an 30.1
paeeotto that m. It tell to
17.5 oeroeotdo that me. The
decline“: umedhylheshttt
ot eooootolc aghast. which
began around was. trolh
oeeondary lodutrtea. par-
ticularly the heavy and
mmme
loduntttee Sentee Manatee
came Ioto Meat laden-mp
replacing mum to-
dustrtea

Tertiary tnduatrteo.

spearheoded by the wholesale
and oervlee Mattias. Iteot
expanding ataee In. Tentery
Who accounted toe dooe
to 70 Default 0! the tut metro-
“IWWM \

ﬁnelhoreaoevaspanlalluly
coosotetma vtth the wholeoile
heathen. Natlooatde, the
weight ol the wholesale
huslneu In GNP lumped to 34.0
percent II we (tom the 21.3
mattetlﬁt'l‘heuwthwu
closely related to the
developmentotdotamm
technology.

4120

meloooot't'okyo'oeeooomle
clootlodlltereotmhuhoseot
om and New You to that

a Walton ot a elaahle
porttoo at natertal nod
Maneuotthenatlonh
Tokyo.

Aodthaaehtohhooneeam-
enetllootleave‘l’okyowhlle
thecltycouthﬁeatohe the
nerve center mt
Hamish-anon and Maine.»

molten.
Aoothetpheoomeoohvoethy
othotelslheodnovottheoet

metmoutaouodocttwﬂehta
puma] home) to My
muw‘mmvmm

Malnlcht Daily News, 1979

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Tokyo Losing Economic clouc"]

whethet thto eveoto; op
stodﬂedaooeeaaetpvmeot

Policy).
some recall theoamvthg

wothoomelevetshetween
urhaoaodmalamaaoeodot
them-leadetlhlhbetltwal
and economic them? Or.
should we [eyed I as the
hemlotaaaaeotlocallsm
tnthaamatten?‘

In a htplyhhatoouaoom
eoctety”llke Jay-t. l1: ex-
tmhelydltﬂudttoarmeota
clear-ammonium
thatreouleoahea-aam
ott'elallouhetmuhuaod
localecooothlunddtweo.
FOR ()FI’ICIAI. USE OHLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

EQUIPMENT QUALITY IN ELEMENTARX PARTICLE PHYSICS LABS DBCRIBD
Tokyo KAGAKU ASA“! in Japanese Nov 78 p 34

[Article by shogo Hizoe of KAGAKU ASARI: "Stagnation in Japanese Blementsry
Physics")

[Text] The level of elementary particle physics in Japan is still flounder-
ing in the minor leagues. Onc even receives the impression that the gap
with the advanced nations is even widening.

The 19th International Conference on high Energy Physics was held in late

August in Japan for the first time. This conference was first held at the
University of Rochester in the United States in 1950, and recently it has

been held every 2 years. This can be considered to be the most important

meeting in this field.

with the discovery of the J-psi particle in late 1976, high-energy physics
has now entered a period of intense activity. These days. there has been
an almost dizzying amount of development every time an international meeting
is convened. Naturally great expectations were held for the present confer-
ence as to what kind of new data might be revealed. This was also the oppor-

tunity to see how much capability Japan, the sponsor nation, had in this
field.

From the standpoint of the results of research announced at the conference,
it ended on a somewhat conservative note. There were few colorful topics

discussed, such as concerning the discovery of new particles, and it seemed
more of a recess during an otherwise active period. This could also be
explained as the lull before the startup of large accelerators now under
construction. One major result, however, was the fact that experimental
data supporting the Weinberg-Salaam unifying theory. which unifies two of

the [our interactions in nature, namely the electromagnetic and the weak
interactions, is not almost complete.

Current high-energy physics is engaged in a two-prong effort. One involves
a more basic investigation of matter in nature centered on quark theory.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

while the other is the effort at unification of the four interactions. It
is in the latter field that there has been solid progress. Now a question
is what is the level of Japanese physics? On this latter, a realistic
appraisal is given in a letter contributed by rrof Leon Lederman of Columbia
Unlvorsity to the 10 September "discussion column" of the ASA“! SHINBUN.

The professor is the discoverer of the upsilon particle which is assumed

to possess the fifth quark. He says that "what is lacking in Japan, which
has built an ultra-modern nation, is depth in its intellectual elite." In
plain words, this is saying that there are only a few among the Japanese
scientists who are of international calibre. There were quite a number of
Japanese among those who presented talks. However, use of the word Japanese
does not accurately reflect the situation. For instance, Prof Ichiro Nambu
(photo insert) of Columbia University is one of a few countable scientists
of world rank as evidenced by the fact that he was delegated the major task
of giving a wind-up lecture. However, his research had been conducted in
the United States with American funding, and furthermore, he is now a
naturalized American citizen. There are many other similar examples of

this type. In other words, the accomplishments of ao-cslled Japanese scien-
tists have almost all been attained with foreign facilities and money.

During the conference. some of the young researchers residing abroad were
heard to complain to the press. In summary, these complaints seemed to be
concerned mainly with the fact that research funding of basic science in
Japan was extremely meager, and that there was some sense of humiliation in
having to depend so much on foreign money. There are also other problems
such as personal competitiveness among scientists, the lack of effort to
curry public understanding, as well as others. On the other hand, however,
there also seems to exist a fundamental problem in the way appropriations
are made, where only economic benefits are considered with a tendency to
neglect cultural values.

There was a time when scientists "of depth" such as Yukawa, Tomonsga, and
Sakata appeared successively on the scene in the field of particle theory
and quantum mechanics. This is due to the fact that at that time, there
still existed in Japan a background of experimental physics which was needed
to ewentually produce results in theory. The present stagnation can be
attributed to a difference in capability of experimental facilities, which
has automatically produced a drag on theoretical development.

The grievance of Japanese experimentalists attending the conference that
"it seems as if a minor league team simply rented out the ball park to watch
major league teams play a game" is likely to continue for some time.

COPYRIGNT: Asshi Shinbunsha 1978

5576
CSO: 4105

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

AGE OF INTELLIGENT ROBOT is UPON US
Tokyo NIKKAN KOCYO SHINBUN in Japanese 11 Dec 78 p 13

[Text] The growth of industrial-use robots continues smoothly even when the
economy is not strong. It is not simply a quantitative expansion in pro-
duction output and sales. Great qualitative and technical progress has

been made. From the first simple Hatehan robots. which were fixed-variable
sequence robots. we have come to the point where Teichene Playback robots
equipped with computer-controlled memory and replay mechanisms are in
widespread use. "ith the appearance of modular robot production systems.
robots are showing their effectiveness in production rationalization.
efficiency and labor well-being--in the manufacture of automobiles and in
other widespread fields. And now. we are actually beginning to have
intelligent robots that "decide by themselves" and "act by themselves."

The year 1985 will be the beginning of "the age of the intelligent robot."
By giving a measure of intelligence to a mechanical robot, people are trying
to make real the boundless dream of production rationalization. labor well-
being and social well-being.

In the production structure of the industrial world, more weight is being
put on diversified small-quantity production (instead of the heretofore
dominant mass production) because of shifts in fashion and needs in all
products. Also. rapid change is demanded in the production line. Because
of this diversification in modes of production. the value of specialized
machinery. which was the key in the age of standardized mass production.
has declined sharply. 0n the other hand. industrial-use robots, which can
cope flexibly with diversified small-quantity production lines with many
model changes. are being brought to the fore. In these past few years.
despite Japan's depressed economy. they have continued at a yearly high
growth of about 40 percent.

The industrial-use robot. whose main function is this flexible automation,
has assured its position with the Teichene Playback robot. which came into
existence with the development of the computer industry. This robot has a
memory and replay capability, and if someone "teaches" it once. afterwards
the robot is capable of performing the same operation any number of times.
Even if there is a change in the production line. this can be accommodated
Just by altering the robot's instructions.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however. this repeating robot has the capability to repeat only the opera-
liens with which it was instructed. In cases where there are changes in
the operational environment. where the manufactured products are random in
kind. and where the operation is not fixed. it does not have the capacity
to adapt.

Thus. if we were able to put into this industrial-use robot the capacity

to measure and discriminate the position and conditions of the manufacturing
environment and products and have it carry out fixed tasks while making
appropriate decisions with regard to conditions. the robot would be a machine
richer in adaptability and flexibility. "hat is appearing now is the
intelligent robot. The intelligent robot has sense capabilities that
correspond to the human five senses (sight. touch. smell. hearing and taste)
and which can be controlled by these sense capabilities.

Even so. we should not hope that a robot will have intelligence and senses
equal to those of man. But. if it can be equipped with sense capabilities
to a certain level and the capacity to adapt to changing conditions. then
the manufacturing capacity of the robot can take a big step forward. Pre-
sently research and development is progressing with focus on an intelligent
robot whose "intelligence" is the sense of sight and the sense of touch.

In part. hearing is also a goal. but taste and smell are not goals at all.

in the sense of touch there are sense of direct touch. sense of pressure.
sense of strength. sense of slipperiness. etc. As for sensors to detect
these. micro-switches. proximity switches. semi-conductor sense-pressure
elements. strain gauges. touch-pressure resistors. warp meters. torque
detectors, photoelectric conversion elements. etc., are being developed.
Also. for sight sensors. there is a variety of things such as photo diodes.
diode arrays. vidicon cameras. image disector cameras and fiberscopes.

In this way the intelligent robot has the facility to take in and analyze
outside information by means of touch. sight and the ability to "handle."
As the result of bringing together independent research into the eye.

hand and software. the making of working intelligent robots has recently
greatly been enlivened. even in the industrial eerld.o Representative
examples are the IC. LSI. etc., bonding in the computer world. which is
the foremost industry in this respect. and the assembly of home electrical
appliances and arc welding.

Influence on Automotive Assembly

0a the whole. intelligent robots are just on the threshold of actual use.
however. it appears that instances of actual use--especis11y in the field ‘
of assembly, such as the assembly of small quantities of complex products
and the assembly of cars--will quickly increase from new on. According

to the Japan Industrial-use Robot Industry Association, in the early 1980s
the technical development of intelligent robots will be fairly complete,
and in 1985 intelligent robots will account for 20 percent of all robot
production. Moreover. according to America's Cyber Factor Company. this
rate will be higher--it may go to 30-50 percent.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In th world as a whole. who ls advanced in the technology of intelligent
robots? Number one abroad is Stanford University's Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory. Since the development of the intelligent robot prototype in

tin hand-eye project at Stanford. a variety of research is accumulating--
the pump assembly robot. the hand-eye system based on feedback fro. the
sense of sight and from answers derived from a three-dimensional color
combination puzale robot. Also. the assembly robots of ltaiy's Olivetti Co.
are known worldwide. and besides. among the reports given at the Inter-
national Robot Symposium. there are several other promising robots.

Expectations Toward Japan of Large Developed Nations

lhwever. in the application and development of working intelligent robots.
Japan leads the world. Japan's strong performance has led to positive
action with respect to robot introduction and outstanding technical
strength for robot makers and industries in the forefront. such as the
automotive and home electric industries. This situation has thrust Japan
late a leading position in the world in terms of the development and use
of robots.

because of that, expectations for our country are extremely greet with re-
gard to industrial-use robots. especially high-level ones including intelli-
gent robots. The hopes of the Soviet Union. Eastern Europe. etc.. in the
communist sphere are strong. Japan Industrial-use Robot Industry Associa-
tion Chairman Shuji Komeeoto, who visited both Czechoslovakia and bulgaria
along with Prof Yoji Umetani of Tokyo Kogyo University. instructor in JETRO's
machine seminar. returned to Japan on 4 December and explained the current
situation as follows.

in Bulgaria. Beroe Combinato is the center of the development and manufacture
of robots. A concentrated production of 50 units per month of fixed-
variable system simple robots is being carried out there. In Czechoslovakia.
centering on Bukof (the national research and development agency). they are
trying to make an automated system with robots as the nucleus. Presently

200 projects are being worked on. They are still at the stage of just

having made an experimental model of an actual robot.

Thus. in the research and development of robots. both countries are very
far behind, but they have a strong interest in robot use. The coming
meeting on robots will be lively. People of both countries involved in the
development of robots will hereafter bring to developaent in their own
countries the low-level Harehan robot. With respect to the high-level
intelligent robots and Teichene Playback robots. they are planning to
introduce products and technology from abroad. In this they agree that
expectations toward Japan are greatest.

In the field of industrial-use robots. the expectations of the world
toward Japan are great. Hereafter. as we advance to high levels with the
intelligent robot, this tendency will probably get stronger. Especially.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hurnuuu lutelilnunt ruhllu are hluh priced product» which require n concou-
Lrntlun of very high level skill which brings together equipment. elec-
lronlcu and control, to fill the needs of the world will probably be a big
plus for Japan' a economy. The future of the intelligent robot. which is a
step taken toward the 1980s. is bright.

(iﬁHIMcﬂﬂbﬂlﬂmﬂ-v l'

(”tho-mumxsm:
"was. new

  
  
    
   

' (a) I
$3.1. Ii”.
M. I“)

(6)1301“
(7)::::Wt7’ '.
m
A“
(10):;7bfxv9nz 3
(“guzrn'b
I
Figure 1
Key:

1. Industrial-use robot in biological space
2. (Professor Ichiro Kate of Waseda University: Robot and Brain.
From the Limbs)

3. Degree of intelligence

4. human

5. (Endurance, high speed, permanence. constancy)

6. Intelligent robot

7. Memory recall industrial-use robot
8. Degree of function ‘- ~
9. (Overall use, space occupancy)

10. Simple Hatehan robot

ll. Degree of physical ability

12. Information mechanism
13. Special use automatic mechanism

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

793 9.3033 :0 A83

  

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.N 6.59...”
I:.-w Kmnnhwo . a; KA»..!3~CI’I no.3!- n~ .Ilulnnc
N\|.:n.\.ﬁ§vxnb\1|ao .IIHgIHuug mxa A I lll4$Ki\n§A:m\ a H3
uhéﬁaauo Ilsa“? .nhnmghnodulz ﬁuﬁAazﬂwtswﬁWAuwmﬂlluo. C
.«A~h\.ni«ﬂn\.mw~um Elgar.” nxnﬁéau !.|- Ikéut
[#35 u......4.....u......?ov . :ilixm Wamwvmwuﬁmmlmmmmwﬂuwa a fﬁniamluﬁ
HelmeAOnhALﬁwnumvaﬂﬁknaﬁlhnwm§ 2:33! R ...vunu.EIu\.vnAamv-IINIE.
. . ..uimmm _ 5.1%.. I: W
I . ﬁrm .nnWCD .. riﬂe 375593.93! I Ensignﬂnumwwwnt

 

Ilquen "Huang“! hnﬂxwmmxwﬂ u. .._a~.l«.\.m..\mmwu%w.% at I. Q .. oﬁultk 1.3%: mu. m (IKE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.«A .kAvunKAAnAu8ungﬁuW lawn mxamgﬁveﬂ z IhAﬁann—ov
r n
a . . Pﬂioov Ilﬁufuﬁuurdﬁﬂ oxaﬂniuovl I ﬁukAazA,i3wo‘IIﬂo~
w
galhugmmn I L nuannknnvﬂ .5 An... IAR'IEAQ
axﬁ..¢ﬂ..u¥W lill.|l'l..-i. l5: l...-n...|. .I M
gnaw“? . .NAuevllest .ﬂbmuuﬂnsa ﬁxamninis. z gaaanimamacv
NIAlvmehnmnAAQLMun glimﬂmﬂlwmﬂulgi :III....llﬁVlmVNCAUvauvl-kldﬂmw‘aﬁ HUN? 3 l.|Mny
n§guu€ ﬁat“ 0n ﬁhaﬁﬂucuaaiﬂ Aﬁnﬁyvaoev’ 9 .3! an UK .

 

- :sﬁuﬁus saw...“ UH mﬁﬁau..,. .. I Jmﬁmé

u.HP...n.UHa~.A¥.9yﬁm£wm./ﬁWﬂﬂhm lawman 3&qu ”mwmmkwnuv.ﬂ.m .m . but. >123OA5~
uu‘naaﬂia in. .0M.uu...na.nwmu n5 .1H .58 :muwmwuwbﬂh .2; I” a. n.za.c?u.v.r.md .

REF-sz gainivaﬂmmu w. iluJﬂwmwMMthchdw O 27. az<=thMmCC

\Avkuuch3A¢A=ui§vunRWMIm< vxansisds u. .m.nAcunuqu%M...wauC . m
Fesecnﬂi‘abuﬂiranudamawwn. .4141... “haulammmwhndc a 3 ﬁ:§...7é:....._=33
glut. Mﬂmwmanc 59K...“ . .i. .u Hung; «i Van.“ Vb. . 32.43;? .3..- .. >t.....3.u..¢! $10.3
. a an: n , u n \A Cd 7. 5H. Aﬂukluﬁﬁapc

all!!! gh|9§8.¢1+wm murmmm . .u «.53... ...E.Nw....mn...r§3 ... r v .- a law 13!»! u m _

guulérllAE II I u. \. .4 GV q. a I g. x. it svwmrrﬁuvﬁyd... z .....u ~mvlnxluw .Gv
§H¢nln§mva33nvﬁuepﬁﬂme‘ a. mwﬂwma 9:.

 

 

 

 

 

 

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 2|

A.

industry
8. (Study made by the Japan Industrial-use Robot Industry Association)

C.

D.
la.
lb.
1c.
1d.
le.

1f.
lg.

lh.

2a.
3a.
3b.
6a.
Sa.
6a.

6b.
7a.
7b.

8a.
9a.
9b.
10a.
11a.
12a.

Name of Robot

Maker

Hitachi 7.
Fuji Electric Co.

Nippon Electric Co.

“TN Toyo Bearing Co.
Yasukawa Electric 00.
Mitsubishi Electric Corp.

9.
1°.
11.
12.

BO
Mister Ares

Mister Aros Junior
Bolt-fastener Robot
HI-T-HAND Expert 2

Fully automated transistor
essenbly system

HI-T-HAND MK-2

Sight and Touch Combination
Ambidextrous Robot
Mobile-type Atomic Furnace
Inspection Robot

Selector

Audio cognitive

Auto-atic bonding system
Auto-stic visual inspector
Motorman

Graphic cognitive handling
robot

Automatic bonder

Large-scale arc welding robot
Setting device for auto-eti-
celly putting wicks in large-
scale welded structures
Grinder operation robot
Locomotive robot

Automatic bonder .

Sight handling robot
Automatic bonding system
HELEOT

Examples of the practical application of intelligent robots in

Miteui Shipbuilding S Engineering
Co.

Sumitono Shipbuilding 6 Machinery
co.

Toshiba

Kawasaki Heavy Industries

Oki Electric Industry Co.

Nippon Kokan K.K.

Type of Intelligence
Sight

Sight

Sight and touch
Touch

Sight
Touch

Sight and touch

Sight and touch and hearing
Sight

Hearing

Sight

Sight

Sight

Sight
Sight
Sight

Touch
Strength
Sight
Sight
Sight
Sight
Touch

[Key to Figure 2 continued on following page]

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Key to

F.
11.

11.
1k.

11.

In.

In.

lo.

2b.

3c.

4b:

5b.

6c.

6d.

1c.

7d.
8b.
9c.

9d.
[Key to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2 continued]

Name of Sennor 6.
Indirect touch gap sensor
utilising magnetic change

Television camera and micro
switch

Touch sensor and semi-conductor
magnetic sensor

Television camera

Strength. pressure and direct
touch sensor utilizing
pressure electric‘gun

Television camera, direct
touch. pressure, strength
sensors

Television camera. vibration
neter, thermostat, microphone,
ion chamber

Television casera

Microphone
Television casera
Television camera

Television camera

Television canera

Television casera

Snell—scale television camera
using 600 image sensor

Magnet scale

Differential notion transformer
Optic sensor which combines
hydrogen injected tungsten

lamp and solar cell

Solid ele-ent camera

Figure 2 continued on following pag
13

Sensor Function
Learning and calculating corner
point coordinates and wrist
compensation

ll

Location and shape detection by
means of shape perception
Resistance detection and location
detection and ability to pinpoint
location

Pinpointing location by means of
pattern perception and detection
of defective goods

Direct touch, pressure and
strength detection

shape perception and direct touch.
pressure. strength detection

Detection of each type (measure-
ment of temperature. bolt looseness.
radiation level, etc.)

Size discrimination of product
utilizing shape perception

To perceive language which is
made by continuous sound
Pinpointing of location by shape
perception

axe-ination of shape, measurement
by shape perception

Confirming condition of rough
location of work by shape percep-
tion; location. set-up of welding
torch

Pinpointing of location by shape
perception

Pinpointing of location by shape
perception and detection of
defective goods

Set-up of torch position and exam-
ination of corner welding
Location detection

axe-ination of grinder strength
Location detection

Pinpointing of location by shape
rce tion
8? P

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure 2 continued]

1
1
1

10b.
11b.

12b I

'l.

In.
1r.
is.
It.
in.
1v.
1w.
1x.
2c.
3e.
3f.
be.

So.
6e.
6f.
70.
7f.

8c.
9e.
9E.
0c.

lc.
2c.

Television camera Pinpointing of location by
shape perception

Television camera Pinpointing of location by
shape perception

Differential transformer Examination of welding line

Application Operation/Process None

Arc welding (construction machinery parts)
I. ll ll

Concrete pouring plastic frame bolt tightener

Precision joining

Bonding of transistors

Boxing

Assembly

Inspection inside atomic furnaces

Vegetable separation

Sorting nail, baggage, etc.

Bonding of transistors

Transistorised. etc.. renovel of defective items of large and
mid-size (vegetables. etc.) goods from small goods parts
Arc welding

Assembly

Bending of transistors

Shipbuilding. etc.. arc welding

To carry out location determination of automatic wick pusher in
shaving-off process of large-scale structures

Grinding operation process of piston crowns

Transport of parts. etc., within a factory

Bonding of transistors

Aseenbly

Bonding of transistors

Arc welding

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1978

9391
cso:

5105

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

'YOHIURI' EDITORIAL CALLS FOR STOL DEVELOPMENT
Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 7 Feb 79 p 2 OH
[Editorials "Push STOL Development"]

{Text} The government has alloted a sun in the fiscal 1979 budget to
develop an experinental STOL (Short Takeoff and Landing) aircraft and this
coupled with the FJR-7lo jet engine project hopefully will rehabilitate
Japan's backward aircraft industry.

since 1967, the government has been studying the feasibility of developing
the YX. or next-generation commercial aircraft to replace the YS-ll. and a
joint development agreement was reached with the Boeing Company. However,
the plan did not work out very well because Japan was reduced to a "sub-
contractor" status. This lesson tells us that assiduous efforts must be
made to inprove technology for the growth of the aircraft industry.

Aircraft Technologies Legged

After Horld Her 11, Japan introduced technology in many industrial areas,
and industries grew and prospered as improvenents were made in imported
technologies. But this method cannot be employed in the aircraft industry
because this is a highly labor-intensive industry and cannot be automated
or operated on a mass production, assembly line basis.

The YX project was to have been the core of the plan to foster Japan's
aircraft industry, but neither the government nor business showed much
zeal for aircraft development which requires big research investment and
is highly risky.

The STOL and jet engine projects are more attractive. The STOL project

aims at developing a plane with a seating capacity of 100 to 150 persons

and with a high-powered lift engine which will reduce takeoff and landing
runway space by half compared to conventional passenger jets. It also would
cause only one-tenth the noise of ordinary aircraft. It will use the FJR-710
jet engine under development.

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

More Advanced

At present jet passenger planes can land at only 25 airports in Japan with
runways of 2,000 meters or note. However. STOL could use 49 airports with
runways of 800 waters or more. The 0.8. also is working on e STOL project
but the Japanese STOL ie more advanced in terms of practicability.

If progress runs snoothly. efforts to develop a prototype STOL will be
started in fiscal 1980 after completion of the experimental STOL. The
EUR-710. with a thrust of seven tons and a low-polluting engine, is
scheduled to be completed in 1980. No other country is developing an
engine for medium and small passenger planes.

To challenge the formidable aircraft industries of other advanced countries.
the government will have to extend liberal subsidies not only for research
and development but also for production. However. aircraft nsnufacturere
must exert great efforts too.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shinbunsha 1979

cso: 1.120 sun

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY