FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10676
22 July 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 44/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION senvnce

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain intonation prinrily fron foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language snurces
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ution was summarized or extracted. ‘

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND “NATIONS GOVERNING “HERSHIP OP
MYERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS FUELICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Komei Party's Position Discussed
(Kazuhiro Kobayashi; TOKYO snrunun, 3 Jun 82) ...

'AKAHATA' Carries JCP Message to SFRY Congress
(AKAHATA, 26 Jun 82) ............................

'AKAHATA' Rejects 'TASS' Reportage on Sofia Meeting
(AKAHATA, 22 Jun 82) ssssssssssssasssssOCOIOlOIOI

MILITARY

Japan's Future Proposals for Disarmament Discussed
(Tetsuya Endo; CHUO KORON, Jul 82) ..............

ECONOMIC

Recurring Profit in the First Quarter in 1982 Reported
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN, 30 May 82) ...............

Economic Prospects Reported
(Various sources, various dates) ................

No Stimulus Until Fall
Few Choices for Planners
Growth Rate Hay Fall, by Koji Takada

Strategies for Revenue Shortfall Discussed
(Various sources, various dates) ................

Government Revenue Sources, Plans
Another Bond Issue Likely
FOR 0F1WC1AI.USE‘0NLN

Japan Urged To Poster Industrial Cooperation
(DAILY Youwu. 23 Jun 82)

HITl's Econonic Support on Depressed Industries Bxanined
(Various sources, various dates) ........................

New Structural Recession Law
Iron-Steel Industries Reconstruction

Public Works Projects in 1983 Discussed
(Various sources, 31 May 82) ............................

Public works Funds Increase
Public Works Budget

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Restructuring of Science and Technology Council Debated
(NIKON IBIZAI SHIHDUN, various dates) ...................

Reorganization This Fall
Reinforcement of Its Function

HITI Surprised by Criticisn of 64K Ran Exports to United States
(K. Ronabashi, T. Ikui; SHURAN IOYO KEIZAI, 6 Mar 82) ...

FY82 Government Projects on Electronics Listed
(NIKKII ELECTRONICS, various dates) .....................

NTT's Information Network System Project Described
(Kazuhisa Haeno; BKONOHISTO, 27 Apr 82) .................

NTT's Plans To Launch CS-3, 88-3 Discussed
(Various sources, various dates) ........................

CS-3 Project
U.S. Satellite as Launcher

Research, Developnent of Solar Battery Updated
(Various sources, various dates) ........................

Inproved Silicon Cell Efficiency
high-Speed Solar Cell Manufacture
Spectral Division Solar battery

Radio-Have Absorbent Ferrite Developed
(SHUKAN SRINCHO, 25 May 82) .............................

-b-

FOI.0FTWC]A1.USE(NVLY
KOMEI PARTY'S POSITION DISCUSSED

Tokyo TOKYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 3 June 82 p 2
[Article by reporter Kazuhiro Kobayashi, "Konei's Lonely Struggle.")

[Text] Komei Party's resistance continues in the for.
of boycotts of conferences for heads of ruling and
opposition parties and absences from the House of
Representatives' Foreign Affairs Comittee which has
been discussing three treaties on arms reduction. The
Konei Party cannot agree to the normalization of the
Diet which will likely lead to passage of the bill
to revise the Public Office Election Law, which the
Komei Party strongly objects. This is the reason for
its boycotts. I have explored the background and
purpose of the tough line asserted by the Konei Party.

The Konei Party's Anti-Diet Policy Comittee discussed the handling of the
three treaties on arms reduction in the morning of 2 June. About 20 Diet
members, almost double the ordinary attendance, were at the meeting. "Don't
agree to normalization of the Diet plotted in collusion with the LI)?

and the s-cialist Party." "Even if the three treaties cone to the House

or Councilors, we should boycott discussions." Tough opinions were
presented one after another. Then, they decided not to attend the Foreign
Affairs Comittee and the Diet session held that day.

Return of "Good Understanding"

Ordinarily. there were always some menbers in the Konei Party who possess
connonsense and would say, "In order to promote am reduction, we should

attend the comittee meeting." On that day, however, there was no matter
who voiced an opinion like that.

The Kamei Party has firmly decided to object to the bill to alter the

Public Office ElectiOn Law intended to revise the nationwide district of the
House of Councilors. "We will prevent the bill from passing to the utmost
of the party's power," said chairman Takeiri. The Kelsi Party's reasons
are: (1) that the questionable constitutionality of a bill which does not

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

allow an individual to run for a nationwide seat in the House of Councilors;
(2) that the bill is a product of the interests and policies of large
parties and is intended to benefit them; and (3) that the bill can be
considered as the first step toward a small electoral district system.
Therefore, the Koaei Party cannot accept a long extension of the session to
facilitate passage of the bill to revise the Public Office Election Law,

and consequently cannot accept normalization of the Diet which would promote
discussion of the bill.

A Decrease of Two Seats If the Bill Is Passed

The reason the Komei Party strongly objects to the bill is that, if passed.
the Komei Party is certain to lose seats. This is the common View shared
by the anti-election policy committee officials of other parties. when
the seat allocation system proposed by the LDP and the Socialist Party is
applied to the nationwide district ballots of the previous election, the
Komei Party clearly declines in seats from nine to seven.

Moreover, there is a view that "the Komei Party seems to be expressing a
fighting attitude toward the decisive political battle of '83" (a leading
member of the LDP). As if to confirm this view, the opinion is heard within
the Komei Party that it has become "too understanding recently," including
its shift of position on the national security and defense policies to a
realistic line at the end of last year. Therefore. the Kamei Party needs to
strengthen its checking function as an opposition party.

There is another incident. At a Komei Party's meeting discussing about the
extension of the current session, one leading member made the following
speech: "whenever there is a trouble in the Diet, the relationship between
our party and the Tanaka faction is mentiOned. Let's object fir-1y to the
extension of the session which has been primarily planned by the Tanska
faction. This is the best chance to prove that our relationship with the
Tsnaka faction is just a rumor with no basis." Then, he received the
enthusiastic applause from young and middle-standing metbers. From this
perspective one can believe that the Komei Party's resistance is a way to
divorce itself from the Tanaka faction.

Isolation Increases

Nevertheless. the Komei Party cannot stay asleep during 94 days of the
remaining Diet session. Even within the Socialist Party with whom the
Komei Party joined to oppose the extensiOn, voices are heard to the effect
that "we cannot go along with the Romei Party forever." The Komei Party's
isolation is gradually increasing within the opposition parties.

The Komei Party is also aware of this. Chairman Okubo of the Komei Party's
Anti-Diet Policy Committee said: "The opening of the Budget Committee
after the return of Prime Minister Suzuki may become a chance for normaliza-
tion of the Diet." He intends to request an extension of one week in each
house once the Budget Chandttee is opened. “Mr Okuho also said "Since many

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
pmblem have piled up. the Budget Oouittee needs to have tine for discussion
until the end of June." lie judges that the reopening of discussion on the
bill to revise the Public Office Election Law will be considetsbly delayed.

Frankly speaking, it is a headache for the Konei Party how to set up s
strategy to cope with the situation until the end of the session on 21

August.
COPYRIGHT: Chu-Nichi Shinbun Tokyo Bonshs 1982

9896
C80: («105/132

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOImICAL

'AKAHATA' CARRIES JCP MESSAGE TO SFRY CONGRESS
M10203 Tokyo AKAIIATA in Japanese 26 Jun 82 p 7

[Text of JCP Central Comittee's message of greetings to the 12th Congress of
the League of Commists of Yugoslavia]

[Text] Dear comrades: The JCP Central Conittee hereby extends heartfelt
congratulations and solidarity to you on the occasion of the opening of the
12th Congress of the League of Cox-mists of Yugoslavia [LCY]. Your congress
opens at a time when world capitalism faces its overall, ever-increasing cri-
sis, a nuclear arm race between rival military blocs is endlessly escalating,
the danger of an outbreak of nuclear war is munting, and movement, opposing
nuclear war, seeking a total ban on nuclear weapons and extensive disarmament
if gaining unprecedented momentum across the world.

We hope that your congress will score a new success in resolving various pend-
ing, urgent issues in a satisfactory way, in expediting the construction of a
socialist society in a manner suitable to the specific conditions of your
country, and in contributing to the development of a joint struggle of anti-
imperialist forces of the world to promote peace and social progress.

The J0? and the LCY are working under different conditions, with the former
struggling as a party in a highly developed capitalist nation subordinate

to the United States and the latter acting as a party in a socialist nation.
However, since early days both parties have myieldingly struggled against
outside interference and pressure and developed their friendship and cooperation
by firmly maintaining their independent stances, observing the principles of
independence, equal rights, and noninterferences in each other's internal af-
fairs, and respecting mutual positions. In this respect, the talks between
JCP Presidium President Kenji Hiyamoto and President Josep Brozovitch Tito

in 1978 were of epochal significance. we believe that the joint statement
issued on that occasion has been of great significance, not only in relations
between our two parties but also has had great international significance as

proved by later developments.

Cascades. The world imperialist and reactionary ruling circles today tend
more to seek a way out the capitalist crisis through large-scale arm expan-
sion, aggression and war. While pushing a large-scale military buildup, the

1;
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
U.S. imperialists regard the strengthening of their military blocs for aggres-
sive purposes as an important pillar of their "policy of strength" and press-

. ing Japan and other allies to strengthen arrangements for joint codaat operations
under the leadership of U.S. forces, and to step up arment. The Reagan
administration has embarked upon a new am race, with nuclear weapons as its
core, by pushing ahead with a concept of limited nuclear war. This mve, in
particular, is confronting all peoples with the danger of a nuclear war. Bow

to prevent the implementation of this dangerous concept and how to realize an
all-out ban on nuclear weapons are matters of life and death to all peoples.

Under the Japan-U.S. military alliance, which makes Japan subservient to the
United States, the Japanese reactionary ruling circles and the Liberal Demo-
cratic Party [LDP] government are hastening the pace of arms buildup and
Japan's militarization while, in fact, approving Reagan's limited nuclear

war plan and the conversion of Japan into-a nuclear base to implement that plan.
They are playing an active role as a U.S. ally in the econoadc, political and
military fields. To this end, the Japanese Government is drastically reducing
state expenditure for the people's livelihood andwelfare under the pretext

of an "administrative reform." By stepping up their reactionary offensive,
Japan's reactionary circles and the LDP have turned the middle-of-the-road
political parties into government parties and are now concentrating their at-
tack on our party. However. this kind of LB? government policy is drawing
criticism from broad sealants of working people in all strata.

These circumstances take it all the lure imperative to step up the struggle
to scrap the Japan-U.S. alliance, build an independent, neutral and nonaligned
Japan, codify the "three nonnuclear principles" of not possessing, not manu-
facturing and not bringing in nuclear weapons, effect a change in the govern-
ment's economic policy in the direction of defending the working people's
livelihood and rights, check the reactionary tendency in politics, and pro-
tect the people's democratic rights and freedom. In this struggle, the JCP
has a still greater role to play.

In the midst of the intensifying reactionary offensive and the quickening tewo
of. the move to the right of the centrist parties. the JCP has stood firm in
the face of stormy anticomist attacks and has actively participated in the
"National Council for Peace. Democracy and Refornist Union" movement in order
to open the way to bringing allireformist forces together. Noted personages
and socialist party medaers have also taken part in this movement. Today, a
year after its inauguration, about 6.1 million meters, including individuals
and organizations, are participating in the movement. The prospect of union
for the reformist forces in Japan largely depends on the development of this
movement.

With its 60th founding anniversary coming on 15 July and with its 16th congress
slated for late July, our party is actively tackling various inediate problems.
At the same time, it is stepping up its drive to increase party ranks and
supporters--the motive force of political reform-~and striving to scale

.1 new peak in party construction.

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-I ONLY

Comrades ,

Today, when the world is at the crossroads of war and peace, the progressive
forces of the world are faced with the serious task of waging struggle

to prevent nuclear war, effecting a total ban on nuclear weapons, realizing

a drastic disarmament, putting an end to the arms race centered around nuclear
weapons, dissolving opposing military blocs serving as a tool to infringe

on other nationa' sovereignty, and realizing the withdrawal of foreign troops
and the removal of foreign military bases. Particularly, a total ban on
nuclear weapons is a cerntral task in eliminating the danger of a nuclear war
and insuring the preservation of the human race. Our party strongly urges
that this task be made the foremost task for world peace and that international
solidarity action be launched to carry it out instead of pushing it into the
background under all kinds of pretetts or making it a goal for the distant
future.

In connection with the issue of wonld peace, we are compelled to point out. in
particular, that, as developments in Afghanistan and Poland indicate, another
nation's right to self-determination is being violated by a socialist country,
which should be a champion of peace and national self-determination, and this
violation stands in the way of the struggle of anti-imperialist democratic
forces. The struggle to oppose this kind of serious error col-itted by big-
power chauvinism and hegemonism and resolutely defend th er-right to national
self-determination has become very important to the cause of world peace and
the social progress of all peoples.

The Nonaliyued Movement, which has developed into a powerful force in world
politics, has an increasingly great role to play. He expect the Nonaligned
Movement to sake fresh successes. While strengthening the ties with this move-
ment, our party will continue to move vigorously forward toward scuttling the
Japan-v.8. military alliance and building a nuclear-free, nonaligned neutral

Japan.

The JCP will continue to fight resolutely for the strict implementation of the
publicly recognized norms of the world columnist movement and do its utmost to
promote cooperation and solidarity in comson tasks.

He earnestly hope that the friendly relationship and solidarity between the
JCP and the LCY will develop further in accordance with publicly recognized

norms.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Ktosanto Chuo Iinkai 1982 nen

CSO: 4120/2532

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'AKAHATA' REJECTS 'TASS' RBPOIU'AGB 0N SOFIA MEETING
OHZSOZIoS Tokyo AKAHATA in Japanese 22 Jun 82 p 2

[Unattributed article: "Contravention of the Principle of Equality and False
Reporting—Issues Involving the International Conference in Commorstion of

Dinitrov's Bird: Anniversary”

[Text] An international theoretical conference was held in Sofia 15 to 17
June under the sponsorship of the Bulgarian Communist Party [BCP] to mark the
100th anniversary of Georgi Dimitrov's birth. Attending from the .10? were:
Hidesato Numata, advisor to the JCP Central Committee; Tomokazu Shirai, neuter
of the JCP Central Calmittee; and Hideo Sakamoto, newer of the JCP Interna-
tional Affairs Committee. They carried a message from Sanzo Nosaka, chairman
of the JCP Central Committee.

Chairman Nosaka's message was read at the opening plenary session by senior
delegate Numata. In the message, Chairman Nosaka recalled vivid memories of
Demitrov with whom he shared Comintern activities. He also referred to Stalin's
errors and the significance of the Comintern's dissolution and stressed the
importance of the task of overcoming big-power chauvinism. He expressed the
JGP's determination to contribute to the struggle against nuclear war and for

a total ban on nucelar weapons.

To our regret, however, two strange things occurred in connection with the
conference, raising the question of whether the meeting measured up to stand-
ards as an international one. One event was that only the CPSU delegate had
the privilege of delivering a long speech. The other was that after the
conference ended, the Soviet media reported an "appeal" allegedly adopted at
the conference, although no such appeal was actually adopted.

when the JCP Central Committee received an invitation to attend this confer-
ence, it sent an inquiry to the 801’, the sponsor, asking these questions:
1) Will all parties present be treated equally? And will there be a keynote
speech? 2) Hill a joint document, such as a resolution or declaration, be

adopted?

The BC? replied that there would be no keynote report, that the Bulgarian dele-
gate, as sponsor of the conference, night he the first to address the meeting,

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

but all delegations would be treated equally, that the duration of each dele-
gation's speech would be limited to 10 minutes. The reply also said that no
resolution or declaration, now any other joint documents would be adopted and
that each participant would express only his view. The JCP decided to attend
the meeting only after it received this reply.

But what actually happened at the meeting was that CPSU delegate Pt-nomarev,
candidate menber of the CPS!) Politburo, spoke for as long as 55 minutes at
the outset while all other delegates were permitted to speak for only 10 to
15 minutes. At the end of the meeting, 801’ Secretary General Zhivkov spoke
for about 1 hours.

Ponomarev paid tribute to the line of the 26th CPSU Congress and the present
Soviet foreign policy. It is apparent from the length and nature of this speech
that is was treated like a "keynote report" for all intents and purposes. JCP
senior delegate Numata made a presentation to the sponsor, regretting the way
the conference proceeded in violation of the principle of equality. Further-
more, the JCP Central Comittee made a presentation to the BCP Central Com-
mittee throng: the Bulgarian Embassy in Tokyo expressing sharp regret at "this
extremely perfidious attitude which runs counter to the formal promise and
good faith between the two parties."

The other strange thing is that TASS and other Soviet media reported as if the
conference had adopted an "appeal" calling upon the people of all comtries

to support General Secretary Brezhnev's statement pledging that the USSR will
not be the first to use nuclear weapons.

The 18 June TASS dispatch from Sofia quoted this "appeal" as saying: "We,
delegates of 140 coununist parties, revolutionary democratic parties and in-
ternational democratic organizations participating in this theoretical confer-
ence, hereby call upon all nations to support the Soviet initiative and the
statement by Leonid Brezhnev, leader of the CPSU and the Soviet state, obli-
gating the Soviet Union not to be the first to use nuclear weapons."

Another TASS dispatch reporting BCP Secretary General Zhivltov's concluding
speech, as well as a 19 June report of PRAVDA, the CPSU organ, said that the
aforementioned "appeal" was "approved unanimously" by the participants during
the Zhivkov speech.

These reports are sheer fabrications. It is a common sense that a normal
procedure for adopting some formal document at any conference requires a draft
to be formally introduced, followed by deliberation and voting.

The three-man JCP delegation attended the conference fmm'beginning to end.
Particularly on the final day, they never left their seats from the beginning
of the Zhivkov speech to the closing of the conference. No such "appeal" was
introduced and deliberated upon. Now was any vote taken.

In his speech as a BCP delegate, Secretary General Zhivltov praised the Soviet
foreign policy, including the Soviet pledge not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons, but this praise was not introduced as an "appeal," nor was it adopted
as such.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yet Soviet news media went so far as to concoct what they call an "appeal,"
and have publicized it. They even quoted the "appeal" as saying "We, the

delegates of 140 columnist parties...participating in this theoretical con-
ference...," thus giving the false impression that all the participants, in—

cluding the JCP delegation, actually adopted the "appeal." Their reports are
an utter distortion of the facts.

As for the Soviet stand on nuclear weapons, up to the year before last, the
Soviet Union maintained an attitude of opposing the UN resolution calling

For the promotion of an agreemnt banning the use of nuclear weapons. Our
party criticized this attitude in letters to the CPSU and by other means.
Meanwhile, the Soviet Union at last came out in support of this resolution
during last year's UN General Assenbly session. Viewed against this back-
gromd, the latest Brezhnev statement pledging not to be the first to use nu-
clear weapons—though it contains no new proposal—deserves attention, although
it only proposes a partial measure which socialist countries regard as a mini-
mum requirement in light of the fact that the United States stubbomly re-
Jects even a ban on first nuclear strikes, not to mention a total ban on the
use of nuclear weapons.

Nevertheless, as repeatedly pointed out by our party, at a time when lethal
nuclear weapons capable of killing all mankind several times over are threat-
ening man's very survival, a partial measure which does not openly and squarely
call for an all—out ban on nuclear weapons cannot measure up to the demand 'of
the hmdreds of millions of people the world over. The signatures of tens of
millions of Japanese submitted to the UN Special Session on Disarmament call
for "top priority to be given to a total ban on nuclear weapons."

Therefore, it is not right to ask the world to evaluate the Brezhnev proposal,
which does not regard a total ban as an urgent task, as if it were something
supreme, and even less so to fabricate a story that an "appeal" calling for

such an appraisal was actually adopted with the support of many parties. Such
behavior is not only unbefittinga socialist country but also cannot be con-
doned from the point of view of general canons of international behavior.

These issues involving the Sofia conference have brought into relief the pic-
ture of the followers of big-power hegemonism who are trying to seize every
opportunity Loimpose the line of regarding the Soviet Union as the center of
communism upon the world comunist movement. Even so, the deception, which is

really a poor one and very easily disproved, casts doubt on the moral fiber and
discernment of those involved.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Ktosanto Chuo Iinkai 1982 nen

CSO: 41.20/332

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

JAPAN'S FUTURE PROPOSALS FOR DISARHAHENT DISCUSSED

Tokyo CEUO KDRON in Japanese July 82 pp 90-96

/Krticle by Tetsuya Endo, Deputy Director-General for the UN Affairs, Mini-

stry of Foreign Affairs: "Four Proposals That Japan Should Hake.:7
[Text] Introduction

The Second United Nations General Assembly Session on Disarmament will be
held at UN Headquarters from 7 June until 9 July; and Japan's Prime Hinister
Suzuki will attend and give a general address on 9 June. Since the First

UN General Assembly Special Session on Disarmament was held in May and June
1978, it was exactly four years ago.

During this period of time, tension has heightened in various areas of the
world, such as the Soviet military invasion of Afghanistan at the end of 1979,
the Iran-Iraq dispute, the strained conditions in Poland in 1981. and the re-
cent Palkland Islands dispute; detente between East and West has greatly re-
ceded and the international situation has undergone an increase in violence.
There is the view that the world situation has turned in the direction of mil-
itary expansion rather than disarmament.

Because of such a state of affairs, it has been asked by some with a feeling
of powerlessness regarding the disarmament issue what in the world was the
meaning of the First General Assembly Special Session on Disarmament and
won't this second session on disarmament end in the same way as the first?
However, the road to disarmament is a long, thorny one; disarmament is not
something which can be realized in a day and a night; it is not something
which can be solved simply because one or two UN sessions on disarmament are
held. Rather, given this kind of violent international state of affairs,
disarmament is a topic which is even more poignant and to which even more
effort can he devoted. This present disarmament conference should be taken
as the "second milepost" (the first session on disarmament was the first mile-
post), and although we should restrain from putting too great an expectation
on this session, we should not look at it nihilietically. Rather, it is im-
portant how this occasion of 157 UN member nations meeting together in one
hall and of the world's top leaders gathered together is used to promote dis-
armament.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in Japan. Europe and the U.S., the concern of the people toward the discon-
tinuance of nuclear weapons, disarmament and this second special session on
disarmament has recently grown tremendously. and compared to the first special
session on disarmament four years ago, has risen markedly. The background

and action format of citizen level concern in the disarmament issue differs
depending on country and region, but it seems that what they have in common

is an earnest desire that a nuclear disaster must be prevented, based on the

fear that perhaps the earth and mankind will be destroyed by the rapid devel-
opment of nuclear arms.

At the time of the Second UN General Assembly Special Session on Disarmament
which will open under such circumstances, I would like to state below my own
views concerning why disarmament is necessary, why disarmament is difficult,
the course of disarmament until now, the manner of advancing realistic disarma—

ment and Japan's basic posture toward this conference. (This does not repre-
sent the government's opinion)

"by Disarmament Now?

it seems that unfortunately the history of mankind for the most part has been
a history of bloody combat and war, rather than a history of peace, but even
so, it is a fact that the search for peace and efforts at disarmament as the
principal means to peace have always continued, no matter how slim. Along
with the fact that the method of combat has gradually become brutal due to
the advances in military technology and has gone from being a fight between
soldiers to one involving civilians indiscriminately, the cry for disarmament
has become more earnest. Reflecting on World war I, the Geneva agreement

on the prohibition of the use of poisonous gas and bacteriological weapons,
concluded in 1925, distinguishes the pros and cons of disarmament, and the

London and Washington naval disarmament treaties from the 1920's through
the 1930's were examples of this.

However, the reason why disarmament is being demanded even more earnestly now
is the atomic bombs which appeared at the end of world war II and the rapid
development of nuclear arms. It is said that at present nuclear warheads

in excess of one million of the Hiiosnims-type bombs are stockpiled on the
earth. Furthermore, not only does the quantity continue to increase, but the
development of missiles, the transport means of nuclear weapons, is rapidly
progressing and their flight distance is increasing and their strike precision
Is surprisingly accurate. These nuclear weapons have already reached an
enormous number which can be called overkill; and once nuclear war occurs,

there is the danger it will develop into a tragic situation involving all of
mankind.

Furthermore, from the economic perspective, expenditures for military arms
are in the astronomical figures. At present, when the definition of what

are the military expenditures has not been established internationally, the
world's military expenditures cannot be calculated accurately, but according
to estimates by the group of experts commissioned by the UN, it is said that
the sum core tins nzcoeds 500 billion dollars annually. According to another

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

view, it is said to have reached 600 billion dollars. It can be calculated
that this is equivalent to about 6 percent of the entire world's total prod-
uction. In terms of human resources directly involved in the military. it is
said that at present the regular armies are at a level of approximately 25
million soldiers. and about 60 million when reserve troops are included.

Naturally, military expenditures enrich the arms industry and industries re-
lated to arms. Although the effect that the development of military technolo-
gy is useful in improving the ultranodern technology of industry, the prob-
lem in macroeconomics is that military expenditures disregard the principles
of market economy and divert limited human resources and natural resources to
nonproductive fields of the military. Moreover, looking at the past 20 years,
military expenditures have steadily increased at about the ratio of a sub-
stantial 3 percent annually.

Recently, such arms have become extremely expensive economically; and more
than anything else, there is the fearsome danger they are tied to the destruc-
tion of this planet and all of mankind. Consequently, it can be said that

the significance and necessity of disarmament are extremely great.

Long, Steep Road to Disarmament

Disarmament is mankind's common desire, and despite the fact that its neces-
sity is fully realized, the fact that the increase in armaments between var-
ious countries of the world, starting with the u.s. and USSR, has continued
as ever is a contradiction of this desire. However, there are inevitable
causes for this which cannot help but exist under present international re-
lations.

International society at present consists of a gathering of sovereign nations
and is in a situation where each nation has to guarantee its own security
independently or in cooperation with other friendly nations so that there

are no superpowers above these sovereign nations with the power to coerce

or police. In short, the guarantee of security for each nation is eventually
entrusted to the national defense efforts and military power. An actual prob-
lem often seen in today's world is the example where an armed force dispute
occurs because. even though one nation wants peace, it is threatened, or in-
vaded or intervention takes place by another nation with superior strength.

At the end of World War II, the United Nations was established after reflection
upon the fact that war must not be repeated again, and the lofty ideal of pre-
serving world peace was displayed by each nation. However, the UN is not a
structure in which the UN possesses military forces in order to preserve in-
ternational peace and security and guarantees security in place of each coun-

try. After all, sovereign nations are obliged to preserve their own security
on their own.

The problem of disarmament which regulates, limits and curtails armaments is
a life and death problem directly concerned with the security of one's own
country. no matter what country. ﬂoreover, guaranteeing security is a re-
quirement of sovereignty for sovereign nations.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Certainly, it is not possible to guarantee the safety of a country simply with
armaments. Stability of the country's economy, government and society and the
maintenance of good international relations through diplomatic efforts are in-
dispensable requirements for security. However, it is not possible to substi-
tute the functions of deterrence and defense which only military power has with
means other than military power. In this sense, it can be said that disarma-
ment and security, first of all. are two sides of the same coin. This is the
difficulty in disarmament. In actually advancing disarmament, it is necessary
to increase each country's perception of security by disarmament measures, or
at least work so as not to damage the perception of security. The fact is
that disarmament will not progress without that.

Course of Disarmament Negotiations

Looking back at the course of disarmament negotiations since World War II,
naturally the core issue was avoiding nuclear war and promoting nuclear dis-
armament. However, as for the concrete places for deliberation and negotia-
tions on the disarmament question, three places can be listed: bilateral
talks with the 0.8. and USSR at the center. negotiations at the Geneva Com-
mittee on Disarmament and the United Nations.

U.S.-USSR Bilatera] Talks

At present, when all is said and done, the core of the world's disarmament
talks is the negatiation between the 0.8. and USSR. In the final analysis,
even disarmament talks at the Geneva Committee on Disarmament cannot be con-
cluded without U.S.—USSR mutual agreement. As for recent international re-
lotions. multipolarization is advancing both politically and economically,

hut militarily, the bipolar structure of the two nuclear superpowers. the U.S.
and USSR, has continued consistently. Consequently, maybe it is natural for

U.s.-Soviet bilateral talks to be the center of the world's disarmament nego-
tiations.

In October 1962, the "Cuban Crisis" occurred when President Kennedy was ready
for the possibility of nuclear war in opposing the Soviet Union's attempt to
bring nuclear missiles into Cuba. the backyard of the 0.8.; and he insisted
that the Soviets withdraw them. The U.S. and USSR which have experienced the
fear facing the threshold of a nuclear war recognise the gravity of such a
situation and the importance of stabilizing relations between the two coun-
tries. And so the era of easing tensions, called detente, opened.

In this era, several international treaties have been concluded, such as the
Treaty for a Partial Nuclear Test Ban, Nuclear Arms Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT), and the Underwater Nuclear Ban Treaty, based on mutual agreement by

the ".5. and USSR. The Ballistic Missile/Antiballistic Missile (ABM) Limita-
tion Treaty. the result of the first Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT-I)

which were held in 1970. as well as the provisional agreement on strategic
offensive weapons limitation can also be listed. Next, SALT-II, which fol-

lowed in I979. was signed but because the Soviet Union militarily invaded Af-

13
FOR orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ghanistan in December of the same year, the u.s, Senate tabled ratification
of the treaty. President Reagan,-purporting the sim should be "reduction"
not "limitation'~l of strategic weapons, re-examining the content of SALT-II
and going s step further, proposed to the USSR that talks should be held with
the name changed to Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START). In response to

this, Secretary Breszhnev responded to the effect that the USSR also welcomes
this.

As for whether or not an agreement will be concluded in which strategic stabil-
ity between the U.S. and USSR is brought about by START, in connection with

the changes in Intermediate Nuclear Force (INF) tdlks already being held in
Geneva since the end of November 1981, it is extremely important that it is
from the viewpoint of nuclear disarmament and in the sense that it is tied

to the promotion of detente between East and West.

Geneva Committee on Disarmament

The Geneva Committee on Disarmament is the only disarmament talks agency for
large numbers of countries in today's world. Disarmament talks after Horld
War It first took place on the stage of the newborn United Nations, but. given
the severe postwar cold war between East and West, efforts of various countries
in the UN toward disarmament were not rewarded and ended in deadlock. So. in
1959. the Commuttee on Disarmament was newly organized in Geneva, and was com-
prised of 5 countries each from the East and West camps, for a total of 10
countries, as the location for disarmament talks outside the limits of the UN.
Thereafter, disarmament talks were separated from the UN and moved to Geneva.

Two years later, in 1961, this committee became an 18 member disarmament com-
mittee with the addition of 8 nonaligned countries. Japan has participated
in the committee on disarmament since 1969; at that time, the committee was
made up of 26 nations; at present, it has increased to 60 nations, including
the five large nuclear powers, the U.S., USSR. UK, trance and China.

In any event, many disarmament agreements and treaties have been prepared here
and among them are the previously mentioned Nuclear Arms Non-Proliferation
Treaty and the Underwater Nuclear Ban Treaty. At present also, efforts are
continuing with the aim of prohibiting all nuclear testing and prohibiting
chemical weapons.

Disarmament Issue in the UN

The disarmament issue, separated from the UN with the relationships between
many countries and moved to the Geneva Committee on Disarmament showed fur-
ther progress after the era of "detente" was achieved. however, in the sense
of nuclear disarmament. that is, directly limiting or reducing nuclear capabil-
ity, disarmament has progressed very slowly and all the while, improvement and

modernization of nuclear arms has continued constantly.

Looking closely at the fact that on the one hand, during this time, the inde-
pendent nstions of Asia and Africa achieved political independence one after

11;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the other, but they are unable to take off economically, and on the other
hand, massive amounts and capital and resources are consumed for arms in the
advanced nations, accordingly then, concern has been directed toward the
disarmament question.

Although the developing nations are participating in the Geneva Con-ittee on
Disarmament--in reality, no more than some of the developing nations are
participating---and also. normally they are dealing with the disarmament
question in the UN General Assembly, it is no more than one topic among many,
diverse topics. Thus. the idea of opening a special General Assembly session
which would have disarmament as its only agenda came into existence among the
nonaligned nations; former President Tito of Yugoslavia formally proposed a

Special United Nations General Assembly Session on Disarmament at the Fifth
Nonaligned Leaders Conference in 1976.

However, I would like to point out that the UN is a place for discussions.
whether a special session or the General Assembly, and can only advise and
propose. what is advocated, advised or proposed in the General Assembly is
not something which will be inuediately transformed into reality. but when
agreement is obtained between concerned countries. the agreement can somehow
change into reality. However, even so, it can be said that international
public opinion on disarmament question for which a proposal was adopted will
not be disregarded by any country. The importance and influence of proposing
disarmament are, after all, great.

In this way, the schema for the disarmament question is U.S.-USSR bilateral
talks, the Geneva Committee on Disarmament and the UN will mutually cooperate
and complement each other. It is worthy of note that the UN special session
on disarmament, with world public opinion as the background, has taken on the
major role of adding momemtum to the U.S.-USSR talks and the negotiations of
the Committee on Disarmament.

Actual Progress of Disarmammt

It is thought that the balance of power among nations maintains the present
peace and security of international society. During the 37 years since the
end of World War II up until the present, there have been more than 100 ter-
ritorial disputes. It is understood that the reason a dispute of worldwide
scale was at least avoided is because there was a comprehensive balance of
power both in terms of nuclear capability and conventional capability of the
0.5. and USSR. It seems that based on such thinking, the nations of the

world generally recognize the necessity of maintaining a certain defense capa-
bility. It is thought that this deterrent force theory or balance of power

theory have fortunately operated effectively until now hnd have validity even
"(WI 0

however. it is argued that such a balance of power theory is already an anti-
quated concept in the present time of nuclear arms and now a new framework of
international relations must be sought. Certainly. regarding the balance of
power thoery, such concepts are expressed such as, in what way is it decided

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE URL!

the concept of "balance" has been realizedI and, won‘t the arms level rapidly
rise in a vicious circle as a result of each country subjectively pursuing

and demanding balance, and, isn‘t this theory tied to nuclear catastrophe if
there is a signle misstep.

However. as long as there does not exist a framework which can replace the ba—
lance of power theory in present international politics, we cannot help but
premise on that theory. Social science is different than natural science,

and experiments are extremely difficult. Sovereign nations cannot make the
survival of its citizens and the free life of its citizens, that is, its own
security. material for experimentation. When such a harsh reality is taken
into account, it is thought that there is no other way but to apply the brakes
somehow or other to arms competition, to continue preserving the balance be-

tween nations and try and devise a balance of power at the lowest level possi-
ble.

As for the real progress of disarmament. it is not an abstract appeal for dis-
armament. but an accumulation of concrete, possible means. For example, a pro-
posal which is too ambitious and which no country could possible meet in today's
state of affairs, or the proposal which is thought to be clearly beneficial
only to specific countries, will not be able to be supported but will only
raise the question of why the proposing country is making such a proposal.

And it is not something which will brighten the prospects of the realization
of disarmament. Likewise, no matter how ambitious the agreement, it would not
last long as long as there are insufficient verifications measures and there
are loopholes. Rather it is possible it would destabilize international rela-
tions. For example. a too idealistic proposal of unilateral disarmament may
be a dream, but it has the danger of destroying the balance of power and as a
result, destabilizing international relations.

Disarmament is a means toward the major objective of peace and security, and
this means should be real and concrete and it should be able to move forward
step by step via persistent negotiations.

As the only country in the world which has suffered from atomic bombing, Japan
is a treaty state of the Nuclear Arms Non-Proliferation Treaty and has given
up the option of nuclear arms. and has adhered to the three principles of non-
nuclearization--"not possessing. nor making nor bringing in nuclear arms."
Likewise, Japan is devoted to a specialized defense under its peace constitu-
tion and possesses a minimum defense capability for self defense. And perhaps
for the first time in the history of mankind, Japan is pursuing the experiment
of not becoming a military power even though it is an economic power.

Furthermore, for Japan. which does not have resources except human resourceful-
ness and technology and which depends greatly overseas for resources. world
peace and Japan's maintenance of friendly relations with the world's nations
are indispensable for maintaining its own peace, security and economic pros-
perity.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Thus there is no other country for which disarmament, one important step
toward world peace and stability, is more necessary than Japan. In particu—
lar, the discontinuation of nuclear weapons is the desire of the people of all
nations. and from Japan's special position, it has the duty to propose and call
for nuclear disarmament. the ultimate extinction of nuclear arms. to the world
and to the nuclear power. the U.S. and USSR.

Then what should Japan insist on and what kind of proposal should it make at
the Second United Nations Special Session on Disarmament which starts 7 June?

Hhat Should Japan Insist On?

First of all, Japan must strongly insist on giving the highest priority to
nuclear disarmament. Moreover, as has been mentioned repeatedly, it is not
enough to simply call abstractly for nuclear disarmament; it must make pro-
posals as realistic and concrete as possible.

One would be the total ban on nuclear testing which would put the brakes on

the development and production of nuclear arms. According to the 1963 Treaty
for a Partial Nuclear Test Ban, nuclear testing in the atmosphere, space and
underwater is prohibited. but adding underground testing to this would pro-
hibit all nuclear testing. Since underground testing of a certain level can
be detected by means of seismologic development. verification of a total ban
on nuclear testing has become possible. More detailed investigative work

on a total ban on nuclear testing has begun at the Geneva Committee on Disarma-
ment and the fact of the matter is that I hope a treaty for a total nuclear
test ban will materialize as rapidly as possible.

The second would he the reinforcement of the nuclear arms non-proliferation
system. The Nuclear Arms Non-proliferation Treaty has the inequality of div-
iding treaty nations into nuclear states and non-nuclear states. However.
apprcval of this inequality is bases on the two premises that the peaceful

use of nuclear power by the non-nuclear states would not be obstructed and the
nuclear states would make efforts at nuclear disarmament. As for Japan, along
with pointing out these two premises again. I would like to have Japan make
an appeal that all countries participate in the Nuclear Arms Non-Proliferation
Treaty no matter whether they are nuclear states or non-nuclear states.

The third would be the development of and compromise agreement on U.S.—USSR
bilateral strategic arms and intermediate range nuclear arms reduction talks.
Certainly, Japan is not directly involved in U.S.-USSR bilateral talks. but
the conclusion of these talks is something which will control the destiny of
the world, including Japan. As for Japan, I would like us to make an appeal
to both the v.5. and USSR for the development of negotiations.

Secondly, Japan should strongly insist on disarmament in the field of chemi-
cal weapons. Next to nuclear arms, chemical weapons are the most genocidal
weapons and, different from nuclear weapons. many countries possess the poten-
tial for producing them. Thus. it is important to advance further the Geneva

17
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

protocal of 1925 which prohibited their use in time of war, and to prohibit
the development. production and storage of these weapons. However, the issue
of prohibiting chemical weapons contains many technological problems; especi-
ally difficult problems are how to clearly stipulate the scope of chemicals
which are the object of prohibition and how to create verification means in
order to ensure the fulfillment of the treaty obligations. Japan must en-
deavor to enter negotiations to draw up a chemical weapons prohibition treaty
together with actively contributing to the resolution of these problems.

Thirdly, sufficient attetnion must be paid to disarmament in the field of
conventional weapons. International disputes and wars since the end of World
War II have all been with conventional weapons. Likewise, 80 percent of the
world's military expenditures have been spent for conventional weapons and
conventional capability. It is a fact that some of the developing countries
which rely solely on conventional arms for their own security have not neces-
sarily shown a positive attitude toward the regulation of conventional weapons.
However, Japan must make an appeal for conventional arms disarmament in the
problem of the dreadful, limitless international transfer of conventional arms
which aggravate territorial disputes and are tied to new disputes. (One step
Would be the understanding of the present situation.)

Fourthly, I would like to take up the problem of disarmament and development.
Although immense sums of money are spent militarily in the world, there are
people who breathe hunger and poverty in other developing nations. Disarma-
ment and the North-South problem are two of the world's greatest problems
today. Along with the advance of concrete disarmament steps in both the nu-
clear and non-nuclear fields, the possibility of turning freed resources toward
improvement of the standard of living of people in various countries can be
expected and sufficient investigation must be conducted. including the ques-
tion of a fair international ratio of military expenditures.

Japan's insistence at this Second Special Session of Disarmament would not

be so spectacular as to excite the admiration of all people. Given the essence
of the disarmament problem, it should not be spectacular. Japan must faith-
fully and quietly come to grips with this special conference as the ”second
milepost" on the long, steep road to disarmament, and with the momentum gained
from the U.s.-USSR bilateral talks and the Geneva Committee on Disarmament by
means of such international efforts. disarmament is something we pray will
move forward a step or two at a time.

COPYRIGHT: Chuo Koronshs 1982

9400
C50: 6105/133

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(NWWCHH.USE(NVLY

ECONMIC

RECURRING PROFIT IN THE FIRST QUARTER IN 1982 REPORTED
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 30 May 82 p 1

[Text] With the world economy in a slump. Japan's erterprises lack the
strength for recovery. A “180“ KBIZAI SHIHBUN tabulation of revenues of 788
firms (banking, insurance and securities excepted) listed in national stock
exchanges and which reported their financial situation for the March quarter
of 1982 as of May 29 shows that recurring profits were up in the second half
(October 1981-March 1982) by 16 percent over the first half (Apri1-September
1982). This can be attributed to the growth of the electrical machinery
industry dealing with growth products such as computers and improved
conditions in the shipbuilding industry which had been striving to wipe out
deficits and in the depressed basic industry abetted by price hikes.

Another large factor is the sharply improved monetary balance through
financial relaxation. Moreover, the second half is a period of seasonal
increase of profits, but still recurring profits represent a 2.3 percent
decrease over the same period last year. Because of zero growth. the
business conditions of enterprises are in a stalemate. Further, in the
structurally depressed industry, such as chemical and oil, virtually no
sense of recovery exists in view of the low level of profits or continuing
deficits. Also, within the same industry. a bright outlook is limited to
specific areas, depending on product line. The management's expressions are
stern, Suffering from the unexpectedly long legacy of the second oil crisis.

More than 90 percent of the firms listed in the stock exchanges have released
their first quarter financial reports as of May 29. For the entire industry.
they show that revenues increased by 8.3 percent in the second half of 1981
over the firs: half, and recurring profits up by 16 percent. The manufacturing
industry itself registered gains, with 7.1 percent increase in revenues and
22.2 percent in recurring profits.

The industry Suffered a loss for two consecutive quarters: in the third
quarter of 1980 when it suffered a record loss and again after the oil crisis
and deflation. It can breathe easier now that it has registered a recurring
profit after a year and a half.

19
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOItOFF1C1Al.USTIDNLN

Along with the favored conditions of certain processing industries such as
electrical machinery. the favorable turn of the basic industry is the prime
mover for increased profits. Especially. the contribution of the oil
industry is great. This can be traced to the penetration of price hikes for
oil produCts from August and reduction of losses from currency fluctuations.
A major national firm, Maruzen Oil Company, cut its deficits from 73.8
billion yen in the first half to 25.5 billion in the second, partly through
personnel retrenchment. The six oil firms' share of total profits have
exceeded 42 percent.

In addition, the paper pulp and chemical industry registered sharp profits,
up 5.9 and 52.8 percent respectively over the first half. In the paper pulp
industry, it was due to improved market conditions and lower prices for raw
materials. The chemical industry received its support from price hikes in
some products and through rationalization measures such as energy
conservation. Another factor was the improved monetary balance following the
monetary easement in the fall of 1980.

In industries. such as oil and chemical, plagued by a wide gap in supply and
demand, improved profits imparts no sense of optimism as market recovery has
fallen short of expectations. Suffering from the import of inexpensive foreign
products, they have barely managed to rise to the water's surface and
deterioration of their strength goes on.

In the iron and steel industry which had a 3.7 percent recurring profit
increase over the first half. only the seamless pipe did well in exports.

In the industry as a whole, there is a lack of sense of brightness because of
depressed domestic demands. With public investments and housing in a slump,
even the glass and gravel industry suffered a recurring profit loss of 8.2
percent over the first half.

Growing conspicuous is the breathing difficulty of the processing industry,
having performed the role of prime mover in enterprises' business conditions.
The machinery and precision machinery industries have seen their profits
decline for two consecutive quarters. Likewise. the automobile industry
also reported a profit decline of 8.9 percent over the first half. In the
precision machinery industry, a profitable turn in camera exports due to weak
yen was offset by sagging domestic demand. The machinery industry is
suffering chiefly from poor sales of industrial machinery. As for machine
tools, the keen price competition has resulted in a profit decline for Okuma
Machinery Works, Ltd. in the second half.

Exporters of completed autos have enjoyed a high level of profits due to weak
yen and boosts in export prices, but some parts-making firms have registered
a profit decline because of a ceiling on auto production.

Amid such a situation, the electrical machinery industry continues to make
gains. Computer, semi-conductor and office automation machinery registered a
high growth as usual. with the information revolution and the energy
conservation related investment boom in the entire industry. Among home
appliances, only VTR saw a high level of production centered on exports.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Recurring profits were up by 12.5 percent in the second half, compared to 9.7
In addition to weak yen. increased profits from
fund applications due to stronger financial structure contributed to profit

percent in the first half.

increases.

Interim Tabulation, March Quarter. 1982 Financial Statements

of National Stock Exchange-Listed Enterprises

(In 1 million yen and percentage; ( )-decrease)

Entire industry

Sales
(Rate of increase
of revenues)

 

(788 firms) Mar 82 97,518.2
Previous quarter 8.3
Corresponding quarter.
previous year 9.6
Sep 81 90.055.2
Previous quarter 1.2
Manufacturing
industry only
(518 firms) Mar 82 33,066.6
7.1
8.3
Sep 81 30,855.2
1.1
Entire firms
excluding oil
and electric
power Mar 82 88,313.2
8.4
10.0
Sep 81 81,555.9
1.5

Recurring Profits
(Rate of increase

of profits)

2,268.8
16.0

(2.3)

1,956.5
(15.8)

1,342.2
22.2
17.7

1,098.8
(3.6)

1,983.6
12.3
13.3

1,766.6
0.9

N.B. Tabulations include 788 firms which released financial statements as of
May 29. out of 864 listed in the eight national exchanges and having March

settlements.
ECONWIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC PROSPECTS REPORTED

No Stimulus Until Fall

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 24 Jun 82 p 5

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

am

Hainichi Daily News 1982

leaders ﬁgﬂut tuner
pmaihc monetary
madam. It mid be wac-
"ally M (at Japan to
adopt a new but-eu-

attunlatlngpmammm.
He ultl the meat

'leadeu .veme connecting

Pew Choices for Planners

Tokyo HAIRICHI DAILY NEWS in English 21. Jun 82 p 5

[Text]

Wham-awn
mic Mutu- m
up at” and m
pollcy choteu ltnlted.
Japanese continent
mkﬂmmm
an moi ﬂow we!
«name M at up-
ped-up public works .ex-

22

E
E?
E:

ii
igég§

‘ E
5%;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080050-3

COPYRIGHT:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An Economic Planning
Agency (EPitmIrveyolmajor
trading time shows they plan
toexpoiuApementrnoreinthe
second hall ot this year then 'm
theiirsthnli.

But a senior EPA olltcial
discounted this by saying the
survey mirrored traders' ex-
pectauoosollamersaieshesed
on an uncertain US. economic
recovery.

Stneksoimnold mthctsnre
swellingstlil ntlevels
eyearngowhenmnnutnetmers
began hinily tryhg to reduce
them. EPA omelet: any h-
venlory adhtstment will con-
tinue into the Jet’spetemher
quarter.

Another dempener is
business capital spending.
whichdroppedinercentinthe
ﬁrst quarter at m mm the
previousthreemonths.

Spending by smaller
businesses is on the downhill.
although big business is
steadily boosting hventments.

rising take-home income. which

the EPA expects to tnnsiate into

increased consumer spending.
A Prime Minister's Ollice

myshowsdtsposdileln-

Hainichi Daily News 1982

523
ﬁg

”i
3;

Eu
5%.;

E?
295?

§§§E§é§§§
5.333% 358

it

3§§§§

E‘

E

giiéiié

:25
f
Es:

Growth Rate Hay Fall

Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 23 Jun 82 p 5

[Article by Koji 'i‘akada]

[Text I

Introducing nn economic
perspective. compiled by the
xnternntionni 'rrnde end
Industry Ministry (M111).
nt n recent plea center-
ench. Internntionnl Trade
nnd Industry Minister
Shintnro Abe sold thnt renl
economic growth rnte tor
the current tine-I yenr will
be as low or 3.3 percent.
for below the government-
set urge: at 5.2 percent

But prospects by the
private sector nound hr

23

more pew

For ennp
Bonk. which
estlmnted the
percent. down
Much to her
three percent.

The hnnit,
third entlmnt
thnt there is
the: the rate
low two per
worst cue.

A peulmlstl
kind in nine

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080050-3

STRATEGIES FOR REVENUE SHORTFALL DISCUSSED
Government Revenue Sources. Plans
‘Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI in Japanese 22 May 82 pp 44-67

[Article: "3 Trillion Yen Revenue Shortfall; Time for the Pretease of
'Financinl Rebuilding' To Be Dropped")

[Excerpt] The Truth Begins To Emerge as the Budget Is Passed

Tax revenues in 1981 never grew actively, but there were signs of recovery in
December of last year and January of this year. However, the hopes of the
government offices involved in finances were in vain. Revenue growth fell
off again in February. and the growth rate fell to only 5.4 percent in March
in comparison with the rate for the same month last year. The cumulative
growth rate up to March. in comparison with the same months in the previous
year, was 9.5 percent. This was 9 percent below the revised budget estimate.
If we assume that tax revenues will continue to grow at this rate, the budget
shortfall will be 2.4 trillion yen.

The government has refused to recognize the likelihood of a large revenue
shortfall in 1981. However. when it realized that this could no longer be
hidden, Finance Minister Hatanabe began to explain the real situation in the
beginning of May, after making certain that the 1982 budget would pass.

At first, the revenue shortfall was expected to exceed 1 trillion yen, but
now the estimates are that it may be as high as 3 trillion yen.

Prime Minister Suzuki has made a public commitment to reduce the issue of
deficit-covering national bonds to zero by 1984 without imposing a tax in-
crease. It has now become apparent to everyone that the pretense of "finan-
cial rebuilding" is an impossibility. The problem is when and how this pre-
tense will be dropped. The government's recognition of a major revenue
shortfall is a step in the direction of readjusting the government position
in line with the real situation.

Useless Argument Over Responsibility

Former Prime Minister Fukuds made a statement at the first of the year that
"a large revenue shortfall would lead directly to political problems." Since

25
FOR oman. use my
WOR‘OFFKJA1.U8310NLN

then, the revenue shortfall has become a political issue. Certainly. with
respect to the revenue shortfall of 1981, the government was responsible for
an excessive estimate of tax revenues at the budget revision stage. In the
revised budget. the tax revenue estimate was adjusted to less than 450 bil-
lion yen, but by the end of last year it was generally expected that the
revenue shortfall would be slightly over 1 trillion yen. In order to reduce
the tax revenue estimate even further, it would have been necessary to cut
expenditures further or expand the issue of national bonds. Either alterna-
tive would have been difficult.

Looking at the graph on page 46, we see that a shortfall in comparison with
the original budget has occurred several times before. Each time, however,
an expanded issue of national bonds has been used in a revised budget to fill
the gap. This is shown by the rapid rise in dependence on national bonds.

There has never been a revenue shortfall of 1 trillion yen at final settle-
ment.

Government policies are shown by expenditures. Revenue is only estimated.
The government is not responsible for a revenue shortfall. The revenue
estimate is based on the government's economic forecasts. Therefore, if
prices are unexpectedly stable or the real growth rate is reduced and goes
below the nominal growth rate, a revenue shortfall is inevitable. This is
exactly what happened in 1981.

The Economic Hhite Paper published last summer declared that the "Japanese
economy weathered the second 011 shock." It was generally believed that a
real growth of 5 percent was possible. However, it later became apparent
that the second oil shock had been taken too lightly. The government’s eco-
nomic forecast at the end of last year lowered the estimated growth rate to
4.1 percent, and now the government estimates that it will go no higher than
2 percent.

When Fukuda was prime minister, Japan made an international commitment to
keep its growth rate high, but it was unable to carry our the promise even
when it took measures to stimulate the economy. In a free economy it is
very difficult to carry out economic goals to the letter.

Corporations must pay corporate taxes within 2 months after annual settlement.
Companies with a March settlement must pay by the end of May, and tax reve-
nues received by this date are included in the revenues for FY81. Tax reve-
nues for May will be counted by the early part of July. so the government
must prepare measures to cope with the problem by then.

It is no longer possible to make up for the shortage of revenue in 1981
through an increased issue of national bonds. After subtracting the unused
amount of expenditures (approximately 500 billion yen), it will be necessary
to follow the law and use the settlement adjustment fund (approximately 250
billion yen), borrow the remainder from the national debt adjustment fund
(approximately 3.5 trillion yen). and pay back that portion by the year after
next (1983). The major impact of the 1981 revenue shortfall will come after
that.

26
FOR‘OFFK]AL.USE¢NNLY
A Scenario of Deferred Payment Leading to a Tax Bike

The cause of the present slackening of growth in tax revenues is the slowdown
in economic growth. And recently the view has gained strength that the eco-
nomic slowdown is due to the effects of the second uil shock rather than the
business cycle. If that is the case, the poor growth in tax revenues is

likely to continue at least up to 198A, through the period of financial re-
building.

At the time of the first oil shock, the real growth rate of the Japanese
economy fell from 10 percent to 5 percent. As a result of the sudden in-
crease in oil prices. there was a growing substitution of other production
elements for oil on the supply side, and capital productivity was reduced.
0n the demand side, the growth rates of most other countries also slowed,
and Japan was unable to greatly expand its exports.

After the inflation caused by the first oil shock had stabilized, Japan took
strong public financial measures to stimulate the economy, partly at the re-
quest of foreign countries. However, it was unable to restore the high
growth rate that had existed previously and only succeeded in increasing its
dependence on national bonds.

In the second oil shock of 1979, a similar change seems to have occurred.
Beginning in 1980 the real growth rate dropped into the 3 percent range.
Now, even with public sector stimulation, there is a good possibility that
the national debt will only grow larger and the growth rate will fail to
increase much. Even with low growth, the rate of unemployment is not sud-
denly increasing. This is one reason why the financial sector is concerned
more with administrative reform than with the restoration of prosperity.

There are three possible ways to deal with a shortage of tax revenues: 1)
cut expenditures; 2) make up the difference with an issue of national bonds;
and 3) increase taxes.

The basic gove:nment policy previously has been to cut expenditures thrOugh
administrative reform and reduce the national bond issue. and then to deal
with the revenue shortfall by reducing expenditures. This eliminates the
effects of built-in stabilizers in government finances and has some negative
effects on prosperity. Also, the greater the shortage, the tougher it is

to cut expenditures. When this happens. a new problem develops in the re-
lationship between administrative reform and financial rebuilding.

Administrative Reform Is First Priority

Ynkin Noguchi (Hitotsubashi University professor) has the following view:
"Administrative reform is the solution to the present problems of government
finances (the 3 trillion yen deficit, etc.) and will make financial rebuild-
lng possible. However, the idea of reducing the issue of deficit-covering

bonds to zero by 1985 was only a way of showing a goal in understandable
terms. It is not fundamentally related to administrative reform. There is
nothing wrong with changing working objectives at any time. It is not

27
FIN!(Mﬂﬁ(1AI.USEGJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

desirable to set firm targets for revenues and expenditures and then cover
up problems with seeming cuts in expenditures and tax increases. The best
method for setting working objectives is to maintain a certain percentage of
the GM? for expenditures."

A real problem is the fact that it is quite possible that measures will be
taken to extend the financial rebuilding period 2 more years. "However,“
says Maseru Yoshitomi (senior general researcher in the Economic Research
Institute of the Economic Planning Agency), "the decision to get away from
deficit-covering national bonds by 1984 was made before the second oil shock.
Although achievement of this goal has been made very difficult by the subse-
quent changes in circumstances, it is no one's fault. Therefore, economists
should be flexible and reevaluate their targets.

"Just the same, however. it is necessary politically to set a deadline. Once
the set goals are changed, it will seem that there is a lack of discipline,
and the people will lose faith in the politicians in power. If the financial
rebuilding period is extended, it will go on being postponed indefinitely
unless there is very strong political leadership."

If things were dOne in the proper order, postponement of financial rebuild—
ing would come after a cut in expenditures. Former Vice Minister of Finance
Minoru Nagaoka (now vice president of the Japan Monopoly Corporation) has
this to say: "The gap between revenues and expenditures is very large. but
as large a cut as possible should be made in expenditures. And if this
proves too difficult, measures should be taken to increase revenues or post-
pone financial rebuilding. It is clear that once we relax, financial re-
building will be postponed more and more."

The Ministry of Finance is really aiming at the introduction of a large in-
direct tax. Even if financial rebuilding is postponed somewhat, the tax
revenue shortage will not be eliminated. Also, it will not be possible to
have a large income tax cut during this period, so it will be necessary to
adjust the ratio of direct to indirect taxes.

It will gradually become clear how Prime Minister Suzuki will go about drop-
ping the pretense of "financial rebuilding without raising taxes." At the
soonest, there is a possibility of shifting the use of public finances to
stimulation measures around the time of the summit in the first part of June
by taking advantage of outside pressure. The first part of June, when the
1981 revenue shortfall will become certain, will be another turning point.
Another possible time for change will be after the election for LDP president
in November. however, it will be impossible to get the people's support for
a tax increase without executing administrative reform that is acceptable to
them.

Greatly Expanded Issue of Deficit-Covering National Bonds Unavoidable
Tax revenues for 1982 are based on the revised budget for 1981, so a revenue

shortfall in 1981 will have a direct effect on 1982. If there is a revenue
shortfall of 3 trillion yen in 1981, there will be a shortfall of 3 trillion

28
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
yen in 1982. even if economic growth is achieved in line with the economic
forecast. If economic growth falls behind the government's forecast, the
revenue shortfall will be even greater.

The government's economic forecast is based on the 1982 budget. It predicts
real economic growth of 5.2 percent and a nominal economic growth of 8.4 per-
cent. It is now clear. however, that this is excessive. It is highly prob-
able that the real economic growth will stay in the 3 percent range and that
the nominal economic growth will stay in the 6 percent range. If the growth
rate drops by two points (asSuming that the income elasticity coefficient

for tax revenues is 1.8), the tax revenue shortage will increase to more than
1 trillion yen. If there is a revenue shortfall of 4 trillion yen, it will
be necessary to revise the budget again.

If the 1982 budget is revised, it will be difficult to make a large cut in
expenditures and it will be necessary to fill in the gap by issuing more
deficit-covering national bonds. The problem is whether the money borrowed
from the national debt adjustment fund can be recovered by issuing deficit-
covering bonds.

The proper procedure would be to make the repayment with the 1983 budget, but
this would make it just that much more difficult to formulate the 1983 bud-
get. Therefore the Hinistry of Finance is studying the idea of revising the
law so that l) repayment could be made and everything cleared up in the 1982
budget revision, or 2) repayment would be permitted after 1986. If the re-
payment is made in the 1982 budget revision, an increased issue of 6 trillion
yen in deficit-covering national bonds will be necessary. It took great ef-
fort to reduce the amount of deficit-covering national bonds by 5 trillion
yen in the 1980 budget, and this effort would all be thrown away at a single
stroke.

Budget formulation for 1983 will be even more difficult. 0n 5 June of last
year. a zero ceiling (zero increase in preliminary budget requests) was set,
and with the help of an emergency report from the Second Ad Hoc Committee,

a tight budget was formulated, with an increase in general expenditures of
only 1.8 percent (see Fig 2). However, it is certain that the setting of the
ceiling will be greatly delayed this year.

if the budget is formulated in accordance with the idea of "financial re-
building without a tax increase." tax revenues will be S or 6 trillion yen
less than the estimate in the "Midterm Prospects for Public Finances" sub-
mitted by the Ministry of Finance as reference material for budget delibera-
tion (see the chart on page 55). The "Midterm Prospects" calculates future
rcVenues and expenditures on the basis of present systems and policies, and
shows a necessary adjustment figure (balancing revenues and expenditures
with a tax increase or expenditure cut) which will reduce deficit-covering
bond issue to zero. The necessary adjustment figure for 1983 is 3.37 tril-
llon yen. If this is added to the shortfall in tax revenues, it will be
necessary to cut expenditures by 8 to 9 trillion yen. If the repayment of
the amount borrowed from the national debt adjustment fund in 1981 is added.
the necessary cut in expenditures will exceed 10 trillion yen.

FORioFFK§;1.USE(NVLY
Fill OINNCJAJ.IJSEI(NNLY

The bold opinion of the financial sector, which took a position of support
for administrative reform in the Second Ad Hoc Committee, is: "Since the
general accounts budget amounts to 50 trillion yen, there is no reason why
that much cauld not be cut. This is a test of whether administrative reform

will be carried out in earnest."

However. this same financial sector makes the following criticism: "A right-
minded person would think that such a budget was impossible. He cannot ex-
pect immediate results from administrative reform. The Ad Hoc Committee
should not indulge in the fantasy that such a huge budget cut is possible."
The Budget Bureau of the Ministry of Finance, of course, rejects a large ex-

penditure cut from the outset.

(nmmnrmaesnumum ?)

  

(1) mouse

   

-20 - I:
(neuuuuuuuuuuaauuuuu

' "IIRU.HI4-I. I'm. II§IKITCOII5L1IIC
( trons.useu:an.vveuoannae§aoss.

(1) Increased Dependence on Deficit-Covering Bonds Because of Revenue Short-
fall

Koy:
1. Rate of Dependence on Deficit-Covering National Bonds

2. Tax Revenue Trend
3. 1966, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1975. 1976,

1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, 1982
4. Note: Rate of dependence on deficit-covering national bonds based

on initial budget. Tax revenue trend is rate of tax revenue sur-
plus or shortfall in comparison with initial budget. A tax revenue
shortfall of 3 trillion yen is predicted for 1981 and a shortfall

of a trillion yen is predicted for 1982.

30
FOR‘OFIWCJAL.USIZ(MVLY
Key:
1.

3.
4.
S.
6.
7.
8.
9.
18.

Key:
1.
2.

 
 
   

( '.
(6% Enema

.5 ) 33.13!)
.( 0) r'

(1 )3 u
(11) a 10.4%
(1 )00133 A

(I )(H—(mn
I(:::(u(n

1135);) ‘J

(17) tar-n

        
      
 
     
    
 
 

 

General Accounts List

 
    
 
 
  
   
  
  
  

 

“'ﬁﬁﬂ'T'lﬂﬁ ‘mu ; Ian‘s“

__ 441.57.- -.__(§)5‘_.__

(25.3) 13.293 (37.1) 33.500 (33.0)

30.335 (23.5) 92.303 (30.2) 300,400 (33.3)

320.50: (3.3) 323.200 (3.3) 303.000 (30.1)

43_7.33.3_ (_9_.3)_ _3_93:30_3__( 3._2)_ 553.900 (33.5)

322,340 (22.2) 303,230 (33.3) 009,700 (3—3537

22.343 (37.)) 33.333 (31.3) 25.1mm”)

322.1oo(.su.0) 303.300(A33.9) 33.300(A33.3)

53.350(A33.1) 33.240(423.5) 19.600(A50.0)

31.350 (0.0) 65.3mm 3.0) 35.2mm 0.))

19.7.2“! .. L229). 19639113.?) 520g 1-91).-
— — 33.700

-n m , mmﬁn 3:33—10:34: 53-3333:ken-muznqimu'éiiuim-303333).)

(l8)+znnn1.

(Unit: hundreds of thousands 10.
of yen, percentage) 11.
Year 12.
1981 13.
1982 16.
1983 15.
Expenditures

Debt Service Expenses

Regional Transfer Taxes 16.
General Expenditures 17.

Note:
previous years.

Total

Revenues

Tax Revenues

Nontax Revenues, etc.
National Bond Income
Deficit-Covering National,
Bonds, National Construction
Bonds

Total

Amount Needed for Adjustment

Figures in parentheses are growth rates in comparison to
Figures for 1983 are taken from the Ministry of

Finance's "Midterm Prospects for Public Finances (1981—1985)."

mnsac—unwwwvm

 

(23.3332333033330333333033325333353331

(2) Decreasing Growth Rate of General Expenditures

Note:
1966,
1977,

Based on Initial Budget
1967, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1975, 1976,

1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, 1982

31

FOI(0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Last year's zero ceiling was an ultimate effort. It was put together by re-
ducing the aaount of the burden borne by the national treasury for welfare
pensions and repaying the amount with interest from 1985 on. "hat will hap-
pen this time? Experts in public finance look at it this way. "Even if the
Ad Hoc Committee can be used again to cut expenditures. the most that can be
hoped for is a ceiling of -5 percent. This will mean an increase in outside
areas such as public works, so as a result. general expenditures will grow
as much as last year."

Prime Minister Suzuki has said that "a transformation in thinking is neces-
sary." It is expected that the present tax system will be reevaluated. that
there will be a tax increase. and that nontax revenues will be scraped up by
such means as using up the supplementary currency recovery reserve. In addi-
tion. tax revenues will probably be assessed on the high side in order to
make ends meet.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1982
Another Bond Issue Likely
Tokyo ASAHI SMIMBUN in Japanese 14 May 82 p 9

[Article: "10 Trillion Yen Over a 3-Year Period; How Can Tax Revenue Gap Be
Filled? Are Deficit-Covering National Bonds the Last Resort? Idea of In-
creasing the Bond Issue During Budget Revision Emerges")

[Text] It is reported that the tax—revenue shortfall from 1981 to 1983 will
amount to a total of 10 trillion yen, and the Ministry of Finance bureaucrats
are turning pale at the thought. It is their own fault, because they were
unable to see that Japan's economic power was declining, and they went ahead
with a financial rebuilding plan based on a tax revenue estimate that was too
high. Now it is an almost impossible task to fill the gap. Also, they must
act within the limits of Prime Minister Suzuki's public promises of "finan-
cial rebuilding without increasing taxes" and "zero increase in deficit-
covcring bond issues in FY84." So they complain that they are "bound hand
and foot." ﬂow will the Ministry of Finance go about aaking up for the huge
revenue shortfall?

During questioning at the Diet on 12 May, Finance Minister Hatanabe stated
that the 1981 revenue shortfall "may be 10 percent (of the initial budget
amount)." Ten percent of the initial budget would be more than 3.2 trillion
yen--or 2.8 trillion yen under the revised budget, which is reduced by #50

billion yen.
Predicting on the High Side?

The Ministry of Finance bureau involved now estimates that the shortfall will
be about 3 trillion yen in relation to the initial budget. so the minister

of finance gave a reply in excess of this prediction. This seems to be a
shrewd plan on the part of the finance minister to predict the shortfall on

32
FORinﬂﬂClkLllﬂEOhﬂﬂ
the high side in order to alleviate the shock when the actual amount is de-
termined. At the same time, it is a fact that the bureau is not trusted,
because it has continually made overly optimistic forecasts. Six months ago,
at the end of last year, the Tax Bureau stated that the maximum shortfall

for FY81 would be a little more than 1 trillion yen. If tax revenues have
fallen so far in the "launching pad" year of 1981, what will happen in 1982?
When we consider that the tax revenues for this year include corporate tax
revenues through the March settlement of next year and that next year's tax
revenues will include corporate tax revenues for the following year, it is
impossible to predict the exact extent of the shortfall. He can see this
from the way the 1981 revenue shortfall kept increasing while various predic-
tions were being made. If the economy begins to move upward, the opposite
might occur.

However. if we calculate on the basis of 1981 tax revenues, which have defi-
nitely fallen to the range of 29 trillion yen, there is a strong probability
that the shortage for this year will be about a trillion yen less than the
amount in the budget (about 36.6 trillion yen), and that for next year it will
be about 6 or 5 trillion yen less than the amount forecast in the 'Tiidterm
Prospects for Public Finances" (about 61 trillion yen). The total shortage,
including that of 1981, will be 11 trillion yen.

The shortfall for 1981 will be taken care of by using the settlement adjust-
ment fund (approximately 250 billion yen) and borrowing from the national
debt adjustment fund (approximately 3.5 trillion yen). This is determined
by law. However, the amount borrowed from the national debt fund must be re-
paid by 1983. It will therefore be necessary somehow to raise 10 trillion
yen with the 1982 budget revision and the 1983 initial budget. If the re-
vised budget is formulated to stimulate the economy and an income tax reduc-
tion is added in 1982, it will become necessary to find even further sources
of funds.

Expenditure Reduction and Tax Increase

The first countermeasure being considered by the Ministry of Finance for the
revenue shortfall is to cut expenditures. For this purpose, the ministry
has adopted a policy of a "minus ceiling" to limit the rough budget requests
by government ministries and agencies for next year, with some exceptions.
However, most portions of the budget, like educational expenses, are made up
of items which slide up with price increases, such as social insurance, pen-
sions, and salaries. So the real belief of the Ministry of Finance is that
a substantial reduction is impossible.

The second source of funds is the special reserves held secretly by govern-
ment ministries and agencies. It is believed that Prime Hinister Suzuki was
referring to this when he said that "a transformation in thinking is neces-
sary." A representative item is the "supplementary currency recovery re-
serVe" (approximately 1.2 trillion yen). If these sorts of reserves are used,
it could amount to a substantial sum. However, this is not a permanent source

of funds.

33
FINI(IHH(1A1.USE§(MVLY
INNICNHWCJAI.USB|MULY

The third possibility is a tax increase. With respect to the prime minis-
ter's public commitment of "no tax increase," high officials in the Ministry
of Finance say: "It was an expression of commitment that no large or new
tax increases would be made without efforts to reduce expenditures." They
are interpreting it very loosely. They maintain that a tax increase within
the limits of the present tax system or a tax increase to obtain sources of
funds to make up for a reduction of income would not violate the public com-
mitment. With an election for the House of Representatives coming up next
year, it may be impossible to have a large tax increase. Some tax increase
is inevitable, however, in the name of "correcting unfairness."

Public Promise Becoming obscured

The three measures mentioned above will require revisions in the law, so they
cannot be carried out immediately. Also, there is a limit to :he ampunt of
funds that can be obtained. What then emerges as a last resort is the issue
of more deficit-covering national bonds in the budget revision for this year.
The Ministry of Finance, latching onto the fact that the prime minister's
public commitment is targeted for 1986, claims that an increased bond issue
in an interim year and in a budget revision does not violate the comitment.
An increased issue of 5 trillion or 6 trillion yen in deficit-covering bonds
would cause great political problems. and there is also the problem of how

to efficiently digest that amount of national bonds in the economy. However,
the majority of Finance Ministry officials lean toward the view that there is
no better proposal than an increased bond issue. The prime minister's commit-
ment is now being expressed rather vaguely. "He will get away from a system
of dependence on deficit-covering national bonds in FY84."

Meeting with these Finance Ministry officials, one is reminded of the scene
in Hashington at the beginning of last year. The Reagan administration's
Office of Management and Budget Director Stockman fought with the various
government agencies and departments and Congressmen, and 2 months after tak-
ing office he came up with a revised budget propoaal that was 6 percent less
than the estimate produced by the previous administration. There is a great
difference between Japan and America in the bureaucratic system for making
up the budget and in the public reaction to reductions in social welfare pay-
ments. It is also a fact, however, that the Japanese Government's budget is
overblown as a carryover from the high-growth period. In spite of this, the
determination of the Ministry of Finance to make improvements seems very
slight in comparison with that of Vashington.

FOR AllﬂﬂE(NVLY
o.“{-‘.Lﬂ '514 u? m
. n Y . . . ’:
(11) museum: hummus“,
rm (:1 ﬂaunmmsm
xerox!» .

Tax Revenue Estimates and Actual Results

Key:
1. (trillion yen) 6. 1979
2. Initial Budget Amount (Note 1) 7. 1980
3. Amount at Settlement (Note 2) 8. 1981
6. 1977 9. 1982
5. 1978 10. 1983

11. Note 1: Figures for 1983 are the estimates found in "Hid-term
Prospects for Public Finances." Note 2: Actual-result figures
for 1981 are the expected amounts; figures for 1982 and 1983 are
forecasts.

COVYRIGHT: Asshi Shimbun Tokyo Honsha 1982

9651
050: 6105/119

Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(i§i.0$ﬁ¢lﬂl¥
BCOWIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN URGBD T0 POSTER INDUSTRIAL COOPERATION

Tokyo DAILY YWIURI in English 23 Jun 82 p 1

[Text]

Japan. it owes moch'

oi its e success to
booming exports, should
promote industrial coopera-
tion among highly advanced
countries. extend technolo-
gical mow-how to other
nations and stimulate do-
mestic demand. the \White
Paper on internat‘onal
Trade '82 said My.

The annual report, pre-
pared by the International
Trade and industry uln-
lstry (tu'i'il, am said Ja-
pan should contribute to
the harmonious develop-
ment of the world economy
by maintaining the princi-
ple oi iree trade and up
pending economic coopera-
tion with developing coun-
tries.

This outline of the coun-
try's ioture trade policy was
upproved by the cabinet
Tuesday.

As one oi a tow indus-
trial states with a relative~
ly low unemployment rate
and high productivity, Ja-
pon advised the US and
Western Europe to expand
technological development
and plant and eouiment
investment to combat un-
employment and lagging
productivity.

The white paper also sug-
gested that Japan‘s Western
allies take steps to keep
labor costs from rising.
streamline labor-manage-
ment relations. and produce

an antiprotectionlst market
environment.

Japan barely managed to
achieve a 2.1 percent real
economic growth in ilscal
ism. which ended March 31.
with exports contributing
21 percent. The rate was
far below so crucial target
of M percent and was the
lowest growth since as per-
cent ln me

The country posted a
um billion current account
surplus last year against a
slim billion deﬁcit a year
heiore.

Japan's exports in iﬂi
grew by 11.1 percent to”
sine: billion reﬂecting the
strong competitive power oi

These ’successtul indus~
tries. the white paper said.
lowered production costs
lumen sermon equip-
ment investment, developed
products which not con-
sumer needs and conducted
an ambitious overseas mar-
ket campaign.

imports on the other
hand recorded a modest 2
percent gain to total $10.39
billion due to stagnant de-
mand ior petroleum and
other raw materials.

The white paper proposed
an upgrading or Japan's es-
port structure, calling (or
greater overseas shipments
oi high quality and high

COPYRIGHT :

THE DAILY YOHIURI 1982

C ' 3 “20/323

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

value-added products. diver-
siiicatlon or markets and
“prudent” activities to avoid

'il'ﬂtltlng its trade WIS.

Japan'slnartetisnotaa
cioaedto asthe
Amerloauandraropeans
sayinlightoithecurrent
tariii‘ rates and residual
importquotas.ltsaid.

Noting the Japanese Gov-
ernment's markebopening
measures since last Decem-
ber. the white paper urged
Japan's trading partners to
make turther eﬂorts to sell
their goods in the Japanese
market which it predicted
h‘ capable of absorbing
We manufactured prod-
ucts trons abroad.

It blamed the economic
malaise gripping the indus-
trialised West on a decline
in labor productivity caused
by the absence or large
plant and equipment in-
vestment and technological
innovation.

One solution put iorward
was industrial cooperation
among highly advanced
countries to create more
”be. revitalise local indus-
try and promote technoloo
gicai exchanges .

For Japan. this optl
would promote internation-
alisation oi industrial man-
agensent. form a close sense
or mutual dependence and
help develop harmonious
external trade ties.
MITI'S ECONOMIC SUPPORT 0N DEPRESSED INDUSTRIES EXAMINED

New Structural Recession Law

Tokyo NIKKEI SANCYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 24 May 82 p 1

[Text] Voices are growing in the industrial world for enactment of a new law
to take the place of the temporary measures law on stabilization of specific
recession industry due to expire at the end of June next year to ensure the
de facto extension of the original law. As a result, Keidanren (Japan
Federation of Economic Organizations) plans to convey the views of the
industrial world for new legislation when its chairman, Inayama, and others
confer with Ministry of International Trade and Industry's Administrative
Vice Minister Fujiwara and members of his staff on May 28 to discuss
measures for each industry. HITI has already begun a study of the new
legislation and will take the views of the industrial world into
consideration.

Strong Endorsements of Paper Pulp and Petrochemical Industries

The Structural Recession Law is a legislation of 5 years duration enforced in
May 1978 to render aid to industries suffering from structural recession
following the initial oil shock. It applies to 15 types of industry, such as
aluminum refinery and ammonia manufacturing which, excluded from application
of the Anti-Monopoly Law. have been disposing of surplus equipment. But with
such steps almost over, those advocating the extension of the law were
limited until last year to sectors such as the paper pulp industry.

However, when Keidanren's Industrial Policy Committee (chairman, Ryoichi
Kauai; president, Komatsu Ltd.) recently polled top officials of 12 industrial
organizations centered on structural recession businesses as petrochemical

and paper pulp, it was found that there were strong opinions in support of a
"law to take the place of the structural recession law after its expiration."

The industries concerned were primarily fertilizer and aluminum. Industries
receiving benefits but cool toward the law's extension seems to be limited to
the textile industry such as synthetic fibers and cotton. Like the paper
pulp and petrochemical industries, there are other industries hoping for the
enactment of a new law and coming under its purview. Among other industries
coming under the provisions of the law, electric open-hearth furnaces and

37
ltll(ﬂﬂﬂC1Al.US£(NVLY
ltlltlﬂﬂClALlJSEGMVLY

ferronlloy industries have also backed the extension. Together with the
textile industry, the shipbuilding industry remains cool regarding the
extension.

The reason for stronger voices in the industrial world for new legislation
and defacto extension of the Structural Recession Law is that business
conditions. which once appeared to improve, are sliding again. The
managements' underlying motive appears to be: "A flexible application of the
Anti-Monopoly Law is essential to improve and revitalize the constitution of
enterprises under conditions of low growth. But if great expectations cannot
be placed thereon. there must be such a thing as the Structural Recession

Law (Eiji Suzuki, chairman. Mitsubishi Chemical Industries Ltd.)”

At the moment, MITI is studying the enactment of a new law, to include the
matter of oil tax reduction and electric power rate discounts. It hopes to
boil down the substance by listening to the views of the industrial world
at the Industrial Structure Council. Eventually, coordination will be
required with the Fair Trade Commission and the Ministry of Finance, but
owing to the strong desires of the industrial world, the chances of the
Structural Recession Law being extended have greatly improved. -

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Iron-Steel Industries Reconstruction
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 25 May 82 p 7

[Text] From the point of view of maintaining international competitive
power, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry has launched a study
of a policy for full support for an equipment replacement program centered on
the iron and steel industry. The bulk of major equipment being constructed
between 1965-1975, the time has come for its replacement. It is feared that
if nothing is done, basic industry such as iron and steel would lose their
international competetive power around the second half of the 1980's and
become afflicted with the same "U.s. ailment." MITI hopes to study concrete
support measures for inclusion in the new fiscal 1983 policy from three
angles: (1) early implementation of iron and steel equipment investment
program; (2) equipment investments related to new technological developments;
and (3) investments to gain higher added values. However, the reduction

of equipment amortization term is considered as difficult from an objective
situation. Hence, a study group is likely to be set up in the Industrial
Policy Bureau.

According to a survey by the Industrial Structure Council's Industrial Fund
Group, the ratio of enterprises responding "not absolete" as to the degree of
equipment absolescence fell from 52.6 percent in fiscal 1976 to 32.5 in fiscal
l982.

Japan's iron and steel industry's large furnaces are among the world's best.
The inexpensive, plentiful and high grade steel produced by these furnaces is
a major reason for the strong international competetive power of other

38
FIMICHWHCIAI.IEIB(NULY
processing and assembly industries. But as most of this steel producing
equipment was constructed in 1965-1975. it requires a complete change after the
next fiscal year.

In fiscal 1980 and 1981. the iron and steel firms managed to finance such
projects themselves. But after this fiscal year, they are unable to do so
and must depend on outside loans because of greater amount of funds needed'
for complete restoration, adverse profitability due to decreased domestic
demand for steel arising from a prolonged business stagnation, and price
hikes enough to cover only the rising cost of raw materials. For instance, at
Nippon Steel Corporation, this fiscal year's equipment investment (payment
basis) amOunts to 290 billion yen. but it can only put up 200 billion within
the range of equipment amortization and the rest of 90 billion would have

to rely on external financing by floating debentures or foreign loans.
Without government support for greater restorative investments after fiscal
1983. implementation of the project will face difficulty and increase the
chances of Japan's iron and steel industry facing a situation similar to its
counterparts in the United States.

Hence. there are feelings in MITI that a positive support is needed to maintain
international competetive power over an intermediate and long-term period,
rather than taking the view that equipment investments in the iron and steel
industry represent a prime mover of economic policy. Presently, intra-
dcpartmental coordination is taking place within HITI on whether the target of
aid should be limited to only the iron and steel industry or whether other
induStries should be included and on what shape it should be. As for
measures for the basic industry. the aluminum and petrochemicals are hard
pressed and require immediate attention. Though there are feelings that the
iron and steel industry can wait since it involves intermediate and

long-term measures, it can be said that equipment replacement which helps
maintain international competetive power is extremely vital as viewed from

the future of Japan's whole economy. Thus, the Basic Industry Bureau is
hoping for early action by the industry on the equipment replacement program
and plans to come up with some plan of support for the program which involves
the development of new technology, a key point, and higher added values.

39
ltllCﬂﬂﬂClAl.U§l(lVLV
CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080050-3

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09:

FOI40FFKJAI.USE¢NNLY

o.oo~ a.ooo
n.m c.~a
a.¢n n.n¢n
H.¢w H.onw
o.o aw
o.mn H.G¢H

o o

 

on an: 239!
Huuauoauum

 

mm Hauuum

 

 

o.ooH m.aeo o.oo~ ~.ono
o.n~ q.nHH m.nn q.¢H~
".3” ~.ee~ ~.no~ o.ooo
n.HoH o.anm ~.on~ «.qnw
Ao.-v Au.~aﬂv Aw.onv A~.mn~v
o.c~ ~.n~a Ao.HV Au.oav
a.o ¢.o n.H m.oH
32a ”.32: 33. 2:82
HQHSUOSNUW HﬂhﬂuU—uhum

~w Huouum Ho Huuoam

«much

Anuusuov
Auouuauuoununv
magnum

2.03

mousucunon

933m

Aho>u=a HHH: .owmucouuoa can :0» coinnwa ca nuns: uoauouuov no oucouoc« uwzv

an: 9523:: anon—3:5 933st Hwoumncouu

Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

COPYRIGHT:

9097

650:

MOS/126

1:0

F0!(ﬂﬂﬂK1Al.USE{NNLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080050-3
FINICINNIJAI.USEINVLY

ECONM IC

PUBLIC UORKS PROJECTS IN 1983 DISGJSSED
Public Works Funds Increase
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 31 May 82 p 3

[Text] A m've is growing in the government and the Liberal-Democratic Party
calling for an increase of public works funds in the fiscal 1983 budget. Since
1979, such funds have remained at about the same level for 3 consecutive years
as compared to the original budget, but the prevailing thought is that they
should no longer be restrained due to their relations with economic buoyancy
and tax revenue increases. The move centers around the Ministry of
Construction and partly on the LDP. They will call on the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry to establish a separate ceiling for public
works funds apart from the estimated demands for the next fiscal budget.

Also, the Economic Planning Agency plans to ask the Ministry of Finance to
increase the public works funds for the next fiscal year by 5-10 percent.

The moves, therefore, are expected to greatly affect the fiscal 1983 budget.

Confrontation with Ministry of Finance Inevitable Over Next Fiscal Year's
Budget

Because of the critical shortage of sources of revenue, the Ministry of Finance
is determined to draw up a minus ceiling to reduce the scope of estimated
requirements for the next fiscal budget over the current budget. But the
Ministry of Construction argues that "revitalization means a cutback of

current spendings more in line with revenues, and that treatment of public
investments the same way as current expenditures is improper." (Construction
Minister Shiseki) Separate handling of public works funds was also

requested at the ministerial conference on economic measures on 28 Hay.

Further, on the same day, proponent LDP members of both the Upper and Lower
llouses convened a "discussion meeting of Dietmen for promotion of public
investments" and drew up demands for an increase of fiscal 1983 public works
funds. At the meeting, the Ministry of Construction reported on its.
analytical findings on the public investment's economic impact.

According to the report, (1) public works funds for fiscal 1982 show an actual
decline of 11 percent over fiscal 1979; (2) as a result, in regions highly
dependent on public works such as Hokkaido, Tohoku, Shikoku and Kyushu, the
economy is in a serious slump; (3) if nothing is done, Japan's economy will

In
ma omcm. use my
FOR'OFEK]AL.USE4DNLY

be in for a diminished equilibrium. Then, it calculated that had public

funds been increased an average of 10.5 percent yearly after fiscal 1979 as was
proposed under the new economic 7-year plan, "nominal GNP would be 0.5-2.5
percent higher than actual, and tax revenues, both national and local, be
higher by about 2.3 trillion yen in 3 years."

Some dietmen commented, 'Whe Economic Planning Agency has come up with the
same sort of analysis. Government funds should be allocated on a preferential
basis for investment type expenditures that bear fruits in the future."

A decision was made to convene a joint meeting of LDP's four groups--
construction, agriculture and forestry, transport and commerce—-and to expand
the circle of demands for more public works funds.

Further, the Ministry of Construction plans to launch a "public investment
fund increase campaign" by explaining the analytical findings on the public
investment's impact.

In the meantime, the Economic Planning Agency plans to ask the Ministry of
Finance that when it decides on ceilings of estimated demands for fiscal 1983
budget, it establish a separate limit for public works and grant increases
over this fiscal year's original budget. Coordination has already been
effected between Economic Planning Agency Director Komoto and Construction
Minister Shiseki on a separate ceiling for public works funds.

Against a backdrop of serious economic stagnation, small and medium-sized
enterprises are making strong appeals for an economic boost through increased
public investments. A frontal confrontation seems likely between the
"allied front," composed of the Ministry of Construction, Economic Planning
Agency and some LDP members, and the Ministry of Finance whose policy is to
hold down the fiscal 1983 budget at any cost.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Public works Budget
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SMIMBUNSHA in Japanese 31 May 82 p 1

[Text] As of June 1, the Ministry of Finance reshuffled its staff and will
commence work on the fiscal 1983 budget under Yasuo Mataushita, the new
administrative vice minister. In keeping with the desires of Finance Minister
wnranabe to "curtail general spending as much as possible," it will reduce

the minus range of the ceiling for estimated demands expected to be presented
in early July and conduct a thorough review of revenues, to include non-tax
revenues. Hence, the pr08pect of realization of the request centered on the
Ministry of Construction for a separate public works ceiling is considered
slim. It seems certain that a "tax increase line" will be pushed, starting
off with a review of the enterprise-related tax system, involving possible
higher tax rates on oil, higher taxes on wage withholdings for retirement, and
adjustment and rationalization of special tax measures.

1:2
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
011 Tax Increase

With respect to insufficient tax revenues for fiscal 1981, the Ministry of
Finance asserts, "No specific figures are yet available." But it has

decided to resolve the problem under the existing law by using up the
settlement adjustment fund (approximately 250 billion yen) and borrowing from
the government bond adjustment fund (about 3.5 trillion yen). As for their
repayment, it hopes to "arrive at a decision" while considering the financial
situation of fiscal years 1982 and 1983. (Finance Minister Hatanabe).

This represents a tilt toward a “divisive formula" separating 1982 and 1983
from the earlier proposed method of including tue fiscal 1982 shortfall in
the fiscal 1982 supplementary budget.

It is based on the reasoning and judgment that: (1) it would be premature,
as fiscal 1982 has just begun. to draw up a supplementary budget to integrate
a revised economic outlook; (2) there is no reason to arrive at a hasty
conclusion, for repayment is not required until fiscal 1983. As for
insufficient tax revenues in fiscal 1981 and 1982, the matter is to be dealt
with separately.

However, the Ministry of Finance is considering the floatation of new
government bonds as "there is no choice but to float more deficit government
bonds“ and there are no new sources of revenue.

However, since the goal with respect to fiscal 1983 is "zero floatation of
government bonds in fiscal 1984," it is absolutely essential to extricate from
the physical constitution of government bonds (debts). For this reason, it
has decided on a policy for a drastic reduction of expenditures, making up

the shortfall in tax revenues in fiscal 1981 and 1982 by increasing revenues
through tax hikes as much as possible.

On the ground that "nothing can be treated uniformly" (Finance Minister
Hatanabe) with respect to expenditure reductions, the proposal is to set up
a separate ceilings for energy, economic cooperation. defense and science
and technology as in fiscal 1982, the idea being to implement a minus
ceiling on all except these special ceilings to hold down general
expenditures as much as possible. Specifically, a drastic minus ceiling of
2-5 percent is sought, but an "unrealistic one would be useless" (Finance
Minister). Thus, a more realistic reduced limit is to be drawn up hurriedly
and presented to various ministries and agencies in the early part of July.

Also, with respect to the request of the Ministry of Construction and some
industries for a "separate ceiling on public works to stimulate domestic
demand," it states "it has no desire to study the matter." Instead of a
separate ceiling, it hopes to include it within the ceiling.

Regarding tax hikes. "He talk about drastic cuts in expenditures, but in the
sectors involved, it amounts to less than 1 trillion yen. From our past
experiences. it only amounts to about several tens of billion yen" (Finance
Minister Hatanabe). Thus, MITI plans to look into drastic measures on the
judgment that making up several trillions of yen would be difficult.

1:3
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Though the introduction of large, indirect taxes such as the general
consumer tax would be difficult, indirect taxes will be hiked through an
expansion of the list of items subject to the comodity tax (not! 80 items)
and} higher tax rate on oil (now 3.5 percent, with a large focus on the
entarprisofrelated tax system.

w".
r

Specifically, wages withheld for retirement would be subject to increase
taxes and special tax measures adjusted and rationalized. As for retirement
withholding. a reduced tax exempt cunulative rate from the current no percent
to 30 percent is expected to yield more than 200 billion yen. In the case of
special tax measures, the lowering of the tax exempt cumlative rate on

Excess Hazard Reserve, Drought Reserve and Reserve for Damage from
Redemption of Computers will be studied.

However, such a "tax increase line" is bound to be furiously opposed by
financial and industrial circles which are strongly demanding that Prime
Minister Suzuki carry out his comitment of "financial revitalization without
a tax hike." It is expected to be a subject of bitter debate hereon.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1982

9097
cso: 4105/126

hh
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
RESTRUCTURING OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL DEBATED
Reorganization This Fall
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 15 May 82 p 1

[Article: "Science Administration To Be Made Mobile: Reorganization of Sci-
ence and Technology Council in the Fall"]

[Text] The Science and Technology Council (Prime Minister Suzuki presiding),
which is a deliberative organization under the direct control of the prine
minister. and is in charge of steering Japan's policies on science and tech-
nology, is to be reorganized in order to build a mobile structure so that
timely policy deliberations can be carried out that will meet the needs of
today's rapidly advancing science and technology. An overall reevaluation
of the organization of variOua sectional meetings, centered around the Sci-
ence and Technology Agency of the Executive Office, is under way.

The council is in the position of being the "headquarters" which promotes
Japan's science and technology. However, the council cannot be said to have
demonstrated its functions sufficiently so far, and the direction in which

to strengthen its functions was being worked out in the second special admin-
istrative investigative meeting. This organizational reevaluation which is
being undertaken is along the lines of the deliberation carried out in the
special inspection, and the council is undergoing a structural reform in
order to strengthen its functions, with the aim of completing [the reform]

by fall, while keeping an eye on the special inspection report.

The objective of the reorganization is to create a structure that will enable
Japan, which aims to base the nation on technology. to cope promptly with

the development and advancement of science and technology and to work out
instantly the necessary research and development promotion policies or to
shape international strategies. As the fields of advanced science and tech-
nology, such as electronics, life sciences, and new materials. become wider,
how Japan as a nation should decide which field is to be chosen as the key
field, how to eliminate obstacles and promote research and development, how
to advance international cooperation, and other such questions must be delib-
erated quickly, according to the circumstances, and decisions must be made
promptly. '

ETHICIﬂﬂcgﬁi.USE{IULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present, the full council consists of six well-informed members and the
relevant cabinet ministers, including the prime minister, the minister of
finance. the minister of education, and the secretary of the Science and
Technology Agency. Since, by the nature of its membership, the full council
meeting cannot be held very often, the council cannot operate with mobility
under the present setup. Therefore, a steering council consisting of the
well-informed members and the secretary of the Science and Technology Agency
is to be established in order to achieve mobility. However, the steering
council cannot digest and solve all the problems, and it also lacks the
power to make decisions.

At present, under the council, there are five sectional meetings (each con-
sisting of approximately 30 members), including the consolidated sectional
meeting and the research goals sectional meeting, plus nine departments.
Except for the life sciences sectional meeting, which has the urgent theme
of drafting guidelines for a gene-rearrangement experiment, many other or-
ganizations are in a state of hibernation and are not necessarily in a mobile
structure.

For the new organization, the idea has been brought up to establish a steer-
ing committee (tentative name), which may be called an expanded version of

the steering council, consisting of approximately 15 members, including well-
informed members chosen from industry, government, and academia. This steer-
ing cormittee would have a mobile structure capable of reflecting the views

of various areas and also would have some power. Proposed as its subordinate
organizations are a policy planning sectional meeting, various sectional meet-
ings according to the technical fields, and various sectional meetings accord—
ing to the problems. These various sectional meetings would deliberate the
makeup of research, among other things.

Reinforcement of Its Function
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 17 Mar 82 p 3

[Article by editorial staff member Koji Sasaki: "Hardy Battle at Special
Administrative Investigative Meeting Over Strengthening the Function of Sci-
ence and Technology Council"]

[Text] The first sectional meeting (Junsei Umemoto presiding) of the special
administrative inVestigative meeting has used the knife of reform on "science
and technology" as an important administrative field, and a considerable
amount of argument has been boiled down. The target of this argument was

Lhe overall reorganization of the science and technology administration. and
a heated debate was conducted, centering on the way the Science and Technology
Council (an advisory organ to the Prime Minister) ought to function. One
faction insists that the regulatory function of the council ought to be
strengthened through the use of the science and technology pramotion fund,
while another faction, wary about this, wants to restrict its regulatory
function. The two factions stood face to face right opposite one another.

It will be interesting to watch how the special administrative investigative
meeting will pass judgment on the matter from the standpoint of administra-
tive and financial reform.

146
FOR 0FFKJAL.USE(NNLY
A Collection of Super Bigwigs

The Science and Technology Council is chaired by the prime minister, and its
membership consists of various cabinet ministers, including the ministers of
finance. education, economic planning, and science and technology; the presi-
dent of the Japan Science Council; and men of learning and experience
(Yoshishige Ashihara, Hichio Okamoto, Yasuhira Suzue, and Isamu Yamashita).
it is Japan's highest deliberative organization dealing with policy matters
relating to science and technology. It is one “rank" higher than other ad-
visory organs related to science and technolosy. such as the Atomic Energy
Commission, the Space Activities Omanission, and the Oceanographic Develop-
ment Council. The fact that it consists of super bigwigs has turned out to
be a disadvantage, because it cannot make "small turns." As a result, it can-
not fully demonstrate its function, and people often wonder aloud what on
earth the Science and Technology Council is doing.

If Japan wants to establish the position that the nation is based on tech-
nology in the 1980s. it is imperative that a consolidated, effective science
and technology administration be developed. At present, the science and
technology administration is implemented vertically. That is to say, matters
related to the universities are handled by the Ministry of Education; matters
related to mining and industry by the Agency of Industrial Science and Tech-
nology of HITI; and agricultural and fishery technology [matters] by the
Ministry of Agriculture. Forestry, and Fishery. As a result, governmental
sectionalism is strong and the system is far from a "consolidated and effec-
tive science and technology administration." Therefore. the Science and
Technology Agency was created as the governmental office to carry out con-
solidated regulation among the various ministries and agencies. Its power

is weak, however, and so it has ended up managing those gigantic projects

not undertaken by other ministries and agencies such as atomic power, space,
and oceanography.

Therefore, an argument has grown for strengthening the function of the Sci-
ence and Technology Council. To do this, the council must have money, and
so a sum of money (3.35 billion yen) was appropriated to a science and tech-
nology promotion regulatory fund in the 1981 budget without request for an
estimate. The use of this budget was left entirely to the Science and Tech-
nology Council. [Some of] this money was immediately distributed for newly
established creative science promotion work and as a special research promo-
tion regulatory fund for regular business. The rest, amounting to 1.35 bil-
lion yen, was allotted to seven research and development themes which the
Science and Technology Council considered important.

Challenging the "Vertical System"

The science and technology promotion regulatory fund was increased to 6 bil-
lion yen in the 1982 administrative budget bill, nearly twice the amount of
the previous year. Not only that, but the estimated request was [only] 5 bil-
lion yen; yet the budgeted amount exceeded the request even though circum-
stances are harsh, as characterized by the zero ceiling. If this trend con-
tinues, the Science and Technology Agency, which is the executive office

POI.0I1NC1AI.UEIZ(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Science and Technology Council, may become a "second ministry of
finance" shielded by the council. It is quite natural that such misgivings
should be felt by the concerned ministries and agencies.

Hen of‘learning and experience who are the members of the Science and Tech-
nology Council have even said: "Consolidated regulation probably will become
feasible with a budget of approximately 50 billion yen." Although not much
Egnvbe done at the level of the present budget, a considerable amount of
work can be done at the level of several tens of billions. Therefore. the
argument about the proper functioning of the Science and Technology Council
reached a climax during the first sectional meeting of the special adminis-
trative investigative meeting. [with the debate] centering on the science and
technology promotion regulatory fund.

The concerned ministries and agencies insist that their own science and tech-
nology policies become very difficult to implement when the promotion regula—
tory fund gets bigger and bigger. That is to say, the promotion regulatory
fund has been strongly conceiVed as a challenge to the traditional, vertical
administrative relatiOnship. Therefore. voices have been advocating more and
more strongly that the promotion regulatory fund should somehow be restricted.
so that each ministry and agency may be able to implement its own science and
technology policies as usual.

Consolidated Policy Is the Future Theme

However, the faction Supporting the Science and Technology Council argues
that the promotional regulatory fund was newly added to the budget because
the traditional, vertical administrative system is no longer able to provide
adequate science and technology policies for a nation which aims to base it-
self on technology. It is incomprehensible to these people why someone would
want to restrict this fund. This fund should be utilized effectively, super-
imposed on the science and technology policies of each individual ministry
and agency. It is quite impertinent to try to upset it.

Originally, the Science and Technology Council was supposed to be in a posi-
tion to grasp the overall situation of the science and technology policies

of various ministries and agencies and to make decisions. However, the scien-
tific research projects carried out by the universities have almost never ap-
peared in the “ring" of the council. If the function of the Science and Tech-
nology Council is to be strengthened through the use of the promotion regula-
tury fund as a steppingstone. the constitution of the council must be reform-
ed so that science and technology policies nationwide may be implemented
broadly and effectively. Namely. the council should not remain the Science
and Technology Council of the Science and Technology Agency alone, but must
evolve into a science and technology council which is "open" to each and
every ministry and agency.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

9113
C80: 4106/108

h8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HIT! SURPRISE! BY CRITICISM 0? 64K RAH EXPORTS TO UNITED STATES
Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KBIZAI in Japanese 6 Mar 82 pp 28-31
[Article by Reporters K. Komabashi and T. Ikui]

[Text] The U.S. Department of Commerce is currently conducting a keen analy-
sis as to why the West German economy has become stagnant. Among various
factors, the fact that the electric machinery manufacturers representing West
Germany, such as Phillips [not a German firm] and Siemens, have lost the in-
ternational development competition with respect to semiconductors and IC is
being studied seriously.

It is a very interesting fact that the United States is seriously worried that
the U.S. semiconductor-IO industry may repeat Heat Germany's mistake if the
current situation is allowed to persist.

This feeling is not in any way limited to the Department of Commerce, but
with slight shades of difference the USTR (U.S. Trade Representative), the
Department of State, and the Department of Defense all feel an enormous sense

of crisis for the American semiconductor industry.

Top-level officials in charge of the actual work, such as Under Secretary of
Commerce Olmer, USTR Deputy MacDonald, and Under Secretary of State Homatz
IPhoneticI, are the central figures who feel a deepening sense of crisis
toward the leading technology industry of semiconductor-16. The Department
of Defense does not hide its impatience with the technical progress and reli-
ability of 18s that are to be incorporated in the cruise missile and HM mis-
sile, which are to be the central weapons in the U.S. defense plan.

Needless to say, the Japanese export offensive with the 6bK-hit RAM semi-
conductor is playing the role of igniter of U.S. irritation. As is well
known, in the case of the l6K-bit RAH the United States took the technolog-
ical lead, following which Japanese enterprises squeezed in. In the case
of the 64K, however, with a drastic leap in fine technology the Japanese
enterprises have overwhelmingly taken the lead. As a result, the Japanese
indeed hold as much as 70 percent of the 64K market in the United States.

Although 64K production has just gotten on its feet, the sense of crisis
heard from Under Secretary of Commerce Olmer, among others, is that "once we

1:9
roa omcuu. use on“
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLV

allow Japan to outdistance us with the 64K, which is the basic hardware of
VLSI's, it will be impossible to catch up with her in the subsequent real
battle for 256! or 1“ (mega) VLSI's. If we were swept over by Japan with
VLSI's, the oil of the industry. it would be a national security problem."

Possible Invocation of Article 232 of the Trump Card

In the case of automobiles or whatever, the conventional pattern of Japan-
U.S. economic friction has been first to stir up labor unions and local
groups, upon which businesses ride, following which strong views are express-
ed one after another in the U.S. Congress. The "customary practice" has
been for the U.S. Government to play the role of appeaser. In the case of
64K semiconductors, however. the unique situation is the fact that the voices
of criticism about Japan heard from some segments of Congress or of indus-
trial circles are sort, while the four departments. State. Commerce, USTR,
and Defense, which do not get along too well together, have a common sense
of crisis.

Some even observe that offices like the Department of Commerce may instigate
a firm like TI (Texas Instruments), which took a neutral position in the
previous case of the 16K Japan-U.S. friction, to bring an ”antidumping suit."
Furthermore, if the Japanese share of 70 percent persists, there is even con-
sideration of freezing out Japanese imports by applying Article 232, the
"national security" provision of their trump card, the 1962 U.S. law on trade
expansion.

The above article has been invoked only once, when the U.S. petroleum indus-
try was driven into a corner due to the flow of cheap oil into the United
States from the Middle East in the 1960's. A sense of crisis on the part of
the U.S. Government can be perceivable.

Nervous MITI

NITI is dumbfounded by the U.S. Government's sense of crisis. As much as
60 percent of the semiconductor market of the world is in the United States.
30 percent in Japan, and 10 percent in other parts. Thus. the significance
of the American market is considerable.

Should Japan be faced with a shutout of its U.S.-destined exports of the

64K, the Japanese semiconductor industry will receive a great blow. Further-
more, should a "dumping suit" be brought, both MIT! and the semiconductor
industry will end up expending enormous energy in response.

Nor is the raising of export prices as a countermeasure for "dumping" so easy,
since it is the nature of the semiconductor [industry] to strive for low cost
through mass production. If this is done, then the end users in computers
and various other industries may on the other hand bring suit over the "anti-
trust law" (the current minimum price for a 66K in the U.S. market is $5.5-

$6.).

50
me omcm. use ONLY
For this reason, MlTl hastily sent for the industry's leaders in mid-February
and warned them "not to make too conspicuous moves."

The basic policy of HITI is "coexistence and coprosperity with the United
States. Re are not even dreaming of Japan's holding a 70 percent share for-
ever." Thus [HITI] is intently and tirelessly stressing the idea of coexis-
tence and coprosperity with the United States. In a press interview on

24 February. the Japan Electronics Industries Association showed that it is
keeping pace with HITI by stating: "The competition for demand for the 66K,
if we use a marathon race as an analogy, has just begun. It is a field in
which the demand will reach a 6.8-fold growth in 1985. If the United States
establishes its mass production system, they will catch up all at once and
we can coexist." (Managing Director Takai)

Overwhelming Differences Between the Two Sides

incidentally. full—scale demand for the 64K will reportedly begin in the
latter half of 1982, and vigorous competition is developing even among Japa-
nese manufacturers. Aiming to regain the No 1 position in Japan, Hitachi
announced loud and clear last fall that it will increase its monthly produc-
tion from 700,000 to 1 million units in March.

In opposition, Nippon Electric Co., the leader in Japan and No 2 in the world
in outside sales, announced that it has increased its production by 150,000
units every month since the monthly production structure of 300,000 in Octo-
ber of last year, and that it will reach 1.05 million units in March. Bull-
ish production plans were also disclosed by others, such as Fujitsu's goal

of 700,000 units in March; Toshiba's 300,000 in March and 1 million units by
yearend; Mitsubishi Electric Corporation's 1 million units in October, up
from the Current rate of 300,000; and Oki Electric's goal of a 500,000-unit
structure.

0n the other hand, on the American side, although IBM and Western Electric
have begun volume production for internal use only, even the world's No 1
outside vendors TI and Motorola have reached a monthly production of only
300,000. It is only natural that the market share of Japanese manufacturers
would reach 70 percent.

A further decisive blow to the U.S. side was the development problem of the
256K, the next hardware to follow the 64K. The newspaper NIHON KBIZAI re-
ported at the end of the last year "...volume production in 2.years"; and
U.S. Government officials were amazed, wondering: "As early as that?" How-
ever, when asked, MITI and the industrial circles stated [this report] was.
”groundless," without hiding their anger. At any rate, the fire had been

lit.

According to a leader in industrial circles, "it takes 1 year to produce a
perfect sample, and 1 year to reach volume production." Thus [the report]
doesn't seem totally groundless.

31
won OFFICIAL use on“
won OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Decisive Difference Hay Appear Hith 256K and 1 Mega

A 66K—bit RAM is a memory (random access) that can write in. store, and read
out 64,000 bits of information on demand. It is one of the important basic
parts used in a computer.

The reason why this 64K is drawing this much attention is that it is a product
for "entering into VLSI." Semiconductor 10's are upgrading the integration
degree each year through fierce competition to develop "smaller, faster"
chips, and the VLSI is at the top. Over 10,000 elements are built on a sili-
con chip of several millimeters square, and an incredibly small circuit pat—
tern of less than 2 microns (hair is 100 micron thick) is drawn. This re-
quires an extremely high degree of technology.

For that reason. it is an area with such a highly strategic character with
respect to nations that (V)LSI is called "the crude oil of the industry" in
the United States, and "the rice of the industry” in Japan.

And the only VLSI currently in commercial production is a 64Krbit RAH. In
other words, the 66K is a symbol of Japan-U.S. competition (Europe has drop-
ped out) with VLSI development to upgrade the degree of integration. Once
outdistanced in this competition, [a firm's] chances of winning future COIF
petition in development become slim. Thus, the U.S. side is displaying a
sense of impatience.

Difference in Output

This does not necessarily mean that the U.S. manufacturers got a slow start
in developing the 64K. Although the research laboratory of Nippon Telegraph
and Telephone Public Corporation and Fujitsu took the lead at the trial-
manufacture stage, the U.S. manufacturers lined up on practically the same
line at the final practical application stage with respect to the standard-
ization problem.

However, the fact that this much difference has developed between the United
States and Japan at the present time is due to "differences in volume produc-
tion technique." As in the case of the automobile industry, Japanese manu-
facturers are more advanced in automation and quality control, the technical
lrregularity of the workers is low, and their morale is high. This difference
has allowed improved output and permitted cost-effective production. Stated
from the opposite side, the situation in the United States is its output is
poor and it cannot compete with the price.

LSI technology can be divided roughly into design technology and manufactur-
ing technology. The American side is superior in the former, whereas Japan
is leading in the latter--that is, output. And, output is precisely what af-
fects the power of the semiconductor industry as an industry.

In the case of the 64K. the technique is an extension of the technique of the
previous 16K generation. Consequently, Nippon Electric, which controlled the
16K in Japan. is also showing strong confidence in 64K development. However,

52
non omcuL us: on“
since Hostek. which was the world's leader with the 16K, is running behind
with the 64K, the American side is feeling restless.

Furthermore, the cause of even more impatience on the U.S. side is the com-
petition for the development of the 256K-bit RAH, the next step up from the
64K. With 256K, the circuit pattern is further reduced to half the size,
reaching 1 micron. At this stage, a big change is needed from the technology
used up to 64K to a new technique such as an electron-beam exposure system.

Japanese manufacturing technology has also taken the lead with the 256K. In
February 1980, dippon Electric-Toshiba's irformation system laboratory and
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone's electrical communications laboratory an-
nounced they would be trial-manufacturing. The blow was felt even harder
because the former is an outflow of the VLSI joint technical research asso-
ciation, which was a joint research group of five Japanese firms started in
1976 under the auspices of MITI, and was criticized by u.s. industrial circles
as a "concerted civilian and government effort."

0n the other hand, it is reported that in the United States, only IBM and
Western Electric have succeeded, but no concrete announcement has been made
by other speciality manufacturers. The volume production by Japanese manu-
facturers was reported competitively under such circumstances, and the 0.5.
side became impatient. In the case of the 1 mega (1 million) chip, the cir-
cuit pattern is again reduced by half, to 0.5 micron.

However, it is the natural course of LSI to advance in the fine-process tech-
nology to 256K and to 1 mega. And the special annOuncements of the volume
production time of various firms serves no other purpose but to fan competi-
tion.

Actually. the volume production time for the next product can be conjectured
from the past pattern of development. From 1K to 66K, the degree of integra-
tion increased fourfold in approximately 2 years. Following the 16!, which
was at its peak in 1980, volume production of 64K will drop in 1982.

Shifting from 64K to 256K, however. the technique takes off with a leap, and
"the pace will be fourfold in 4 years, with 256K sitting on the throne in
1986 and 1 mega in 1990, plus or minus a year." (A. Oouchi, vice president
of Nippon Electric).

Hint of Crisis Before the Fact

As is well known, this is not the first U.S.-Japan semiconductor war. It is
still fresh in our memory that small and medium-size manufacturers in the
United States organized SIA (v.5. Semiconductor Industry Association) and
brought a suit for dumping before the ITC (International Trade Comission).

in the end, although the accusation was cleared, SIA and IBM succeeded in
getting a development fund of 200 million dollars by bringing out the VHSIC
(very-high-speed 1c) development project from the Department of Defense.

53
con OFFICIAL use our
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLV

0n the other hand, the Japanese side has also increased the customs duty to
4.2 percent and enforced it fro: 1982. In addition, ventures into the United
States are taking place one after another, beginning with Nippon Electric.
followed by Hitachi, Toshiba, Fujitsu, etc.

U.S. enterprises such as T1, Motorola, Pairchild, and Intel have production
bases in Japan, and at least as a trade issue "there is no reason for the
United States to complain." (Nippon Blectric's Oouchi). Moreover, in overb
all semiconductors, the U.S.-Japan trade balance is at an equilibriun.

In the present situation, if Japan controls exports of the 64X, which is
short in stock as it is, loud displeasure will certainly be forthcoming fro-
U.S. users. The U.S. Government is not necessarily showing its displeasure
after adjusting to that situation, and it is undeniable that there is consid-
erable hint of their sense of crisis before the fact. Although they do not
market it abroad, the IBM and Western Electric 66K is no less competitive
than the Japanese ones.

Nevertheless, HITI has taken up Alert 6 (the naxinun alert posture), as long
as the U.S. Government is deepening the sense of crisis fron the national
security viewpoint. The tine to show a fight is up until the end of March.
There is no telling what will jump out, including application of the trade
expansion law. "The odds are 6 to 6"--showin3 their extrese nerVOusness.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1982

7722
C50: 4106/78

5h
roe omau. use on“
FY82 CW ROJBCTS 0N BLECI'RONICS LISTED

Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 12, 26 Apr 82

[[2 Apr 82 pp 217-219]

[Part I: "HITI: Three Long-Range, Large-Scale Projects Started"]

[Text] The projects on electronics included in the 1982
government budget will be introduced in three installments,
starting in this issue. Beginning with am, the following
offices will be picked up in the order shown: the Science
and Technology Agency, the Defense Agency, the Ministry of
Transport, the Ministry of Posts and Telecomnications,
and the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation.

In spite of the hue and cry about "zero ceiling," ml's electronics projects
are in many instances growing in scope (Table l). The three large-scale
projects started in 1981, including "MD on the fifth-generation computer,"
"m on a high-speed computing system for science and technology, " and "RED
on new function elements (R60 on basic technology for the next generation of
industry);" will begin research and development activities in earnest start-
ing in 1982. Therefore, almost no new projects will be started in 1982.

The specifications for the "fifth-generation computer" will be drawn up and

design work implemented over a period of 3 years, with the cost expected to
be approximately 10 billion yen.

The research and development period of "the fifth-generation computer" of the
non-Neuman type has been extended an additimal year beyond the original plan
to l99lv-a total of 10 years. The ultimate goals include the realization of

mechanical translation, question and response, voice application, and drwing
and image applications which are to be the foundation of the application sys-
tems of the 1990's. The basic functions that are required for achieving these

goals include capabilities for problem solving, reasoning. knowledge base
managemnt, and intelligence interface.

For the problem-solving and reasoning capabilities, a nnxinun reasoning execu-
tion rate in the range of 100 iLIPS-l CLIPS (logical inference per second) is
the target. (he LIPS is equivalent to loo-1,000 IPS (instructions per second).

55
momemmom
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Knowledge base management capability comprises a data base machine having a
capacity of too-1,000 G-bits as a nucleus and the ability to reach the
knowledge base for information needed in reasoning within several seconds.
The purpose of intelligent interface is to enable interaction with the com-
puter through the use of voice, drawings, and natural language, so that man
may be able to exchange information with the computer by natural means of
cosnunication.

For the elements used in the hardware, it is considered necessary to have an
element that is an extension of 181 but has a much higher density than today's
1.31, ms element, and Josephson junction element. however, this project
will not be concerned with the development of these elements. Whatever ele-
ment that is available at the time will be used.

This project is divided into three periods: 192-84, 1985-88, and 1989-91,
designated respectively as the first, the second, and the third periods. The
total cost is expected to be 100 billion yen over a period of 10 years. Dur-
ing the first period, the basic technology will be developed at a cost of ap-
proximately 10 billion yen. During the second period, a small-scale system
will be constructed at a cost of approximtely 50 billion yen, and during the
third and the last period, several consolidated system will be completed at

a cost of approximtely 40 billion yen. The greater part of the 3 years of
the first period will be spent in drawing up the specifications, and a portion

of the specifications may becarried out through the processes of designing and
trial construction (of both software and hardware).

The 1982 budget is approximately 430 million yea (the 1981 budget was 1.5 mil-
lion yen).

The bureau which is to carry out the preparation is tentatively located in the
Electronics Industry Promocion Association, but the activity structure has not
yet been formally decided on.

Research Partnership for "Science and Technology Computer" Begun

The "science and 1 technology computer" is to achieve a high-speed processing
capability of 10‘ MIDPS (million floating point operations per second), and
a research partnership which is to undertake this task was established a step
earlier. The name of the research partnership, which was started officially
last December, is "Science and Technology Computing System Technical Research
Partnership." It consists of the following six firms: Hitachi Ltd., Toshiba
Corp., Mitsubishi Electric Corp., Nippon Electric 00., Fujitsu Ltd., and Oki
Electric Industry Co. This project is one of the big projects undertaken by
the Industrial Science and Technology Agency. This project, too, has been

extended to 1989, 1 year beyond the original plan, for a total of 9 years.

The budget has also been adjusted downward to a total of 23 billion yen.

RAD will be undertaken on a parallel-processing format, in which from several
hundreds to 1,000 basic processors are operated simultaneously, and on high-
speed logic elements and memory elements, in addition to the conventional Si
151 which are needed to achieve high-speed computation. Development of three

56
roe omcm. use on“
types of elementsucaas field effect transistor, high electron mobility ‘GaAs
transistor, and Josephson junction element-will be undertaken, and whichever
is the most advanced in development will be used at the time the equip-ant is
to be trial-constructed. If everything goes well, these three types of ele-
ments will be used separately in the high-speed computation parallel-processing
equipment, in the large-capacity, high-speed memory equipment, and in the
parallel-processing equipment for distributed processing.

For the parallel-computing format, both NIH) (mltiple instruction stream,
multiple data stream) and SIM) (single instruction stream, multiple data
stream) will be investigated. The challenge to achieve 10“ was will be
tackled by a combination of high-speed element and parallel-processing format.

In 1982, investigative research will be started with a budget of approximately
810 million yen (30 million yen in 1981). Investigative research is expected
to continue until the middle of 1983, and the conceptual design will connence
in 1984.

As for the development of the elements: the GaAS field effect element will
be developed by Hitachi, Toshiba, Mitsubishi, and Nippon Electric; the GaAS
high electron mobility element by Fujitsu and Oki Electric; and the Josephson
junction element by Hitachi, Nippon Electric, and Fujitsu. The Electronic
Technology Consolidated Research Center will also take research on the
Josephson junction element and parallel-processing format.

530 Million Yen on “3-D Circuit Element"

"km on new function elements," which in the beginning was planned to continue
for a period 0f 10 years until 1990. will have a 1982 budget of approximately
1.13 billion yen, an increase of approximately 68 percent over that of the
previous year. Approximately 530 million yen of this budget is earmarked for
86:!) on the 3-D circuit element; approximately 360 million yen for the super-

lattice element; and approximately 260 million yen for the environment-proof
strengthened element.

The total budget over a period of 10 years for this "new function element"

' project undertaken by the Industrial Service and Technology Agency is expected
to be approximately 30 billion yen.

The "Association for RED on New Function Elements" was established last August

as the group that is to carry out this project. This association consists of
10 firms.

Rab on the 3-D circuit element is entrusted to Toshiba, Nippon Electric,
Mitsubishi, Oki Electric, lhtsushita Electric Industry, Sanyo Electric, and
Sharp. Three-dimensional integration is to be achieved, starting from the
conventional 2—D integration of LSI. There are roughly three themes: 1)
integrating memory and computational Emotions; 2) completing sensor, memory,

computational functions, and output; and 3) raising the speed and capacity of
memory.

5?
son omau. use ONLY
MD on the superlattice element is entrusted to Hitachi, Fujitsu, and Smitomo
Electric Industries. One [element] that has a structure consisting of alter-

nating layers of very thin, several nm, GaAS and AlAS layers, and another that
has a structure similar to that of triode vacuum tube inside the semiconductor,

with a distance corresponding to the cathode-anode gap of less than 0.5 -mu,
will be investigated. The Industrial Science and Technology Agency calls the
former the supparlattice function element, and the latter the superstructure

lattice element .

MD on environment-proof strengthened elements is entrusted to Hitachi,
Toshiba, and Mitsubishi. Development of elements which can be used in extreme
environments, such as those in outer space, inside a nuclear furnace, and in
an automobile engine compartment, will also be undertaken. Resistance to
radiation, heat, vibration, and impact will be improved.

The budget for "RAD on solar photoelectric generation technology" as part of
the Sunshine Project (Industrial Science and Technology Agency) was raised

to approximately 6.6 billion yen, an increase of 16 percent over that of the
previous year. Approximately 5 billion of this amount is in a special account
and the rest, approximately 1.6 billion yen, in the regular account. The
special account is earmarked for construction of s 500 Hi class solar cell
and solar panel experimental mufacturing equipment, a low-cost SI refining
plant, a utilization system for schools and factories, and a focusing-type
photoelectric generator.

Approximately 1.1 billion yen of the 1.6 billion yen in the regular account

is earmarked for MD on Si solar cells. Starting in 1982, investigations into
reliability will be carried out.

One of the Industrial Science and Technology Agency's large-scale projects,
"instrunentation and control system for optic application," was begun in
October 1981 by the "Optical Technology Joint Research Center" in Kawasaki.
This research center will undertake the developnent of a light-focusing
circuit, which constitutes the center of this project. The 1982 budget for
the entire project reached 3,237 billion yen, an increase of approximately 36
percent over that of the previous year. Up to 1981, most of the work con~
sisted of discussions of various subsystems according to their functions.

Starting in 1982, construction of an engineering model and detailed design
work will begin.

“Aid Fund for Important Technology" Continues Its 9-Year Decline

The majority of the projects introduced so far are those whose themes have
been determined and the work assigned by HITI, and the participating firms
have been almost exclusively large enterprises. In contrast, the aid fund

for MD on important technology (Industrial Science and Technology Agency)
is also available to medium and small enterprises. This aid fund is granted

for MD proposals submitted by private enterprises. However, the 1982 budget
is smaller than that for 1981. The 1982 budget is approximately 2.9 billion
yen, a decrease of approximately 3 percent over that of the previous year.

58
won omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although the decrease is not significant in magnitude, this fund has been de-
clining steadily since 1974.

The new themes to be introduced in 1982 are expected to be decided by aid-my.
The themes on electronics which began in 1981 and are continuing through 1982
are as follows:

The nuclear technologies include: 1) application research on the high-bright-
ness, wide-viewfield, head-up display unit carried aboard aircraft (Shinezu
Seisakuaho, 1981-83); 2) industrialization test on a napping display systeu
(Nippon Avionics Inlustry, 1981-83); 3) application research on a solid
electrochronisn display element (Citizen Hatch, 1981-82); lo) research and
trial construction of an intelligent canplex automatic recording systel using
1.81 (Autoutic Instrumentation Technology Research Association, 1981-82); and

5) research and trial construction of short-duration annealing of seaiconduc-
tors.

No neu themes on "untrod, innovative technology" and "energy conservation
technology" were started in 1981.

Table 1. “111's thjor Projects for the Development of Electronics (unit:
million yen)

g. .ga has; 7pu.-.'I'r.l:|'¢m¢it 'u. - 7! --|-I.‘: lmul'l-

 
      

nn(i 2 meal. as 3 am as»: w.

2 rum:era—nuuummeu (5) am. “(27) mm 5.616 51-min. ::.IzI.-:m
ER, oM-I'I r -7. 1M. 5.150 was 5mm :1. :.~.I mun
(M, omzuaumm Low no ru-rM a. (-513.51!) ‘30)
(two-tum» Ira-meme (a) Mr. 32) 15 as aroma. «momm- J. - .
In on rnmnmmlm ”Law-Isa (31; um. 1" w. n so an: rams-‘1 v1. cam-mm It-K ~ -.
12 ensit4;1unnm»umt (31 nut. nu use sch-mu. «moon» -r.s-~ -
(13 email: manila £22) 613 um sci-um n. emamo tt-k- I.
(m “manlmayxnmu (31) um, - u.“ 2.09 m m-aum. gammy» 2.x . .
(15 swine» “hummus; v.-n.- ":12 31 um. mus-i n ma :un arm-1:1. amnion" "(1‘ ~ -.
(I6; snmw, .._ i'.. 31 um". ).-.~-ru,-. n o :n 11.13;) ‘39

(17) e u: .. c H Human: 31 I use w, , r ( am ”so am £35 an my... New 2:”.
19 > as: team-amt 33 mo new 35 mar-up... “widows :u;
gingennmutmznaur (31) lust. am- (27) use ms

(20 o-r-rumummau LSIB ma I £33)”, ., 7 ’ u 7 m“:
(21) D tantrum-16:12.1: :55 m I ”HIT; -.-::::.r.'m '
ézz; w..- 1.1 Huntsman» (g) :m m

23 e ' -| .-.. 'rnI-tumml:-.'.' '. In Ire-sum: 2m! 2463)

an slammemum 26 m r. o 9

2'3. ... -. -. r. 1- - w -7 ~ , c-i- .m/IllltEZég m n 2:: us ram-M ':

 

FOIOFHCaLUSEONLY
Key:

21.

26.

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

36.
37.
38.

Note to

Item

Office in Charge

Type

FY81

FY82

Remarks

Promotion for the development of basic technologies for the next gen-
eration of computers

Basic software technology

New peripheral terminal device technology.

MD on fifth generation computer

RED on highespeed computing system for science and technology
MD on basic technologies for the next generation of industry
REID on new function elements

Development of instrumentation and control system for topical appli-
cation

Development of complex production system for ultrahigh-performance
laser application

Automatic sewing and manufacturing system
Developent of solar energy technology

MD on solar photoelectric generation

Aid fund for MD on important technology
Important technology RH) themes

Untrod, innovative technology MD themes
Energy conservation technology REID theses
Promotion of software-related technology
Advanced information processing countermeasure

Development of health-care network system
KIT!

Assis tance fund
FY

Sum total

Request base

Industrial Science and Technology Agency
Large-scale project

Sunshine project

Brandnew

Starting in FY74

Including special account.. .

Total number of object themes related to electronics granted in FY81:
21..

Information Processing promotion Business Association.

Table: The name of and budget for the mjor electronics projects and

the projected duration of the budget are shown. Some budgets with a known

sum may

be without a theme. Some budgets shown may not be used exclusively

on electronics projects. Budgets which are not known are not shown. (The
same rule also will apply to tables in later installments.)

FOIOI-‘FIOALUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

[26 Apr 82 pp 229-233]
[Part 11: “Defense Agency: Missiles Are the Focus of RAD")

[Text] The Defense Agency's 1982 budget is 2,586.1 billion yen. This is an
increase of 7.8 percent compared with the 1981 budget of 2J0 trillion yen.
The preferential treatment the Defense Agency budget has received is quite
conspicuous against the background of the relatively small increase of 6.2
percent for the regular account as a whole. Its proportion to the gross
national product has been raised to 0.93 percent (from 0.90 percent in 1980
and 0.91 percent in 1981). With regard to MD, the budget of the Technical
Research Headquarters increased to 35,618 million yen, 12.3 percent over
that of the previous year.

Red) on missiles, including a new surface-to-ship missile (SSH), an intermedi-
ate-range antitank missile, and the former portable surface-to-air missile,
constitutes the focus of MD activities for this year. There are also a
number of items related to land-based weapons, including the first trial-
construction of a new tank and a new automatic antiaircraft cannon. RED
begun last year on a medium training plane (m), an improved-capacity mobil-
ity vehicle (00V), and a high-speed homing torpedo will continue to be carried
out this year.

As for business and procurement, the suppliers of "Badge X," involving a total
budget of more than 200 billion yen, will be determined.

Development of Surface-to-Ship Missile To Begin

Table 1 shows the details (centered around R60) of the defense-related 1982
budget. The Defense Agency's Technical Research Headquarters will initiate
four new development projects. They are the surface-to-ship missile, the
medium-range antitank missile, the new tank, and the new automtic anti-
aircraft cannon. Research and trial construction of these items have been
under way. carried out by the relevant manufacturers such as Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries and Kawasaki Heavy Industries, but activities will be conducted in
earnest starting in 1982. These projects are expected to last 5 years or so.
The RGD cost of some of these items may well exceed 20 billion yen, showing
that they are very large-scale MD projects.

The surface-to-ship missile, to be used from land to launch counterattacks
against invading ships, will be developed on the basis of the air-to~ship
missile (ASHl). It has a long range, 120-130 km, so it can be launched from
a mountain cove several tens of kilometers inland from the coast. The missile

will fly, avoiding obstacles, toward the target, the ship. Even if a multiple
number of missiles are launched simultaneously, these missiles can be made to
detect and select different targets, so the missiles will not be concentrated
on the sane ship. This type of "random target selection format" is said to
be incorporated into the system. The Defense Agency is putting extra effort

into the MD of this missile as defensive equipment appropriate for Japan's
defense-only defense objective.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Defense Agency's Technical Research Headquarters plans to carry out the.
first trial construction of the surface-to-ship missile over a period of 3
years, 1982-1981.; the second trial construction in 1985; and technical ex-
periments in 1986; its development is to be finished in 1987. The total
develoment cost is estimted to be approximately 20 billion yen; the .1982
budget is approximately 5 billion yen. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, which
was the major contractor for the A3141, is again the major contractor for
this missile. Mitsubishi Electric is in charge of the construction of the
guidance device; Nissan Motors, the auxiliary propulsion device; and Nippon
Oils and Pets, the propellant.

The Defense Agency's procurement plan after completion of the development of
the surface-to-ship missile has not yet been decided. However, its unit price
will certainly exceed that of the A8111 (120-130 million yen), so an order
amounting to several tens of billions of yen can be expected.

The medial-range antitank missile (ATM) is a missile for attacking tanks; its
range is 1.5-2 km. The major contractor is Kawasaki Heavy Industries. A
number of other firms, including Nippon Electric, will participate in the
trial construction of various canponents. The first trial construction is
to be carried out over a period of 2 years starting in 1982 (with a budget
of 500 million yen), and its developent is to be completed in 1986. The
total cost is expected to be approximately 7 billion yen.

The medium-range ATM has a range of 1.5-2 km; it uses a "laser homing" format
for aiming. A laser light is directed onto the tank, and the missile traces
the reflected light. This antitank missile follows after the wire system
“Type 79 antiship, antitank missile" (range, approximately lo km), and a
higher hit rate with high accuracy is to be achieved.

The new tanks are scheduled to be formalized (formally adopted into the
troops) in 1988, so they are called Type 88 tanks. They will replace the
Type 7a tanks, which are the newest tanks today, and become the main force
after the latter half of the 1980's. According to the development plan, the
first trial construction is to be conducted in 1982-1986 and the second trial
construction in 1985-86. The new tanks will have improved firepower and
motive power and improved performnce through use of computerized PCS (fire

control system), compared with the Type 719 tanks. As pert of the 1982 budget,
the Defense Agency requested 7 billion yen to cover the entire first trial-

construction cost, but only 1.3 billion yen of that portion was approved for

1982-83. The total development cost is expected to reach 20 billion yen.
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is the major contractor.

The new automatic antiaircraft cannon consists of a 35-pin antiaircraft can-
non mounted on the chassis of a Type 7a tank, with emphasis on autonntion and
conservation of power. Its development cost of 3 billion yen for a period of
2 years, 1982-83, has been appropriated. It is to undergo trial construction
in 1982-83; various tests are to be carried out in 1984; and it is to be
formalized in 1985. The Japan Steel Horks will have responsibility for the

cannon, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries for the chassis, and Mitsubishi Electric
for the PCS.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lbdium Training Plans for the Next Period To Enter Into Partial Trial Construc-
tion

The mdium training planes (m) for the next period, whose development was
started in 1981, are the training planes which will replace the T-l and T-33
in use today. Their development will continue until 1987, at a cost of ap-
proximtely 37 billion yen (1980 cost). Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Fuji
Heavy Industries, and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries competed vigorously to
become the major contractor, and Kawasaki Heavy Industries was the winner.
Division of the production work is as follows: Kawasaki will be in charge
of the construction of the forward fuselage, the control room, and the final
assembly; Mitsubishi, the midsection of the fuselage and part of the tail
wing; and Fuji, the min wing. The engine is expected to be the F3 engine
being developed by the Ishikawajima-Harim Heavy Industries. Partial trial
construction will be begun in 1982, and the first flight is targeted for 1984.

In addition, research and trial construction of an improved-capacity mobility
vehicle (CCV) is also under way, with the first flight planned for 1983. The
research and trial construction of a portable surface-to-sir missile (SAM) is
also being carried out under a 3-year plan which started in 1981. This
missile is characterised by its image homing device using COD (charge coupled
device) and infrared-ray homing. Toshiba has the main responsibility for its
development. In addition, the development of Ill-ca) as a semiconductor

sensor for military applications will be undertaken in earnest. This sensor
is scheduled to be installed on the domestically manufactured missile in .early
1985. Its 1982. budget is approximtely 800 million yen.

As for procurement and business, the major concerns for 1982 include the
selection of a major contractor for the construction of an automatic air-
defense warning control system (Badge X). The major contractor will be de-
cided this smar, based on estimates submitted by Fujitsu, Hitachi Works,
and Nippon Electric, and developent will be implemented in 1983-87. Total
cost is expected to reach 250-300 billion yen.

The aircraft includes 23 F15 fighters, 7 P36 antisubmrine patrol planes, and
l2 Ali-IS antitank helicopters-«11 very expensive craft. Electronic parts

produced in Japan will positively be adopted on the P15 and P30 ordered in
1982. According to the predictions by the machinery manufacturers, some 600
billion of the approximately 2 trillion yen in orders for F15 and BC after

1982, will be spent on machinery, and 30-50 billion yen will be spent on
parts. Orders for metal film resistors, connectors, transformers, and con-
denser-4, in particular, are expected to increase appreciably.

Science and Technology Agency, Ministry of Bducatim: H-II Rocket-Launching
Projects Brewing - -

In the budgets of the Science and Technology Agency and the Ministry of Edu-
cation, activities related to space development occupy the largest part in the
field of electronics. The sum of the space-related budgets of these two or-
ganizations is [00.6 billion yen, an increase of 2.7 percent over fiscal 1981.
The total budget for space development, including all other agencies and

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ministries, is 108.5 billion yen; this is an increase of 3.3 percent over the
year before. A small increase of 2-3 percent has continued for the past 2 or

3 years. The fiscal 1982 limit for national treasury future obligation au-
thority is 67.6 billion yen.

Other newly budgeted major projects include the development of a geostationary
meteorological satellite (OMS-3) and research on the next generations of com-
munications satellite technology. The budget comes to 6.1 billion yen and 20
million yen, respectively (Table 2). The 618-3 follows the 616-2 (Himawari
No 2), which was launched by the domestically manufactured N-II rocket on

11 August 1981. The Gus-2 was the first practical satellite which was suc-
cessfully launched by a domestically produced rocket. The scheduled rim of

launching for the 618-3 is the sinner of 1984. The major contractor for the
016-3 is Nippon Electric.

Launching of the next-generation commanications satellite, the 08-3, is ex-
pected sometime after 1987. The rocket that is to be used to launch this
satellite is the H-1 rocket, which is bigger than the “-11 rocket that launched

a satellite weighing 350 kg. The H-I rocket will launch a satellite weighing
550 kg.

Fresh courage probably has resulted fran the successful launching of the 018-2,
and plans are brewing for the launching of satellites by means of the 11-11
rocket. According to National Space Development Agency plans, after the

CS-Za is launched in the winter of 1982 (January-February 1983), the CS-2b
will be launched in the susner of 1983 (August-September 1983); a No 2 broad-
cast satellite (BS-Za) in the winter of 1984; the GIG-3 in the sunset of 1984;
a No 2 broadcast satellite (BS-2b) in the sunsner of 1985; and a No 1 marine
observation satellite (ms-1) in the sumer of 1986.

The performance characteristics of the CS-2 connunications satellite are
similar to those of the experimental communications satellite (CS) "Sakura"
launched by NASA in December 1977. Its main objectives include ensuring com-

mnications in times of emergency and disaster and maintaining communications
with the offshore islands. Its major contractor is Mitsubishi Electric.

The broadcast satellite BS-Z's performance characteristics are similar to
those of today's experimental broadcast satellite (BS) "Yuri." Its major
contractor is Toshiba. For the next broadcast satellite, the 35-3, a budget

of 210 billion yen has been appropriated by the Radio Regulatory Bureau of

the Ministry of Posts and Telecumnunications, launching of the 88-3 is schedu-
led for February 1989.

Thc marine observation satellite HOS-1 is to maintain surveillance of the ocean
surface, mainly of its color and temperature, in order to understand the con-

ditions of ocean pollution and to detect the changing of the tides and the red
tide. Its major contractor is Nippon Electric.

Besides the (S-Za, an experimental technology satellite, the BTS-III, is
scheduled to be launched in 1982. The launch is scheduled for this smr.

6h
roe omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

With regard to the new H-I rocket, the development of its ground tester and
two-stage tester will be started in 1982. The “-1 rocket was originally a
three-stage rocket; however, the experiment will be carried out with two
stages. Launching is scheduled for the winter of 1985.

The Ministry of Education has a plan to launch a number of science satellites:
No 8 will be launched in the winter of 1982; No 9 in the winter of 1983; No
10 in the scanner of 1985; and No 11 in the sunner of 1986. The rocket used
to launch these satellites will be the M rocket, which is smaller than the

"'1 rockets
Specified Research Settled Upon

In the Ministry of Education's budget for electronics, aside from the space
projects, the specified research projects are relatively large in scale.
These are allocated from the scientific research fund. The 1982 scientific
research fund amounts to 38 billion yen, an increase of 6.1 percent over that
of the previous year. Of this figure, 30.1 billion yen has been allocated to
the "advancement of superior research projects." Specific research is further
broken off from it. Specific research projects usually last 3 years, and the
budget per project over the 3-year period comes to around 600-700 million yen.

There are eight new specified research projects starting out this year, as
well as 14 ongoing projects. The themes of the new research projects start-
ing this year have been decided on, but their budget scale has not yet been
determined. Themes related to electronics include 'hicrostructure electronics"
and "research on functional ceramics."

"Hicmstructure electronics" has nicroworking technology and micro devices
as its objectives. "Research on functional ceramics" includes research on
sensors of environment, heat, pressure, and light, plus research on materials
for these sensors.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table l. The Defense Agency Budget (unit: million yen)

IIII lll'l .

     

. '-:'..-'. I’ll: I' “ 'I'l-'~

 

RI

        

ill“!

a mu-

(7) mum-lam

8 onuuumnw (32) rm-i'cw um 14.199 am 192)
? 9.1.9“st Maui-cu um use 5.21! {Jam-z

 

 

  
 
 
 
  
    
   

) b‘aEl‘IIBﬂM MW'NI41 mo L339 35.: v—r-U-e (3'!)
I E .1 Ir — ’5‘!-
11 M2: - +mu; nan-mu an 1.242 3.42:; via-w.- 435)
12 o :u- k'l'attﬂﬂé tam-HM 1.11: was mu mu- 3 , man-Y (3E
13 panama: ram-nu 1.319 79:. 63:7» -I-'HH1|'.' 2S 2
(15)!” 1t: - mm
1 Maw»:
13 D'I'lﬂ ”MIMOS) mu m. 4521-:
1 nut-mum" mun o u I.6l‘.' x -: - r (39)
13 .war 2mm
19 HKK+ “Min 0 I» :Um ."w(u0)
20 DmHtAﬂw um+n MUD lﬁu mru
21 l- 7 ”Jul“; Lml Ll“) . If!!!
22 ItII'I-Iltll‘chﬂw mm"? m n 'L’JI‘J u -- : (39)
2 hSAMI
23 «naming-w am. Hi rm Lain um rs. .. . +09)
2 nmslwl
22 OIL? a mum rum am 271m um (ho)
27 Dew umwi 7x5 :uu lulu Ileuﬁmlv (“1)
8 "mp-1 nmumm: mm}- 5127 4.195 6.930
29 III-I'll.” . ‘I. rum)!-

cv-a. -: mm: mm; 5.1;". 2.3m 3.1m .-..-« ~ mew» (1‘2)
l>-l"l:l::l+', 7. H. "mm: tin LEE-I

        

Key:

1. Item

2. Office in Charge
3. FY81

4. FY82

5. Future Obligation
6. Remarks

7. REID

8. New m fund
9. Guidance weaponry

10. Electronic devices

11. Firearms and vehicles

12. Warships and naval weaponry
13. Aircraft

11.. Bus iness' and procurement
15. Replenishment of equipment
16. Armored

17. Type 79 antiship,_ antitank

FOIOFHCIAIJJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

18. Missile launchers

19. Type 74 tanks

20. Surface-to-sir missiles

21. Hawk

22. Short-range surfsce-to-air missiles

23. Short-range SAH's

24. Portable surfsce-to-air missiles

25. Portable SAH's

26. Aircraft

27. Ships

28-29. construction of defensive microcircuits and consolidation of
central cool-and system

30. Defensive microcircuits

31. Central cosmnd system

32. Defense Agency‘s Technical Research Headquarters

33. Surface-to-ship missiles, etc.

34. Radar electronic war simulators, etc.

35. New tanks, etc.

36. High-speed homing torpedoes, etc.

37. lbdium training planes, etc.

38. Defense Agency Headquarters

39. Sets -

40. Vehicles

lol. 10 12,520-ton ships

42. Furnkawa-Somhara, etc.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2 .

mi 1 lion yen)

K 2 H‘.‘ “M": . tannin/r; iiimkmll- Fl)‘ 'I'IJ III! '5";

WW

(2&70917H

   

(6) comma J mcusm

“II

(7) «5mm». 1 mum.”

mile

(8) slum-mum)
«nae

(9) smsm-zmm-z)
one

(10) ouwmm Ill NETslll)

wilt
(11) .{tliﬂllly "'5'!
vrwwxnxn
(12) O, r I» wrung.
’ 1+ 1..an
$13 .lllu’r , pal!
' i sum-mm“
? .M ""1 PIER

1
{1 .1-<--1->rt~£ll~
(SI-II'ACNHIfb’IﬁII

(17) one» ‘1' tall"
“Quill"

omumumuen
.JMII ~ ﬂkn‘r-zl -

20
x. > .' 2 ﬂanlt

’18 unusual-mm“
:19

'r-wmuzm 22 a
ram“ ﬁll mm
11%;!!! 21‘ Ill mot-2
Val-132$ Ila 7m
'f-l-‘llzﬁ III 3,13:
'mliﬁ 211m 7m
inﬁll 215 III :m
WWII! 13 8M mun
'm'mm m (23) 1|.“
WWW-Hm 2.211
'FWH'rﬂt-Ii :4: l
'f-Wll'rﬂwﬁ .‘nl

want“: (22) u
war-um mr.
uwrmmuum (an) m;

(21 omuummulrsux uwvmmum

The Science and Technology Agency's and Ministry of Education's-
Budgets for Space Development (unit:

liﬂl N I!)

«no 13.!“

 
 

7.1! Mun
21.733

IZTJJ 9.656
9.2!:

W 7m
JJI

20.475 1‘. l'.’.'.

{.765 6.9 l.'
was
2m
N l

1311
9':

 

(25) n -i--.I.1nuxmuaun.un; m w-r—mum rm : .mun-

Item (lbjor projects)
Organization in Charge
FY81

FY82

Future Obligation Authority (FY82)
Development of (RS-3
Development of pus-1
Development of CS-Z
Development of 88-2
Dcve lopment
Trial construction and testing of sensors such as synthetic aperture
radar
Research on experimental systems carried on-bosrd shuttle
Development of H-I rocket
Science satellite research fund
Development fund for H rocket

Fund for participating in space shuttle project (SEﬂC)

of HTS-III

68

NR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

3.1”": ‘. h
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

17. Basic research fund for development of liquid water engine

18. Research of the next generation of communications satellite
technology

[9. Reception and processing of earch observation data

20. Research on the elements of liquid acid, liquid water rocket
engine

21. Research on basic satellite technology

22. National Space Development Agency

23. Space Science Research Center

24. National Aerospace Laboratory

25. Note: Space science Research Center was established in April 1981 by
reorganizing the Aerospace Research Center of Tokyo University.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-HtGraw-Hill, Inc. 1982.

9113
C80: 6106/111

FOR 0'11CJAI.USEIMNLY
NTT'S INFORMATION NETHORK SYSTEM PROJECT DESCRIBED
Tokyo EKONOHISTO in Japanese 27 Apr 82 pp 80-83

[Article by Kazuhisa Haeno of the Society Section of HAINICHI SHIHBUN:
'The Era of a Telephone That Can 'Read, Write, and See' Is Coming; Bx-
pectations and Uncertainty Concerning NTT's INS Project"]

[Text] Our society will be changed significantly as
a result of the unification of communication and informa-

tion processing, and their advancement...

Experimental application of the INS (advanced information
communication system) project is to be started this fall
by the Japan Telephone and Telegraph Corporation [NIT].
It is a farbreaching project, with a huge investment
amounting to 25 trillion yen; it is targeted for comple-
tion at the end of this century. what kind of impact
will it have on Japanese society? The following is a
report filed by our society section reporter who covers
the field.

From Analog to Digital

Tsune Hafuji, president of NTT, appeared amazed himself when he stated
the following at the press conference: "When it is completed as NTT has
planned, I don't know what the world will look like. It is a little bit
scary to think of it." The "it" referred to by President Hafuji is the
"INS project" into which NTT is pouring all its resources.

INS is the abbreviation for information network system. In the language
of NTT, it means "advanced information communication system." Translated
into the society section reporter's language, which is easier to under-
stand, it is a project by which the telephone today, through which we

can "talk and listen," will be changed into a more convenient telephone

by which we can "read, write. and see."

Although it may become somewhat technical, I will explain it in some de-
tail, because we must consider the future electric communications system.
There are two ways in which the signal (information) can be transmitted

by electric communications system today: analog format and digital format.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NIX

Japan's electric conunications networks can be roughly divided into five
groups: telephone. telegraph, subscription telegraph, data comica-
tions, and facsimile. The telephone network, with its circuits strtlng
out all over the country, is based on the analog format. Therefore,
even though other networks may employ a digital format in their network
trunkline section, eventually they must convert to an analog format.

"hen we use this means, however, we cannot expect to have efficient tele-
phone and telegraph transmissions, because analog means "similar." Take
the telephone, for example. The wave form of the human voice is converted
into an electric current having a similar wave form and then is trans-
mitted and received. 0n the other hand, digital means "numerical."

The digital telephone to be employed by the INS project digitizes the

wave form of human voice, which varies as a function of time, and transmits
the numerical signal. At the receiving end, this numerical signal is
converted back into the original wave form, and thus the human voice is
reproduced.

Doing it this way has many advantages. With a telephone circuit using
analog format, the transmission rate is 50 bits per second. If the cis-
cuit is digitized, the transmission rate can be increased more than 1,000
times, to 666 kilobits per second. Moreover, using digital format, the
wave form of voice over a l-second period can be compressed to 0.016
second and then transmitted, so that the remaining time, 0.9986 seconds,
can be used to transmit other signals. This is called time-sharing multi-
plex transmission.

Furthermore, using digital format, the signal can be temporarily stored
and the useless signal can be eliminated. For examle, TV telephones
are expected to make an appearance in the future. The background of a
person who is talking on the phone is usually a wall, which does not
move. In such a case, if the simal representing the background at rest
is eliminated, useless transmission can be avoided.

Now then, the circuit used in the future to transmit these signals will
not be the conventional coaxial copper cables. Instead. optic fibers
will replace copper cables. Optic fibers consist of transparent quartz
glass fibers, and the signals will be transmitted through these fibers

by the use of laser. It is a broadband cable capable of transmitting
and receiving 10,000 circuits of telephone channels using a line as thin
as a human hair. Of course, the exchange will also be converted into the
newest digital exchange.

Then the telephone circuit, which heretofore could be used only for tele-
phone commications, can be shared by other modes of communications,
such as data and facsimile transmissions, by using different terminals.
In other words, what the INS project is trying to accomplish is to take
today's system, which is thin and narrow so the information (car) can
only travel slowly, and turn it into a big, wide superhighway so that
high-speed travel may be realized.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this purpose, NT? is starting experimental application of INS this
year in an area in the vicinity of the Musashino Electric Commmnications
Research Center, including Hitaka City in Tokyo Metropolis. Basic tech-
nologies needed by this experiment have all been established, and approxi-
mately 10,000 general subscription telephones. 250 digital telephones,

and 750 nontelephone terminals such as ultrahigh-speed facsimile, "drawing
communications" with which handwritten letters and drawings can be trans-
mitted simultaneously, and "TV conferences" in which images are trans-
mitted and received, will be involved in this experiment.

As for the other construction projects, since the useful life of a tele-
phone network is approximately 20 years, old facilities which have reached
retirement age will be converted one after another. The project is far-
reaching, involving an estimated total investment of 25 trillion yen.
Although NTT finances in the future are "full of problens," including

the telephone rates reaching the ceiling and an increasing debt burden,
NTT's plan includes the introduction of optic fiber into the trunk net-
work linking the major metropolitan areas of every prefecture by 1985,

and conversion of every family subscriber circuit to optic fiber by 1995.
The entire INS project will be completed by the let century.

Internal Affairs of NTT

When this INS project is realized--in the realm of business activities,
utilization of an on-line electric communications system (business tele-
communication center-BTC) by DA and industrial robot will become feasible
and, as a result, rationalization of production and management will be
achieved. In the realm of personal life, using a home telecommunications
terminal in which the four basic functions--telephone, data, facsimile

and image--have been integrated, a person will be able to acquire culture,
livelihood, and local information inexpensively. This then is NTT's

rosy dream.

However. it was last August when NTT suddenly became enthusiastic about
undertaking the INS project. In the background are NTT's internal affairs.

Two years ago, NTT completed its two important operational goals: "settle-
ment of accumulated and delayed telephone installation," and "instant
dialing." Against this background, it was highly probable that the INS
project was proposed as the next operational goal. Therefore, some
criticized it as "a project solely for the convenience of NTT, without

any regard for the people's needs." President Mafuji, who previously

was president of Harima Heavy Industries in Ishikawajima, and who took
office last January, was himself perplexed at the time and was at a loss

to make up his mind.

However, stimulated in part by France's "telematique," the president
too began to recognize the need for a sound infrastructure of communica-
tions in order for Japan to be able to make progress in the 21st century,

and he is said to have been completely behind the INS project since last
swmmer.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, some sectors are still apprehensive about this INS project.

For example, some suspect that "NTT say have the ambition to grasp Japan's
entire information system in its hands" because a single optic fiber can
carry various media, including data and facsimile comications. The
Ministry of Posts and‘relecommunications is still half in doubt and is
watching MIT's moves carefully.

To be sure, when various media are carried by a single cable, management
of infatuation can make further progress. Furthermore, if a citizen
identification mater system is to be implemented, this could provide

a fertile gromd for it.

There once was an incident concerning the forgery by the m staff of a
CD card through the wiretapping of a data co-unication. New crimes
sinilar to this computer crime can be expected to increase. Moreover.
fear of invasion of privacy is quite justified, because the personal
data stored in the data base can easily be retrieved. The modern tech-
nological innovations are all a double-edged sword. They can work both
ways, depending on how they are used.

There is an aspect which can thus be criticized. Whether we like it or
not, however, we cannot help but move deeper into an informationalized
society today. Therefore, what we probably ought to do is to watch the
progress of the INS project closely, with an understanding of its problem
areas. In fact, in spite of the criticism, much can be expected of the
project.

As its first merit, N'l'T Vice President Yasusada Kitahara cited a significant
change in the rate structures, whereby "the difference in rates based

on distance can be expected to be rectified." Since the same network is
shared by various media, including facsimile and data consumications,

the construction cost of the circuit will be low and the charge for

usage will also be low as a result. Furthermore, the rate structure will
change basically. At present, a time-based charge system, based on "how
many minutes and seconds the circuit was used." is in effect. After the
INS project is completed, it will become an information-based charge
system, based on "how much information was transmitted." In a digital
system. it is very easy to count the nunber of bits--the amount of informa-
tion——so charges based on the nuaber of bits can easily be set up.

Moreover, today's telephone rates differ significantly according to distance,
with a difference as great as a ratio of l to 60. Within the Tokyo
Metropolis, the rate is 10 yen per 3 minutes. Between Tokyo and Kagoshima,
however, 10 yen buys only 3 seconds of telephone time. According to the

INS project, information can be stored temporarily and transnitted all

at once at a very high rate when a circuit becomes available. The circuit
utilization rate can be increased significantly, so circuit costs can be
reduced and the difference in rates due to distance can be rectified.

Blossoming of New Media

As another merit of the INS project, we cannot ignore its contribution
to the development of new media. For example, the "captain system,"

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by which information consisting of letters and drawings stored in a com-
puter located at the center in the downtown Ginza can be projected onto
a Braun tube (cathode ray tube) at home via a telephone circuit. is to
be put to practical application in the summer of 1983. Moreover. TV
letter multiplex broadcasting. by which letter information such as telop
of newsbrief can be shown on the TV screen by means of superimposing letter
signals in the gap between TV scanning lines. is to be started experi-
mentally toward the end of 1983. Furthermore, also within the same year,
a stationary satellite is to be launched into the space 36,000 km above
the equator for the purpose of bouncing TV waves back to the Japanese
islands. and each family will be able to receive a TV image directly by
means of a parabolic antenna. Satellite broadcasting is to begin.

The year 1983 may thus be called the first year of the new media. How-
ever. many people in the field of mass communications are not overly

excited. in view of the fact that "when CATV (community antenna televi-
sion) first appeared in early 1965, the mass media were greatly excited.
but it did not develop as much as expected." However. the difficulties
encountered by the independent broadcasting stations of CATV were due

in part to regulatory restrictions and also to the high cost of setting

up a program and selecting materials. These became the bottleneck of
CATV development.

But the INS project can make information gathering simpler and less
expensive. The appearance of new media supported by the INS project will
be fundamentally different from that of the 1960's. A typical example
is the captain system mentioned previously. Traditionally. the IP (in-
formation provider) such as a newspaper office must prepare a manuscript
for a TV program, which must be delivered to the center downtown on the
Cinza. And the delivery of the manuscript from the IP to the center is
dependent on "manpower." using a motorcycle as a means of transportation.
As a result. while electric communication systems such as telephone cirh
cuits are being used otherwise, the program-making stage becomes the
bottleneck and the media cannot fully develop the characteristics of
speedy reporting.

Last fall, however. NTT developed a Japanese word processor that accepts
a handwritten manuscript as input. This is one of the indispensable
terminals for realization of the INS project. When a sentence consisting
of a mixture of Rana and kanji is written on a special board, after
computer processing. the sentence can be printed out. If this sentence

is transmitted via a telephone line to the newspaper office. the "print"
can be picked up and organized into a news report. Utilizing this system.
input to the captain system can be carried out in real time, and the

speedy reporting which is characteristic of the captain system can be
fully demonstrated.

An Era of Work At Home

Vice President Kitahara predicts that. as described by the American
critic on culture A. Toffler. "work at home will also become widespread

7h
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Japan" after the IRS project is completed. In Japan, where the people
engage in the cultivation of rice, and where festivals have been a part
of the people's lives since the age of the gods. work at home cannot be
expected to catch on instantly. However, it appears to be a fact of the
future that instead of peOple coming to a place of work, the work will
be transferred to where the people are. The INS project is expected to
have an impact on the people's life style and mode of movement.

Being close to the INS project, NTT has already begun to implement the
concept of moving work toward the people. The dial 104 business, the
telephone directory information, is very busy within the Tokyo Metropolis--
as many as 200,000 inquiries a day--while the same activity at a telephone
exchange office in the Tohoku area is not busy, with approximately 5,000
inquiries a day. Ordinarily, this problem would have been solved by
transferring information clerks from the local districts to the busy

Tokyo office. However, the great majority of these female clerks not

only are married but also have an agreement with the union that they
cannot be transferred forcibly.

Thereupon, NTT came up with the idea of transferring directory inquiries
which come into the Tokyo office to the district offices in the Tohoku
and Shinetsu areas, where the activity is less busy, and processed there.
For example, when a call is made from Sagamihara City, Kanagawa Prefecture,
to inquire about a phone number in Tokyo, the call does not go to the
directory information office in Tokyo. Instead, the call is routed to
the Omegari office in Akita Prefecture, where the person in charge will
check the telephone book of Tokyo Metropolis and reply. This type of
business transfer to outside directory information offices has already
been implemented in Tokyo and Osaka. This is a preview of one of the
ideas to be introduced by the INS project.

Since information does not exist in substantive form, it can easily be
transferred to the local districts by means of electric communications.
Therefore, the information difference that exists today between Tokyo
and the local districts can be diminished significantly in the future
by the INS project.

To consider how our society may be affected by it. take education for
example. Education is itself an information business, and it is the
first field in which the difference between the metropolis and the local
districts can be rectified by the INS project. Probably it will become
feasible in the future for people who live in local districts to utilize
the literature and documents stored in the National Diet Library or the
official document office in Tokyo through the use of data communications
and facsimile transmission. Thus a professor in the literature depart-
ment, in which no experimental equipment is needed, will be able to
accomplish much while living in a local district as long as he or she
has the ability.

Another example: The popular correspondent correction companies among
the high school students who are preparing for the college entrance

75
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
examination include ? bookstore in Okayama Prefecture and 6 company in
Shizuoka Prefecture. That fact that these enterprises are located not
in Tokyo but in local districts is proof that education is information
that can be transferred by mail. This trend is expected to be promoted
even further by the progress of the "INS society." You may live in a
local district. but if your ides is unique and has marketable value,
you can "sell" it nationally.

Moreover, in the world of new music today, there are many singers who

live in a local district while their music is selling well in the "market“
of the metropolis; for example, there are Hunesachi Sato of Sendai city
and Chiharu Hatsuyama of Ashiyose-cho, Hokkaido. This trend is expected
to become stronger in the IRS society, and the averaging of information
levels between the metropolis and the local districts will progress fur-
ther through this mechanism.

In the INS society, the flow of "man, money, and goods" will also change
drastically. Business travel will be replaced by TV conferences; cash
by credit cards; and the world of circulation will also witness drastic
changes.

To be sure, electric communications can move only information and not
goods. However. it will be easy to order Yame tea. the famous product

of Kume City, on Kyushu, by means of data communications in an INS society.
Of course. to bring the tea itself home, one still has to rely upon such
means of transportation as truck and railroad freight. If so, the trans-
portation and circulation of small items of freight such as books and

packages will become very active in the future, as the process of placing
an order is made simpler.

Coping With Virtual Image Society

NTT has organized an "INS working group." consisting of 20 young staff
members who are assistants or section chiefs at its main office, to con-
duct a study concerning the impact of the INS project on future society.
The results of this study will soon be published in a report. According
to this report, the place occupied by the primary and the secondary in-
dustries will be lower in the future and the tertiary industry will grow
even bigger. Especially, the appearance of mass comunications, a direct
information industry, will reportedly be altered most significantly.

In the newspaper industry, it is believed that the printing and distribu-
tion departments will undergo the most significant changes as a result
of the introduction of terminals in keeping with the INS project. The
group considers that speedy reporting will be strengthened further. Some
sports newspapers are already using facsimile transmission facilities
today to send their papers electrically nationwide to every prefecture
seat. where the papers are printed and distributed locally. In an INS
society, this type of activity will be more advanced, according to the
INS working group. Local papers, which are enjoying a peak of prosperity

today, may receive a blow when the netropolitan papers advance into their
territories in the future.

76
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Broadcasting stations today monopolize the airwaves, which constitute
a finite national asset, and are making huge profits for themselves.
when optic fibers, which have a band broad enouut to contain 10,000
circuits, become reality through the INS project, the nulber of broad-
casting stations utilizing this wire-broadcast system can be expected
to increase, so the existing broadcasting stations cannot take it too-
easy.

What is even more noteworthy is the possibility of transmitting and re-
ceiving moving pictures through optic fiber. Very beautiful TV pictures
can be obtained if the signals are carried by optic fiber, so the existing
broadcasting stations using the airwaves will be significantly affected.
This mode of image transmission has been shown to the public experiment-
ally by m's Ibaragi Commications Research Center. The image was so
refined that it looked as beautiful as a photogravure. In the world of
radio, young people abandoned AH when PM with its beautiful tone quality
appeared. A similar phenomenon is bound to take place in the world of
TV in the future. The impact of the INS project on the field of mass
comication is illeasurable.

The report also states that it may be useful in improving today's formal-
ized, indirect democracy to be able to install a voting terminal in every
family [home]. However, we should not forget that as a result of the
progress Inde in an informationalized society, too much detailed informa-
tion about a person may be gathered and the people's attention may become
concentrated on this, thereby diluting his interest in the big political
issues.

After all, media such as the telephone and the telegraph are nothing but
a proxy for man's five senses. The telephone substitutes for the mouth
and ears; television for the eyes. But a substitute is always a substi-
tute and can never replace the real thing. Telephones cannot transmit
the facial expressions of the speaker. Even if the facial expressions
may be made visible through the use of a TV telephone, the lower half
of the body is still out of sight. And even if the lower half of the
body too is made visible, the house in which the speaker lives cannot
be seen.... The media cannot transmit every detail of the background.
The media, like journalism, gather the clipped parts and present them
as if they represented the whole. That is to say, an informationalized
society is a virtual-image society. We mat keep this in -ind when we
cope with the INS society that is to come.

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Shimbunsha 1982

9113
cso: 6106/110

77
NTT'S HANS TO LAUNCH 08-3, 38-3 DISCUSSED
cs-3 Project
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 20 Feb 82 p 9

[Text] Nippon Telephone and Telegraph Public Corporation
(rm) (H. mfuji, president) is going to embark on the
full-scale development of a large-capacity comnicstims
satellite (CS). This is part of promotional work to form
a new network for building a high-level information net-
work system (IRS) aimed at the information-oriented society
of the 21st century. N’l'r's satellite comunication plan
thus far is to launch 08-2 in FY1982 for disaster and
emergency use as well as for distant island commica-
tions. However, the plan is to expand the range drasti-
cally, even to general public circuits and data commiss-
tion circuits, by developing a large-capacity CS. For
this reason, they will launch a l-ton satellite (25,000
telephone circuits) in 1987 and a lo-ton (100,000 telephone
circuits) commications satellite (08) around 1995. For
the launch, the plan is to use NASA's (0.8. National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration) space shuttle. N11 has
already begun (IS-related develoment.

Beginning in FY1982, however, the development of. mltibeam
satellite antenna systems will be undertaken [by MT] so as
to cover the entire Japanese archipelago, as well as atti-
tude control. Such concepts by NTT will certainly influence
Japanese communications satellite policy a great deal.

Part of INS Network Buildup

The NTT concept of INS centers on digital technology. Optical fiber con-uni-
cations, digital data exchange (DDX) service, automobile telephones, etc.,
have already been practiced, and the groundwork is steadily being consoli-
dated. Under such circuastances, it has been deemed necessary to build a
comprehensive network combining satellites with the conventional network
suited for terrestrial commnications, and the concept of launching a large-
capacity cmnunications satellite has been solidified.

78
F0. OHIO“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Japanese cannunications satellites (05) are in accordance with the space
policy guidelines of the Space Activities Comission, and present plans in-
clude launching a medium-capacity utility satellite '08-2' (weight: 350 kilo-
grams; 3,000 telephone circuits) in February 1983 and a second-generation 08-3
(550 kilograms, 600 circuits) with a target date of 1987 using the Japanese-
made Hm booster rocket. With regard to the 08-3, the specific content of the
satellite will be determined by the Space Activities Comission in 1982; no
decision has yet been made. Nl'l' plans to use both the 08-2 and the 08-3 in

times of emergency and disaster affecting ground trunk lines or distant island
comnications.

However, the circuit capacity of the 03-3 is only double that of the 03-2 and
is insufficient to fully demonstrate the INS concept of supporting the forma-
tion of high-level information-oriented society of the future. Based on this
judgment, [N'l'l'] has decided on a plan to launch a large-capacity commica-
tions satellite itself. The planned launch time is also set to coincide with
that of the cs-3.

The INS network conceived by NIT will be built by connecting satellite cir-
cuits of antennas installed without reinforcement on the rooftops of major
central exchange offices and ground circuits using fiber optics cables. Hith-
in the network, a multibeam system will be employed for satellite commica-
tions in order to effect efficient use of frequency. This is due to the fact
that the angle of frequency emission from the satellite is as high as 40-500
in the case of Japan, and negligible interbeam interference occurs. This
permits the exchange of 20 mega bits/sec. digital information with a 4-meter
earth exchange antenna by mounting a large transmission antenna on the
satellite. NTT clains that, in the case of the l-ton satellite planned in
1987, only four beams will be required to cover Japan. Since smaller earth
antennas will do as the satellites become larger, MT is even contemplatinS
expansion of 30 beams in the case of the a-ton satellite.

N'l'l‘ set up a new, large-capacity satellite connnunicatims research laboratory
within the Yokosuka conmmnications research laboratory in January of this
year and is building up a research structure in coordination with the con-
ventional satellite connunications system and the satellite connunications
system research laboratory.

Statement by Y. Kitahara, vice president: The use of large-capacity satellite
consnunications as one of the INS network systems has many advantages. On this
satellite, we will rely on the United States for launching technology, satel-
lite technology within space, etc.; m will lead in the development of var-
ious technologies related to the main body of the satellite. For the time be-
ing, it will be used for general public circuits, but it will eventually be-
come open to special circuits and value added network (VAN) enterprises.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982.

79
FOR OFFSCIAI. USE ONLY
U.S. Satellite as Launcher

Tokyo DBNPA SHIHBUN in Japanese 8 hr 82 p 1

[Text] 'ﬂe should seriously consider asking other countries
to launch the next-generation domestic utility satellites
(CS-3, 83-3) with the U.S. shuttle and not with a Japanese-
made rocket." Two major users of domestic satellites in
Japan, Nippon Telephone and Telegraph Public Corporation
[MT] and NHK [Japan Broadcasting Corporation], demon-
strated in unison a position in opposition to the present
space development program. This is due to the fact that,
when relying upon a Japanese rocket, there is an economic
problem as well as a risk of being left behind in the

world stream. The space development project planned by

the Space Activities Comission is reevaluated every year,
and reevaluation requests from relevant ministries and
agencies are submitted tram June to August. Preceding the
above event, a change in rocket-launching is expected to

be discussed in May or June as an important item at the
"four-party council" (which consists of the Ministry of
Posts and Telecommunications, NTT, NHK, and KB!) [Interna-
tional Telephone & Telegraphl). According to related

sources, the trend is to lean heavily toward the use of
foreign rockets.

Four-Party Council

The progress in satellite comunications and broadcasting is remarkable. In
order to cope with the satellite era, Japan in 1968 established the Space Ac-
tivities Omission (with the director general of the Science and Technology
Agency serving as chairman) under the Prime Minister's 0ff1Cc, made up of
related ministries and agencies, and planned the Japanese space development
program. Development and practical applications have been advanced accord-
ingly. with regard to comnications and broadcast satellites, an experi-
mental co-nunications satellite (CS) was hunched in December 1977, and an
experimental broadcast satellite (BS) in April 1978. The plan is to launch

a utility comunications satellite (CS-2) in February 1983 and a utility
broadcast satellite (BS-2) in February 1984.

Up to this point, the plans have moved along without problems. However, re-
gard ing the next-generation utility satellites, which are expected to be full-
scale domestic satellites with respect to their capacity, signs to seek a

change in plans are beginning to arise among comunications and broadcast
businesses.

increasing Views for Reevaluation

Although the space development project is an absolute plan, a reevaluation
is made once a year. For FY1981, it is scheduled to take place this month.
This reevaluation will be conducted along the lines of the reevaluation

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_—____—..__—__—_.

requests submitted by various ministries and agencies in June-August of this
fiscal year. Regarding coaumications and broadcast satellites under the

jurisdiction of the mnistry of Posts and Telecmmications, it is expected
that a plan will be proposed to launch the next-generation counsmications
satellite (CS-3) in FY1987 (term of February 1988), using a Japanese-made
ll-l rocket. ‘ However, more and more voices to change this plan have already

been heard .

At the present point, a change in the Ibrch reevaluation proposal seems dif-
ficult with respect to time, but a reevaluation is contemplated in FY1982.

In the “1982 reevaluation requests, the launching of the 38-3 next-gener-
ation broadcast satellite in FY1983 is even considered, and the object is

to open the way to request that the launching of both the (28-3 and the 138-3

be made by a foreign country, for example with the U.8. shuttle, and not with
the Japanese li-l rocket. At the four-party council to be held in thy-June

to solidify the plan of the Ministry of Posts and Teleconnunications regarding
the FYl982 reevaluation, this proposal is expected to become the focus of dis-
cussion.

Europe Closes in Past

An upgrading of international technology also has the purpose of space de-
velopment. Putting ripple effects aside and focusing on the main objective,
the major basis for the use of a foreign launch Vehicle proposal is the in-
creasingly strong concern that Japan may fall behind the world's level if it
relies on domestic products for a launch vehicle. The development of space
communications and broadcasting has been led by the United States, with France
and Japan in pursuit. Other European countries are catching up remarkably
fast, however, and the Japanese position is being threatened. Especially in
the Pacific region, it may be said that it is Japan's duty to take the leader-
ship, and a speeding up of the satellite project is considered necessary, in
view of the opposition posed by the United States and Prance as well. To this
end, it is reasonable to use a foreign launch vehicle, which is conceivably

more advantageous costwise rather than relying on a Japanese-made launch
vehicle. Incidentally, launching by shuttle is said to be already assigned
as far [in the future] as No 50, and an early decision is necessary even when

using a shuttle .

In addition to such launching problems, it has become necessary to study the
operation of the satellite itself as well as the present comunications and
broadcast satellite structure, such as operation by users themselves, namely
MT and NHK as the major force. In the service work, multilateral deve lop-
ments are being sought, such as applications to future comnications and new
media regarding data transmission, image transmission, prime broadcasting,
still-image broadcasting, etc., as well as applications to mobile radio.
Various problems related to satellites are brought into focus one after
another, and a total reworking of the space coammications and broadcast de-
velopment program is becoming urgent. Upon receipt of a report to be sub-
mitted soon by the survey and research council on versatile broadcasting
(reported in this paper on the 6th), the Ministry of Posts and

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Telecomnications plans to formlate a long-tern vision. Along with sub-
stantive measures, sufficiently fast responses are strongly urged.

COPYRIGHT: Denpa Shimbunshn 1982.

7722
(:80: 4106/82

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_"_______'____—___"—'-—_'1Iﬂf1ﬂﬂﬁT1KITtﬂﬂ?fﬂ¢tv"'__-_'_'______— _______ _'_‘-'

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT 0? SOLAR BATTERY UPDATED
Improved Silicon Cell Efficiency
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 30 Apr 82 p 7

[Text] The Fuji Electric Company (president, Shigeo Abe) has successfully
improved its energy-conversion efficiency of amorphous silicon solar cells by
2 percent, using amorphous (nondistinct crystalline) silicon with a fine
crystal structure. Furthermore, they have discovered that the efficiency

can be improved by selecting the quantity of boron contained in the "1" layer
of thezsolar cell, and they intend to achieve "8-percent efficiency for s

100 cm cell" before the end of this fiscal year; this is the goal of the
Sunshine Project, which is the nation's comprehensive new energy development
project.

The company has been working to improve the performance of amorphous silicon
solar cells, one theme of the Sunshine Project commissioned by the Ministry

of International Trade and Industry. This cell is predicted to be the real
winner for practicalization, as it is considered easy to manufacture at lower
cost even among silicon solar cells regarded superior in cost and energy effi-
ciency to other materials. The biggest problems for practicalizstion have
been the scale-up and improvement of performance.

The company has improved the efficiency of the canventional “-1-? structure
solar cell approximately 2 percent by replacing the outside N type amorphous
silicon with especially made amorphous silicon containing 90-percent fine
crystals. The manufacturing method for the N layer is characterized mainly
by: (l) the dilution of silane gas by 20-fold with hydrogen, (2) the dis-
charge of ISO-watt. 13.5-megahertz high power. This treatment produces fine
crystals of the 60 Angstrom level.

The improved performance is considered attributable to the effective use of
the short-wavelength band with high energy, as a result of improved optical
properties of better light permeability and less light reflection, in addi-
tlon_to the improved electric conductivity following the adoption of amorphous
silicon containing fine crystals. Also, simultaneously, when the concentra-
tion of boron in the center "1" layer was controlled, they found it possible
to prevent the deterioration of efficiency due to the reuniting of ionized
electrons caused by defects in crystals.

83
FOI.OF1WC1A1.U5310NLY
According to the current state of silicon solar cells, the energy efficiency
of the single crystal type is 10-12 percent for a 1 cm cell, and that of the
amorphous type is about 6 percent for the same cell. What is more, a drop

in efficiency is anticipated in association with the scale-up. The goal of
the Sunshine Project is to achieve 8-percent efficiency for a 100 cm cell.
Fuji Electric has already achieved 6.1-percent efficiency for the same cell.
and plans to aim at 8-percent efficiency in the future by controlling the
boron concentration in the "1" layer.

 

Structure of Fine Crystal Amorphous Solar Cell

Key:
1. Oxidized film 6. "N" layer
2. Electrode 7. "1" layer
3. Stainless 8. "P" layer
A. Amorphous 9. Amorphous

5. Fine Crystal

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

\

High-Speed Solar Cell Manufacture
Tokyo NIHON KOCYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 26 May 82 p 1

[Text] Hokusan (president, Kenzo Mizushima) has succeeded in developing an
cpochal new technology which almost instantly manufactures in less than a
second a large solar cell silicon sheet (thin plate) with a diameter exceed-
ing 15 cm. This is the world's first method for manufacturing practical
solar cell materials at such high speed. The complete process takes only

2 seconds. even including the time to retrieve the manufactured sheet. Pro-
ductivity will indeed be enhanced 30- to 100-fold, compared to the current
process in which a silicon single-crystal ingot rod is produced. In addi-
tion, while approximately half of the ingot is scrapped as shavings from cut-
ting during processing, the thickness of this sheet matches the solar cell
exactly, and no portion of the sheet will be wasted. This feature can reduce
the silicon material cost, which is one half to one third of solar cell costs,

8h

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE¢HNLY
—W

to 1/10-1/20 in one fell swoop. Photoelectric conversion efficiency is a
bit low: 6 percent. As it improves with time, a lO-percent level of effi-
ciency is attainable, according to a professional scurce. The company in-
tends to achieve a lO-percent level of efficiency before the end of this
fiscal year and plans to go into commercialization.

The toughest issue regarding solar cells is the reduction of costs. The sili—
con single-crystal ingot currently in use requires a large quantity of power
for manufacture, and about half of it is, in addition, wasted as loss in the
cutting process. Consequently, substrate is obtained at only about 1.3 cm2
area/hour (area deposition rate), resulting in an inevitably high price.

Therefore, the major proposition is to develop a “post-single-crystal sili-
u.

can , three ideas have surfaced: amorphous silicon, ribbon silicon, and
multicrystal silicon.

The question as to which will emerge the winner has yet to be debated, bUt
silicOn sheets at this time are made of multicrystal silicon composed of
countless clustering small crystals.

As for multicryatal silicon, the Heat German [firm] Hacker has established a
casting method which produces ingots in the same manner as the casting of
moldings and has come up with solar cells of about 10—percent efficiency. In
Japan, Nippon Electric also developed an original casting method and made
trial solar cells of ll-percent efficiency. However, multicrystal silicon
has the same loss during cutting as single-crystal silicon.

The new manufacturing method just invented has completely solved the problem
of loss due to cutting.

The process is extremely simple. Everyone wonders why no One had thought of
it before.

First. a rotary plate made of quartz is heated to SOD-900°C and spun at a
speed of about 160 rpm. Then, heated and melted silicon is dropped in an
argon gas atmosphere.

Subsequently, according to the inventors. the molten silicon dropped on the
rotary plate is spun out by centrifugal force and instantly spread thin and
hardened to form a multicrystal silicon sheet. The whole process takes less
than a second. The total time, including retrival of the sheet, will be about
2 seconds.

In experiments, silicon sheets about 15 cm in diameter and 0.3-0.6 mm in
thickness were obtained. However, area scale-up is achievable if the diame-
ter of the rotary plate is extended. The thickness is also said to be con-
trolled as desired.

Likewise, a square is preferable to a circle as a solar cell, in the sense

that squares can be lined up neatly without wasting space. Square cells can
be made if the rotary plate has a square shape.

85
F1)Ri0!1ﬂ€1Al.lﬁSEi(HVLV
With all these good indications. practicability is very high. The area
deposition rate has reached 36-100m2 lh, equivalent to 30-100 times more

than that of a single-crystal silicon, and this promises to reduce the cost
to [/10 or 1/20.

Comment by Assistant Professor Hiroyuki Matsuba, Electronic Engineering De-
partment, Engineering School, Kyoto University: "Cells of considerably good
quality are produced. Performance (efficiency) is upgraded daily. I think
it is an epochs] method. The peak (improvement of efficiency) has not yet
been reached, but it will not be that high. If they can achieve 9-percent

efficiency, they have nothing to be afraid of and can proudly announce it
to the world."

Review

The ribbon silicon area deposition rate is 0.12-0.18m2/h. The area deposi-
tion rate claimed by the multicrystal silicon film manufacturing method, the
"SOC method" (in which silicon is deposited on a ceramic substrate), said

to be in development by American Honeywell, is also still at the 0. 36m 2/h
level. Hokusan' 3 manufacturing method has indeed achieved an astonishing
speed that is equivalent to some hundred times more than these [methods].

The silicon sheet that is obtained has a uniform thickness and can, without
polishing, be made into solar cells that have practically the same efficiency
as polished ones.

That leaves only the problem of efficiency to be solved. The efficiency
achieved by the multicrystal silicon improves with the increase in the size
of crystal grain. The current average crystal size is about 200 microns.
How large the grain can be made is one of the points connected with improve-
ment of efficiency.

Nevertheless, the outlook for silicon sheets seems bright, as can be seen
by the following indications: lo-percent efficiency is reported to be
achievable as long as the crystal size measures 100 microns; the quality of
the column-structured crystals obtained by the new manufacturing method is
good; a larger grain size is realizable by optimizing manufacturing condi-
tions.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1982
Spectral Division Solar Battery
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 24 May 82 p 3

[Text] A research group headed by Prof Masayoshi Umeno and Assistant Shiro
Sakai of the Nagoya Institute of Technology has succeeded in producing a

trial spectral division type solar cell with a gallium/arsenic element and a
gallium/aluminum/arsenic element by the metal organic chemical vapor deposi-
tion method. This solar cell is designed to absorb efficiently the spectra

86
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(HULY
"'—'—' ~"—~

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from short-wavelength bands to long-wavelength bands (the conventional method
is designed to absorb the short-wavelength band spectrum) by placing gsllium/
arsenic elements and gallium/aluminum/arsenic elements in layers. This
achievement is expected to raise photoelectric conversion efficiency to over
30 percent, three times more than the currently practical silicon single
crystal solar cells, and approximately 50 percent more than the gallium/
arsenic solar cells being studied for practicalizstion. Practicalization

in the field of space development is drawing attention.

In solar power generation, which makes the most of gallium/arsenic technology,
the Mitsubishi Electric Corporation and Sumitono Electric Industry have de-
veloped a heteroface (hetero-surface contact) solar cell with gallium/alumi-
num/arsenic and gallium/arsenic elements. Mitsubishi achieved a high conver-
sion efficiency of 21.6 percent with a trial element made in April 1979 (12
percent in the case of the silicon). However, the element was processed by
liquid deposition. and the adopted system stratified gallium/arsenic and
gallium/aluminum/arsenic on the substrates.

In contrast, the research by Umeno and his group is characterized by the use
of the metal organic chemical vapor deposition (HOCVD) method.

The merits of this method over the liquid deposition method are that it is a
simpler process and has a larger element area.

The crystal deposition method uses a reactor to administer high-frequency

heating of flat square graphite (black lead) base. Trimethyl gallium (THC).
trimethyl aluminum (THA), and diethyl zinc (082) are kept at a predetermined
temperature in an electronic cooler. .

Among those chemicals, THC and TM are transported to the reactor in liquid
form bubbled with hydrogen. 0n the other hand, D32 is transformed into a
solid in a vessel in the next step and transported to the reactor with the
hydrogen blown over the solid. D82 is the raw material for impurities of the
P type, while hydrosulfide is the raw material for impurities of the N type.

N type gallium/arsenic with silicon impurities and semi-insulating gallium/
arsenic with chromium and oxygen impurities were used as the substrate.
Crystal deposition conditions are as follows: deposition temperature, 700-
800°C; total hydrogen flow rate, 1.7-2.5 liter/m; hydrogen flow rate con-
taining THC (minus lO-O’C), S-lOcc/min; containing THA (20-30°C), 5-30cc/min;
containing DBZ (minus 35°C), 10-60cc/min.

The flow rate of arsinc (2 percent) is lOO—SOOcc/min. The flow rate of hydro-
sulfide (200 ppm) is lOO—600cc/min. The deposition rate is 0.1-0.2 micron/
min. Professor Umeno and his group established these crystal deposition con-
ditions for the MOCVD method.

The HOCVD method can obtain an uniformal epitaxial layer (to make single
crystal thin film deposit to the same axial direction of the semiconductor

substrate) over a large area, and therefore i: is excellent as a highly effi-
cient mass production technology for gallium/arsenic group solar cells. In

87

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE1DNLY
order to prove the point. a heteroface solar cell was made using elements
obtained by the MOCVD method.

The following were deposited in regular sequence on top of the N type gallium]
arsenic substrate with silicon impurities: gallium/arsenic without impuri-
ties; p type gallium (0.2)laluminum (0.8)larsenic with zinc impurities. PN
(plus minus) contacts were formed in the gallium/arsenic layer by the diffu-
sion of zinc during deposition.

The typical thickness of each layer is 3 microns for N type gallium/arsenic,
1 micron for P type gallium/arsenic, and the same for P type gallium/aluminum/
arsenic.

Spectral division is 1 micron, and P type gallium/aluminum/arsenie is the
same.

As a preliminary step toward the spectral division type solar cell, the group
challenged the task of producing a heteroface solar cell and obtained good
results in fabrication of elements and conversion efficiency.

Bandgap (forbidden bandwidth) energy of the gallium/arsenic layer is virtually
the same as the optimal bandgap energy of a solar cell, thus contributing to
the production of highly efficient solar cells. Furthermore, the gallium/
aluminum/arsenic layer can be adjusted to the solar photo spectrum to enhance
the conversion ratio by selecting the proper percentage of aluminum.

Professor Umeno proposed a spectral division type solar cell which used gal-
lium/aluminum/arsenic and gallium/arsenic in order to apply these principles
for efficiency enhancement. The trial solar cell made in accordance with the
above design operates to improve energy conversion efficiency by absorbing
the short-wavelength component of solar photo energy into a gallium/aluminum/
arsenic layer (element) having a large bandgap. and by absorbing long wave-
length coaponent into gallium/arsenic layer (element) having a small bandgap.

The solar cell is comprised of an N type gallium/arsenic substrate with
silicon impurizies and sequential epitaxial depositions without impurities
of N type gallium/arsenic layer, P type gallium (0.7)laluminun (0.25)/arsenic
layer, N type same layer, and N type gallium (0.2)Ialuminum (0.8)larsenic
layer over the substrate. P type gallium/arsenic layer was formed by the
zinc diffused from P type gallium/aluminum/arsenie layer. The thickness of
each layer is 3.5 microns. 1.2 microns, and 0.8 microns, respectively.

One of the characteristics of the HOCVD method is its ability to mass-produce
gallium/aluminum/arsenic epitaxial thin film. However. many problems remain
to be clarified with respect to its crystallinity. Particularly, the diffu-
sion length become markedly short in proportion to the increase in the alumi-
num component ratio. This phenomenon dampens the special quality of spectral
division type solar cells that are designed to achieve high-energy conversion
efficiency.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIDFFKJAL.USE(M§LY

The ahovc-acntioned deterioration of gallium/aluminum/arsenic crystals is
assumed to have resulted from the residual hydrogen and steam in the reactor.
This problem can be solved by purging the reactor with THA.

The solar cell being developed by Professor Umeno and his group is still in
the laboratory stage, but a conversion efficiency of up to 31 percent can be
hoped for in terms of theoretical value. This means that efficiency can be
inproved about threefold, compared to a cell with a silicon element. Another
advantage is that. unlike the silicon element, the efficiency improves if the
light is further focused. Use of gallium/aluminum/arsenic can focus the
light almost 200 times greater than regular sunlight. One other feature is
the reduction of the element thickness to 5 microns, about one fifth of the
silicon which is 100 microns. [as printed]

1 CELL 1
(1;)(2)

CELL 1

   

Au-Snta-az)(a)

Spectral Division Type Solar Cell Stracture

Key:
1. Sunlight
2. Element
3. Substrate
4. Gold-tin

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1982

8940
cso: 4106/126

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RADIO-WAVE ABSORBENT PERRITE DEVELOPED
Tokyo SHUKAN SHINCBO in Japanese 25 May 82 p 29

[Text] A radio—wave absorbent consisting mainly of ferrite for effective
absorption of super-high-frequency radio waves used in radar and micro-
wave communication has been developed by Nippon Electric Company [NBC].
The Tokyo Electrochemical Industry (TDK) developed a similar ferrite
coating last year.

Both companies claim that "this technology is aimed for civilian use,

such as in steel towers, bridges, skyscrapers, electronic ranges, etc.,

to prevent the irregular reflection and leakage of radio waves." However,
the topic of conversation has turned to military use. as it did when
TDK's development became known. This is because the absorption of radar
waves would permit missiles and aircraft to sneak through the defense's
monitoring network and attack the enemy by surprise.

Ferrite is a magnetic material consisting mainly of iron oxide with
manganese, magnesium, nickel. and lead added. That developed by NEC is
a three-layer material. One layer is a transformer layer consisting of
a mixture of ferrite and epoxy resin which allows free passage of radio
waves. The other is a radio-wave absorbent consisting of a mixture of
ferrite, metal short fiber, and epoxy resin. These two layers are mounted
on a metallic plate. When the high-frequency radio wave hits this ab-
sorbent, it penetrates the two layers and bounces off the metallic plate.
The reflected wave refracts within the transformer layer, where it loses
its energy and is absorbed. This "three-layer plate" can be processed
in many ways depending on the quality for coating materials, rubber
sheets, etc. The absorbent can effectively absorb 99 percent of the
frequencies of l to 20 gigaﬂertz (l gigsHertz - 1 billion Hertz). It

is said that it will cost "100,000-150,000 yen per square meter."

0n the one hand, a report on TDK's ferrite coating introduced by the
0.5. Air Force at a symposium on electronic warfare held last October
at Andrews Air Force Base stated, "It is a mixture of powdered ferrite
and paint, and it became known that when a metallic surface is coated
with this [material] to a thickness of 2.5 millimeters, reflected waves

from frequencies ranging from 7 to 92 gigaHertz can be weakened by up
to 250:1."

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan's Defense Agency also has focused its attention on this technology.
and it is reported that the 0.8. national military establishment has
requested sanples to be used in joint research as part of Japanese-0.8.
military technology cooperation.

The NEC's recent ferrite technology may not be able to avoid being the
target of Japanese-v.8. military cooperation. NBC denies this, saying,
"It was developed strictly for civilian use, and we are not thinking of
converting it to military use." It needs to be made lighter for military
use, and NBC says, "We are not thinking along those lines." An absorbent
about 2 centimeters thick would be required for a l-gigaﬂerta-range
television relay, but in the case of a radar, a thickness of A milli-
meters in the coamnnly used lO-gigaﬂertz range and a 2-millimeter thick-
ness in the ZO-gigaHertz range would be sufficient. It has been cal-
culated that the "use of a b-millimeter-thick material weighing 6.3
kilograms per square meter is feasible in a military aircraft."

TDK has said, "We have not yet achieved the practical stage for a coating.
It would surely become heavier as a coating; therefore, militarization
cannot come to mind."

Both companies say, "Our product is not for military use." But as long

as the U.S. military is eyeing it. the question would be whether the
matter can be settled by saying that there is no connection.... Ever
since radar appeared, efforts have been made to develop a technology to
make it ineffective. It is claimed at this time that the best method

is absorption of radio waves. This is known as "stealth technology."

Both the United States and the Soviet Union are putting great energy into
this. The Reagan administration has been aiming for the stealth operation
of the 3-1 strategic bomber and cruise missiles, and because of the lack
of an effective radio-wave absorbent, they were attracted to TDK's tech-
nology. If stealth technology can be realized, its strategic and tac-
tical significance would be great, because a surprise attack could be
carried out by "unseen missiles and aircraft."

Because of this, the new technology of both manufacturers in Japan is
attracting great attention. At present, however, new technologies of
all sorts are losing their clear-cut distinction between civilian and
military usage.

COPYRIGHT: Shinchosha 1982

9218
CSO: 8129/1299 END

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY