Hill OFFICIAL I'SI". "NIX

JPRS L/10651
9 July 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 40/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL FSE ONLY

JPRS L/10651
9 July 1982

JAPAN REPORT

(Pouo 40/82)
CouTeurs

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDCICAL

Tanaka's Control of Political Agenda Discussed
('l'akehiko Tnknhnshi; HAINIGII MILY NW8, 16 Jun 82)..... 1

Paper Urges LDP Housecleaning
(Hideo I‘htsuoka; HAINICHI DAILY NW8. 15 Jun 32)......... 3

Split in LDP Actions lbported
(HAINIQII DAILY NEWS, 15 Jun 82)... 6

MILITARY

Security of Sealane Analyzed
(ﬂirosato Asonuna; KOKIBO. Jm 82)....................... 7

ECNOHIC

Econouh- Growth Rate in Next “to Decades
(111E DAILY YOHIURI, 12 Jul 82. MINIOII DAILY NEWS,
12 Jul 82)................................................ 28

Four Percent Growth Seen
Growth Rate in Next 1V0 [heades

Growth Target for 1982 Seen Difficult To Attain
(HAINIGiI DAILY "DIS, 15 Jun 82).. 30

Japan Records $453 Million Trade Surplus in My
(HAINICHI DAILY NEWS. 11 Jun 82).......................... 31

Hholesale Prices Drop 0.6 Percent in May
(MAINIOH DAILY NEWS, 12 Jm 82). 32

Fiscal 1981 (NP Posts Lackluster 2.7 Percent Cain
("Ill-Z DAILY YOHIURI, 12 Jun 82)............................ 33

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 F000]

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘l-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

H81 Economic Growth Only 2.7 Percent
(HAINICEI DAILY NEHS, 12 Jun 82).

Toyota leor Nuﬂaer (he Earner
(MINICHI DAILY NEWS. 10 Jun 82)..................

Cars H111 Take ‘lhird of World Sales
(HAINIOiI DAILY NEWS, 12 Jun 82).

Imports Bell 23.1. Percent in my From 1981
(NAINIOlI DAILY NEWS, 11 Jm 82)

Worst Profit Drops H1: 011 Companies
(MINICHI DAILY NEWS, 10 Jun 82).

Steel Production Hay Fall to ll-Year Low
(HAINIOu DAILY NBHS, 11 Jun 82)

April Plant Exports 24.5 Percent Less Than 1981
(DAILY NEWS. 11 Jul 82)...........................

-b-

FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
TANMOVS QNTROL 03? POLITICA.

AGENDA DISCUSSED

Tokyo MAINIcnI mum news in English 16 Jun 82 p 2

[Prom "tiaqatacho Doings" column by Takehiko Takahashil

[Text]

Who is it that is actually
moving Japanese politics?
Ostensihly it should he Zenko
Suzuki who is the prime
minister and also president ot
the Liberal-Democratic Party.
But in actuality. this does not
seem to he the case. Rather. it
seems that polities L9 moving
centering on tormer Prime
Minister Kainei Tanaka who is
e deiendant in the uckhnd

handed down on detendants

Tomisahuro liaahimooo and -

‘l'akayohi Sato. Since
Hashimoto tailed to he
reelected in the last getter-a!
election he to not now a
member ot the House oi
Representatives. Nevertheless.
he still remahis an inﬂuential
politician oi the'l‘analta (action.
Previoinly there was a tumor
in some gamers that “Soto will
probably be iound guilty but
Haahtmoto is likely to he not
guilty."

This did not happen and it
mint have been a shoot tor
‘l'anaka. ltueover. when the

atatememoitheverdicttsread.
it thesame argument is applied
toTanaka. itwill hediﬂlcdt tor
Tanaka to avoid a 1mm oi
“guilty." in addition. although
Hashimoto warmed a three-
yeur suspended sentence. it is
even said that a suspended
aemenoe will not be given to
‘i‘anatta.

Whu should he done hy
‘l‘anaka to overcome this
disadvantage“ envhonment

. andtooutianeholoiupoiltlcal

tntlueooeﬂhtetoatthe root at
'i'anaha's political movements
atthemtime.

The election at the House of
Councillors will he held next
year. Stmdtameteotions oi
the Home oi Representatives
andthellomeotOoimctllors. as
in the caae at last year. is
possible. Even ﬂ simultaneous
elections do not take place. the
atmosphere will strengii‘en tor
a diaaqution oi the melee ot
Representativea alter the
passageotthreeyeanhom the
previous general election. The
poeaihtlity is strong that there
will he a lover tiouae election
nextyear.

in the case oi Tanaka per-
sonally. it the verdict is
"guilty" and. moreover. these
is no suspended sentence.
criticism by public opinion will
become stronger than at
pieaeot. ii a aural election is
heldmdermchchcnmstamee.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080025-1

COPYRIGHT:

FOR ()I’FK'IAI. USE ONLY

even It the members ol his
iartion are elected as bctorc.
the votes cast tor them are
likely to dwindle considerably.
This will be a big blow to
Tanalia.

For Taoaka. therefore. it
would be most desirable tor a
general election to be held
before the prosecution’s
meet this autumn and the
oout'sverdlctnextapml-‘or
this purpose. a atudy will start
being made an to how the en-

beta.
the Komeito. It the liaise
Testimony Law is revised. LDP
Secretary General Susuinu
Nikaido could appear in the
Dietasavitnees-thisappears
to be the condition thereby the
Dietpmeeedinpverereturned
tononnalcy.

It is said that in the

background of this is a dual
given by the Tanaka tactton to

Mainichi Daily News 1982

- CSO: 4120/302

theliotneitothaltta
seethe summoning
asavitneaatohec
that is done. the t
revision ot the Up
national comtltaeu

bepennittedtopaas
aeaelon

For the Kontelto.
the Upper lloaae
comtituency electii
trotn being revised

- greater importance

summoning oi LOP
generalasawitoeee.

it the Upper ilou:
constituency electiol
not mixed du-lagt
Diet sealon. the
responsibility it
Minister Suzuki
questioned. 111i: 1
despitetheextemion
session by at days
the revision ot th
constituency. it col
done "because ot t
Prime Mintsta’Sun:

in leadership."

[twill thenhecorni
to choose either the
ot theSmkieebine
a dissolution at l
Hm.Sincedlscusa
growing brisk by th
recommendation by
Ad Hoc Council
,dMution maybe:
order to ascertain t
the people."

it that is done.
exactly in accord
tormer Prime
Tanaka'estrategy.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080025-1
PAPER URGES LOP ttWSECLBABING

Tokyo MAXNICHI DAILY NEWS in English 15 Jun 82 p 2

[From "Zooming-In" column by Hideo Matsuokal

[Text]

A look at the verdict passed
on Tomisabuo Hashlmoto and
Tahayuiri Sato in the toothed
payott trial convinced me that
the men on the bench acted
according to common acme. it
a person holding a pubm ottice
took money trout a person

‘ atavor.itiaacaaeot
taking a bribe. in our common
senseJ‘hcchieljudgelomdthe
twoguittyaccordingtocommon
aense.

Did we have to ace the case
argued for tar to ﬁve years
only to have these common
sense verdicts? But democracy.
as we know. ts a time-
consuming governing process.
Even it there is a foregone
conclusion. a case has to he
tried without a procedural iault.
Court proceedings cannot cut
corners. We irettcd while thick-
sttinned politicians told one
apparent tie alter another in
court. dragging on the trial
almost interminahly. Even
more tretlul must havebeen the
judges. We must ~~~~ nathtze
with them (or put on with
what in the Watergate language
might be called "misstate
ments."

The judges put almost
unqualiﬁed trust in the
proaecutora' records 0! pretrial
muting ot suspects and
testimonies by witnesses tor the

proaecutioo, Allegations by the
defense. astttmnedout. didnot
immerse the judges at all. They
were mpieteiy spurned For

Milereaistancetoralongtune.
They might have known that
their ettorts. based on

the kind 0! rulings they
received. But they had the
cheek to make it“ ot the trial.
Else, they would not have acted
thcwaytheydid

me ludgea had no mom ot
accepting such a slight “they
were aware ot the nation's
wrath at the corruption in the
political world. They [cared for
the future that Japan would be
li‘h‘ahmm m

Forcea Irepresenting aomd
judgement. including the new:
media and other clrclea. were
also preasing tor a unclean-
iog ot the political world an
theae iorcea tact the ailhority

to entorce ouch hooaeclaaatag.
9mm m Kan. “8009
5aman
,9 mmuomﬂul am 01
33m mm as amp am In
a (no «I:
Kain mu sasnoxa mm
mm w all! u women
5"“; aq ma 11 13‘“ PW
.4399 o: mm min €1an
m M mm '93!!!
max m

mum
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080025-1

r-mr UH’N'IAI. liSl’. URI)

verdict is as prod as out mu
already’ lie had better he tionotpi
l0 eel a willy verdict to help
in count oi tirst resort, and covering
cameraman nuclear
mm ”mm mm
politicians to live with verdicts should or
t in. theeotltot tirat resort. or m Re
letting them do so. mean the perceive
m ot a Mnedeaning tedionsi
within the Wit: M
PW - not lie all
Another problem eooeems taets. iii
these-called “my poiiticians" withom i
_ or politicians in the “ the mt
zone." meaning politicians houaeclt
known to have received money member:
concerning the Lockheed case club is
who escaped proseemion either matte so
because ot the remotenees oi repreeen
their involvementorduetothe ilndithr
statute oi limitations. The reeoiutio
court's verdicts on Hashimoto reeolve l
and Sate also named other sueh an
leiaos who toot: money in sayletit
the case One of those named Even
\vas Susumu Nikaido. the leaido.
party's secretary general who secretar-
- even alter hearing his name at Nohot
mentioned in the Hashimoto pointm
Sato verdict. still kept denying mail
theallegedreeeiptoimoneth Pan
isrviththisiiarotapolitieian hadexp
that reporter's covering the Takeshi
- LOP hold press eonterenees Tanakal
several times a week to get Ever, I
whatever hits or news the liar Tanaka
_ deimstoirnpartﬁhameonthe withnar.
media! Members ot the is intole
' reporterscluh attheparty pimp.
headquarters should reiuse to make (it
hold ionnul press eontcrenees Mid
with Nikaido. They should relay media
their retreat to Prime Minister issue.
and Party President lento Emu
Suzuki as the elim's imanimous and 61h!
- resolution. theiredi
the verd
News Media Saloand
the Locl
News media have two time- well enc
tions. One is to report nerve as on the
[acts — straiimi reporting. 1he "mm.

COPYRIGHT: liainichi Daily News 1982

C80: 4 120/301

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080025-1
POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

SPLIT IN LDP ACTIONS REPORTED

FOR OFFICIAL “SI-l UNIX

Tokyo ttMNIC‘ltI DAILY NEWS in English 15 Jun 82 p 1

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

U50:

The Liberal-Democratic
Party tLDPi is sharply split
into “ori” and “coo" groups
regarding the Diet
summoning ot "gray
poiiticim"suspcctedotnam
received bribes trorn lockheed.
accordhg to an analysis ot an
opinion poll conducted by the
Itainidii.

Tamika and Nattasooe (action
members were [wad reluctant
to support the Diet summoning.
while members at the Fukudn
and Kornolo [actions as well as
the Natagawa group were in
tavor. the Mainicht analysis
melted.

The Mainichi conducted the
poll. sampling all [DP Diet
inemuers‘. imineuiately arm
the Tokyo District Court handed
down suspended jail term on
June a to two Liberat-
Dcmocrats tone 3 Diet mem-
beri (or having accepted bribes
trom the American aircraft

ntanutaicturer.

41330/300

In the poll so percent ot the
Liberal-Democrats replied that
“m pollticim” W '9'
pear’heiore a Diet nessttl to
clarity their positions It con-
nection with the noticed

scuidal.
“Gray ”3'33"!” those
' m'mmmwmm
Theirumeswerementiooedtn
theJuneOndinp

summoning the
politicians" hetore the Diet.
who were against. and who
were insisting that Dlet
members tnnprtson
termdiouldresigo.

.Accortl'w. to the onaiysts.
more than 3) percent oi the
LDPDiotmemherahelonstoti
to the FM and Itonioto
tactiousathahwlm
said that Tannin Soto. the
Dietmanseotencedtoapetsoo

tuiiiictii Daily Nevis 1982

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With regard to the Diet
summoning ot “gray
politicians." 57 percent hi the
PM tactioo. It percent in
the Itomoto tncttoo and 25
permththelinhngawam
said that “my politicians"
should accept a Diet un-
moning. it tamed Only 2 per-
oeutinthel-‘tlmdatactionmd'l
percent in the Komoto iactioo
were opposed to the sum-
montaguohodywnsagaiontit
intheNnitagaway'oup.

Meanwhitemnlytperceotin
and 13
peroentintheltakasooetaotion
supported the summoning.
whiteaaperoeotaodtspereeot.
respectivelymereopposed.

In the Suzuki taction M

repliedthattheywere
in tavorot the summoning while
19 percent said they were
mm.
SECURITY 0F SEALANE ANALYZED

Tokyo KOKUBO in Japanese Jun 82 pp 17-35

[hrticle by Hirosato Asonuna: "Security of Sealaneﬁ]
[Text] Preface

Japan is a maritime country. Although an island country, it is not an "autar-
kic island nation." This can be said to be the core of the security question.

Since a maritime power depends on the favors of the sea for the najor portion
of its national power, the national benefit is governed by whether the seas
can be used freely and whether it can sufficiently control the sealenes.

Needless to say, Japan's national life and the working of the national economy
demand natural resources from overseas, then process them, export finished
products and thus obtain wealth and power. In short, it may be said to be
made up of a natural resource cycle.

The position of transportation in this natural resource cycle is exceedingly
important, and moreover, narine transport occupies the majority of transporta-
tion. Without shipping, especially foreign shipping, the natural resources
cycle would not function, and since this would signify a danger to Japan's
existence, it has a life or death value.

Likewise, we must not forget coastal shipping---the so-called second transport-
ation---which has rendered great service in supporting the vital strength of
Japan's industry. This is because it is shipping which makes possible the in-
expensive transport of industry's basic materials to the coastal industrial
zones in large volume.

We call sea power the comprehensive power of a country which freely uses the
seas, has the ability to be able to gain profit from them and guarantee them.
The words, "sea power," do not mean only the ability to simply carry out bat-
tles on the seas, but expresses the overall ability covering a wide range of
activities, such as naritine security functions, shipping operations, the a;
bility for fishing industry activity, harbor functions and shipbuilding abili-

ty.

FOR 0F7ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ty. in addition to those, recently it must be interpreted to include maritime
research ability and maritime development capacity.

Japan received a crushing blow to its merchant marine from World War II. but

at present it occupies the position of a maritime power'which is second in

the world in terms of tonnage of shipping possessed. Likewise, it is blessed
with good harbors and leads the world in shipbuilding capacity. It holds the
top position in the world both in fishing fleets and fish hauls. In short,
except for naval defense power, Japan possesses great sea power. As long as

it is an era of peace, this sea power is contributing to allowing the resources
cycle to function in an extremely stable manner and increasing the national

wealth and power. This is because Japan can use the seas freely and the sea—
lanes will not be cut off.

Then, as for the perception of what kind of connection the sea environment

has to the national life, it cannot be said that the perception of either
statesmen or the people in Japan is very sharp. Consequently, the recognition
of the "value of defending them" is somewhat vague.

Let's try to take an example which points out this perception difference. In
1968. England disclosed a policy of withdrawing its troops from east of the
Suez. 0n the other hand, the Soviet Union launched its naval power into the
Indian Ocean. When such a change in the strategic environment of the world's
oceans occurred, the government of Norway took the trouble to declare and
express its fear that "England's withdrawal of troops from east of the Suez
produces a grave threat to Norway's sealanes." This was an incident in which
it was seen that Norway's political leaders have a mature perception. Re-
flecting further what happened with the Japanese government. there was a not-
Iceable perception gap. Although Japan is a sea power, it must be said that
Japan's oceano-political perception is immature.

These days, 0.8. demands for an increase in Japan's defense responsibility
are very strong, and within those demands, the call for a defense of the sea-
ianes is most conspicous. In this manuscript I would like to consider the
security of r:e sealanes which should be a central topic of the security of

a sea power.

Japan's Economy and the Sealanes

In order to ascertain what kind of significance Japan's marine shipping has,
it is obvious when it is known how much Japan depends on overseas for natural
resources.

Graph I shows the level of overseas reliance for important natural resources.

In this connection, Graph 2 indicates Japan's trade volume and the transporta-
tion situation in 1980.

It can be demonstrated from the general conditions in the graphs what import-
nnce shipping has, and Graph 3 shows the effective strength of Japanese ships
in Japan's merchant marine (Japanese ships and foreign chartered ships).

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE GlLY
l.

3.
lo.
5.
6.
7.
8.

 

NR OFFICIAL USE (NIX

(0 III iltloﬂﬁﬂtl<nM) (2)(I&:$)
'\\-\ n r n “47 '9; y:
<8) = * ~ * - .1. «mm m
(9) E a 19. . 9. s s. 1. 51.0
(10) I? at 95. a. 95. no. 99.0
I 5: ﬂ 1. as a. as. 19 63s
(11)
(12) R U: B as. r 29. 96. so. «J
(13) I I 95.4 sq 99H .q .
(14) 82. 59. .
(15)
(16)
(17)
(13)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25) (as) I. $914"!th x100 1"!!le
am. an. n. In. a. nun. =27klzav‘l'nJI-W)
xmmmncxtnvnns)ucwrn.ntnsurrmun.v4+zsam
t!*-
2.x$~¥—.EN.EI.inﬁ=.*ﬁﬂ.n¥nﬁﬁﬂﬁl?bbo
a. bat-ox #Mt-n 6!. an. xnrananxnommua.
d.x$~¥—n.GR.GI.inﬂz.lﬂ(th.l¥n)oﬁﬂvbto
5. thrommmmeo.
(ﬂﬂ) Yearbook of Work] Bum Siltiaﬁta
FAG—Predation Yearbook. Tnda Yearbook. Yurbook o! Pam:
Map. World Meal Satisﬁe-
M!!. 002*hf-Rit. Inna“
(1!) ”m1. rues: 3!

Graph 1: Level of Overseas Reliance for Principal Resources (1979)
2. (unit: percentage)

Japan
America

Nest Germany
England
France
energy

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.
ll.
12.
13.
16.
15.
l6.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
2‘.
25.

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

coal

oil

natural gas

iron ore

copper

lead

zinc

tin

aluninum

nickel

Hood

wool

raw cotton

soybeans

corn

wheat

“.3. 1. Overseas reliance was calculated by the formula: import a-
mount - export amount 4 by domestic production amount + import a-
mount - export amount x 100. But for copper, lead, zinc. tin, alu-
minum and nickel, it was calculated as (l - domestic ore production
amount i metal ore consumption amount) x 100. For wood (logs and

lumber), it was calculated after conversion to lumber. The sign
indicates exports.

2. Energy, coal, oil, natural gas and wood are figures for the 1978
level of overseas reliance.

3. Japan's energy, coal, oil, natural gas are overseas reliance lev~
els for 1979.

6. Energy is the sum of coal, oil, natural gas and electricity (hydro-
and nuclear).

5. “heat imports/exports include four.
(Data) From Yearbook of world Energy Statistics

FAO—-Production Yearbook, Trade Yearbook, Yearbook of Forest Products,
Horld Metal Statistics

Steel Survey, Comprehensive Energy Statistics, and Ministry of Agri-
culture and Fisheries data.

Note: From the "Commerce Hhite Paper" published in 1981

10

FOR OFFICIAL 15!! (”LY
(I)

(9)

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂEY

n 2 a bonanza”: (an: umma)
(3) (muouow. s ,amuuww:-::>(2)
“I.

5 muum (6)“man (7)0 n

 
  

l.

     
     

YE rvmrumaazu E3ZEnﬁama

      
  

     
 
 

   
 

IIIIIIIIIIIiﬂiil “nl'VHTJIFEEEEEI'%

scum anus) aaua can
nae) ammo ammo nu!
nunm naum noun na-
amen) anus) a”) an
mam zircon ‘lﬂﬂﬂ ﬁn
nun) amm) :umw nu

ma) mu-msmnu. lmluaut. on; mommy. mumwﬁw. MN I
&ﬂ3ﬁb7?ba.#mutntlﬂmzﬁoﬂERtmafus.hkuoutn.at
mu mam: 1‘25”) by (HM). nlumuzuou. 231817! by

(mums). bbtf‘umbvrbl. summation (am
mzmtrlutrwoso)urormienrns.
—xnmeuwru.atnﬁLaiﬁrv(lnnmnna.hﬂlﬂﬂzcuzrv(l
hklu%)bhcr{dsﬂbv.£Iwn0w%¢a*ﬁnﬂﬁnnbtn6.Bill
omﬁﬁntiarlmahrwa:zeua.
Lmt.awnurotos.eﬂﬂloﬁﬁuL63ofwkv.

Graph 2: Japan's Trade and Transportation Situation (supplied by
Japan Shipovners' Association)

(Unit: 1,000 tons. figure enclosed in parentheses is load rate as
a percentage)

Imports

Japanese ships

Foreign charter ships

Foreign ships

total

exports
(N.B.) Japan's trade volume consisted of imports of 605.66 million

and exports of 76.49 million tons, for a total of 682.13 million
tons. Next to the 0.8., this is the second largest trade amount.

As for imports, transport by Japanese ships is 226,66 million tons
(load rate of 38 percent), transport by foreign charter ships was
233.87 nillion tons (36 percent), for a total of 633.87 million tons

11

FOR OFFICIAL ISB am
(1) ma athm—ummm-Immcn. manual)
(6); wamvmn « ‘ \ u
(5): xﬁmml‘.

  
  
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

(7) rlﬂ'l‘wmm L1“ ( '5”

(8) {WW-Wm ;::~.. :3; 1.310 (am)

(9) m u“ t m
(10) '~‘* 3.5-6 (1.00:)
(11) km ( 1m
(12) m t m)

(m) I. ::L:Ewn$rzn*tll3t«+uw6/TuhoMm an. uan'mnumo

(13) the.

2. GIT kl: Gm. Tot-made F 7)!)Q‘l‘. MONK“ 107011}? 4 - t (1911')
t! l- 7: bit?!“ |~ Vb“). amok: SQIIIJUtRTéIcEIbh. W:
nunmauu. ”manual-morn. 1):. “man: DIW-
Dad Wow" Tmnm<tﬁiﬁ W) a“: (manna :ltntomml
«IIEIILTNG.
FOR OPFICIAL [BB NIX

l3. “.8. l. The figures indicated above are steel vessels of more than
100 GT flying the Japanese flag and exclude fishing and government
ships. 2. GT is an abbreviattion for gross tonnage and is the total
capacity of the ship. Tonnage is measured as 100 cubic feet (2.83
cubic meters) equals 1 ton. It is used in comparing the size and
shipping capacity of a merchant ship and is the basis of calculation
for regulation and registration tas, and pilot fees. Likewise, dead
weight tonnage is often used with merchant ships and expresses the
carrying capacity of a ship.

Likewise, for your information, Diagram 1 illustrates the transportation
situation of Japan's resource imports. "hen the export shipping network is
considered in connection with this, it can be understood that the sealanes
supporting Japan's economy are extremely large scale. Compared to the ad-
vanced nations of the Heat, the transport distance is very great and taking
iron ore as an example, the average distance is 12,000 kilometers, and con-
tainer ships carrying export products travel 18,000 kilometers across the
Pacific Ocean to New York. (Data from Japan Shipowners' Association)

In this way, maintenance of the stability and security of sealanes of large
distances is an important condition ensuring the maintenance and development
of Japan's national life and economy.

In order to solve the problem of the sealanes security when the world is at
peace, it is sufficient to consider policies limited mainly to economic se-
curity, contemplating the stable security of the function of the resources
cycle. There are various risks related to the sealanes in this case but

we should calculate sflely the economic side.

However, at the present time, concerning the problem of resources and ship-
ping, we have been unable to resolve the problem simply with economic theo-
ries and the rationale of economics. The oil shock of 1973 taught us that.
In short, this says the locus of :his problem is not only the economic situa-
tion of the supply and demand of resources. Likewise, even though it was
localized, we tasted the bitterness of transportation being impeded by the
blow from the Iran-Iraq war.

The origin of the oil shock was the fourth Mideast war and the Arab oil prod-
ucing countries of OPEC, using oil as a strategic weapon, pushed for the
withdrawal of Israeli troops. This pointed out that the supply of resources
is linked with international politics and military problems. The Suez Canal
was closed and shipping was influenced in no small way. This was new to our
memory.

Moreover, the matter I would like to take not of is that the sealanes which
are vitally connected with Japan's economy have several choke points. As
illustrated in Diagram 1. the choke points are ﬂormuz Strait, Malacca-Singa-
pore Strait, Lonbok Strait, Panama Canal, Suez Canal and the open sea route
around the southern tip of Africa. These are easily controlled by the coun-
tries along the coasts of these choke points.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BB (NLY

 

53... x; at
EUR OFFICIAL USE (NIX

Key:
1. Diagran 1: Import Amount and Transportation Routes of Principal
Inport Products by Region (Data tron Ministry of Transport)
2. Suez Canal
3. Hormuz Strait
b. Maldive Islands
5. Malacca-Singapore Strait
6. Sunda Strait
7. Indonesia
8. 140an Strait
9. Pans-a Canal
10. Explanatory Notes
11. crude oil
12. coal
13. iron ore
16. grain
15. 100 million tons - crude oil
16. 25 million tons - coal
17. 5 million tons - grain
18. 50 nillion tons - iron ore

when the situation is viewed in roughly this way, it is very clear that Japan's
sealanes are vulnerable. This is the reason why an extensive, diverse risk
management is necessary to resolve the risk of international tension.

General Statement on Crisis Management in Shipping

In considering crisis aanagement in shipping. we need to exanine the risks
related to the sealanes. Even in a tine of peace. there are diverse risks.
Some of the risks are a supply suspension in countries supplying resources,
econonic blockade, damage iron the develop-ent of a crisis in the loading
ports or transit ports, obstruction of the loading of commodities, navigation
regulations in the choke point areas of the sea routes. We must also consi-
der that if an international dispute occurs, the disputing countries may ex-
propriate ships and the shipping supply and demand will become tight. Also.
if there are dangerous ocean areas. we will be obliged to take roundabout
routes 0

Concerning these risks which would impede the resources cycle, we must not
simply think that we can solve them merely by maintaining and ensuring ship-
ping strength. If we are challenged by a military war which destroys sea
transportation (guerre de course), the situation will be even graver.

Concerning shipping risk management in a case in which nilitary risks do not
have to be considered, considerable research is already being done in terns
of shipping administration and several counter-ensures have been set forth.
Nanely, these are, along with planning the ultra-automation and aodernization
of the aerchant marine, ensuring excellent crews by planning a rational work-
ing system for the crews, and besides working out a favorable tax systen for

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL L58 (NLY

shipping businesses, planning the improvement of license standards for planned
shipbuilding, and improving and strengthening the requirements for ship con-

struction. That is to say, plant the quantitative and qualitative buildup of
Japan's ships.

Likewise, from the standpoint of putting importance on the international con-
nection shipping has, the promotion of international cooperation has special
emphasis. Such things can be listed as technological cooperation and finan-
cial cooperation related to preparation of a disaster prevention system in

order to secure stable navigation conditions in the Malacca-Singapore Strait.

As for the problem of ensuring the stability and security of the sealanes,

as referred to earlier. given that a sealane network has been spread out.

a resolution of the issue is doubtful without an international cooperation sy-
stem. Even though the sea control of the sea areas around Japan is in satis-
factory condtion and we endeavor to ensure the security of 1,000 nautical
miles of sealanes, which has recently become an outstanding issue between
Japan and the U.S., ensuring the security of the sealanes connected to them

in areas of the sea beyond then will not be successful without the cooperation
of the various related countries.

In "Present Situation of Japan's Marine Transportation" published in 1981 (by
Ministry of Transport. Shipping Bureau), it is reported that: "In order to
provide for the stability of Japan's national economy, it is necessary to en-
deavor to secure the marine transportation routes of important resources and
such by establishing stable, friendly reations with the various countries by
means of promoting economic and technological cooperation." At the same tine,
it was stated that since international conflicts, such as the Iran-Iraq war,
exert an influence on Japan's shipping, it is necessary to immediately ad-
vance an investigation of an information communication system in order to
ensure the security of Japan's merchant marine in times of emergencies, mak-
ing the most of this current expeerience.

Namely, although not a critical case in which Japan must exercise protection
of navigation (defense of the sealanes), a case in which shipping is impeded
by an international military dispute is already a reality. Looked at from a
global perspective, this kind of risk cannot be kept from occurring even in

an environment which can be described as "peaceful."

Since last year, the Transportation Policy Deliberative Council, an advisory
body of the Ministry of Transport, was allowed to start "comprehensive secur-
ity sectional meetings" and deliberated countermeasures to secure stability
of marine transportaion; a proposal was made regarding risk calculation and
risk nanagenent policies. It is a sarcastic way of saying it but perhaps it
may be estimated for the present that Japan has gradually made a start toward
being a mature sea power. However, what I would like to emphasize here is
that. although an anmlification of what has already been stated, the problem
of ensuring the security of the sealanes is precisely an economic, political
issue (eco-politico-military issue), and the question of resources is not
separated from it. Its military correspondence cannot be excluded. Indded

16

FOR OFFICIAL [SE WLY
EUR OFFICIAL USP. (“LY

it must be founded on the philosophy and science of a sea power. It goes with-
out saying that it is not subsumed merely in one administrative agency.

In other words, it must be said that shipping crisis management is both in

name and in reality an extremely high level priority project within a compre-
hensive security.

Shipping Crisis Control in World Her II

1. Shipping Regulations

In considering Japan's shipping crisis control. the actual past record must

be consulted heavily. In these paragraphs, I would quite sinply like to trace
how Japan's shipping crisis control was carried out in world Par II. The key-
points can be narrowed down to how were shipping regulations carried out and
in what way were ships protected.

After the start of the China Incident, Japan's shipping went through several
stages and the form of shipping regulations changed. Eventually, it progressed

to a form of centralized management by the government according to the "Hartime
Shipping Regulations Act."

Before World War II, Japan has a merchant marine of approximately 638 million
tons and boasted of being the world's third largest shipping nation. Merchant
ships which Just before the outbreak of the war were the target of the "guerre
de course" by Allied submarines, were attacked by aircraft and were expropri-
ated by the army and navy, and were engaged in strategic transport suffered

a death blow in naval battles. At the end of the war, shipping had declined
to about l.b million tons. Furthermore, since unnavigable ships amoun:ing to
500,000 tons were included in this, ships capable of working were barely a
pitiful 900,000 gross tons. And almost all of them were inferior ships de-
signated for war and hastily constructed during the war, and besides these,
there were superannuated, inefficient ships.

And when changes in the shipping regulation system are pursued, they followed
a very complicated course. The shipping businesses' ordinary practice is to
carry out activities of free competition with the pursuit of profit as the
native. That is, respecting the "principle of free shipping" and Japan's
shipping prior to the war was just that. Consequently, even though they re-

ceived government assistance, their disposition was one of dislike for strong
government interference.

However, with the outbreak of the china Incident as the occasion, government
interference was expected from the general state of affairs in shipping enter-
prises and given the environment of the enactment of the National Hobilization
Decree. Then because of their intent to try to somehow avoid such a turn of

events, they independently created a system of self-governing regulations.
This was in July 1938.

-17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um OFFICIAL USE (NIX

in September 1938, the government enacted the "Temporary Shipping Regulations
ACt," and since this law was made in order to regulate general transportation
on the seas, faced with the international crisis of the China Incident. it
was a law which tried to execute regulations for the protection of ships,
assignment of ships, shipping charges, charter fees, shipbuilding, crews and
ship equipment. However, the framework of the aforementioned shipping enter-
prises' se1f_governing regulations was maintained to the utmost and so the
exercise of this law was shelved

Nevertheless, the China Incident lasted a long period of time, and along with
the increase in transport of important merchandise (staple products), Japan
was afflicted with a lack of ships. And with this, strong regulations finally
became necessary. In September 1939, under such circumstance, the structure
(according to a government and private sector cooperative formula of shipping
regulations which included distribution of ships) was made. However, the sit-
uation of the world's shipping abruptly became constrained due to the outbreak
of war in Europe, and the nanagement of the situation was difficult simply
with regulations which had advanced by then from self-governing regulations

to comprehensive shipping regulations due to government and private sector
cooperation. And so a switch to stronger government regulations could not be
avoided.

In February 1940, because the "Temporary Ship Control Act" was insufficient,
the "Shipping Regulations Act" was enacted and promulgated. Its content
prescribed a shift to a shipbuilding license system, government order for the
acceleration of ship repairs, and a government order for the loan and commis-
sion of ships for the promotion of efficent operation of ships and a license
system for foreign charter ships. Also included were clauses limiting or for-
bidding navigation in dangerous areas and the transport of war contraband.

In September of the same year, the "Shipping Regulations National Policy Pros-
pectus" was decided at a cabinet conference, and furthermore. in August l9hl,
“wartime Shipping Control Prospectus" was decided at a cabinet meeting. The
prospectus was made with the aim of placing ships, crews and shipbuilding
under government control in order to plan for the centralized management of

all Japanese ships, the establishment of battle preparedness of crews and the
rapid and broad expansion of ships in anticipation of successful operation of
wartime shipping. As for theformat of government control, a special organiza-
tion was set up based on the mobilization decree and it was allowed to adminis-
tcr control of ships, crew control and shipbuilding control.

1he reason why such a prospectus was decided at a cabinet meeting was that

it was not possible to force ships to sail in dangerous waters with the
regulations in existence until then. That is, since the ships belonged to
private enterprises, even though the shipowners consented, it was anticipated
that the crews would refuse to sail and there was the fear that ship assign-
ment would be impossible.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NIX

Using this prospectus as the pattern, the "wartime Shipping Control Act" and
the ”wartime Shipping Control Act Regulations" were enacted and promulgated
in March 1962. Before that, with the outbreak of the Pacific War as the oc-
casion, the Ministry of Communications, Shipping Control Bureau, which had
directed shipping administration until then, was abolished and the Maritime
Bureau was set up as an extra-ministerial bureau and a wartime maritime af-
fairs administrative structure was prepared and built up.

The "wartime Shipping Control Act" was a law which had as its objective cen-
tralized control over all of Japan's privately used ships and set up a system
to assign ships and transportation based completely on government intentions.
According to this law, the government acquired the right to use the ships and
was allowed to control the leasing of these ships to a special organization,
the "Ship Control Organization."

The Ship Control Organization started in April 1962 and this organization was
set up with the objectives of allowing the strong national purpose to permeate
shipping operations, allowing centralized operations of all ships and to cause
an epochal improvement in service efficiency in order to plan the successful
execution of shipment of goods for transport use and private use in time of
war. And at the same time. in cases where the government made reparations

to the traders for damages occurring during the war. the Ship Control Organi-
zation received these reparations in place of the various shipping companies.

After the start of world War II. a major problem for the war leadership was how
to keep the transport of goods and strategic transport going. Ships, divided
into three categories of army, navy and private use were each managed with a
different purpose, but with the progress of the war situation, the tendency
developed to manage the ships under one purpose as a nation. After the fall

of 1962, despite the fact that this problem was argued over and over between
the army and navy, agreement on a general outline remained unsettled because
of opposition to itemized discusssiona.

However, with the worsening of the war situation, it was not permissible to
leave the situation as it was and in March of the year the war ended. the de-
cision was made for centralized management of the country's ships and harbors
by the supreme war leadership council. An inspector ganeral's office was
created in Imperial Headquarters; and it was comprised of a number of people
from the Ministry of the Army, the Ministry of the Navy, the Ministry of
Munitions, the Ministry of Transport and Communications and the Civilian
Merchant Marine Committee.

Accompanying the progress of the war situation, unless they somehow set up

a centralized management of ships and harbors, the war leadership, of course,
would have been faced with crises in the national life and the nation’s eco-
nomic activity. However, this centralized management structure was created

at a time when the sea routes from the suth had already been cut and sea trans-
port was impeded because the inland harbors and waterways were being bombed
and were mined against submarines. Creation of this special structure was
unable to satisfactorily increase effectiveness.

19
NR OFFICIAL USE (”LY
NR OFFICIAL 153 WLY

Yasuji Hatanabe. navy commander who staffed the marine transportation inspector
general's office at that time. made the following reflections after the war,
and although the reflections are quite commonplace. they touch the very core.
"Pondering over the drastic. basic wartime thinking. unhampered by law or the
established system in tim: of peace, and adapting to the situation. I think it
was the best policy. being able to move one right after the other from a peace
time system to a war preparation time system and then a wartime system."

2. Protection of Ships

It may be said the policy on crisis control for shipping up until World War 11
did not provide concrete policies which worked for the safety of long-distance
marine transportation extending over a long period of time. Meanwhile. weak
consideration was given to protection of shipping within the shipping strate-
gic plans. Consequently. the truth of the matter is that Japan rushed head-
long into war with the u.s. with insufficient feeling of urgency about protec-
tion of marine transport.

That was expressed quite well in terms of both organization and system and
military preparedness. The departments with the main responsibility for the
protection of marine transport were very weak. and it was not enought that
during the period from 1960 to 1961 four coastal defense ships, worthy of
being prototypes. were specially built.

In March of the year hostilities began. a law was enacted---the "Ship Protec-
tion Act”--which can be considered to have a deep relationship with today's
security of the sealanes. The navy at that time felt it was necessary to

make operation regulations and escort of ships inseparable. They insisted

on incorporating articles relating to ship operations regulations in this

law. but the shipping enterprises, fearing that having such articles would
increase the difficulty of operating. appealed to the Diet to limit the navy's
directive authority to a minimum. As a result. the navy's intent was not
sufficiently incorporated and was limited to being able to provide a minimum
of articles necessary for sea route direction and formation navigation.

0n the one hand. even in the ideas of shipping strategy and tactics. protec-
tion of ships was considered a matter of secondary importance. Military units
with responsibility for convoys of ships between H011 and Singapore and Yoko-
hamn and Truk were first organized in April 1942. and the implementation of
convoys was started immediately. However. that does not mean these units
assigned powerful vessels.

Nevertheless. accompanying the changes in the later war situation, escort
forces were built and diversion of ships from strategic units took place,
and improvement of the organization and escort system was made. With the
urgency of the situation. the demand for safe navigation of ships. whether
one or many. strengthened. and the Marine Protection Supreme Command was
set up. making protection of ships its central idea. But that actually oc-
curred two yenrs after the start of the war.

20
FOR OFFICIAL IBE (“LY
Looking back at World War II, while it can be fully understood that military
forces for the protection of ships were inadequate from the very beginning.
the navy's primary tactical purpose was a sharp decrease in enemy fleets.
And it cannot be denied that the protection of sea transport. which was sim-
ple and never very splendid, was a matter of secondary importance.

The issue of marine transportation and protection of ships in time of war
causes contradiction in all respects. Namely, how does one deal with the
question of safety and the question of shipping efficiency.

In the above paragraphs, I have tried to take up the question of regulation
of shipping and protection of ships during World War II, but in 1961, Vice-
admiral Narumi Inoue of the Naval Air Counund (later admiral) made an appeal
when he wrote "New war Preparations Planning Theory." In that, Inoue took
up the importance of preserving the sea transport routes and emphasized the
necessity of providing military force for the necessary protection of ships,
but because there was no sense of urgency about crisis control of shipping
in Japan at that time. it is regrettable that this appeal was not given life.
After the war, Admiral Inoue recalled that "it would have been better had I
proposed it and had it put into practice at least two or three years earlier;
it was already too late the year the war started." That is impressive.

Approach to Security of Sealanes

I have already stated that since last year there has been a noticeable call
for defense of the sealanes in the 0.5. demand for an increase in Japan's
defense obligations. This is the special feature of the resolution submitted
by Representative Findley, Republican Party, and 20 other legislators. The
resolution is the "resolution on ensuring the security of the sealanes."

Its main purport is that since there has been a further buildup of the Soviet
capability threatening the security of the sealanes and free navigation in

the Indian and Pacific Oceans, due to the remarkable increase in Soviet naval
and air power in those areas, it is necessary for the 0.8., Australia, Japan,
New Zealand and the ASEAN nations to cooperate and strengthen the security

of the sealanes in those areas. And it requests that, especially with regard
to Japan. there should be a great improvement in the sealane defense capabili-
ty for Japan's security, by improving the capability in such areas as mine-
laying. air defense and anti-submarine defense. Likewise, in order to facili-
tate Japan-v.8. mutual tactics, there must be efforts to standardize and con-
solidate information gathering, col-unication and logistic weapons systems.

Furthermore, it proclaims that the 0.5., Japan, Australia and New Zealand must
continuously give support to the ASEAN nations which occupy an important posi-
tion regarding the (maintenance of the security of) sealanes which run from
the Indian Ocean across the Pacific Ocean.

I do not think that Japan has the definitive, absolute expertise concerning
the security of the sealanes. however, to the extent one looks at the content
of the resolution in the 0.8. legislature described above, in reality, it

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NIX

can he considered as coming close to what Japan should be considering. This
is my frank feeling.

As I have already mentioned when presenting the present situation of Japan's
shipping. the sealane network necessary for Japan covers an extremely wide

area. It goes without saying that international cooperation is necessary to
ensure the security of these sealanes.

It is thought that the "International Treaty on Marine Search and Rescue (SAR
Treaty) will perhaps produce mutual cooperation on an international basis
regarding disasters and shipwrecks in time of peace. This treaty was adopted
in April 1979. Its purpose is to create a global sea disaster rescue system
by having coastal countries mutually cooperate and share the responsibility
for search and rescue in set areas of the oceans in order to promptly and
effectively rescue people in disasters on the seas.

The content of this treaty is as follows: 1. Coastal countries will determine
search and rescue areas under an agreement with neighboring countries and will
bear the responsibility for search and rescue activities within that area.

2. In order to do so, coastal countries will provide the necessary organiza-
tion. system and facilities in order to suitably and sufficiently carry out
search and rescue activities. 3. They will maintain a cooperative system
with neighboring countries. 4. They will provide a system sharing needed
information. such as introduction of a ship locating and reporting system
useful in making the search and rescue activities prompt and effective.

Regarding this treaty, it is necessary for Japan as a sea power to ratify it
as quickly as possible and become a treaty country.

In considering countermeasures for ensuring the safety of the sealanes, we
must always grasp as a nation in a focused manner the movement of ships which
are the object to be protected. Likewise, concerning the risks which hinder
the safety of the sealanes. it is necessary to understand the present situation
as much as possible. In particular. it is necessary to endeavor to always
understand the "position and military force" of submarines and the like which
attempt to militarily challenge the sealanes.

He will have the key to ensuring the safety of the sealanes only after there
has been a continuous accumulation of such efforts. Preparation of an inform-
ation system is one of the first things which must be considered a priority.

A condition for the international treay alliance and a milepost for solving
the problem is that the Maritime Safety Agency continues to promote a plan
establishing an "ocean information system." It is hoped that this system
will prepare an "ocean information center" and will set up a communication
system whereby communication is possible with ships in distant locations,

and will form an international information network such as the 0.5. ship
locating and reporting information system (amber system) or the ship locating
reporting system of the Philippines, Indonesia and India. An outline of the
wide area patrol system and ocean information system of the Maritime Safety
Agency are shown in Diagrams 2 and 3.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NU!

Key:

1. Diagram 2: Hide Range Patrol System of the Maritime Safety Agency
(provided by Ministry of Transport)

2. North America

3. 1.200 nautical miles

6. 500 nautical miles

5. Chitose

6. Japan Sea

7. North America

8. Sea area east of Honshu

9. Haneda

10. Hschijojima

11. East China Sea

[2. forward disposition of ships

13. Naha

lb. Ogasawara

15. Iwojima

16. Nanchojima

17. Okinotorishima

[8. South America

19. Middle and Near East, Scutheast Asia

20. Australia

21. “.3.

22. area intended for wide range patrol

23. major transportation routes

24. helicopter carrying patrol ships' usual area of dispositon

25. In these four areas, situations will be dealt with by six already
prepared or being prepared helicopter carrying patrol ships.

26. In these four areas, situations will be tackled with new reinforcement
of seven helicopter carrying patrol ships.

27. patrol zone for which new large scale aircraft are anticipated
(1,200 nautical miles)

28. patrol zone for large scale aircraft (YS-ll) (500 nautical miles)

Likewise, concerning the movements of aircraft, warships and submarines which
form the plan for a guerre de course, infomation gathering, together with

the Maritime Defense Force's surveillance system and sensor system. can be
expected to be effective.

The areas and the ships which are the target of the ocean information system
can he considered as follows: ocean liners and open seas fishing ships in the
waters near Japan (the area encompassed within 160 degrees longitude east

12! degrees longitude east, 57 degrees latitude north and 17 degrees latitude
north). as well as long-distance passenger ships and ships carrying dangerous
articles, and Japan's open seas fishing vessels and ocean liners which sail
the senlanes in transport of resources.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY
(l) I 1 I Mﬂﬂﬂﬁﬂﬂﬂﬂ IR = 1.8

  
      

’“\ an»:
‘ 7H7)

 
    

(19) s—zno‘ml (20)

Will ‘ Ill“? 9171i

 

{3}) (an

23) Willi-T1“
m mumm— I»

(24,513, M; ary-mlnummmam

(25) it nlﬂlilrn'fu. an”mun-muommmsn.
(26) ﬂ Inhalzauﬂl‘ manna-J3: (96*!!!) ﬁlms”.

(27)—— unnvinm-‘rzmuumnm
(28)"- mum! (vs-u) man (was!!!)

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE (”LY
m ma suaanmmmwuuon Imam:

    

(2) ”mug-l,—

sua) :0 wt 9anllﬁlaznlzucomuz ammo

”0 mama“. ”mu. Munrwmnu.
I: 9 own—nmmuutaumoanrmvmu
manhunt. nun-onus!!!“
FOR OFFICIAL (SE ONLY

and control of foreign fishing vessels. foreign ocean research ves-
sels and suspicious ships: 3. providing navigation safety informa-
tion for ships which it is feared are approaching dangerous waters.

Also. what I would like to emphasize at this time is that the Ocean Informa-
tion Center of the Maritime Safety Agency and the central command organiza-
tion of the Defense Agency. and the command. control. communication and in-
formation (C3 I) system of the self-defense fleet and air squadrons must be
kep't in close contact. In short, it is very important as a country to es-
tablish a total information system to ensure the security of the sealanes.

It is also important to maintain sub-spotting planes. anti-submarine ships

and patrol boats. And I think what should be given attention is the establish-
ment of a soft. intensive sealane security system. For this, preparation of

a diversified anti-submarine detection system. of course, and preparation of

a system of data analysis. verification. evaluation and storage and a command/
control system must be hastened. If not. no matter how many P3c's and naval
vessels are completed. it will never work effectively.

A situation in which the safety of the sealanes is impeded cannot be simply
specified. What can be said with certainty is that a plan has been drawn up
in which the freedom of the seas of the Western nations is challenged. given
the dramatic buildup of Soviet naval power (including the naval air force)

the change in the strategic map due to the Soviet navy's use of bases in Viet-
nam and the advance of Soviet naval power into the Indian Ocean.

As has already been stated. preparation of an information system in order to
ensure the security of the sealanes is urgent. and I want to consider the point
that the development of Soviet naval power has several weaknesses. Namely.
there are the choke points. which cannot avoid access to the sealanes by the
Soviet naval power. It goes without saying that one of these weakenesses is
Japan's three straits. The foremost problem is Tsushima Strait. I think the
detection system at this choke point or a checking system must be investigated
and prepared. Likewise, special consideration is desired concerning the de-
fense of important harbors. which are the terminals of these sealanes.

Postscript

If the political situation in Japan's trading partners is unstable. there

will be a lack of stability in the resources cycle. Good examples of that

are energy resources and scarce metal resources. 0n the basis of such a
situation. reserves countermeasures were set up in Japan in the past from

an economic viewpoint. Certainly. reserve stores give a kind of flexibility
to policies on resources and shipping policies. and are effective as temporary
substitute measures.

Recently. it has been said that in the 0.8. policy on reserves, items and
asmunts are cedided on the basis of an exclusively strategic point of view
and the position of ensuring security. Let this he a lesson to us.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In short. a plan should be developed in Japan concerning reserves of import-
ant resources which can withstand an interruption of shipping over a long
period of time. giving Sufficient consideration to changes in the military
environment in the future. And countermeasures must be devised from the view
point of ensuring a comprehesive safety, including. of course, granting of
strong bases for reserves. He must make preparations to be able to decrease
as much as possible reliance on shipping at the outset of a military crisis.

As always, preparing for international tenstion and international disputes
in regions supplying resources, we must plan a diversification of supplier
areas, the economization of resources consumption, substitution of other
resources and sufficient transportation means. It is necessary to improve
the rate of food self-support. Ensuring sufficient transportation means is
a matter which must not be forgotten in the security of the sealanes. In
short, to make a long story short, it is the equipping of Japanese ships.
Preparation of ships for the future will not be limited only to ensuring a
set number; an important issue is qualitative changes which can be seen to
ensure ships suitable for transportation such as transport of liquefied

natural gas. coal and liquefied petroleum gas. Preparation of ships
must also be considered.

Likewise. the issue of ensuring qualified crews must not be forgotten. Then
it is also necessary to modernize the crew system in order to arrange for a

job environment in which the crews can sufficiently demonstrate their abili-
ties.

Finally. what we have to consider is the question of what degree of the flow
of ships must be maintained to be regarded as keeping the security of the
sealanes.

According to a newspaper report, it is said that at a cabinet meeting on 23
April,.the government decided to conclude countermeasures on the basis of
ideas from the ministries involved, conerning the defense of the sealanes
and the import of food and petroleum resources in time of emergency. In
this manuscript, I have pointed out that the issue of sealane security is an

eco-politico-military issue, and I feel deeply that the government leaders
have finally opened their eyes to sea power.

In a way, there is the fear that the security of the sealanes will lack a
finishing touch unless there is a system which puts ships and crews under
government control in line with the national benefit in times of emergency.
At such a time. I hope that people related to the security of the sealanes
in the government will observe in practice the control system of a country
which has ship operations regulations system, such as the 0.8. and the NATO

countries. and along with that, examining the historical facts of Japan's
shipping regulations and ship protection during World War II. will prepare
countermeasures.

COPYRIGHT: Asagumo Shimbunsha

9400
C80: 6105/13!

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE (ELY
ECOMHIC

FOR ()Fi-'l('lAl. “SI-I ONLY

EmiDMIC m}! RATE IN NEXT '1‘!) DECADES

Four Percent Growth Seen

Tokyo Till-2 DAILY YmIURI in English 12 Jun 82 p 1

[Text]

A panel oi economic
advisers to the prime min-
ister projected Pridny Ja-
pan can achieve an inﬂa-
tion-adjusted average eco-
nomic pron-tn rate oi
around 4 percent a year in
the next two decades. a
rate silehtly higher than
what is acnerally believed
possible in other Industrial
democracies.

The projection was con-
tained in a ”Port Dilb-
“..:!-.::i by the Bconomle
Council which discussed in
the past year what Japan
would look like in the year
8000.

The report. titled “Japan
in moo." was on

earlier recommendations
irom six subcommittee.
But it dropped some oi

them. including controver-
sial proposals calling ior
the acceptance or iorelsn
workers and the liberaliza-
lion oi the [aim produce
market.

Government oiﬂriuls said
tine rt-tmrt villi. provide 'lm-
portant data" ior drawing
up Japan's economic pol-
icies, including a new live-
yssr economic plan to be

drafted by the council in
the months ahead.

The 4 percent Krowth rate
will be possible because. to.-
uno- lining. Japan Is expect-
ed to maintain an interna-
tionally high level oi warh-
erx nerd Iii-M. the report
mid.

Another reason is that
the savings rate--the pro-
portion of take-home in-
come put Into savings ae-
counls—wlll decline at a
slower pace than in other
industrial countries. from
19.4 percent in ma to 16-17
percent in 2000 oliering
capital enough for invest—
meats to sustain the 4 per-
cent growth rate. It said.

Mi‘he world economy in
the 1080s is in an adjust-
ment period to establish a
new order," the row said.

“If it ov-rcomes enemy.
population and other prob-
lems. the 1990: will be pe-
riod oi mul'ipolarlsed stabi-
lity” where major economic
blocs such as Japan. North
America and Western Eu-
rope will enjoy relative
stability.

Based on that assump-
tion. the rcnort said that:

0 Japan alll amount for l2
percent oi the world‘s
moss uallnnal product
‘ONPI in mo, up from 10
percent at present.
.Japtut's population -wll!
peak at 130 million in
2008. with out out oi everv
0.1 persons and 65 or older
compared with one oi every
ll currentlt‘,
0 It will be possible to es-
tablish prices on domes-
tic [arm produce compara-
ble to European Common
Marin-t levels it lreor trade
in farm land and other
mndltionu are Int-i.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0 People in primary indus-

try will be halved to 5
percent. those in secondary
industry will drop to 33 per-
cent iron as percent while
those in tertiary industry
such as services will rise to
82 percent iron 55 percent.

Wholesale Prices Dip

Japan's wholesale prices
recorded the ilrst month-
to-month decline in ﬁve
months in May. reflecting
drops in the prices oi both
export commodities and in:-
ported goods as a result oi
the yen's appreciation in the
month. the Bank of Japan
announced Friday.

The central hour said the
May wholesale price index
stood at ms analnst too in
ma up L3 percent from a
year earlier but down 0.0
percent irom Apnl.

The bank said the prim
or imported soods such as
crude oil and raw sugar,
decreased 2.l percent from
the previous month. due to
a 3.2 percent rise in the
yen's exchange rate in the
month

It said the yen's value
stood at 237.00 to the dol-
lur in May on the average
against 344.07 in April.

The wholesale prices oi
export commodities like
steel and automobiles also
declined by 2.1 percent irom
the preceding month.

The prices oi domestically
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nrmiumd mind» also declin-
r-d 0.1 ll'l‘t'l-lll

Bonk of Japan officials
said the wholesale price in-
dex was expected to regio-
ter 1 0.5-0.0 percent rise in
June iron my a the germ
value has been declining
awn recently

COPYRIGHT :

The Daily Yomiuri 1982

[Text]

COPYRI

C50:

GII’I‘ :

-I 1 20/ 308

Growth Rate in Next No Decades
Tokyo liAINICllI DAILY NEVIS in English 12 Jun 82 p 5

Apaoeloiecooomicadvlsa's mwmmtm 19.4
to Prune HintsierZeokoStmkl percent in 199 to lG-l‘l percent
projected Friday Japan can to woo. uttering «pita! aw
achieve an initiation-adjusted tor mvesiments to Mail the 4
average ccooomnc growth rate percentgnmhrate. it said.
oiarouodtperoeotoyenrhthe "The world economy in the
next two decades. a rate liﬂsisio an “mam-
SIIR’III’ him "Ia“ What IS w math I m m n u”
pericmlly believed possible in "M9” '
other industrial democracies. u" it w w

WWW“ Y” Wu“ population aodoihcrprohlelns:
MWMWWWW lhelmvillbcperlodoi
Economic Council which multlpolarioed mmlynm
discussedinlhepastyenrvhat major-economicblocksaichas
Japanwooidlooltllhelnthe JaponNorthAmerlcaand
yeerm- Western Europe will alloy

The report. titled “Japan in
2000.“ was based on earlier
recommendations from six sob-
committcu But ildropped some
at them. lociodiogcontmversial

relativesiablliiy.
Baaedonthaiassomptmme
reportsaidthai:
0 Japan will account ior 12
percent. oi the world’s you

proposals calling tor the ac- MM“
ceplanccol Ionian workersand :mw Mew
"If liberalization OI III “I'll! . Japan's ”mam "III
PWWW- . peakatmmillioninm'ith
Government olnclnls said the one not otever 6.4 persons Iii“!
"9°” “'i" mid" “important 65 or older compared with one
data" I“ drawing "9 Japan's oloveryllcm-rently;
mm" 90"“05' WNW a . u will be possible to

how rive-year economic plan to
bedratted bythc comeilinthe
monthrahcarl.
mipemcotgrwih ralewill
be possible because. tor one
thing. Japan is expected to
maintain an internationally

establish prices on domestic
(arm produce comparable to
European Common Market
levelslttreertradeiolarmiami
andotherooodilloosaremet:

Nah Icvdohmmascdlsﬁ momma lndostrywill
thercportsaid. drop to 33 percent iron 35
Another mo is that the W “new hieﬂlary
minim nw-MPWM“ industry such as services will
lake-hometocomeputlnto mwumgms
saving accounts—willdcelioe W
ataslowerpooethenlnoiher '

Hainichi Daily News 1982

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WHO

m TARGET FOR 1982 SEE" DH?ICULT TO Aﬂm

Tokyo names: MY NEWS in English 15 Jun 82 p 6

[Text] A slow growth oi only 1.7 Thirdiy. exports toiled to
per'centtnthenationeleconorny womidstoooholreceaioo
int‘locoltm.endediostm oeuteriogoothetinitedsuteo
:i. he: rtrengthened the ‘l'heee (actor: remain m-
prediction that Japan's changed in the current that
myvittnotmhutat year.saytheeouiorntsts.
uishopedhytheaovernment unyﬂthemsaythatmieu
thistiealyeor. theJapaneseeconomyhemes

The government in: ear- very much buoyant later. it
mnedoszperoemgwthtor wotdnotheohietoadrtevethe
limit”: projectedmnhotszperurt.

0n . however, the Suppose the my one-
Bconornte Am thus growing at on m
discioeedthatthemnotioooi roteotzperoentoraohthe
pmducttGNPi here-serially 'tiuthottotthisiiocelyeor-e
17mmdluinguiemyeor raterecordedthelostqmteol
pertodendedlastilarrh. last that year. I 51 percent

Thelmklnotergrovththt govthwtﬂremeacrowthot
compared with e revteed 7todpercentintheaeoondhoit.
estimateoHJpercenthyti-e mimumm.
government. resulted many isverydiittctdttoexpectmder
tromthreetoctors,ocoordh¢to thepmaniogsitMMnythe
mists. enperts.

in the ﬁrst place. personal Should an upturn not
consumption remained materialize in the second halt.
stagnant as disposal boomer the current fiscal year will
droppedageinintiscaltm. aphrecordomediocrepwth

Secondly.thehusinesscon- nteoileesthanSpercent.
ditions 0‘ small “Wires. according .to the some
putty relying on panel eeooornista
consumption ondhuuinghoth one my to stimulate the
indeprenedcooditimvor- economyistotowerm
send and their investment rates. Minding the dim
octivttieneredampened. rate or the Bank oi Japan. but

COPYRIGi‘t': Hainichi Daily News 1982

cso: 4120/310

1)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3‘
5

g:
i
i

E
a
5
§

3
g
'3

ii
ii
'53 a
JAPAN 12803808 3453 MILLION TRADE SURPLUS IN HAY

Tokyo mitten: DAILY traits in English 11

[Text]

COPYRIGHT a

C80:

4120/315

Declining oil imports and the
yen'n depreciation canned
Jam's imports to decrease
at perceu b May irntn the
year ago level to am million.
the Iiinistry oi international
Trade and industry said Thora-
day.

The ﬁgures are based on
import settlement reports
mbmitted to ioreign exchange
banltsbyJapaneae “ﬁlls.

A Mli'i oitlcial said Japan
purchased videhody aircraft
valttedattlJszlllioninliay
last year. which vasone reason
iortheuaydropthisyear

The country' s imports oi
toodsttrlls tell u percent to
$1.31lmillionandcnrn imports
chieﬂy trom the United States
dropped32.2percenL

him said imports or oil.
iumberandotherrawmaterials
came to $6.”? million. oil 24.4
percent.

The lil‘l'i otticial said im-
ports oi crude recorded a 34.6
percent decline. reﬂecting a
drop oi more than $3 per barrel
in thepriceotcrndeoil trout
May last year.

During the past one year. the
otiiciai said. the Japanese
currency also tell tn value trom
32.33 yen to one US. dollar to

lininichi. Daily New 1982

Jun82p5

an average more yea last
month,

Japanese imparts ol
marroiactnred aorta tell 21.4
percent to $2.456 million.

aw imports otelectrrc
machineryandatttonpewbi-

advanced countries totaled
8.758 million. oil 217 percent.
with the "rated States ac-
cotmtiu tor 81.50 million. oil
mm

imports at American corn
and lumber registered drops or
35.0 percent and 217 percen'
while imports ot coal and
electrlcmachineryposted gains
oiJSJpercentandOSpercent.

Japanese imports trout the
European Community declined
:32 percent to $507 million in
liay.hll‘l‘isald

Japan also imported $550
million worth oi goods trorn
developing countries last
month. down 21.1th
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

MIC

WE PRICES UMP 0.6 PERCENT IN HAY

Tokyo MUNICH]: DAILY NEWS in English 12 Jun 82 p 3

C50:

COPYRIGHT: mien: Daily New. 1982

4120/3123

['l‘cxtl Japan's wholesale prices mmwaumm
tecordw the ﬁrst month.»- mum'sendmcmmhe
mum declinehﬁvemh mouth.
my reﬂecting drops In the ltaldlheyeokmnema
prices oi both expat colu- mmlothedolhthlhyonthe
mmeMB awmhstuemm“
etesdtottheyu'eap- Newman.
W W that month. mmnodﬁleeltemelend
mmamw ammunmmhyu
Fem. penal Inn the MD:

The antral hank mid the month.
In: M mice than the ol
MINJWIIhlm W out all decibel!
Q 1: parent {m e year MW
mumum: Mdemmd
mm the-uhgkpdcehdexns

‘l'hehnknldlhepﬂcaot ' ‘5"
wmmm 533?”..."3:
ollndm .deemeedz.

m ' Meal-M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

318C”: 1981 GNP POSTS WKIDS‘I'ER 2.7 rem GAIN

Tokyo m min! rostrum in English 12 Jun 82 p 1

(Mt)

COPYRIG'I‘l's

$0

0
o

4120/309

hundnbodhontbolmdnplnmnyunln
the tour”. quarter 0! "ﬂ, Ibo Japanese economy grew
untidy in the in! three months oi this your, closing local
"It um. a lackluster 2.7 percent cola, the government

crammed FM.

The innotion- mooted
growth in mu 2901. ended
March 31.01” the donut
dnce ilscei Mt end tor
lover then the reviood gov-
ernment projection of ti
percent. outing it impos-
sible in elect to ottotn :
5.2 percent growth project»
ed tor tiscol 1m. Final
190 set I 3.7 percent 0N?
pin.

Preliminory lie-urea from
the manic mania:
Agency shoved Jopon's

'm notional product

.(om—uu voice or total
moods end services the na-
tion produced—was running
at e muir-odiosted
ennui rote 'ot “00.2241
billion t8”! atom» in the
ileum-lurch orriod el-
iot'ine ior Inacticn. op 08
percent over the previous
quofter. ‘nie growth trenc-
toted into 31 percent at on
ennui rote.

The one showed o re.
vised 0.1 percent 'eciine in
the int quarter of user.

We the tscoi m:
amt: vere exports. which
jumped to percent. con-
sumer mending. ooconntine

Daily xqmui 1982

Toi"m‘tbon inn the

GNP. climbed Lt percent.

Bounc- upitli spendine.
another min {one oi eco-
nomic activity. stored to e
0.1 percent rise in iiscol
1”! iron the previous
yenr’t 6.7 percent increase.
automating the
tented economic slowdown.

Private booting invest-
ment edged Mn N per-
cent. improving from u
101 percent slump in ileeoi
mo.

The pertamnce in the
ﬁrst comer o! no show
ed the economy m up-
held by otroo: outcome?
spendin: dorine the period
rather then exports.

Computer opendinc rose
1.0 percent over the lat
quarter oi Mi. while hous-
ing construe“. pom
inventnent end no. ether
oeeton oi the donutic
oector declined. 01 percent

Wu [rev
in the ﬁrst cm. In”
due to o specie! tutor—tn
erased and exports—M
{died to recoup be pro.
«on ow 8.! pucent
dive.
ECONUIIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FY81 aoomc GROWTH MY 2.7 PERCENT

Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY ms in English 12 Jun 82 p 1

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO :

Whacktromthettnt
drophlaevenyeamothetourth
quarter of Int. the Japanese
my new mildly h the
tintthreemonthsotthhyeor.
clam ttscal 198! with a
lackluster 2.7 pervert gain. the
governmentemcedli‘rlday.

1helnﬂatho-adjmtedmvth
In ﬁscal lﬂl. ended larch :ll.
wastheslovestetneenscallm
and tar lowerthanthemhed

percent growth projected tor
rarrenttiecallmjtmllm

saw a 3.7 percent GNP uh.
Preltmtnary nm from the
Economic Hurling Agency
showed Japan's gross national
(GNP) - the value ot
total goods and services the
nation produced - was running
at a womanly-ﬂuted ml
rate at 196.224.1htllloe yea ($79!
billion» In the Jammy-lurch
period allow: tor inﬂation. to
0.8 percent over the previous
quarter. The growth translated
Into 3.3 percent at an annual
rate.
The GNP showed a revised 0.7
percent decline in the lat

quarterorm.

Mainichi Daily News 1982

4120/30)

36

leadingthetisealltttywth
were exportsmhlchjmpedlc
percent. Coowner spending.
accounting tor more than halt
the GNP. cltmhed 1.4 percent.

Boom capital rpm
anothermatotoreeotecenomic
activity, slowed to a 0.7 percent
rtse tn ﬁscal 1901 Iron the
prevlom you": 5.7 pereeu
Increase. mhetanttattnc the

hustnesstnveetmentendnoet

0.7 percent in the ﬁrst matter
largelydueloamctallactor-
increased veeselexports—hut

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TOYOTA MOTOR NUMBER ONE EARNER

Tokyo HAINICRI DAILY news in English 10 Jun 82 p 5

[Text]

WOLMIIS
aalesArablaaOlllu

amneed'l‘aeeday

alter-lax

to sales. Toyota Ilotor.
Japan's No. l amalner. was
second as In the previous year.
Nissan Motor (30.. use [mm
fourthtothirdplace.

Nissan said the rise It PM
more than ottset the decline in
the number of exported
vehicles.

mum»: Heavy mm
m. )olned the Inn 10 sales “3‘
for the that time in M mu.
uﬂeattngaa ”Increase In it:
shipbulldlngdlvislonaatea. ‘l'lle

alum did at new

yanmtsspementolttspnnt
hastogo tntheSamlt Arable»
and Kuwait

melts.”
therealﬂwlannchsmaller.
Ilatsuttlta Electric In-

top Integrated electrical
manutacturer. advanced to

straight year. Nban later
advmdlronmmeeeond.

COPYRIGHT: HainiChi Daily News 1982

C50: 4120/30?
ECONOMIC

CARS WILL TAKE THIRD OF HORLD SALES

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NW3 in English 12 Jun 82 p 5

[Text]

(DPYMGBT: minichi Daily M3 1982

One out of three automobiles
rolling Into the international
market in the near luture will
he a Japanese vehicle. oc-
cording to a report compiled by
Toyota Motor Sales 00.. the
salsarmol‘l‘oyotaﬂotorCe.

in a report on the ml world
automobile production. the
company said Japan produced
a total oi tut million cars.
buses and tanks, up lzpercent
irorn a year ago. increashg its
share in global allomobile
production to 29.5 percent irom
aspercent.

Auto production in use:
aroundtheworldiellnpercent
to 37.83 million, continuing the
downtrend ot the precedlu
year.thereporteaid.

The decihe was called by
worldwide recession all the
resultant sluggish auto
demand. ltsaid

C80: 4120/312

36

Passenger cer' production
decthed by 1.22 million units to
2917 million. and output ot
buses and tnicha dropped by
125.000 to ”I million. oc-
cordingtoihereport

By country. US. amount“
which outlered e hell, 8.!
percent production decree:
theprecedlnayeerJrn-nedou
7.93millioemlts.a0.9percen
telllmthepmiouyu'.

”muse-dun
comirteeledvithlzunillion.
w 1.0 percent. tollo'ed by
Western Europe with ".7
millionomspercut ‘

North American makers
produced 9.21 million.'otl 13
percent. and Latin American
prorhictiondroppedajpaeent
toi.53rnillion.‘l'heSoviettinton
and Beaten Bullpen nation
made 3.3 million-m
omeereaI.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IMPORTS FELL 23.4 PERCENT IN MY m 1981

'Dokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 11 Jun 82 p 5

[Text]

mPYRIGlT:

C50:

4120/ 315

Japan recorded a $453 million
trade surplus in May. compared
to a trade deficit oi su million a
year before. the Finance
Ministry reported ‘thursday.

Japan's exports last month
totaled SILSIl million. oil 8.3
percent irorn a year ago while
imports came to 311.128 million.
down]! percent.

The ministry said the country
registered a suit? million trade
surplus in May alter seasonal
adjustments. compared to $745
million in the black a year
belore.

Japanese exports oi motor
vehicles totaled 525.915 mils
valued at $2.233 million. down
1.1 percent trom May. 191.0t
the total. the ministry said.
motor vehicle exports to the
United States totaled 207.0”. in)
0.7 percent. to the European
Community. sumo. oil I“
percentandtothelltlddleﬁast.
66.000.up3.5percent.

Steel exports net! up 2.6
percent to $1.435 million III
ship exports dropped 39.3
percent to total $400 million.
“Ship exports appear to he on
the gradual wane." a ministry
official explained.

imports oi crude also
sustained a 30.7 percent tall in
May to 83.730 million due to

Mainlchi Daily News 1982

sluggishdemamdandadmph
themrdeoilprice.
Botsngarirnportsmnrethn
doubledtamsmiliionandthe
mlnltyotticialattrihutedthe
diagriaetoanextremetylov
8&0 ntmigarirnportaayear

Jam's exports to the United
Stats gained 1.9 perceu to
$.10! million in May \rhile
imports iron that country rose
3.4percenttosz.Mmillion.
The ministry said Japan
exported $1.338 minim worth oi
goods to the Emnpean Com-
munity. ott 27.4 percent and
imported $661 million worth ot
products. otit.5percent.
Japanese exports to South-
east Asia tell 5.! percent to
£2590 millionandirnportsstnod
at $1395 million. down 81 per-

cent.

Japanese exports to the
Middle East-totaled SIM?
million. oft 1.5 percent. shite
imports chieﬂy ot crude and
otherrawmateriaissustaineda
as percent drop to $3.14:
million.

Japan's exports to the
communist hloc last month
dropped at percent to ma
million and imports came to
Mummmsjpemt.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ROWIC

WRST PRO?I'1| DROPS HIT OIL CMPANIES

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 10 Jun 82 p 6

I’l‘extl Japan's nine major

COPYRIGHT r

080:

petrolem companies sutlered
their whatever setback to

earnings diving liscal m

nnprecedentedly large ex-
change losses caused by

depreciatloooltheyen against
thedollar

St: at the nine posted or-
dinary deﬁcits. while the three
others. though managing to
chalk w ordinary protlts. also

aohataotlal declines.
according to their on-
consolidated ﬁnancial
sum
nmmmmm

year.

only two [inns entered det'lcla
whileallothersnpoﬂedduhle
profits — Including the Ingct'al
ever in the case 1. Nippon (in
Co. and KyodoOilCo

In this poi ﬁscal year. in-
depeodeﬂ oil ﬁrms without ties
to major international oil
companies tool: a severe

beam

4120/311

Martino Oil On. tor instance.
posted an ordinary deﬁcit of
90.2 billion yen (mo rotlltool -
the I ever among coin-
Eanleshstedonthe'loltyoStoct

xchanpe. M a renal. its
llahllltlesaceeded assets”

ldemltao Kosaa Co. and
W Oil also uttered heavy
losses. although they did
manage - barely - to prom:
liabilities tron surpassing

meta.

Cornhbeduleool petroleum
pm hy the one that;
came to 215 million When.
down 3 percent (root the
prevloaa year owing to

Total sales wattle. however.
was a by 7 percent to about
15.040 billion yen (SSS lion)
tliankstotvopricehikes
ltscal 1S1.

Hainichi Daily News 1982

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC

STEEL PRODUCTION HAY FALL T0 ll-YBAR LOH

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 11 Jun 82 p 5

[Text]

Wotscnmg prospects lor
exports are raising tun
Japan’s steel M will
drop below 100 million t. (a
the ﬁrst time In II yea: i the
comm ﬁscalyw.

ptoductlou In the July-

Seplembet pew Iii slop
somelmlﬂiontuushugdme

production in the year up to
next March at ms million. I?
(mm It): million tons In ﬁscal
I981.

With the elapse 0! In than
two months. (his projection Is
tailtnglohold.

the Untied Sum

”ﬁsmehrgwm
market lot Japmsteel

quarts
ﬂlyunmmnmmm
membetdoﬂshmoﬂ
drmmriphmhuue
0.8.. an mm at Mon
demand lot tubal» steel.

uwmmmmo
[must .
APRIL PIANT EXPORTS 24.5 PERCENT LESS THAN 198].

Hainichi DAILY NEWS in English 11 Jun 82 p 5

[Text]

JEiqm't crunch won by
apanenem-hlnacbinnry

mwmhmm
93. 58 billlon yen ($381.0
million). down on peanut
iron the previous month all
also oil as percent tron the
same Mb at “$3.2,”
cordlncbtbelapan
Industrial Machinery
"warmers.

The society said the sharp
decrease was largely in reac-
tion to an unnsnally Ilia level
reachedlntheprevionsmootb.

Bxpnrteonb'actshlarebbit
anall-limeblaolwnbllllon

yaanllllﬂl

MMWMMa

3811'th MW
«pom Wilhelm

mere oil 561 vernal (mm
llarebatlsnbllliooyeum
million).

Meanwhile. lndnatrlal
machinery orders. both
domestic and loreun. in April
annealed 32819 blllinn yen
($116 billion). don as per-
centlmayearearlier.

The society blamed the
dedlneonrlngglsbonlesarnld
lbeeeonolnlcslunp.

COPYRIGHT: Munich! Daily News 1982

680:

4120/315

END