FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10383

12 March 1982

Japan Report

(FOUOI17/821

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JYRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
l-‘OIOFI'IGALUSEONLY

12

JAPAN REPORT
(roco 17/821

Courauts
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Foreign Mission: To Be Allowed 1b Operate Radios
(KiJio Snknkibnre; sum SEIMBUII, 19 Feb 82)

EOOIMC

um May Send Adviser lleohiro We to 0.8.
(Jm. 22de 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCQIO0.0...00.00.00.

SCIHCB AID TERROLOGY

Cmputer Development Treced Up to Fifth Generation ROD com
(Sozeburo Chantal; 13m 83m, 8-11, 15—18 Dec 81) .

Country Haven Toward lucleer Energy Generation _
(Shigeru Katmai; 31.53388 JAPMI. Feb 82)

Country Reported 'A Step Closet" to Nucleu- Fusion
(m ML! YMWI’ 17 Feb 82) 0.0.0....OOOOOOOOOOOIAOOO

New Pumps for Nuclear Energy, Space kplorntion
I (mes J0”. Feb 82) 0.00000.00.00.00...OOOOOOOOOIIO

Kantian Begins Shipping Pipelewera to £883 .
(m0! KBIZAI SBDIBUI, 2 Feb 82) .

Optical Fiber Columnicetione Are on Takeoff
(Dm's 1m. Feb 82) OIOOOOOOOIOUOOOOOt000.0...

Whether Robots Hill Creete meuploynent Discussed .
(DW'S Immn’ Feb 82) 00.00.000.000...0.0.0....

- e - [III - nsn '- 111

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
BUA Ufllblﬂo UDB UM!

m President Proposes Opening Terminals to Prints Sector
(mom KEIZAI 8mm, 20, 21 Jan 82)

Denetionslization Propossl
Debste Over Propossl

MED Generator 's'n. lurk VII' Capleted
(WT, ” 81) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOCOOOOCOOQOOOOOOQ'

High-Performance Logic VIBI
(WM, ‘0' 81) 00.00.000.000...00.0.0.9....0000...

Materials: Research of Bionic Synthesis (.1)
(mm. wt 81) 0.0......0.0.0.0....0000000.COCO...

Meta-isle: Research of Bionics Synthesis (2)
(mm. M81) .‘OOOOOIOIOOOOOOI0......UUOOOOOOOOOO

Briefs

Curb I81 Exports to 0.8.
Policy on Cmunicstion astemtes
Turbine Order Fran PRC

Vibration Absorption llaterisl

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL
JAPAN

PMIGN MISSIONS TO 33 annual) TO OPERATE RADIOS
OWZZIOSl Tokyo SAM! swam in Japanese 19 Feb 82 Morning Edition p 1
[By reporter Kijio Sakakibara]

[Text] The Posts and Teleconunications Ministry has decided to revise the wire-
less telegraphy act to pernit foreign embassies and legations in Japan to have
their own radio co-unication facilities. The decision will be included in a bill
of amendments to the act which is being prepared by the Ministry for Submission to
the current diet session. The revision is also designed to enable Japanese diplo-
matic establislnents abroad to have their own wireless communication facilities,
under the "principle of reciprocity," so that in the future such counmication
disruptions as that which happened to the eabassy in Poland can be avoided. All
co-unications vith the Japanese-Messy in Warsaw were disrupted for nearly a
month due to the suspension of general circuits under the martial law rule.

According to the Poets and Teleco-unicationa Ministry, there was a strong request
from the Foreign Hinistry to authorise foreign diplosatic establishments to oper-
ate their own radio stations.

Article 5 of the present wireless telegraphy act stipulates that "a foreign govern-
ment or its representatives" are not li:.ensed to operate a radio station; under
the principle of diplomatic "reciprocity" Japanese abasaies abroad also were not

allowed to have their own radio facilities by the goverments of the respective
countries.

Japanese embassies abroad have thus been depending solely on general couunciations
circuits for their comunications with the Foreign Ministry in Tokyo. Troubles
occurred in Decelber last year when the martial lav rule in Poland suspended
operations of the general circuits for nearly a month. cutting all contacts with
the eabassy an causing problems in the efforts to protect Japanese nationals as
well as in orher areas.

This prompted the Foreign Ministry to review the need for the nation's .enbaasies
and legations abroad to have their own radio conunication facilities, and to
strongly ask the Poets and Telecomnications Ministry to revise the wireless
telegraphy act. As an initial step, the Poets and Teleco-Iunications ministry
decided to delete the phrase "a foreign goverment or its representatives" from

the text of article 5 of the act. Possible amendments to other related articles
are also under study.

C80: 4120/ 163

FOROFHCIALIJSEONLY
”MUSEONLY

ECONOHIC

HI'I‘I HAY sm ADVISE! WEIRD MAYA 1‘0 0.8.
M21600 Tokyo JIJI in English 1343 (it! 22 Feb 82

{Text} Tokyo, 22 Feb (JIJI Press)-Ihe Ministry of International Trade and Industry
is considering sending its adviser. Nsohiro Anya. to the United States from late
this week to early March to warn against the ilplnentation of trade reciprocity
bills, which Japan sees as threatening bilateral trade. The trip, to najor cities
such as Hashington. New York and Boston. would coincide 'uith renewed publicity
efforts in the United States by the foreign office. Miti is also studying the
possibility of using Anerican cable television networks in its drive to put Aneri-
cans wise to Japan's sincere efforts to solve trade'frict'ion with the United States
and Western Europe.

But there is little expectation that Tokyo's efforts so far. including a reduction
in advance of iaport tariffs and the lowering of non-tariff trade barriers. will
lead to any significant easing of pressure fron'ﬂaahington. Consultations are non
under way between Hiti and other government agencies on what additional steps the
goverment can take by the tine Poreign Minister Yoshio Saharauchi visits the

- United States in late March. Along the new leasu'es reportedly under considera-
tion are the advocacy of freeing rules regarding investaent and services in the
arenaof the general agree-ent on tariffs and trade (cm). a review of the list
of product its-s whose imports into this country are still restricted. and an
increase in the nuber of retailers of American-made tobaccos. Rovever, it is
clear the goverment would want sore thrust to ieprese the Aaericans.

The third round of talks on the stalled project to build a gigantic petrwchuical
couple): in Bandar Dioneyni in Southern Iran vill be held in Tehran 23-27 February.
The joint ventu:e project, undertaken by Iran-Japan Petrochesical Co (UPC), now
hangs in the balance with the Hitsui group. the Japanese partners, displaying
reluctance because of the project's soaring costs. The Iran-Iraq war has left the
venture in sbsyance with no breakthrough in sight. Hiti indicates no change in
the Japanese position. nor does it anticipate any drastic proposals fro. the
Iranian side at the Tehran talks.

Nevertheless, the ninistry says it is inportant to continue dialogue with the
Iranians. Rulers get abroad fron tine to tine that Iranian leader Ayatollah
Ruhollah moneyni is dead. and Hiti is concerned they could throw the Gulf nation
into confusion and deprive the Tehran Goverment of the ability to proceed with
negotiations. -
POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Miti will enter into discussions with the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications
on the liberalization of data cal-unication whis week. The Posts and Telecon-
nunications Ministry is inclined to incorporate it in a package proposal only in

a vague form. But Miti is bent upon full liberalization based on a recent interim

report of the second extraordinary administrative research council, a government
advisory body.

080: 4120/161

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL I” ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MDT!!! nrvmmm'r TRACE!) UP TO FIFTH ammo m GOALS
Tokyo DENKI SEIHBUN in Japanese 8-11, 15-18 Dec 81

[Article by Souburo Okamatsu, head of Electronics Policy Division, Bureau of
Machine Intelligence, HITI]

[8 Dec 81 p 3]
[Text] To Break the Barrier of the Roman-Type Computer

Developnent of computer technology, which has made such brilliant progress so
far, entered the "fourth generation" when super 1.31 became practical. By the
1990's, a brand new type of computer capable of understanding human speech is
expected to make its appearance. Confronted by the development of an informa-
tion society and the need for this type of advanced computer, HIT]: undertook the
development of the "fifth generation computer" starting in 1981. To be sure,
this "fifth generation computer" is not yet generally well understood, partly
because it employs a coeputational format basically different from that of the
conventional computer and partly because its development has just begun. As
part of its technology series. this newspaper will introduce the circumstances
related to non of the "fifth generation computer" and its prospects.

Circumstances Leading to 8&0 of Fifth Generation Computer

Today, the computer is said to have entered the fourth generation, in which
super LSI elements are utilized. In approximately 35 years since the first
practical computer was developed, the coeputer has experienced a number of guer-
ation changes and expansion in the number of functions as a result of innovative
technological development. '

The greater part of these computers belong to the so-called Neunen-type based on
the theory developed in 1956 by Dr von Nemaen in the United States.

If we look forward into the future. the computer environment is expected to
change drastically in the next 10-year period, and as the field of applications
is expanded rapidly, new utilization forests and the teclnology to realise them
will be in demand.

however. with the Nansen-type computer, the software increases enormously in
sire and complexity as the computer is applied to more and more advanced problems.

MWWONLY
The basic flaws of the present-day conputer having their origin in the construc-
tion and design concept of the conputer have become evident, and itlis highly
probable that the computer of today nay not be able to cope withIthe advanced
functions denuded by the future.

Therefore, based on the past experience in the life cycle of technological
change. a brand new fifth generation conputer based on brand new theory and tech-
nology is expected to appear in the early 1990's.

HIT! has thereforeundertaken R5!) of the fifth generation cosputer as a national
project on the basis that computer technology is not only one of the basic
technologies in support of industry, but also a teckmology indispensable for the
establishment of an abundant informationalised society.

The Background of Research and Development
1. Possibility Due to Advancsnent in Semiconductor Technology

The development of seniconductor technology is quite astonishing, as evidenced by
the development of super L51. Hithin 10 years, a chip several millimeters square
containing several nillion bits of memory elenents or hundreds of thousands of
gates (gate - the snallest unit of logic eleIent) nay become a reality.

In view of the recent technological advancenent and reduction in the hardware
cost, it is necessary to undertake no of a computer system desirable in the
1990's by drastically reocamining the construction of the computer.

2. Problans Related to the Software

Running counter to the trend of hardware technology, the software cost is rising
year after year, and 80-90 percent of all 1985 information processing cost is
expected to be the software cost.

This is so because the computers used today are dependent on the software. He
must reevaluate from scratch the construction, the basic concept, and the lan-
guage theory concerning the computer and carry out RED of the software systen
which will be desirable in the 1990‘s.

3. Utilization of the Results of Basic Theoretical Research

Those research activities which are at the basic research stage today, including
analysis of natural language and study of artificial intelligence. are expected
to be the technologies which will have an important impact on the field of in-
formation processing in the future. It is therefore imperative that due atten-
tion be paid to these basic theoretical research activities, and new development
of computer technology must be attewted through introduction of new concepts
and fruits of research activities.

lo. Changes in the Social Environment

Observing the conditions of society that are expected to exist in the 1990's.
analyzing the demands that will be made by this society on computer technology.

FORWUSEONLY
FWHICHNNCJAI.USEGDNLY

and viewing it from the standpoint of the user. the computer system that will be
desirable in the 1990's must be carefully investigated.

 

The LSI package used in the computer.
[9 Dec 81 p 3] A

[Text] Epoch-ﬂaking “Internally Stored Program"

The History of Computer Development (1)

In science fiction novels, scenes in which man and computer or robot carrying on
a conversation naturally are often depicted. The day when computers may break
the shell of being just a "computing machine" and truly become nan's associate
may not be too far off.

Computers are already so deeply involved in our daily lives today that it is
fair to say that we cannot do without then. Newspaper editing, telephone ex-
change, traffic signal control, seat reservations, and deposit and withdrawal
at the bank--computers are being utilized all around us today.

However. the history of the practical computer is surprisingly short: only about
35 years.

Indeed, we must not forget that before the practical computer was born, the head-
waters of technology which sprang up in ancient China were passed on by numerous
nathematicians and scientists over a long period of time.

There are three mainstreams leading to the establishment of the practical com-
puter we know today.

The first stream consists of a "computing machine" such as the abacus which was
the product of an attempt to mechanize the ability to count numbers. By the
19th century, a machine capable of computing square root and cube root to say
nothing of addition, subtraction. multiplication and division was perfected
through the use of a combination of intricate gear trains.

FORiOFFKJAl.U§l(NVLY
FOI.0FFIC1AI.US£|NVLY

The second stream has its origin in the pattern paper (punch cards) that was used
to control the threads of a weaving machine. A "statistical machine" which han-
dles and classifies large numbers belongs to this stream. This machine demon-
strated its power by processing the 1890 0.8. census data in 2 years (a popula-
tion of 62 million), which formerly took 8 years done manually.

The third stream consists of a "logic machine" which generalizes and mechanizes
the computing process by analyzing the human thought process employed in computa-
tion and patterning after it. It represents the most substantial way of thinking
related to mechanization of the algorithm. It has been judged the key which
opened the way to today's research into artificial intelligence. It is also

expected to play an important role in the development of the fifth generation
computer.

These three streams have been united through the introduction of electronic tech-

nology and adoption of the binary system, and significant progress has been made
since.

The practical digital computers of today include the MARK I (Harvard, 1944) using
electromagnetic relays, and the world's first genuine computer (electronic com-
puter) developed after electronic technology was introduced was ENIAC (Pennsyl-
vania University, 1946).

This computer consisted of 18,000 vacuum tubes, weighed 30 tons, consumed 150 kw
of electric power, and required a room big enough for 100 tatamimats to contain
it. Its performance characteristics, including 0.2 millisecond for addition and
subtraction and 3 milliseconds for multiplication. were considered marvelous

at the time (as a reference, the addition speed of the modern computer is of the
order of approximately one-millionth of a second).

However, ENIAC's electric circuit had to be reassembled for different jobs. The
lack of a large data memory capacity was one of its shortcomings.

The idea advanced by Von Neuman, a mathematical genius, to eliminate these short-
comings consisted of an internally contained program format (commands and data
are contained in the "memory unit" and retrieved from there for processing).

The prototype of the modern computer (Neuman-type computer) was completed when
EDSAC (Cambridge University) appeared in 1949, followed by EDVAC (Pennsylvania
University) in 1952. The history of the modern computer had just begun.

Since then, the performance characteristics of the computer have improved by leaps
and bounds, but no significant change in the essential principle has been made
up to today.

The computer MARK I contained
3.300 electromagnetic relays
(completed in 1946).

 

IIHRCHWWCIAI.USIZON1Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[10 Dec 81 p 3]
[Text] The Fourth Generation Cmuter Using Super 151 Makes Its Appearance
History of Computer Development (11)

Who could have guessed that the huge computer which occupied a room big enough
for 100 tatamis could be miniaturized to fit in the palm of one's hand after
only 35 years.

The development process of the practical computer from its inception to today
is often divided into "generations" based on the changes in technology. Today
is the dam of the fourth generation.

The first generation was the ”vacuum tube era" which began in 1946 with the com-
pletion of tune.

During that generation, the computer was utilized with programs written in
machine language consisting of a series of binary numbers or in assembly lan-
guage consisting of cal-and code symbols. Toward the end of the first genera-
tion, programing languages such as FORTRAN (scientific and technical computa-
tion language) and COBOL (business computation language) were developed. These
languages could be translated into aachine language automatically and are still
being used today. As a result, the number of users expanded significantly.

As the speed of computation and processing was upgraded, the operating sequence
was indicated to the computer through use of control cards. enabling the com-
puter to continuously carry out necessary operations such as assigning the input
unit and retrieving a program from the mmsory.

The second generation, the "transistor era," started in 1959 when the comercial
computer using transistors was introduced.

The first generation vacuum tube cosputer had problems because of the huge
space it occupied, the frequent failures, and the large quantity of heat
generated. These problens were solved through use of the transistor, which
possesses manyadvantages over the vacuum tube, including a requirmlent for
approximately one-thousandth the electric power consumption. small size, and
long useful life.

The transistor (for transfer resistor) was invented in 19107 by Dr Shockley et s1
of Bell Laboratories (the United States). It was found capable of functioning
like a vacmm tube through utilization of the property of certain substances
(known today as semiconductors) such as silicon and germanium: which become
conductive or nonconductive depending on the conditions.

The second generation may be termed the true counter utilisation period, and
the present-day operating systmn consisting of a software system was firmly
established. The remote batch fornat. in which a user at a remote location can
log-in and use an advanced large-scale computer at a central location via a
comaunications circuit, was also introduced during this period.

MWLWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The third generation, consisting of the "1c (integrated circuit) are," started
in 19610 with the appearance of the IBM 360 series. The E was successfully
developed in the early 1960's by integrating an entire circuit consisting of

various parts performing various functions, such as rectification, amplifica-
tion, and resistance, on a single chip.

In the early days of development, the work accuracy of the 1c was of the order
of 15 microns and it contained one-two gates of logic circuit per chip (1 gate

in general consists of one-four transistors. two-five resistors, and three-six
diodes).

Since then, high-density integration and miniaturization of IC has progressed
rapidly, and by the 1970's, LSI (large-scale integrated circuit), consisting of
more than 100 logic gates or 1,000 namory bits per chip, appeared. Then, the
3.5th generation computer, represented by the IBM 370 series using LSI'a,
appeared.

During this period, significmt advancement was also made in the utilization
format--for example. the time-sharing nethod of computer utilization in vhicb an
arbitrary number of users can access the computer from on-line terminals and
share the use of the computer on a divided-time basis, and transition from the
batch process to the on-line process and also from the concentrated processing
format to distributed processing.

And since the technology of drawing lines with an accuracy in excess of 1 micron
has been established, it is now possible to integrate more than 1,000 logic cir-
cuits or more than 100,000 memory bits on a single chip. This means the thresh-
old or‘ the era of super 1.81 and the fourth generation computer using it. The
quickening can be felt by the annotmcunent of the m 1! series nade in 1980.

"II“ I’OKIUO) 0'30 .

lllﬁva’amefoaeur)
(um)

SEA-.- " M.

. 919sma'p) 4.3: W

  

' . luv-sugsév-«(mfgi

lumen "usual
_ (mason

The volume (cubic feet) per 1 million characters of IBM mory.

Key: (1) 400 cubic feet
(2) The second generation IBM 1401 (1959) and the third generation 360
model 300 (core) (1971.)
(3) 100 cubic feet
(4) The first generation IBM 650
(5) 8 cubic feet, systan 370 model 135, model 165 (bipolar)
(6) 13!! system E series (4300)
(7) IBM system H series (3081)
(8) Reference: ACT Technical Analysis Group

9 .r.
MOWUSEONLY
FOR (WHOM. USE ONLY

 

The generation changes seen in m products

Key: (1) (Unit: 1,000) (6) Product cycle 6 years
(2) Number of systems (7) Product cycle 7 years
(3) 8/360 generation (third generation) (8) Product cycle 10 years(?)
(4) 5/370 generation (3.5th generation) (9) Total output
(5) Fourth generation (estimate) (10) Year end
(11) Source: ACT Technical Analysis

Group

[11 Dec 81 p 3]
[Text] "New Idea" Electronic Computer To Appear in next 10 Years
Necessity for Development of Fifth Generation Computer

The advancement of computer technology has been extremely rapid. In the rela-
tively short period of about 35 years, from the development of the first practi-
cal computer until today, significant achievements have been made in high speed
and miniaturization, and an advanced technical level represented by the fourth
generation computer using super 1.81 is about to be reached.

Under these circumstances, why is it necessary to develop the fifth generation
computer? Because the Herman-type computer has reached its limit. It is there-
fore imperative to develop a new type of computer, and this new computer tech-
nology is very important.

Demand for the Development of New Computer

The present-day computer technology is based on the theory advanced by Von
Neman in 1946. Its goals were set from its inception on high speed, large
capacity, and digital computation. and its development has been guided by these
principles throughout the period. .

The hardware cost was very high at the time the Riemann-type coaputer was devel-
oped, so the cowuter design was based on a concept of making the machine struc-
ture simple while achieving the necessary functions through accumulation of
programs.

As a result, the following problems cropped up as the utilization of the computer
became more advanced and sophisticated and the fields of application broadened.

10
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
I. As the fields of application were expanded from the scientific field to in-
clude the business processing field, the demand for a computer input-output for-
mat compatible with the format of cousunciations by which huan beings transfer
information, such as voice, letter, and diagram, became stronger and stronger.
However, conventional computers are designed to process only digital data, with
a consequent restriction on its input-output format. This placed strict restric-

tions on the areas of application and the method of utilization. The computer
utilization cannot be expanded freely.

2. Since the conventional computer is software-dependent, expansion of computer
functions and expansion of the utilization field are tied directly to the heavily
loaded operating system and the operating software. This has evolved into a situ-
ation known as a software crisis, in which the rise in personnel expenditure and
the low productivity of the software compound the problem.

In order to alleviate this difficulty, it is not enough to treat the problems
surrounding the software only. A reexamination of the basic concepts, including
computer structure, basic ideas, and the language theory, is called for.

3. The Neuman-type computer employs the sequential processing format, in which
the col-lands and data are first stored inside the main memory unit, and during
the processing the content of the main memory unit is transferred one word at a
time from it to the central processing unit through a narrow and straight route
(called Neuman's narrow path or bottleneck) connecting these two units.

In addition, the data traffic consists mainly of the data name and not useful
data. Therefore, a limit is imposed on the computational processing speed, and
this type of computer cannot cope with the tremendous expansion in functions
expected in the future.

lo. During the data processing period, the data to be processed can also be
transferred from the external memory unite (secondary units), such as magnetic
disks and magnetic tapes, to the main memory unit as they are needed. however.
as the volume of data handled became so big as to require the use of a gigantic
data base, the data transfer speed between the external memry uni ts and the
main memory unit became another bottleneck.

In order to solve this problem, development of a secondary memory unit, equipped
with some judgmental functions so it will be able to transfer only the necessary
data to the main memory, has become highly desirable.

At the same time, a new technical foundation is maturing, with which new archi-
tecture, improvement of computer intelligence, and new functions may be realized.
This new technological foundation contains the seeds for the development of the
new technologies conceived in the past several years-for example, super LSI
technology, large capacity memory unit, and the mass application technology for
super LSI'a, including research into a separated instruction [funkyo 0433 2403]
system and a parallel processing system, and development of the elemental tech-
nology for the realization of artificial intelligence and pattern recognition
technology.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INM!(NWHCJAI.USE(NVLY

Taking into consideration the correspondence between these needs and seeds, it
appears quite certain that new computers based on a brand new concept will

appear within the next 10 years and accomplish another big stride in the 30-year
history of computer technology.

-.

.'.
u
a
s
D
a
i

 

The problem points of the presenteday computer

Key:

(1) Man (4) CPU (central processing unit)
(2) Input/output unit (5) NEH (main memory unit)

(3) Programmer (6) External memory units

(15 Dec 81 p 3]

[Text] Ultra Modern Technology for Broad Foundation of Industry
Necessity for Development of Fifth Generation Computer

The Inportance of Computer Technology

There is no need to reiterate how much power can be developed from the utiliza-
tion of the computer. without the computer, one cannot imagine how that gigan-
tic space shuttle could be launched into space and then returned to earth to land
on a predetermined airfield (which is only a spot viewed from the global scale)
without the slightest error.

Computers have not only entered factories and offices, but they have also per-
meated deep into our daily lives and become the "central nerve of our economic
society," playing an increasingly important role in a society that is growing
more sophisticated and complex. The number of general purpose computers in Japan
has reached approximately 88,000 (and of March 1981), and Japan has become the
world's second most informationalizad nation, after the United States.

Such expansion in the field of computer utilisation and continued development of
the informationalized society are in large part due to the phenomenal progress
of semiconductor technology centered around the IC (integrated circuit). With
the appearance of super LSI today, we are entering a period in which the once

large-scale computer is making an appearance as an office computer or personal
computer.

12

lNll¢lﬂﬂC1Al.USB¢lVLY
Furthermore, the microcomputer, which was realized by integrating the computer
functions in a single chip, has been incorporated into numerous machines, includ-
ing machine tools, automobiles, robots, and household electric appliances. impart-
ing in each new functions, higher performance, and better quality. Some new com-
posite products have even been born.

Based on the viewpoint that computer-related technologies constitute the most
important technologies which are the sources of an international competitive
edge and thus may affect the nation' a future. every nation in the world is in-

vesting a large sum of public funds to assist in the technological development
and cultivate its computer industry.

In the United States, the computer enterprises are enjoying indirect assistance
through enormous military demand centered around the Department of Defense and
the tremendous technical development undertaken by NASA for the purpose of space
development as well as military applications.

IBM was able to grow into the "giant" it is today, holding approximately 60 per-
cent of the world' a share less than 30 years after world war II, because of this
enormous backup. The Department of Defense has recently launched a new 6-year
project on VHSIC (very high speed 10) research with an investment of $200 million.

In Great Britain, France, and West Germany, too, the development of technologies
related to the computer is said to receive huge public subsidies, estimated at
over 10 billion yen a year.

Although Japan's computer industry has grown smoothly so far, the total share of
all Japanese computer makers is no more than 7 percent, compared with the 80 per-
cent share held by the Alerican makers. The difference in the enterprise power
is plainly evident.

Up to now, the goal of Japanese makers has been to catch up with the advanced
technology of the Buroamerican nations, but Japanese nakers have become some-
what comparable with these advanced makers in a portion of the technical field,
such as super L81.

However. Japan's improved technological power has been greeted by the Euroameri-
can advanced nations' reluctance to supply the ultraqaodern technologies. This
trend will probably worsen in the future.

Computer technology is a field in which progress is very rapid. If a nation
fails to endeavor, it will soon be dethroned from the position of a technically
advanced nation.

Therefore, Japan must strive to improve its own unique technological development
potential, and it must keep on carrying out research and development with large
sums of financial assistance in order to insure the future development of its
computer industry, which constitutes the foundation of vast industries.

On this basis, it appears highly significant that RED of the fifth generation
computer, which involves ultra-modern and broad technical bases, should be under-
taken aggressively as a national project.

13
ltﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1A1.USE(NNLY
MWLUSEONLY

  
       
      

     
 

(2) Japan's A conpany
_ (1) I“ con-uter deartlent

$26.2 billion
Total sales (5.933 trillion yen) 581.7 billion yen
$5.9 billion '
Profit before tax (1.5658 trillion yen) 31.6 billion yen 108.9.

Profit to sales ratio 22.5 percent

$1.5 billion

Rab expenditure (339.7 billion yen) 53.8 billion yen
$10 billion

Capital (1.0“ trilll yen) 66.6 billion yen

Note: 1. IBM: 1980; Japanese naker: 1980
2. Dollar conversion rate: 226.45 yen (average value, 1980 calendar year)
(A large difference exists in the enterprise power of the 0.8. naker
and the Japanese naker.)

     
   

       

61 . 6 percent

[16 Dec 81 p 3]
[Text] Logic Type "Nuclear Language" Desirable
Theme and Prospects Related to m of Fifth Generation Conputer (I)

The fifth generation cowuter will be an intelligent, infatuation processing-
oriented conputer systen capable of neeting the needs of the highly advarced
and diversified society of the 1990's.

In utilize the coquter today, nan nuat prepare a program by carefully analyzing
the processing nethod and the operational sequence and then instruct the conputer.

however. if the conputer is to really becons nan'a companion. then the intelli-
gence level of the computer nuat be raised first of all. That is, the computer
nust acquire the function of automatically naking judgnents by using the data
accunulated in its own knowledge data base. '

Second, instead of nan working for the convenience of the conputer, the nachine,
the cosputer, nust acquire the necessary functions so that nan nay be able to
utilize it using the nost natural infornation transfer fornst he knows. including
daily conversation, writing, and diagrams (intelligent interface function and
autonstic program synthesis function). It is necessary to improve drastically
the nan-nachine co-Iunication capability.

Furthermore. these functions nust be capable of processing the problen at high
speed vithin a practical tine limit. using a for-at which can fully utilize the
potential of the super 1.81.

1h

MMIBIONLY
These functions must also be able to contribute positively to the realization of
such systems as s machine translation system and a consulta.ion system in vari-
ous specialized fields, which could not be realized easily by the conventional
computer technology.

To be able to realize the fifth generation computer, innovative technological
development must be carried out covering a large area, including hardware,
architecture technology (construction format) and software technology. The
themes for research and development are as follows.

1. Problem-Solving Reasoning System

This system constitutes the nucleus of the processing function of the fifth
generation computer. It determines the level of intelligence capacity and the
flexibility (adaptability) of the computer.

For a computer to be able to make up for incomplete instructions concerning a
problem and to form a complete model of the problem (computer understanding of
the problem), or to process the problem and find its solution (the goal) based
on various abstract facts including axioms and laws stored in the system as
knowledge (computer reasoning), research and development of the following items
must be carried out first: 1) a "nuclear language" suitable for the reasoning
process with which both the method of solution and the data can be described;
2) "basic software for problem-solving and reasoning" which carries out the
reasoning operation using the equivalency format (substituting something with
its equivalent); 3) "parallel processing type architecture using distributed
control format" with which to carry out parallel processing at high speed.

For example, in order to compute the "average age" of a group using the modern
computer, the areas in which to carry out various computations including the sum
of ages and the number of persons must be defined and the method of computation
indicated to the computer by a program.

However, as far as we are concerned, we do not care about the convenience of the
computer as long as we get the average age. Therefore, the computer should be
taught the general concepts such as "average" and "age" (including the method
of computing and information concerning the sequence of operation). To be able
to do this, a "nuclear language" of the logic type which facilitates logic
description is considered most desirable.

To utilize these concepts, the computer must be in possession of a mechanism by
which the computational method, consisting of dividing the "sum of ages" by the
"number of persons," can be found automatically (the reasoning mechanism)--the
mechanism being provided by software. A reasoning format using syllogism (e.g.,
if A - B and B - C, then A I c) comes to mind as a possible solution to this
problem.

Furthermore, until the necessary solution can be obtained, the reasoning process
must carry out a number of operations by the trial and error method. Therefore,
in order to be able to obtain the solution within a reasonable practical time limit.
a reasoning structure which is based on the parallel processing architecture of
the distributed control type, capable of carrying out parallel processing simul-
taneously. is considered necessary, and the data flow format is considered the
nest powerful.

15
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
The fifth generation conputer

Key:

(1) Voice (8) Conventionel digital data

(2) Daily conversation (9) Conversation fonst
. (3) writings (10) Renewing-learning function

(6) Drawings (blueprint. etc) (11) Knowledge deta base

-(5) Charts (12) Special function

.(6) Photographs . . (13) Knowledge-information processing systes
(7) Picture images (14) Optisun function distribution syste-

[17 Dec 81 p 3']

"Resource Bag” as Nucleus of Processing Function

Thene end .Prospect Related to m of l'ifth Generation Coquter (II)
2. Knowledge Base (Knowledge Data Base) Syste-

‘rhis systen, together with the probl-s-solving reasoning systu. constitutes

the nucleus of the processing function of the fifth generation co-puter. The
knowledge base-in other words, resource bag—is a collective body consisting
of organized intonation corresponding to the knowledge of a hunsn being.

Up to now, the computer is progrsned separately for each problem it is to
solve, so the infornstion used by the conputer is confined to that which per-
tsins to s specific problem.

However, if a cosputer is expected to find out the related data, to understand
the problem to be solved. and to find out the method for solving the problem.

its dsta base nust store the infornstion in such a way that it csn be utilised

as "knowledge" rather than as a nere collection of individual data. To be able
to reelize such a knowledge base systus, it is first necessary to carry out up
of the following itals: 1) "knowledge expression language" suitable for express-
ing and acquiring new nultidinensionel knowledge; 2) "basic software for the
nsnagenent of knowledge base" capable of accunulsting and searching for knowledge;
3) "knowledge base structure" based on s nultidinensional senory'(structurel
nsnory) instead of a one-dinensional nesory.

16
”WISCONIX
The content of the knowledge base may vary according to the field of application.
For example, in a machine translation system, the knowledge base may contain data
concerning vocabulary and granular. The knowledge base used in a special field
such as medicine may be said to contain a specialist of the field in it.

The "knowledge base structure" must be such as to facilitate execution of collec-
tive cosputation based on the relative logic with high speed and high efficiency.

A relative algebraic machine with parallel architecture is considered highly
desirable.

3. Intelligent Interface System

This system is to give a flexible conversational function to the fifth generation

computer so as to eliminate the gap between the language used by man-and the
language used by the machine.

To be able to realise such a function, it is first necessary to carry out MD of
the following items: 1) "basic software for the management of intelligent inter—
face" capable of natural language processing and voice processing by means of
phoneme recognition and diagram and picture image processing; 2) "intelligent
interface structure" consisting of a special elemental processor capable of pro-
cessing voices and signals; 3) "high performance man-machine interface unit"
capable of advanced processing of voice, diagram, and picture image, as the
machine becomes more advanced.

4. Intelligent Programing System

It is necessary to carry out RED of an intelligent prograllling systen which will
be capable of synthesizing a program which meets the needs of the user by with-

drawing those programs having the necessary functions from the algoritln bank
(knowledge base) using its own reasoning power and assembling them, and then
verifying that the optimized program thus synthesised satisfies the needs.

5. Basic Application System

It is also necessary to carry out MD of the basic application systmns repre-
senting human functions, including listening, speaking, looking, drawing, think-

ing, and solving, which constitute the foundation for various other types of
application systems.

The secondary themes may include a multilingual "machine translation system"

which is also capable of significant information processing and a "consulta-
tion system" which is' capable of giving appropriate instructions in response
to various requests made by the user by utilizing its vast knowledge base sys-
tem containing special knowledge of a particular field.

17
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ja) _ ' M‘gss‘fpmuvn .saoag'ia...;p.n".u,n

U

    

A

Conceptual diagram of the fifth generation computer from the viewpoint of program-
ning

Key:

(1) Human system (application system). model system (software system)
(2) lit-nan system (hardware system)

(3) Intelligent programing system

(10) User language using voice. natural language, diagram, and picture image
(5) Analysis, understanding, and synthesis of voice, diagram etc
(6) Intermediate specifications and responses

(7) Problem solving and response synthesis

(8) Processing specifications and results

(9) Optimizing program synthesis

(10) Logic language, knowledge expression language

(11) Problem-solving reasoning machine

(12) Symbol-processing machine '

(13) Knowledge related to language and image

(14) Knowledge related to the problem

(15) Knowledge related to machine system and knowledge expression
(16) Knowledge base machine

(17) Data base machine

(18) Scientific computation machine

(19) Knowledge base system

(20) Interface with the fourth generation machine

[18 Dec 81 p 3)

[Text] Flexible Ran System Necessary; International Cooperation Too
Development Plan for the Fifth Generation Computer

According to the past history of computer development, by the time a new
generation of machine is made public, the 3&0 of technologies which will become
the basis of the next-generation machine have already begun. nan of the fifth
generation computer based on innovative theory and tectmology is expected to

require about a period of 10 years, and the sen activities may be roughly divided
into three phases. ,

18
mammal“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first phase consists of the first 3 years (1982-86). This is the period
in which "development of basic technologies" including the hardware, architec-
ture, and the software of the fifth generation computer will be carried out.
The major projects for this phase are as follows.

1. Design and trial manufacture of the cowonent elements of the reasoning
mechanisn and the knowledge base mechanism. which constitute the nucleus of
the fifth generation computer. The component elasnts include various nodules

according to various functional nechanisms, including a basic mechanism nodule
and a data flow mechanism nodule for reasoning and knowledge base.

2. Design and nanufacture of an experinental action simlator to be used 'for
the purpose of evaluating the construction and combination format of various

cosponent elements of the module, systen used for simulating various nodules
according to various functional nachsnisms.

3. Design and trial manufacture ofbasic software systen coqrising the nucleus
of the knowledge information processing system. This systen may be called the
operating system of the fifth generation computer. 'It contains software nodules
for various functions. including problen solving, reasoning. knowledge base
management. intelligent interface, and intelligent programing.

4. Design and trial manufacture of a software development pilot model (anall-
scale pilot nodal of serial control reasoning computer) which is to be used to
carry out development of software for the fifth generation coquter efficiently.
This pilot model is to be derived from existing Neuman-type architecture by
remodeling and inproving a portion of it, and a language suitable for reasoning
processing will be selected and improved.

5. One of the goals of developing the fifth generation computer is to design

its structure in such a way that the potential of super 1.81 can be fully utilized.
Therefore, a technology with which super 1.8! design any be carried out effi-
ciently must be developed first. In addition, a complete set of tools used in

support of the MD activities, including machines and the networks interconnect-
ing then, must also‘ be provided. -

The second phase consists of the next 6 years (1985-1988). This is the period
in which. based on the results obtained during the first phase, development of
a "small-scale subsystem" is to be carried out. The two mechanisms conprising

the nucleus of the fifth generation computer will have been finished by this
stage.

The third phase consists of the last 3 years (1989-1991). This is the period
in which development of a "total system" is to be carried out by combining all
RED results obtained thus far, including the reasoning nechanism, the knowledge
base mechanism, and the software. By this stage, a basic application system
will have been trial nanufactured based on the prototype of the fifth generation
computer and its performance and functions will have been explored and proved.

For this nan project, a budget of approximately 509 million yen was requested
for the development of basic technologies to be carried out in 1982.

19
mommiussomv
I-‘OII OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

The Drive System for Developnent of the Fifth Generation Computer

To carry out Rel) of the fifth generation cowuter successfully, the most advanced
technologies which are to become the nucleus of the future infomtion-related
technologies will 'be required, and at each phase of the development, the results
must be evaluated thoroughly and carefully. Therefore, a flexible up systen
suitable for a new generation, in which all concerned, including universities.
governmental research institutes, makers and users. nay participate positively

in the area of the specialty of each. is highly desirable.

Moreover, the international synposiun on the fifth generation colputer held in
October this year was attended by approximately 100 specialists representing 14
countries, including the United States, Great Britain, France, and West Germany.
Although this project did catch sufficient world attention, some form of inter-
national cooperation seems desirable in view of the fact that the nsgnitude of

this project is so enormous, the technologies involved so basic in nature. and
the extent of the contribution that Japan nay nake.

     
  

,- '- erg-$32 ‘
[11511113.] (6)
I 13.73237”;-

    

 
 

’|" K?" IKVI‘
In? 36:42:14“
”AM

"all i

I. 7.." .. 'VZWJB) .1

  
 

23?;

II

     

g¥

MD activities for the fifth generation computer

Key:

(1) Development of basic teclmologies (approximately 3 years)

(2) nodules according to functional nechanisas used in reasoning subsystem:
sinulator to be used for action experiment; technologies to realize V1.81

(3) Modules according to functional lechanisas used in knowledge base subsystem:
simulator to be used for action experiment; technologies to realize VLSI

(5) Basic software systen (OS-type); pilot nodal for software development

(5) Subsysten developnent (small-scale experimental subsystem) (reasoning
subsystem)

(6) Intelligent interface software; problem-solving reasoning software. reason-
ing nechanisa; intelligent programing software

(7) Intelligent interface software; knowledge base magaent software; knowledge
base mechanisa; intelligent programing software; (knowledge base subsysten)

(8) Total systen development

(9) Reasoning knowledge base mechanism (realised by V1.81); basic software; basic
application system software

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1982

9113
(280: 8329/0766

POI OFFICIAL ISE ONLY
comma roves man NUCLEAR m WON
‘l'okyo BUSINESS JAPAll in English Feb 82 pp 33-35

[Article by Shigaru Hazards

"Japan Moving Rapid]. toward Expanded Nuclear liter
Generation") y 8!

[Text] JAPAN‘s power consumption in.

creased at an aver annual in-

crease of 8.9% from tscal l97l to
I973. At the end 0! I973. the ﬁrst oil
crisis took place as the Arab oil pro-
ducing countries resorted to a stratey
of suddenly increasing oil prices by
several times as a result of the fourth
Middle East war. Consequently.
Japan's power consumption de-
creased by 8.6% from the previous
year in fiscal 1924. From fiscal I976
to fiscal 1979. the nation's power
consumption grew at an average annu-
al rate of 5.8%. Due to cool weather
during summer months. power con-
sumption declined to 98.9% of the
previous year‘s level in fiscal I980.
Accordin to a forecast by the Japan
Electric ower Research Committee.
however. the nation's power con.
sumptlon from now to ﬁscal l990 is
expected to grow by 6.3% on an
annual average.

Of the nation‘s total power output
in ﬁscal 1978. oil thermal power gen.
ention assumed $l.7%. hydraulic
pneration 22.3%. LNG thermal gen-
eration l0.9%. LPG thermal genera.
tion 0.5%. coal thermal generation
3.7% and geothermal generation 0.l%.
Though the rate of oil thermal genera-
tion assumes a high position. the price
of oil has e up sharply. The price
of crude 0' was only SIJ per barrel at
the end of I978. but it grew to nearly
$40. about three times. in only two
and but years. it has now siidrtly
declined and the extraordinary general

assembl of the Organization of Petro-
leum 83“". Countries (OPEC) \
held in ober i98l adopted the
unified price of $34 per barrel Of the
total cost of oil thermal generation.
fuel costs assume 75.6}, an extremely
high rate as compared with 34.1% for
cod thermal generation and 26.2% for
nuclear power tion. This has
been markedly a ecting power genera-

"eostsin neral.
MM far as pﬁwer poeration costs are
concerned. 08 powerwﬁaeration costs
¥l8.8 pet kit/horn. ml WW
tion costs “2.3. nuclear WNW
only no.3 and LNG rev-9mm

“6'1' the initial 00“ meaning
i’ h draulie general . cos

'3' {gm ya long-term standpoint as

there is no {worm generation

'0 W W

$1.93 which on foreign

countries for lbel sources. but llydm

iic resources in lap-t have

been almost fully exploited. in this

sense. emphasis is being placed on

pumping-up power pncration that

' recycles used water. It is planned that

PW“ hdust ‘s output "mush
u” method int amounted to

this

.I MO “I in fiscal l978 — will be
l9ncr20'ased to 27 million kW in fiscal
i990. Along with this. there are plans
to increase the industrys hydnailic
power output. which touted
l7.i$0.000 it“! in fiscal 1978, to a
level of 23 million to 24.5 million it“!
h ﬁscal I990. some L34 to L43

times

FORWUSEONLY
Main emphasis will thus be placed
on nuclear, coal and LNG thermal
pneration. The largest emphasis wil
be placed on the most Inex nsive
httclear power generation. wh costs
only 54.8% o the amount {or on
thennai generation for basic fuels? The
power industry's targets for power
generation according to the of

sources is shown in ie 1.

on a report by the Demand-
Supply Committee of the Power
Industry Deliberation Council.

The table htdlcat‘e's‘kgtat nuclea‘;
power ration, generate
12.7 m lion kW in Ilscal I978 or

tus’bol' the industry‘s total output. is
expected to produce some 28 million
to 30 miltiurr kill in fiscal IVES, 6.6%

to l6.8%. and some 5i million to 53
million W! or 22.l to 22.9% in fiscal
I990. In fact. however. the ratio is

expected to be somewhat less than
these estimates.

There are 22 nuclear plants in
o ration with a total output capacit
o lS.SI0.000 kW and i0 plantswit
a total capacity of 9.220.000 kW
under construction scheduled to be
completed for operation by the end of.
fiscal I985. And even if another one.
approved by the Deliberation Council
for the Development and Adjustment
of Electric Power Sources and to be
put into operation with a total output
apacity or t.loo.000 kit! by the end
of fiscal I985 is included. the total
output capacity will reach only
25.830.000 kW. 92.3% of the target
ca aclty. in addition. it is hardly
be ievable that the nation will corn-
plete another 20 or so plants with a
combined output capacity of some 28
million kw within live years after
fiscal i985. Nevertheless. the above
council intends to give approval to the
power companies for new locations for
nuclear plants at the earliest possible
opportunities. In this sense. it is al-
most certain that the number of
nuclear plants will increase from now
on and it will be in the not too distant
future that their scale will expand
from the current scale of ”00.000
kill! each to l.300.000 kW.

As far as commercial power gener-
atiia reactors currently in operation
are concerned. all. except for one in
operation at Tokaimura. lbaraki Pre-
fecture. by Japan Nuclear Generation

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040029-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Co.. are liaht~water type reactors. The
one at Tokaimura i: of cooled gas
ape. While Tokyo Electric Power.

ubu Electric Power. Ch ltu Elec-
tric Power. Tohoku Electric ower and
Japan Nuclear Generation Co. have
utilized. through Toshiba and Hitachi.
Japan's representative Electric Wis--
chinery companies. boiled water re-
actors made by General Electric Co..
Kansai Electric Power Co., Kyushu
Electric Power Co. ltd Shikoku Elec-
tric Power Co. have bought through
Mitsubishi Heavy industries Co.
rcssed water reactors from Westing-

ouse C . Plants currently in
operation include it boiled water re-
actors with a combined capacity of
7,993.0“) kW and nine pressed water
reactors with a total capacity of
6.793.000 kw.

Throughout the world. however,
there are about twice as many pressed
water reactors in operation as boiled
water ones. and their number is ex-
pected to further increase.

To brieﬂy explain about these
reactors. while in a boiled water re-
actor (BWR), steam. that rotates the
turbine. is directly heated in the pres-
sure vessel of the reactor. in a ressed
water reactor (Nit). water at has
been heated in the ressure vessel of
the reactor is tran ered to different
water. Steam that has thus been
granted rotates the turbine. The
structure of a PWR. therefore. is more
complicated than that of a 091R. but
the steam that rotates the turbine is
less polluted than in the BWR.

Tokyo Electric Power Co., the
nation's largest power company. was
using solely Wits. Now it has started
preparations for incorporatin PWRs.
At present. Tokyo Electric er is
the world's largest user of BWRs. The
company has requested Toshira and
Hitachi. which have provided the for-
mer with Bil/Rs. as well as Fuji Elec-
tric to study technology concentin;
PWRs roduced by West Germany's
Kraft erke Union (KY/U) which it is
planning to Induce. This technical
tieup with KW has been concluded

with the oval of General Electric
Co. with ' Tokyo Electric has
been long enjoyht; cooperation in
techn concerning BWRs.

The produced by KWU has
been cotnpleted with KWs tech-

noiogywhichwasdevelopedonthe

22

MOMLUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600040029-1

regucsted that Siemens and two other
companies study such technologies.
Total costs for research a‘nd personnel
for this purpose were extended by the
government and a huge amount
equivalent to some ¥$00 billion was
spent in the ﬁve years between I964
and I968. As a result. West Germany
succeeded in the development of its
own system of nuclear power genera-
tion. It became possible for West
Germany to cancel its contracts for
technology induction from the US.
The nuclear generation departments of
both Siemens and AEG Telefunlsen
were thus amalgamated and KWU was
established in l973. _

While West Germany was con-
centrating its efforts on developing
technology concemlng LWRs. the
Japanese government spent only #6
billion for technology concerning
LWRs out or its aggregated budget of
#360 billion for nuclear neration
front I954 to I973. From tscal I974
on. the government started to spend
more for LWRs. ¥I2 billion for the
ﬁrst ﬁscal year. This difference in
expenditure has failed to make Japan
reach the level where it can design its
own systems as West Ger-muty has
done. Japan still needs to study some
West German technologies

In I975. the Ministry of Inter-
national Trade and Industry ITI)
established a study committee or im-

oving and standardizing equipment
tor nuclear power generation as well as
a cornmlttee for improving and stand-
ardizing nuclear generating facilities.
Projects to improve and standardize
LWRs were thus initiated. The projects
are. in fact. following the pattern of
similar projects in West Germany.1'he
Japanese projects are divided into
three stages of development. 0n the
basis of both the ﬁrst stage study from
I975 to I977 and the second stage
study from I978 to I980, model
plants are expected to be completed in
the third stage study from I98I to
I985. By means of the model plants.
improvement in capability for systems
designing and in operational reliability
will be attempted. Four model plants
will be built including it BWR and a
Will with an output capacity oi“
800.0“) kW each and a M and a
PWR with an output capacity of I
million kill each. -

It was with the intention to learn
from West Germany in ntlnd that the

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040029-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁrst joint conference of specialists on
nuclear .vneration .10 energy was
held in West Germany in February
l980 with some 20 nuclear generation
specialists from Japlt attending.

Japan is thus intending to complete
its own technologies concerning LWRs
by inducing technologies from West
Germany.

In addition to its intention to in-
duce technologies for KWU-type PWRs
from West Germany. Tokyo Electric
Power Co. Is also promoting improve
ments for conventional BWRs. It has
exchanged a memorandum with GE,
Toshba arid Hitachi concerning a pro.
ject to develop new' BWRs over the
next ﬁvevyears. Sudt power companies
as Chubu. Toholsu and Japan Nuclear
Power Generation are participating in
this project. which is promoting devel
WM of en improveddype A Model
3 Results are expected to be
utilized in future nuclear generation
for plants with an output capacity of
L3 million ltW.

The monopoly held b Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries in the market is
thus expected to be broken down by
the new entries. Toshiba and Hitachi.
Meanwhile. Mitsubishi Heavy In-
dustries is promoting the development
cl‘anewPWRinc ation with
Westinghouse Electric Corp. Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries has recently decided
to extend cooperation in both tech-
nical arid business aspects to Korea
Heavy Industries Co.. South Korea's
only nuclear plartt mutufaeturer.

The aforementionedJroject to in-
duce technoloy from ear Germany
for improving aid standardizing Hills
is intended not only to fulﬁll require-
ments for the resent LWRs bttt also
to soliditz'the oundation for inducing
in the ture technologies for fast
breeding reactors (FBRs). Therefore. it
is necessary to train engineers. who
have ex rience in handling various
techni oblems eoncernbtg nuclear
reactors. or these future projects. it is
with this intention that ToItyo Electric
Power has requested both Toshiba and
Hitachi not only to improve the con-
ventional BWRs but also to undertake
the study ot‘KWU—Model PWRssoas
to raise the technical level of their
engineers

When Japan completes its
acauisition of technologies concerning
l. Rs. its nuclear power generation

2h

FOROFFICIALISEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500040029-1
industry is expected to either take a
route toward directly inducing FBRs
or inducing FBRs only after having
attempted power generation with ad-
vanced thermal converter reactors

(ATRs) deve by the Power Re-
actor and Nuc at Fuel Development
Corporation.

As far as A‘l‘Rs are concerned.
experimental reactors have already
been in operation in the past two lid
a half years. Construction of corn-
mercial plants has been considered.
but as construction and power er-
ating costs are so high. power i ustry
circles are not very enthusiastic about
the construction of such pints. Nevet~
tireless. as an ATR can use reprocessed
fuel that have been used once by
LWRs. some peo e insist that ATRs
be induced until BRs cart be realized.

As for Fails. the Power Reactor
and Nuclear Fuel Development Corp.
started p aratory designing in I968.
The cost or constructing a PM! is
about #400 bilion. with the budget
being allocated from fiscal l98l. 0f
the total construction cost. 20} or
#80 billion wll be borne by the
related private enterprises. includ
¥60 billion for power companies
#20 billion for machinery manufac-
tutors.

The power industry decided to ex-
tend cooperation for the construction
project with the lap-t Nuclear Gen-
eration Co. as the project represen~
tative. A section to be engaged in the
devel tol' the FDR was setup at
the company in ‘ebruary l98l lid
with the concerted eﬂ‘orls of engineers
specialized in Hits from every corn-
pany concerned. technical cooperation
is being extended for the com letion
of the reactor. The target is to elop
a proving reactor with a capacity of l
million ltW once the experimental re-
actor has been proven successful in the
expenme‘ 31nd currently 'un’deer way. Coo-
ception esigning o t proving te-
actor was started in March 1981. The
Meat program is being under taken
by a section set up to develop Falls in
the Electric Enterprise Federation.

comment:

080: 6120/ 160

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040029-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the side 0? machinery matters.
the Fast Breeder Engineering Co. was
established in Aptll l98l through the
joint efforts of the four nuclear plant
miters - Toshiba. Hitachi. Mitsubishi
Heavy industries and Fuji Electric Co.
The oompmy will design FBRs.

Nuclear generation authorities in
both the us. and Britaht have recent-
ly inquired of their counterparts in
Japan on m informal basisconcernln;
the feasibili of conducting joint de-
velopment o FBRs. It will beinletest.
in; to see how these moves progress

1982 The Nihon Kogyo Slat-bun

25
FOR omcutt. use onu'r

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-R0982-00850R000500040029-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECWLOGY

COUNTRY REPORTED 'A STEP CLOSER' T0 NUCLEAR FUSION
OWISIIoOS Tokyo THE DAILY YMIURI in English 17 Feb 82 p 2

[Text] Japanese scientists have cone s step closer to nuclear fusion power
stations with the recent coupletion of a new plasna heating system which they
claim to be 10 times lore powerful than any other. [passage published in boldface]

Researchers at the Japan Atonic Energy Research Institute said that new device
- would help then heat plasma, the ionized gas that fuels the fusion reactor. to a
level high enough for a self-sustaining fusion reaction within fiscal 1985.

With the device just conpleted last year-end, they have successfully sent powerful
heating beans for a record 10 seconds as against 0.3 second in the US.

The feat cane while scientists are still racing for the developuent of a system
capeble of bonbarding' planes with neutral heating particles for one second or so.

"Ten seconds are required for the next-generation test nuclear fusion reactor‘
rather than for the research reactor we are developing at present,” said one in-
stitute researcher.

The plasna is required to [be] heated to 100 sillion degress c to harness surplus
energy, and many scientists are trying to attain the critical heat through par-
ticle bombard-eat.

One col-on trouble was in the short-lived beating beans as the result of the over-
heating of the aittsr, neatly in a fraction of a second.

The Japanese scientists have succeeded in keeping the high-mergy beans for'lo
seconds primarily through developing a unique cooling syste- for the nitter.

They plan to use the new heater for their experi-ents on the ram (Troidal
Calera Magnet) fusion simulator, hoping to attain the critical fusion level within
fiscal 1985.

In the TOW test device, plasna is heated to nearly 20 million degrees with
electricity while the beans of neutralized hydrogen nuclei, traveling at a speed
of 3.800 kiloneters per second. provide heating energy the rest of the way toward
100 million degrees.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0510“. USE ONLY

According to the institute. however, the lstest break-through would not spell
the imminent arrival of the nuclear fusion age. "He are still at a halfway
hark." said one of the institute's researchers.

lie said the practical use of fusion energy would be preceded by developing high-
power superconductive magnets to contain the critical plasna and new Interials to
shield the strong neutrons generated during fusion reaction.

mPYRICBT: Daily Yoniuri 1982

080: ){120/162

27
FOR OFFICIAL 15E ONLY
l-‘Oll OMCIAI. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND W

mmmnmmm, SPACBWRATIOI

Tokyo ausnms JAPMI in English Feb 82 pp 91-92

(Article: "New Per-pa to Open llay to Nuclear berg and Space Exploration“

[Text]

HIGH level technology is required
in the manufacture of pumps for
feeding water to the boiler in thermal
electric plants. Technical know-
how of rgeelze pumps was induch
from abroad repeatedly after the con-
struction of the Chikujo Thermal
Power Plant by Kyushu Electric Power
Co. in l952.

The d capacity oi' feed
pumps has In edly increased along
with the increasing output ty of
ma station. The latest m elhasas

a presatre as 300 leg 5 cm’.
Previously the driving forcepcwas elec-

tric motors but now turbines of rapid
revolution are used. Domestic tech.
nology has now reached an inter-
national level and many large capacity

mps are used for pumping water
or power plants. Their relia ty has
phenomena iy improved. Japanese-
made pumps have been installed in
both waterworks and for sewerage in
hufe cities. and in long undersea tun-
ne s.

The typeset pumps can be divided
basically into centrifugal mps. axial
ﬂow pumps. diagode "appalling;
will! ml” 8‘
pumps. 1% can also be classiﬁed into
corrosion-resisting pumps, submarine
pumps. etc.

Centrifupai pumps are used to feed ~

Squid with centrifugal force by rota-
ting the impeller within the casting
Such pumps assume more than 1/3 of
the total output of pumps and are
extensively used [or water supply lid

drains, at stations and facto-
ries, lid for ltural irription.
Growth rates 0 sin tage models
and multle lnlhe ﬁve

years‘ i were i 2.4%and 139.1 respec-
tvey. '

Axial (low pumps are used to feed
liquidirthedirectionoitheaxislikea
motor fan and are suitablelor large-
capacity. lowhead water feeding. Die

gonal ﬂow ptrmps
the thrust of the rotating
centrifugal force and have the charac-
teristic of both centrifugal pumps lid

now mps. Such pumps have
characierlstlcr and are

#3 .300miiiion.‘l‘he owthratecor-

W to 260.” compared with
I9 4.

Rotary pumps are subdivided into
Lutz pumps and screw pumps. They
are resistant to high prams aid are
usedinileidswheredurablltyisre-
quired as compared with reciprocating
Pum-

Corrosion-reslstant pumps are made
by lining the interior of the above-
mentioned ptunps with tantalum.
titanium. ﬂuoride resin or polyvinyl
chloride. Their production is stagna-
thg after attainhtg a pealt in l974.
dileﬂy owing to the slowdown of
eouiomrnt investrmnts in the chemical

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jr

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00860R000500040029-1

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

mendint . hose amount of time and develophcoouutrlu and palate works

mmwhplnlultooomoudatmiu mWhhpm.

much etuptnordotto outcome mmmmmgm

duhckmvdmoflumumindus- world I: new likely to decrease.

try. Japan's pump Mostly is urged to
Production of pump: has made Winfoothotdnduublhha

"condom m m the w symtodonlopltsmndmolou:

tluwulthotnductionot‘fo tech- acidic-1W": Intonation.

nolouu and the Industry’s on to .oanpctitivc pom. a

mob“: domestic ptoducdon. up-

poned by tho Didi-paced growth of

the muon's economy. Doom“! for

I: still makedly vowing to:
gxmtmctton of industrinl plants in

cannon: 1982 The Hilton logo Mun
cso: 4120/2160

30
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0ﬂ09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040029-1
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TWENOLOGY

WSU WINS $81?le PIPBIAYERS'TO USSR
0W50207 Tokyo FINN KBIZAI Slim in Japanese 2 Feb 82 Morning Edition p 7

[Text] In defiance of the 0.3. Goverment's request for a halt to its export of
pipelayers to the Soviet Union as part of anti-Soviet econonic sanctions, Konatsu
Ltd has begun shipping pipelayers under an order received last autun in connection
with a Rest Siberian project. This was nade known on 1 February.

Since the Export and Inpori. Bank of. Japan endorsed the deal with loans and since
the Japanese Government takes the position that "it is difficult to have companies
stop exporting goods under a contract which has already been concluded," the deal
is likely to be blessed with a "tacit approval."

The deal calls for the export of approxinately 36 billion yen (about $160 sillion)
worth of pipelayers, bulldozers, etc, for use in a natural gas pipeline project
eyed by the Soviet Goveruaent for West Siberia. '

Last smer, when talks on the deal started, the project fell victin to the U.s.
Governent's opposition for its linkage to the Yanburg project. However, since
the Soviet Union later changed the Yanburg project, Konateu for-ally concluded
the contract with the Soviet Machinery Import Corporation (msnmomorr) last
October.

\

Subsequently, Reagan's U.S. Administration announced eocnonic sanctions against
the Soviet Union in connection with the Polish situation, resulting in the sus-
pension by caterpillar tractor and General Electric Conpaniea of the United States
of their export deals related to the ﬂeet Siberian natural gas pipeline project.

Washington called on Konstau to stop exporting pipelayers to the Soviet Union in
line with these neasures, and Konsteu for its part has been watching the develop-
nent of talks between the Japanese and U.S. Goveruents. However, the Japanese
Covert-eat takes the position that "the export deal has already been contracted
for and the contract, endorsed by the Export-Import Bank's loans, has been already
formally approved by the goverment." Minister of International Trade and Industry
Abe has conveyed this position to the 0.8. Govermente- It is believed that
Kmatsu cane to the conclusion that, in viev of the goverment's position, it say
start shipping those which have already been contracted for. It started shipping
since late last year and is scheduled to carry out-the shipeents in several in-
stallaents oVer a period of several nonths.

COPYRIGHT: Ilihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1982

080: h120/ 162
31

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIMADDWY

OPTICAL um ”040131“?st m (N rm:

Myo tom's mm in ”nth W1 12, lb 2. Ida 82 pp 8. 10-16

[Text 1

Active in World Nbrltets

in October, l98l, it was reported that Fujitsu Ltd., a lead-
ing lapanese communications equipment and.computer
producer, had made the lowest bid at an innrnationd bid-
ding for the construCtion of the New York~Boston lid
Washington~Moseley corridors of an optical fibercommuni-
cations networlt, Mtich is being built by American Tele-
- phone & Telegraph 00. (AT&T). So far, Western Electric
00., ATatT’s subsidiary, has supplied almost all the maior
equipment and systems AT&T boudtt. if a Japanese maker
had ioined the huge ATJT pnoiect. it would have been
exnemely significant for the future business of the Japa-
nese communications equipment industry. However,
Futitsu was, in fact, ruled out for security reasons on the
part of the us.
in making the bid, Fuiitsu devdoped a new system to
keep die cost of the project to a minimum. For optical
fiber corrtrnunicatiorts, mainly laser beams of the 0.85%
(micron) range has been used. However, those of the 1.31m
range are considered more suitable for lonpdistance. large.
capacity communications. Fierce competition has been
going on in the world to develop systems employing that
rang of laser beam, 'and Fujitsu is in the forefront in the
development. In the AT&T proiect. Fujitsu proposed the
use of a wide-band communications system of 135 Mbls
(mega bits per secoi-id) that would employ the 1.31m ram.
Because of the specific system, Fujitsu's system can drasr
tically decrease the number of optical fibers and relay
facilities compared with the system proposed by Western
Electric.
' It seems that Fuiitsu had an apparent aim to avoid possi-
ble trade friction by buying American-made optical fiber
cables which would account for about half the tool costof

32

the proiect. Fujitsu planned to buy more American prod-
ucts, such as an electric pnerator to operate the system.
However, Fuiitsu could not join the project.

Fuiitsu's tender for the AT&T proiect provided a chance
for the iapmese industry to demonstrate to the world that
its technology in optical fiber communications was above
the international standard and that it had strong inter-
national competitiveness. The failure to win the bid dew
the worldwide attention as lapanese and American govern-
ment sources commented many times on the delicate
nutter.

Only afewyearshavepassedsince opticalflbercom-
munications technology was put to practical use. During
the short period both government institutions and private
firmsinjapahaveproducednonbleresultsinthedeveiop-
ment of optical ﬁber conununications, while raisin their
technological smdards in the field.

In February, 1977, Fuiitsu and Furultawa Electric, 1
leading cable manufacturer, exported a 4.2-kiiorneter optical
ﬁber communications system to the Telecommunication
Authority of Singapore. That was the first such system to
be put to practical use for public telecommunication in-
the world. In 1973, Nippon Electric Co. (NEC),_]apa'n’s
larcst maker of communications equipment, delivered an
optical fiber communications system to linlt two telephone
exchange stations 9 km apart to Vista Florida Telephone ‘in
the resort area of the Walt Disney World, Florida. This was
followed by the conclusion ofcontracts for the export of
similar systems to the U.S., Canada. Mexico, Argentina.
8m", Hong Kong and Singapore.

Among big export contracts was a ¥2$.000 million
order for a tandem telephone exchana system using optical
fiber cables that Nippon Electric Co. (NBC) and Sumitomo
Electric industries, another leading cable maker. lointly

toe omcm. use 0me
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

received from ENTEL, the Amntine public communica-
tions corporation. NEC was also desiotated as a long-term
vendor that would supply telephone exchancrs to ENTEL
over the next IS years.

In addition to those mentioned above, a number of
optical ﬁber communications systems were exported in
l98|. In Jaiuary, Fuiitsu and Furulrawa Electric jointly
received at order for a new optical ﬁber communications
trunk line network from the Hong Kong Telephone Co.
An order for the railway system modemltation project
received by Mitsui at C0. in August included a i50itm
optical ﬁber communications system. In October, NEC and
Sumitomo Electric Industries received an order for a
250km communications system employing the coaxial
and optical ﬁber combined cables from the Mexican Trans
portation Ministry. Sumitomo Electric Industries also
received a l30-km optical ﬁber communications system to
be used by Manitoba Telephone 00. of Canada.

Optical ﬁber communications are spreading rapidly in
the U.S. In I981 NEC won a contract for an optical ﬁber
communications system from New York Telephone under
the wing of ATdiT. while exporting similar systems to
other U.S. ﬁrms. Recently, however, the U.S. raised import
duties for optical ﬁber cables to 17.9% (896 in Japan).
This could develop into a trade issue between the two
countries, since there is another case - theATaT decision
to reject Fujitsu. Optical fiber cables have also been export-
ed to European countries. but their quantities are still
small.

On the other hand, developing countries whose tele-
phone system lap behind that in advanced nations show
strong interest in employing optical fibers in their new
telephone networks. Makers of optical fiber communica-
tions equipment from various countries are fraitic, trying
to sell their products. But, in fact, a majority of ordersare
won by Japanese manufacturers. This proves strong com-
petitiveness of the Japanese industry in’ this ﬁeld.

Deveiopment of Unique Technology

The principle of optical fiber communications had long
been known to experts But the United States was the first
to put this to practical use. It was reported in October,
1970, that Corning Glass Worits had developed a glass fiber
of a low tratsmission loss - 20 d8 (decibels) per kilometer.
This report triggered a worldwide race to develop optical
glass ﬁbers.

In Japan, NEC began research on optical ﬁber communi-
cations in l967, and in 1968 it announced a joint develop-
ment of an optical ﬁber, called "SELFOC," with Nippon

.Sheet Glass, the 2nd largest sheet glass maker in Japan.
SELFOC was a glass of multiple contents. Later, Corning

‘GTass Works developed an optical ﬁber made of quartz.
SELFOC is now being used widely for lens material for
micro-optics.

In February, 1971, shortly after the announcement by
Corning Glass Works, Nippon Telegaph a Telephone
Public Corp. (NTT) launched research on optical fiber
communications with the establishment of an optical
ﬁber research team in its Electrical Communication
Laboratory. In the U.S.. Bell Laboratories of the AT&T
Group developed a MCVD (Modiﬁed Chemical Vapour
Deposition) method by improving the CVO method of
Corning Glass Works. The optical ﬁber made by the MCVD
method has a less transmission loss that that of
Coming. In May, l975, NTT began joint researches on
optical fibers with Japan's top three cable makers -
Furukawa Electric, Sumitomo Electric Industries and
Fuiiltura Cable Works and developed a VAD (Vapour
Phase Axial Deposition) method.

An optical ﬁber is a ﬁne pass fiber (core) covered with
a glass tube (clad) of lower refractive index. The beam that
passes through the core will not go outside thecore thanks
to the principle of total refraction. in the MCVD method
silica gas (to be made In core), added by germanium and
other compounds to adjust the refractive index, is blown in
the quartz tube (to be made in clad) and is deposited inside
the tube by heating. The soot preform thus made is heated
again to make transparent preform. A ﬁne optical glass
ﬁber is made by drawing a preform.

In die VAD method developed in Japan, core material
gas in blown and deposited to the lowerendofaglassrod.
8y lifting up the rod, core is developed. The core thus made
is put it the clad tube to form a preform. The site of the
preform made by the VAD method can be made far larger
that that of the MCVD method. This means a lonpr
optical glass ﬁber can be drawn by the VAD method.

in Japan, optical ﬁbers are being made by both methods.
For the MCVD method of Coming, Furukawa Electric in
1978 became the sole licensee in Japan, and other makers
have taken sub-licenses from Furultawa. In fact, both
methods are undergoing rapid advances in technology.
In 1979 an optical ﬁber having the world’s lowest power
loss of 0.2 (8 per kilometer was made under the VAD
method. This ﬁber can transmit 95% of the beam to a
receiver a ltlometer away. In 1980. a 100an single mode
optical fiber was made by the VAD method.

Optical ﬁbers are classiﬁed as a graded index type and a
step index type by the distribution of refractive index, and
as a multiomode type and a single mode type by the transfer

'characteristic of beam. In the graded index type, the refrac-
tive index of the core chanps gradually from its center
to the outer direction. This keeps the transmitting speed

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of beam constant and transmitted information clear. The
core is about 50 um in diameter. in the step index type,
the refractive index of the core is uniform. Recently tlte
graded index type fiber is used more frequently than the
step index type. The core for the single mode type is about
loam in diameter. This type fiber keeps the aberration of
intonation-carrying beams to a minimum. This is suitable
for long-distance transmission. The fiber of the single mode
type is difficult to make and the VAD method was the best.
Therefore, japan was the ﬁrst to commercialiae the single
mode fiber.

In 1973 Furukawa Electric and Fujitsu concluded a
contract with Coming Glass Works for joint research in
optical fiber cables and opticai fiber communications
system These moves contributed to a rapid advance in
Japan's optical fiber communications technology. Furu-
ltawa supplied a large quantity of optical fiber cables to
Coming to be used for the construction of an optical fiber
communications system in Canada.

In I972, Sumitomo Electric industries developed a
double coated optical fiber cable with the primary silicone
resin coating and the overlay nylon coating on the optical
fiber. and granted its license to Corning Glass Works.

'In optical ﬁber communications, the beam that carries
information is produced by LED (light emitting diode) or
L0 (laser diode). Optical modern. a modulation equipment
to change electric siptals into light signals and vice versa,
and various other equipment are necessary. Japan is at the
world's top level in communications and electronic equip-
ment for non-military use, and this has benefited )apan
in speedy development of optical communications equip-
ment. The rise in international competitiveness has brought
about many export contracts.

Challeme to New Era

in Osaka's satellite town of Higashi-lkoma, a large scale
experiment, claimed to be the world‘s first of its kind, is
now under way to develop a visual information system
using optical fiber cables. The experiment is of the Highly
interactive Optical Visual Information System (Hi-OVIS)
being conducted by the Visual information System
Development Association under the guidance of the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI).

To develop this type of system, both MlTi and the
Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications created associa-
tions in I972. Since their purpose was the same. they were
merged into one association in lune. 1973. The association
is ioined by electric appliance makers, electric cable makers,
broadcasting companies, banks and other inforrnation-
related businesses. ll selected the test site. designed the
system, and developed and installed necessary equipment

BR

and facilities before starting the laying of optical fiber
cables in the site in October. l977. All the facilities were
completed in July. l978. Then. the association asked 158
households in the area to become monitors and installed
terminal equipment. which are linked with the central
facilities by way of subcenters, along with ten terrninat
equipment at public facilities. The system went into opera-
tion in luly, 1978.

Since the Hi-OVIS uses optical fiber cables. the data
transmission capacity is extremely lar’, and full two-way
communication is possible. This totally differs from the
CATV (Cable Television), which uses coaxial cables. The
terminal equipment of the monitor incorporates a terminal
adapm, a key-board, a TV-camera and a microphone and

-can be connected with a TV set. The central facilities are

equipped with a broadcasting system. a video system, a
still picture system. a central computer, etc. The monitor
not only sees specified prop’unson theTV set butalsocan
call for other prop'ams or information and also take part In
the procams usinga TV camera or a microphone.

in the production of the optical fiber communications
system for the HiOVls, Sumitomo Electric Industries and
Fuiitsu played a major role. An LED of the 0.85pm rame
is used for the light source; the Iidtt sensing element is PM
Photo Diode; Iheoptical fiberhasacorediameterof
lSO um and a clad diameter of 350 am; the external
diameter of the fiber is 0.7 mm; and the main line of the
cable has an external diameter of l7 mm with 24~36 fibers
bound inside, while the subscriber's cable has an external
diamenr of )3 mm with two fibers. The cables used in
the system total. 44 ltm in length and the ﬁber length
totaled 350 km. The broadcastirg facilities were manu-
factured minty by Matsushlta Electric Industrial, while
he conputer was made by Fujitsu. Fuii Telecasting Co.
cooperated in broadcasting techniques.

The HiOVlS is a new experiment. A number of equip-
ment had to be developed to meet its requbennnts. The
software for broadcasting and operations is all new. All is
being developed in the course of experiments. This is a
challenge to the new era. With the start of the test opera-
tions, a system evaluation conunittee was established. The
overall operations are reviewed and assessed annually, and
the results are reflected on tin test operations.

The evaluation report prepared in March. 1930, gives
fuii particulars of both the hardware and software of the
system. it states that all the equipment and facilities
continue normal operations and that the foundation of
the system has been laid. It also says that the system is
useful for the formation of a community and can make
peat contributions to the lifelong education and welfare
of community members. The association has received many

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inquiries about the experiment of the l-liOVlS from
overseas, and many visitors have come to see the operations
of the system Foll0wing this Japanese system, plans to
conduct similar experiments are now under way both at
home and abroad.

The current operational experiment will continue until
March, l983. Then, work will begin to develop a proven
system, which will proceed to a commercial system to be
established in the future. The Hi-OVIS can also be applied
for an industrial information system within an enterprise or
an industrial complex or for an educational system.

lrroads into Telecommuniations

country. On the other hand, '
telephone network will be inadequate sooner or later to
meet the rapidly growing demand for data transmission.
It is quite understandable that no sooner had N'lT learned
the development of optical ﬁbers by Coming Glass Works
than it began research on the subiect

While continuing basic research, N‘l'l‘ launched, in l978,
experiments of optical ﬁber communications for practical
use in a 2lltrn distance in Tokyo. it is now carryiru out a
long-distance, large-capacity experiment and medium-
range, mediumcapacity experiments for practical use.

The former experiment began in October, l980, in the
outskirts of Tokyo by linking an 18km distance with an

.3-um rang produced
by an lnGaAsP semiconductor. The information transmission
speed is 400 Mb/s. A sirgle optical ﬁber of the kind now in
use can handle 5,760 telephone channels at a time. It will
be used for a trunk line linking major cities.

in the medium-range. mediumocwacity experiments,
optical ﬁber cables of the graded index type are used. They
are being conducted in Tokyo, Kyoto. Nagasaki and nine
other cities where optical ﬁber communications are being
tested between telephone exchanges or relay stations 6~
l3 km mart. The light sources used are laser beams of the
0.85-um range produced by GaAlAs semiconductor and of

the l.3-um range produced by lnGaAsP semiconductor.
The transmission speeds are 32 Mb/s and lOOMb/s, respec-

tively. This series of commercial experiment began in
March. l981. and on December 3, a test channel in Chiba
near Tokyo was linked with the ordinary telephone net-
work. Since then, similar linkups have taken place in
Tokyo and other cities. On January 2i. l982, NTT am

35

network in ﬁscal l982.
In another move, NTT announced in May. 1981, that it

had neceeded in tests of art optical ﬁber undersea cable
laid in the seas off lzu Peninsula near Tokyo. The tests
were designed to lay the optical ﬁber cable between islands
or through straits. The light source was a laser beam of the
1.31m mac and had a data transmission speed of400Mb/
s. Notable in the tests is that a light relaying device worked
satisfactorily in waters 700 rn below the sea level. The feat
wasthe firstofits kind in theworld.

Kokusal Denshln Oenwa Co. (K00), Japan's overseas
telephone and telegraph monopoly, plans to launch a series
of tests on a 50km optical ﬁber undersea cable in March,
l982, off Ninomiya Cable Landing Station, cenb'al Japan,
which is the terrnlnal of the Pacific undersea cable to
Japan. Optical ﬁbers are suitable for the undersea cables,
which are required to carry a large volume of information
to long distant places at high speed. Since the power loss
in transmission is small, the use of optical ﬁbers can extend
the distance between relay facilities undersea where
maintenance work is very difﬁcult. KOO is now engaged
in research in this field and plans to lay a TransPacific
optical ﬁber undersea cable in the late 1980s.

Wide Applications

in March, l978, Tokyo Electric Power Co. and Kyushu
Electric Power Co. built some 6km optical ﬁber communi-
cations lines between electric power plants and substations,
respectively. Unlike the ordinary ebctric wire. the optical
ﬁber is immune from electromagnetic interference and
enables the installation of an optical ﬁber cable riust along
a super high tension power transmission underground cable.
Other power companies followed suit in adopting optical
fiber corrmnicadons for data transmission and control
purposes. The electric power industry, so far. has most
widely adopted optical ﬁber communications for practical
use in fields other than the public telephone and telegraph

system.
in February, I979, Sumitomo Electric industries and

ldernitsu industries, a leading petroleum company, iointly
developed a composite cable of the electric wire cable and
the optical fiber cable, first in the world. A 4-km composite
cable was laid between a reﬁnery and an oil storage facility
for the electric power supply and controlling and tele-
communications purposes

in November, i979, NEC completed an optical ﬁber
communications system linking the mainframe computer
with eight data stations in Waltayama Steel Works of Sumi-
tomo Metal industries. it was the first fulloscale system for

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

factories where a web of power lines and enter electric
circuits are laid across. it is also good in oil refining facili-
ties and petrochemical plants where there are dangers of
explosion induced by electric sparks. Various research
institutes and educational facilities were also relatively
quick in introducing optical ﬁber communications.

At the end of i980, Fujitsu and Furuitawa Electric joint-
iy convicted a largescaie information network. called

Trade and industry, with its head ofﬁce. The resaroh
institutes are now under construction in Tsultuba Academic
New Town, ibaraki Prefecture, north of Tokyo. The is”;
mainframe computer, FACOM-MZWO, installed in the
head office, is linked with each institute by an independent
line and a common ring line - both using optical fiber
cables The system will evenuially be a network linking
about 3.000 terminal units. The total length of optical ﬁber
used in the system is about 350 km. Thus it ism unpreoe.
dentedly large communications and data processing system
for research purposes in the world.

Around I978 optical fiber communications began to be

systems. Both systems employed optical fiber conununica-
tions to link monitoring TV cameras at stations with the
central control offices. To transmit many TV pictures
simultaneously, WDM (Wave-length Division Multiplexing)
systems using four different wave lengths were adopted.
For Hanshin Expressway an optical fibercommunications
system was completed in the summer of i98l to monitor

The Transit Bureau of Sapporo in Hokkaido developed
a voice-responsive optical data transmission system for
subways in cooperation with Nippon Signal Co. and Matsu-
shita Communication industrial Co. and put part of the

30!.

The system, using LED as its light source, has a built-in

Equipment Manufactturs

Nippon Electric
Fujitsu

Cable Manufacturers
Sumitomo
Furukawa
F ujiitura
Hitachi

FY1981 FY1982
(in ¥i00 million)

loo 1 $0
50'60 IOO
50"60 i00~i 20
24~2$ SO

20 ‘0

15 2$~30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dainichi-Nippon 5
Showa 2 4

handle the entire system if they want to survive conpetl-
tion in technological development.

Toward Even Higher Technology

in October, l98i, NTT announced that it had developed
a super h‘gh performance semiconductor laser of the
1.5-um rang. KOO also announced a success in the
development of a similar product. NTT and KO!) achieved
the world's first successes in pursuit of the same goal
through separate development efforts.

In the development of systems for long wave length
ranps above i pm. the system of the 1.31m rame is
especially advanced, because the loss of power in the
optical fiber is low in the range and because the wave forms
of signals are quite steady. It had been known that the
power loss in transmission of the I.$-um range was mini-
mum and about half the amount of the Lil-um range. And.
two years ago KDD succeeded in an experiment of con-
tinuous operation of a semiconductor laser of the l.56-um
range in the ordinary room temperature for the first time in
the world. But when the semiconductor laser was operated
at high speeds to transmit a large amount of information,
many different wave lengths close to the l.$6-um wave
form of the signal. There-

wave length even at high
KDD attained the goal by
devising new structures of the semiconductor.

The newly developed semiconductors can double the
relay span in optical fiber communications compared
with that of i.3-um range. This isa great advantage for the
optical fiber undersea cable. For the practical use of the
products, it is necessary to grade up their dependability.
But they have deﬁnitely brought us cl0ser to the ideal of

" optical fiber communications.

NTT is now developing the "Information Network Sys-
tem" (INS), a highly advanced data transmission system
enploying optical ﬁber technology to replace the conven-
tional telephone network. In the system. new network
would carry not only voice, like telephone conversations.
but also imaps of facsimile and computer data. NTT is
also developing a snail facsimile for home use and other
products, while conducting commercial tests of telephone
communications by using optical fiber cables. NTT aims to
build a new highlyefficient
a system which will employ fiber optics~applied digital
technology, instead of the current analog technology. In
fiscal 1984 NTI' plans to launch an experiment of INS at
a model district to be desimated in suburban Tokyo.

established in January, I981. by the earlier-mentioned
Optoelectronic

Research funds touting ”8,000 million are to be spent
for the new project during the 8-year period started in fiscal
I979. in the project. studies will be made on three subiects
- optical element technology, functional sub-systems and
total systems. Optical elements to be taken up are lasers,
optical fibers, optical sensors, optical actuators and optical
circuit elements. Sub-systems will include high-spud
picture data subsystem, highqualiw picture data sub-
system, high-speed process data sub-system, composite
process data sub-system and data control sub-system. As to
plant, enterprise and social systems will
be studied in the proiect. The Optoelectronlcs Joint
established under OAS, is engaged
in the development of basic technologies of "opto
electronic integrated circuits" - integration of optical
elements and electronic elements.

The Optoelectronic Indusuy and Technology Devel0p-
ment Association has undertaken research and development
of the total systems of the project and also research on the
standardization of optoelectronic devices, which is assigned
by the Agency of Industrial Science & Technology.

37
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electric technology created modern civilization, and the
social structure of today is based on electric and electronic
technologies Now, onto-electronic technology is emerging
to form a new industry. 'lhe optical fiber communications
industry cannot remain merely part of the information
industry. It is a new industry that is bringing renovations
in the social structme. In the futuristic industry. Japan is
at the world's top level. But the futon of the industry is
too great. and so is difﬁcult to predict, now.

Ind 00., Mid. 1982

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HILL CREATE WWW DISCUBSBD

RomuluthVbln,N02,hb82pp30-42

 

An lntermtlonel robot show, “A UT OMAN '83, "Is to be held
In London In May, I983. A relermt [openese organizer/on
end monufecwrers are now preparing to mice port In the
robot show. Robot: which executed only pert efrnen's work
In the post are becoming nre/or wed: force Indispensable for
factories. However, the wlder use of Industrial robot: ls
closely related to employment problems. Although there Is
'nopresslngpreblenr In [open In drls regard, the failure In

the use of robes end In employment measures could create
problems In the future. Let us Introduce to our reoders some
exam/es el‘reecdons to the adoption of robots frenr [epeo

nese labor and menogenrent.

 

rltln: V009 on information,
trs and communications
of the Orpnlzatlon for
It: Cooperation and Develop-
)ECD) has been conducting
for the past three years
inﬂuence of microelectronics
n productivity and employ-

e course of the research and
tion of the problem, the

group heard seriouscom-
rom a maiority of European
. that "robots will deprive

39

workers of their jobs." In cor
Japanese representatives said,

inﬂuence of ME on employmer
not become a serious proble:
Japan." This remark seems to
surprised representatives from

countries who got the impressler
the Japanese were likely to son!
problem skillfully, although the
nese said there mluht be a probl
the future. More that that, Pm
Hiroshi loose ol Tokyo lnstitu
Technology, one of the lap
representatives, reported later 'th
and US. representatives “had

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500040029-1

roe orr'r‘cm. usr: ONLY

considerably" the pessimism of Euro-
pean countries by stressin; the ME’s
effects of raising productivity and
creatingemployment.

The All Japan Federation of
Electric Machine Workers’ Unions has
corrpiied an interim report on the
"Outlook for the Electric Industry In
the I980s.” According to Its inquiries,
sent to member unions to colbct data
for the report, the introduction of
microcomputers and robots has not
produced serious effects on employ-
ment. A majority of the unions
replied that there is "no change."
Although some of them said employ-
ment was "reduced," almost the same
number of unions reported an
"increase." _

Why was such a situation brou‘ht
about? The number of workers in the
Japanese electric industry dropped
rieht after the first oil crisis. There
were l,400,000 workers at the peak
time in I973, but they declined by
nearty I336 to the premt l,220,000.
The drastic cut in the work force was
covered by overtime work or a two
shift work system Therefore, there is
a feeIin; of busyness at factories even
today. In addition, there is a tendency
among workers to dislike dirty or
dancrous work, raising the voices for
stepped-up automation. including the
use of industrial robots.

The Ministry of Labour started a
two-year research in I98I on the
effects of ME on employment. The
research was entrusted to a committee
headed by Professor Shoiiro Uiihara of
Shinshu University. A preliminary
survey was mied out In June, I981,
on the basis of fiptres for I980, and
2,000 manufacturing plants in the
country were inquired about the
problem The results of the research
showed a rosy picture that ”the intro-
chIiOO‘I of NC machine tools and
others, coupled with the expansion of
production capacity and the increase
in the booking of orders, maintained

to

the enployment Ie
margin of decrease it
was also found tit:
the types of job anr
workers were carri
and there were a
personnel cuts."

Rationalization of Pi

The ME revqu
Industrial robots has
the robots will hav
increased efficiency
the amount of wor
laborosavine effects,
The effects of the
employment will
appreciable, but, at
will be a conditi
survival of enterpris
less county and a e
win internationalco

Japanese enurpr
increase labor prodt
production to low:
up investments for
saving. Behind this
material costs. If ti
products in the ma
try in I973 is set
went up to WI, wh
costs reached 209
too much 'to say tl
robot revolution f
Japan In order to
tween the price of
material costs A
materials have com
effectively than b
rate of Increase
productivity in I
industry was 0596
period of fast eoor
between I965 and
shot up sharply tr
tween I913and I91

It was also dev
ever-rising labor
modernization of
automation and ti
industrial 'robots).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500040029-1
Japan, as stated above, will continue
until labor shorta' in speciﬁc ﬁvi-
sions issettied, and therecarmotbe
any employment probbm arising from
the use of industrial robots. The
problem is the inuoduction of robots
purely for increasing productivity.
Since they are for labor-saving
purposes, a decrease in employment is
unavoidable. And, the use of vol-on
could ultimately lead to an unattended
operation of plants.

For instance, Hitachi, Ltd. is carry-
Moutaﬂveyeaplanwcutdn
number of worlters in the assembly
division by 70% by introducing
indusuial robots into 60% of the
assembly process. Toshiba Corp.
introduced FMS (ﬂexible manufactur»
in; system) centering on the use of
robots into the entire production
divisions in fiscal 1981 in an effort to
cut production workers (now totaling
25,000) by about 10.000 in the latter
half of the 1900; The OECD’s Japan
Working Group has found in its survey
that the number of workers will be
reduced by the introduction of ME
and industrial robots into the manu-
facturing divisions. To be affected we
the makers of process control equip-
ment, automated manufacturing
machines. general office machines and
equipment, equipment for commerce'
related clerical worlt, equipment for
the automation of railway station
worlt. timepieces and elecuonic calcu-
lators. It was also found that the
”users of these machines and equipment
are gradually reducing their depen-
dence on sltllled workers and em-
ployees ensued in simple work.

These industries are still developing
industries. Stimulated by the harsh
competition for the improvement of
product quality, lowering of product
prices and the development of new
products, these industries will employ
robots to increase production as a
whole. while maintaining a certain
degree of employment-creating effects.
Corporate managers say that personnel
cuts in the production process will be
carried out, as in the past, through
the natural decrease in the number
of employees or by changing the types
of workers' iobs over a long period of
time. But, as a matter of fact. nobody
can foresee the future employment
situation.

Demand for production-process

work force from the machinery,electric
and precision equipment industries
will reach about 2.430.000 men in
I985. according to the average annual
growth rate estimated by the Indus.
trial Structure Deliberative Council.
Considering the i,880,000 workers in
1975, the increase will be very large.
But the labor-saving effects of ME and
industrial robots was not taken into
account in making the estimates.
OECD's Japan Working Group
estimates that the introduction of ME
and robots will have the effects of
reducing the work force by the maxi-
num of 480,000and by the minimum
of 210,000 by 1985. If this estimate
is correct, the number of factory
workers in the above three sectors of
- industries will increase only slightly
or level off.
- Separately from robots, estimates
on the distribution industry com-
prising departrnent stores and super-
mrket chains show that the diffusion
of P05 (point of sales) system will cut
the work 9' by the maximum of
23,000 by - J. Since the number of
enployees in the distribution indus
try is estimated to increase from
260,000 in 1975 to about 283,000 in
1985, the increase is expected to be
absorbed exactly by 905 and other .
autonotion measures.

Thus, seen from the macroscopic
viewpoint, the introduction of robots
and nicrocomputers is not likely to
cause a serious anxiety among workers _
about unemployment. But this is
based on condition that the relocation
past, it was difficult for small- and
mediumscale enterprises to employ
dtilled writers. but the inuoduction
ofrobotshassettledtheproblemand
elirninatedthedangerinvolvedmthe.
process. The company was able to
increase employment. successfully
adapt itself to the recent trends
toward receiving higher education,
give enuloyees education and training
and conulbute to the disaster preven-
tion on the part of users. What the
company is do'mg mldtt be a good
example of the foam-oriented ME
revolution

Undoubudly. die ME industry In
the broad sense of the word will
touch off an expansion of employ-
ment at the level of small- and medium-
scale enterprises. OECD's Ivan Work-
hg Group estimates that the number
of information processors alone will
reach the maximum of about 796,000
in 1985, compared to 130,000 in
1900. Demnd (or operators of punch-
ing machines and electrode com-
puters is also expected to increase at
the same pace. An overwhelmingly
larp number of companies consider
that the employment for summation-
related lobe will either remah at the
present level or increase over the next
three years, when industrial robots and
NC machine tools-will be introduced
atanincreaslm speed.

is it too optimistic to conclude, at
this moment. that Japan will be able
to do everything smoome with regard
to the Increased use of robots? At
least, it seems unlikely that the
Introduction of robots In Japan will
cause mass unemployment and incur
serious social unrest about employ-
ment. Then, how is lapan going to
avoid the possible emetgence of un-
employment? “On the basis of the
Japanese-style management, labor and
management may join hands to attain
the highest productivity in the world
and gain further international con»

petitiveness. thereby exporting un-
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of member cc ntries of the
ME commission. And this is u
tant problem which Japan, tc
considerseriously.

employment to other parts ol the
wrld through the massive exportsof
iapanese-made industrial robots." This
is the fear harbored by representatives

ls Robot Production
Profitable?

WPYRIGHT a

C3):

(120/172

Moves for exports of industrial robot
production technologies have been
accelerated. Hitachi, Ltd., Japan’s
largest electric and electronic equip
ment manufacturer, has abeady con-
cluded with two US. companiesand
a British company, including General
Electric of the 05., for exports of
robot production technology. Mitsu-
bishi Heavy Industries. Ltd. gave
license to an Australian manufac-
turer, while Dainichi Kilto Co., Ltd.
is providing its technology to a
British company. In addition, Fujitsu
Funac Ltd., a subsidiary of Fujitsu
Ltd.. is expected to conclude a
similar contract with a British maker.

At home, a number of foreign
engineers are visiting robot manufac~
turing plants almost every day.
Reflecting such a situation, stock
prices of robot producers have been
on the rise.

However, robot production does
not always seem to bring large profits
to the maker. For example, Kawasaki
Heavy industries, Ltd., the top
maker in this ﬁeld, begm commercial
production of industrial robots in
I968 but suspended the production
on the way due to sluggish sales.
it was aboutIthree years ago that the
company resumed robOt produc-
tion after clearing cumulative losses
caused by the robot business failure
at the initial stag.

Oil crises on two occasions seem

Md land 00., Ltd. 1982

to have required a long time before
Kawasaki was able to geton the right
traclt in the field of robot produc-
tion. Kawasaki’s robot sales are
estimated at about ¥7,000 million,
while its overall sales stand at around
#750,000 million a yes. This means
that it will talte more time before the
company gets full scale merits.

in view of increasing populariaa.
tion and spread of industrial robots.
many manufacturers have been
entering this field of business. At
present, a total of some 150 com-
panies are engaged in the production
of industrial robots. Japan industrial
Robot Association forecasts that
Japan's robot production will ton!
about ¥3(XJ,000 million in l985,
while it reached $18,400 million in
i980. A private econornic research
institute estimates the production
value at even VSOOM million in
l985.

Sooner or later, robot producers
will get merits accrued from mass
production. But considering such a
larp number of participants in robot
production and expected harsh com~
petition among themselves, profits
may vary widi producers. in addi-
tion, the development of high
performance robots will require a
huge amount of monev. It is. there
fore, unlikely that all the robot
manufacturers will enioy thriving
business.

 

FOIOI'F'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

m WIDE]? PROPOSBS OMING TERMINALS TO PRIVATE SECTOR

Denationalisation Proposal
Tokyo mos KBIZAI 8mm in Japanese 20 Jan 82 p 1

[Text] Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public CorporatiOn (m) has followed its
announcensnt of plans to completely open to private enterprise the business of
commications terminals, including telephone receivers, by asking it known that
it intends to reorganize its structure and concentrate all terninal-related divi-
sions into a "private terminals business division.” 1m expects to operate this
division as an independent profit-making entity, and has made 1983 the target date
for its establish-ant. It is anticipated that this division will have sons 50.000
personnel. That scans that the overall structure of am will be broadly divided
between a network division, with the telephone exchange. long distance circuits,
and the like, and a terminals division, with telephone receivers, facsimile ma-
chines, and the like. These will becoss dominant. quite beyond cowarison with
the snll. soney-losing, data and telegraph divisions; The Provisional Cos-ittee
for the Investigation of Administration is presently considering whether to con-
tinue,the organisation of m as it is or to denationalise it, and 811's autono-
souely determined "large divisions" policy will necessarily have an inset on
future discussions of the administrative structure of m within the co-ittee.

NIT President Shindo Kn has ends it known that "basic telephone receivers" (the
first receiver installed by a subscriber), alone excluded from the offer for

private participation in the terminals business ads by 111': last year, will also
be opened to private enterprise. Thus the entire terminals field will be opened
to competition from the private sector, but, in fact, there are cosplaints fron

the private sector that by asking the terminals division financially autonosous
there will be open capacities between an and private enterprise.

Within NT‘r up to now the business window and maintenance personnel of the tele-
phone office, the adsinistration division, and so on. have been equal with those
of the network and terminals divisions. and. on the grounds that differentiation
would be difficult, their finances have not been kept separate. however. Presi-
dent Shindo has directed thnt personnel, structure, and finances must be com-
pletely separated, so as to give priority to competition with the private sector,
and this has becone settled as m policy.

The area taken in by the newly established private terminals division will cover
telephone receivers. facsimile mchines, PBX (private telephone exchanges). and

3&5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬁOR‘OFﬁKJAI.USE¢MVLY

all other kinds of terminals connected to telephone circuits. As there is no
manufacturing division, all terminals installed will be purchased from outside,
but subsequent maintenance of terminals installed by the user will be included.

NTT will take charge of maintenance of well over $0 million telephone instruments
over the whole country, including. besides the installation of some 200,000 new
instruments a year, the transfer of about 300,000. Furthermore, income from
terminals other than basic telephone instruments, such as PBX (16 billion yen)
and telephone facsimile machine: (2 billion yen), amounts to 179 billion yen (in
all cases as of 1980). when these are included, even after allowing for the re-
duction in the installation of new equipment due to the entry of private competi-
tion, the overall income would give birth to a giant "terminal specialist firm"
of 1 trillion yen.

On the human side, this new division will field some 50,000 personnel. as a lower
limit. from among the 330,000 of which NTT is comprised in its competition with
private enterprise.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982
Debate Over Proposal
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SBIHBUN in Japanese 21 Jan 82 p 3

[Text] A positive statement by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) President
Shindo concerning the problem of denationalising NTT, now being studied by the
Second Provisional Conittee for the Investigation of Administration, has recently
attracted much attention. The new form of NTT as presented by President Shindo,
who came from the private sector, is as a half public. half private special legal
entity like Japan Air Lines or KDD (Kokusai Denshin Denwa). with the data communi-
cation division becoming an independent private corporation. It might be said
that Shindo's idea has taken the wind from the sails of the committee. however,
careerists in the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications and NTT who wish to
preserve the structure of NTT are bewildered by the pace of Shindo's activity.

It seems that Shindo's idea will not be realized easily.

"th is President Shindo coming out with a succession of concrete denationaliza-
tion proposals?" (an NTT manager) "Does President Shindo understand that his own
words are gradually wringing the neck of NTT?" (a ministry leader) President
Shindo's latest statement has provoked cries of “we cannot fathom his real pur-
pose," not only within the ministry but within NTT also.

All of this is since President Shindo, who had originally said, ”All will be de-
cided by the provisional committee; the persons concerned should say nothing,"
himself began at the end of last year to make known a succession of his own ideas
concerning the denationaliaation of NTT. President Shindo first presented a

group of three ideas being studied within NTT: l) to turn NTT into a fully pri-
vate corporation like the American AT and T (American Telephone and Telegraph).

2) to make it into a special legal entity combining public and private capital
like Japan Air Lines or KDD, or 3) to maintain its status as a public corporation.
but in a form close to a private corporation, unfettered legally and budgetarily

h6
FOR 0P11C1Al.USE1ONlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and requiring as little governmental peraission to act as possible. Next, he sug-
gested that among these three proposals the Japan Air Lines form was the most
suitable, and then, on the 14th, he presented the idea that the data communica-
tion division should be separated froa RTT and made an independent private corpo-
ration.

President Shindo seems to have reached a different judgment fro: the thinking
within the ministry and NTT. Above all, he sees that the Suzuki cabinet is not
retreating from the denationalization, to some extent, of the administrative
structure of NTT, which follows from the general trend to reform the administra-
tion, which is taken as an overwhelming mandate. Consequently, the best approach
is to adopt a posture of being prepared for denationalization. Moreover, with the
present public corporation structure, even minor matters in the budget are subject
to determination by the Diet, and when they wish to inaugurate new services they
are restricted by regulations and the need for ministry approval, so that whatever
they may wish to do they are tied hand and foot. President Shindo, who came from
private enterprise, has complained that “vigorous management is impossible.” In
this instance the idea that it would be beneficial to gain the vigor of private
enterprise by escaping these shackles has directly led to the denationalirstion
thesis, it would seen.

There is also a selfish aspect to Shindo's thinking. The data communication divi-
sion is a burden on NTT's management, as it has lost money from the beginning.
With the separation of this division from the main body of 8T1, it would retain
as its responsibility business which should expand greatly over present levels,
such as the high-level information communication systems (INS systems in which
telephones, facsimile machines and data cmmnunications are installed in conjunc-
tion), which are under development as the 21st century successors to the tele-
phone, and circuit service for communications circuits installed by private enter-
prise. One can see that included among his considerations is the aim of trans-
forming the conservative atmosphere within NTT through denationslization. ’

Also, there are those who think that President Shindo's views are influenced by
a desire to win credit for the chairman of the Second Provisional Committee,
Tsuchi ﬂikaru, whom he regards as a mentor. If NTT is transformed into a half
public and half private special legal entity, the new corporation would have
capital of 1 trillion yen, and authorized capital of 3 trillion yen, according
to NTT studies, and would be the largest company in Japan, surpassing the Tokyo
Electric Power Company, with 650 billion yen. The contribution of this to the
revolution in administration and finance would-be great, hence the attention of
the Second Provisional Committee. ' '

President Shindo has recently shown a tendency to present his own views on dena-
tionalization in opposition to the Second Provisional Committee. To that extent
he has legitimized before the committee the arguments concerning the denational-
ization problem within NTT that have been stirred up by the pace of Shindo's own
activities. However, at this juncture one also sees the start of bickering among
the conservative career employees of the ministry and NTT and, as we approach a
climax, it seems that the intensity of the debate has been raised a degree.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keirsi Shimbunsha 1982
9898
080: 4106/41

1&7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm mm 'm MVII' W

mkyo m: in mount: Vol 14. lo 11, nov 81 pp 46-49

[Text]

The Electrotechnical laboratory of the Agency of Industrial
Science and Technology has mently completed an NHD
generator “8T1. Marl: VII" and has installed it at the Taitmgo
Test Center in Hyogo Prefecture. Open cycle MHD generation
is a compound system that directly generates power by pasdm
at high speed. combustion gas plasma. obtained from road!
fuel and burned at high temperatures. through a power genera-
tion channel placed in the powerful mausedcﬂeld (Fig!) and
3:” to use exhaust heat for steam turbine power generation

ig.2).

The total heat efficiencycanbegreatly improvedtoover
50 percent, compared with about 40 percent for nasal steam
power generation. The MED generation system has the great
advantage ofdirectlyusingcoalcombustiongasandhas
importance In increasing power generation efﬁciency and
providingraeans forovercomingrelianceonoilasasourcefor
electric power. .

Figure3provideaanoverallsystemdiagnmofthenewly
developed Mill) Marl: Vll generator and Fig.4 shows the
layout. The main facilities are various and include supply
units for fuel, oxygen, air. and seed. cooling water facility.
burner. accelerating noule. power generation channel and

load unit, copper/iron magnet. excitation power apply.

‘ diffuser, high-temperature duct. low~ternperamre duct. elec-

trical dust precipitator for seed collection, low temperature
catalyzer denitration unit, silencer, chimney. operation measr
tiring control unit. and data procedng unit.

The burner consists of a plot burner. a subburner.and

'main burners. The plot turner is used for igniting the ash.

burnerbymaltlutheﬂameelongerbyburninginanair-ehortage
condition in theburnercyllnderthroughmairoomhustion.
The arbburner effectiveiyprovidestheremainingheatofthe
power generation channel and highutemperature duct. and
alsoseedandatiftudloxidedurlngordinaryopendonfhe
nibbumer is equipped with one mixed-air nozzle for oxygen.
ailfur dioxide. lid seed centering around it, and ﬁve l‘uel
nozzles around it. Fuel burns hitting with oxygen jetted out

and ciratlating in the surroundiw with steam storninng.
Theta m mm min human mounted and fuel is mad.
intoamiuﬂnano-ﬂusd spray system that magnum:
aim medium. Two oxygen nozzles for main combustion
and two Ill non!» for adjusunent of pa tampmnm ue
mounted at n unset“ und they mm" a mixture of fuel

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m." °°mbumo
“0" Ind 1.,” .

n 3‘3 have
5 "m8 retenuOn ,
" “matured WW,

I circulating
”nod. The man Pof‘iOn
will. the ﬂuid; of °°pper
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

generated in the burner and moves it from the burner exit
section 220mm in diameter. to the power generation entry
section measuring 220x90mrn’. Construction is of water-
cooled copper.

The ﬁrst channel used for experimental power generation
consists of an insulated wall of an alumina-coating peg and
a water-cooled metal electrode wall (Fig.5). The entry section
of the channel measures 220x90mm' and the exit section is
measures 280x90rnrn‘. The total length is l,600mnt. Dimen-
sions of the effective power generation portion are 217x75rnrna
for the entry. 266x75rnrn’ for the exit, and 1,248mm lorg.
The electrode pitch is 20.8mm, electrode logarithm 60,
electrode width 9.4mm insulated wall width between electrodes
10mm. and base width 0.7mm. Anodes of stainless steei
(SUS 304) and cathodes of copper tungsten (CuW) are used
as electrode material in the same manner as the generation
channel of ETL Mark V.

The power generation load unit provides a load resistor to
conmme electrical output of the generation channel and
perform switching of Faraday and diagonal generation. and
increase or decrease of load resistance to measure generation
characteristics.

The iron magnet generates a maximum ﬂux density of
2.5 Tesla in space with a up of 240mm between polarities
and 1,200mm long. For experimental convenience. the magnet
itself and its stand can be divided into two, right and left,
structually. The stand can move on a rail up to about 2m.

 

Photo 3. Overall View of Inside I

  

~ Photo 4. Exhaust Gas Processing Equipment

51
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it weijts about 90 tons and excitation power supply outputs
685x2,700A (D.C.).

The diffuser moves frorntheeetitwctionmeaatrins280x
90mm’ , of the generation channel, to' the entry section $60mtn
in diameter. of the back current high-temperanue duct and
itisaconeducttorecovercombustiongaspremre.

The high-temperature duct consists of the ﬁrst and second
hialuernperature ducts and a high-temperature elbow. The
ﬁrst high-temperature duct is used, with an air~phase reactim.
to dissolve and reduce NOx concentrations in cornbustlongas
pnerated in the burner. it is constructed with water coolha
comprutg ﬁreproof materials ﬁtted inside, having a total

I-illilllllmuimulu mlnnmulm lilllllllillil
.I-

I nut: Ii llﬂlllll

     

Noaaie orlﬂee insulated wall Peg piece

          
      
   
 

Norrie oriﬁce i240 (effective oenereelon pen)

 

.. . . ., . . ., 4 . r4 . - . n n..l.. II
unl-lulIlllllIlllllllllIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIlulllll'llllllllllllllIlllllllllllllllllllll-I'l'

3
ﬂ _
ual'llelllilhl‘"lllvl‘ulll'l‘llIII:II'III'I‘IIIIIIII’III‘IVIIIIIII‘I'IIIIIIIIDIIIIIIIIII'IIIIIlllllllllllllnle

 

Fig. 6. No.1 Power Generation Channel

length of Win and a thickness of 90mm. The combustion gas
temperature is about 2200°C. The second hidtotemperature
duct is used to decrease Combustion as temperature with a
water spray and to completely burn any unburnt portions of
- combustion gas. throuah the injection of oxygen. it is con-
structed with water cooling, partly comprising ﬁreproof
materials ﬁtted inside, having a total length of 10m and a
thickness of 90mm. The combustion gas temperature is about
[300°C at the exit. The huh-temperature elbow is used to
bend combustion use current in a rkht angle for its connection
to the low temperature duct. The elbow is constructed with
sufﬁcient thickness of ﬁreproof materials fitted inside in
order to maintain higher wail temperature to prevent attach.
ment or accumulation of seeds in combustion gas.
The low-temperature duct consists of a temperature
adjustment duct at the upper current part and a denitration

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 4. Layout of Tamooo Tut Cantu

duct at the low: current put. The tempcntun-adjtutmont
duct is used to adjust combustion as temperature using 1

mm spray. tn otdet to ootatn mtmum dcnltmlon efﬁdsncy
in the dealtmton duct. The tout length ts about 7.5m and

tho combustion as tompmtuu maps from 1,300 to 1.050°C.
The tempmnue-ndjustment duct is constructed of a welded

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COP YRIGHI' :

(:80:

4120/17}.

water-cooled tube wall and passes circulating water from the
steam generator to collect heat. The denitration duct is
similar to the temperature-adjustment duct structurally.- but
It injects ammonia gas instead of a water spray and performs
non-catalyzer denitration at high temperatures to decrease
NOX concentrations.

The electrostatic dust precipitator is used to collect euihrric
acid ltalium powder that is generated by the reaction ofseeds
Vithsulfur inthecombustiongael‘heptecipitatorcieata
the concentration of dust and 80:: that are for exhaust get
control. NOX concentration is further decreased to below
200ppm by the low temperature catalyzer denitration unit.

According to the Electrotechnical Laboratory the experi-
mental study of the Mark VII gneerator ls sdteduled as follows:
(i) Adjustment of all system devices (April and May)
The overall adjustment will be made to the Mark Vll generator.
(2) lat experiment of power generation (lune)
20-hour experimental generation will be made after adjusting
trial operation (combustion test) to accumulate various experi-
mental data.

(3) 2nd experimental power generation (September)
Experiment for power generation will be made aiming at
loom/zoo hours to accumulate data on durability of the
generation channel.

(4) 3nd experimental power generation (November)

Based on the remlta of the previous experiment. parts of
electrodes and insulated materials will be replaced for loo-hour
experimental generation.

1981 Mid. marketing Monarch 00.. Ltd.
axon-mam noczc vns:
mxyo Wm 1:: 3191111: V01 14, no 11. nov 81 pp 54-55

mm Nippon mm» a nick»... Public emu” am)

has usually 600109“ My. an highest Mel “Lode
‘Vlsr'hmcwodd,yhlchhnabou zopooomonuhtp
ofl.an',mdwh|chmulaﬂmwith32bm. Thunm
MWWMWVBIWWVMhm—
ducedhl983.mdltanboaﬂmtuumoﬂthISl
“Mmmromrdtomlmphmfotmdnfmdon
www.mormmm
EMMalnch/ISLdupmbhutoboom
mhidullnwmum.muldumhm,low pout ammunition.
www.mormddpm. Slmhnbanduuo
adopdngaCMOSudniqmwﬂhaMlmumZmW
ammo: M tedmlquu, and automatic design and»
ulquo. Mammﬁholmpw poinumﬁhmhhmm
Wmnndabout lﬁﬁmhhumuon.mwodvith
daupmbmlypublhhod.
Thoohwonkexnhnnpbmmﬁnmdthchfomuon
pm; mom (DDS). which Inn been mm and—-
inuoduood bymmupmnhthdtanml uniunnd
dmlopmt of the Logic V151. which continuum tho bun
ofdnptocmotmﬂlpodblybuppﬂudtotheﬂﬂpmt.
and thus will coauibuu to envelop” mu, mullet In
mmdulovcou.
WNWsmM-.ms-nquhuahmwnmrk
Mom, main; 9|:th minimum: and Woma-
don processing, a hm nnmbet ofpozfotnunce prom-or: will
beam,mdmus.thBVlSlwiﬂconuibuudsnmawy
tonemofNSmhlchbnowundnpinnhmhgmg
amodclsyuemhthcuuum-Wuhmor’fokyo.
mmrummormemuucvwmmvw
pwmafoﬂm:

I. Mfumotuﬁcvw

(l) ngmumumhnmm 21min:-
Widlh. it can alcuhte With 32 hm. hm Nth htmdon with
a maximum of20.000,|ndhavnlovpoweonamﬂouof
0.75 W. It alto has 200 ambush.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Own-outﬁt” ﬁns-adenine.-

W '
m

Fig.1. «mummrmoww and
ﬁunction Shaw ofVLSI Free-nor

(2) By alum; combinations of ooméi but: uranium
al),mnytypaofl.ochLSl’sfotDBXoolePSanbo
Mcmdmundooopoulc.

Luv-mama”

(I) Mkwfammbommmmﬂyh.
a wick «no of oppllcouou. mallet ultphone «chum
mm. o few {hound «baton only. :01th handling
My mound 0‘ mm W. by combining a numbor
ofpmomnhmodsvithmexdm’sdu.

(2) WVISIpxomforDlPSbommmmwpoin
unDIPS'mia.th¢ mMmofmutDlPs.wchu
muluptooeaot. mam! communication control. who;
prooﬁng and mean. {motions with ”siphon! ammo.
mo Nahum" function. mchthchNofpmupply.
W309mtba.mddhpmmmfmomu
nation.

(3) Thotofwm mmfwbothptommmma

pm.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
      
   
 

mm ‘O‘ONMKIMu'N.
mm";

”Inca-“WW“.
“Main..."

VW mu
8 8

“MM
lit-Oioxonww

VLII m
cal-u: w

“luau-u

2m -m.1MiW-wo

DI'F‘ Ola." DIN-H VW

 

no. 2. Voiumo/Porfotmo Ruio of DEX OIPS hm“
(Yum cum oi Small Size and Con Reduction)

an Marketing March 00.. Ltd.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MATERIALS:

m N BIWIC WIS (1)

mm momentu- 1:: must: Vat 14. no 10, Oct 81 pp 37-42

[Text]

Al pment. biotechnology is hltltllehtcd ea one of the tech
nolopee for the next pnemlon The Agency of Industrial
Sclenee and Technoloy. Mlnletty of International Trade and
Industry (Nl‘l’l). hat propoeed from FY l98l a new item celled

Research and Development of Basic Technology for Industry
in the Next Genemlon." and a one subject.hae taken up
blotechnolou (budget lot FY 1981: V67S-mllllon). natnln;
the following three at ptlmc development tatlta:

l Blomctot for lndusttlel use
2 Technology of cdtlvating lane amounts of cell:

3 Technology for utillzin; rearranged DNA

llowevex.elnoethe lwmdnaancyhubeenmdln
match and development telated to blotcchnolog at “Re-
search of Bionic Synthesis". Hue we lnttoduoe “Rested: of
Bionic Syntheeie" let FY l98l, as compiled by the Agency of
Industrial Science and Technology.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tm: .

A noninndinund efﬁcient method (or mum
physical characteristics of systems of organhms and body
to be developed and related data prowesing system to be C9
tablished. Further. as application to etuneering and medical
science. there is need for establishment of astotnatlc
technology. sensors for robots. rehabilitation Woo.“
technology formeawringthespeedofebloodllow.

Contents:
(I) Research of electric and dynamic characteristics of
son times

Data ofthe eiectricanddynamiccbaracteristiceoforgans
in a physiolodcal state have been collected. at the same time.
an apparatus enabling measurement of electric characteristics
in the microwave zone of an organnrn. has been developed.
(a) Elucidation of dynamic characteristics: ‘lhe oscillation
characteristics and hardness of organs in a physiological state
were measured and podtionuise and caeeowise data collected.
(b) Development ol‘ ll apparatus for «dusting electric
and dynamic characteristics: An apparatus and a probe {or
measuring the dielectric charactensticeol'anorganlamin the
microwave none were developed.
(c) Elucidation of electric characteristics: Measuring the
dielectriccharacteristiceoforgansoforganinnsanddasaillca-
donpercase werecarrledoticlmageanalyslsoi‘mmhuo
clear magnetic resonance oftheorganswascartiedout.
(d) Examination of : The invading states in a rat. of
various organic materials. were examined and organism adapt-
ability was evaluated.

(2) Researchol'opticalmeasuringteclmologyofabloodﬂow
Meuurlngoi'z-sanimalswascarriedoutusingalaser

Doppler method. basic experhnents investigating the correla-
tion between blood ﬂow rate (physical amount)andthestate
oforganisms werecatriedoutandconaideratlon-wasalsomade
with reference to the measuring limits and problems of the
apparatus used.

(a) _ Measuring of blood (low under transparent tissue of an
animal: Analysis of correlation between the organism control
function and variation of blood ﬂow rate.

(b) Manning of subcutaneous blood now: An apparatus
formeasuringsubcueeneousblood ﬂowofananlmal wasmade
on an experimental basis. And experimental consideration of
thepreclsionandmeasuringllmitsol‘theapparatuswasmade.

(c) Application of technology for measuring blood ﬂow:
Development of necmry attachments at each measuring posi-

tionwascarriedout.

(3) Research of threedmenuonal measuring technolog ol‘

thestructureofanorganlam
Apracticalapperatusformeasuringthesltapeeoflirnbswas

developed. and at the same time, junction of the measured

results of the shapes with NC processim technology was
continued.

_' 59 __
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(a). (1:) Manufacture of m apparatus to: measuring the shapes
of the limbs: A [lactic-laps annulus for naming the
shamoflhubcutﬂizingapodtionmmdahmspotw
commdbuodonanimpmdmpemthod.

(c) Softwuo: Based on data obuinedbythe dorm“ ammo
mum dactibingawmdauﬁcewdevelopcd.ud
atthcmtimuystmfotconmaimthistoNCng
wdevelopod.

((1) Technology for fabricating ll'l utiﬂchi limb aockpt:
Monbctualmcmmi miltsoftludupaoflimhsancxo
pcﬁmntfanpmdmmmpawanbdout.

(a) Evaluatioaofthempuhilityofmmiﬂcilllimbm:
Data W distribution of internal m of an atti-
fuiniﬁmbsockctmooﬂocutmdattlnmumnnlur
tion ofthe mpublity own socket maintained.

(0 Technology for “blunting an milieu! joint: The 1”"
_ dbilityofindiamabom-likednpebyacmtourlincm
“examined. -

Prom:
(1) Wofmuwdymicmmohoﬂ
than
FY1977:1n”lbemuﬁﬂmsthchmamofm
Wm"ﬂokkea).ﬂndocuicmddymm
Wormmuamanammwm.
FY1978: mWonmfmuncyofmw_
ofmmknmmmmnuimoﬂm
moxaminedmodtiowbo mdmclmiﬁationw
made.;tthcmtimo.aprobofumxiutiuvhcodatid~
tyofmomﬂmwhichwdinhlymabh,wu fabricated
onanexpcdnmtulbm. FY1979:Mmdngofth¢dicbcu-ic
spasm ofaon mummmfoﬂmdliumfomtion
of m cranium wen dmlopod. FY 1980: uniﬁcation of
doctncmddyumicdunctuitiaonpcdmmorommud
Wtofmammfummw
mmmomemmmmmm
gmofoaoMMnuood
FY1977: thfomtionhmdlmintcompound
eye” (Toma). master of mpcrﬂumilu in an «pain
wmmmawuboppktnmhodmdbdcdmm
applymﬂnmothodmobuined. FY1978: ALImDop-
pinuppnntus {amuleodnowwfabdatod on
www.mdmomNMmMmm
pndﬂoo and optimum "sleuth m examined.FY1979:
Mowing of the now an ofthohlood ﬂow It fixed positions
(uilmdﬂnofaﬂdt)wumiedout,aboppktsimdhmdl-
mmmwmmmuupdmnulbmmdt
umplomlimhuyumtformmmmwym
FotonCotmtiuumhodwwrhdwt.

FY1980: man; ofdistribution crow nu attach-
podtion of omnitm: (tail md ﬂn of: ﬂshnnd mutety of:

FOROFFIOALUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' rat; was carried out and the responae to stirntilus ofvariation
ofnowratewasexamlned.Andawealtiightdauproceating
applnlll was fabricated on an experimental basis. As the
optimumpositiontobemesmrednbloodveaelundertram-
parenttissuewasseiected.

(3) Researchoftechnologyforthree-dirnensionaliymeamr-
ingthestmctureoi‘anorganism.

FY1979: Exantinationwasmadeccncsmingmeasuringa
curvednirfaceshape.andatthesametime.acunredsurface
meantring system based on Moire's method was developed.

FY 1980: Improvement to the curved surface meaning
systembmdonMoire'srnethodwasmade.andattheseme
time.deﬁgningofapracticalcumdsurfacemeasuringsystem
wascompleted. '

2. Research Concerning an Enzyme Reactor

(1979-1983) Nationd W laboratory tor Industry
(Seed-l Study)

Target:
in recent years. in along with the rapid development of
.biochemistry. development of research concerning reactions
of biochemical methods to chemical synthesis and related
technologies. has been strondy requested by induarial circles.
To meet this request. development of technology for applying
a biochemical method to synthetic chemical industries was
made a target. .

Contents: '

Bya reactor usingahollow systemoramolecularsieve
membrane. the relation between a substrate (especially long-
chain fatty acid) and transfer of a substance was examined.
and further. examination of a composite enzyme system react-
or V'.‘ started. As such an enzyme system. the composite
enzyme systemoi‘thepreﬂousliscalyearwasueedmsingmixed
fatty acid. such as fish oil. containing highly unsaturated fatty
acid as a material. prostaglandin was synthesized.

Progress:

Improvement of an enzyme reactor and construction of a
hollow reactor on an experimental basis you carried out. data
for development of a composite enzyme reactor for synthesis
were obtained. and at the same time. the actions of various
enzymes to unsaturated fatty acids for synthesis of prostag-
landin and the inﬂuence of additives were clariﬁed.

3.Research Conceming Production of an Active

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Substance of on Organism Utilizing the Function
oitheOruanism

09804983) Fermentation Reeemeb institute (5“
SM!)

Target: " -
Utiiidngthermiquehrnetionoi‘acreature.anovelactive

substance of an orunism was soudtt. whose biodaernicai
production technologwasdewlopedtoattainenergyssvina
and bias advancement oftechnology for preparing fine chemi-
cals. and at the same time. contributing to human welfare was
aimed at. As specific targets:

(1) Buddation of an enzyme (motion control substance
(phosphodiesterae-obstructinz mbstance) and development of
its ﬁeld applications.

(2) Search for a microomniam producing a hormone action-
related substance by the use of animal cultured cells and devel~
opment of production technoiogy by a microorganism
-(3) Development of D-peptide decomposition enzyme and
:ynthetic enzyme. and development of synthetic technology
for Domino acidccntaining peptide by an enzyme reaction.

Contents:
(1) Developmt of an enzyme hurcu‘on control substance
The stnreture of phosphodiesterase-obstmctln; asbstsoce
produced bye newly fotrndmicroorpanismvasanaiyzedbya
method such. as analysis urine a machine or tool.
(2) Search for a microorunism producing hormone action-
relsred substances
Examination was made about production conditions and sep-
aration and refinement of a blood pressure-reducing mbstance
obtained in the previous ﬁscal year.
(3) Development of technology for production and separa-
tion of enzyme decompodn; We
(a) Examination was made about production conditions for
enzyme decomposingD-peptldebyamicroorganmnoboained
by separation and selection from nature. (0)11» inﬂuence of
temperature. ion strength and lrind of enzyme (mainly molecu-
lar weight) exerted over aqueous two-phase distribution was
analyzed.

Process:

(1) Mainspreviousﬂscalyearnmieroormnismproduc
inea substanceobetrucrinenhoephodieaterasevasdiscomed
and it was potable toenmn. rulrore conditionsand therefore.
completelyreﬂnethisobstruetinasbttance.

(2) inanordinuymuamwtureconditionsfortbesystem
ofanimallridneyceiiswereesrminedandbytheseceilsn
method ofexaminineabormone.nrcbasvasopmsinwases-
tablished. From" i9w.asamecialstudy.abormoneex-
armningmethodbyradioiminoaanymethodwasexaminedand
separation and search {or a becllus producinaa blood pressure
controlsubstancewascarriedoot.

62 _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(3) In FY l980. search for a bacillus deootnporin; peptide
oontainluD-aminoacldwaacarriedoutandltmpoWe
to aeparata taro ldnda ofbacilli. With reference to an aqueous
two-phase distribution method. examination was made about
thelnmenoeofthe lrindofpolymarandpiiexertedoverthe
diatrimion coeﬂlcient.

4. Reeearch Concerning Engineering Synthetic Utiliza-
tion of Enzyme Functi tione

(tree—1934) run-none. km Institute
(Seed-l SM!)

Tue“

Enzyme reactions are to be ayaterrutiud enslnurlngiyto
develop high-deuce utiimtion technology to provide applica
tionstothecherucalengineerlncandmedicallnduatriea. More

speciﬁcally. development of the following recluiologlaa iabaln.
aimed at-

(I) Preparationofanionaelectivemembnnehavinganowl
function

(2) Deteloprnent of general enzyme ﬁxing technoloy by
the above ion selective membrane and it: novel applicadon

Contents:

(l) Examination ofaprocaaaforpreparingamrmbrane
aubatancehavinganlonexchanprftmctionwaacarriedout.

(2) Bunination was made ofgeneral ﬁxing conditions for
enzymeureaaebytheabovemembnnenrbatanoe.

Prone“:
In FY I980. by using pchlorornethyl polystyrene as a
starting material and working thereon ethylene dianlne and

trimethyl amine. it waa poaaible to prepare a polyatyrane-
derlvatiee containing quaternary amine. Next. uain; the tame
derivative. it was poaible to nuke more into the state of

microcaprulesbyadryingmethodlnallquid.

5. Research Concerning Development and Proceasing
Euchnolozy of an Active High Polymer of an Organ-

(l978-1982) Roaearch institute for Polymers and Texaco
(W SW)

Tarpt:

in order to develop an engineering proceae utilitins the
function of an organism effectively in the energyaavln; acid.
a continuous chemical process at room temperature, by ﬁxing

ofanactivehidtpolyrnarofanorganiamiatobedeaisned.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Counts:
(I) Research of development of an active high polymer of
an organism

As a model of a functional hiﬂt polymer. a composite ttnit
of nickel borate and polysinyl alcohol or polyvinyl pyrrolldone
was selected and in order to raise catalytic activities. optimum
production conditions in a colloidal state having a large surface
area were sought. and at the same time. stabiiiaation area at.
tempted. Further. with reference to a liquid membrane using a
copoiymer containing vinyl adenines. its auction as a reaction
place was eiucidated. And. the inﬂuence by a liquid crystal ex.
erted over the asymmetric synthen's reaction to be carried out
in a cholesteric liqu crystal solvent. was crammed with the
posibiiity of realizing the structure of an organimHllre function
being soudtt.
(2) Research of processing technology by titration

An apparatus having a ﬁlter paper-type titted carrier with a
large surface area.waausedandacontinuousen:yme reaction
experiment at a high-now rate was carried out.Further. a corn-
posite apparatus capable of carrying out a nonaqueous enzyme
reaction was constructed on an experimental basis. and using
the already made fixed carrier. a basic experiment for process-
ing was carried out.

Progress:
(1) Research for development of an active high polymer of
an organism

Various metal complex-type polypeptides were synthesized
to evaluate the active function of an organism and the oxygen
transporting function of a cobalt-histidine complex was ascer-
tained. The catalytic effects of a hydrophobic liquid membrane
were recognized. (one patent application was filed on thebasis.)
The dependence on the temperature of a liquid crystal of the
cholesteric series and a cholesterol liquid crystal was clarified
to ascertain change as places for the reaction.
(2) Research for processing technology by ﬁxation

it was ascertained that the adsorption activity of enzyme
by aminoacetalized. sulfonated and ion compiexed poly-
vinyl alcohol was high (three patent applications were filed
on the basis) and the properties of a fixed membrane by optical
cross-linking was analyzed. it was ascertained that an ad-
sorption-type center adsorbed a large amount of enzyme by
the surface treatment with fine fiber. establishment ofa simul-
taneous enzyme reaction and filtration system incorporated
with a filter paper-type carrier. using the same. was carried
out (one patent application was filed on the basis).

6. Research Concenting a Material of a High Polymer
Having a Pharmacological Action

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1980—1984) Research Indium for Polymers and Textiles
(Swill Studn

Target:

The contribution of medicines to medical welfare and
securing of resources is very great. This research is charac-
terized by utilizing properties inherent in a high polymer
possessed by an organism and a synthesized high polymer. and
development of materials of a high polymer having a plum-
loglcai action from the two aspects ofthe syntheds ofa mole-
cule having a pharmacological activity. and synthesis of a high
polymer helping a pharmacological activity was carried out.

Contents:

( 1) Research of a high polymer for slowly releasing medicines
(a) Research of a high polymer chemically connecting a medi-
cine: The hormone activity of a watersoluble high polymer
bonding somatostatin was measured and the relation between
the bonding method and the activity was examined.

(1» Research of a high polymer physically retaining a medi-
cine. The medicine stabilizing action and it slow release of
cyclodextrin becoming a crossiinlred high polymer were ex-
amined. Further. the crossilnlting conditions were examined.

(2) Research of a high polymer having a pharmacological
action

(a) Research on the synthesis of peptide havinga pharmacol-
oucai activity: As polypeptide. hid: in activity. a somatoseation
derivative was synthesized and its aetivitywaameasured. The
evaluation of recognition of an indispensable metal ion in an
organism of biacyclopeptide containing a synthesized non-
protein amino acid and a basic amino acid. wascarrledout.
(b) Research of syntheds of a high polymer havinga pharma-
coloﬁcal activity: The cancer inhibiting action of a maleic
anhydride - vinyl ester oopolymer bonding Siluorouracil
and nitrogen mustard, was examined. .

(3) Research of a high polymer having a. pharmacological
aetion and a capacity of recomidng the affected part

' The mark recognizing capacity (for example. gathering to
the affected liver) possessed by latex. was examined.

Progress:

(I) Research of a high polymer for slowly releasinga medi-
cine

(a) Research of a high polymer chemically bonding a medi-
cine. Somatostatin was bonded lonicaily to a watercoluble
high polymer and the strength of bonding was measured.

(b) Research of a high polymer physically retaining a medi-
cine: The medicine utbilizing capacity of cyclodextrin was
measured.

(2) Research of a high polymer having a pharmacological
action

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in) Research of polypeptide having pharmacological activity:
Somatosutin having a hormone action was synthesized by a
solid-phase method and biscyclopeptide having an ionofore
(phonetic) action was synthesiud by a liquid-phase method.
(b) Research on the synthesis of a synthetic hid! polymer
having a pharmacolopcal activity: it was studied to bond
a maleic anhydride - divinyl ester eopolymer to S-ﬂuoroura-
cii. a cancer-inhibiting drug,

7. Research of an Adsorption-Type Aniﬁcial Kidney
Material and Its System '

(l98l-l984) Research institute for Polymers and Taattiiea
(W 5M1!)

Target:

in order to contribute to medical welfare and the infor-
mation industry's technology. for the purpose of developing
a material for adsorption-type artiﬁcial intemai organs and a
blood component sensor, a material having a particular func-
tion of adsorng or responding to organism components
and Its system was studied.

Contents:
(1) Research on an adsorbing material of organism com-
ponents and its system

A composite high polymer material combining polyhydroxy
ethyl methacryiate (PHEMA) with various materials such as an
inorganic adsorbent was prepared and the selective adsorbing
capacity to speciﬁed electrolytes such as inorganic phosph-
orus was examined to seelt the compatibility with an organism
of these compodte materials.

(2) Research of a blood cornpcnent sensor

in order to control reaction between ieucine amino peptide
and a substrate. an experiment centering around pH control
was carried out.

Progress:

In the special research conducted until FY 1980. a hunnn
body function substituting system was studied and the follow.
ing results were obtained:

(l) A plasma separator ws developed to obtain the possibili-
ty of realizing an adsorption-type artiﬁcial kidney, and at the
same time. direction of development concerning novel absorb-
ing materials was found.

(2) Researchot'an artificial intermiorgancircuitwascar-
ried out and knowledge of a material having thrombus re-
sistance was obtained.

(3) in a research of an adsorption system initiated from FY
I978. an adsorbent to a poisonous substance. such as am-
monia. was developed. A research entitled “Research concem-
ing separating technology of omniam components" at the

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

expense of the Special Research Promotion Adjustment Fund
of the Science and Technology Agency. was carried out in FY
1979 and 1980. in “Special research concerning energy of an
organism" conducted until FY I980. new knowledge was ob-
tained about the electric potential of an organism membrane.
Also. an oxygen electrode aimed at urea and OPT was fabri-
cated and made into a sensor.

enamel: Concerning an Information Handling
System ofan Organism

(I’M-I990) (Electrolcchnlcll laboram (89%” Study)

Target:

This research will solidify the basis of development of the
information handling technology and measuring technology
of a hidr degree. in the next generation. by elucidating the
mechanism of an excellent information handling function

possessed by an organist.

Contents: .
(1) Research of acceptance and conversion technology of
information obtained by visual sense -

For the purpose of separating the visual stimulus procea
frosutheouterirnottotheinnerltnotofthevisualcell.the
feed-beck process from the secondary neuron to the visual
cell. the electric potentialofasinglecelloftherodvisualceil
and the pyramid visual cell. “unwantednndlhe response
ofthisvisualcelltoanopticelstirnuluswasexarnined. Also.
a computer sinulation of the electric potential generating mem-
brane ofthevisual cell. wascarriedoutandthephotoeiectric
conversion function W: considered.

(2) Reeeerch on stimulating membranes of an organism
0f proteins constituthtg the stimulatir; membranes of an
omnirmmellularboneproteinnwchaseverysmalltubular
microﬁlarnent are considered to control the function ofgen-
eration anddisseminatlonofstirnulusverenoticedandthe
physiolodcel functions of these proteins were elucidated
indetail.
(3) Research on formation of an organic imitation place and
revelation of the function

The change of stnrcture of membranes. such as riboeom.
taken place when a peculiar interaction is carried out between
molecules in the medium and an organism by simple riboeom
and a lipid membrane abnormally accumulated. was closely
examined.

(4) Research on the ibnction of a composite neuron group
system .

For the purpose of clarifying a highly relhble transmission
mechanism due to the parallel and cooperative information
handling of a composite neuron group:

(a) The effective computer utilizing method to the analysis
ofsystem data ofan organismwhenithasalargecenecity.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was established. (it) The alprithrn extracting interdependence ‘
in terms of space and time of the system at the time of apply-
in; an impulse to thesctivity oftheneurongroup.wasde~
veloped.
(5) Research intemtsofinfonnationsystentofthefunction
of an organism
(a) The perceptual interaction of a motion diagram and a
still diagram was examined using an optical illusion diagram.
(1:) The function of information handling of neuron cells
inthevisualnervesystem.wasexammo from thevlewpoint
of space frequency analysis and the evoking eyeball motion.
(6) Research on the responsive characteristics of color sense
stnicture

For the purpose of elucidating responsive characteristics
of color sense structure necenary for establimingthe predict-
ing form ofa visible coiorofacoloredmatterunderoptional
illumination conditions, the follow‘mg searches were carried
out.
(a) lite stimulus presenting portion of an apparatus for ex-
perimenting with a reactive color response was developed.
(it) The responsive characteristics to the strength ofa stimulat-

ing light of outer ltneedtaped cells ofan organism. was ex.
tracted.

Progress:

This research attempted to elucidate the function of an or.
pnism‘as an organically connected information handlln system
from FY l98l. on the basis ofachievement ofthe "
concerning the information handling function of an organism"
complewd in FY 1980.

(I) Ruearch on acceptance and conversion functions of
information perceived by the vintal sense
lntlte“ResearchonrespomivefunctionsoftheVIsual
sense system.” color signal transmission characteristics of
horizontal cells and the bedtground optical eﬂ’ect to the ac-
cepting ﬁeld of bipolar cells were made clear. and at the same
time. antagonism (reciprocity) of a color ignal and space
information in the accepting field of the visual sense of boti‘ the
cells, were considetedandafeed-bacltsignaltothevinialcelis
from these celh. was confirmed.
(2) Research on the function of a stimulating membrane of
an orga'nhm

in the “Research of information handling function of an
organism." for the ﬁrst time in the world. breeding of squids
in a water vessel was carried out ntocessi‘ully. making possible
a constant supply samples of good quality. and at the same
time. it was elucidated that the phenomenon of nerve stimulus

wasofthe same typeas the phenomenon oflaeeroecillation.
Further. restructure of the nerve was realmd.

(3) Research on formation of a synthetized organiser: imita-
tion position and revelation ofthe function

in the “Research on the physical properties oforgan'nm-
related substances." a model liquid crystal of an organism was

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CDPYRIGET:

C80:

4120/171

dovelopedandanlmnldnnpofmllquldcrymlalon.
unhionlndlntennolewlatlntenalon.waemdedear. A

(4) Mummofacompoallemonuoup

aynem
hlhe“monthemodellngofmmlonofa
nemuoup." nmduoompaaelecaodeuppammwdeveo
makinhnpoeahletomotddmultaneooaly them-
“WWoﬂbmm. thin-dimension.
allydlmibotedandeﬁsduloeallylnthelooalandnﬂao-
namlnFYlWB-l980.aleamkunemmodelapeble
ofmemauodlymmmmaoquﬁ-
llonofleaminhndbeenpropoeedandamlyud.
(S) Raearohonhlnctionofanomnlnninmmof-an
lufonuodonayuem
lnlhe“Ruaa:choneeyetemoflnfonnatlonhnndllm
function ofanomnlun."chronicexpuimentalteclmolo¢yof
aoetweeublialde'needgeemplndzingecﬁonofadb
mmwptovedbytheneuronoellaofaeat UalnsPocken-
Median-am. Wintencﬁonofaeﬁlldhyamanda
mlondlammmaanudedm.
(6) Researchonlhemponaivedumtedniceoftheoolor
mm.
Ftomthevleualevoldngbralnwevenmponeelntneopv
podleeolotmextmted fonheﬂmtlmelnthe worktA
nerve joining model concerning color adaptability was devised.
and Mabel. a nonlinear color-odapuble model wudeveloped.
m model made it possible to automatically predict varlous

color preceivlng phenomena hithmo «needed as independent.

i

1981 rim Wing Menorah co., Ltd.
F0! OFFIOAL USE ONLY

:3 or 3:0ch WIS (2)

t mglaah Vol. 14, lo 11, Nov 81 pp 40-45

9. Research on Adaptability of a Synthetieed Poly-
amino Acid Composite Membrane to a Material oi'
the Outerth Cutie Layer

(me-1m) am mam Research menu)
WM)

‘1‘ t:
nlgeorsecuringcutist"otgrai’tlns.mu¢:lttlrneantilabotls
required and considerable human and material Investment
is also required. in addition. it is said that'there is a problem
in storage of arch cutie over long periods. Therefore, for
covering dantsged areas of the cutis outermost layer and pro-
tecting the areas until the epithelhtm reclaims theteon. develo
opment of a woundeoverin; materhl of a composlte mem~
brane. composed of synthetic polyamlno acid was made the
target.
Content:
(I) An expetlmem for examination concerning the adapt-
ability as a materhl for the cutie outermost. of a composite
polyamlnc acid/vinyl polymer membrane carried out in. the
previous ﬁscal year. was continued. Namely. a composite
membrane of a Teﬂon vinyl polymer. etc. was synthesized.
having physical properties such as penneabt’lity of saccharide,
electrolyte, oxygen and aoueousvapot. aswell as strength and
elongation. and was measured.
(b) As a polyamino acid membrane. a carbobenzoxylldlne-
benzyl glutamate copolymer membrane and its composite
membrane were synthesized. the relationship between the
copolymet composition and making it hydrophilic is made
ciesr.and measurement ofthesameasin (a)wascsrriedout
to examine aptitude as a atbstitute for the cutie.
Progress:

During the period from FYI973 to FYl9TI, “Research
concernm'thesynthesisofahighpolymetmembranehavm'
a physiological action and a penneatln; membrane" was
carriedout.Maklnganaminoacidpolymerwhichwasthe

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

closest to protein. constituting an organhm was made the
object. tvhoae membrane-forming property and permeability
were explained. in the ﬁrst year of this research. FY1978. as
a chemically treatable polyamino acid membrane. membranes
of polymethionine membrane. polybenzyl glutamate mem-
brane and a leucine-benzyl glutamate copolyrner were taken
up. and malthg only one surface thereof . hydrophilic properties
were studied. Structural analysis was also carried out. in
FY1979. with reference to membranes obtained by uniting
one surface and two surfaces thereof. hydrophllic. their
strength. elongation. permeability of oxygen and aqueous
vapor as tvell as solute. were meoured to examme their
functions as substitutes for the cutis. in FY1980. for the
preparation of a composite membrane of a vinyl polymer
and poiyamino acid. a plasma treatment was carried out to
improve bondability.

lo. Rceearch on thorine-Containing Functional
Materials of An Organism

09744980 (Government industrial Renard initiate.
NreovnNSr-dI-ISW)

Target:

A ﬂuorine chemical manufacture using ﬂuorine chemistry.
has already been studied and developed extensively. as a life
scienceeelated industry. especially. concerning research and
development of materials for functions organisms based on
ﬂuorinecontaining organic compounds, to which attention
has been paid. For example. development of fluorocarbon as
artificial blood (oxygen transporting liquid) and research on
the synthesis of ﬂuorine-containing amino acid derivatives.
anticipated to have physiological activity. at present attract
attention. ’

This laboratory has heretofore been engaged in research
of ﬂuorine chemistry. whose achievements have been hthly
evaluated in and out of Japan. making such achievements as
the basis. research is being driven forward. such as the synthesis
of materials for artiﬁcial blood and physiologically active
compounds. playing a guiding role for the further development
of Japan’s ﬂuorine chemistry and industry as well as life science.
Content: '

(1) Synthesis of ﬂuorocarbons

hrﬂuoroalkyl substituted adarrnntanes were synthesized
by electrolytic ﬂuorination of adarnantanes having halogenated
alkyls or ﬂuorination by high-degree metal ﬂuoride. The
characteristics of the perﬂuorocarbons obtained were corn-
pared with those of previously synthesized materials and their
evaluation as artificial blood was carried out.

(2) Synthesis of ﬂuorineoontaining surface active agents

Surface active agents of the perﬂuoroallryl group series
containing phosphorus and nitrogen were synthesized and the
various properties of ﬂuorocarbon emulsions (emulﬂcation

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rate. distribution of particle size. turbidity. etc.) of these
surface active agents were meantred. Further. the performance
of materials for artificial blood as emulsifiers was sought. and
at the same time. these agents were compared with nonionic
ﬂuorine-containing surface active agents in respect of emulsify-
ing properties and the results were studied.

(3) Synthesis of ﬂuorine-containing amino acids

By introducing the periluoroaliryi group to the imidazol ring
of histidinee. synthesis of iluorinecontaining amino acids.
each having a physiological action. was carried out. Also. the
synthesis of fluorine-containing derivatives of histidines and
urocantns that. are metabolic intermediates in an organism
wasattempted.

Progreu:

Based on the technology and results accumulated by the
research of ﬂuorine chemistry at the laboratory. mearch
concerning materials for the function of a fluorinecontainlng
organism was carried out. Namely. in the research on the
synthesis of ﬂuorocarbon as materials for artiﬁcial blood
(oxygen transporting liquid). in FY 191e, perﬂuorocycloalltanes
were synthesized by an electrolytic ﬂuorination method. in
FY1975. triﬂuoromethyl substituted petiiuoro-cyclohettanee
were synthesized. in FY1977. a chain-like perﬂuoroether was
synthesized, in FY1978. long chain perﬂuorocerbon ethers
were synthesized. FY1979. perfluoroadamantane was synthe-
sized and FY1980. per ﬂuoroalltyl adarnantane was synthesized.
in research on the synthesis of ﬂuorine-containing surface
active agents. in FY1974, an addition the reaction of ﬂow-
alcohol. fluorocarboxylic acid and ethylene oxide was also
carried out. in FY197$.addition reactions of periluorocarboxy~
iic acid. amid perﬂuorocarboxyiate and ethylene oxide were
carried out. in FY1976. addition reactions of ﬂuorine-contain.
ing alcohols having various structures. a ﬂuorine-containing
carboxylic acid derivative and ethylene oxide were carried
out. in FYi977. addition reactions of a ﬂuorinated ester
and amines were carried out. in FY1978. a ﬂuorinecontain‘atg
surface active agent was prepared by a 1:] addition reaction
of longchain ﬂuoroailtyl and ethylene oxide was carried out.
in FY1979. a multimoiar adduct was synthesized by a similar
reaction. and in FY1980. ﬂuorocarbon emulsions were pre-
pared by these nonionic fluorine-containing surface active
agents and their behaviors as emulsifiers were elucidated. In
research on the synthesis of ﬂuorineoontaining amino acids.
in FY1974. ﬂuorine-containing alanins were synthesized. in
FY1975. ﬂuorine-containing phenyl alanins were synthesized
and in FY1976.'alanins. each having a ﬂuorinecontaining furil
group were synthesized. in FY1977, a ﬂuorine-containing
amino acid precursor was synthesized. in FY1978. amino
acid having a ﬂuoropyridine group. a iiuorophenyl group or
a ﬂuoroaliryi group was synthesized. in FY1979. examination
of a process for synthesizing ﬂuorine-containing amino acid
via oxazoie. and the synthesis of amino acid haviru a substio
tuted polyﬂuorophenyl group were carried out. and in FY1980.
the synthesis of a valine derivative containing a polyﬂuoroalltyl
group and the synthesis of amino acid having a pentalluoro-

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

phenylthyroxy group were carried out. in “1917—1980, an
entrusted research concerning a material for ﬂuorocarbon
oxygen transporting liquid was arried out at the Medicine
Paculty,of Osalta University.

ll. Resend! Concerning Blood Compatibility of
High-polymer Material and Application to Artiﬁ-
cial internal Organs

(revs—1981) (Government iaduatrhl Reeeuch Meats.
Osaka) (Speck! Study)

Research Concerning the Medical Evaluation of Thrombus
Resistance of a High-Polymer Material, m Antithrombosis
Substance and a “0050M“ Substance Fixing Material

(Citadel Ml! WtofNMOanIoapltaI)
WM)

Target:
Artificial internal organs are now contributing to life saving
of many people, however. there are still many unexplained
points to be solved. The ﬁrst such important point is that a
hidwoiymer material for artiﬁcial internal organs should be
resistant to thrombosis.ﬂiswerchwiilexaminetheproblem
of blood coagulation by a high~poiymer materhl to establidi
the guiding principle for development of an antithrornbosis
material, and at the same time. improve the thrombus resistance
of existing materials and additionally, develop a new dialysis
system. such as an artiﬁcial kidney. wherein lice the target.
(1) Research on surface characteristics of a material and
blood compatibility
The surface structure of a material. interaction of physical
properties and blood components. and the physical properties
ot'a material for melting it into heparin. must be made clear
to obtain the guiding principle for develophrg antithromboaia
material.
(2) Synthesis of a material compatible with blood and its
application to artiﬁcial internal organs
(a) by a surface poiymerintion method. and a mince
modification method. an antithromboais material will be
developed. (b) By research of a polysaccharide composite
membrane. a new dialysis system will be developed.
Content:
(1) Research on surface characteristia of the material and
blood compatibility
(a) The interaction of a material‘s surface and blood corn~
ponents: The surface characteristics of mterlals different in
thrombosis-forming capacity. and adsorption of plasma
protein, are measured using mainly. a spectroscopic method.
And adhesion of the thrombocyte and change of the shape
are observed by both optical and electron microscom The
measured results or the two are compared and examined to

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

collect the correlation between adhesion of the tluombocyu,
adsorption of protein, and the kind of material. (is) With
reference to materials. making a matter into heparin (covalent
bond method. electrovaient bond method) different in threes»
bus resistance, bonding density and content, the elution be-
havior (safety) of these bonded heparins were W and
the relation with the thrombus resistame was coiiemd.
(2) Synthesisoi'smaterialcompatibiewithbloodandite
application to artificial internal organs
(a) Synthesis of a composite antithromboais material:
Appiyhg surface polymerisation and surface modiﬁcation
treatment methods. thrombus resistance is improved. and
various tubes were made and experiments using animals with
these tubes were carried out to evaluate the aptitude as a
blood circuit material. (b) Rewards on a dialysis system
twinge newfunction:hasedontheanalyudreeultsofa
very unall amount of urine components obtained in the previous
year. the practical evaluation of a poiysaeclnride composite
mane as an artiﬁcial dialysis membrane was carried out.
ass:
(1) Research on the material surface and the blood compati-
bility
In FY1978, for research of the surface structure of a
material. $8M. ATR infrared methods. and a Raman total
internal reﬂection method were employed to examine the
ntri‘ace structure. Especially. concerning the Raman total
internal reﬂection method, a measurim technique was estab-
lished. A Place! (phonetic) system for a microscope was made
on an experimental basis to examhie the relation between
the ﬂowing conditions of the thrombocyte and plans. and
the adhesion of the thromboeyte. In silicone rubber becoming
heparin byscovalentmthod.increaseofthedensityof
heparin bond increased the retaining strength of heparin and
aoodthrombusteaistancewasshowninanorganlstn
FYI979. using the Raman total intemai reﬂeccion method. a
double-layer sample was measured. the measurable airface
thicknesswssexamined indetail.Thebasiccapabilityasa
- surface measuring method was established. With reference to
1 kinds ofhigh-poiymer material andékindsot’plasma portion,
the adsorbed amounts of protein were unarmed and their
relationship with thrombus resistance was ectamined. With
reference to quaternary basic polymers. their cation contents
and the underwater dissociation behavior of anion complex
of an acid coloring matter and the polymers were made clear.
in FYl980. using a Fourier infrared internal reﬂection spectro-
scopic method. the adsorbed amounts of plasma protein and
lipid were meaasred and their relation With the kind of material
was clariﬁed. With refererice to matter grafted to polyethylene.
the hydrophilic degree. distribution ofgrait chahtsand adhesion
of thrombocyte, change of the shape and relationship thereof
with thrombus resistance were examined.
(2) The rynthee's of a materhl compatible with blood and
its appliatit :oartihciallnternal organs
in Hl978. a high-polymer mm was impregnated with
many compounds. thereafter. a glow discharge treatment was

MWUSEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carriedoutandtherelationahlpofthemmwiththethrombus
reshtanoe was examined. And from a polyethylene graft co-
polymer. a high-polymer complex was synthesized. The
membrane-making conditions of a chitoeon membrane were
examined. a membrane excellent in solute permeability was
obtained and the relationship between the membrane structure
and the permeable characteristics wu clarified. Siloxene having

a polar ntbstlnrent was synthesized and various properties
thereof wereexamined.

in FY1979, a now discharge treatment method was
examined and the reletlondlp between thrombus resistance

of a sample and the treated effect was mntined. The safety
of the syntheziad high-polymer ebctroiyte complex was
tested to ascertain tint it was sufﬁciently stable. A composite
membrane of the chltoean ﬁbrous active carbon series was
prepared. and pemteabillty and 'adsorbing capacity were
examined.1\voltindsofsillconcompound,eechhavinga

polargroup,wereselectedanda lowmoleculerweightpolymer
wasobtained therefrom.

in FY1980. it was shown that l.2-po|ybutadiene material
subjected to a glow discharge treatment was improved in
thrombus resistance and there was no deterioration of the
substrate. The thrombus reﬁnance of a high-polymer elec-
trolytecomplexwasevaluatedlnanomniam.Andltwas
made clear that graft acrylamlde to polyethylene waseapeclally
signiﬁcantlnthrombusreslstance.Theanalyaisofurtne
components was carried out and it was clear that cellulose
membrane and chltotan membrane differed considerably in

pemteabillty and adsorbing properties.

12. Reneerch Concerning Development of Biochem-
lcal Pulping Technology

0980-1983) (Government lnduatrhl Rees-eh Mute,
MHSW SW)

Target:

As pulping methods, until now there have been. roughly.
only two kinds, namely. a mechanical pulping method and
a chemical pulping method. From the viewpoint of effective
utilization of unused natural resources, it is necessary to
newly add to these a biochemical pulping method. An object
of this research resides in establlehhg the basis of applied
technology to nonwood fiber out of a blochemlal pulping
method. The most important material of nonwood ﬁbers.
is best ﬁber. which is used for making high-class paper.
Therefore, this reaeerch aims broadly, at searching fot the
Icind of bacillus producing an enzyme synem effective for
pulping best, using such bacillus in overcoming a slow motion
rate whichisaahortcomhgpoaaeseedhytheenzymmand
searching for a new biochemical pulping system for making
pulp having paper-making characteristics comparing favorably
with chemical pulp.

75
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Content:
(I) Research on technologyfor producingapulpingenzyme

In order to advance the productivity of the enzyme of
Bacillus sp. CIR-277. separated and identified at this laboratory.
using a physicochemical method.vatious species were produced.
A ten-fold productivity of the present productive capacity of
enzyme was aimed at.
(2) Researchon pulping technology

Continuous to the previous ﬁscal year. optimum pulping
conditions were sought centering around the relationship
berweentheamountofenzymeandthedegmofpulping.
(3) Evaluation of biochemicelpulp

The physical properties of a pulp sheet and paper-making
characteristics were examined and evaluation was also made
concerning the correlation between pulping conditions and
physical ptopertiee of the resultant pulp sheet. Again. com-
parison with pulping by Erwinh enayme was carried out.

see:

Pmgfagtwoupofbaciilihav'htgail'irtityvrlthallraii.therewas
what produced a pectin-decomposed enzyme and as a most
powerful productive bacillus. Bacillus sp._ CIR-277, was
obtained. This bacillus produced iyase pectate by alkali
culture. By examining culture conditions from various angles.

it was possible to herease the enzyme productive capacity
to 5-10 times. And it turned out that a pulp sheet comparim

favorably with chemical pulp sheet was obtained by either
letting’s (phonetic) method or an enzyme method.

I. Research on Visual Sense Function and Simulation

(Study in FY1980 (Med-raid EM laboratory)

The nervestructureofacompoeiteeyevisihlesysumis
being examined, and at the same time. application of the image
handling to the medical none will be explained.

(I) The nerve structure of the information handling mechan-
ismin thecompoaiteeyevimalsensenervesystemwillbe
analyzed.

(2) The treating method for automatic detection of focus
at the liver and R1 image. will be established.

2. Research on Energy Conversion Organism-like
Functional Material

(StudthYl98l) (Nation! Chennai laboratory for
WM) '

From an organism having high activity and a stable energy

conversion wstern, an energy conversion element is to be
extracted and incorporated in a stabilized artificial membrane.

76
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and u an artificial energy conversion element. on aggregate
of various coloring matter: and electronic carrier: it to be
preparedandtheenergyconvereionfunctionofutiﬂdal
membranes incorporating the aggregates (lipid membrane.
liquid rnernbrane)ietobemmined.

3. Reaearch of Organism-like Reaction Transporting
Membrane

(SMthYl981)(Natioml Che“ Lobautory [or
My)

heed on previously conducted research concerning pre-
perationot‘anartlhcialomnisnmetnbrane,tim ofall.an
efficient eeparatiu membrane, especially a merubrene which
could aeparateantbetencesirnlartoanorganicntbetance.
letobedeveloped. lnacarbonicacidﬂxlngreection. a
motion :yntheeiﬁnga aiow rnoleauar weight oranlc acid
having about 4 carbon arm from C0,. is to be examhied
andlnreeearchot‘anartiticiaienzyrne.oiddiud.thena
reduced enzyme rnodel is to be prepared and its functions are
tobeexarnined.

4. Reecarch on Stability of Spherical Protein and
“needirnensional Structure

(sueyurvmt) M mum to. Polynte and
Textiiee)

By changing the annular state of spherical proteet. tuch to
an enzyme. condition: for enabling enzyme to maintain the '
enzynmic activity and its structure at a high degree at high
and low tempereturee. is to be aought. in this ﬁscal year.
aaccharide peculiarly bonding to title protein will be added
nuinly to a Iyeozinte solution to measure the change of the
bonding constant by temperature and the inﬂuence given by
the bond formed over stability to hear of the structure of a
high degree of lyeozirne will be sought.

5. Physical Properties of e Nucleic Acid and its
utilization as a Functional Material

(Studyhl’Yl’Sl) (Research Institute for Polymer: end
Textilee

Various characteriatice of a nucleic acid fragment will be
clarified front the study of its phyticai properties and at the
same time. creation of functional groupe utilizing these

77
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

characteristics will be attempted. in this ﬁscal year. the inter-
action of a nucleic acid {haunt and a substance of a different
lrind will be studied and its applicationAas a Nat-polymer
material for selective separation will be examined.

6. Research on interaction Between a High-polymer
Interface and Cells

(Stttdy’mFYlnl) (Research institute for Palm and
Text“)

The interaction of cells and protein with a hidwolymer
interface is being investigated in connection with the physical
properties of the material surface and acquisrtion ot’ the basis
of the material designing in separation tecltnoiogy of cells
and protein. development of an antithrombosis material and
cultme technology of cell. is aimed at. in this fiscal year. the
adsorbing belnvior of the thromhocyte with reference to
natural and synthetic high polymer material whose surface
characteristics are controlled and the connection between
the adsorbing behavior and the surface physical properties.
such as surface energy and surface electric charge. are being
sought systematically.

7. Fixation of Membrane of an Organism and its
Selective and Active Transport

(Studyiaf‘llnl) (Rcaearclt laminate for Polymers ad
Textiles)

For the purpoee of realizing utilization of the selective

aura active'tranaporting hmctions of various metal ions

by the membrane ot'anorganistixationot‘themembme
oftheorgamantoahighvpolymermateriaiﬁsbeingat-
tempted. To that end. formation and culture of plotoplast

of a microorganism and bonding between plotoplaets and
bonding to a lipid membrane is being attempted to reel: their

stabilized conditions. Further. they will be eyntheshed. and
bonding to high-polymer materials is to be examined.

8.Reeearch of Constitution of a Chemical Sensor
for Organismvimitation Organic Membrane

(Study'nFYNSl) (Ranch Institute {a Polymers and
W)

A creame has the capacity of detecting and discriminating
very small amounts of chemical substances as taste and smell.
ltisalsolcnowntlutacrearurerevealsthefunctionof
acceptingchemical kti'ormation and converting it to an electric

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

si 1 and hand] such signal at a level of the membrane

the organism. research aims at artiﬁcially reproducing
this chemically accepting function and utilizing a reproduced
function as a chemical sensor. In this fiscal year. a method
of forming a thin membrane using an organism substance and
the change of physical properties shown by the thin membrane
in the presence of a chemical substance will be examined.

9. Synthesis of Cyclic Peptide and its Substrate Dis-
aiminatirig Capacity

(StudyilFYlnl) (Resend! Institute for Polymers and
Textﬂee)

The balance of the interaction between the ligand of an
organism and the indispensable metal ions in the organism.
is one of the important factors indisputable for maintaining
life. in this research, as a simulating compound of the liond
of an orga‘ism. cyclic peptide will be synthesized and the
mbatrate discriminating capacity to a low molecular weight
compound is to be made clear. in this ﬁscal year. using cyclic
peptide having a discriminating capacity of various cations
of elements in Groups l and II of the Periodic Table obtained
in previous ﬁscal year as an object. tho structural chemical
conditions for revealhtg the discriminating capacity. is to be
examined and consideration will be made about the molecular
design and functional design of the novel cyclic peptide.

[0. Structure of Hydrogel and its Compatibility with
an Organism

(StudylnFYl98l) (Research institute for Polymers nil
Textiles)

The structure of hydrogel of the PVA series will be analyzed
and the basic data for developing a new material compatible
with an organiln will be obtained. in this fiscal year, based
on the results obtained in the previous fiscal year. the
interaction between body ﬂuids of an organism and gel will
be evaluated from an In vino experiment by smart: and an
in viva experiment at the amen: ocul! anterior of a rabbit
including the peripheral times of the organism. With reference

to vinyl pyrrolidone graft gel to WA, organism compatibility
will be examined by pouring into a vitreous body.

ll. Research of Nerve Circuit Network

(Study in FY1981) (Blemtechnical Laboratory)

79
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With combination of nerve knots at the abdomen with
those at the brain, side and feet, a pair of cells having direct
bond are to be confirmed by staining in cells. an electrode
for measuring stimulus will be inserted. and the transmission
characteristicebetweenthetwoceilswillbeexaminedusing
a transient memory.

12. Research of Complementary Function of Rod
and Pyramid Visual Cells

(Study in FY1981) (Elecuotecltnial hborasory)

Die eye's spectroscopic sensibility control function. ranging
from seeing in a bright place through seeing in a dark place
via seeing in a dim place. will be examined and the comple-
mentary function of both the pyramid and-rod visual cells
attained in bright/dark adaptation, will be clarified.

13. Research of Numeration of Sense of Smelling

(Study in FYl98l) (25mm Laboratory)

As reeearch of numeraticn of the sense of smiling by the
induced electric potential, the concentration of a smelling
substance melting the nostrils.-wlll be precisely determined
and especially the technology of detecting and ﬁltering a bad
smell will be developed to carry out advancement of brain
shape analysis. On the other hand, a molecular, physiological
basic research will be carried out ccnceming the initial process
of accepting the sense of smelling.

14. Research on Weighing Mode of Perceptual Judg-
ment

(Study it FYI981) (Industrhl Products Reurch Institute)

Development of the weighing model of human perceptual
judgment and scrutiny of its practical nature will be studied.
By this, quantiﬁcation and predictlon of perceptual judgment
characteristics will be made easy. at the same time, the rearlts
will be made data for establishing the psychological measuring
method for designing and evaluating industrial products and
nuklng the method instrumental.

ls. Physiological and Engineering Research on Con-
trol Mechaan of Voluntary Action

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Study inFY1981) “In“ Products Rm Institute)

The control mechanism of cooperative activity of muscles
infundamental actionsoi'manwlllbeclariﬁedudngphysiologi-
celandengineeringmethods,andbasedontheeedata.the
ﬁtndamentalcharactemtiaofohstaclestomotionareto
boobtahed,endetthesametime.baeicdataistobeobtained
aimhgattheweifateoihandicappedpersonsinl‘unctionsoi‘
locomotion and development of electronic instruments mess-

on.

16. Research of Information Handling Mode in the
Central Nerve

(Study it mm mm mam numb institute)

An orientation reaction related to signal detection and the
action of memory and learning related to extraction of the
characteristics of a rural will be physiopsycitologiceiiy sought
to elucidate the nerve mechanism and a way for emineering
applications of these vital functions by simulation usirg a
nuthemstical model. will be opened.

17. Research of Visual Sense Mechanism

(Study in FY1981) (lndttatahl Products Renard inﬁnite)

Ofthevisualsense mechanlern.themechanlsmoi‘coior
sense and eyehan motion will be examined. With reference
to the color sense, quantiﬁcation for the industrial utilization
of color and development of s new meaning technology
is to be carried out. With reference to the eyeball motion.
examination will be made concerning development ol‘a machine
for measuring eyeball motion. measuring and exsmhtation
of two-eyeball motion at the time of space perception. and
progressive characteristics of the eyeball motion system
including congestion of infants and those with open eyes
to obtain basic data for development of welfare instruments
for medical use.

18. Research on Transmission of information of
Sensation

(Study in FY1981) (lam Products Renault Induce)

Through the comparative study of ”caution handling
modes of the sensation system. the handling modes peculiar
to the respective sensations. will be made clear. Further.
based on these data, basic data for aiming at development

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of electronic instrument: for welfare and nndlcal care of
physically handicapped persons,lstobeobtained.

19. Research of Decomposition and Inactivation of
Blohazards

(Stndyhil’szl) (Government In“ Development
laboratory. BM)

ﬂee decomposition mechanism of nucleic acid-related arb-

stancesbyoxidlzingecentslstobeexamlnedintheinitlal
fiealyear. -

20. Synthesis of Elastorner of Polyurethane Series
end Application of Such Elastomer to Materiala

for Medical Use

(Smdy'ml-‘YNBD (Gomnment Indttatrial W hal-
tttbe. Onka)

Ethylene oxide- propylene oxide. block copolymera having
various molecular weights and different in polyethylene oxide
content are tobeuaedaaadlol componentlnsynthesizln;
novel polyurethane urea: by reaction between diphenyl
urethane dlisocyanate and ethylene dlamlne, and the mehanical
properties. dynamic properties (vlacoelaaticity) and water
contents ol'theee ureaswllibeexamined.andatthetame
time. theircoegulation resistanceoutsldeanomnlamwlllhe
evaluated. And the inﬂuence of the moleailar weights of the
diol component. polyethylene oxide content and molar ratioe
in reactlon between diol and dilaocyanate exerted over these
characteristics are to be exanuned h detail.

21. Research of Information Handling of a Blood
Vessel [mace

(SMylnFYl98l) (Government M Renard Ind-
tute. M)

As e basic study for elucidatiu the physiological function
of the blood circulation system. the analytical method of
measuring the diameter of the blood ml two-dimensionally
from the blood vessel image. will beexamined.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCI“! AND TRHNOWY

BRIEFS

CURB LSI BIPORTS T0 U.s.—The government has called on saiconductor manufacturers
to "use discretion" in exporting large-scale integrated circuits (1.81) to the
United States, a Ministry of, International Trade and Industry (HITI) official said
Friday [12 February]. The HITI served the notice separately on Hitachi, Nippon
Electric, Fujitsu, Mitsubishi Electric, 001 Electric and Toshiba after the U.S.
National Saiconductor Industry Association began pressuring Washington recently
to curb imports of 6lo-Rilobit ram (random access manory). chips from Japan.
Japanese products currently account for an estimated 70 percent of the Anerican
narket for 6b-kilobit ram chips. The official said the ministry has no statistics
on the export of the 64-kilobit type to the United States. he added. homer.
that Japan was a net integrated circuits (IC) exporter to the United. States, if
by a narrow nargin. in the first 11 months of 1981. The official said Japan's 1c
exports to the United States in the January-November 1981 period totaled 63.9
billion yen ($272 nillion) worth, compared with 63.4 billion yen ($270 million)
worth imported fron the United States in the same period. [Text] [M61001 Tong
THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 13 Feb 82 p 1] [com1m: Daily Yomiuri 1982]

POLICY ON COHUNICATION SATmI'rBs-Tokyo, 16 Feb (JIJI Press)-The Quasi-govern-
nental Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corp 0111‘) has fixed its policy of
orbiting its large-capacity collaunications satellites using the space shuttle of -
the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Japan's comunica-
tions satellites for practical use have hitherto been launched using domestically-
produced rockets. NTT, the nation's telecommications monopoly, will seek appro-
val of the space development council before asking a final decision on this score.
Under NTT's plans revealed so far, it will blast off a one-ton co-unications
satellite with a capacity of 25.000 telephone circuits in‘ fiscal 1988 and a four-
ton satellite with a capacity of' 100,000 circuits around fiscal 1992. Japan's
fiscal year starts in April. NTT also plans to link via these satellites tele-
phone stations exclusively for long-distance calls to be set up in each prefecture
by putting up antennas of four meters in dineter on the roofs of these stations.
Another factor behind NTT's emerging policy of launching large-capacity co-Iunica-
tions satellites is its strong wish to advance into data comunications business.
[Text] [051161451 Tokyo JIJI in English 1436 GMT 16 Feb 82]

TURBINE ORDER FRO“ FRC--Toltyo. 3 Feb (JIJI Press)-Mitsubishi leavy Industries Ltd
announced Uedneaday that it has received an order for a 300 million yen (about 1.3
nillion dollars) compressor-driVen steam turbine from China's National Technical

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Import Corp the turbine with power output of 20.000 kilowatts will be placed

in an mania plant in Anhui Province which produces 1,000 tons of amonia per
day. This is the 24th such turbine the Chinese corporation has ordered from the
Japanese company. [Text] [0W6093l Tokyo JIJI in English 1332 GMT 3 Feb 82]

VIBRATION ABSORPTION MATERIAL—What is claimed to be the world's highest vibration
absorption material has been developed by Nippon Electric Co (M), a major
Japanese maker of electric appliances. A conpany spokesman said it is a ferrite
complex material whose vibration suction is sons 100 times more than steel and
aluminum and will be effective for noise prevention. The aaterial is a mixture
of grain condition ferrite ranging from 0.1 to lo nicrons and polyester resin and
its corrosion resistance is very high against acid and alkali. It can be pro-
cessed freely like steel and aluninitll, he said. The spokesman said that by
using a vibration proof pad aade from the ferrite complex material, it is effec-
tive in production of ultralarge scale integrations (L81), assembly of precision
melchinery and inspection of optical microscopes. The company will shortly pro-
duce the pad at a subsidiary. he said. he also said that the company has been
developing vibration-proof material. using a large amount of regenerated ferrite
available as byproducts for use in roads, railway roadbeds and bridges. [Text]
[OHZZIélol Tokyo HAINICEI DAILY NEWS in English 20 Feb 82 p 5] [COPYRIGE‘I‘E Mainichi

Daily News, 19821‘

cm: 6120/162 END

an
ion omau. use on“