FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10125

18 November 1981

Japan Report

(FOUO 65/8 1)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/lOlZS
18 November 198:

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 65/81)

Comeurs

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

Despite Indictment. Tanaka Strengthens Influence
(Teuro Tsutsuni; niE JAPAN EWOHIC JOURNAL, 3 Nov 81)........ l

Komoto's Strategy for Rising to Top Analyzed
(Mlchisada ﬂirosa; ASAHI EVENING NW8 . 22 Oct 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiyazsua's Position Evaluted
(Ken Ando; HAINIOH DAILY NEWS, 23 Oct 81).................... 5

J8? Faces Pbre Affluent Society, Publishes Revised Manifesto
(Editorial; mt DAILY YODEURI, 24 Oct 81). 8

Nakasone Troubled Over Establishment of 'Policy Group'
(Raisuke Honda; THE DAILY YOHIURI, 23 Oct 81)................. 10

Arafat's Visit Caused Big Headaches for Kimra
(Takehiko Takahasi; MAINIGlI DAILY NM, 28 Oct 81)............ 11

Popular Support for Prime Minister Reported
(Hilton: 5111312031113 JAPM TIES, 29 Oct 81)....assssoesssssso 13

ECWOHIC

Postal Savings Policy Dispute Settled
(Various sources. 19, 30 Sep 81).............................. 15

Roundtable Discussion of Issues

Settlemut Within IDF
Editorial Consent

SCIENCE ANb TECHNOLOGY

U.S.-Jppan Military Technology Cooperation Examined
(SHUKAN onu TOSHI, 0 Sep 81)................................. 24

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

urn To Launch 7-Year Project To Develop Intelligent Robot
(Various sources, variom dates)..............................

Uses in Nuclear Field
Help in Improving Productivity
beading Robot Technology

lo-Yeer Project for Fifth-Generction Computer Anhounced
(NIXKEI SANGYO SHIPBUN, 9 Sep 81)............................

Associative, learning Functions
Cooperation With Foreign Oomtries

Drive for High Technology at MitsuMshi Electric Discussed
(SHUKAN ORU TOSHI, 28 Aug 81)..

VISI Technology CHCS Gate Array Developed by Toshiba
(NIKKAN KOGYO SHIDBUN, BNov 81)...............................

Future of Plant Export Industry Discussed
(Funihiko Matsuda; NIHG KOGYO sunsul. various dates).........
Why are so many LDP Dietmen rushing
into the Tanaka camp? The anwer may be
found partly in a survey conducted by a
weekly magazine which inteviewed them.
Firstly. the survey said that (or most of
Tanalta's men. the (newt source of his
magnetism is his aggressiveness. which
brought him to the richest pint oi premier
without the help oi education and inherited
wealth in a country where social success is
more or less reserved for people with a col~
lose degree. Secondly. others said Tanaka is
"a man oi compassion and very humane and
warm-hearted" 'No prospective candidates
to the premiership within the Tanalta (action.
lormer Finance Minster hoboru Takeshita
and iormer Deiense Aptncy Director-Gen-
eral Ganri Yamashita. are also said to be
"men of compassion" equal to'i‘anah. their
mentor. All this wintantiates the reputation

tint “the Tania faction: ls auemeiy good
intakinccareolitamemben’fandpoves
thatthereis"astrongboudaimiiiartothe
one in a totally. between the (action mem-
bets and 'l'anala as the center."

Forexample. take thecaseol a iuniorDiet-
mammi'eceiveoapetitioniromtiacon-
stimency (or building a bridge or two and
paving road. The novice Dietitian may be in
aeriouatrotblebecamehedoesoothiow the
intact d penetratiiu the bureaucracy. But it
vilibemarveiiousiisem‘ormembersothis
iactionrenderahelpinlnndtotaiktothe
Construction Ministry and meet the expecta-
tionsoihisoonstituency. Hereinthisaspeet
ol mutual help anion; {action members. the
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDPOZ-00850R000400070040-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rmuucuonumcmam-ﬂ sumahubroru
“mammamuunowam tummy
behnndu’umuunlhnlpuulhchctml mnfhbbwhyu‘
Mm my "what. dichﬂ'wilh» m will be "no h
in 0. ”WHO d Fm [mm Mammal
Tndrl: Ina-try. and Pam and Talmu- magma-m“
WMMMtwmcme m, the key in
www.mmmymmm mepm
m m mu tron locum member: mm mg sm
Evenuthbbmemooemmu uwPucmary-u
mslmuonuuwmmmm imml
umutmwtyinmc‘rokyobm mum...
CmuiaLBanJmnthe“Ihnemﬂce "gum,"mlh'|nun
systun"isndopndandmeu-hlmuuon mums)...“
mthe'rotyoﬂlshcmmghomm MVMMPHM
Cmanammﬂngumdamthsﬁokyo W”. o!
DWMNMMWI W .mfrom’
pnwmmmammamm W
canohudoudedtobﬁuwaniuutht (Toma Touuumiia

political editor.)

g
E
a
5
§
2
a;

COPYRIGHT: 1981 The Nikon Kauai Shannon, Inc.

CSO: 6120/46

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070040-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070040-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGI CAL

KOWTO'S STRATEGY FOR RISIM TO TOP ANALYZED

Tokyo ASAHI EVENIM NEWS in English 22 Oct 81 p 2

["Polieics and Politicians" column by Michisada Hirose-z “I
Rising to top Amlyzed"]

[Text]

The strategy of Toshlo Ko-
moto. director-general ol‘ the
Economic Planning Agency.
for rising to the top when
Prime Minister Zenlto Suzuki
steps down remains vague.
This is partly due to the nap
txe oi the man: Kornoto
t es a cautious approach to
everything. But more impor-
tant reason is that the situa-
tion within the ruling Liberal-
Dernocratic Party is unlavora-
hie for him, and he cannot
two)? on; an le‘lelective strategy.

ow oes propose toact
in connection with the reshuf-
ﬂe o! the Cabinet and the
LDP executive lineup. which
is to he made alter the cur-
rcnt Diet session ends?

In the spring of last yesr.
Kotnoto end hts aides had a
clear strategy for sweep-
ing into power and were car-
rying it out on a nationwide
scale. The strategy called for
recruiting pro-Kotnoto people
into the ruling party. With
their votes. Komoto was to
win by a large margin in LDP
presidential primary elections.
In which the party rank and
file are eligible to vote

At that time. the LDP
membership increased to 2.5
million. of whom 0.7 to 0.8
{union were thought to be

omoto supporters.

The sudden death 0! Prime
Minister Masayoshi Ohia in

June last year and t
ance oi the three “tr
conservative" {actions
ed by Suzuki and
Prime Ministers Kah
nah and Takeo Ft
which was lorrnet
Ohira'a demise destrq
basic assumption 0
tnoto's strategy.

With the support
group led by Yasuhirc
sone. director-general
Administrative Man:
Agency. the three “ms
(actions have virtuall
ished the system of P
rial primary elections
made a new rule unde

im elections will
rad w three or let
pie run (or the prettdt
reality. it is inconoetv
there to he four or all
didatee)

an' aries are SUPP
he followed by an ele
which on! the 1.0? r
of both onset o! t
can vote. but it woult
tremely difﬁcult for.
to win such an electu
his {notion is the m:
the live maior L0?
The Kornoto faction's
members a
Tanska faction‘s I(
Suzuki laction's 80. th
do faction‘s 75 and th
sone faction's 49.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070040-6
$.55 50 Hal-xi nuns—CF

E 83:2. £9 :3 83..
Fm 0358 35:50. $9.66
1: 38.553 388 8 uB<
2. .— 95.5w .35: 92—
80338 mu 5. $333}
mac—«338:2. on mvzoma. F.
306825.530 ~33?
a35— nroaoo E 093302..
an». «8... we £9...— ao 038..
8 n3 2.. on :5 93:8 2:.
5395 3:98 v :30 an.
«2.8. .33 :88 on 95.5..
US in $53 8 :63 no.3
3353 E: 1:. 363.3.
2.58.5 16:. G. 95.5
‘55? 5.. .5 (E a: 903.
ant—u: n.2- ld..l.a. I...-
maze—E335!

33.25... .5 9.5 8332.
23.323 :3 83 so: .325
.8. 8... s .58.. 2: :8
332. 3 2. 362.. .u
gaievsaxa «58
.5 5. 2.28.. n83. a so
@3833 325.3 £32
:8 cask—Emu 55.83 2
5.3.2.8.. 5% 2... .a.
953. 8 to: B 3338.. 2
83.953?

was; .3 2:22. :8
35...». 5...... Pg! ‘3 E.
assacgsocannasn 2
:6 8:5». “289 V355.
2.588 a u can!" 333
89933 .2. .530 5552.
9.26 is was $35 35.3
8 43:33 7.2888 2:
.383 5:68.

$.68...» 2x. 95.: 93
8s. 5 z... «.23 32 359i.
:5. 52.... 8.53. 38:8 5
23 «Emma 3 =8 .99.»:
82.8 :5. 35.”. 82...
3.3. 83a 3% 8 32. 3.5.
an B. 32:26. 398...

it! v. Oil-LL IIL
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02IO9: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400070040-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oga wa who was a «1an'

politician in prewar days.
Ogawa sen-ed as railway
minister. Heiji Ogawa. his
uncleonhismother's side. was
once home aiiairs minister and
is now chairman oi the Kochiltai
laction. lending a supporting
hand to Sumki and Mlyazawa.
A younger brother oi lieiii
Ogawa is iieisbiro Ogawa who
was the iirst Japanese am-

bassador to China aiter Japan'

and China restored diplomatic
relatlonsinim.

The brothers oi itiiyaaawa
himseli are holding important
positions. liiroshi hliyauwa is
gosernor oi Hiroshima

reiecture and is expected to

run iortheliouseoiCotaicillors-

in the next election. Yasushl
Miy aaawa is ambassador to
Al gyeria. and was once director
ﬁner“ oi the European and

um aiiairs bureau oi the
Foreign Ministry.

These examples show how
noble the Miyazawa iamily is.

it is too early to tell shetiier
or not Miyazaira would be able
to become prime minister. But
it is saie to say that he must
learn the business oi dealing
with party aiiairs and organise
more iollosers capable oi

raising political iunds
business world. it I
wantstoassurnepowe

A race tor the ne
minister has atrea
getting under I:
Roktnike Tanaka.
been claiming that
successor to Qbira. i
groupwpportinghtm
Kochikai iaction.
observers call the it
Tanalta competition 1
Roku 16) — iKiiclii-F
—war.

Thereiore. It seer
advisable ior Miyazat
such a post as chairn
Policy Ailairs 5
Council. one at the
executive posts in th
ordertoestahliahap
lntheparty.

But ior Prime
Suzuki. biiyaaaw:

‘ ie.andthen
benobodyavailahleir
to replace hliyazawi
cabinetsecr'etary.

Whether or not Stu
let ally azawa go is
meritlng considerati
iuturecourseoi both
administration and
as a possible candid:
primemlnister.

WPYRIGHT: “ULRICH! MILY “£95 1981

030: 4120/56

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬁ09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400070040-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IOIDGIC‘AL

‘LUENT SOCIETY, PUBLISHES REVISED MANIFESTO
)MIURI in English 2'4 Oct 81 p 2

il' Road to Socialism"]

The Socialist Party (.18?) is reviewing its posi-
tion in present-day Japanese society. Reaiintion has
come that Marxist-Leninist dogma has no appeal to
today's increasingly sifluent working class.

In this new mood of realism. a JSP subcommittee
has drafted amendments to the party's 15-year old
manifesto. "Road to Socialism in Japan." which vir-
tually represented the party's platform.

The draft amendments are based on an interim re-
port which the Center for Socialist Theory submitted
to the JSP's 45th national convention in December
last year. The pros and cons of revising the manifesto
were thoroughly debated both at that convention and
at meetings of the party's lows: chapters.

Various anachromams were identified. For example.
the Marxist- Leninist argument that socialism is in-
evitable preaupposed the absolute pauperism of the
working class.

Coping With Changes ' ‘

Casting aside such dogma. the new review adopts
a realistic line in giving the draft the subtitle of
"View of the Domestic and International Situation
in the 1980s."

The review recognises that the working class today
consists of blue collar and white collar workers, as
well as workers in the service industries. It takes
into account that the aims and aspirations of the
new working class are not what they might have
been 15 years ago.

In fact. the review takes note of Japan's strong
economic potential and admits that there is no ac-
cepted ideal model for socialism to follow.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This éontrasts with the manifesto approved by the
27th national convention in 1966 which said that
capitalism was dead and must give way to socialism.
pre£erably a Soviet-type socialism.

History has since shown that socialism is not the
path to peace, for the socialist countries .are even
now squabbling among themselves.

Which Way Will The JSP Go?

The JSP‘s Central Executive Committee is expectc
ed to approve the drai‘t amendments to its manifesto
and submit the revision to its national convention
next year.

Party members are questioning whether the re-
visions are only a medium-range guideline or a re-
placement for the old manifesto.

Lef‘owingers insist on keeping the old manifesto.
while right-wingers say it should be scrapped or
drastically modiﬁed as long as it is out of date.

People will have to guess what the party's inten-
tions are. The new draft avoids stating whether the
amendments are a new. guideline to replace the old
manifesto. Such an ambiguous attitude will not profit
the J82. - -

\ILY YOMIURI 1981

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGI GU.

MSONE TROUBLED OVER ESTABLISHMENT OF 'POLICY GROUP'

Tokyo THE DAILY YOMIURI in English 23 Oct 81 p 2

("Political Beat" column by Raisuke Honda: 'Msone's Troubles"]

[Tare]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO :

6120/66

Administratlye Management Agency Di-
rector-General Yasuhiro Natasone. who
hopes to succeed Prime Minister Suzuki.
is deeply troubled over the establishment
or a "policy study" group by his onetime
friend and {action member Finance Min-
ister Michio Watanabe.

Watanabe iormerly belonged to the fac-
tion led by Nakasone.

Nakesone and Watanabe were at odds
with each other during the 40-day striie
within the Liberal-Democratic Party (LDP)
under the Ohira administration in M».

In the power struggle. the Nakasone tac-
tion sided with two antileadership iactions
led by iormer premiers Takeo Pukuda and
'ibkeo Niki respectively. This LDP bloc
demanded that the then prime minister
Ohira step down to take the responsibility
ior an LDP setback in general elections
earlier in the same year.

However. Watanabe and a iew other
members of the Nakasone (action refused
to participate in the attack on Ohira. He
was ousted from iaction membership for
“nﬂsleading” the faction members.

Since then. Watanabe has remained
unaililiaied with any (action. while keep-
ing good relations with Premier Sunk! as
his ﬁnance minister.

Earlier this month. he rounded a policy
study group together with about so other
LDP Dietinen. thus making himself a
"next-generation leader" or the LDP. along
with Rokusuke Tanaita. the international
trade and industry minister. who also set
up his own policy study group recently.

Participants in Watsnabe's policy study
group are mostly irorn the (action led by
Premier Suzuki and the Nahsone iattlon.

in particular. more than 20 members oi
the Nakasone laction. including all those
who have returned to the Diet (our times

THE MILY YOMIURI 1981

10

or less. are aililiated with the group led
by Watanabe.

The younger members of the Nakasone
iaction reportedly spurned repeated warn-
ings irom its senior members against tali-
ing part in Watanabe's group.

One or them has said: “We certainly
will make ail-out eﬂorts to realize a Na-
kasone government. but what is wrong
with us cooperating with Watanabe alter
that?”

According to close Nakasone aides, he
outwardly keeps composed over the be-
havior of the younger members oi his iac-
tion, but is inwardly very disturbed.

At the outset of the Suzuki administra-
tion. Nansone eagerly sought the post
or ﬁnance minister. but it was given to
his onetime “subordinate" Watanabe.

Now. many or the Natasone faction
members have been "taken away" by Wa-
tanabe. ohylously to the disadvantage oi
Natasone in seeking the prenuership.

No wonder Nakasone reels oliended.

Watanabe. tor his part. has made a
point of maintaining that his group is not
a “iaction” but a “study group," thus
making it dilhcuit for Nahasone to lodge
any complaint against hint

Meanwhile. behind-the-scene maneuvers
are certain to intensity shortly over the
cabinet and LDP esecutives' reshuiile
scheduled for late November.

In the oncoming cabinet reshuine. Na-
bsone is expected to agree to remain in
his current cabinet post to continue his
full-scale cooperation with Premier Suzu-
ki In carrying out the budget-saving ad-
ministrative reform program.

Since Suzuki will most likely ask Watc-
nabe to stay on as iinance minister. Na-
kssone will continue to worry about his
growing political inﬂuence.
WAT'S VISIT CAUSED BIG ill-INCHES FOR KIMURA

Tokyo ﬂINIGlI MILY NEWS in English 28 Oct 81 p 2

["Nagatacho Doings" column by Takahiko Takahaahi:

Headaches for K1mrl"]

[Text]

The leading role in PLO
Chairman Yasser Arafat‘s visit
to Japan was taken by Toshio
Ktmura. A close confidant oi
the late Eisaitu Sato. former

prime minister. Kimura served.

as chief cabinet secretary in the
Sato administration. lie at-
tracted attention when because

of personnelconsiderations.he
moved down from chiel to

deputy cabinet secretary at one
time.

Later he served successively
as ioreign minister and director-

geoeral oi the Economic
Planning Agency but foreign
retaliate are the field in which
Klmura is most interested at
the presenttime.

The tamer Sato faction was
divided into the ‘l'analra iaction
and the Fukuda (action but
Kimura did not Join either one.
He is still unattached to a
faction today.

After iorming the
Parliamentarians League for
Japan-Palestine Friendship.
Kimura became its chairman.
in December last year. a group
from this parliamentarians'
league visited Lebanon. Beirut.
At that time Kimura called
alone on Chairman Arafat.
asking Arafat to visit Japan.
This was to be tn the form of an
invitation to Chairman Arafat
from the Parliamentarians'
League ior Japan-Palestine

Friendship.

11

On his part. Chairman
Aralat. in visiting Japan.
sought formal contact with the
Japanese government Kimura
promised a meeting with the
prime minister but did not
make any further commitment.

This paved the way. however.
ior Chairman Arafat's visit to
Japan. While these talks were
going on. procedures were also
advancing ior Egyptian
President Anvar Sadat's visit
to Japan. The assassination oi
President Sadat occurred and
Chairman—Araiat alone visited
Japan.

we Opposition

There was considerable
opposition within the Liberal-
Democratic Party against
Chairman Arafat‘s visit to
Japan. Alter hearing various
reports from a certain experton
Middle East problems. this
feeling oi opposition
strengthened. Some of the LDP
members urged Kimura to
cancel the invitation to
Chairman Araiat.

Klmura. however. did not
change his policy. For that
reason. Klmura's responsibility
became greater. One oi the
problems that arose was that oi
security. It is said that 17.000
policemen were mobilized to
guard Chairman Arafat during
thefour days thathestayed at
the Hotel New Otani.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

"Arafat's Visit Caused Big
7.5:Hn «Ania E :nun

3:32. 5». 9 53:3 5 =5
22 can...“ scan .36 6
”=3 5... 5.59 2 :68 £8
v.2.» 3:8. 2 933;:
232». an: 8 .52.. _= 2..
9.22.. :8 22 9:55: £8
2.12.qu .35 :5 22.82:.
2395?

zm:m 53.
POPUIAR SUPPORT FOR PRIME MINISTER REPORTED

Tokyo ms JAM mes in English 29 Oct 81 p 14

("Politics Tokyo-and Tomorrow" column by Minoan Shinizu:

Prime Ministers"]

[Text]

M’s.» Ion all 9mm

m h the W n In
mamamnce. m.
held power (0: uven yum
nmummwmomi
umupmdlrpmaemln-a
but. -' -' ' ' 1

man; to ww'c «pun:
survey: conducted by t):
mulljorm

ms. nun who an no! W.
port Mm ranged between a“
nmamssgemm.‘ ‘ -

‘l'hﬂmpﬂmmuﬂnerhlmo

13

or "cum-wen: '9'- “our?!
charging pm use surveys]
wanna My W. 1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Popular Suppou for
38 3: 8 2 v2.33 5 133..
«J. 58. 19.353 :8 can...
533. o. Eu 3352 883
can: no a» unwn¢su _= ua~<
§§~3§33§¢§9§
392.699.089.552.
.93.

azcaamgiagi
:8 03: 033.3 3.2.25
:5... vet—.32; 3.03. a?
38m = 2:3 58 8:5 2:2.
385132536333
8:. mason u auzo 332.5
58§3§¢55383u
u» 333. 5 .EQ .89 .33....
988.2 38. .8 «:5. 3.33 o
a: 8 b... 333. 5 053302.
man .3»: no ‘o u~qnosn _nm~
>3r§b§ﬁ§Z§§5.
982.6 m 9583 3:3 2 8
743:. 3:2 55 32.5.

.25 >3... 9:395 33..

gags-3:28:85

DB‘QEOOQY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

POSTAL SAVINGS POLICY DISPUTE SETTLED
Boundtable Discussion of Issues
Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI in Japanese 19 Sep 81 pp 16-20

[Roundtable discussion with the following participants, in addition to the moderator:
A is an economic section reporter; B is on the political desk; C is an economic
Journalist; and D is a political consentator]

[Excerpts] Politics and Postal Savings Dispute: Agreement Among Kanemaru. Takeshita,
Abe Brings Settlement

SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI (ASIA ECONOMICS HBEKLY) moderator: The Postal Savings Report,
which extolled the ”unification of interests rates" and denied "autonomous investment
of postal funds," has led to a political battle that has split the Liberal Democratic
Party (L0?) in two.

The Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (HP?) faction, faced with a report dis-
advantageous to their cause, is said to have already gathered petition signatures

from the 333 Lb? representatives. This group is led by the LDP Communications
Committee (chairman: Yoshihide Mori) and they have organized themselves into a
Special Committee on Postal Policy Operations (chairman: Shin Kanemaru). Countering
them, a league representing the Finance Ministry and the banks which uphold the report
have formed a "Free Economy Council (chairman: Noboru Takeshita) which is prepared

to fight them head on....

Signatures in Excess of 500

A: Prior to issuance of the report. the HP? supporters were overwhelmingly in the
majority and the bank faction was only an insignificant force. But since the report
was so cool to the former group, the bank faction feared a backlash so they--Junichiro
Koizumi (LDP Financial Policy Committee Chairman) and Ichiro Sato (LDP Monetary Issues
Research Committee Chairman)--decided that they needed to launch a countermove with

a big name heading, and Noboru Takeshita was chosen.

D: Implicit in the name "Free Economy Council" is the thrust of their cause--hold
down bureaucratic pressure and protect the civilian free market economy....

15

F03‘MﬁﬂClALlEﬂiONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

A: The reasoning of Koizumi et a1 is that capital funds must flow to minor industries
and agriculture by way of the free market. The Free Economy Council is scheduled to
hold a general meeting in late September and early October. It is boasting that it
will get over 300 signatures.

C: I understand that it claims to have more than 200 signatures already. If we add
the 333 that signed the HPT signature drive to this figure, the number easily exceeds
500. Since there are 423 L0? members (upper and lower houses combined), it means
that there are more than 100 signatures beyond the full quota.

B: I know of a Diet member who secretly admitted to us that he signed both pledges.
(laughter) If we exclude such waverers from consideration, the HPT faction has a
closer solidarity. There are some 10 stalwarts such as Horiyoshi Sate, Yuji Nagata
and so on. But there are very few real banking group adherents.

D: According to an executive member of the Federation of Bankers Associations of
Japan, "there are 1 million employees of banking facilities in Japan. If we count
the life insurance group, the number becomes 1.5 million. Compared to the 300,000
postal employees, we are overwhelmingly superior in voting strength.

But compared to the strong political pressure that postal employees wield, with their
privately owned post offices forming the axis of their power, the banking faction's
pipeline to politicians is far weaker.

Agricultural Cooperatives Assigned To Spearhead the Opposition

A: Banks follow a policy of puinc mindedness; thus, it is difficult for them to
apply political preSSure. Mr Teizo Matsuzawa of the Fuji Bank has repeatedly
said that "(banks) must be neutral in politics." They are willing to go along if
the result is one that the financial agencies can consent to, but unless that
guarantee is present, they fear that a tie with politicians might end in political
contributions being milked from them.

But there is a feeling that since the situation has come this far, it cannot be
helped...so, let us really do it.

c: However, the bank group has an "ultra-C" called Agricultural Cooperatives. The
"Viet Cong representatives" (i.e. farm delegates) have a power that cannot be easily
overwhelmed by the HPT faction. Besides, farm cooperatives-and not the metropolitan
and regional banks--are those most affected by the postal savings offensive.

B: At the time of the establishment of the individual postal pension fund in the
1981 budget, the strongest opposition came from farm cooperatives. The metropolitan
bank executives are not very adept at petitioning. Farm cooperatives, on the other
hand, have authority and the Diet representatives will work for them. Thus, the
banking group's strategy is to use agricultural cooperatives as the front runners

in dealing individual blows to the opposition.

D: Farm representatives and HPT representatives have the same electoral base, so
the situation will be tense.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As a matter of fact. farm cooperatives have launched an active telephone campaign
with regard to the Diet members. The majority of the representatives--when the
entreaty is made that the farmers' savings will flow to the post office--can easily
be persuaded to sign.

0: If we include the duplicate signatures, the bank faction may be able to amass
300 signatures.

LDP Trio Hill Coordinate

Moderator: The administration must make a decision on the Postal Savings Report
before the yearend drafting of the 1982 budget estimate. Is it not true that if the
confrontation escalates, the decision will become more difficult?

D: with regard to the "unification of interest rates on savings." the report urges
that "a cabinet decision be made as an interim measure." But to change postal in-
terest rates at the same time as a bank deposit-~in particular when it involves the
lowering of the interest rate-will arouse strong reaction from the MPT faction. A
smooth straight road to a cabinet decision is virtually impossible.

B: Prime Minister Suzuki is saying he "would like a public statement on this subject
from Finance Minister Hatansbe, Minister of Posts and Telecommunications Yamauchi

and Chief Cabinet Secretary Miyazawa after full examination," but a resolution cannot
be reached by making the cabinet members collide.

A: A resolution can only be realized by coordination at the party level.

8: I think the fact that Takeshita was chosen as chairman of the Free Economy Council
is an indicator. Kanemaru, who represents the MPT faction, and Takeshita, the
banking group's chosen representative, both belong to the Thanks group, and further-
more they are related.

0: Takeshita's eldest daughter is married to Kanemaru's eldest son.

B: So, when the heads are Kanemaru and Iakeshita, the struggle does not have the
flavor of a bloodbath. Immediately after the publication of the Postal Savings
Report. Shintaro Abe (Policy Coordinating Committee chairman) said that, "Takeshita
is the only one who can counter Kanamaru and at the same time talk to him." "Even
if the ministries are in conflict, he will somehow be able to resolve the matter."

Takeshita himself is silent in response to reporters' leading questions, but I think
that Takeshita was nominated for the Free Economy Council's chairmanship by Abe.

D: What it boils down to is that there was a plan to effect a conciliation by a trio
composed of Abe, representing the Pukuda faction, and Kanemaru and Takeshita. repre-
senting the Tanaka faction.

B: The fact that the bank group has amassed over 300 signatures and is attempting
to counter the MPT faction can be seen as a way of maintaining intraparty balance.

While equalizing the strength of the two factions, Kanemaru and Takeshita carefully
modulate--a very typical LOP approach to politics.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SIi ONLY

A: At a lecture meeting a while back, Abe said that, "the nice thing about the LDP
is that the conbined signatures of the EFT faction and the banking group exceed the
total number of LDP representatives." (laughter) He means to seek a sensible conr
promise along this line.

Thus. the aim is not to separate the two camps but to make them balance each other--
that is the significance of the signature—gathering competition. The scheme is for
the Kanemaru-Takeshita-Abe trio to find the ultimate settlement condition with the
above factor in mind. Based on Abe's statement. I have a feeling that the scenario
has been worked out already.

Pipeline With the Bank Group, Too

D: The fact that the Tanaka faction's Kanemaru and Takeshita will become coordinators
is a plus factor for that faction, which had HPT supporters but weak ties with the
bank group.

C: Although banks have contributed political funds to the LDP's Citizens Association
[kokumin Kyokai], they have not made contributions to individual politicians. How-
ever....

B: On that score, it will be interesting to see what moves Takeshita, who has been
a finance minister, will make. He is very gifted in creating campaign contribution
pipelines.

Moderator: Notwithstanding all that, if the party-level performance precedes all
other factions, what about the positions of Finance Minister Hatanabe and Minister
of Posts and Telecommunications Yamauchi?

A: In terms of the sequence of events, Chief Cabinet Secretary ruyazaki will call
Kanemaru and Takeshita to discuss the final settlement. At this point, if broad
based agreement can be reached, talks will proceed with Natanabe and Yamauchi's par-
ticipation. Miyazaki wlll select the appropriate moment.

C: Yamauchi is scheduled to step down at the time of the cabinet reorganization
slated for November. Wotanabe is sure to stay on. The difficult question is how
to give due credit to Hatanabe, who has been very active in this affair.

8: Of course, before the events in the scenario move forward, there will be one or
two shakeups. HPT opposition to unification of interest rates is firm, and Kanemaru,
too, is stubborn. So, if the course of the coordination attempt goes wrong, the
matter could get sticky. Chief Executive Secretary Nakasone has been concerned

that, "although Kanemaru and Takcshita will manage capably, the problem being what
it is, the solution will not be easy." I think there is a good chance that the
settlement will not be reached until the very end of the budget compilation.

There Will Be No Great Change

Moderator: Incidentally, if the final format is as proposed by the LDP, what will
it contain...especially regarding the greatest point of controversy--unification of
savings interest rate determination...?

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A: So as not to create a misunderstanding. let me say that the report advocates
unification of "interest rate determination procedure" and not "the establishment of
a uniform standard for postal savings and bank savings interest rates." Moreover,
the concrete method of unification of "interest rate determination procedure"

is left in the hands of the government. There are several ways to unify the deter-
mination procedure: joining of the Postal Policy Commission, which determines the
postal savings interest rate, and the Interest Rate Regulation Conndssion, which
decides on the bank? savings interest rate, or else a reciprocal membership among the
commissions. But either alternative is difficult to realize immediately. I think

the outcome would be a temporizing solution-~a reliance on a cabinet meeting to de-
cide on the direction of the unification.

C: It would indeed be difficult to institute new interest rate determination
machinery. In thatoase,another dispute would arise over the question of who would
have the leadership role in the interest rate determination-~the Finance Ministry or
the Bank of Japan. So, I agree with Mr A that the immediate step would be a mere
confirmation of basic policies at the cabinet meeting. Then, the discertionary
powers--unlike the current format of rigid interest rate determination at individual
committee meetings--would be expanded significantly.

D: But if the savings interest rate must be lowered. the MPT will oppose it totally
and cause a fuss again.

c: For the time being, a further interest reduction is unlikely. Moreover, although
the bank faction is a stickler on the issue of unification of interest rates, it does
not say that it should be realized by any specific date. The idea behind the drive
for unification of interest rates is to create a system in which the savings interest
rate fluctuates dynamically in keeping with the market trend. In order to do this,
unwillingness to lower the interest rate--such as the stand professed by the MPT

in the name of protecting the depositors--is a hindrance. The banks' argument is

not so rigid.

D: Give plenty of room for discretion in the solution of the unification controversy
and ease the tension.... Is that the rationale?

One more thing. What is going to happen to the MPT's strong claim for "autonomous
use of postal savings funds," "raising of deposit limit." "expansion of new services
[shinki gyomul," and "expansion into the individual finance sector"? The Postal
Savings Report suppressed all the requests made by the MPT.

C: On this point, the MPT is threatening the Ministry of Finance. As you know, the
postal savings are all deposited with the Ministry of Finance's Funds Appropriation
Section [Shikin Unyobu] and are used as the basic fund for the fiscal policy invest-
ment fund [zaisei toyushi]. But as a result of a recent decline in postal savings.
the deposits with the Funds Appropriation Section for next year are 1 trillion yen
less than this year--or 7.9 trillion yen. This is due to the fact that the Ministry
of Financerecognized a commodity very advantageous to the banks--the

fixed-term [kijitsu shitei teiki] account"—-and the postal savings were all eaten

up by it.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-‘K'l \I. USE ONLY

The content of the threat. therefore. is that if the Ministry of Finance wishes to
secure fiscal policy investment funds, it should recognize the raising of the postal

savings deposit limit and the establishment of a silver savings account at a 10-
million-yen limit.

D: Autonomous use of the postal savings fund, too, is a negotiable item. Autonomous
use is the MPT's long-standing claim, and there is also a rationale that if national
bonds can be purchased with postal savings, then the Funds Appropriation Section's
public debt can be subrogated.

A: But the Finance Ministry will never recognize autonomous use. It is true that
direct purchase of national bonds with postal savings will make for a much more streamr
lined operation than going through the Funds Appropriations Section. But once that

is sanctioned, there is the danger of gradual expansion of the autonomous use cate—
gory--to include regional bonds, Telephone and Telegraph Corporation bonds and then

the money trusts. nxe Finance Ministry's stand is that it will not sanction national
bond purchase, if only to curb such a trend.

C: Then the solution may be to support the interest rate unification in intent by
a cabinet decision and on the other hand perhaps to recognize the raising of the
deposit limit amount so as not to downgrade the MPT's prestige.

A: 1here is also the rand to save the Postal Savings Report Committee's face by
reviewing the incentive pay for postal savings employees and other such moves....

D: Then there will not be much difference from thecurrent situation. When the Postal
Savings Report Committee members hear of such a conclusion(?), won't they be furious?

B: Unfortunately, such is the reality of politics.
COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1981

Settlement Within LDP
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHlMBUN in Japanese 30 Sep 81 p 1

[Text] The administration/Liberal Democratic Party's adjustment (coordination attempt)
regarding the Postal Savings Deliberative Committee's report. which in part was about
the unification of savings interest rate determination, was in effect completed the
evening of on 29 September. An agreement reached between Chief Cabinet Secretary
Miyazaki and LDP Policy Affairs Research Council Chairman Abe contains following main
items: 1) In deciding on or changing the savings interest rate of a civilian banking
facility, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Poets and Telecommunications
will strive for an exchange of ideas and intentions, and will handle the matter

while maintaining flexibility and with the emphasis on compromise. 2) Examination

of other issues will be continued by the Ministerial Secretariat. the MPT and the
Finance Ministry. 3) The issue of autonomous use of the postal savings fund will

be shelved for the time being. Following the conclusion of the LDP's internal
coordination, the administration will hold a three-way cabinet meeting involving the
Finance Ministry, the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications and the Cabinet Secre-
tariat on 30 September, and after a formal agreement. the chief cabinet secretary
will make a report at the 2 October cabinet meeting.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIﬂAl. USF. ONLY

The conflict resolution plan for handling the Postal Savings Report was compiled by
Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiyazaki in cooperation with Shin Kanemaru, Special Committee
on Postal Policy Operations chairman; and Noboru Takeshita, Free Economy Council
chairman. The LUP is scheduled to seek a formal acknowledgment of the conflict
resolution plan at the 30 September morning meeting called by Policy Affairs Research
Council Chairman Abe. Kanemaru, Takeshita and the representatives of public finance,
communications sections and other related organs will all be called to this nesting.

With regard to the focal point of the controversy--the interest rate unification
question--in consideration of the position of the HPT,a "revision of postal savings
regulations" for the purpose of unification of interest rate determination will be
shelved. 0n the other hand, "flexible handling" relying on the application of
regulations currently in force will be emphasized. The Finance Ministry's assertion
in favor of a substantive unification decision appears to have been highly regarded.
Now, with respect to "the review of fixed rate savings" and the "policy of non-
expansion of the postal savings operation" indicated in the Postal Savings Report,
'tontinued investigation" by government agencies has been decided on as a result of
strong opposition from the HPT, which declared that these items are crucial to the
survival of the postal savings program itself.

As for the question of the autonomous use of postal saving funds, which is expected
to be the focal point of conflict between the Finance Ministry and the HPT at the
1982 budget compilation session, no clear direction will be stipulated and the deci-
sion will be left to the future budget compilation operation.

If the HPT's requests are suppressed at this stage and there is a conflict of opinion
within the government, the opposition is sure to point out cabinet disunity at the
emergency session of the Diet. For this reason, it would appear that the "temporary
shelving of the issue" is designed to insure that there are no discrepancies between
the responses of the HPT and the Finance Ministry at the Diet session.

The current conflict resolution plan is a "vague" statement which left the issue of
interest rate unification unclear. (LDP leadership) Basically, however, it adopted
more of the Finance Ministry’s ideas. For this reason, the format of the settlement--
a ”cabinet report based on agreement by three cabinet offices"--is an ambiguous one
aimed at parrying the HPT and those LDF members who deal with HPT affairs who are
dissatisfied .

One of the reasons that the administration and the LDP leadership hastened to temper
the postal savings problem is that recently there has been a strengthening of the
move to 'Uefer to the civilian financial organ's reports-such as the opinion of the
agricultural cooperatives—~and there wasxicry for 'early settlement" from the LDP
representatives who were wedged between such civilian organizations and the “PT
faction--postal station chiefs and the like.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kclzal Shinbunsha 1981

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICI U. USE ONLY

Editorial Comment
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHlMBUN in Japanese 30 Sep 81 p 3
[Editorial]

[Text] The confrontation between the Finance Ministry and the Ministry of Posts and
Telecommunications over the Postal Savings Report, which had nushroomed into a con-
flict that divided the LDP admdnistration in two, has ended, at least for the time
being. with the current resolution. The focal point of the dispute-~unification of
interest rate deternunatiun procedures--was dealt with in more ambiguous terms than
in the original report and has taken on an ambiguous coloring [tamanushi-iro], but
we can say that its renliiation has been furthered. However. the initial thinking
by the Cabinet Secretariat and the Finance Ministry, to stand by the report and take
it to a cabinet decision and to review Japan's financial system within its framework,
has greatly been retrograded. Before the report can take actual shape, more diffi-
culties appear to be in store.

With regard to the content of the settlement, in the end the words "unification of
interest rates" as well as "simultaneous determination." and interlocking of savings
interest rates. contained in the original report backed by the Finance Ministry--
expressions directly tied to actual realization of interest rate unification-~were
bypassed. but the resolution contains the phrase, 'bith emphasis on adjustment...
and flexibility." lhus. we can say that the Finance Ministry's proposal, though an—
biguously stated, has been adopted." The Finance Ministry's interpretation is that
"flexibility" can be interpreted to mean that the savings interest rate will be
determined following the civilian savings interest rate format.“ (Finance Ministry
leadership) "Adjustment" can be translated substantively to mean "simultaneous de~
termination and categorial interlocking." (same source)

The MPT, meanwhile. sees the resolution as 'hnrely a written account of the currently
effective savings interest rate determination procedure." (MPT leadership) Moreover,
the "cabinet decision" that the Finance Ministry and the Cabinet Secretariat originally
contemplated has been replaced by the phrase "cabinet report" as a result of MPT
opposition. As to its significance, "it can be evaluated as a settlement that opened
the way for talks between the Finance Ministry and the Ministry of Posts and Tele-
communications" (administration leaders), but as to how this will be used in interest
rate management is, in fact, largely left to the coordination process between the

two ministries.

But it is true that when there is disagreement between the Ministry of Finance and
the MPT over the question of changing the savings interest rate in the future, on the
strength of the present agreement the Finance Ministry can claim that "the interest
rate should be determined in the spirit of adjustment and with flexibility," and

consequently its position will be stronger than its current position. In this sense,
we can say that we are one step closer to the unification of interest rate determin-

ation procedure as sought in the Postal Savings Report.

Although the Postal Savings Report has provided a nominal settlement of the unifica-
tion of interest rate question, many topics--review of fixed amount savings, inroads

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

into new [postal savings] operations such as a comprehensive account [sogo Rosa] and
autonomous use of postal savings funds--are still unresolved; and there is a strong
possibility that the conflict betveen the Finance Ministry and the HPT will flare up
and enbroil the LDP once again at the time of the yearend budget compilation session.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kelzai Shiﬂmnsha 1981

11460
CSO: 4105/3

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S.-JAPAN MILITARY TECHNOLOGY COOPERATION EXAMINBD
Tokyo SHUKAN ORU TOSHI in Japanese No 1057, la Sep 81 pp 20-23

[Text] Behind the Scenes of U.S.-Japan Military Technology Cooperation; Specific
Discussion of Mutual Technological Assistance

Recently, the government has taken a unified position on the issue of providing
military technology as requested by the United States. It says that doing so will
not infringe on the "three anti-arms-export principles."

In accordance with this position, Japanese arms makers can export military tech-
nology to the United States on a large scale. Right now, the government is making
up a 11st of the items that can be sent to America. There are some sectors, such
as the trading companies, which have already began looking at this list. However,
the manufacturing companies have not yet shown much of a reaction.

U.S.-Japan military technology cooperation was conspicuously discussed at the
conference between Defense Agency Director General Omura and U.S. Secretary of
Defense Weinberger at the end of June. The United States made this proposal sudden—
ly in connection with the demmd to increase the military buget, but there was a
more dubious reason behind the proposal. Apparently, the United States told Japan
to export its most advanced technology in exchange for letting Japan manufacture
the BADGE X system (next-period air defense warning control system) domestically.

At any rate, this problem of military technology cooperation did not just arise
recently. There was already a DEA (Data Exchange Agreement) for pure research
and development between the United States and Japan, in addition to the Japan-
U.S. Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement. There have already been more than 100
instances of military technology assistance provided by the U.S. Department of
Defense to the Japanese Defense Agency's Technical Research and Development Insti-
tute.

These were instances of one-sided assistance from the United States. In the fall
of last year, the suggestion was made that Japan should also provide military tech-
nology to the United States so it would be a mutual exchange. Defense Agency
Equipment liuresu Director Wada and u.s. Defense Department Under Secretary Perry
(at that time in charge of research and development and technology) conducted the
first romd of U.S.-Japan talks concerning military equiment technology.

210-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This conference was entirely unofficial, but it drew attention as a prelude to
cooperative arms develop-cut by the United States and Japan. The second round of
talks was conducted in Tokyo this spring. This fall, Nada and Under Secretary
DeLauer (in charge of research and development and technology) will hold a third
round of talks. it is certain that rather specific methods of cooperation will be
discussed at this meeting.

United States Gives High Marks to CCD's and Other Electronics Technology

"hat kind of military technology can Japan provide to the United States? Techno-
logical capsbility, particularly in the military area, is top secret, so it is
difficult to compare the United States and Japan. However, many kinds of recent
military technology are interchangeable with civilian technology. So we can expect
that Japan, which has made great efforts in civilian technology, has many things

to offer the United States.

Compared to the United States, Japan has superior technology in fiber optics laser
technology necessary for improving the accuracy of missiles, infrared (pursuit)
technology, all types of radar technology, some sonar teclnology, and some VLSI
(very large-scale integrated circuit) technology. All of these items are
electronics-related.

A 0.8. article on lasers last year, which stated that Japanese military laser
technology is the most advanced in the world, attracted a lot of attention. The
companies which have made the most progress in research and develop-eat using light
are Nippon Electric, Hitachi, and Fujitsu, the companies which are exerting them-
selves in the field of optoelectronic communications including optic fibers.

Optic communications technology is still in the research stage at Nippon Telegraph
and Telephone Public Corporation. but Nippon Electric is already receiving overseas
orders for optic communications systeus. Application of this optoelectronic tech-
nology is very attractive to the United States as well.

In infrared forming and radar, Toshiba has received attention for developing the
Tan-SAM (short-range surface-to-air missile) with the world's most advanced lock-on
system and phased array radar. Toshiba has recently begun officially taking orders
for the Tan—SAM. Many manufacturers’ representatives have come to Japan from Europe
and America and expressed a desire to use this technology.

In the VLSI field, the large 0.8. electrical companies, 13H, Texas Instruments,

and Westinghouse, are cooperatively developing the VHSIC (very high speed inte-
grated circuit). Uith this combined strength, the United States is clearly superior.
However, five Japanese companies--Hitachi, Toshiba, Mitsubishi Electric, Nippon
Electric. and Fujitsu--have also formed a VLSI research association and have
achieved revolutionary results in the technology for printing circuits on silicon
wafers. The results obtained by this research association are being put to use in
mass production of VLSI's by the various companies.

In some aspects, Japan is ahead of the United States in general-use VLSI's. In
fact, trade friction is appearing and complaints are being made that it is not
right for industry to ecoperate with the government in developing VLSI technology.

Of course, this will be sure to have an effect in the coming military technology
cooperation.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The portable SAM (portable short-range missile), for which Toshiba is taking orders,
Applies the CCD (charge-coupled device) technology which is used in home VTR. It
uses a pursuit system which perceives the invading aircraft as an image. The CCD
chip is small and easy to use, so it is a central technology for the latest home
electrical products. Sony, Hatushita Electrical Industry, Hitachi, Japan Victor,
and other leading manufacturers are competing to develop this technology. Japan is
ahead in CCD's, so it is very likely that the United States will try to obtain this
technology for military use.

Many Japanese electronics manufacturers are involved in the items listed here,
including those like Sony, Hataushita, and Japan Victor which have few dealings
with the Defense Agency at present. But the United States is clearly interested

in Japan's highest level electronics technology regardless of whether the developer
is an arms manufacturer or not. An important key to the military technology
cooperation lies here.

ls U.S.-Japan Joint Arms Development the Ultimate Goal?

It is not clear what kind of cooperation was requested in the Hada-DeLauer meeting
in September. However, this meeting was given official status by the governments
of both countries, so rather specific categories of technology were probably dis-
cussed. The ultimate goal of this military technology cooperation is joint U.S.-
Japan arms development. This must be made clear because it relates to Japan's
principles opposing arms export.

Two years ago, the Keidanren's Defense Production Committee announced a plan for
joint arms development based on technological assistance from Japan. Specific plans
were made for joint development of PGH (precision guided missiles) and cruise
missiles. The government was approached and the Defense Agency responded by setting
up a regular conference on equipment technology. The sights were set for military
technology cooperation in precisely this direction.

The cruise missile, one of the two weapons specified by the Defense Production
Committee as examples, is seen by most observers as "an offensive weapon not
suitable for Japan's system of defense only." However, the PGH is desired by the
Defense Agency as future equipment, and some trading companies are showing strong
interest because it is likely to appear as an extension of the military technology
cooperation.

With respect to joing arms development, at a meeting between U.S. and Japanese
financial leaders several years ago, the United States proposed that Japan build
aircraft carriers and lease them to the United States. This was even considered
in the U.S. Congress.

Partly because of the slump in shipbuilding, the shipbuilding industry responded
favorably. The president of the Shipbuilder's Association at the time, Tsunesaburo
Nishimura, said: "Aircraft carriers are offensive weapons, but Japan has plenty
of capability to build them." This proposal was dismissed, partly because it was
judged to violate the anti~arms—export principles. But there have been grounds for
joint U.S.—Japan arms development for several years now.

261

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

How has Japanese government and industry responded to this idea of military tech-
nology cooperation? The government supports this policy as a way to get around
the demand for an increased defense budget. The trading companies are showing
positive interest in developing this new arms business because of concern over a
slowdown in the previously lucrative arms business brought on by increasing domes-
tic arms production. For example, C. Itoh, which is the Japanese dealer for the
Hughes Company of the United States, is investigating how much cooperation is
possible from private industry.

However, the all-important manufacturers show only a negative reaction. Technolo-
gical cooperation is likely to include products and parts and not just the provision
of knowhow, so from the commonsense point of view it would seem to be very advan-
tageous to the manufacturers. In other words, this is an important opportunity for
the manufacturers, who have been plagued by poor mass production results and low
profits because arms could not be exported and sales:were limited to the Defense
Agency.

So why are the manufacturers so reluctant? This puzzle can be solved by looking
at the history of technological assistance from America.

The United States has sold a large volume of arms to Japan in order to obtain
security in the Far East. As Japanese manufacturers have become stronger, the
United States has granted them licenses. However, arms exports are a huge trade
item, close to 20 billion dollars annually, for the United States. weapons, along
with atomic reactors and computers, are a strategic product. If many countries
begin making their own arms, the U.S. arms makers would suffer serious damage, and
the U.S. balance of trade would also suffer.

In other words, the United States would not be able to maintain a strong dollar.
There is also the danger that the security of the ﬂeet, which is connected to the
supply of arms, would be affected.

This "politics and economics of arms" puts a damper on the granting of licenses
from America to Japan because it is a large arms market for the United States.

For example, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries is presently manufacturing the F-15
fighter under a license fron HoDonnsl Douglas of the United States. According to
executives of the Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Nagoya works, the domestic production
rate is no more than 75 percent, while 25 percent of the parts must be obtained
from the United States. The domestic production rate for the F-43 Phantom, pre-
viously manufactured under license by the same company, was 85 percent.

Standardization of weapons in the Far East Is the Next Goal

This dependence on the United States is due to "black boxes." Unknown items

include materials such as carbon fiber reinforced plastic used in speed brakes,
knowhow for control of engine air intake, and software for the electronics equip-
ment on the aircraft. These high-technology parts are put into a package by the
United States so that Japan "cannot understand how they work even if it disassemblee
and analyzes them" (according to Mitsubishi Heavy Industries). The United States

is reluctant to let out its technological knowhow.

.27.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
er slt itude

k nissile)

itank

ile)

- 28.

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries

Mitsubishi Electric, Toshiba, Nippon
Electric, Toyo Tsushinki

Toshiba, Kawasaki Heavy Industries,
Nissan Jidosha

Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Daikin,
Tohoku mtal, Matsushita Electric
Industrial, Nippon Oils and Fats,
hicsl, Nippon Electric, Japan Radio,
Ushio Electric, Shinkobe Electric
(Ssnei Sokki)

Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Nippon Elec-
tric, Mitsubishi Electric, Toshiba

Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Toshiba,
Mitsubishi Electric

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. Kawasaki
Heavy Industries, Fuji Heavy Industries

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Kawasaki
Heavy Industries, Fuji Heavy Industries,
Shinneiva Industries, Nippm Aircraft,
Ishikawaj ina-Harim Heavy Industries,
Mitsubishi Electric, Toshiba, Nippon
Electric, Shinadzu Seisakusho, Tokyo
Precision Instrument, Toyo Tsushinki,
Nittoku Metal, Nippon Koku Denshi,
Daicel, Hitachi Ltd, Shinko Electric,
Smitono Preeision Industry, Shin Chuo
Kogyo, Teijin Seiki, Sakura Mber,
Tokyo Glass, Hokushin Electric, Kayaba
Industry, Ovari Seiki, Kobe Steel,
Sunitomo Light Metal Industries, Daido
Special Steel

Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Nippon Air-
craft, Shinneiwa Industries, Fuji Heavy
Industries, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries,
Ishikavajim-Harina, Mitsubishi

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Parentheses indicate nonliated companies

In the coming military technology cooperation, the positions will be reversed. 0f
ecurse. the United States will still be superior in military technology. However,
what the United States seems to desire is technology that can be converted to pri--
vate use. The superior Japanese technology mentioned above was mostly developed
for civilian use. Unlike the United States, which has converted technology to
civilian use which was originally developed with the huge financial backing of the
Defense Department, Japan has given priority to development of technology for pri-
vate use. Although research and development expenses in the defense budget are
small, priority is given to civilian use and this knowhow has been converted to
military use. The result of this strengthening of civilian technology is the trade
friction in color television, semiconductors and 16's, and video. Therefore, it

is not strange if the real aim of the U.S. demand is seen to be a remodeling of
Japan's most advanced technology with the ultimate goal of joint arms development.
It is no wonder that Japanese manufacturers are hesitant to provide such technolo-

gicsl assistance.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, Japan will be almost forced to give its accnmulated technology to the

United States. The government is saying that "force will not be used." However,
the United States is proposing technological assistance in connection with a large

increase in defense spending. From the point of via: of "U.S.-Japan defense fric-
tion," the manufacturers are placed in a difficult position. The United States is
also pushing for the standardization of weapons (unification of software and other
items so that U.S. forces can use local arms in an emergency) and it has almost
obtained complete standardization within the RAN countries. The next area for
standardization is the Far East. Including the military technology assistance to
China. standardization will be carried out between four countries—the United
States, China, Japan. and the 80K. This will be achieved through joint develop-
ment, and Japan is under political and military restrictions that will make it

impossible to back out.

Of course, it is not entirely to the disadvantage of the manufacturers for the
military technology cooperation with the United States to make a breach in the
anti-arms-export principles. However, there will be a big price to pay. In the
wake of the wads-DeLauer conference, how will the Japanese arms manufacturers
react to the political pressure?

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Oru 'i‘oshi 1981

9651
C50: 4106/2

. 30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HITI TO LAUNCH 7—YEAR PROJECT TO DEVELOP INTELLIGENT ROBOT
Uses in Nuclear Field
Tokyo GENSBIRXOKU SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 16 Jul 81 p 3

[Text] Nuclear Power Plant Robot: HITI's 7-Year Project To Develop Intelligent
Robot

Beginning next fiscal year, HIT! has decided it will engage in the development of an
"intelligent robot" in a large-scale project. It will invest about 30 billion yen
in the next 7 years to develop technologies for a high performance robot which will
possess the basic power of reasoning and will be capable of handling complex opera-
tions; the robot will be able to serve in a wide range of areas, such as nuclear
energy, space, marine development, manufacturing and social welfare. In the area

of nuclear energy, especially, its application in operation under high radiation
conditions and in reactor disassembling work is anticipated. "hen the project is
realized, Japanese nuclear power plants should be far less susceptible to radiation
contamination and will be a step closer to "unmanned operations."

The maintenance and inspection of nuclear power plants are mainly carried out under
the threat of radiation contamination; at present these tasks are carried out by

humans in most cases. But there are limits to the amount of contamination of employees.
and their working hours are restricted.

Ultimately what is needed in our society in order to control, reduce, and eliminate
the risk of contamination is the automation and unmanned operation of nuclear power
plants.

In these circumstances. during the past fiscal year HITI started a 5-year "nuclear
power plant support system" project involving the development of a technology which
provides for automatic reactor housing inspection by remote control. The new project,
however, will take the old one a step further: its goal is to develop the technolo-
gies for an "intelligent robot" possessing a certain degree of independent judgment
and capable of handling more complex operations.

In the new project, MITI will focus on 1) high performance sensors, 2) robot language,
J) manipulator, and 4) mobile technology. It will also develop basic technologies
which can be utilized extensively not only in such highly technological areas as
nuclear power, space and marine development, but also in the automobile industry and
in general lifestyle.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present, the popularization rate of robots in Japan is one of the highest in the
world, but because some robot technologies are "inports," HITI considers that "if
the present situation continues, Japan will fall behind the West." It was this
feeling which triggered the present move.

with respect to the R a D schedule, the two major national projects, "manufacture of
olefin from heavy oil" and "development of an aircraft jet engine," will be completed
this fiscal year and they will be succeeded by the project for the development of an
"intelligent robot" at a cost of 30 billion yen for the next 7 years.

At present, nuclear power plants are utilizing automted technologies for inspection
of the nuclear reac tor pressure housing while in service. inspection of the heat con-
ducting tubes of steam producing equipment, and replacement of the control bar driving
mechanism; however, if more sophisticated robot technologies can be developed by the
present large-scale project and introduced in nuclear power plants, the automation

of maintenance and inspection operations will be enhanced.

In the future the most desired application of robot technology is in the repair of
malfunctioning equipment under high radiation conditions and in disassembly of reac-
tors. In addition, the development of new robot technology is being sought in repro-
cessing plants and in the replacement of parts in Tokamak-type reactors.

Help in Improving Productivity
Tokyo KABUSHIKI NIPPON in Japanese 25 Jul 81 p 88

[Text] Overanxious Robot Industry, Due to Decision To Go Ahead With Intelligent
Robot Project

[Text] MITI has decided that beginning in ”—82, through the joint effort of govern-
ment and the private sector, it will engage in R a D on an "intelligent robot" (second-
generation robot) which is capable of making decisions and handling complex operations
such as assembly operations.

MITI's decision to give priority to the development of an intelligent robot over other
advanced technology projects is based on the judynent that the intelligent robot will
not only liberate workers from dangerous or monotonous operations but will also help
improve productivity by speeding up operations and upgrading precision.

NITI will establish an intelligent robot research organization jointly composed of
government and private industry, including the Electrotechnical Laboratory of the
Agency for Industrial Science and Technology and more than 10 robot related manu-
facturers such as Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Yasukawa Electric Manufacturing Co Ltd,
Hitachi. and Fujitsu Fanu. and MIT]. will comdssion the organization to engage in

R 8 D. The total amount of funding is expected to reach 30 billion yen over a 7-
year period, from 1982 to 1988; the budget will be requested through the Ministry of
Finance. If this large-scale project is accomplished, the robots are expected to be
used in .1 wide range of areas-mot only for industrial uses such as operations within
nuclear power reactors and development of marine resources, but also for home and
hospital uses for upgrading welfare services.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present. the use of industrial robots is spreading rapidly in Japan, and while
existing robotsmnufaocarers such as Kawasaki Heavy Industries are preparing to in-
crease their production capacity, a series of newanufaCturerSsuch as Hatsushita
Electrical Industrial Co Ltd and Sumitomo Shipbuilding and Machinery Co Ltd.have also
entered the market. Competition, therefore, has become fierce. In addition, Japan
owns 70 percent of all industrial robots in use worldwide; its share far exceeds

that of the United States and European countries. However, the majority of these
industrial robots are used for repetitious mass-production tasks such as welding,

coating. and hauling in the automobile industry. MITI calls these "first-generation
robots."

0n the other hand, the robots whose development will begin as of the next fiscal
year will be intelligent robots capable of making decisions and handling complex
operations such as assembly operations. These are called "second-generation robots."
According to HITI, intelligent robots cannot be built without R 8 D in the following
areas: 1) sense and recognition functions which will enable the robot to receive
immediately various types of information on the working environment, 2) the ability
to operate and function autonomously, and 3) the ability to make decisions and reason
so that it can understand the orders given and report the results. Since the

United States has already made significant developments in intelligent robot techno-
logy, it was considered that Japan must also move ahead, and this could be done
through promotion of joint R 8 D by government and private sources.

The production of industrial robots in Japan totaled about 78.4 billion yen last
year, but it is expected to reach 300 billion yen in 1985, and 600 billion yen in
1990. Thus, the development of an intelligent robot will further stimulate the in-
troduction of robots in various industries.

Leading Robot Technology
Tokyo NIPPON KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 25 Aug 81 p 2

[Text] Joint Covernaent-Private Industry Intelligent Robot Committee: HETI to
Sponsor R a D Tb Create Intelligent Robots

[Text] MITT has announced that it will soon establish an "Intelligent Robot Develop-
ment Research Committee" étentativedesignation) composed of both government and pri-
vate industries to begin technological development and research on an intelligent
robot. The committee will study the various problems of creating an intelligent
robot. which is a strategic future product for Japan, as well as its marketability
and the present technological level; it will seek the developmental system which

Is most suitable for final creation of an intelligent robot. The committee's work
is indispensable if Japan is to lead the advanced Western countries in this field.
In September, HITI will organize the committee, which will be composed of more than
10 representatives from industry, academia, and government. It hopes to compile a
preliminary report on the developmental structure by next May at the latest.

Toward Taking the Lead Among Advanced Western Countries

The intelligent robot is a robot of the future which will follow the industrial
robot now being used for welding, coating and assembly work.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

While the conventional robot is based on a playback system which enables it to re-
produce accurately what it has been taught (instructed) by humans, the intelligent

robot will be equipped with a sensor mechanism that will enable it to recognize not

only shapes but also colors. and on this basis to make decisions and take independent
action. It is expected to be put to comercial use by the 1990's at the earliest.

When this is realized. the robot will be used not only for complex assenbly operations
but also in risky marine development and nuclear power works, and in medicine where

it will handle human beings. The robot is therefore expected to be used in an extremely
wide range of areas. It is indeed a strategic product which will lead the industries
of the future.

It is on the basis of these observations that HI‘l'I has decided to launch R G D of
intelligent robot. At the same time, there is the thought that although Japan is the
world's forerunner in industrial robots, it is at disadvantage because all of its
basic technology depends on the Heat.

HITI wants Japan to lead the world in robot technology. and this Inst begin with
basic technologies which it will promote by actively supporting the R 8 D on
intelligent robots.

For this reason. the proposed R a D will first of all study the marketability of
intelligent robots, present technological levels, and problems anticipated in the
future. Then it will select the most suitable developmental method in terms of the
project's direction and structure. The committee's goal is one of fact-finding, which
must precede actual full-scale development work.

HITI intends to complete the study by next May and to begin the full-scale develop-
ment of intelligent robots after 1982.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha Tokyo Honsha 1981

9710
C50: 6106/7

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

lO-YEAR PROJECT FOR FIFTH-GENERATION COMPUTER ANNOUNCED
Associative. Learning Functions
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Sep 81 p 1

[Text] The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (HITI)
has decided on the 3-year first-stage research objectives for
the 10-year fifth-generation computer plan scheduled to begin in
FY-82. The fifth-generation computer will be composed of
super-high-speed computation elements such as Josephson
elements. It will be a completely new computer capable of
"association" and "learning"--functions which have been absent
in computers up to now and which will augment the capacity of
the machines significantly. HITI is consolidating domestic
and foreign computer manufacturers' efforts in furthering this
important project. It will be divided into three parts: the
initial stage will take 3 years; the middle stage. 6 years:

and the final stage will involve another 3 years. The initial
stage, 3-year research will begin in FY-82.

Associative and Learning Functions Are Goals

The research objectives decided on by HITI are as follows: During the initial
stage (3 years), a 10-billion-yen research fund will be poured into the develop-
ment of the electronic circuit unit (module) which will make up the fifth-genera-
tion computer and the development of the basic computer which will operate the
respective modules. Development of a facility that can process spoken words--a
greatly awaited peripheral device that will make human/computer conversation
possible--will also be attempted.

The fifth-generation computer will be a crystallization of all the achievements
in computer theory up to now, encompassing the computer's basic design. software
and peripheral equipment; in each of these fields, the current computer and
peripheral equipment capabilities will be surpassed by a wide margin.

In the research objectives, emphasis is being given to the structural design of
the respective electronic circuits which will form the basis of associative and
learning functions--a deductive function module, a tree-structure information

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0Nl.\

base nadule. n classification-structure information base module and no nu. The
structural design for the control module which unites each of the electronic
circuit units will also be attempted. This. then, is the chief hardware agenda
for realization of the fifth-generation computer.

The core element of the fifth—generation computer--the associative function--will
enable the computer to think for itself. in a manner of speaking. For example,
the input may be either "MIT!" or "Ministry of International Trade and Industry."
The computer will have the necessary flexibility to handle the two terms as

being synonymous. Heretofore, computers had to have minute human direction
beforehand. and unless there was a command entry to handle "HIT!" and "Ministry

of International Trade and Industry" as synonymous terms, they were handled

as different entities. By possessing an associative capability, the computer will
make autonomous judgments without prior human direction. Learning is a function
whereby in the process of making the same type of computation, the computation
procedure becomes progressively more complex. As with a human being. the computer
becomes more sophisticated with each new task. Heretofore. the speed of homo-
geneous computations. regardless of the number of times they were performed, was
the same for each operation; but a computer with a learning function will increase
its computation speed each time it performs its task. Such capabilities are
created by a deductive reasoning module and information base modules of various
kinds. They are patterned after the human brain's nerve circuits.

in the software sector. the development of basic programs for operating the
respective modules will be pursued. as well as the development of a basic program
for unifying the various modules and for overall operation. In this connection.
the data transfer volume between modules will be computed by means of simulation
tests so as to create an efficient basic program.

in addition. the development of information base management software-~automatically
synthesized software for programs designed to enhance associative and learning
functions from the software side--will also be attempted.

With regard to peripheral equipment for the fifth-generation computer, emphasis
will be given to a conversation machine that uses normal spoken words. Prom
the hardware aspect. the development of a device capable of 100 percent recog-
nition of spoken words will be attempted. From the software perspective, the
development of software that can enable programming with normal spoken words,

so that a spoken word recognition facility will be used in full. will be sought.
The aim is to complete construction of the basic foundation for the fifth-
generation computer in 3 years.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha l98l
Cooperation with Foreign Countries
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Sep 81 p 1
[Text] According to a disclosure by the Ministry of International Trade and

Industry (HIT!) on 8 September. West Germany has decided to participate directly
in the "research and development for the fifth-generation computer" that Japan

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

will launch next year. West Germany will send a mission to Japan in mid-October.
Britain and France also intend to participate in the computer research and
developsent, and they are now in the process of negotiating with MITI. Previously,
the West German Government had taken a wait-and-see attitude. But it has not
decided to send a mission to our country to get in touch with MITI regarding
participation in the project. The mission will be headed by Professor Marx, the
chief of the Research and Technology Agency's Data Processing Section. This lave
by West Germany is indicative of the strong interest aaong the major West European
states in the fifth-generation computer research and development, and the project
has taken on an international cooperative research aspect. Amng the West
European states. Great Britain was the first to react to the fifth-generation
computer research and development project. "he Comerce Minister Baker visited
Japan a while ago, at a meeting with Minister Tanalta of MITI, he expressed his
country's strong interest in the project as an aspect of promting Japan-Britain
industrial cooperation. They agreed to gradually work out the business arrange-
ments. Based on this agreement, Assistant Vice Minister Mangy [phonetic] is
scheduled to visit Japan 10-11 September to make further detailed arrangements.
France, :00. has registered strong interest. In the midst of these reactions,
previously the West German Government had not demonstrated any significant
reaction.

Now. however, the Government of West Germany has decided to send Prof wolfgang
Biebell lphonetic] of Munich University to the "Fifth-Generation Computer Inter-
national Symposium" to be held 19—22 October in Tokyo (sponsored by the Japan
Data Processing Development Association and backed by MITI) as a speaker. At

the same time. "es: Germany decided to dispatch a fifth-generation computer
professional mission, comprised of 10 representatives from government, university,
industry and academic associations and headed by Professor Marx, to Japan for the
purpose of discussing with MITI the format of future research and development
cooperation .

With regard to the symposium. approximately 250 participants from Japan and 50
participants from overseas are scheduled. Foreign participants include:
Professor Figenbaum [phonetic] of Stanford University, Professor Allen of MIT,
Professor McCormick of Illinois University (United States); Professor Trellibune
[transliteration] of Newcastle University (Britain); and Professor Kahn of the
National Data Procession/Automation Technology Research Center (France). Profes-
sor Reese [phonetic] of the IBM Hatson Research Center will also attend the

synposium.
COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shillbunsha 1981

111060
CSO: 4106/10

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1.“. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DRIVE FOR HIGH TECHNOLOGY AT MITSUBISHI ELECTRIC DISCUSSED
Tokyo SHUKAN ORU TOSHI in Japanese No 456, 28 Aug 81 pp 52-57

[Text] High Technology Potential of Mitsubishi Electric Sufficiently Different
From Hitachi or Toshiba

During his term as president, Sadao Shindo breathed new life into Mitsubishi Elec-
tric Corporation, whose operation was dubbed "Tonosana Commerce," and significantly
vitalized its business activity. It has been 2 years since the corporation moved
from the Shindo system to the present Katayama (Ninhachiro) system. The goals for
the 1980 strategy were set by President Katayama as "energy, electronics, and
overseas." During the past year, Mitsubishi Electric concentrated all its ener—
gies on the construction of a system with which to implement the new strategies
with great vigor.

Large-Scale Assault on Semiconductors with Corporation's Future at Stake

First of all, an “L8! research center“ was newly founded in April 1980. The re-
search system, which had been scattered, was unified. The aim was to strengthen
the consolidated development power, including the material, equipment, and manu-
facturing technology. At the same time, an "electronic merchandise development
research center" was also established in order to strengthen the audio machine
department.

Furthermore, an "office automation project“ office was established in October 1980,
and a defense system project office in November. By May 1981 a personal computer
department was established, and by June an information electronics research center
was built. It thus launched research and development of optoelectronics, includ-
ing semiconductor lasers. optic fibers, optic Ic's, and photosensors.

Moreover, since electronification has gone deep into all business departments, a
conventional vertical organization alone has become inadequate to cope with the
situation. In order to strengthen the horizontal coordination of the organiza-
tion. headquarters for the promotion of electronics-related businesses and head-
quarters for overseas businesses to coordinate overseas activities were estab-
lished. It has thus put its organization on the offensive, and made ready to im-
plement its 1980 strategies. The directors and personnel have also been greatly
changed, and a rejuvenation of personnel was attempted in the process.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SI-I ONLY

As soon as the system adjustment was completed, Mitsubishi Electric turned to an
all-out assault on the semiconductor. which constitutes one of the most important
departments for the promotion of electronification. Semiconductors have entered
into practically every field. so that the technological power of transistors in
itself is going to have a decisive effect on success in the future.

Mitsubishi was among the pioneers in semiconductors. but it specialized too much
in 16's for the public such as those used in watches and cameras, and completely
neglected industrial iC's such as the 16 K RAM (random access memory).

In order to secure an advantageous position for the next mainline-64 K RAM-
Mitsubishi Electric has resolutely carried out a large-scale expansion project,
betting the future of the corporation on it.

At present. 64 K RAM's are being manufactured at the rate of 30.000—50,000 a month
at its headquarters plant. Kitaitan Manufacturing Plant. located in Osaka.

Mass-production of this item will be carried out in earnest at its Kumamoto plant.
In July, production of 100,000 64 K RAM's a month was started. and new facilities
are being added. It is expected that by January 1982 the rate will be 300,000 per
month. and by June 1982 the rate will be 400,000 per month. As part of this ef-
fort, a portion of Fukuoka manufacturing plant belonging to the heavy equipment
department has been converted to a semiconductor assembly plant, and the future
design includes production of logic Ic'a at Nishijiro plant in Shikoku. which is
expected to begin production in earnest in the spring of 1983.

Thus strengthening itself, Mitsubishi Electric is aiming to join the top ranks of

those dealing in the 64 K RAM. "Mitsubishi semiconductors, together with Hitachi

semiconductors are favored by the users" (according to Kimio Sato, director of the
semiconductor business department). so that its all-out assault is worth watching.
It is also investigating the feasibility of overseas onsite semiconductor produc-

tion. Joint production in the United States with Hestinghouse, with which it has

a cooperative relationship, is also a possibility.

The pillar of the energy strategy-~the other E--is nuclear energy. after all. Al-
though it is a subcontractor to Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Hestinghouse's PHR
(pressurized water type reactor) occupies approximately 50 percent of the domestic
share. lhe P type nuclear reactors are said to be the mainstream of the future
nuclear reactors in the world, so a great potential exists in this area also.

Moreover. Mitsubishi Electric is the world's top manufacturer of gas contact—
hrenkers and gas-lnsulated substations of a capacity smaller than 500,000 R". It
is among the world's three best regarding substations of all types and capacities.
It is in a position to compete for the top position with Hitachi for the produc-
tion of chopper type electric trains.

Overwhelming in Defense and Space Technologies
Among the three heavy electric firms, Mitsubishi. compared with Hitachi and Toshi-

ba. is said to have something missing. Although its technical power is superior,
its business skill is mediocre. so that the combined total power is inferior.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE OVLY

However, Mitsubishi has something that cannot be denigrated by others when indi-
vidual product and technology are concerned. It shines in a different way from
Hitachi and Toshiba. In other words, there is no doubt Mitsubishi has something
distinctly different from others.

For example, the defense—related technology is one area. According to the 1980
ranking of firms dealing with the Defense Agency, the Mitsubishi (contract) amount-
ed to 72.4 billion yen. As far as the total volume is concerned, Mitsubishi Elec-
tric ranked fourth, after Mitsubishi Heavy Industry, Ishikawajima-Harima, and
Kawasaki Heavy Industry. But in the field of electronic equipment, it was far
ahead of Toshiba (32.9 billion yen) and Nippon Electric (22.3 billion yen).

It holds a loo—percent share in firing control systems (PCS) and a SO-percent share
in all kinds of missiles. In addition to air-to-air and air-to-ship missiles,
Mitsubishi lends others in BCM with reversal detector, ECCM, and ECCCM, which re-
quire even more advanced technology. Mitsubishi's radar equipment is also valued
very highly.

In dealing with the so-calied new BADGE system (automatic air defense warning sys-
tem) costing 150-200 billion yen, it joined forces with the Nippon Electric group
together with Toshiba in order to oppose Hitachi and Fuji Industries. It is an
accepted view that a coalition of three firms with past experience should be in

an advantageous position.

Another field which is as unique as the defense industry is the space industry.
The domestic artificial satellite production is almost completely monopolized by
Mitsubishi. The past records of Mitsubishi in defense and space technologies are
proof of its technical strength, and the effect of its technical influence should

he outreaching.

ComputerS, which occupy the central place in the electronics industry, also give a
special color to Mitsubishi‘s strategy. Mitsubishi's computer business ranges
widely, from large—scale to medium— and small-scale computers, but its core is the
0A (office automation) field, which is expected to make rapid progress in the fu-
turc.

1n the 0A field, Toshiba is in the lead as far as the combined total force is con-
cerned. However, on the basis of individual products, Mitsubishi has the top
share of office computers. Technologically, it was the first to introduce the
office computer using the Japanese language. By March 1981, 50 percent of all of-
fice computers were using the Japanese language.

The fastest speed. or the C III standard for facsimile, which is an essential part
of the 0A equipment, was set by Mitsubishi. Mitsubishi's photocelegraphic tech-
nology is also said to lead the world. Mitsubishi recently put on the market a
Japanese word processor, which has been the center of attention lately, and thus
increased the weight of its 0A equipment. The Mitsubishi word processor uses the
Kane and Kanji conversion format with a grammatical function. Mitsubishi is said
to be technically closest to the successful development of a voice-input word

processor.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It will take up the business personal computer, which is going to become one of
the important types of 0A machines. in the spring of 1982. Since Mitsubishi has
been lagging in the field of personal computers. the goal will be to "produce an
epoch-making machine no one else has ever thought of" (President Katayama). At
presett, 8-bit microcomputers are most common; therefore, Mitsubishi's new machine
probably will include a 16-bit microcomputer. Demand for the microcomputers needs
to be developed widely. so that subject is being investigated by every department.
Mitsubishi is determined to give a hard chase to the leading manufacturers.

Mitsubishi's own company brand office computers are being exported. Sales in the
United States are continuing smoothly. so the export of office computers has been
stepped up, together with the export of semiconductors and 10's.

As a result of a good sales record in office computers, the computer department
went into the black in the latest period. Therefore. production of large-scale
computers, which was weak in the past, will be emphasized in the future for the
purpose, in part, of strengthening the technological development power. The IBM
convertible type (interchangeable machine) is being developed today with eyes set
on 1983 for the development of a large-scale market in earnest.

It is Fuji Industries which is advancing rapidly today with the IBM convertible
type machines. Now. Mitsubishi Electric is taking the offensive in the large-

scale computer market and appears to be chasing Fuji Industries. One can get a
glimpse of the extraordinary posture regarding electronics from this alone.

Strengthening Cooperative Ties Hith U.S. Westinghouse Co

Mitsubishi Electric has made a few significant hits in the household electric de-
partment, such as the Futon (quilt) dryer and force-fed oil heater, but it is be-
hind in the VTR and audio departments.

Mitsubishi Electric is plotting a daring strategic conversion to production of
electronic merchandise such as VTR and audio items, so that the present ratio of
70 percent household appliances to 30 percent electronic merchandise can be quick-
ly changed to 50-50 in the future.

of these, the VTR will be the main thrust. Up until last year, it was only a
"fledgling merchandise" receiving a supply of parts from Victor. Starting this
year, an overall changeover to independent production has been made. Mitsubishi
Electric has a solid technological background, as shown by the development of a
picture search machine using VHS format. which was heretofore considered difficult
to achieve. Video disks, which are considered to follow the steps of VTR, are
being developed now. In the field of television, the sales of giant-screen color
TV "Auroravision" have been steady to the owners of ball parks and advertisement
COHEI'S .

In addition. in the field of automotive parts, emphasis is placed on the electron-
ificntion of the automobile. including a trip computer and an electronic fuel in-
jection device. In the field of robots. production of arc-welding robots, which
is expected to grow 30-40 percent in the future, began in August at the rate of

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

30 units a month. It is hoped that 20 percent of the market share can be secured
by 1985.

The sequencer, which is handled by the machine business department, is also grou~
ing at the brisk pace of 30-50 percent a year, thanks to the movement toward ra-
tionalization and labor-saving. The K-series which was put on the market in 1980
has been moving smoothly. Removal of humans from production lines is being pro-
moted by these labor—saving and rationalizing machines. At its Himeji plant,
eight production lines have been completely taken over by machines.

Mitsubishi's technical potential will blossom during the process of consolidating
its strongly electronic-oriented system. The strength of Mitsubishi's technical
power can be appreciated from the value placed on it by 0.8. Westinghouse, which
has maintained a technical tie with it. The coalition between Mitsubishi and
Westinghouse has lasted more than half a century, since 1923, and the tie is very
strong. In the beginning, the contract was one of technical assistance. In 1966,
it became a contract of technical exchange. and the exchange has continued since
then on the basis of equal partnership.

The contraCt agreement revised this year has expanded the range of cooperation

into operational management, or overall cooperation. This speaks clearly of the
increased esteem Westinghouse has for Mitsubishi. Over the past several years,

the top management personnel of Westinghouse have visited Japan one after another,
showing their interest in overall operation and management. including labor manage-
ment and production management. 0n the technical side, technical exports by Mitsu-
bishi are increasing in number, and in some departments the situation has been com-
pletely turned around.

Nevertheless, there are still many problems to be overcome before Mitsubishi can
join the ranks of real international enterprises. Aside from the products, the
most urgent requirement is the improvement of financial affairs. Being far behind
Hitachi and Toshiba financially. Mitsubishi must also positively develop a finan-
cial affairs strategy. In September this year. $100 million in Eurodollar con-
vertibie bonds will be issued, and domestically, a chance for increasing capital
from public subscription may also arise.

As Mitsubishi Heavy Industry Sees It

Mitsubishi Electric, which was launched from the electric plant of Nagasaki Ship-
yard, remains a "subsidiary company" of Mitsubishi heavy Industry. The tie is
strong because of the blood relation, but on the other hand, mutual repulsion re-
sembling hatred of a close relative is also strongly felt.

For example. the manufacture of a power generating station is being carried out
cooperatively, with the Heavy Industry responsible for the boiler and the turbine,
while the Electric is responsible for the generator; the Heavy Industry is the
main contractor and the Electric is the subcontractor. From the viewpoint of the
technical camp of the Heavy Industry. the difficulties encountered in connecting
the turbine and the generator and the high cost of the generator are always a
scarce of dissatisfaction.

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0n the other hand. the Electric as a subcontractor complains of "bidding low in
order to secure an export item and putting the blame on us." It is an old story
by now, but the rivalry between these two companies surfaced around the Mitsubishi
Nuclear Power Industry, which was positioned as the nucleus for the development
and production of a nuclear power plant. To the Heavy Industry, which is eager
to push for construction of a practical production system, the Electric, which
emphasized research and development, was always a pain in the neck. The strained
relationship between the two companies is said to have lasted until the Heavy
Industry shOuldered the responsibility for the cumulative losses of the Nuclear
Power Industry and the industry was reorganized into a unified company under the
leadership of the Heavy Industry.

These two companies also collided head-on in matters related to missiles, which
comprise the frontline of the weapons department. More recently, they fought
over the position of main contractor for the licensed production of the A-H9L
which is carried on board the P-15, and the Heavy Industry was the final victor.
The Electric used to be in charge of missiles of this series, so the recent coup
is considered by the Heavy Industry as reestablishing itself as the rightful sys-
tem organizer.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Oru Toshi 1981

9113
C50: 6105/259

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

VLSI TECHNOLOGY CHOS GATE ARRAY DEVELOPED BY TOSHIBA
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 8 Nov 81 p lb

[Text] Toshiba Corporation (president, Shoichi Saha) announced on the 10th that it
had developed the technology for the world's fastest gate array (semicustom LSI)
using CHOS construction. This technology, along with the company's other technology,
makes possible 6,000 gate number, 2 micron design line width, and 1.5 nanosecond
propagation delay time, which represents the world's highest level in high degree

of integration and high speed. The company plans to improve the reliability of

this technology and to develop mass production technology so that it can market the
product starting in 1982. Regarding gate arrays, Toshiba will be the third to enter
the market, following Fujitsu and 0&1 Electric, while Hitachi is planning to enter
the market soon. Thus, there has been a sudden burst of activity in the gate array
market.

In the past, the special logic circuits used in computers, ME equipment, measuring
equipment and communications equipment were TTL or ECL type, consisting of a com-
bination of a number of high-speed bipolar 10's but recently miniaturization, light-
ness in weight, and low power consumption have become greatly desired preperties in
such equipment, and there has been a demand for special LSI which can conform to

these needs. On the ether hand, special 1.51 are expensive to develop, and the pro-
duction involves many problems. one of which is small volume production with asso-
ciated high unit cost.

Attention has been directed to gate array as the solution to this problem, and this
is a product which can be produced in a fairly short time in fairly large-scale mass
production and at low cost. Gate array includes, aside from CHOS, the TTL which is
based on bipolar IC technology.

Toshiba has an abundant technological record where CMOS is concerned. It focused
attention on the development of CHOS characterized by small power consumption and
high degree of integration, using its own CHDS technology and super LSI technology
to develop a CHOS gate array with a high-speed operation rivaling that of the TTL.

The products which Toshiba developed and test produced are five types of high-speed
VLSI using 2-3 micron finely finished and two-metal layer distribution line technology
with gate numbers between 880 and 6,000. This company already has produced high
pressure resistant LSI with gate number 400 for intracompany use, and this present
development has filled out this product group.

Mo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The high speed gate array was realized through 3-n1cron very fine finish technology

and two-metal layer distribution lines, to make possible 2.5 nanosecond propagation

delay time per internal gate with the sane level operating speed as the advanced low
power Schottky TIL.

The super high speed gate array incorporates 2-nicron very fine finish technology
and aluminum two-layer distribution lines. to enable a propagation delay tine of 1.5
nanoseconds, the sate level as the high speed Schottky m.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunaha 1981

2267
(:50: 8129/65

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FUTURE OF PLANT EXPORT INDUSTkY DISCUSSED

Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 6, 7, B, 10 Jul 81
[Article by reporter Fumihiko Matsuda]

[6 Jul 81 p 7]

[Text] Japan's plant export industry is abOut to face a turning point. Plant ex-
ports, which broke the $10 billion mark, reaching $12.9 billion in FY-79. showed a
recession in FY—BO, tumbling down to the 1968 level of $8.8 billion. Plant ex-
ports were dubbed "exports without friction" and it was hoped they would be the
most promising export commodities of the 80's, but they were curbed in the wake of
the Iran-Iraq war and by suspension of construction of the large plants bound for
China. In addition. international political and social changes such as the eco-
nomic sanctions against the Soviet Union affected these exports. Meanwhile, Ja-
pan's plant industry, in the midst of the severe plant export conditions, has
started to reverse its gray picture led by the three major engineering corpora-
tions. Changes have resulted due to advancements into new fields through develop-
ment of new technologies around the axes of the reviewing of economic strategy,
reinforcement of the economic camp, change of generations, energy conservation
and energy substitution. Now, let us look into the future trend of plant exports
and the destination of this industry in pursuit of a new direction in the midst

of the transition period.

Inheritance of Human Resources

"We lost our foremost attraction, Akiyoshi Tamaki, but I am encouraged to inherit
the human resources raised on the command of the former president," said President
Hasakazu Tamaki, who became the new president of Chiyoda Chemical Engineering 6
Construction, the top firm of the plant industry. after the sudden death of the
former president. at a press interview on the 2d of this month, exactly 1 month

after he took over the office of president.

The former president, the late Akiyoshi Tamaki, was an excellent manager who broke
away from Mitsubishi Oil, es‘ablished Chiyoda Chemical Engineering 5 Construction
soon after the war. and raised it into a top world engineering firm. He was also
the commonly acknowledged top leader and a pioneer in Japan's plant engineering
industry. The shock of the loss of this gigantic star of the industry was felt

46

FOR‘0FF1C1AI.IJSE§(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'Sli ONLY

keenly, but at the same time, it may be considered to be an incident that symbol-
izes the plant industry at a turning point.

The. death of the former president (also chairman) brought a change of generations
to Chiyoda Chemical Engineering 8 Construction, but signs of change have been vis-
ibie for the last few years. It was in June 1979 that the company adopted a col-
lective operation system under executive council. "Since the president ran a one-
man show. it is questionable that a collective operation system was always at
work" (President Masakazu Tamaki). However. the rails were already laid, and the
change of generat ions. including those in affiliated companies. will be further
speoded up under the new president.

Challenge. by Dividing Responsibilities

These phenomena are commonly seen in the three plant engineering companies. For
example, in Japan Gasoline, President Yoshio Suzuki has moved up to become chair-
man. The bilateral structure with Chairman Suzuki and President Ilaruo Shinoda
started in June last year. "A two-headed structure with two top leaders to
strengthen management" (Chairman Suzuki) is viewed by some in the industry as
"the cloiSter government of Chairman Suzuki," but it is a fact that the rights of
nmnngemeut were divided. Especially in View of the fact that Chairman Suzuki's
key posts as a doyen of the industry are expected to increasev-he was recently
assigned to the office of director of the Engineering Promotion Association suc-
ceeding the late Akiyoshi Tamaki and also to serve as chairman of the "81 Chemical
Plant Show“ to be held at Harumi this autuum--it appears that the lineup will be:
Chairman Suzuki for activities related to the plant engineering industry and Presi-
dent Shinoda for activities within the company. Toyo Engineering, the youngest
of the three companies specializing in plant engineering, celebrated the 20th
anniversary of its establ ishmeut in May this year. Although the company is still
behind the two leaders. Chiyoda and Japan Gasoline, in sales and in construction
orders received, Toyo Engineering is planning to challenge once again: "Re have
consolidated our foundation to leap from TCE that manufactured fertilizers to the
world's top comprehensive engineering firm" (President Hasayoshi Naito). In man-
agemeni. a system to divide the responsibilities among three vice presidents,

Fuj imoto. Cho and Sakurai. has been incorporated, and new strategies are being
launched one after another to consolidate its position as one of the "big three"
in the background of the new "listed" status and the 10th anniversary.

Mitsubishi Heavy industries and Kawasaki Heavy Industries. the two companies which
play an important role as comprehensive hardware oriented makers in the plant in-
duscry other than the three specialized companies, also concurrently celebrated
the inception of a new president and realized the change of generations at the end
of June this year. in the case of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, it is thinking of
breaking away from its role as a conventional hardware maker to a comprehensive
plant engineering business including software, with the Chemical Plant Engineer-
ing Center (HCEC) serving as an axis. The company is delaying the policy change
partially as a result of the direct damage received by the cancellation of proj-
cc ts in connection with the Iran-Iraq war and the suspension of plant construc-
tion in China.

.47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reevaluatiun of Domestic Market

Kawasaki Heavy Industries is a similar case. Kawasaki. which was promoting work
to construct a cement plant in Iraq. has now been forced to hold it up for a while.
and its plant business balance has been severely damaged.

In reaction, criticisms have been heard within the company: "Our simplistic atti-
tude of looking for overseas markets because of the difficulty in securing domes-
tic orders was a factor which contributed to the problem." It is said that the
company is now focusing on reevaluating the order securing system.

This situation is not exclusive to Kawasaki Heavy Industries. The opinion that
"overseas markets are risky and domestic market reevaluation is necessary" is about
to become mainstream thinking. although risk preventive measures are improvised
based upon the increase in risk in the overseas country. For instance, both Chi-
yoda and Japan Gasoline, which used to claim an overseas construction order ratio
of over 80 percent, revealed a decline to 60 percent in FY-BO. Conversely, domes-
tic constructions increased. Hith confidence restored by these results, it is a
natural consequence that each company has begun to put more energy into securing
domestic work orders. "1c is not that we think lightly of overseas opportunities,
but the ratio of overseas and domestic orders should ideally be half and half for
the stability of the business operation" is the perception conmmnly shared by the
leaders of the industry. Compared to the attitude of the plant industry prevail-
ing in the past. which worshiped only the overseas markets, the new posture is a
lBO—degree turn. Thanks to the change of generations, the operational transition
of each maker is progressing steadily.

[7 Jul 81 p 7]
[Text] Revitalized Activities of Consortium

The recently presented "FY-81 Commerce white Paper" emphatically calls for organiz-
ing an "international consortium (international business partnership) as a means

to expand plant exports: "Due to the occurrence of situations where international
urned conflicts and the change in internal policies threaten to uproot plant con-
struction, there emerges a tendency for firms of one nation to hesitate to accept
orders for a large plant from other nations. in this perspective, the necessity
for an international consortium is increasing so that the liability for risks can
be diffused, merits of public aid from each nation can be utilized, fund procure-
ment ability and technological ability can be mutually furnished and perfected,

and cost reductions can be realized by procuring part of the plant supplies from

a third power." Without the necessity to be pointed out in the Commerce Hhite
Paper, many examples can be seen pertaining to achievements and bids submitted by
companies which formed a consortium with European and American reputable plant
engineering firms in response to international tenders for large projects overseas.
Nevertheless. international consortiuma previously were organized more for reasons
of strategies for securing orders and insuring work volumes, whereas the recent
consortiums entered into by Japanese firms have different purposes: 'Whe interna-
tional consortium is indispensable from the aspects of facing country risks and

of finances" (Chiyoda Chemical Engineering 5 Construction. ono Engineering).

That adds up to the arrival of a genuine international consortium era.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SF. ONLY

Duel of the Largest Consortiums in History

will soon enter the stage of a scramble for securing orders among the three indus-
trial consortiums which passed the preliminary examination: 1) Chiyoda Chemical
Engineering a Construction-Rumas [phonetic] (America). 2) Japan Gasoline-Kellogg
(America)-Daelim industrial (Korea), and 3) SHAH (Italy)-Foster Wheeler (same).

rather rare for a fertilizer plant. In accordance with this system. the partici-
pation of five consortiums featuring Japanese firms is expected after the prelim-
inary examinations: l) Toyo Engineering-Mitsui Toatsu Chemicals-Kellogg (America),
2) Mitsubishi Heavy Industry-C. ltoh-Sunamu [phonetic] (Italy). 3) Kobe Steel-
Nichimcn-Friedrich Uhde (West Germany). 6) Hitachi Shipbuilding & Engineering-
Humphly Glasgow (England). 5) Chiyoda Chemical Engineering & Construction-

yen iron Japan, Japanese firms by themselves could properly bid and win without
any problem. However. even the bidding on this project is said to be attended by
international consortiums.

Chemical Engineering 6 Construction-Mitsubishi Heavy Industries-Mitsubishi Corp-
0ration--ended up, strange to say. as a case where the project was subcontracted
to a local subsidiary of Bechtel of America which has gained experience in build-
ing plants in Indonesia. A complex international consortium system beyond capital
affiliations is about to be forged.

International Procurement of Machinery and Equipment

The international consortium system as described above has become common sense in
the business world. On the other hand. it is the Japan Machinery Exporters' Asso-
ciation (director. Ichiro Terano) that is active in advocating "International
Exchange for Plants" under the flag of "frictionless trade" paying heed to the
international trade frictions endemic in automobile exports. from the standpoint
of international industrial cooperation and promotion by the private sector.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘K'MI. l'Sl-Z ONLY

world and nations are looking forward to cooperation with Japan in plant exports
to Third Norid nations. Japan will also profit greatly from financial deals such
as the conclusion of the joint insurance agreement" (executive office of the Japan
Machinery Exporter's Association). It is hoped that the service window exchange
among groups of companies will advance to the level of exchange among the member
firms.

Meanwhile. the movement to "strengthen the international procurement of plant ma-
chinery and equipment in unison with the formation of international consortiums"
(President Hasayoshi Naito. Toyo Engineering) also attracts attention. In the
overseas projects. employment of foreign labor has become a general practice. and
following the patterns of human resources, material procurement is also multi-
nationalized. With this trend in mind. the following point of view is expressed:
"The recession in plant exports is only statistical. Statistics do not include
cases of business contracted for cost plus fee and cases of overseas procurement.
Plant exports are not necessarily in a recession" (Executive Director Hiromi Goto,
Chiyoda ChemiCal Engineering 5 Construction). Conversely. the consortium system
contains an aspect in which the export of plant machinery can be anticipated even
if Japan is defeated in international biddings. The order for the modernization
project for two oil refineries planned by Pertamina of Indonesia was given to two
American companies. Bechtel and Floor [phonetic] over Japanese companies, but it
is said that "one-third of the plant machinery and equipment will be procured
from Japan." and machine makers have already received orders.

While the waves oi internationalization reach the shore led by international con-
sortiums. a "new internationalization era" has arrived when Japan's plant business
is questioning whether or not it can survive as a world plant maker after it has
deviated from the road of international competition and has selected international
cooperation.

[8 Jul 81 p 8]
[Text] Relaxant of International Friction

In order for Japan's plant industry to survive, in the unanimous opinion of the
leaders of both specialized and nonspeciaiized companies in this industry, techno-
logical ability (including technological development and research and development)
is the decisive and inevitable factor in winning the competition, much more than
the reinforcement of international competitive power. MITI authorities ranked
plant exports as a "promising export commodity of the eighties based upon techno-
logical capability." and expects it to play the role as a "relaxant" to avoid
trade friction because of that vision.

Specifically, the engineering industry which is basically the core of the plant
industry, is by its origin considered a typical resource and energy conserving.
knowledge-intensive industry. The engineering industry, which gathers technolo-
gies and knowhow accumulated in each field and utilizes them as integral systems,
may be a uwsterioun industry from the outsider's viewpoint. In that sense. the
Engineering Promotion Association is noteworthy as a clear expression of the in-
tention of the industry to aim at the establishment of a plant industry supported
by these technological capabilities.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The association is new: it was organized only in August 1978. Since its incep-
tion, it has conducted investigation and research stressing social development
and resource development systems, and has worked for the development of engineer-
ing technology during its brief existence. The structure with Inayama-Suzuki is
now succeeding the structure with Chairman Yoshihiro Inayama-Director Akiyoshi
Tamaki, who were the leaders from the founding of the association, as a result of
putting in the office of director Yoshio Suzuki. chairman of Japan Gasoline. New
Director Suzuki is one of the executive managers who has been strongly devoted to
advancement into new technological development and new fields such as social de-
velopment, resources and nuclear power since the days when he served as president
of Japan Gasoline. it is speculated that as the mediator of the industry, the
director will lead the activities of the engineering industry greatly stressing
technological development.

‘

Also Promotion of New Energy Development

0n the other hand. in the midst of severe foreign and domestic conditions--the
turbulent world situation and the plant industry confronting a turning point--it
is true that each company is wrestling with technological development and develop-
ment of new fields by means of its own creativity and ingenuity. For example.
Chiyoda Chemical Engineering 5. Construction. partially due to the late president
and chairman, Akiyoshi Tamaki, who was an engineer, has been making an annual in-
vestment of 5-6 billion yen in research and development expenses" (Masakazu
Tamaki, president of Chiyoda Chemical Engineering 5. Construction). The company
is engaging in research and development in practical themes such as development
of heavy oil lightening systems and LNG cooling and heating utilization systems,
rather than "advanced technology."

in contrast, Japan Gasoline plans to advance into multilateral new technologies
and new fields primarily with the triad of social development, resources and
nuclear power. Social development of the three is meant to serve as a test case
for the company to grow into a comprehensive engineering firm like Bechtel and
Floor [phonetic] of America. Furthermore, Toyo Engineering is also pushing
straightforward research and development aimed at becoming a "world top engineer-
ing firm covering TEC of fertilizers, general chemistry, nuclear power and social
deve lopmen t .

Likewise, relating to companies other than those specializing in plant engineer-
ing, Kobe Steel, which has recently attracted attention in the business world as
the "third power" of the plant industry, has made "energy saving," "clean energy"
and "substitute energy" the pillars of its new business ventures and is approach-
ing this field by naming the new activities "three energy strategies." The ob-
jective of each company is slightly different due to the corporate policies, but
the point commonly shared is that the focus is on energy and resource conserva-
tion and developm-nt of new energy." In this sense. the "81 Chemical Plant Show"
to be held 30 September—3 October this autumn (chairman Yoshio Suzuki, chairman
of Japan Gasoline), is very interesting as it Openly and directly indicates the
direction of the industrial plant world through a display which selects energy
co-Lsctvation and development of new energy as themes.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Integration of Technologies at Issue

in parallel with the plant show, the "INCHEM Tokyo 81 International Forum" and the
"8] Chemical Plant Technological Conference" will be held, where some research re-
sults and science papers are to be presented. Also, in the special session of

the “International Forum," "Ideal Future Japan-China Technological Cooperation“
will be the theme of discussion scheduled as the Japan-China Joint chemical Indus-
try Meeting. Hith all these exciting activities scheduled, the results of this
international conference, which gathers the plant industry engineers in one place,
are very much anticipated.

Incidentally, althOugh the technological capacity is the "decisive factor" for

the establishment of the plant engineering industry, it is also a fact that engi-
neering technology (software) weighs more in importance than R 8 D technology when
the two are weighed in the balance. Not only is it said that "there is a limit

to the research conducted by plant engineering companies" (Yoshio Suzuki, chair—
man of Japan Gasoline), but it is even argued that "basic research in new tech-
nology is of no use for an engineering company" (leading figure of a company).

In particular, taking into consideration the fact that plant engineering must deal
with technological development which spreads over extensive fields, how to handle
the proposition, "to explore broadly and lightly into research and development,
and to probe deeply into engineering technology," will be an important issue.

However, it is an important role that is played by the plant engineering industry
and business: the practical application of energy and resource conservation and
new energy development. In this respect, it is essential to determine how to in-
corporate new technologies and engineering technologies into an integral entity.
This is, indeed, a challenge to the survival of the plant engineering which must
solve the question of "how to produce an energy-efficient plant safely at a low
cost."

[10 Jul 31 p 7]

[Text] As of 30 June, Yoshio Suzuki, chairman of Japan Gasoline who is also the
director of the ”81 Chemical Plant Show," became the new director of the Engineer-
ing Promotion Association, a group that leads the plant engineering industry. The
baton was handed over to him by the sudden death of the former director, Akiyoshi
Tamaki (former president and chairman of Chiyoda Chemical Engineering 8 Construc-
tion), and he is expected to fulfill the function as the doyen of doyens in the
industry following in the foetsteps of the departed Tamaki. The plant industry

of Japan has played an important role as the supplier of strategic export commod-
ities in international economic society, and its contribution in the future is
expected to be equally significant. Director Suzuki, who comments that in the

30 years since the war "the plant engineering industry of Japan has grown to be a
college student," was asked his views regarding the present state and future out-
look of the plant industry. which has now reached a turning point.

No Need To Vorry About Cooperative Operation

Hatsuda: "Can you tell us your thoughts and aspirations as new director of the
Engineering Promotion Association?"

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Suzuki: "The Engineering Promotion Association was established in August 1978,
which means it is fully 3 years old. Although it is a foundation, there are more
than 100 companies contributing as patron members, and operational activities ap-
pear to be on the rise. Since its start, the growth of the association has been
nourished by the guidance of MITI, the zeal of the member companies and the effort
of the late director Tamaki. I do not worry about the operation of the association
because it is fully staffed with, to begin with, Chairman Yoshihiro Inayana (chair-
man of the Federation of Economic Organizations), executive directors and executive
office staff. For FY-8l, in particular, I do not need to worry, since the business
plan has already been completed and approved. My real tasks are from next year on.

Hatsuda: The plant industry is at the dawn of a transitional period. What do you
think is the role of the association director?

Japan-U.S.-Europe Meeting

Suzuki: Members of the association are not limited to companies specializing in
plant engineering but are from all sorts of fields--iron and steel, electric ma-
chines and construction. With all these strengths put together, I hope to accom-
plish a great deal. 0n the other hand, it is also very difficult to achieve a
consensus of opinion. Major operations that constitute the backbone of the asso-
ciation's activities are: l) cultivation of human resources, 2) promotion of
engineering standardization, 3) project management techniques, 4) establishment
of the engineering fee, and 5) research and development of new fields such as so-
cial development and resource development. Our future task is “to explore the
possibility for development of international operations," as well as to strengthen
the international competitive power of Japan's plant engineering industry.

Matsuda: what is the specific content of internationalization?

Suzuki: in September, a Japan-U.S.-Europe joint meeting for project management
will be held. We would like to investigate whether it is possible to exchange
opinions and data with the European nations and America through meetings such as
this. The opening of an "International Engineering Symposium" is scheduled for
November as the first such program. Also, at the "81 Chemical Plant Show" to be
held toward the end of September. an "International Forum" will be held. We
haven't made up our minds yet as to how to promote international exchanges, but
we are completing the steps to be formulated for turning the wheels of interna-
tional operations.

Mutsudn: What are you going to do to strengthen international competitive power?

Suzuki: International competitive power can be, I suppose, translated as the im-
provenmni of productivity. Every company in this industry is working hard to
achieve results, but we want to examine what we can do as an association confront-
ing the difficult period for the plant industry anticipated this year and next
year. Japan's plant engineering industry has grown to be a college student in
terms of child rearing. It is slightly behind the automobile and electronics in-
dustries, but has grown promisingly enough to stand shoulder to shoulder with the
world's top levels. For example, speaking of the soft technology of engineering,

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we are rnnlldcnt that we rank comfortably high. although compared to the world's
top class plant cnmpnnles such as Bechtel and Floor [phonetic] of America, there
is still a considerable gap in overall power. Particularly. the three companies
specializing in plant engineering have fully reached the world's level.

Matsuda: I hear that international cooperation regarding plant exports. for in-
stance, forming of an international consortium, is in progress....

Suzuki: True. the number of consortiums is increasing, and international procure-
ment of plant machinery and equipment is also active. The Japan Machinery Ex-
porters' Association functions as a service window and is promoting cooperation
in plant exports to Third World nations with European nations and Korea. In
Europe, a lot is expected from Japan's plant industry. On the other hand, coop-
eration among Japanese companies themselves is an important theme, along with
international cooperation. Regarding the procurement of machinery and equipment.
we are in trouble unless Japanese makers supply us with inexpensive machinery and
equipment to deal with international procurement. On this point, I feel that we
can achieve domestic cooperation if we work together with the related makers,
since there are quite a few members which are known as electric machinery and
general heavy machinery makers. Indeed, the plant industry has a difficult side,
but it is also an interesting industry from this aspect, which can be called an
industry with potential.

Waiting for Recovery of Exports

Matsuda: Plant exports went below the $10 billion mark last year. What about the
future prospects?

Suzuki: Many things happened last year--the Iran-Iraq war and problems related
to China. However. projects started from the beginning of this year, attribut-
able to the completion of the reviewing of economic plans in countries such as
Algeria, Indonesia and Malaysia. Big projects are surfacing in Saudi Arabia and
Venezuela. Based on all indications. I expect a recovery, but I don't know how
big, although some people forecast that exports will recover up to the "$15 bil-
lion level."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981

8960
C80: 4105/224 END

54

ron omcm. Use: ONLY