FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10633
6 JULY 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 38/82)

U.S.-JAPAN TRADE FRxcrxons

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non

JPBS publications contain infatuation primrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. l’rocessing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information ms
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate vith the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGlT MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WEEKSHIP 0P
“TRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTI- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10633
6 July 1982

JAPAN REPORT

(POGO 38/82)

U.S.-JAPAN TRADE chnons
Courems

mmt‘m for me masts-00.00.000.000...ooosseossesseoooauto-souls 1

Little Effect Prom Lowering Tsriffs.................................... 26

Trade Friction With EC
(Ymhimn cash)IOOOOIOOOIIOIOOOIOOC0.000IOOOCOOOIOOOOOLOOOOOOI 37

Interviews on Relations With lbited Ststes
(Tad‘ m‘bo. seiidlim sdt0)000000OIOOIOOOIOOOOOO0.00.0.00... A7

Alex-1cm Left-Hand Drive Syndrome
(Keitsro Bsegws)............................................... 90

American Ray of Business
(mimshi ma“h1)IIOOIOOOOOOIIIOC0.00...OOOOOOOCCIOIOOOOOIOO ms

U.S;-ansn Economic Friction
(Yoshizsne stsn Interviev)..................................... 116

No Iuediste kmdy for Trade Prictions
(mnjim so“1).00000000000000.....00OOOIDIIOOOOOOUI.IIOOOOOIIOO 120

'nlinking Process Is bot of Friction
(Kiyoshi Sakai Interview)....................................... 123

Differences in Situations
(Jiro Tokuyann)................................................. 125

Need for Japanese Self (bnfidenos
(Toshihiro Tonsbechi Interview)................................. 134

- s - [III - ASIA - 11]. P000
COUNT-m FOR 171183 Tm
Tolqro 83W DAIYWDO in Japanese 3 Apr 82 pp 16-31
[Excerpts] Liberalisation lukes Japanese Rconow Strong

Upon reflection, we can observe that every time trade. or capital participation,
has been opened up, the Japanese economy has grown stronger. It has been
characteristic in Japan for industrial competitiveness to increase the more the
market is opened. This will probably happen again. The "dranatic opening" of
the Japanese market now being demanded by herica may backfire and cause more
trouble for Inerica in the future.

From the first round of capital liberalisation in 1967 to the fourth round in
1971, there was an excited reaction that "big herican companies will land on
our shores and take us over." That idea is now irrelevant. There seems to
have been no "threat of foreign capital." It was pushed aside. The ’results
were the same for subsequent liberalisation of specific industries including
automobiles, computers, real estate; and retailing.

Exceptional industries for which capital participation was not opened up were
limited to agriculture, forestry, fishery, mining, and 'leather. Trade was
almost completely liberalized during the 1960's. Now there are only 2‘! items
which are still under inport restrictions. America and the sc also have
restricted categories and are asking too much of a fuss over these few excep-
tional items.

The 0.8. trade deficit with Japan was 819 billion in 1981. In order to reduce
the more than 820 billion deficit in 1982, America is demanding that "stingy"
Japan open up its remaining categories dramatically, even though it realises
that this will not help much. -

As evidenced by the use of the adjective "dramatic," this is no longer a matter
of economic rationality. It is the epitome of political irrationality.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICt'AL USE ONLY

For example, let us consider agricultural products, an item which causes
problens among all countries. A recent forecast by the 0.8. Department of
Agriculture showed that Anerican exports of agricultural and food products
will actually drop this year on a monetary basis. This is the first time this
has occurred since 1969. The main reasons are the worldwide recession and the
loss of Soviet purchasing power due to a shortage of foreign currency.

The Reagan administration has Just doubled the agricultural product price
support budget to $17 billion, and the prospects for exports are bleak. The
burden on government finances for protecting farmers will increase.

Furthermore, off-year elections are casing up in November. In an important
agricultural country like America, the viral vote is more important than in
Japan. The effects of this development will lead to reciprocity and eventually
extend to Japan. The Imerican media and gcverment officials clearly
acknowledge this concern.

Dramatic Opening Up of Information

Since the "demand for a dramatic opening of the market" is a political problem,
it is always possible that once the reality is exposed, Just as with a scare-
crow or a mirage, the results may be disappointing.

For example, there is the problem of material purchases by the Nippon Telegraph
and Telephone Public Corporation. Based on U.s.-Japanese negotiations, I'l'l'
clearly began opening up last year, and has praised its own effort as "overall
liberalization.” However, there are unexpectedly few offers from the United
States.

Did Imerica draw back because of the firmly rooted reputation of "purchases
being made only inside the ITT family?" Or was Japan too quick to go along with
herican complaints which were based upon only a small amount of information.
During l98l, the first year of the open system, U.S.Japanese trade in
communications equipaent ended up with a large Japanese surplus.

'I'here is a similar story in the field of banking. mring U.S.-Japanese
negotiations, America voiced the following criticism: "Japanese banks can bw
American banks, and consolidate their base of operations. But the same action
by American banks is not allowed in Japan. This is unfair." To this, the
Ministry of Finance replied: ”The purchase of Japanese banks by foreign banks
is not prohibited by law. Furthermore, there have never been any such
applications."

In this example, there was a clear error on the part of Americans, who went

along with the criticism of Japan raised by ignorant amateurs, including
Ambassador Mansfield. The blame for allowing such a silly mistake lust partly

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
be taken by the Japanese Goverment with its usual clumsy diplomacy and
inability to give intonation as well as receive it. The hiring of private
public relations cmpanies, the publishing of PR publications through auxiliary
organizations, and the dispatching of missions obviously designed to build

up the Japanese image are examples of lack of skill in public relations.

Public relations should be a "dramatic liberalization of information" and a
"dramatic opening up 01 government offices," including administrative reform.

Reversing the Pressure Being hit on Japan

In this context, why not dramatically liberalize imports of beef, which have
for man years been a symbol of isolationist import policies which are not
appropriate to the world situation?

The government's response, that "liberalization of beef imports would not be
sufficient to balance America's huge trade deficit of $19 billion,” hardly
bears scrutiny in terms of the extremely political nature of the problem.

The same thing can be said for oranges and tobacco. Since there are deep-seated
political and economic interests involved in these agricultural products, it is
impossible to avoid domestic friction. There are dealers who are receiving
monopolistic privileges, farmers who are being protected with aid, and
legislators who are receiving votes as compensation in connection with the
allocation of import restrictions. The pressure on Japan in this area will
inevitably lead to the destruction of part of the postwar Japanese social
structure which has been controlled by the LDP. An unexpectedly large segment
of public opinion seems to think that would be all right. low that Japan is
being asked to assume an international role, it is necessary to open up the
society and economy, and by doing so, make the Japanese economy even stronger.

For example, there is tobacco. Tobacco is one of the few superior products
haerica can offer Japan. Why not let the Americans sell it freely? Some say
that it will hurt more than 100,000 rum families who raise leaf tobacco.
However, even though it is an agricultural product, there is no argument that
it is necessary for food security. Japanese leaf tobacco is inferior in
quality and productivity, and cultivation of it should gradually be reduced.

Japan is said to be strong in production technology. This is true for tobacco
also. Taking the 1971 figure as 100, labor productivity in tobacco production
had grown to 133.6 by 1979. This was about the same as the overall growth in
manufacturing productivity (136.5). so envied by the rest of the world. The
industry had the strength to challenge the maaor foreign tobacco companies
head on. In fact, one executive of the Japan Monopoly Corporation said:

"If we manufactured cigarettes using Japanese technology and labor with
inexpensive Anerican tobacco, we could make cigarettes good enough to export
to the United States."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .
FORIDFFKJAI.USE(NVLV

At this point, it is necessary to develop positive ideas for taking the anti-
anancsc pressure and turning it around. Japan has the strength to do that.

Beef
Trying to Avoid the Opponent

Import restrictions on beef have been in place since 1958. At that time the
previous system of automatic approval was changed to a system of foreign
currency allocation. The Livestock Promotion Corporation, an auxiliary organ-
ization related to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishery, now
stocks and releases imported beef in the name of protecting domestic cattle
raiscrs.

The beef exporters, America, Australia, and New Zealand, are highly concerned
about the Livestock Promotion corporation because of its huge marginal profits.

The marginal profit (also known as adjusted income) is the difference between
the high cost of domestic beef and the low cost, even after the payment of a
25 percent tariff, of imported beef, which is pooled by the corporation and
used for the promotion of domestic beef production. The margin varies with
fluctuations in the export price from the beef exporting countries, but it
usually falls within the range of 200 to too yen per kilogram. Annually, this
amounts to 30 to 35 billion yen.

Twenty years have passed since the Livestock Promotion corporation was estab—
lished. However, it is a fact that many people doubt that a strong foundation
has been created for a beef production system. Of course, if beef were liber-
alized, most of the reasons for the existence of the Livestock Promotion Cor-
poration would disappear.

Government negotiations with America over beef imports were scheduled for this
fall, but the date has been moved up by half a year.' The negotiations will be
held Just before the Paris summit (meeting of heads of state of the advanced
nations) in June. In these negotiations, the Americans will undoubtedly use a
very logical approach to demand liberalization of beef imports. In response,
Japan will continue to advocate nonliberalizstion of beef, and it will turn
into a fierce wrestling matzh. However, Japan will probably end up running
around the ring trying to escape its opponent.

Livestock Management on the verge of Failure
It is impossible to predict the outcome of the U.S.-Japanese negotiations over
liberalization or nonliberalization of been. What can be said at this stage,

however, is that Japan does not have reasonable arguments sufficient to over-
come the U.S. demands to open up the beef import market.

FORIOFFMJA1.USE(NVLY
One of the reasons given for the high price of Japanese beef is that the
cattle here are raised on grain. There are two main ways to raise beef: the
method in which the cattle are kept in a small space and fed large amounts of
grain and the grazing method where they feed in an open pasture.

Even in Japan, ranches with large pastures have been created in various places
throughout the archipelago. There are ranches in Hakkanai in Hokkaido of
1,000 hectares. There are also more than 1,000 ranches of various sizes in
Japan which are similar to "public corporations,” created with investment from
the central government or the prefecture, town, or village.

These ranches are generally suffering from an accumulation of debt, and opera-
tions are on the verge of failure. One could explain this situation as simply
a result of mistaken policies for promotion of beef cattle production, and that
would be the end of it. However, if the applications of the marginal profits
and subsidies were discovered. it would probably stir up a great deal of
controversy.

There are now 360,000 fans households raising beef cattle. However, the
"publi: corporation" ranches and the agricultural cooperative system raise
the banner of protest against beef import liberalization more than do the
individual farm households. The liberalization of beef imports would let out
the "pus” accumulated in the system over the years.

The idea that the cost of raising beef cattle is necessarily high in a small.
country is no longer convincing. This can be seen by observing a New Zealand
ranch. New Zealand is an island country Just like Japan with lots of steep
mountains. Pastures were developed in those areas to create fine ranches.

The public corporation ranches mentioned above caused the farm families who
raised cattle to see "visions" of ranches like those in New Zealand, which are
known as the most advanced in the world. The central and local governments
created livestock cultivation areas with everything from the beef cattle to
physical plant and sold sections at a low price similar to that a white collar
worker would pay for a cooperative apartment. However, this project has many
problems and is likely to end up like a drawing of food that looks good but
cannot be eaten.

The liberalization of beef imports would be likely to affect farmers who raise
dairy bulls, which are thought of as a byproduct of dairy farming. The price
system for dairy bulls in the market is related to the distribution of imported
beef. That is because the quality of the meat is about the same. If beef is
liberalized, farmers who raise dairy bulls will have to change their business
or create a demand for veal. They must somehow find a new field which is not
in competition with imported meat.

Also, the liberalization of beef would contribute to improvement of the strange
and complicated beef distribution system. Imported beef is known as a special

5

INJRIOFTTCIAI.IHHE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interests substance, distributed to the ordinary consumers only after passing
through the hands or special organizations and dealers. The liberalization of
beef imports would undoubtedly be strong medicine that would clear away the
deep mist which has enveloped this business for so long.

The liberalization of beef would be a windfall for the Japan Food Service Chain
Association which is made up of 200 large food and beverage businesses. Hotels
and school food programs are included in the business categories which receive
imported beet, but the restaurant business is excluded.

Therefore, the association has had the goal of being admitted to this category
for a number of years and has taken serious action toward that end. The
restaurant business consmses 70 percent of all imported best, so there is a
large danand. In 1980, restaurant and catering businesses accounted for 2’!
percent of beef consumption.

Also the liberalization of beef imports would probably be good medicine for
reviving meat retailers who are struggling for survival. This is because most
small butcher shops have relied on large ham companies for their supply of
beef since 1955. They have had to accept a combined supply of processed meat
products and raw meat. Because of this, the profits or the small retailers
have been decreasing year by year, and they have begun going out of business
one after the other.

kt the same time, beer, chiefly imported, now makes up more than half of the

sales of the large ham companies. The Japan Ham and Sausage Industry Cooper-
ative Association, made up of the large ham companies, is one of the organisa-
tions which receives an allotment from the small amount of imported meat. ‘

Fran this point of view, the liberalization of beef imports actually would
have many advantages, not Just the negative aspects of a general downfall of
all cattle raisers claimed by the legislators who are backed by livestock
interests and agriculture cooperative representatives.

The American demand for the Opening of the beef import market has the strength
to remove the disguises from Japan's useless policies for protecting cattle
raisers. That is because of the information on the Japanese market collected

by America over many years.

Citrus Fruit

Unknown Ties to Special Interests

If orange imports are liberalized, the Ministry of agriculture, Forestry, and

Fishery and the agricultural cooperatives say that it will cause the bankruptcy
of 300,000 farm families who grow mandarin oranges. However, it cannot be

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
denied that in the background there is a feverish attempt to protect the
interests of certain orange importers which make huge profits from orange
imports and are known to have special political connections.

There are 100 orange importers in Japan. Last year 72 ,000 tons of oranges were
imported; 60 percent of this amount was handled by the big four—mJii Osami
Trading company, llishimoto Trading Cum, Small Trading Company, and
Kanematsu Goshoo-a completely oligopolistic situation. The representative
member or the group, Mii Osamu, has tremendous earnings.

The president of the company, Kazuo M11, is also president of the Japan
Citrus Import Association. He is close to Iwao Yamaguchi, executive managing
director or the Central Committee or the National Federation of Agricultural
Cooperatives, and the cutting edge of protest against orange liberalization.

PuJii has carried on continuous protest actions since last year. At the 11.8.-
Japan agricultural product negotiations in 1978, an import timetable was set
for 82,000 tons of orange imports by 1982. Then, during talks between Prime
Minister Suzuki and President Reagan last year, herica made a renewed demand
for expansion or orange imports.

Why Stop Inport Liberalization?

So M11 had the idea of discussing the problem with herican growers and
attempting to achieve a peaceful solution before the import of oranges became
a serious political problem.

TheJapan Citrus Import Association established the "Citrus Expansion Commit-
tee ," and a party of 18 visited the thited states in birch last year. The
purpose or the visit was said to be to maintain harmonious relations with the
producers and exporters of oranges in the thited States. or course, this was
Just a pretext. The real purpose was to prevent liberalization of imports.

One can understand why Japanese mandarin orange growers are opposed to liberal-
ization. The regulation of rice production has spurred an increase in produc-
tion or fruit trees and animal products. Because of this, fruit production has
doubled in the last 10 years. Citrus fruit production has grown rapidly, by
2.6 times. The cultivated area in 1975 reached a high of 200 .000 hectares, and
the amount of production was.h,250,000 tons.

Then there was an herican demand to increase the allowed amount of orange
imports, and mandarin oranges became subject to a reduction in cultivated area
Just as was the case with rice.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

Two-thirds of the mandarin orange growers are in the (hugoku, Shikoku, and
Kyushu regions, and mandarin oranges are an important crop in these regions.
As the importing of oranges expands, the roar of bulldozers is heard in the
mandarin orange orchards, pulling trees out by the roots.

Production of mandarin oranges has dropped to less than 3 million tons. At
the same time, the mandarin orange growers are continuing an effort to cut
costs. As a result they have increased productivity and there are mam
growers who view the liberalization of orange imports calmly. There are even
sole mandarin orange growers who say, "The best product will win out.”

However, most growers operate on a small scale, with an area of about 110 ares
per household. Oranges are grown on flat land in California where machines can
be used, but Japanese mandarin oranges are grown on sloping land and there is

a clear difference in productivity.

If orange imports are liberalized, it will become possible to buy oranges at
American prices. At present, oranges go through three or four stages of
distribution, and this system would be simplified promptly. For example, the
trade departments of supermarkets would be able to import oranges directly and
they could then be sold through affiliated stores.

Naturally, it would be impossible to avoid competition with mandarin oranges.
However, there is a solid demand for mandarin oranges, and some fruit dealers
believe that they would not be beaten out by oranges, that peaceful coexistence
is possible.

Although they are both restricted import categories, oranges differ fran beef
in that only a handful of importers are opposed to liberalization.

Australia Also Dissatisfied

Let us discuss the Run Osamu Trading Company some more. The compaw was
established in 1957. President Kazuo Mii was said to be an old friend of the

late former Prime Minister Sisaku Sato and he was from the same prefecture,
Yamaguchi. He has several affiliated businesses.

One of these is race horse breeding; he owns ranches in Hokkaido and in the
United States (California).

The ranch in California was purchased in 1972. The amount of authorized
capital is $500,000, and the area is 200 acres. 'hro hundred thoroughbreds are

being raised there. With this ranch and the M11 Ranch in Hokkaido, FuJii
is attenpting to expend profits from race horses.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, the race horse breeding business is not very profitable. It costs
several hundred million yen a head to import thoroughbred horses, and this
business is known as a "money eater.” Therefore, it is not surprising that
he is putting the profits from the orange business, where the profit for an
imported case (17 kilograms) of reconstituted Juice is 1,500 yen, into these
affiliated businesses.

There is a tendency to loudly oppose the liberalization of orange imports on
the grounds that it will destroy the mandarin orange growers. However, it
would be wrong if what is behind this is a selfish desire on the part of
importers to protect the profits they have enJoyed for many years. It can be
said that liberalization of orange imports is the only measure for improving
the distribution system without cost. Also, the liberalization of imports
would open the doors equally to the countries desiring to export to Japan, and
it would eliminate the charge that Japan is a closed market.

For example, Australia has attempted to export oranges to Japan for some time
and is unhappy because the Japanese Government does not allow imports.

The liberalisation of orange imports would bring about great changes for
growers and exporters in the United States as an exporting country. At
present, access for exports to Japan is limited to certain exporters such as
Sunkist. However, through liberalization, large orange growers in the Uhited
States could carry out direct transactions with Japanese importers. It would
be possible to lower the high export price of oranges.

According tothe prime minister's office survey cf household finances, the
average household purchases 160 kilograns of fruit per year. This breaks down
into 55 kilograms of mandarin oranges (35 percent), 19 kilograms of apples

(12 percent), and 1h kilograms of bananas (8.8 percent). There is a limit to
the amount of fruit a person's stomach can hold, but if, through liberalization
of imports, the price was reduced to one—third the present price, the amount of
consumption per person would probably increase. If that happened, it would
probably have an effect on the market share of other fruit such as apples and
pears.

Survival Tactics for Mandarin Orange Growers

There are three possible strategies for mandarin orange growers after the
opening up of orange imports.

One is to change from mandarin oranges to other crops. Specialists see the
kiwi fruit, of which consumption is rapidly expanding, as a promising candidate
for such a change. Kiwi fruit can be harvested after 3 years. It does not
require the use of insecticides or a great deal of labor. In addition, the
regions where mandarin oranges are grown are perfectly suited to kiwi fruit as
well.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second strategy is a shift to other citrus crops such as navel oranges and
hassaku. These fruits can be produced with grafts on mardarin orange trees,
so this is regarded as the most efficient type of change in operations.

The third approach is to organize groups of mandarin orange growers. There
will probably be some failures among mandarin orange growers if liberalization
occurs. Once oranges are liberalized, it would be essential for mandarin
orange growers to work quickly to cut production costs through larger scale
Operations in order to survive.

Therefore, one issue for the administration would be how to bring together and
organize dispersed mandarin orange farms.

Orange imports grew from 13,000 tons in 1972 to 72,000 tons last year. The
liberalization of orange imports would undoubtedly remove the veil from
"political businesses" which are closely tied to certain politicians.

Tobacco

The rift in U.S.-Japanese relations caused by tobacco has a long history and
cannot be healed with stopgap measures. At the Japan-U.S. Trade Improvanent
Committee meeting in hbruary 1978, the v.5. Goverment charged that the import
of cigarettes to Japan is obstructed by a number of restrictions. Then in the
Strauss-Ushiba statanent in June 1979, tobacco was mentioned along with beef
and oranges as a product which symbolizes the closed nature of the Japanese
market,-and both parties agreed that "talks will be started soon."

' Under this pressure from outside, Japan announced a series of reform measures
in November of last year.

These included the following measures: The tariff was to be reduced from 90
percent to 30 percent. The standard price of the major ﬁnerican products
(king size) was to be reduced by 10 yen to 280 yen beginning in 1981 in order
to reduce the difference with the price of, say, Mild Seven to 100 yen. The
number of stores handling imported tobacco was to be increased from 110,200 to
20,000 stores (of 260,000 retail outlets in Japan). The retail profit margin
for imported tobacco was to be increased from 7 percent to 8.5 percent, and
then after 1981, to 10 percent, which would be comparable to the profit on
Japanese tobacco. Also, advertising was not to discriminate against foreign
tobacco.

Now Is the Time To Attack

Now trouble has arisen again after only about 1 year. There are several
reasons for this. Tobacco is a strong product for the Lbited States. herican

tobacco commands 20 to 30 percent of the market in France and West Germany, but
only 1h percent (in 1981) in Japan. America cannot stand for this. Consumption

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
is falling off domestically, and the three msJor tobacco canpanies, including
Phillip Morris, are angry. with off-year elections coming up, legislators from
tobacco states such as Virginia and North Caroline are also going into action.
In addition to the overall problem of the trade imbalance with Japan, they are
aware that the temporary trade problems coordinating comittee is acting to
reform the tobacco monopoly system, and they have Judged that now is the time
to attack.

Merica is now demanding that the herican share of the huge Japanese market,
where 300 billion cigarettes are consumed a year, be expanded to 10 percent, or
$1 billion. For this purpose, they are asking that the Japan Monopoly
Corporation make inclusive bulk purchases of foreign tobacco and reform the
"distribution monopoly" in which products are priced and distributed to
designated retail outlets. In addition, herica is demanding that the import
price of cigarettes be raised by 30 percent because of the rise in the value of
the dollar and the reduction in the value of the yen, and at the same time,
that the standard selling price be kept at the same level to avoid a reduction
in market share.

At first, Japan used tricks with figures to deal with these dunands. President
Izumi of the Japan lbnopoly Corp said: "Look at the record for this year.
Domestic tobacco grew by only 1 percent while American tobacco grew by 21.6
percent." However, in terms of the total market share, not Just the growth
rate, American tobacco only grew from 1.1 percent to 1.15 percent, a miniscule
increase that would require a microscope to see.

"Even so, tobacco is a matter of taste. You cannot stop peOple from buying
what they are used to,” protested Finance Minister Hatanabe. In response,
Secretary McDonald, Deputy U.S. Trade Representative, said: "In that case,
why not liberalize it right away?” Finally, the Japanese side promised to
increase the number of stores selling foreign tobacco. A negative attitude is
being taken toward the Merican demand to hold the selling price while raising
the import price. "This is impossible; it is like asking for a subsidy."
However, many observers believe that it will be necessary to reduce the tariff.

Strategy of the MaJor Tobacco Companies

However, what America is demanding is an expansion to 10 percent of the market.
Unless the tariff reduction and delivery of foreign tobacco to rural shops
causes a dramatic increase in market share, the Americans are not likely to lay
down the sword. Ultimately, they want Japan to stop monopoly distribution and
to open up the path for free marketing of herican tobacco in Japan.

Officials of the Japan lionopoly Corporation have this to say about the strategy
of the maJor U.S. tobacco cunpanies in Japan: "If marketing is opened up, the

U.S. majors will not rely only on retail outlets designated by the Japan
Monopoly Corporation. They will probably try independent marketing approaches

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFIHCJAI.IJSEI(NQLY

such as tying up with a cola distributing network. It is also possible that
they will dump American tobacco in Japan, selling high grade tobacco at the
same price as our domestic brands."

Some observers say that even if prices are reduced, the Japanese will not buy
because they do not like the foreign product. However, cola, at first
regarded as a "strange é.ink," and hamburgers have taken a firm hold in Japan.
Also, 30 percent foreign tobacco leaf is mixed into Japanese tobacco, so an
aversion to it is not likely. The Ministry of Finance predicts that if
marketing were liberalized, ”The American share would probably increase to
about 10 percent, the level of the American demand."

Furthermore, the temporary coordinating commdttee reported that if the Japan
Monopoly Corporation is turned into a private corporation, the Americans plan
to create companies inJapan. If tobacco suited to Japanese taste were produced
locally using cheap American leaf tobacco and superior Japanese labor, it is
not unrealistic to suppose that the market share would Jump to 30 percent,
similar to that in Europe.

The tobacco interest legislators in the LDP probably do not expect Japanese
tobacco farmers to be greatly hurt by increasing the number of stores handling
foreign tobacco. But thelatest American demands are raising fears because the
Americans are asking for freedom in marketing.

leaf tobacco is three times as valuable a crop as rice in terms of income per
lO ares. It makes up 2.3 percent of net agricultural production. It ranks
seventh among farm products. If animal products such as pork and milk are
excluded, it stands next to rice (33.3 percent) as a basic product. Also, the
consumption of tobacco is falling off. The Japan Monopoly Corporation has a
1-year supply of excess inventory. Beginning in 1982, it embarked on a forced
reduction of 5,000 hectares of tobacco producing land. It is in difficult
circumstances. If the share of foreign tobacco is increased now, there is an
understandable fear that this will develop into a serious agricultural problem.

What About Reverse Exports to the United States?

It is necessary to think about the basic issue of whether leaf tobacco is a
necessary crop for Japan or not. It is not essential from the standpoint of
food security. Also the price is three times higher than that in the Uhited
States, and production of tobacco is spreading to regions not suited to its
cultivation. Quality is decreasing, and a commercial product cannot be created
without blending in foreign tobacco leaves.

Ultimately, would it not be more reasonable to eliminate leaf tobacco from
Japanese agricultural production and use the same land and labor to produce a
crop which is necessary for greater self-sufficiency? However, since the

12

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(MULY
Japan Monopoly Corporation is in control of cultivation, leaf tobacco falls
outside the Jurisdiction of the comprehensive agricultural policies of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishery.

As a result, it is not possible for agricultural officials to provide the
necessary guidance to reduce the crop of leaf tobacco and shift to another
crop. When the Japan abnopoly Corporation plans a reduction, it stops produc-
tion without considering substitution of a different crop. Therefore, compen-
sation of 150,000 yen per are is paid, a much higher rate than the 60,000 yen
per are paid for rice. This leads to a vicious circle of inaction. Because

the financial burden is so great, large reductions in this crop cannot be
carried out.

Considering this. a major key to ending the Japan-U.S. tobacco war is to cast
off the territorial consciousness of the bureaucratic organs and reduce leaf
tobacco production through a comprehensive government policy. If this is done,
there may be some concern about the impact of the maJor U.8. tobacco companies
on the Japanese tobacco market. However, there will be no abandoning of
Japanese production technology for tobacco products. The major 0.8. companies'
strategy can be turned to our advantage. Japanese productivity is good enough
to allow Japan to develop as a production base for tobacco.

Cmunicatious Equipment

Why Again?

The hippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation (Hisashi Shinto, presi-
dent) has sent a "material procurement survey team" to the United States.
giving the impression at home and abroad of a 180 degree turnaround in NTT
policy.

When the issue of opening up material procurement at MT first arose as a maJor
political problem between the United States and Japan, the president at the
time, Mr Akikusa, was firmly opposed to opening up, saying: "The only things
we wish to bw from foreign countries are telephone poles." Also, it took 3
long years before the actual items to be opened up for bidding had been deter-
mined and agreement was reached between the United States and Japan. When this
is considered, it would be appropriate to refer to this import promotion '
mission as a radical change.

The survey team left llarita Airport on 15 March and made the rounds of prospec-
tive suppliers for 13 days. The members of the party were all veteran pur-
chasers, but even before they started most of then were doubtful about the out-
come. "Is there anything we can buy in Merica? There probably are not any
quick ranedies."

l3

MOMMMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In any case, the party energetically visited the maJor U.S. manufacturers of
telecommunications equipment, beginning with Rockwell International and then
ITT, AET International, and GT8, and approached them about supplying NTT.
They also made courtesy visits to the related government agencies including
the Department of State, the Department of Commerce Trade Administration, and

the FCC (Federal Cbnmunications Commission). They did everything possible to
demonstrate a positive attitude on the part of NTT toward international pur-
chasing.

In the House of Representatives, an amendment to the Communications Act (inser-
tion of a reciprocity clause) was being considered with the aim of boycotting
Japanese telecommunications equipment. At a public hearing on this issue, a
critical view was presented at every opportunity to the effect that NTT was

not moving ahead with international purchasing. If the amendment to the
Communications Act were passed with the reciprocity clause included, the sur~
vival of Japanese telecommunications manufacturers, who export 30 percent of
their products to the Uhited States, would be in danger.

Irritation at Huge Trade Surplus with united States

Of course, President Shinto completely denies this sort or political approach.
u: often repeats: "NTT collects money from the consumers who use telephones,
and it is natural for us to seek out the best quality products at low cost.
Therefore, we are going as far as America to look for them." He evinces no
concern for U.S.-Japanese relations. In spite of this disavowal of politics
from the president, the survey team visit was carried out as one step toward
normalizing U.S.-Japanese economic relations.

Right now, there is a huge Japanese surplus in the trade balance in telecommun-
ications equipment between Japan and the United States, and the U.S. industry
is getting more and more irritated. In Japan, there is growing concern about
NTT, which is seen as having great resources, and voices calling on the public
corporation to "open the door" are becoming louder. According to data of the
Telecommunications Equipment Industry Association, last year's exports of
Japanese telecommunications equipment amounted to h68.2 billion yen, a growth
of 58.2 percent compared to 1980. Of this, 185.1h3 billion yen, or approxi-
mately ho percent, went to the United States. Furthermore, last year's growth
in exports to the United States was 78.2 percent compared to the previous year.
In contrast, although imports from the united States doubled in comparison to
the year before last, they were only 2h.ll3 billion yen, one fifth the amount
of exports. This imbalance is increasing every year.

FuJitsu's difficulties in bidding for construction of ATT's optical communica-
tion facilities, made known last year, were certainly related to this problem
of trade imbalance between the United States and Japan.

1h

I‘HICHHHC1A1.U§EINVLY
Although Fujitsu presented the low bid to supply optical communication lines
for ATT, the contract was awarded to ATT's affiliate, Western Electric. This
was reported to be the result.of pressure from the U.S. Government and legis-
Lature because of a need for secrecy in cans "ications. However, in an inves-
tigation following the incident, it was found that Nippon Electric Company had
previously supplied optical communications facilities to the Department of
Defense. Therefore, there are not sufficient grounds for the argument that
Fujitsu lost out Just for reasons of maintaining secrecy in communications and
national security. One can see in this an expression of irritation at the
increasing trade imbalance with the U.S. telecommunications industry.

The amendment to the Communications Act has two sides. One is the separation
of regional telephone companies affiliated with ATT in conJunction with the
settlement of litigation betwten ATT and the Department of Justice, and
improvement of telephone charges and the service system in relation to this.
The second is the introduction of a reciprocity clause. The problem here is
the latter item. This provides that if a foreign company which attempts to
eXport conmmnications equipment to the Uhited States does not take a position
of reciprocity in trade with the United States, the FCC (Federal Communications
Commission) will not approve the exports of that company at the stage of
equipment inspection, in effect boycotting those products.

The American telecommunications equipment industry fears expansion of the trade
imbalance, and it singled out Japan as a target and lobbied certain legislators
to bring this concern out in the open. The U.S. legislature is facing off-year
elections, and the supporters of the amendment are reported to be increasing
in number. In addition, the field of communications equipment includes the
most advanced technology such as optical and satellite communications. America
is concerned about Japan catching up or moving ahead in these areas, and this
growing alann about Japan has also been a spur to these political moves.

The amendment to the Communications Act will be coming in for serious debate
and there is no predicting the outcome.

No Enthusiasm Seen From American Industry

In actuality, the opening of material purchases to international bidding has
been moving ahead on the basis of the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade) agreement concerning government procurement of January 1981. On the
basis of this agreement, the procedures for procurement determined in a U.S.-
Japanese accord, were categorized as Track I, Track II, Track III, Track II-A,
and Track III-A.

under Track I, when NTT purchases items which are already available on the open
market, it will make a public announcement in advance concerning the qualifi-
cations for bidding participation, determine the bidders who are qualified, and
invite the qualified bidders to submit a bid whenever a public announcement of
purchasing plans is made and determine the successful bidder.

15

FOI:OWIIC1Al.l!ﬂE(M‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under Track II, for purchases of items which are available on the open market
but for which an requires modifications, “'1'? will make a public announcement
and announce the proposed requirement. It will then make a fair and even-
handed review of applications submitted by suppliers, make a comprehensive

evaluation, and select a supplier.

Track III is the procedure for selecting a partner for Joint research and
development of items not presently available on the open market. A compre-
hensive evaluation will be made in the same way to select a supplier. Track
II-A and Track III-A are procedures for raking continuous purchases from
suppliers which have received orders under the procedures of Track II and
Track III. These also include procedures for ordering from new prospective
suppliers if they are found to be superior to existing suppliers.

According to results on international purchasing compiled up to February of
this year, bids were awarded on 33 items (136 billion yen, contracts awarded
to 1:9 companies) in the Track I category. American companies were awarded con-
tracts for only 7 items (800 million yen, 9 companies). Most of these were
U.S.-Japanese Joint venture companies such as Sumitomo-3-M, Graham, Memorex,
and Applicon. The names of the major U.S. corporations wiere not to be found
among them.

In Track II and Track III, there was only one application from a major company,
mtorola. With this complete lack of enthusiasm, the people in charge of pur-
chasing appear as if they would like to complain: "After all the pressure to
open up bidding, what is going on?”

Careful Guidance

During this process, at the beginning of this year, ll'I'I' concluded an agreement
with Motorola, independent of international material procurmnent procedures,
to buy pocket bells worth 9 million dollars (about 2 billion yen) annually.
Also, it formally approved the switching function push-button telephone of
ITT Asia-Pacific, the Japan branch of the U.S. firm ITT. and gave permission
for its sale in Japan. In the case of bbtorola, the agreement was made

after 2 years of guidance by NTT on modifications in the pocket bell. Taking
such things into consideration it seems very likely that these two cases are
the result of "concern over U.S.-Japanese relations."

Except for such hand-holding operations as these, the supply of materials
from American companies to NTT is showing no progress at all. Why? NT'I'
officials point out that (l) the procedures were not well understood during
the first year so there were few applications and (2) it has been found in
the investigations conducted so far that the Merican companies are not price
competitive in comparison to the Japanese companies. They stoutly maintain
that there is nothing wrong with m's purchasing policies.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

President Shinto has repeatedly made it clear that "we are always ready to
buy high-quality, low-cost items from America or amhere else." HTT believes
that Anerican criticism of the "narrow door" of llTT is "putting the blame on
the wrong party." There are even some who criticize the American side as
lacking in desire. This tendency seen to have led to the recent dispatch of
the trade mission. However, it is highly doubtful this will lead to more
kserican supply to NTT or have a calming effect on herican criticism of ITI‘.

In fact, there is a danger that this search for a special remedy may produce
results which are the opposite of those intmded.

Banking, Insurance, Securities
False Accusation

Along with 0.8. and EC demands for an opening of the Japanese market for
product trade, there has also been strong criticism of the isolationiem of the
Japanese finance, insurance and securities markets. The Ministry of Finance
has made public relations statements in response to this criticism, stating
that there is no difference in the present legal structure or in the handling
of foreign currency in Japan and that in Europe and the United States.

The critics were forced by this counted-argument from the Ministry of Finance to
realize that there had been a misunderstanding of the facts, and the criticism

seems to have died down. In fact, in the U.S.-Japan Trade Subcomittee meeting
in March, the demands for an open market in these three areas were dropped from
the list of maJor demands for the inediate future. This was a change from the
meeting of the same comittee last fall.

Certainly, there has been great progress in opening these fields in the last
5 years.

The Foreign Currency Law was changed from regulations which were prohibitive
in principle to regulations which are free in principle. The activities of
foreign banks and insurance companies in Japan have ceased to be regulated in
a discriminatory way. In terms of the legal system, they are treated the same
as Japanese banks and insurance canpanies. In terms of approval of bank
branch networks and loan limits, they are treated more leniently than Japanese
banks.

The purchase of Japanese banks by foreign banks is unrestricted in principle.
In insurance, approval has been given to Imerican companies, in disregard of
Japanese insurance companies, for new types of insurance such as cancer
insurance. In securities, although there was a delay, the rules of the ‘1on
Stock Exchange have been amended to open the way for foreign brokers to become
regular members.

17

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Whatever the case may be with securities, in banking and insurance there are
any areas in which there is more of a need in America than in Japan for large-
scale reforms of the legal system.

Howuer, as in the case with friction over trade, there is a problem of may
regulations and obstacles remaining in domestic law and regulations even
though the overall legal system is free in principle. However, even under the
present'system, Japanese banks are surprisingly vulnerable.

The by a Large Bank Is Purchased

Sometime in the future when a Japanese bank is purchased with foreign bank
capital, it will no longer be possible to consider it a great problem even if
the Japanese bank involved is a large one. It will be impossible to prevent a
foreign bank from establishing a bank under Japanese law and purchasing or -
merging with a Japanese bank.

Foreign banks will probably aim at taking over a large city bank rather than a
regional bank, a mutual loan and savings bank or other medium or small finan-
cial institution. What is most attractive to large foreign banking capital is

the great financial power and influence on industry held by the major Japanese
banks.

One thing that is causing deep dissatisfaction along foreign banks in Japan is
the difficulty of approaching and dealing with Japanese industry. In Japan
there is very strong leadership and group solidarity among affiliated groups of
comapnies and banks. There is very little room for foreign banks to operate.
Foreign banking interests are well aware that the only way to obtain funds ‘by
taking deposits and earning interest from loans to Japanese companies is to
gain control of a Japanese bank. They cannot be satisfied if their only Job

in Japan is assisting Japanese companies in overseas ventures and handling
foreign exchange.

The problem is when and where to grab the chance to start full-scale operap
tions. There are at least two areas of business which can be seen as weak-
nesses of Japanese banks. These are international financing operations and
consumer financing. These are areas into which Japanese banks did not venture
until the late 1970's. The large banks of the United States and Europe have

a great deal of knowledge and experience in these fields. They are a major
specialty with them.

In international financing, as shown by the example of loans to Poland,
Japanese banks have rapidly been drawn into making cooperative loans with

foreign banks. There are a growing number of instances in which Japanese
banks are showing aggressiveness, but there is a growing danger of Japanese

18

FOIOIFICIALDSEONLY
banks being left with bad debts when 0.8. banks, with their greater experience,
sense danger and pull out of a transaction quickly while Japanese banks react
more slowly because of a lack of informtion. If large Japanese banks run
into trouble with international financing, an opportunity may be created for
the foreign banks.

In the field of individual loans and consumer financing, foreign banks had
difficulty in understanding Japanese methods of making credit checks and were
unable to move ahead aggressively. Recently, there are signs that they have
learned to guide these checks, and that they are about to make substantial
progress in their operations. Up to now, Japanese banks have been very timid
in this field, and there is a definite possibility for a great advance by
foreign banks in the near future.

If this happens, it is possible that funds from ordinary individuals will be
rapidly absorbed by foreign banks. If interest is ever liberalized, how much
resistance can Japanese banks offer to the competitiveness of foreign banks!
The fact is that Japanese banks have made no progress in getting past the
stage of being overprotected children, dependent on the administrative guid-
ance of the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance and tacit agreements and
understandings between banks.

The Insurance Industry: Strong Sense of Operating Like an Escorted Convoy

In the field of insurance, the Ministry of Finance claims that Japan has a
freer systan on a national scale than the United States and certain parts of
Europe. In terms of the law, this is certainly true. However, in both life
insurance and property damage insurance, it is customary in this industry in
Japan for existing companies to operate as in a convoy, protecting each other.
This conservative system is designed not to let any company fail.

It is true that foreign insurance companies have received permission to market
new types of insurance such as cancer insurance which have not been used in
Japan before. Japanese insurance canpanies did not venture into these new
types of insurance for fear they would not be profitable. Japanese insurance
companies have been pulled around by the Ministry of Finance in all fields of
insurance, including life and property insurance, and have only had the exper-
ience of free competition for a short time.

Therefore, the overseeing government ministry, the Ministry of Finance itself,
has had a tendency not to approve applications from foreign insurance compa-
nies for new types of insurance in, fields where there would be competition
with the insurance policies of Japanese canpanies. This was a cause of great
dissatisfaction to foreign insurance companies.

19

mommmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is a basic difference in the attitude toward insurance in Japan and in
the United States and Europe. In Japan, there is a feeling that the govern-
nent should be held responsible if insurance products are approved in which
the policy holder's rights are not maintained. If an insurance problen occurs,
the policy holder may call the gonrment to account for approving the policy.

However, in the United States and Europe, an insurance policy is a private
agreement between the insurance agent and the policy holder. The responsi-
bility for related damages or infringements can only be borne by the parties
who made the contract. This thinking has a firm historical basis. The super-
visory government agency will approve new types of insurance if there is a
general possibility for maintenance of the policy holder’s rights. However, if
a problem occurs, the govern-eat agency has nothing to do with it.

This is a big difference in outlook. The Japanese insurance industry has
relied on its convoy-like operations on the basis of this unique Japanese
concept. The Japanese insurance industry will not be able to cope successfully

with an age of internationalization until it can move beyond this limited
concept.

Great Weaknesses in the Securities Industry

The case of the securities industry is a bit different. Japanese stockbroker-s
have adapted to the situation of Japanese industry and finance and have concen-
trated on creating markets which neglect the individual investor and earning
their money from comissions. And even though the Tokyo Stock Exchange has
opened the way to regular membership in the exchange for foreign brokers , it
has not increased the fixed number. The quota is now filled with Japanese

brokers, so there is no room for participation and the restriction has been
removed in principle only.

What is most important in the United States and Europe is the rights of the
individual investor. Japanese industry and securities companies have up to
now ignored the rights of the individual investor with impunity and contin-
ually made capital increases by issuing stock at market value. Individual
investors and institutional investors in the United States and mrope will
probably not allow this sort of thing.

With the new Oomerce Code, it will be difficult for industries to continue
the practice of not paying for their seals, increasing capital with narket
value stock issues. However, if the Japanese securities industry does not sake
radical reforms, it will be plagued by repeated suits fron foreign investors
and be kept under constant pressure.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIGURE APPENDIX

Iﬁlmﬂ'ﬂi yo ‘/ (1)

Key:

l. 0.8. Food Exports Down

2. Domestic Conditions Behind Demand
on Japan To Open Door

3. billion dollars

lo. (estimate)

5. Data. Sources: 0.8. Dept. of
Agriculture

 

p...

. Trade Goes By Turns

(custom!!!) ' 2. Big Surplus with BC

+8£0(h) (a: 3. (0.3 Froduct Trude Balance by Region)
n ) to. with EC

5. plus

6. with Japan:

7. minus

8. (unit: 100 mil. donus) Data Source:

U.S. Dept. of Comerce

    

(III Ir»)ll:m(8) —

\,w W

21

FOR 05710“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

7x '1 new.» —emnmeotnr(alun—

 

Increase in Alex-lean Beer - Share or Japanese Beef Import Volume
by Country (MITI statistics)
Note: Reminder from New Zeelend 8. 1976
Meta-3113 9. 1977
Merica 10. 1978
1973 11. 1979
19710 12. 1980
1975 13. 1981

22

MWUSIONLV
twp“: —maunue—— (1)

[.9—
”’.""'I

 

N ma {Row c0 ox 8:40: to

b b-F- hbh- (— I~ too (0

Chase» mmo‘ Ox 0\ exam O\

H H H HHH 0-! H HP! H H
(estimate)

Note: The 1981 volume is the sum from January to November

(um statistics)
Key:

1. Rapid Growth in Oranges - Changes in Volume of Citrus Imports
2. thousand metric tone

3. grapefruit

h. lemons

S. oranges

23

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       
   

ﬁﬂlhﬂzwlﬂﬂlc
antoxaoncu)

Ana—AA

(10)

Key: 1. Share of Imported Products in Total Cigarette Sales

2. billion cigarettes
3. domestic products
h. Percentage of Imported Products in Total Sales
5. billion cigarettes
6. imported products
7. 1970

8. 1972

9. 197%
10. 1976
11. 1978
12. 1980
13. 1981

2%

FOI‘OIIHCIAl.lEiB(HVLY
5.
60
T.
8.
9.
1o.
11.
12.
13.
1h.
15.
16.

  
    
    
     
    
      

  

”var-’43.;
an” 7(91‘7-Q'Iaéi)
~inust'lmuslnu1(12f
L70” thxu3)‘

: 11m ‘axvvx( 1h)

 

 

W 9)::nust Junta
. ”@4911”? . - (-13-)

7- - e , 7‘ ," . “
7m summon“...

World Mhrket Share of Major Tobacco Cbnpanies (1979)
52 country Total

2,2h1,hoo,ooo,ooo (100 5)

Miscellaneous

85h.2 billion (38.1%)

396.5 billion cigarettes

325.6 bil.

306.8 bil.

2101.10 bil.

110.9 bil.

1,387,2oo,ooo.ooo (61.9%)

British herican Tobacco

Phillip wrris

Japan Monopoly Corp.

Reynolds

Rotunan's

Total of Five Companies Above -

Note: Market share is percentage of consumption in 52
countries where data are available.

COPYRIGHT: Dsiyamondoshe 1982

9651

080: 10105/95

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LITTLE EFFECT MM LOWERING TARIFPS
Tokyo suntan ourmonno in Japanese 13 set 82 pp 16-21
[Text] Overprotection Versus Selfishness

A certain MITI official said the following in a tone that made it hard to tell
if he was Joking or serious. "th not have the auto makers and electrical
equipment makers pay a subsidy 2 years in advance to industries that'vill come
into stiff competition with imported goods because of the reduction of tariffs
and improvement of nontariff barriers. After all, the auto makers and elec-
trical equipsent makers caused the trade friction."

The EC trade deficit with Japan is $13 - 110 billion (EC statistics) and the
0.8. deficit is $18 billion (0.8. Department of Oomerce statistics). There-
fore, the BC and the Lhited States are pressing hard for further opening of
the Japanese market.

Under this pressure, the government is speeding up the Tokyo round schedule of
successive tariff reductions. It has decided to move up the reductions by 2
years and to improve the import inspection procedures for 67 items.

Hovever, a number of Japanese industries, such as candy, liquor, and computers,
are suffering from the successive market openings and are lodging complaints.
Therefore, HITI officials, who have many headaches because of their contact
with trade problems, may feel like making statements such as the above.

In reality, imports cannot be promoted very much by lowering the tariff a
little or simplifying import procedures a bit. BC representatives have said
that "it is doubtful hov much effect there vill be.” A study by the [herican
embassy in Japan states that only $800 million could be saved by removing all
nontariff barriers.

The average Japanese tariff rate for all import items is 3.1 percent. This is
lower than the 30's 6.1» percent and America's 6.0 percent (as of December 1981).
There were 109 remaining itens with import restrictions in 1970, but non the
number has been reduced to 27 items. These figures are not especially large
when compared to other advanced countries.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As a result of this opening of the door, the amount of manufactured product
imports in 1980 was $33.3 billion, 5.8 times the $5.7 billion of 1970.

At this stage, small efforts at import promotion are not likely to have much
effect.

Furthermore, the government is apparently standing by the position that "the
limit has been reached" for liberalization of agricultural products being
demanded by the EC and the United States. The EC and the Uhited States have
only criticized Japan and have not investigated why their products do not sell
in Japan. The most important problem is not being considered.

Even Daiei Cannot Compete

Not only the EC and the United States, but Japanese consumers as well are as]:-
ing; "Why isn't something being done?" about the policy of overprotecting farm
products.

A glance at the accompanying list of items which still have import restrictions
will show the problem clearly. And although they are not designated as
products with import restrictions, many processed foods are restricted in
effect. Some representative items are chocolate and cookies.

In the name of protecting domestic confection manufacturers who must buy high-
priced ingredients, a tariff of 33.1 percent is laid on chocolate and a tariff

of 37.8 percent is placed on cookies.

The EC countries are the maJor producers of chocolate and cookies, and they are
criticizing these high tariffs. However, as long as Japan maintains its
present agricultural policies, it will be difficult to make large reductions.

The EC countries have inexpensive ingredients, and they mass produce these
products for export to the countries of the world. Therefore, the factory
shipment price is 30 to ho percent less than that of Japanese manufacturers.

However, when these products are exported to Japan, the final price is higher
than that of Japanese products because of freight costs, tariffs, and the
profits of importers and retailers.

Japanese distributors also have difficulties in this area.

For example, there is the case of the Daiei supermarket. This company formed
a tie-up with Britain's largest chain, Marks and Spencer, and began importing
and selling that store's own brand, "St Michael" cookies and candy. This was
an important effort in promoting trade between Japan and Britain, and company
President Isao Nakauchi and his wife were even invited to a garden party given
by Queen Elizabeth.

27

FOI‘OIFKJAI.USBIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, because of difficulties in pricing, the St Michael confections are
not doing well. Nakauchi tries to control his anger, saying: "He have
absolute confidence in both quality and taste."

Also several years ago, (hdbury, the large British candy company, established
a Joint venture in Japan with Kanebo Food Products, and United Biscuit, the
large British biscuit company, famed a similar venture with Meiji Confection-
ery. The production of products by these companies has contributed indirectly
to the difficulties of imports.

The production of chocolate candy by Japanese ushers was 130,000 tons in 1980.
In comparison, the imported amount was h,812 tons in 1978, 6,265 tons in 1979,
and 5,081 tons in 1980. Domestic production of biscuits and cookies was
270,000 tons in 1980, compared to imports of Is,0'r9 tons in 1978, 1.,813 tons
in 1979. and 3,951 tons in 1980.

Protection of Leather Goods Benefits Large Companies

The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishery is not giving way on 22
restricted items, and likewise, MITI is attanpting to protect coal, cattle
and horses hides, sheep hides, goat hides, and leather shoes, the five remain-
ing restricted items under its Jurisdiction.

For example, the tariff on leather shoes is 27 percent. The voices which are
heard complaining about this customs rate surprisingly come from the sporting
goods industry.

A certain sporting goods iaporter reports the following: "The problem is that
while athletic shoes which use only a small amount of leather are taxed only
10 percent, a tax of 27 percent may be assessed on shoes with a larger amount
of leather. Domestic manufacturers of athletic equipment are taking advantage
of this nitpicking categorization and making athletic shoes with lots of
leather. If the import volume is restricted and a high tariff is imposed,
there is little advantage for the importer. He may be driven out by products
like Ashikkusu."

The same situation is developing in the market for ski boots. Ilow most ski
boots are made of plastics. However, because ski boots were previously made of
leather, there is a 27 percent tariff on ski boots Just like that for leather
shoes.

According to the owner of a Tolqo sporting goods store: "Many ski boot
manufacturers are small. Ski boots are very much a seasonal product. Also,
they can be a one-in-a—lifetime purchase, so large companies have not taken an
interest in them. How, however, the large sporting goods manufacturers who

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
make skis have taken notice of the high tariffs on imports and the year by
year increase in the skiing population, and are moving toward involvement in
ski boots."

Another problem is that important athletic organisations in such sports as
tennis, soccer, and baseball are reluctant to publicly endorse foreign-made
athletic goods.

A number of problems exist which have nothing to do with the supposed healthi-
ness of sports.

The Hard Battle for Scotch and Bourbon

The radical solution is being demanded to open the door for agricultural and
leather products. However, there are certain things which the United States
and the 30 must reconsider. There are many cases in which they do not seem
to have understood the actual circumstances of the Japanese market.

Scotch whiskey is an example. Great Britain is demanding that "Japan lower the
tariff." The situation in Japan is not such that sales will improve Just by
lowering the tariff.

In Japan sales have actually worsened because of a price reduction.

The import volume of scotch increased year by year after 1971. The amount of
imported whiskey (98 percent scotch) on the Japanese market, as shown in the
accompanying table, Jumped dramtically, from 320,000 cases (12 bottles per
case) in 1971 to 11 times that amount, 3,h70,000 cases in 1979. The share of
the high-quality whiskey market, including scotch whiskey and high-grade
domestic whiskey. has grown from 6.9 percent to 16.6 percent.

The price has now fallen. The yen has continued to be strong and the import
tax has been lowered three times since liberalisation 3 years ago. As a result,
the standard retail price for such standard brands as Johnny Walker Red, ‘
Outty Sark, and white Horse has moved into the 3,000-yen range.

However, sales of scotch whiskey have not gone well in the last 2 or 3 years.
In 1980, the amount of scotch taxed at custom was 2,260,000 eases, down 12
percent from the previous year. In 1981, the same amount was 2,310,000 cases
(estimate), increase 11 percent from the previous year. It is not accurate to
say that "consumption has cooled off and it is harder for consumers to put out
3,000 yen for a high-grade whiskey." That is because the share of the high-
quality whiskey market held by scotch whiskey has fallen to 6.3 percent from
10.3 percent in 1980 and 16.6 percent in 1979. W?

29

“WWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A- running lo the stock section manager or an import dealer: "The greatest
reason for the drop is that it became too popular and lost its attraction.
Also, there was a great fluctuation in the final price, so consumers lost
faith in the price of scotch. Even though the standard retail price is 3,500
yen, department stores sell it as a bargain for 2,800 to 2,900 yen. Then in
the midsummer and year-end gift-giving seasons, they charge full price of
3,500 yen. Because of this kind of marketing practice, consumers have
preferred to buy domestic high-grade whiskey with a more stable price."

or the scotch consumed in Japan, 1‘5 percent is used for gifts, 1&5 percent is
consumed in drinking establishments such as bars and clubs, and the remaining
10 percent goes to the general demand in liquor stores.

Therefore, it hurts when the gift demand is taken away by domestic products.
Also, in drinking establishments, the price is higher for a scotch and water
than for the same drink made with domestic whiskey. So scotch has been
greatly affected by the cuts in corporate entertainment expenses and the slump
in overall consumption.

Now that the brand name myths have been exposed, will scotch dealers attempt
to emphasize the "merit" of a low price in comparison to domestic whiskey of
the same class, push the low price, and increase general demand? Or will they
stop the disorderly selling practices, regain the trust of consumers, and
revitalize the gift market?

Which path will the standard brands take?

The bourbon imported from the United States is .1... faltering. The import
volume was 596 kiloliters in 1978, 1,000 kiloliters in 1979, and 11h kiloliters
in 1980.

What is interesting is the difference in the method of assessing import duties
for scotch, which is made from malt, and bourbon, which is made from corn. A
set amount of 31:3 yen is assessed for each bottle of scotch, while bourbon is

assessed by a percentage of 2h.5 percent.

Standard brands of scotch as well as bourbon cost less than 1,000 yen per liter
at the CIF' price stage, so as far as the tariff is concerned, bourbon has the
advantage.

According to one importer: "The preferential tariff for bourbon was won by
Imerica as compensation for Japan's refusal to liberalize agricultural
products." However, bourbon is not succeeding in exploiting this advantage.
Perhaps its unique smell has put off consumers. There is nothing that can be
done about matters of taste.

30

MWLIISIONLY
Creation of a Special Quote

In the tanned leather market, the United States continues to complain that the
tariff of 20 percent is too high. This market has some similarities to the
scotch and bourbon markets. '

The domestic demand for leather in Japan has cooled and the American product
does not adapt well to Japanese demand.

The leather shoe industry cox-ands more than half of the ultimate demand for
leather. In a reaction to the boot boom of several years ago, this industry
is in a serious slump. Boots require three times the volume of leather used
for ordinary shoes, and because of phenoaenal sales, most dealers rushed to
expand production facilities.

low the situation is completely reversed, and shoes are a featured product in
bargain sales.

About 90 percent of the aninal hides which'are the raw naterial for shoes come
from the United States. The import volume peaked at 280,000-tons in 1976, and
then went to 250 ,000 tons in 1977, 220,000 tons in 1978, 220,000 tons in 1979,
220,000 tons in 1980, and 230,000 tons in 1981. These figures are representa-
tive of the present status of the leather industry.

However, in spite of this situation in the Japanese leather market, the United
States is seeking expanded imports of tanned leather to Japan. It is telling
us to buy more products with higher added value than raw hides.

HITI cannot lover the 20 percent tariff because of a need to protect the
Japanese tanning industry. However, in place of a tariff reduction, MITI has
created a special U.S. quota for tanned leather imports for a 3-year period in
addition to the overall quota for leather.

That was in Ihrch 1979. The 0.8. quota included 12 million square feet of
processed leather, 6.5 million square feet of semiprocessed leather, and '0
million square feet of car seat leather in 1979. Each category was to be
increased by 10 percent in 1980 and by another 10 percent in 1981.
Ultimately, the consumption rate for the 0.8. quota will remain low.

The consumption rate in 1980 was about 30 percent. After all, demand has
dropped.

Another thing that should be noted is that American tanned leather does not
meet the requirements of the Japanese market very well.

31

”NEWLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mozaki Industries. a trading company with a strong leather business, reports:
"American tanning technique is not inferior, but perhaps because the American
products are mass produced, the finish is rough and there are a lot of flaws.
The Japanese market requires carefully finished products, and so the herican
leather does not stand up in the Japanese market. There are also delivery
problems. If we place an order with a Japanese tanner, it might be finished
in 2 weeks or a month, whereas it would take 2 or 3 months to get it fra
Merica. Perhaps because the volume of leather for Japan is small, our orders
tend to be put off until last. While 2 or 3 months are passing by, demand may
change because of changes in fashion."

The term of the U.S. quota will expire in lurch, and U.S.-Japanese negotiations
will be opened again. How much understanding will the United States show for
the present situation of the Japanese market?

Depends on Effort

Japan is determined to hold the line to the end, and the United States and the
EC are making loud demands. This is not a problem that can be solved with
stopgap measures.

Ultimately, the only hope is for companies of the EC and the United States to
understand the facts about each type of market in Japan and mke efforts to
export in line with that understanding.

There are some areas in which the import volume is steadily increasing even
under bad conditions.

One example is American confections. As shown in the accompanying chart,
exports to Japan in this area grew from 1.1 billion yen in 1975 to 2.5 billion
yen in 1980, putting the United States even with the EC countries.

According to Takeshi Tanaka, Confection Department manager for Seiyu Store,
"America is closer than the EC countries, so it is easier to make arrangements
for purchasing the products. Not only that, Merican companies, work hard at
developing new and unusual products."

The same goes for skis. Import growth is slowing because of the high tariff,
but foreign skis still have a strong position in the upper price range of
30,000 yen or above. Italy and Austria are taking advantage of their technical
skill and brand name appeal to sell to young people.

Japanese consumers will buy good quality products even if the price is high.
Imports are expanding for such products as Northern European and West German
system kitchens and furniture, fur products, down clothing, famous brand tennis

32

summon“
wear, deck shoes which are essential for narine sports, high quality Swiss
wrist watches, and diamonds. In the area of food and beverage products,

high quality wine and delicatessen items are naJor products in the food
section of department stores. This shows the character or a country which
has produced such things as an expensive 300-yen package of instant noodles.
The question is whether foreign exporters will provide products in response to
this kind of demand.

It the United States and Europe do nothing but press their demands what will
happen even if Japan liberalizes all import items?

This is the view of one executive of a large trading compawx "Regardless of
what happens with trade in financial services and service industries such as
transportation, construction, advertising, and consulting, the increase in
imports of agricultural and industrial products will probably come fru Korea,
Taiwan, and the countries of Southeast Asia. Their wages are low and the time
required for transportation is short. There will probably be an increased
number of ventures in which Japanese companies create local corporations and
import the products to Japan. The products of the EC and the United States
will probably get even less competitive.” As this statusent shows, the outlook
for imports from the advanced countries to Japan may be unexpectedly bleak.

33

POIOIFICIALUSIONLY
nun-s11)
u- (3) (soul: ram) (
5

   
 
 

  
  

...............

.mMuL‘ 31
)uquze )

sonsacecvt 32
team... a8) «mum
on ' . '

   
    

   

17. List or Inpo
18. heat (fresh)

16. America
rt Items Restricted in Japan

31. pesnuts (exc
l9. herring, cod (fresh)

32. see weed, devil's tongue
20. cod eggs (salted), salted cod,

herring yellow tail

beer or pork products
, mackerel 31a. grape sugsr, lactose (without sugar),
21. scallopsﬁcsllop eyes sug water, artificial honey
22. milk and cream 35. fruit puree, fruit paste
23. condensed milk, sugsrless 36. processed pineapple, fruit pulp
condensed milk 3?. fruit Juice, tomato Juice
214. cheese (not including 38. tomato ketchup tomato ssuce,sesson-
natural cheese) ing with monosodiun glutamate es the
?S. szuki beans, revs beans, peas main ingredient
‘6. oranges, tamerines (fresh)

39. processed food
. oranges, tengerines
(temporarily stored)

sugar, ice cream mixes
h . coal
3. wheat ﬂour. rice flour, 1:1. horse hides, cattle hides
barley flour, rye flour '02. sheep hides
‘. ground or checked wheat, rice, 3:3. goat hides
barley, or rye “4. leather shoes
. starch, inulin
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080007-1

2h.
26.

MOFHCIALUSEONLY

 
 
  
 

”swan-mum...”
(3,3 (55; ( 3)!- .55). *1) gammpo

”a T ‘

 
   

 
 

f

      
      
     
 

      

m “m“ ' ’ '
W

 

    
 

K

Wholesale Price Comparison for LhJor Confection Ingredients

(as or October 1981)

unit:C7en per kilogram) 11. hard wheat flour

herica 12. sort wheat flour

Canada 13. sugar

Australia 15. whole eggs

llew Zealand 15. corn starch

Great Britain 16. wheat flour starch

The Netherlands 1?. corn syrup

Belgium 18. liquid glucose

Japan - 19. whole powdered milk
20. non-fat powdered milk
21. butter

chocolate candy imports 23. (CI?)

total import anount 25. inport amount from BC

inport amount from ISA

35

MWWONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080007-1
FOI‘OFFK3A1.USE(NNLY

,9 aavfllol.
.. (a, vt-vaav9a u”!

(8):

 

in Taxable volume or Imported Whiskey
in price of Scotch
-d Retail Price per Bottle of Standard Scotch)

-lea per case) 9. duty lowered 20 percent

maea 10. taxable volume

urice raised 11. Scotch import liberalization
cred 12. Bourbon liberalization 1969

Irice raised

e-cmxaiu’g

   

Key: 1. Ski Boot Imports
2. money amount (CI?)
3. billion yen
b. no. of pairs
5. (eatilate)

annual“
a.)

Daiyamondosha 1982

FOI:0IIIC1A1.UBE10NLN
Tm FRICTION Hm BC
Tokyo KAIGAI SHIJO in Japanese Apr 82 pp 513-58

[Article by Yoshinori Osade. manager of Buropean Section, JETRO (Japan External
Trade Organisation”

[Text] The problem of trade friction between Japan and the BC drew a great
deal of attention when the Tauchimitsu mission visited Europe in October 1976.
Then, 5 years later, in October 1981, the sovernnent-sponsored economic nission
to Europe headed by President anama of the Keidanren visited the 30 countries
searching for a way to solve the problems between the two.

The roots of friction between Japan and the lbited States and the countries of
Europe, including the BC, run deep. Recently, with the me toward reciprocity
in the United States, there is talk of not Just trade friction but cultural
friction as well. In this article I will concentrate on the aspects of trade
between Japan and the BC. I would like to identify the problems and suggest
some quick therapy to treat the symptoms as well as some long-ten remedies.

I would like to make it clear in advance that W main intention is simply to
analyze the friction problem in these terms. This does not represent the
official View of JETRO.

Special Features of Japan-BC Trade

Let us consider why the trade imbalance between Japan and Burope became such a
his problem. It is because unlike the complimentary North-South trade where
food and raw materials are inported and industrial products are exported, the
European countries and Japan all export industrial products to each other.
Therefore, they are in a competitive relationship and the difference in competi-
tiveness reflects directly on the trade balance. Therefore, there is no other
way to improve this relationship than that specified recently by the em
office director. The European countries must increase their productivity and
catch up with Japan or, more fundamentally. a thoroushgoing horizontal
division of labor must be created between Japan and Europe in industrial
products.

37

”MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Japanese Product Export to BC by Product
(unit: million dollars, percent)

   

Total amount 16.650 3 9 9
Food products _118 3 b 0
Fish and shellfish 86 19 7 lo 3
Textile & textile products I122 32 10 6 7
Synthetic textiles 126 18.7 139 9.7
Chemicals 703 16.3 65!. A 7.7
Synthetic plastic 127 13.2 108 616.5
Non-metallic mineral

products 175 Ml . 5 153 513 . 3
Ceramic ware 91 60.7 73 021.1
Metal 1: metal products 1,131» 118.5 7110 1128.5
Steel and iron 1‘87 11.8 251 15510.10
Non-ferrous metals 298 1711.3 205 A31.7
Metal products 3119 58.9 285 619.5
Machinery & equipment 12,033 29.2 110,956 19.9
Motors 162 30.5 21:1 h3.6
Office Machines 589 21.1; 6’07 9.2
Metal processing machines 27': 58.1: 261 65.15
Weaving mchines 58 29.7 60 0.1
Sewing machines 77 6.5 68 1515.0
Bearings 130 163.9 102 621.?
Heavy electrical equipment 75 32.1! 92 11.!»
Television receivers 221 16.5 200 610.0
Radio receivers 582 2.8 606 2.?
Electron tubes 1033 166.9 1‘29 A 0.8
Automobiles 2,663 23.2 2,810 A 0.2
Motorcycles 653 103.2 712 9.2
Ships 373 A15.h 1.590 189.5
Scientific l: optical

instruments 1 .552 20 .6 1 .778 in . 1
Watches 2 clocks 2'18 39.1 2108 A 0.1
Tape recorders

(Incl. m) 1,200 71.5 1.919 59.0

_____—.—.._————_—————5

Note: 1980 amount is for 9 EC countries, excluding Greece; the 1981 change
over previous year is calculated for 10 EC countries, including Greece.
Source: Japanese Customs Statistics, nor Reports

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2.

Japanese Product Imports from RC

(units: million dollars, percent)

 
   
 

lucts

equipment
tea

as Table 1.

previous yeer

OH.»
0

123
11.6
1 .611
11.2
2,587
133

Dl>>
w

e

H

5
8
5h
88
7.8
9h
no
5
6

\II P
o

100

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

   

Change from
previous year

D H
F’H
[03'wa
O...

0

>>
Hw
Gwyn.

.
rmmwkwmwm
Table 3.

of change of present period over previous period)

USA
exports
imports
balance

EC
exports
imports
balance

Great Britain
exports
imports
balance

France
exports
imports
balance

Vest Germany
exports
imports
balance

letherlands
exports
imports
balance

Belgium
exports
imports
balance

Italy
exports
imports
balance

Ireland
exports
imports
balance

Source: Japanese Cu

FOICHHHCJAI.USE¢MNLY

Trade Balance Between Japan and Major EC Countries
(units: millions of dollars; items in parentheses are percentages

26.no3( 6.0)
20,h31( 38.1)
5,972(sh1.0)

12,685( 1u.2)
7.581( 2h.8)
5,105( 1.))

3.097( 32.3)
1,681( 21.9)
1,h16()h7.1)

1,395( 26.5)
1.078( 93.0)
317(A 8.5)

n.266( 16.7)
2,58h( 29.h)
1,682( 1.5)

1.611( h.5)
u19( 31.1)
1,252(A 2.2)

1.087( 13.0)
381( 20.8)
706( 9.3)

681( 39.2)
993( 51.3)
A3l2( -- )

208( 8.3)
101( 3h.8)
107(A 9.6)

atoms Statistics

31.367( 18.8)
2h,h08( 19.5)

16,650( 31.3)

7,8b2( 3.5)
8,808( 72.5)

3.182( 22.1)
1.95u( 16.3)
1,827( 29.1)

2,021( uh.9)
1,296( 20.2)
726(129.o)

5.756( 3h.9)
2,sol(A 3.2)
3.256( 93.6)

2,061( 23.3)
380(A 9.h)
1,681( 3h.2)

1,h19( 30.5)
372(A 2.))
1.0h7( h8.3)

955( no.3)
938( 5.5)
17( - )

221( 6.1)
78(A22.6)
1u3( 33.1)

 

llll(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USEllNLY

38,6o9(23.1)
25.297( 3.6)
13,312(91.3)

18.89h(13.5)
1o,3h2(11.h

9.789(26.6)
2,69h(37.9)
2.095(1h.7)

2,222(9.9)
1,111(A9.6)
1,051(hh.8)

5.968( 3.7)
2.u29(A2.9)
3.539( 8.7)

1.902(A7.7)
u21(12.h)
1,875(A12.3)

1.h36( 1.2)
337( 9.))
1,099( 5.0)

912(Ah.5)
856(AB.7)
56( -)

2h5(1o.9)

106(35.9)
139(A2.8)
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1 shows the amount of exports fron Japan to the EC and the rate of
increase and decrease by product. Table 2 gives the same intonation for
imports.

Exports to the EC in 1980, with the exception of ships, were higher overall
than in the previous year. Tape recorders in particular Juaped dramatically

in comparison to the previous year. The largest factors monetarily in increas-
ing exports were automobiles, m, and numerically controlled machine tools.

In 1981 also, mchinery and equipent, including these items, showed a 20 per-
cent rise over the previous year. However, as Table 1 shows, there were a
fairly large number of items in 1981 which did worse than the previous year.
Total exports did not increase by even 10 percent compared to the previous
year. Ships went up rapidly, but overall, export results were rather moderate.

Imports from the EC in 1980, in spite of an increase in chemical products and
machinery and equipmem, showed an overall rise of only 3.5 percent over the
previous year. This was due to a reduction in food products and fiber products.
In 1.981, imports of food and other processed p! oducts showed a relative
increase, so the total import amount rose by 8.6 percent over the previous year.
In any case,the increase was small.

As a result, the total amount of exports to the 2c in 1980 was $16.65 billion,
while the import total was $7.852 billion. The Japanese export surplus Jumped
to $8.8 billion from the SSA-billion surplus of 1979. This was a record
figure, but in 1981 the surplus passed the 88.8-billion aark in the first 10
months and reached $10.3 billion for the year (the figures for 1981 include
Greece).

Table 3 shows the trade balance between Japan and each European country. The
largest imbalance was $3.5 billion with Heat Germany in 1981. Next came $2.1
billion with the at, $1.5 billion with the Netherlands, $1.1 billion with
Belgium, $1.0 billion with France, and $1.0 billion with Ireland.

The imbalance with Italy did not reach the $1-billion mark, and in some years
there was even a surplus of imports to Japan. This was an exceptional case.
At any rate, there was an overall trade surplus of $10.3 billion, the highest
figure in history, with the BC. This figure explains wry the 30 has been
pressing Japan for the last year or two to redress this imbalance. The
imbalance with the United States also grew dramatically in 1981, passing the
$lO-billion mark in the first 10 months, to reach $13.3 billion for the year.

European Recession Inplifies Criticism of Japan
The pattern of trade payments between Japan, The United States, and Europe

shows a flow of payments from Europe to the United States and from the United
States to Japan. Japan shows a surplus with regard to both the United States

I01

MWLIJSEONLY
INJR‘OIWHCIAI.Iﬂ5Ei(MVLY

and the EC. The United States has a deficit with Japan but a surplus with the
EC. The EC is in the unfortunate position of having a deficit with both Japan
and the United States.

Furthermore, the economic difficulties which began with the second oil crisis
have caused the greatest amount of unemployment in Europe since the Great
Depression of the 1930's. Therefore, the criticism of Japan, which is the only
country with a good economic performance, is growing harsher.

The causes of Europe's economic difficulties have been identified as a loss of
worker morale, insufficient plant and equipment investment, and a lag in tech-
nological developments in some fields. Also, there is reportedly a lack of
effort to sell to the Japanese market. However, there are two sides to this
argument, and it is necessary to hear them out sufficiently. In this article,
I would like to consider how the friction between Japan and Europe can be
reduced, even a little. I will consider the measures taken so far and the
direction to be taken from now on.

Industrial Revitalization of Trading Partners

The method for solving the problem which is being carried out most actively is
industrial cooperation between Japan and Europe. The concept of industrial
cooperation can be very broad. Here, I will consider it in three main
cstegories--investment exchange, technological collaboration and Joint
research and development, and third country market cooperation.

Investment exchange helps create employment opportunities in the host country
through Joint ventures and direct investment.

Technological collaboration and Joint research and development promote mutual
transfer of technology and knowhow and make it possible to reach a higher
technological level at low cost. In third country market cooperation, each
party takes priority over the other in certain areas. For example, in plant
exports, complimentary groupings of the equipment supplied can increase
economic efficiency and help spread out the risk.

These approaches will not lead to an immediate resolution of the trade
imbalance between Japan and Europe. But when we consider how the trade
imbalance is chiefly caused by differences in industrial competitiveness
between Japan and Europe, these kinds of industrial cooperation are very
important as ways to reduce the differences and improve our relationship as
trading partners. Here are some specific recent examples.

--VTR Joint venture between Japan Victor, Thorn EMT of Great Britain, and
Telefunken of West Germany

-VTR Joint venture between Matsushita Electric Works and Bosch of

Rest Germany

h2

llﬂltlﬂﬂCIAl.llil(MKL¥
POI ONION. USE ONLY

-Joint development of a Jet engine (XJB program) between Rolls-Royce of Great
Britain and IshikawaJima ﬁarima and other companies

--Joint development of a coal-fired boiler between Kawasaki Heavy Industries
and Babcock of West Germany

-Minifax Joint venture between Natsushita Electrical Transmission Equipment
and the British Government

--Joint development of a ship turbocharger between Ishikawaaima Harima and BBC
of Switzerland

--Technological assistance for industrial robots between PuJitsu Panac and Six
Hundred of Great Britain

--Technological assistance for lighting and air regulation equipment between
Hatsushita Electric Works and BBC of Heat Germany

--Technological assistance for large computers and semiconductors between
Fujitsu and ICL of Great Britain

--Technological assistance for a ship turbocharger between Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries and 080 of Great Britain

-Joint venture for carbon fiber production between Toray and Elf-Aequitaine
of France

Mutual Effort necessary by Japan and EC

Although we can recognize the necessity of such industrial cooperation, the
effects will generally come too late to contribute to a solution of the trade
imbalance. The situation could be remedied more quickly if the European side
expanded exports and the Japanese restrained exports.

First, let us examine the problems involved in expanding European exports to
Japan or, in other words, expanding imports to Japan.

According to a JETRO survey of inquiries made to JETRO last year, only 9.6
percent concerned exports, while 90.h percent concerned imports. As in the
past, there was a strong desire to import from Japan and, while interest in
exporting to Japan is increasing year by year, it has not yet reached the
level of 10 percent of total inquiries.

The five top ranking items of export to Japan are: l) processed foods,
alcoholic beverages, and tobacco (21.0 percent); 2) furniture, toys, and
sundry goods (18.3 percent); 3) textiles and textile products (11.8 percent);
h) machinery, electrical equipment, and parts for the same (7.8 percent); and
5) art and antiques (5.7 percent). With the exception of item h), machinery
and electrical equipment, the list includes only food products and light
industrial products which do not make a great monetary contribution to improv-
ing the balance of trade. Therefore, it is necessary for the European side to
make a more careful study of the characteristics of the Japanese market in the
fields of capital goodsand durable and consumer goods. JETRO and other organi-
zations stand ready to help as much as possible. Beginning this year JETRO has
installed an Export to Japan desk in its offices in Europe and is ready to
provide consultation on exporting to Japan.

1&3

lﬂlllﬂlﬂﬂClAl.lEi!(ﬂﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'h-- European nations will have to reconsider the Japanese market, with its 100
million population, as a maJor market and make the necessary effort in export
marketing to exploit this market, not as a limited Far Eastern market, but as
an important market with great future potential. JETRO has held seminars to
promote exports to Japan and export clinics in the major EC countries in an
effort to introduce the special features of our market and explain the syst-
of distribution and import procedures. We have provided help from the side-
lines to aid in renewing barriers to their exports.

The problems on the Japanese side have been repeatedly pointed out by Europe
and the United States. The demands of the EC countries to open the Japanese
market and expand imports, made on the occasion of the Inayama mission's visit
last year, were typical. An extreme example of these demands was the list of
20 itemized demands presented by Great Britain. Another list of demands for
improvement of trade with Japan was submitted in December and it centered on
demands to open the market, lower tariffs, and modify import inspection
procedures.

The demand to open the market specifies such measures as modernization of the
distribution system, reform of the import marketing system, promotion of
government purchasing of imported goods, and expediting of customs procedures.
Ham! of these areas cannot be made subJect to government intervention. How-
ever, Japan is attempting to deal with the demands by creating a single contact
organization for handling complaints.

Also, the government is taking positive action to lower tariffs, moving up the
1,653 items agreed upon at the Tokyo round of GATT talks by 2 years, and
lowering tariffs on the third year items at one time.

Also, with respect to improvement of import inspection procedures, an intial

study was completed at the end of January for food products, phamceuticals,
high-pressure gas containers, electrical products, automobiles, and agrichemi-
cals, and a decision was made to accept 67 items out of a total of 99 demnds
for improvement of nontariff barriers. Although the United States and Europe

recognize our effort, they both hold the view that it is still insufficient.

In any case, the purpose of these improvements in the system is to increase
the amount of product exports to Japan, and fundamentally, to balance the
expansion of Japanese exports by promoting imports. The United States and
Europe are becoming impatient at the lack of visible results. However, product
exports make up 25 percent of total exports in Japan, compared to a rate of 60
percent in the United States and the EC, and they recognize that we are making
a substantial effort.

As we have seen, even with the continuation of mutual effort, we must be a bit
pessimistic about a simple solution to the trade imbalance between Japan and

“6

FOR OFFICIAL {BB ONLY
Europe. The areas in which Japan has strong international canpetitiveness,
where there is little possibility for imports, are roughly the same areas in
which Europe has strong export products. This competitive relationship between

Japan and the EC, which I mentioned at the beginning of the article, will
always remain.

Therefore, the problem of Japanese moderation of ':.ports comes up as a final
proposal. The EC demands mentioned above call for. Japan to restrain imports to
the EC of automobiles, color television sets, color television tubes, machine
tools, and light commercial vehicles. The BC asks that the laserlike concen-
tration of these export items be moderated and that time be given to the EC to
rebuild its own forces.

This method is fundamentally in opposition to the GATT principle of free trade,
and it leads to a balanced reduction of trade or protectionism. So it is not
at all desirable. However, when as today, our partners in free trade are faced
with great economic difficulties, helping them can be considered a pragmatic
policy for maintaining the market in the long run. Also, even though it does
not lead to the vitalization of European industry, such restraint can be seen

as having an innediate effect as an emergency relief measure, and therefore,
is being put into effect.

Reassessment of the Horizontal Division of Labor and the Cultivation
of Preferred Industries

The last thing I would like to point out is that there are naturally some
fields in which the BC has a position superior to Japan in terms of industrial
competitiveness. As is often noted, Europe is firmly in the lead in certain
fields, such as chemicals and nuclear power (light water reactors) in West
Germany and aircraft and nuclear power (fast breeder reactors) in France. In
the field of machine tools, for example, Japan is strong in numerically con-
trolled machine tools, but West Germany is still highly competitive in tradi-
tional precision machine tools.

In the area of equipment, Japan is generally strong in mass-produced equipment
such as cameras, watches, audio equipment, automobiles, and household electri-
cal products, while Europe is strong in non-mass-produced general equipment
(farm equipment, weaving machines, printing machines, pumps, boilers, etc).

Thercfore, it is necessary for the BC to streamline these industries and
regulate industry in the region in order to cultivate them as export industries
with overwhelming competitive strength. However, at present, Europe is in
difficulty because it cannot find the promising areas of industry suitable for
cultivation. No matter what happens, the trade imbalance cannot be radically
improved without exports of heavy industrial goods. The Japan-EC trade imbal-
ance problem cannot be solved if European exports continue to center on food

“5

ma OFFIGAL use ONLY
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

and textile products such as British whiskey, ﬁ-ench wine and cognac, and
Italian fashion products. As for Japan, it goes without saying that it must

make even greater efforts to.expand imports while it continues to eliminate
nontariff barriers and open its market.

For the immediate future, it will be interesting to watch the results for
imports of rare metals and grains which were discussed at the end of last year,
the increased stockpiling of oil, and the emergency import of aircraft, as
well as the effect of the import promotion mission that will be sent to France
and Austria this May. Japan will attempt to expand its internal demand, but
the way in which the 30 works to gain access to the Japanese market and dis-
cover new possibilities will be an important factor.

COPYRIGHT: mac 1982

9651
($0: MOS/95

156

summon“
INTERVIEWS OH RELATIONS WITH UNITED STATES
Tom SROKUN in Japanese May 82 pp 166-83

[Joint article and interviews by Tadae Takubo, foreign policy critic, and
Seiichiro Saito. professor of socioeconomics at Rikkyo University]

[Text] Declining U.S.-Japan Relations; the Japanese Rebuttal
This Is What the Politicians Think

The present econonic tension between the united States and Japan is not a
problan of particular products. It is becoming a problem that will require a
comprehensive response by Japan. We can say that a response in the political
dimension is necessary. Can Japanese politicians exert the leadership to make
a political response which is above bureaucratic limitations?

We interviewed six politicians-diam Suki, Ichiro Rakagawa, Xoichi Kato,
Shintaro Ishihara, Yoshiro ﬁayashi, and to represent the opposition parties,
Eiichi lagamatsu of the Socialist Party. They had many different approaches
and requests for herica, but they were all highly critical of the Foreign
Ministry. -

Only the Soviet Union Is Pleased

The interview began in Dhsuni Bsaki'e office in Sabo Hall in Tokyo. Following
a visit to America at the end of February, Masumi Ezaki is planning to visit
Europe soon and seemed very busy.

Masmni Esaki was born in 1915 and is 60 years old. He is a member of the House
of Representatives and is the chainan of the LDP Special Study Comittee on
International Economic Measures. He graduated in economics from Nippon
University in 1910.. After serving as secretary to the president of Daido Steel
Company, he became a member of the House. of Representatives. He has served as
director general of the Defense Agency, minister of house affairs, and ninister

of international trade and industry. In addition, he is an influential member
of the LDP, having served as chairman of the party Executive Council and chair-
man of the Political Coordinating Committee.

in
mammonu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was reported that when Mast-i Esaki visited the thited States as chairman
of the Special Study Comittee on International Economic Measures, he was
thoroughly worked over by the Americans.

According to him, "The opponent was waiting to pounce on me."
[Question] What would you like to say to America?

[Ezaki] "hiring the time or the Pukuda government, we were asked by the Carter
administration to take a "locomotive” role in the world economy along with
Nest Germany. I remember this well because I was serving as chairman of the
party's Political Coordinating Omittee and Executive Council. Japan issued
large amounts of government bonds for 3 years to stimulate domestic demand and
assist in creating international harmony. The debt for that still remains in
the form of hso billion yen in government bonds. Japan is making sacrifices.
The problem is why herican goods do not sell on the Japanese market. Is it
because the Japanese market is closed? That may be true to some extent, but
doesn't Imerica have aw responsibility for the. problem?

"It is wrong to turn people's frustration toward Japan and say that Japan has
more to lose than the lhited States it the trade imbalance is not corrected
immediately. It may be easy to make Japan a scapegoat and put more and more
pressure on us. It will lead to a harsh reaction from Japan it they do not
give us credit for the good Job we have done but go on making statements that
unless 'something dramatic' is done, this problem cannot be solved and pro-
tectionism and reciprocity laws will be passed. There may even be a political
upheaval in Japan. If this happens, the only happy party will be the Soviet
Union.”

[Interviewer] It seems that Esaki said what he had to say in the United States
while being hit with a barrage of criticism of Japan. However, he was probably
more relaxed in an interview with fellow Japanese. His counterargument flowed
smoothly. He did not get upset at our questions but countered them with a
smile. This "man or the hour' was probably unable to smile like this when
Secretary of Oomerce Baldridge demanded "dramatic" measures.

During the U.8.-Japan textile negotiations in 1970, it was reported that

Mr Miyazawa, the minister of international trade and industry at the time,
turned white when he was threatened by Secretary of Commerce Stans during a
meeting at the Hatergate Hotel. Miyazawa's recent statements have an anti-
American tone. Perhaps he still holds a grudge. In comparison, Ezaki seems
more or an old pro.

[Question] So what is the best way to get out of the present difficulties?
If the approval system is abolished, the Tokyo round agreement is moved up by
8 years, or beef and oranges are liberalized, won't the Suzuki government fall?

158

IOIOFI’IGALUSIONLY
[Ezahi] "Yes, it will fall. Japan will she efforts to open its market, but
there is a limit to what each country can do by itself."

”Take the action of moving the Tokyo round tariff changes up by 2 years. that
other country could have done something like that? I think we should be given
more credit. That agreement was worked out in multilateral negotiations and

it called for a gradual lowering of tariffs ,to a reasonable point over a period
of 8 years. I .think we should be given more credit for moving up the schedule

by 2 years.

"Is Japan really the only country with a lot to lose if things keep going as
they are? Does not herica have a lot to lose as well? It is necessary to
discuss this patiently over a long period. To determine the proper course of
action, we must gather the advice of experts, debate the issues between the
ruling and opposition parties, and get the participation of the financial
sector. The proper responsive measures will naturally merge from this
process. I have my ideas, but if I let them out little by little, taking this
or that position, the opponent will think that our policy is already set.
This is not in the national interest. Carefully, but quickly, we must deter-
mine the measures to take."

[Interviewer] Esaki is not the only person without a clear answer on how to
reply to U.S. demands. Hardly amone is able to say what to do.

Japan is suffering because it is caught between the demands of a ”duestic
logic" and "international logic." However, there is no trace of bitterness

in Bzaki' s face.

[Question] How do you rate the Foreign Ministry on its gathering of info:-b
mation, public relations efforts, and response after the problem developed?

[Ezaki] "The Foreign Ministry asks that we leave matters of diplomacy to it.
It is still dominated by a tendency to sectionalism and overconfidence. In
the 0.8. Senate, there are four rooms for eating. One of these is the
Mansﬁeld Room. It is said that Imhhssador to Japan mucus is the only
postwar politician to have his name affixed to a room. A man of his stature,
now 78 years of age, has come to Japan. In comparison, Japanese ambassadors
are assigned by turn according to a seniority system. With such a way of
doing things, how can an upstart power like Japan carry out decent diplomacy?

"Reportedly, there are 500 or 600 employees in the 0.3. Rnbassy in Tone. If
auxiliary organizations are included, there must be at least 800. Now that
Japan is such an influential country, we should freely select the ambassadors
for major countries, although this would require administrative reform, in
order to have an ambassador similar to Inbassador Mansfield whom the 0.8.
President or his adviser, Mr lbese, could meet with respect."

'69

FOIOMGALUBONLY
I70! OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

[Interviewer] Ezaki's criticism of the Foreign Ministry was very severe.
From Domestic Logic to International logic

The next person we interviewed, Biichi lagamtsu, is the top expert in the
Socialist Party on defense and foreign policy. Unlike the LDP politicians,
who are tied to a variety of domestic special interests, he presented a clear
argument on U.S.-Japan relations. lagamatsu was born in 1918. He is a muber
of the House of Representatives (Democratic Socialist Party). After graduating
frm the law department of Tokyo University, he Joined the Navy (crew of the
battleship Yamato). Before taking his present post, he served as a member of
the Kyoto city council, the Kyoto prefectural assembly, and the House of
Councilors.

[Question] If the market is opened, it will cause a disturbance in domestic
politics. If not, there will be a crisis in U.8.-Japan relations. Should we
give priority to "domestic logic" or "international logic?"

[hagamatsu] ”Japanese politics are based on an old social structure, but we
should pay attention to the fact that the social structure is changing. The
LDP has not attained 50 percent support in urban areas, including the six
maJor cities. It is now a 30-percent political party. Here we see a tendency
toward a multiparty system. However, in the nation as a whole, the LDP has 60
percent of the seats in the Diet. This is because it has a solid base in rural
areas. The Socialist Party is also unable to get many Diet seats from the
cities, but in the rural areas it is the only influential opposition party, so
it has a substantial number of seats. The middle-of-the-road parties are most
inﬂuential outside of the farming villages. We can say that the old system
which gave great importance to the rural villages has created the political
concepts of the present. Does this accurately reflect the will of the people
of Japan? I do not think that everything the Americans claim is true. How-
ever, we must move in the direction of building the political and social
structure necessary for Japan to live in international society. Ihless we make
this decision, the tensions over trade will never be eliminated.”

In other words, he is saying that changes are already occurring in Japan in
line with an "international logic" and that is the direction we should take.
his argument is very clear. He points out that lost of Japan's import
restrictions are being carried out in accordance with the needs of dcmestic
politics and "domestic logic."

If beef and oranges are liberalized in accordance with "international logic"
the Diet members from rural villages will be violently opposed. This is a
strange situation, and by opening the domestic market, the political system
can also be changed. It fohlows that the Democratic Socialist Party will
benefit from this since it is based in the cities.

50

“musics“
migamatsu's statements turned to wholesale criticism of the government and the
LDP. "When foreign countries observe the dramatic advance of the Japanese
economy, it is only natural for them to complain that it is due to a lack of
defense spending. They get angry when they see Japan audaciously living next
to the Soviet union while only spending 0.9 percent of its GNP on defense.

"The prime minister comes and celebrates an alliance in talks with the president,
and then before the words are out of his mouth, Prime Minister Suzuki turns
around and says that this 'has no military meaning' and fires Foreign Minister
Ito who accompanied him on the trip to America. How can the Americans under-
stand Prime Minister Suzuki? The way to eliminate the tensions between the
United States and Japan is for the politicians to get a clear understanding of
where our country is going and make certain that Japan builds the kind of
economic and social system that can be understood in international society. If
we perform our proper role as a member nation in the free world, there will be
no reason for anyone to complain about a trade imbalance."

[Question] It costs money to carry out this responsibility, and the government
purse is empty. It is deep in debt. -

[llagamatsu] "This will require administrative reform. Because of continued
high growth; Japan was able to keep increasing goverment revenues by simply
keeping the tax system in place, and under these conditions, the government
kept on spending. He cannot go on this way. Inst year there were 1,000
instances of agricultural subsidies. This year the number has dropped to 600.
however, the amount of money involved exceeds 2 trillion yen. This is foolish.
It is due to pressure from legislators from the rural villages. The national
railways is receiving 700 million yen in subsidies this year and is still l.|o
trillion yen in the red. Isn't this wrong? If we carry out administrative
reform. taxes can be lowered and foreign aid and defense spending can be
increased. Outside pressure may create the opportunity for this."

[Question] In conclusion, how do you feel about the Foreign Ministry?

[Nagamatsu] "I had the experience of going to Washington as a mqnber of a
representative group from the Democratic Socialist Party. We ate lunch in a
restaurant next to the office of the Senate diplomatic comittee. The Japanese
ambassador was with us and he said that that was the first time he had eaten in
that restaurant. I was amazed at this. Doesn't the Japanese ambassador
associate with kaeriean politicians? Because of the separation of powers in
the U.S. Government. there is a limit to what the Department of State can do.
No matter how much the Japanese Foreign Ministry deals with the Department of
State, the Department of State has little connection with the American people.
If it has no dealings with the legislators who represent actual American
society, it cannot be conducting real diplomacy. Also, the Foreign Ministry
has a very small budget. with things as they are, it is unable to understand
the feelings of the Lhited States.”

51

FOIOFFICIALUSIONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Liberalization of Beef Would Destroy Agriculture

[Interviewer] After hearing the clear argument of Nagamatsu, we listened to
the frank opinions of Ichiro Nakagawa, who has climbed to a position of great
influence in the LDP.

Ichiro Naksgawa was born in 1925. He is the director general of the Science
and Technology Agency. After graduating in agriculture from Kyushu University,
he worked for the Hokkaido goverment office. After serving as a development
officer for that office, he became a member of the House of Representd‘tives.

He has served as minister of agriculture, forestry, and fishery. lie is one of
a breed of new leaders with independent opinions on donestic government,
foreign policy, and defense problems.

Perhaps for that reason, this man's statements are full of confidence.

[Question] what do you think about the present tensions in U.S.-Japanese
trade?

[Naksgawa] "I think both sides have a point. The United States has not tried
hard enough to sell. The Japanese trading companies have carried out marketing
activities unlike any other companies in the world. Also, Japan has exported
good products at low cost. In both cars and television sets, the decisive
element is that the Japanese products are high in quality. In addition, the
price of American products has gone up because of high rates of inflation and
interest.

"As for Japan, if Japan spent as much for defense as America, 5 or 6 percent
of the GNP, the economy would not have grown this much. He would not be able
to build roads or houses or anything. There would be more unemployment. It
would be terrible. So there is an argument that we should sympathize with the
Americans in this regard."

[Question] In that case, wouldn't it be all right to liberalize agricultural
products, as Merica so strongly desires?

[Nakagawa] ”America and Japan each have their own views on this question.
merica bought cheap Japanese cameras, televisions, and cars and this led to
unemployment. Therefore, they say, why not buy our cheap beef and oranges?
This is one theory. However, if we imported a lot of beef, Japanese agricul-
ture would be destroyed."

[Question] What? Japanese agriculture would be destroyed?
[Nakagawa] "That may be an exaggeration, but there are a lot of beef producers

in Kyushu and also in Hokkaido. Beef provides side-product incme to help
support dairy farmers. If inexpensive beef were imported, it would have a

52

MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

very great effect on them. When I was minister of agriculture and forestry,
American Secretary of Commerce Strauss said that if the Japanese farm popula-
tion was reduced, the government should take care of them. I said that Japan
would be in trouble if the farm population dropped below 10 percent. Good
honest people of strong character come from the farm villages."

[Question] Did this explanation satisfy the United States?

[lakagawa] "Strauss did not say he understood, but we decided to negotiate
in good faith in a range that would not hurt Japan's rural areas."

[Question] However, America is calling for "dramatic" measures. It seems to
be a critical situation.

[Nakagawa] "It is troublesome because we do not know if by 'dramatic'
measures they mean beef or oranges. Even if we liberalize beef, it will not
help correct the trade iabalance. We may get a large amount of inexpensive
beef from Australia in both Japan and the United States. The situation may be
serious now, but I believe it was the same 3 years ago when I was minister of
agriculture and forestry. I had table-pounding talks with then Secretary of
Comerce Strauss which resembled a fight. At one time, I even considered
resigning. knbassador hnsfield finally took the matter to the White House
and we arrived at a compromise."

Nakagawa takes a very hard line on liberalizing beef. As he stated, he had
the experience of negotiating with a letter of resignation in his pocket, so
his present thinking does not come fron desperation. lie takes the position
that "Japan cannot possibly separate itself froa America and be independent.
Harmonious relations with the United States are a prerequisite for everything."

He continued: ”ﬂobuhiko Ushiba knows both Japan and the United States well.
He is a type of person similar to Mr hhnsfield. It is best to have a person

like him act as umpire, participating in discussions and att-pting to find a
solution."

Although he balks at the liberalization of beef, Nakagawa is not Just another
farm-interest Diet member.

"The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan with its sights on the Middle East and
there is trouble in Poland. The thited States has no choice but to undertake
a military buildup. This in turn will have a bad effect on the American
economy. The world is in a typhoon condition. At the same time, Japan is in
an unhealthy financial condition. However, our overcast sky is in a favorable
state when compared with circumstances in other countries. At a time like this
many people wonder if we can afford to have a conflict over whether to give
bombing capacity to the F—h fighter or not."

53

FOR OFFICIAL US ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in discussing the international situation, his specialty of defense issues
came up.

[Question] What do you think about the Anerican demand for the strengthening
of our defense capacity?

[Nakagawa] "After the war, America pushed a constitution on Japan which
included the concept of unarmed neutrality. It is awkward for us to be asked
to strengthen our defense capability now. I recently stated something to this
effect to a 0.3. Government official. He can suppose that America did not have
a long-term strategy. At the end of World War II, it did not understand the
threat of communism. It was concentrating on preventing the return of milita-
rism in Japan."

[Interviewer] As is well known, Nakagawa has consistently advocated constitu-
tional reform and the strengthening of Japan's defense capability. He believes
that the United States has created a situation that makes this difficult to do.

The United States Is an Economic Colony of Japan

The liberalization of agricultural products such as beef and oranges has become
a focus of concern. What is the opinion of Koichi Kato, the chairman of the
LDP Agriculture and Forestry Committee and an internationalist?

Koichi Kato was born in 1939 and is 1&2 years old. He is presently a member of
the House of Representatives and chairman of the LDP Agriculture and Forestry
Committee. After graduating from the law department of Tokyo University in
1963, he entered the Foreign Ministry. After serving as a deputy chief of the
China section, he was elected as a member of the House of Representatives.

He served as the deputy chief cabinet secretary in the Ohira cabinet.

Because of his experience in the Foreign Ministry, Koichi Kato is recognized by
everyone as the top international expert in the LDP. He recently visited the
United States as a member of the Bzaki mission.

[Question] What do you think about the growing strain in U.S.-Japan relations?

Koichi Kato gave his reply with a tone of conviction: "his is a problem we
must consider seriously. Although it is partially due to the difficulties of
the American economy and the effect of the upcoming elections, the roots of the
problem go much deeper. The fire has Just been lit, but there is a danger
that it could spread through an appeal to the simple emotions of the American

people. "

After saying this, he spoke of a speech given by a woman legislator in a public
hearing in the 0.8. Congress.

5b

m OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
"This Congresswoman called for an import duty of $150 per vehicle on cars
imported from countries for which the Uhited States bears a defense responsi-
bility. There are grounds in America for making such frank proposals. The
basic problem between Japan and America is not trade. It is the fact that
Japan is not doing enough in defense and economic cooperation."

In short, from the American point of view, Japan is thinking of nothing but
itself and this is unfair.

[Question] How much of the defense burden must Japan bear for America to be
satisfied. It would seem that America would be cautious about militarization

in Japan.

[Kato] "Two percent of the GNP is the upper limit. More than that and it
would be on guard."

[Question] However, if it goes to 2 percent, won't America be afraid we will
escalate further.

[Kato] "There is certainly some uneasiness, but it believes that the Japanese
constitution and maintenance of the U.8.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty will keep

the brakes on Japanese militarization."

He emphasized that the problem was how to expand Japan's military spending
from the present 0.9” percent rather than a concern with Japanese militarissp
tion.

[Question] Then Japanese military spending will advance further and further.
Domestic criticism will grow.

[Kata] ”Yes. criticism will grow. But that is a political decision. Japan
must gradually increase its spending for defense.”

[Question] In addition to a gradual increase in military spending, there is
the matter of economic cooperation. Does America recognize the increase in

Japanese foreign economic aid?

[Kato] "Japanese economic aid must not be limited to the purpose of 'stabili-
nation of the people's livelihood.‘ It must be carried out with diplomatic and
strategic intent. For example, to the Caribbean countries. If the aid is
unrelated to political diplomacy, the Uhited States will think that our
economic cooperation is only being used to expand the Japanese market."

Kato emphasised again and again that the root problem of U.8.-Japan relations
is defense and economic cooperation. If the sum of defense spending and ODA
(official development aid) reaches 2.0 or 2.5 percent, trade will cease to be
a great problem.

55

FOR4OFFKJAI.USBIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] However, won't it be necessary to liberalize agricultural products?

On this point, Koichi Kata, who is chairman of the LDP Agriculture and Forestry
Committee, suddenly turned reticent and spoke like an isolationist.

[Kata] "Over the middle and long term, I would like to eliminate the remain-
ing import restrictions as much as possible."

lie repeated the phrase “over the middle and long term."
[Question] In 5 years?
[Kata] "lo, over the middle and long term."

[Interviewer] I felt that it would be meaningless to press him any further on
the farm products question, so I turned to the next question.

[Question] Since Japan is now a great economic power, should it not open its
market from the point of View of making a contribution to international

society?

[Kata] "Up to now, Japanese policies have all been in accordance with GATT
and on a level with other advanced countries. We have been saying that there
is no reason for complaint. However, Japan is the country that stands to gain
the most from free trade. Japan must make even greater efforts than the
other countries. I became convinced of this on say recent visit to the United

States."
[Question] Specifically, what must be done?

[Kato] "In simple language, the liberalization of tobacco imports. In addi-
tion, making it possible to import drugs which have passed inspection in the
United States.”

[Question] What about beef and oranges as a symbol of an open market?

[Kata] "The political sacrifice would be too-great. He cannot shake up the
fundamental political support of agriculture."

with this, Kata said he had another important point and continued.

"Recently, there has been a strong feeling in the United States that the United
States has dropped to the status of an economic colony of Japan. Merica has
become an exporter of primary raw materials and Japan has become an exporter
of high-level industrial products. Automobiles are a symbol of this. There-
fore. America feels that its pride has been hurt. The Japanese have ignored

this feeling and have even begun sermonizing, offering to teach management
methods to the hericans. We must not becane arrogant."

56

roamussmv
[Question] Whether Japan expands its economic cooperation or becomes a model
of free trade, it will be difficult for it to continue with the foreign policy
of the past. It will be necessary for Japan to make fundamental changes in
its foreign policy, will it not?

[Kato] "Exactly. President Reagan told Mr Bzaki that even a tame horse must
be beaten occasionally or it will not do what you ask. He was hinting that we
should make more use of our bureaucrats. There is a growing awareness in
haerica that Japanese politicians have trouble controlling the bureaucrats.
Certainly, political leadership is important."

[Question] But can the politicians exercise leadership?

[Kate] "Hhen it is necessary, the Ln? will. If the prime minister and the
three party executives make a decision, it can be carried out even if special
domestic interests are involved."

[Interviewer] In the interview with Koichi Kate, I was somewhat surprised at
this optimism about U.S.-Japan relations and change in Japanese foreign policy.
He said: ”If defense spending and economic cooperation are improved, the trade

tensions will be reduced to a business problem. Business problems can be
worked out . "

[Question] Are you saying that Japan can take the "dramatic" measures being
asked for by America?

[Kato] "America is saying that it is tine for Japan to consider what to do by
itself and take positive action. It does not seem to feel it necessary to
specify the content of the 'dramatic' action. Japan must get rid of the idea
that it is a small country and that protectionism is Justified."

with this, Koichi Kato concluded as follows. "The United States is hearing
down hard on Japan. There may be some racial discrimination in this. However,
Japan should not cooperate with Europe in building a strategy against America.
Compared with the United States, Europe is more protectionist and racially
discriminatory. America is simply trying to protect its own trade. Did it not
take good care of Japan in the past?"

Racial Discrimination?
[Interviewer] Shintaro Ishihara, like Koichi Kate, is a young man with
experience as a cabinet minister. Shintaro Ishihara has alwys spoken frankly,

and he presented clear views on the present relations between the Ubited States
and Japan.

57

FOI10FFKJAI.UEEGMVLV
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Shintaro Ishihara was born in 1932. lie is presently serving as a member of the
House of Representatives. He graduated from ﬂitotsubashi University and won
the Akutagawa Prize for literature with his novel "Season of the Sun." He
served as a member of the House of Councilors and as director of the Environ-
mental Agency before being elected to his present position. He has always been
active in making pronouncements on defense and diplomatic issues.

[Question] After hearing the U.S. statements, do you have anything to say back
to them? '

[Ishihara] "Senator Muskie proposed the Miskie bill to strengthen emission
regulations, and Japan implemented it immediately. Muslde visited Japan and
was impressed when he rode in the htsuda automobile which was the first to
apply the Miskie standards. However, America itself did almost nothing in this
regard. Now these Japanese measures have become a barrier to trade. When I
asked an American Congressman who came to Japan in connection with the trade
barrier issue, 'Hho made this Muskie law amay?’ he had nothing to say.

"In an interview with a Hest German reporter, the chairman of Ford lbtor 00
said: 'I don't mind Volkswagen selling in herica, but I can't stand to see
Japanese cars selling that well.‘ When I told this story to Mr Reagan in a
television discussion, he became angry. He told me another story. When I

was in New Mexico, I saw a runner with a placard saying 'buy Merican!‘

Below 'Imerican' was the word 'Japanese' crossed out in red. But when I looked
at the car he was driving, it was a Toyota.‘

"The kind of angry emotionalism represented by the Ford chairman exists in the
United States. They taught Japan very carefully and kindly and now they are
shocked that we have not only caught up with but surpassed them."

[Interviewer] The specific examples given by Shintaro Ishihara are very
interesting. How would President Reagan, Senator Danforth, Secretary of
Commerce Baldridge, and Senator Muskie react if they heard him.

Ishihara continued: ”On the issue of defense as well, the United States would
probably not be in favor of Japan having all the information on even the sea
lanes in the Indian Ocean. It would be different in the case of New Zealand
or Australia. If such information cannot be exchanged with Japan, we must see
it as racial discrimination and prejudice. When we point out that there is
racial discrimination at the root of the U.S.-Japan trade tensions, they wince.
In foreign countries, when racial discrimination is mentioned, the other
party's annoyed expression seems to say: 'th bring that into the discussion?‘
However, unless this is overcome, tension will occur unnecessarily, and prob-
lems that should cool off will not. lucial discrimination is always lurking
in the background of civilization and history.“

FOIOFFICIALUSBONLY
[Interviewer] "Racial discrimination" has become a kind of taboo. There are
many observers even in Japan who say that it cannot exist. Ishihara explains
the history of superiority and inferiority complexes, using the examples of
the decadence of Edo culture and the Ibngolian rule of mirope. This is some-
thing that an Japanese who has lived in herica for a lots time has had one
or two painful experiences with.

[Question] What do you think about problems on the Japanese side!

[Ishihara] "Isn't the Japanese press making too big a fuss over U.S.-Japan
economic problems? when you read 0.8. newspapers, there is a big difference
from the conotion in Japan. when automobiles became a problem, the HIT!
adviser, Hr have, ran about shouting, 'It's terrible! It's terrible!’
There were American politicians who had rational views, but the Japanese did
not approach them. Furthermore, the Foreign Ministry. the Defense Ministry,
and KITI all held bilateral discussions with the United States without any
communication among themselves. They used the crude method of saying, "You
go to America," to the people who were making the most noise. The business
sector did some lobbying, but it was scolded by the politicians and the
bureaucrats, and it ended up making unnecessary concessions. Japan has little
tradition of government offices working together and lending assistance to
each other in order to deal with even major problems in international rela-
tions. It is the task of the politicians to bring the goverment agencies
together, but the international awareness of the politicians is limited. In
fact, they are used by the bureaucrats.

"The Foreign Ministry is poor at gathering intonation. The bill proposed by
Senator Helms to revise the Security Treaty was submitted in October of last
year. It was finally withdrawn, but the Foreign Ministry had no knowledge of
movements prior to the submission of the bill and it was unable to take an
action. It would probably be impossible to get an appointment with an imporb
tant person in Washington by going through the embassy."

The criticism kept coming.
[Question] What is the solution for the present trade problems?

[Ismnu-d] "Take farm products, for example. Even if they are liberalized,
the amounts involved are insignificant. However, when those of us from the
city saw this, the politicians with a rural base get angry."

[Interviewer] Although he is a member of the llakagawa faction, his opinion
differs from the head of the faction, Ichiro lakagawa, who is opposed to the

liberalization of beef. It seems that there is no definite proposal for a
solution.

59

“OFFICIALUSIONLY
POI omml. USE ONLY

Inhihara says the following about Japan's role. "The peace in southeast Asia
is due to the fact that it is in the Japanese economic sphere. U.S. policies
in Africa and the Middle East are not working. If Southeast Asia falls apart,
it will mean trouble for the united States and the world. The United States
is not the only country with an international viewpoint. When I explain this
to Mericans, they say. 'I understand.' Japan must take the position of pro-
tecting Southeast Asia and the sea lanes in the Indian Ocean, even if this only
takes the form of gathering information with the use of civilian ships. He
must change the regime based on the concepts produced by Shigeru Yoshida.
Japanese politicians are still part of the Yoshida regime. If social welfare
expenses are held down so that Japan does not imitate the decline that has
occurred in Europe, it should be possible to raise defense spending to 2 per-
cent of the GIIP."

U.S. Congressmen Afraid of Elections

[Interviewer] Yoshiro Rayashi is the director of the LDP Accounting Office.
Like Kato, he is a former bureaucrat and an expert on international affairs.
He made his way to the United States and to the EC countries in a public
relations effort for Japan as a member of the Ezaki mission.

Yoshiro Hayashi was born in 192T and is‘ 510 years old. After graduating fra-
the law department of Tokyo University, he entered the Ministry of Inter-
national Trade and Industry. He was elected to the House of Representatives
in 1969. After serving as chairman of the Executive Council and the Fisheries
Committee of the LB? and as parliamentary vice minister of finance, he took
his present post as director of the Accounting Office.

Hayashi said that he was shocked at the unexpectedly bad state of the American
econow. "Observing from Japan, we get the strong impression only of the
decline in the auto industry in America. Autos are in bad shape and so is
steel. The construction industry and the housing industry are both in trouble.
Agriculture is in the worst condition it has been in since 1937. Because of
high interest rates, there are almost no industries which are doing well. The
only ones that are doing all right are the industries related to oil and
military demand."

[Question] What image do Americans have of Japan?

[Hayashi] "when you watch television in America, you see a lot of comercials
for Japanese productso-electricsl products, transistors, videos, cameras, cars.
Even the invader game is mistakenly thought to be Japanese. To the average
person being bombarded by these advertisements for Japanese products every day,
through the television set in his living room, the image of the Japanese is of
people who are always coming to sell something."

MOMMONLY
[Question] Is there an evident attack on Japan, especially from members or
the House of Representatives, in forums such as Congressional hearings?

[Hayashi] "As if prearranged, they bring up all the obvious items such as
oranges, beef, and tobacco. I got the impression that there is an image being
built up among hericans of 'Japan, Incorporated' where the Japanese agree
among themselves, using a language that the Americans cannot understand, and
come to sell their products."

ﬂayashi then turned the discussion from foreign policy concepts to 0.8. domes-
tic politics, in other words, to the Congressional elections coming up in the
fall and the relationship of the tensions with Japan to votes. In his own
position as a politician, he understands how they think.

"Japan buys" 55 percent of its wheat, more than 9|: percent of its soy beans, and
90 percent of its corn from herica. Therefore, Japan is one of America's best
customers. When I talk this way, the Americans say that they understand what

I mean. It is the same with beef. American beef is high in quality.
Australia's beef is a more ordinary grade. Therefore, if beef were completely
liberalized in the Japanese market, American beef would be pushed aside and
only Australian beef would come in in large amounts. If that happened, it
would be a severe blow to the Japanese animal industry, there would be a
decline in the need for feed grain, and imports would decrease. When I explain
this, they say they understand me."

However, according to Hayashi, when the politicians say they understand, they
still have one eye on elections and mean ”yes, but...." "hen the elections
are over, will the fierce American attack on Japan also end? If so, then
perhaps we can be optimistic about U.8.-Japan relations.

"There are not new Japanese in America. Therefore, there are no votes to be
gained by siding with the Japanese. When the politicians return to their
electoral districts to campaign for the offyear elections, it is easy to say
that so may people are losing their Jobs because of the large amount of
Japanese imports. Therefore, Japan is to blame. I think this feeling exists."

[Question] So there is a pattern of American Congressmen understanding the
Japanese position intellectually but being opposed on an emotional level?

[Hayashi] ”I asked the Americans to consider the Japanese problem t‘run the
overall point of view of food and energ security. They say they understand
that but what about beef? The same arguments get repeated over and over.”

[Interviewer] The relationship has declined seriously when the other party
understands with his head but his body will not go along. Whether Japan can
overcome this situation or not will depend on the strategy it takes as a nation.

61

MOMLIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This Is what the Business Sector Thinks

Following the views of the politicians, let us investigate the issues of 0.8.-
Japan relations from the business sector's point of view. The direct cause
of the tension between Japan and the United States is the trade imbalance.
Behind this is the fact of the great expansion of the Japanese economy.

'Nenty years ago the ratio of the size of the Japanese and 0.5. economies was
1 to 10. ﬂow, it is l to 2. Thus, there has been a big drop in the relative
position of the American econow. Because of this, the 0.8. demand on Japan
to open its markets is growing in intensity. How do Japan's top business
executives feel about this?

Problems in Vertical Diplomacy

Our interviews with maJor business leaders started with ﬂaruo Suzuki. Suzuki's
views were moderate, perhaps because of his long experience in the business
world or because his industry is not directly involved in the tensions.

Haruo Suzuki was born in 1913 and he is 68 years old. He is the chairman of
Shows Denko K. K. and director of the Japan Committee for Economic Development.
After graduating fran the law department of Tolqo University in 1936. he
entered Showa Denko. He became president of the company and then chairman.
Recently, he received an honorary doctorate in economics from Humboldt Univer-
sity in East Germany. A logical thinker, he is known as a top theorist in
financial circles.

Speaking in a soft tone, Suzuki began by pointing out the low level of aware-
ness of U.S.-Japan relations in Japan. "I believe the present situation in
U.S.-Japan relations is serious. There was a meeting in Hawaii this rebruary
between the Japan Comittee for Economic Development and the U.S. CED (Council
for Economic Development). 'ihe American side was surprised at the limited
awareness of the Japanese. What I noticed at this meeting was a sharp general
perception of Japan rather than an thing specific."

He said that ”perception" is a conceptual image that differs fraa both certain

facts and ideals. so it is difficult to understand. With a trace of sarcasm,
he said that it seemed as if there was a comon text for the critical 11.8. view

of Japan because everyone said the same things.

[Question] However, isn't the reaction of the Japanese press excessive?
[Suzuki] "No, it isn't. U.S.-Japan relations are very bad. There are not
that many people who think the situation is serious. That is true even in the

business world."

[Question] Then, what is the fundamental problem in this serious situation?

62

”WWW!”
[Suzuki] "Even though the herican economy is weak, the hericans do not want
to shit it. So they have begun harping on the faults of others. Then they
bring up such things as farm products, which puts us in a difficult position."

Haruo Suzuki said that from an objective point of view, the solution to the
problems between the thited States and Japan is the passage of the proposed
reciprocity bill. According to his logic, passage of this bill would absorb
all the frustration directed at Japan. This could be thought of as reverse
psycholog.

"However, the business sector would say that this is ridiculous. So, symbolic
measures are necessary. Japan should make an all-out effort to remove the
remaining restrictions on imports such as tobacco. However, this should be
done effectively, with due consideration to timing and the manner of public
announcement.”

[Question] what about the linkage between these issues and defense?

[Suzuki] "0.8. Goverunent officials are now recognizing Japan's efforts in
defense. A situation is developing in which economic matters and defense can
be kept separate. A domestic debate will probably develop on the issue of
'excessive advance,‘ but as long as the buildup is gradual, the United States
will probably be satisfied."

On this point, he was in agreement with the opinion expressed by ﬂori Yoshii
(Sony adviser) later in this article while substantially disagreeing with the
views of the politicians seen above. This may be the mJority view of the
business sector.

[Question] There are some in Japan who reJect the 0.8. demands for opening the
Japanese market as excessive.

[Suzuki] "There is a lot of that kind of feeling in the business world as
well. I also think that may of the herican claims are illogical and esteem-
sive. However, there are areas where we should take action. There are areas
that we should open up without being told to. In this regard, the Imerican
pressure will help promote rationalisation in the Japanese economy."

[Interviewer] After making this statement, he made a strong claim that more
freedom from government control in the financial and insurance fields is
essential from the standpoint of internationalization. This refers to Merica's
attempt to have the service industries liberalized.

However, there are may people in the Japanese financial sector who think that
the system of goverment controls is what has made Japanese economic growth
possible.

MWWONLY
FOIOFIICIALlBEONLY

This will be made clear by the statements of Toshihiro TaJina (vice president
of the Industrial Bank of Japan) later in this article.

[Suzuki] ”Certainly it has advantages, but there have been many excesses. It
is difficult for the United States to understand government guidance which is
not based on laws or official documents."

Certainly this Japanese systan must be hard for the Imericans to understand.
This obscurity is comonly referred to as m (non-tariff barriers). There are
unique features in the Japanese system of which the Japanese themselves may not
be aware.

[Question] Isn't the lhited States being discriminatory toward Japan?

[Suzuki] "The lhited States thinks that Japan is different from other coun-
tries. The reciprocity bill is clearly directed at Japan. This is because it
believes that the Japanese concept of free trade is different from the concept
of- free trade in the Lhited States and other countries. In herica, there is
a tendency to think that world peace could be maintained if it were not for
the Soviet military threat and the Japanese economic threat."

[Question] Perhaps Japan.really is unique.

[Suzuki] "In consideration of its position as a major economic power, repre-
senting 10 percent of the world economy, it has new peculiar features."

[Question] However, it could be argued that there is no Justification for
crititing Japanese patterns of behavior.

lie replied in a clipped tone. "10. America can be self-sufficient, but Japan
cannot live without world trade. Otherwise, it must go into isolation. Can
it exist as an isolated country?"

[Question] So there is no other way but to use skillful diplomacy?

[Suzuki] "Our diplomacy is not necessarily poor. The problem is that it is
conducted without horizontal coordination. There is no comprehensive strategy
for dealing with the united States. than there is a failure to resolve con-
flicts between the various ministries and agencies, everyone goes to the prime
minister. However, the prime minister is not able to exercise that kind of
absolute authority."-

[Queetion] So it is difficult for Japan to change its passive diplomacy.

[Suzuki] "Passive diplomacy is not necessarily bad. The Japanese are not
insensitive to foreign developments. They areoversensitive. Therefore in

6':

[0| OIIIOAL [Bl ONLY
crisis situations, they have an unexpected capacity for pramatic action. For
the time being we have no choice but to rely on this kind of zigzag approach to
problem-solving."

[Question] The mited States seems to be developing a fear of Japanese
economic power. Gan U.8. economic power ever be restored?

[Suzuki] ”The present tensions between the United States and Japan come from
three sources of frustrationo-cnltural differences, a fear of Japanese indus-
trial power, and the 0.8. economic recession. However, I think that the
United State". unlike Europe, has underlying vitality. In the fundanental
areas, military power, energy resources, and food, Iberica has tremendous
strength as annation. It is necessary for Japan to be tolerant with Anerica
until it recovers."

After making this statement. daruo Suzuki concluded by advocating that the
time has come for Japan to like an international contribution.

"In the coming sumit meeting in June, Japan should take the initiative for
overcoming the world recession. Interest rates should be lowered in the Lhited
States. Domestic growth must be expanded in Japan. And we must increase our
foreign aid.”

Government Involvement Also Strong in‘uthe United States

[Interviewer] The next businessman to be interviewed was Atsuyoshi Ouchi of
Nippon Electric Company. Since he has responsibility in a high technology
field which is being viewed with increasing alarm in the United States, his

statuenta were rather strong.

Atsuyoshi Ouchi was born in 1919 and is 62 years of age. He is vice president
of Nippon Electric Company. He entered Nippon Electric in l9h2 after gradu-
ating men the engineering department of Tone University. He reached his
present position after serving as general manager of the Integrated Circuit
Design Division of NBC. He holds a doctorate in engineering and is a naJor
force in IC development in Japen.

Throughout the interview, Atsuyoshi Ouchi‘ spoke rapidly and aggressively about
U.8.-Japan economic problem. This was probably due to his pride as an impor-
tant figure in advanced technology standing on the front lines of the
"Japanese challenge."

[Ouchi] "Theoretically, the Americans have no reason to casplain about the
battle over 10's with which I an involved. The U.8.-Japan trade is relatively
balanced in the field of 10's, and in September of last year, Japan speeded
up tariff reductions at the request of the lbited States, so the present
tariff is “.2 percent, the same level as in the United States."

65

NIOH'ICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After this statement, he frowned and said: "However, this year the United
States began to complain about IC's along with other items." An argument

has arisen in America that import restrictions should be placed on 63K IBI's,
for which Japan is the top producer, for reasons of national security.

It is a fact that 70 or 80 percent of the 6hK chips sold in America are
imported from Japan. Japan is suddenly putting pressure on the high technology
industries of which America has been so proud, and it seems possible that, in
its momentum, it could surpass America. This idea took the form of alarm

at Japanese economic power expressed in the Gibbons report.

Ouchi frowned as he went on: "I do not understand the true intention of
America. . .s demands are confused. Is it asking us to get out of advanced
technology or is it asking us to cooperate in Joint research?"

[Question] Can you say that Japanese advanced technology has surpassed that
of the United States?

[Ouchi] "No, I do not think so. Japan is superior in the 61m product, but we
rely on imports from the United States in mam high-performance items. In
other words, there is an even trade between Japan and the United States in
high technology, and in this area, there is coexistence and coprosperity."

[Question] Is the United States becoming more alarmed at the underlying
strength of Japan?

[Ouchi] "Yes. The United States instinctively feels that it has been able to
maintain its leadership of the free world mainly because of its absolutely
superior world position in advanced technology. There is a fundamental
annoyance at this being threatened by Japan. However, I cannot go along with
the idea that Japan and Europe must always be subordinate to the United States
in advanced technology. It would be very sad if the United States came to
look at Japan in the same way that the Soviet Union looks at Poland and
Afghanistan. "

After this statement, Ouchi turned to parrying U.S. critism of Japan Inc.

"The United States often criticizes the fact that the Japanese Government
provides support for research and \evelopment of advanced technology, but this
is mistaken. Only 2 or 3 percent of the research and development in Japan's
electronic and machine industries is paid for by the government. Almost all
of this expense is taken out of corporate profits. In comparison, business in
the United States is much more dependent on Uncle Sam. Almost 50 percent of
research and development expenses in the U.S. electronics industry is provided
by the U.S. military or NASA orders."

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Because of this, he emphasized that the U.S. view that Japanese competitiveness
has grown so much because of the small Japanese defense burden is not con-
vincing. In short, the development of advanced technology in the United
States has been supported by defense expenditures.

[Question] In that case, the American ideas of linkage between economics and
defense and the Japanese free ride are mistaken!

[Ouchi] "That's right. The United States is carrying out research and
development on advanced technology in the name of military preparedness. The
strength of the Japanese economy is a result of the great effort we have made
since the end of the war, not of a failure to am."

These strong statuents are backed up by the record of the Japanese high
technology industries, which, unlike farm products and automobiles, have com-
peted fairly with the united States.

"Nippon Electric itself has built a plant in the United States and is working
with American employees. In this area, we were much quicker than the auto-
mobile industry to move into the United States and make a contribution to

American employment."
[Question] So what action should Japan take?

[Ouchi] Japan should open its markets where appropriate and stand up to
America when necessary. when I observe the United States now, I feel that it
is taking out its frustration on Japan because of the failure of its economic
policy. The United States has great underlying strength and if it makes the
effort, it can recover. On this point, it is different from the developing
countries. Japan has a large population, few resources, and a small land area.
You can say that Japan should provide aid to the developing countries, but
there is no reason to be concerned about the country like the United States
which is much wealthier than Japan."

[Question] Do you think that the Japanese Government is showing too much
deference to the United States?

[Ouchi] "The Japanese Govermnent comes and tries to convince us not to upset
the United States. That is all right, but we must make our position clear.
Japan should conduct diplomacy in a much more straightforward way. If the
United States makes unreasonable demands about the defense burden, the Japanese
situation should be explained clearly. In other words, we should tell the
Americans that excessive demands will lend strength to the movement to abolish
the Mutual Security Treaty, that there is a danger of alienating Japan from

the free world."

67

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Financial Liberalization would Lead to maos

[Interviewer] Along with high technology, America has targeted the isolation
of Japan's financial market. On this question, I asked the views of Toshihiro
TaJima, vice president of the Industrial Bank of Japan. The Industrial Bank of
Japan has been a major controlling power in the Japanese financial system since
it was founded in 1902, providing support for the industrialization of Japan.

Toshihiro TaJima was born in 1919 and is 62 years of age. He presently serves
as the vice president of the Industrial Bank of Japan. After graduating

from Tokyo University of Commerce in 1900, he entered the Industrial Bank of
Japan. He reached his present position after serving as manager of the
research department of the bank. At present he is a representative spokesman
of the financial sector, serving as a member of councils associated with the
Ministry of Finance, MITI, and the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications.
Perhaps because he is very much aware that the focus of attention in the
economic tensions between the United States and Japan is shifting toward ser-
vice industries, especially banking, Toshihiro Tajima spoke with feeling about
the effectiveness and advantages of the Japanese financial system. His views
were in sharp contrast with those of Nori Yoshii of Sony.

[Question] what do you think of the condition of U.S.-Japan relations?

l'l'aJima] "Merican emotionalism is escalating. I don't think it can be helped
in view of the huge trade deficit it has with Japan, but there is much mis-
understanding about the closed market of Japan. Attention seems to have
focused on service industries, especially banking, 'but this is inappropriate."

[Question] Can you say that the Japanese financial system and financial market
is sufficiently open?

[Tajima] "In Japan, there is no distinction made between foreign and domestic
banks. In fact, foreign banks even have some special privileges such as being
exempt from the obligation to purchase national bonds. However, the United
States is asking us to stop the administrative guidance of the Ministry of
Finance and to liberalize the system. It is difficult to change the unique
Japanese system."

Vi th this, TaJima began to point out the merits of the Japanese financial
system. "Banks have the important function of supplying funds to industry.
If the Japanese financial market collapses, it will have a serious effect on
the industrial order. If the financial market is completely liberalized like
that of the United States, many new products will be introduced, as we saw
with zero coupon bonds. The results will be higher interest rates in Japan.
If the interest rate rises to 15 percent, what will happen? The economy will
be destroyed. The result would be awful if we imported the U.S. system."

68

FOR WI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] however, if Japan advocates free trade and free transactions in
physical products, but does not liberalize the financial system, will the
Mericsns accept such a position!

[Tajina] "Just as herica allows possession of guns. there is nothing wrong
with Japan having its own unique system as long as it does not discriminate
between foreign banks and domestic banks."

[Question] In Anerica, may people are saying that the Japanese system itself
is insular and closed and are calling loudly for reform.

[TaJima] "He would like to ask the hericans to stop allowing the possession
of guns. The American system isn't perfect. A systaa cannot be changed
immediately."

Raising his voice, he went on to criticize the American charge of a "free ride"
in defense as being excessively self-centered. The original cause of Japan's
low defense spending was the 0.8. occupation policies and the constitution the
Imericans forced on the Japanese. The seeds sown by the Mericans have grown
into a great tree of Japanese resistance to defense. Therefore, Just because
they tell us to increase our military capacity now. the system cannot be
changed so quickly. Then he continued: "I would like to ask which banking
system is better, that of the United States or Japan. Industry should have
complete freedom for competition. Banks have the function of providing the
life blood of industry, and if they are not regulated to some extent,.the
optimum distribution of resources cannot be achieved from the standpoint of
the entire national econow. This is something in which we have unshakable
confidence. Without the optimum distribution of resources, high growth is
impossible. In a free financial system, the ground the banks stand on is
weakened and bank operations come to focus on profits. If this happens, the
banks become unable to lend money to industry from a long-range point of view,
and bankruptcies increase."

[Question] This kind of thinking is the concept behind Japan Incorporated,
and this is exactly what the Imericans criticise.

[TaJima] "Japanese postwar growth was possible because of the Japan Incor-
porated system. I would like to tell the hericans to use h more moderate
system. A small government is fine. But a free financial system creates
problems. Interest rates should be controlled. I would like to tell this to
K- Rcagan directly."

[Interviewer] I was somewhat awestruck by Toshiro TaJima's argument criticis-

ing financial liberalisation and the American financial system and praising
the Japanese system of controls. It even had a fresh sound to me because
there are so few people nowadays who argue against financial liberalization so
energetically.

69

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or vnurs--, the 0.3. Department of the Treasury says that there is no need to
greatly revise the unique financial system of Japan. But how long can Japan
continue to ignore Merican demands for a more open market?

[Question] So is there no need for Japan to accede to Inerican demands?

[TaJima] "As far as the financial system is concerned, there is no need to
introduce the American system because it does not work well. However, we
should liberalize the remaining import restrictions on the 22 farm products
and improve import procedures as much as possible. These measures would
produce only a slight shock in the national econono'. There will certainly be
political problems, but we must plead with the people involved and beg for
their cooperation as Inch as possible."

[Question] However. as a great economic power, shouldn't Japan make a greater
international contribution?

[Twins] "Defense spending should be increased to some extent. And for now
there should be an increase on ODA. As a first step, the sum of defense
spending and ODA should be increased from the present 1.5 percent to 3 percent."

Then 'i‘aJima concluded by reiterating: "If we liberalize the financial system

that has supported the Japanese economy, the result would be the kind of chaos
we see in America."

The Friction Has Been Taken Care Of

[Interviewer] Hei Yoshii of Sony cautioned against an extreme reaction on the
part of Japan and presented a unique view of U.S.-Japan economic relations.

Hei Yoshii was born in 1911 and is 70 years old. He is now a consultant to
Sony. After graduating from the Nagasaki Higher School in 1932, he entered
Mitsui Bank. In 1962, he moved to Sony and served as executive managing
director and senior executive managing director before taking his present post.
He has unique capitalistic economic views and is conversant with international
affairs. Hei Yoshii began axpounding his unique views in a strong voice that
didn't seem to belong to a 70-year-old man even before I had finished asking w
question about what he thought of the status of U.S.-Japan economic relations.

[Yoshii] "I do not think that U.S.-Japan relations are bad at all. A number
of problals have come up, but they have been taken care of one by one. All the
problems related to physical products were solved with the automobile export
restraints last year. The only retaining problem for automobiles is how fast
the industry can move into local production. The only other problass concern-
ing physical things are oranges and tobacco, but these are small problems."

70

MWUSEONLY
[Question] So are you saying that the only remaining U.S.-Japan economic
problems are minor ones?

[Yoshii] "Yes. The service industries come next. There are plenty of prob-
lems in this area in Japan even if the Americans did not point them out. The
Ministry of Finance says that it does not discriminate against foreign coun-
tries in banking, securities, and insurance. However, there are many problems.
At any rate, it is not desirable to invite problems Just because of insignifi-
cant considerations in either farm products or service industries. Electronics
have competed openly, and sooner or later, the market should be opened in these
other areas."

Perhaps because of confidence gained in overcoming the television problem,
Hei Yoshii believes that the U.S.-Japan economic problems are fundamentally

minor ones.
[Question] Is it overreacting to say that Japan is in big trouble?

[Yoshii] "Yes. The Japanese overreact to small things and have unnecessary
feelings of victimization. This is because the Japanese are poor and good
people. Even the reciprocity bill is not a big problem. The U.S. Congressmen
are saying all sorts of things for the benefit of their voting constituencies,
but the maJor U.S. newspapers are ignoring this movement. The reciprocity
movement itself can be thought of as an opportunity for the Japanese to stop
some foolish practices."

[Question] There is a growing view in the united States which links economic
issues with defense.

[Yoshii] "The increased defense spending in this year's budget was a big
success. The united States knows that it forced the peace constitution on us.
They are not really coming out very strongly on this issue, are they? The next
target of the United States is the service industries, not defense."

here he pointed out that many of the problems connected with the service
industries were minor but that there were others which could not be ignored.
Then he continued: ”For example, if an American company wants to issue bonds
in Japan, it takes a year and a half after making the application to complete
inspections, underwriting, and other procedures. In the United States, it only
takes 20 days. The united States will focus on such problems as this from now
on. At any rate, the Japanese financial market is not normal."

[Question] However, even though we are asked to liberalize the financial
market, there are some who feel that there is no Justification for the
Americans to make such a demand on the unique Japanese system.

71

INDI!0FFIC1Al.lEiE(M'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[YoshiL] "lhnless we liberalize the financial system, the Japanese economy
cannot grow stronger. A system without competition will inevitably work badly.
U.S. color television was beaten out by Japan for this reason."

He emphasized that the bureaucracy has its fingers in every part of the
Japanese economy, not Just the financial system, and that this is beginning
to draw the vitality out of the Japanese econow itself as well as preventing
the penetration of foreign industry. He then concluded his statement.

"The thing that worries me the most right now is that the Japanese economy is
not as strong as the Japanese people believe. By 1985 there will be a
reversal in the positions of the U.S. and Japanese economies. Observing the
recent developments and government policies in the United States, I believe
that a recovery of the herican econow is very likely. The real problem is
that the Japanese econolw is‘ in danger of declining. Compared to this, the
present tensions between Japan and the United States are a small problem."

“Sympathy" for Merica

These four businessmen gave their unreserved opinions on the economic tensions
between Japan and the mited States. llext, in order to find out how a labor
leader viewed these problmss, we interviewed Ichiro Shiomichi, the head of

the automobile workers union.

Ichiro Shiomichi was born in 1927 and is 5‘! years old. He is president of
the National Federation of Auto Workers Unions and vice president of the
Japanese Confederation of Labor. After graduating from the law department of
Meiji University in 1953. he entered the Nissan Motor Company. Recently he
studied at the Harvard Business School. After serving as president of the
Nissan Motor Company Labor Union, he came to hold his present position. He is
the most influential figure in auto industry labor unions and the top expert
on foreign affairs among labor leaders.

Ichiro Shiomichi spoke eloquently on the positive role to be taken by labor
is easing the economic tensions between the United States and Japan, especially
with respect to the auto issue.

[Question] U.S.-Japan relations have gotten quite bad.

[Shiomichi] ”Rather than saying that relations are bad, I would say that they
have gotten close enough to make quarrelling possible. However, it is unfor-
tunate that the Japanese side has not clearly grasped what the real nature of
the trade problem is. Trade is a purely economic problem, but the friction is
a political problem. Therefore a solution cannot be produced with economic
theories alone. We have to get away from theories and take a political
approach. However, the Japanese Government and industry are, as usual, relying
only on economic theories and failing to deal with the prom. politically."

72

[0| OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] There is a common View in Japan that the United States is wrong
to make an issue of the bilateral trade deficit with Japan rather than its
overall trade deficit.

Japanese Government officials and many econmists stoutly criticize the
American claims as one-sided.

[Shiomichi] "With respect to an overall View, there is no agreement among all
countries of the world. There are certain countries with a relationship

that must be considered bilaterally. The United States is not thinking of
limiting the problem to our two countries. however, it is saying that con-
sideration of the problems between the United States and Japan is necessary."

After making this statement in one breath, he paused and went on.

”It is not a problem of money. The problem is whether there is 'sympathy' in
Japan for Merica's difficulties. The biggest problem in Japan is the
occurrence of large-scale unemployment. Japan is forgetting that the basic
economic problem between the United States and Japan is the issue of employ-
ment."

[Question] Last year Japan determined restraints on auto exports to the
United States. Hill this have an effect in solving the unemployment problem
in the U.S. auto industry?

[Shiomichi] ”There is no reason to expect an increase in employment because
of the reduction of 1100,000 vehicles last W. This measure had great signif-
icance in showing Japanese sensitivity, or in other words, sympathy and
sincere concern, toward the United states. This is a matter of politics,

not economic theory."

After this statement, he emphasized that ﬁaser, head of the UAR (United
Auto Workers), had shown understanding of the Japanese position on this
point.

[Question] There is criticism that the Japanese auto industry has been slow
in building plants in the United States.

[Shiomichi] ”It could have been done better. Instead of resisting from the
start, it should have promised the United States at an early point to make
studies and investigations to see if local production would be feasible. Just
because a study was made, it would not have been necessary to go ahead and
build a plant. The problem is that the Japanese side was not sincerely
concerned."

[Question] In any case, we can say that tension over autmobiles has been
eliminated for the present, can't we?

73

”MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[shiomichi] "No, it still exists. Last year, 1.8 million Japanese cars were
imported in the Ihited States, while only 7,700 American cars were imported in
Japan. This is an abnorml gap. Furthermore, U.S. auto production capacity
is 10 million cars per year, but only 6.2 million cars were produced last year
and unemployment is becoming a serious problem."

[Question] How should Japan deal with the United States?

[sun-1cm] "Such efforts as the Joint production being carried out by
Toyota and GM will help alleviate friction. UAH President Fraser and other
officials told me the following. They want Japan to build local plants to
help solve the employment problem. But they also hope that this will stimu-
late U.S. auto companies such as GM and Ford."

Following this, Shimichi raised his voice as he began to criticize the
methods of the Japanese industry.

"The Japanese auto companies are attempting to prevent the organization of
unions at local plants. The Japanese companies are building their plants in
the sun belt where there are new non-union workers. What will happen if
Japanese companies carry out production with low-cost labor and poor working
conditions? [merican industry in the northeast employs union labor. There-
fore, the new Japanese plants in the United States will further exacerbate
the "North-South problem" in the United States. The United States is hoping
that Japanese companies will bring Japanese style labor relations to the
United States. The UAR has said that it will cooperate with these Japanese
style labor relations."

The approach of Japanese industry is to pursue innediate profits. It is lack-
ing in ”understanding" of the United States.

[Question] What should be done from now on to improve U.S.-Japan relations?

[Shiomichi] "In U.8.-Japan auto negotiations, MITI, the Foreign Ministry,
and industry all take separate approaches. This sort of approach is odd for
a large country. With respect to automobiles, there is a relationship of
trust between the labor unions of the United States and Japan. In future
U.S.-Japan negotiations, the government and the unions should work together."

Because of his confidence in the strong trusting relationship between the auto
workers unions of the United States and Japan and his personal trusting
relationship with President Fraser, he concluded as follows.

"The relationship between one country and another is built up from the

relationships of individual people. If personal relationships are created
between people in the lhited States and Japan from the various sectors,

N;

we OFFICIAL USE ONLY
goverment, business, education, and labor, I am sure that a close relation-
ship of trust will develop between the two countries. then this happens, the
tensions will disappear. However, at present, outside of the labor unions, we
cannot say that there is trust between the thited States and Japan."

Special System in Japan

[Interviewer] Our last interview related to the business world was with

Jiro Tokuyama. He is not purely a businessman or financier, so he analysed
the structural characteristics of U.S.-Japan relations from an obJective point
of View.

Jiro Tokuyama was born in 1919 and is 62 years old. At present he is director
of the Nomura Nanagensnt School. After graduating from the economics depart-
ment of Tohro University, he worked for the Defense Agency, mo. and served
as vice president of the lomura Research Institute before taking his present
post. He is a profound scholar of herican politics and government and a
commentator with unique views.

Jiro Tokuyama began the interview with his theory of the uniqueness of
Japanese society. It was an extremely interesting theory.

[Tokuyama] "may people do not like the argment that Japan is a country with
a unique structure, but I believe that, compared to the United States, Japan
has a very unique system. For example, the United States has 27 times the
land area of Ja but only twice the population. If this ratio were applied
to Japan, only million people would live there. However, there are 120
million people living in Japan. Under these conditions, the Japanese system
is 'warped' from the start.”

He began with this statement and then said: "Because of this excessive situa-
tion, the Japanese have few opportunities and have a hard life. W of the
mechanisms of Japanese society have resulted fron this. may of the things
that seem illogical from the viewpoint of the United States are logical under
the given conditions in Japan. Our resplendent method of decisionmaking is a
good example. Because of the lack of opportunity, group harmony provides a
guarantee of security. This leads to strong group loyalty. However, this also
results in exclusion of other groups. The Japanese archipelago is built up to
a total system of such groups and organisations.

"It is difficult for the Japanese themselves to be accepted in these groups.
In this sense, it is not only foreigners who are excluded."

He stated further that because the systen is insular, it does no good to
advise the leaders to become internationalists. In the foreign branches of
Japanese companies, there is a system of "noncomissioned officer" compensap
tion for uployees hired locally. The representatives of the company living
abroad work with their eyes on Tokyo. Their children discard their extra-
ordinary foreign experience and return to Japanese high schools and universi-
ties in order to adapt to the group system in Japan.

[Question] Then, is it necessary to revamp this entire system in order to
eliminate the tension between Japan and the mited States?

75

”MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Tokwama] "Theoretically, that may be true. Such a social system cannot be
simply changed overnight. For example, there are other problass than over-
population. Japan is being criticised for not buying the products of foreign
countries, but until recently there were no industrial countries around Japan
with which it could have a buying and selling relationship with a horizontal
division of labor like that in Burope. Therefore, Japan came to make all its
own products."

[Question] why doesn't the Japanese Government explain these things to the
United States?

[Tokwama] "There are new Japanese who themselves do not understand the struc-
ture of Japanese society. Also, the Japanese elite, in government or in the
private sector, seldom move outside of the groups to which they themselves
belong. Since they do not have the experience of being cut off from the group,
these people on the ”inside" in Japan may not be able to understand the
frustration of the United States at being on the "outside." Also because this
is not a contest where the losers have a chance to Lake a comeback, the govern-
ment does not dare make any bold statements."

Perhaps Tokuyama has a good understanding of the "logic of exclusion" because
of his own experience in changing Jobs several times, from the Defense Agency
to JETRO to the lcmura Research Institute.

[Question] If we do not provide an explanation to the United States or if it
does not understand our explanation, is there any course left except defiance?

[Tokuyame] "Certainly, America is making some rather one-sided claims. How-
ever, if no col-on ground is found for the claims of the two sides, the
reality is that the argument of the strongest side will prevail in the arena
of international politics. If we asst-1e a defiant attitude, it will probably
lead to a repeat of the Pacific war or to a position of isolation. But be that
as it may, because of modern progress in Jet aircraft. communications, and
computer networks, the economic world is rapidly becoming more and more inter-
dependent. Japan can no longer go back to being an economically isolated
country.”

After saying this, he emphatically stated that the most effective approach is
for Japanese companies to go overseas. hrthermore, he said that in consider-
ation of the present pace of liberalisation, it would be necessary for domestic
business methods in Japan to become Just the same as the business methods of
foreign countries.

[Question] How should Japan deal with economic tensions for the time being?
[Tokuyama] "In any case, we should open the market to symbolic items like
tobacco, oranges, and beef and service industries such as finance, insurance.

and data communications. Tobacco and oranges are irrelevant to Japan's food
security. Those who are hurt by this measure should be helped domestically."

76

”WWW!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Japanese diplomacy has a tendency to take the form of passive
reaction. This gives rise to an uneasy feeling about Japan's nature.

[Tokuyama] "Considering the previous position of Japan in the world, there
was a time when it was better not to have a diplomatic philosophy. However,
now that Japan is the second greatest economic power in the world, that will
not do. It should take an appropriate role in international society. If
Prime Minister Suzuki is a novice at diplomacy, the foreign minister should
assign an expert in this area. The post of foreign trade minister should not
have been abolished.

"Japanese politicians cultivate their domestic voting districts with great
vigor, but they have completely failed to cultivate the electoral districts in
the arena of international politics as the world has grown smaller. If trade
friction between the United States and Japan occurs again, we will have no
bargaining power.” '

This Is What the Bureaucrats Think

[Interviewer] The real power to determine the will of Japan and formulate
government policies belongs to the bureaucrats. They have great intelligence
and access to huge amounts of information, and it is undeniable that their
thoughts and actions have a great effect in determining the direction that
Japan takes.

He obtained the frank views of three bureaucrats on U.8.-Japan relations.

They were Jo ﬂashimoto, a bureaucrat serving in the Foreign Ministry, Takashi
Hosomi, a former nor bureaucrat presently working for the Overseas Economic
Cooperation Fund, and Saburo Oki, a former Economic Planning Agency bureaucrat
who has served as foreign minister.

We Don't Feel Like a Great Economic Power

Jo Hashimoto was born in 1926 and is 56 years old. At present he is chief of
the Public Information and Cultural Affairs Bureau. He entered the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs after graduating from the law department of Tokyo University
in 1953. He served as manager of the com section of the Asian Affairs
Bureau before taking his present post. Hashimoto has been on the front lines
in the trade conflicts with the thited States. As a Foreign Ministry spokes-
men, he has had contact with the United States and has served in a coordinating
role among the various ministries and agencies in Japan. Speaking with a
unique accent, he advocated Japan's position and fiercely attacked the domestic
criticism of the Foreign Ministry.

[Question] What do you think has caused the U.S.-J'apan trade friction?

77

FOIOI’FIOALUEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Hashimoto] "The basis of problems between Japan and other countries is a
perception gap. Japan may be called the second largest economic power in the
world or an economic giant, but I wself and the majority of the Japanese do
not have a sense that this is a reality. other countries tell us to carry out
the responsibilities of a great power, but the Japanese do not feel as if they
are a great power, so this doesn't ring true. Since even the United States is
telling Japan to take more responsibility, we must suppose that there is an
even stronger demnd from countries which are economically weaker than Japan
such as the EC, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East. This is the basic nature
of the problem."

[Question] More specifically, wlmt is this perception gap?

[Hashimoto] "For example, in terms of statistics Great Britain has very bad
unemployment and inflation. However, if you drive along the Thames River,

you will see many beautiful houses with large lawns and more people than you
can count enJoying themselves with their families on sailboats in the river on
Sundays. No matter how far you go up the Sumida River in Japan, there are only
small matchbox-like houses. And on Sundays, would you ever see families in
sailboats? There are exellent restaurants along the upper Thames, but the
most you will find along the upper Sumida River are noodle shops. I have no
sense of Japan being a great economic power. He were beaten in war and have
crawled up out of an environment of levelled cities where we were hardly able
to eat."

This is one Japanese viewpoint. When Japan is subjected to one-sided criti-
cism. it is not unusual for some Japanese to become defiant and say along with
llashimoto: "That's ridiculous: He had to drag ourselves up from burned out
cities." The director of Public Information and Cultural Affairs at the
Foreign Ministry may be making this kind of statement because his position puts
him at the center of the tension. He continued to energetically defend the
Japanese position.

"Japan has opened its markets more than America says. The United States says
that it cannot do business in Japan. That's ridiculous! Last year the
American who is president of the Japan DBD Company came to see me. He said
that he had had great success in Japan. The company has developed medicines
for use by doctors and hospitals, and not only medicines for human beings but
also for cattle, horses, dogs, and cats. It has built new factories in a
number of locations and is expanding. According to the president, the greatest
reason for success is that no trouble has been created between the partners.
They always speak openly to each other, and he and the officers of the Joint
venture live the same life as the Japanese. He says that for the year-end
party, they go to a hot springs resort in the country and all get in the bath
together. And they do dances wearing Japanese-style headbands. He cannot
speak Japanese but he understands the Japanese mentality perfectly, so he was

78

FOIOFIICIALUSBONLY
able to open up his market. he is bringing students from Imerica to have them
learn Japanese. He says that most Inericans do not understand Japanese at
all. he emphaticalhr stated that 'the Japanese are not shutting foreigners
out or their narket.‘ I would like to have the Americans read a pauphlet
entitled 'A Success Story in Japan.”

[Question] men if the Japanese viewpoint is understandable, it will not do
to reject all the claims of the other side in actual negotiations between the
United States and Japan, will it?

[Hashimoto] "There are always economic tensions between the united States and
Canada and between the United States and the BC. However, they are fighting

in the same ring and under the same rules so they always reach a solution.
However, the things that the United States is asking of Japan show a difference
in the rules between the United States and the EC and those between the lhited
States and Japan, don't they? Also, Japanese customs are 2,000 or 3,000

years old. There are certain minimum conditions that make it impossible to
change the rules immediately on demand. He must make the other party aware of
this. In other areas, it is necessary to move as close to the common rules .
of the free world as possible."

[Question] Which requests is it impossible to accept?

[Hashimoto] "One example is rice. The Americans want to sell rice from
California. But can we reduce the Japanese rice farmers to nothing? This we.
cannot accept. If a war started and the sea lanes were closed off, what

country would guarantee a supply of rice to Japan? It is clear that this is
impossible. Because this is a consensus society, it is difficult to reach a
decision on what should and shouldn't be liberalized."

[Question] It is reported that the prospects of the Danforth bill will become
clear fairly soon. What measures do you think should be taken to solve the
problem for the time being?

[Hashimoto] "Pbrtunately, there is a definite feeling now that both the
related ministries and the LDP must take some sort of action. Postwar Japan
has handled these kinds of crises very well. Since Japan is being criticized
not for being a poor student or economics, but rather for being too good a
student, the solution is comparatively simple. The proposed solution is being
formulated right now, so I cannot divulge it in detail."

[Question] The Foreign Ministry is slow at catching information and slow in
taking action when a problem develops. Some very strong criticisms are being
made. There is a View that, irrespective of U.S.-Japan trade friction, the
Foreign Ministry is creating friction inside Japan between itself and other
sectors.

79

MOWIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hashimto responded to this immediately, perhaps because of his position at the
center of this strong criticism. "Politicians, businessmen, and scholars all
criticize the Foreign Ministry. But I am not surprised at this. That is
because the Japancsc have a cannon habit of self-abuse. This has been true
since the MeiJi period, whenever there is strong pressure from the outside.
They find a scapegoat, saying that he is to blame. Furthermore, there is no
fccling of affinity among the people regarding Foreign Ministry officials. In
the past, most people never came near the Foreign Ministry except when applying
for a passport. Now the prefectures and municipal areas handle passport
procedures, so there is even greater distance. The Foreign Ministry differs
from the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
Health and Welfare, MITI, and the Ministry of Construction which have a close
connection with the peOple. The people probably feel that diplmats marry
girls from rich families, receive guests from foreign countries,'and cavort at
parties in white tie and tails. Also, the strength of bureaucrats comes from
their authority to grant approvals, but the Foreign Ministry has none of that.
Therefore, no matter how badly a person speaks of the Foreign Ministry, there
will be no retaliation, so it is easy to criticize.

"The most important property of the Foreign Ministry is the diplomatic
personnel themselves. It is useless to ask the diplomats to do a better Job
than politicians, businessmen, or the press. They are average Japanese. It
is wmng to simply tell the Foreign Ministry to shape up while refusing to let
oneself be the target of criticism. The people in the Foreign Ministry are
rathcr timid, nice people in comparison with media people, politicians, or
other bureaucrats. If the entire Japanese nation says that the Foreign
Ministry is no good, they fall into a state of depression. Therefore, they
should be treated with more finesse. If the politicians and the media would
caJole them a little, they would work themselves to death."

[Question] Ambassador mnsfield is an influential man who served as the
Senate maJority leader for the Democratic Party in the United States. He makes
contact with all sectors of Japanese society, including politicians, business-
men, and the mass media. Can you say that the Japanese ambassador to the
United States is doing the same kind of thing?

[Hashimoto] "In Just the last 2 or 3 months, Ambassador Ogawara and other
Japanese Embassy officials have met with over 80 American legislators from both
houses of Congress. The ambassador is continually having lunch and dinner with
influential American politicians. he even meets often with Senator Danforth,
who proposed the reciprocity bill. The Foreign Ministry is not good at communi-
cation and Just has not advertised this in Japan. Just the same, we cannot say
that things are fine Just as they are. He will give due consideration to our
shortcomings. Information is the life blood of the Foreign Ministry. The
ministry has always been aware of this. Another thing we must do is to carry
out the function of coordination between the ot‘rcr ministries. However, the
execution of specific measures must be left up is the ministry involved.”

80

POI 0mm]. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Clestion] If it is that type of government organ, it cannot be expected to
function well without the support of the Diet members and public opinion.

however the Foreign Ministry seems to have a tendency to keep them at a
distance.

[hashimoto] "I am sorry for that. We must get the Japanese people on our
side. Public relations will not suffice for three thousand and several
hundred employees of the Foreign Ministry to obtain the support of a hundred
million people. Therefore, we must at least be supported by the Diet, the
mass media, and the prime minister. The prime minister's office is the only
organ which can make decisions from a high vantage point without being, swayed
by the positions of the various ministries. The mass media is stronger than
the old Imperial Army and Navy put together. Therefore, the Foreign Ministry
must produce good policies and obtain everyone's support."

In conclusion, he said the following. ”What I would like to say to the
leaders of every sector is not to make a big causation and overreact Just
because of some demands from a foreign country. It is natural for the wind
to buffet the front runner. He should not sigh and brood about this, any more
than we should take the small country attitude of slandering our fellow
countrymen. We must learn to take a tougher attitude."

The Japanese Are Too Nonchalant

[Interviewer] Jo Hashimto is a uniquely patriotic bureaucrat from the
Foreign Ministry. Takashi Hosomi is known as a flexible but tough inter-
nationalist even though he served in the Finance Ministry where new of the
bureaucrats have domestic leanings. Bis statement was in sharp contrast to
that of Hashimoto. '

Takashi Hosomi was born in 1920 and is 61 years old. At present he is the
president of the Overseas Cooperation Development Fund. He entered the
Ministry of Finance after graduating from the economics department of Tokyo
University in 19h2. After serving as director of the Tax Bureau and as a
finance officer, he was transferred to the Industrial Bank of Japan as an
adviser and then moved to his present post. He is an authoritative commenta-
tor on international finance and economics. Takashi Hosomi spoke in a light
tone but be emphasized that the present 'J.S.-Japan relations are in a serious
state.

[Hosomi] "U.S.-Japan relations are now in a more serious state than before.
What is worse is that the American perception of the Japanese has become

cynical. They are calling us comercialistic. I sensed this strongly when I
went to the United States in February."

81

FOIOFFIGALUSIONLY
FORIMNHWJAL.USE(NULY

After this, he added that the Japanese have gotten carried away and over-
emphasized the charge that the Americans are not trying hard enough. Now that
America is imposing demands to open the market, insularity that the Japanese
themselves were not aware of has come out in the open. With a look of great
irritation, Takashi Hosomi criticized the non-international character of the
Japanese.

"0n the issue of farm products, the Japanese are always being pressed hard by
the Americans and they always respond with tiny improvements. In other words,
from the American point of view, the Japanese market is very hard to under-
stand. The Japanese should have let the Americans know in advance how far
they were willing to open the market and how far they were going to put a
handicap on it."

[Question] But isn't the recent Japanese reaction excessive?

[Hosomi] "No, too nonchalant. We were taking the problem too lightly. With
the Ezaki mission, we finally understood how serious it was.

[Question] I get the feeling that America is saying whatever it wants.

But he denied this. "No, Japan has done nothing to make America feel obligated.
Up to now, we have Just hung on the United States."

[Question] Why is there no progress in opening the Japanese market?

[Hosomi] "It is connected with streamlining the administration. There is a
huge number of government officials who participate in regulating the market in
direct and indirect ways. If the employment security of these officials is
considered, it is not possible to open the market easily."

After saying this, he stated emphatically that it will be impossible to change
the American perception of Japan unless a bold plan for carrying out liberal-
ization measures is presented.

"In addition to opening the market, another thing we should do in our role as

a great economic power is to increase our share of the defense burden. If the
responsibilities and burdens of a great economic power are undesirable, we will
have to lower our standards of living and live within narrower limits. Is that
possible?"

After this statement, Hosomi pointed out that there was no tradition in the

long history of Japanese political parties for political groups to think

about national security or diplomatic strategy. Before the war these kinds
of problems were handled by the military and the diplomats. After the war, the

82

llll(ﬂﬂﬂC1A1.lﬁi§(lULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bureaucrats took power away from the politicians, and as a result, they lost
the role of passing legislation on national security and diplomatic issues
from an international point of view. Because of the traditions of party
politics, it is easy not to think in terms of international issues.

[Question] Is it possible for Japan to carry out diplomacy as a maJor power?

[Hosomi] "In any case, it must be done. For this purpose, it may be necessary
for members of political parties to take some blows from the United States as
part of their patriotic mission. In this way, an international viewpoint may
begin to grow in Japanese politics. The Ezaki mission succeeded as the first
step in such a process."

In other words, Japan must cultivate new politicians to cope with the "inter-
national environment." According to Hosomi, a system mist be constructed in
which international interests and separate local interests compete with each
other within the political parties.

[Question] So you are saying that the passive diplasacy of the past will no
longer work?

[Hosomi] "It is impossible. At any rate, the United States is poor now and
cannot do anything for us except provide a nuclear umbrella. Japan must make
an effort in defense. But we must consider the dangers of an aggressive
foreign policy losing its balance. There are new Yosuke lhtsuoka's in Japan
who could stir up anti-Americanism."

ﬂosomi concluded with the following observation, which he prefaced by saying
that he was promoting his own personal interests.

"Japan could amaze the world if it doubled its ODA. The United States might
not give us the credit due, but it would be good for the world."

Global Contribution by Japan

[Interviewer] The last person to be interviewed was Saburo Oki, an inter-
national economist who spends a third of his time overseas at international
conferences. He is known for his balanced views.

Saburo Oki was born in 191." and is 67 years old. At present, he heads the
Foreign and Domestic Policy Study Committee. After graduating from the
engineering department of Tokyo University, he entered the Communications
Ministry. He has served as director general of the Economic Planning Agency,
director of the Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, and Foreign Minister.

Although he had Just returned from Hong Kong the previous evening, there was
no trace of fatigue in his expression, and he began to talk about the present
difficulties in U.8.-Japan relations without a pause.

83

summon“
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Oki] "Previous econmic ‘ roblems between the United States and Japan,
whether it was textiles, color television, or autusobiles, were always related
to specific products. Now the demand is for a general opening of the market.
The direct cause of this is the fact that Japanese exports to the United States
in 1981 increased by 23 percent while imports from the United States increased
by only 3 percent. This sparked off trouble immediately."

[Question] Is it accurate to say that the roots of U.8. criticism of Japan
run very deep?

[Oki] "Recently I met with the former representative of U.S. commerce, Mr
Askew, in Miami. He said that previously there were guidelines on both sides
for taking the necessary steps in economic problems between the United States
and Japan. However, now the problem is snowballing to such an extent that
such guidelines no longer exist."

Because Saburo Oki's views are based on frequent contact with foreign officials,
even his matter-of-fact tone was very convincing. He continued.

"Therefore, in the present U.S.-Japan trade problems, there is a tendency to
forget the broad view. Even the 0.9. side is concerned about this."

[Question] There are soae odd aspects to the merican claims. For emple,
the criticism of Japan based only on the trade deficit....

lie said that was true and went on with reference to trade statistics.

[01:1] "The American claim is lacking in basic common sense on economic issues.
First, there is the narrow focus on the trade deficit between only two coun-
tries, the United States and Japan. The United States certainly has a large
trade deficit with Japan, but it has a surplus with the 30 nations. Second,
the united States is only looking at product exports. It should look at the
current balance with service trade included. The United States has a large
deficit in product trade but the non-trade balance shows a large surplus. In
short, it should look at the overall current balance, not Just at a bilateral
product trade balance."

[Interviewer] Oki's observation was logical. As far as economic problems are
concerned, the 0.8. claim is'illogieal. However, the fundunental nature of
the economic friction problem relates to political logic, not economic logic.
Therefore, it will not solve the problem if the Japanese side continues to
repeat its economic arguments. The problem goes beyond economics. One source
of frustration for the United States is the problem of Japan's defense burden.

[Question] In the United States there is a concept of linkage between
economics and politics, isn't there?

8’;

MOWISIONLY
[Oki] "The 0.5. State Department and government officials officially deny
this idea of linkage. However. the linkage concept exists as a real problen.
There is an underlying idea in the United States of the 'free ride,’ whereby
Japan has been able to direct its economic power to the expansion of inter-
national competitiveness because of the small size of its defense burden.”

Besides this idea of a "free ride." there is a growing fear of Japan that
underlies criticism of Japan in the united States which cannot be ignored.
Saburo Oki quoted from the Gibbons Report on this subject and pointed out that
the United States is taking a serious view of the Japanese challenge in the
field of high technology. Japanese industry is holding a knife at the heart of
American industry. .

0ki said that "Japan should do what it can to alleviate American frustration."
Then he continued.

"Japan has come to hold a great deal of economic power in the world. Japan's
present system and bureaucratic thinking seem very unnatural from the outside.
Japan is wearing clothing which does not fit its large body any nore. Former
Treasury Secretary Solomon said that Japan is 'narrowly selfish.’ It thinks
only of Japan. There have been too many instances of words and actions which
show no consideration for the problems of the entire world."

[QuestionJ But is it possible for Japan to make a change in this area?
Isn't it difficult for an international viewpoint to get into the Japanese
decision-axing apparatus?

[Oki] "No. that's not true. Japan is very sensitive to developments in
foreign countries. The problem is that a way of thinking has become estab-
lished in Japan since the time of the lbiJi according to which Japan is a small
country dependent on the outside world. We have reached the point at which
this way of thinking will have to be pushed forward."

[Question] What should be done, specifically?

[Oki] "Japan should not make the areas of agricultural products and service
industries into sacred precincts. However, because everything cannot be
liberalized due to domestic conditions, what can and cannot be liberalized
should be clearly stated."

[Question] What do you think about the problem of the defense burden?

[Oki] "Twenty years ago the ratio between the 0.8. and Japanese GlP's was 10
to 1. Now it is close to 2 to 1. Because of this, there is good reason for

the Uhited States to demand that Japan increase its share of the defense burden.
I believe that Japan made a naJor choice because of its experience in Horld War

85

l0ll€ﬂﬂﬂ€1A1.lﬂl!(llLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II. That was not to use armed force in international conflicts as stated in
the preamble of the constitution. Japan's choice was to attempt long-term
am limitation and use military forces'which are non-nuclear and used only
for defense,“ it moves toward the 21st century. however, in the short term.
Japan must have the power to defend itself. Therefore, it should develop an
effective defense-only system using electronics technology."

[Question] What percentage of the GNP is an appropriate goal?

[Oki] "It will be enough if it is slightly over 1 percent. In any case,
research spending for defense technology should be increased, and a low-cost
defense system should be developed. This level of spending shouldn't make the
United States afraid that Japan will become a great military power." '

Oki concluded his discussion as follows. "Japanese economic power should be
used for world development. Therefore, the percentage of the GHP used for ODA
should be increased to 0.7 or 1.0 percent. unless Japan takes an active role
in contributing to the world, it will be left in a blind alley in its attempt
to solve bilateral trade problems. Now is the time for Japan to formulate
global policies.”

Five Proposals for Japanese Foreign Relations

[Interviewer] These are suggestions for future Japanese diplomacy. The first
suggestion is a sharp increase in foreign aid, especially ODA (official
developsent aid). Prime Minister Suzuki promised the world a large increase
in foreign aid at the U.8.-Japan emit talks and at the Ottawa sunnit last
year. Unless we are sincere and actually make an effort to carry out this
increase, our position as a major economic power will be undermined. There
were subtle differences of opinion among the people we interviewed about
foreign aid itself, but there is not likely to be any objective to the idea of
increasing foreign aid as a maJor policy direction. Koichi Kato's idea of
using aid strategically is worthy of being considered. There are some doubts
about the desirability of giving aid. However, while it may seem like money
thrown away from the point of view of short-term foreign relations, it is
possible that it will be unexpectedly useful for national security in the
future. If we make a steady international contribution in this way, no matter
how much Japan is criticized by the United States, it cannot be called
"narrowly selfish" in international society.

Second is a defense effort. There is a principle of unarmed neutrality in
Japan, but there are probably few people who would object to Japan defending
itself. The problem is how Japan is to be defended. As has been seen, there
were many different views presented in the interviews, but it seemed that
there was no strong opposition to a strengthening of the present defense
capability.

86

summon“
There was certainly no one who advocated weakening the defense capability.

The 0.8. demand for a buildup of the Japanese defense capability has tempo-
rarily slackened off, but a chorus of voices calling for a buildup is expected
to start up again. In order for Japan to fulfill its responsibility as a maJor
economic power, it is necessary to go along with this to a certain extent. The
problem is the speed and scale of the buildup. however, as was pointed out by
Saburo Oki and Yonosuke lagai, Japan should make a patient effort toward

controlling military expansion in addition to the short-term buildup of its
defense capability.

Also, it should be added that it is abnormal for Japan to decide whether to
examine its national security in accordance with directives from the United
States. We have reached the point where Japan should decide what to do for
itself after considering the requests of the United States. Chief Cabinet
Secretary Miyazawa has stated strongly that ”it is wrong for Japan to deter-
mine its defense capability on the basis of Imerican requests." That is true,
but even so, it will not do to leave them out of consideration altogether.

It will take money to increase foreign aid and defense capability, but Japanese
finances are strained. Still, Japan is better off than Europe and the United
States. As pointed out by ﬂiroshi Kate, administrative reform will probably

be necessary in order to squeeze out the money. Administrative reform needs
to be carried out irrespective of overseas pressure. If this is not done,
sooner or later Japan will lose its energy as a nation. If the pressure from
overseas creates an opportunity for administrative reform, that may be our
good fortune. The bureaucrats should stop opposing this from their narrow
viewpoint.

The third suggestion is to improve the function of the Foreign Ministry. The
responsibility of the Foreign Ministry for allowing the tensions between the
United States and Japan to case to the.:surface is evident. Almost everyone
interviewed criticized the Foreign Ministry. men Mr Johnson, who is pro-
Japanese, has said that there was a deficiency in public relations. It is
impossible to defend the Foreign Ministry, no matter how hard Jo ﬂashimoto
tries. At this Juncture, the Foreign Ministry should make a maJor effort to
improve its information-gathering function. Furthermore, this should not be
left entirely up to the Foreign Ministry. There is a need for the entire
nation to keep a sharp lookout and for all valuable information to be gathered
in one place. This problem is also related to administrative reform.

Fourth is the opening of the Japanese market. heryone has different things
to say in reply to the United states. However, the insularity of the Japanese
market is something that is recognized by everyone to a greater or lesser
extent. The only issue is how much it should be opened. The problem is what
"dramatic" measures to take. Just as Jo Hashimoto said, there are some areas

mammal“
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in which Japan can make concession and some in which it cannot. If this
explanation is "convincing to the world," the problem can be solved in no
time. As Takashi Hosomi emphasized, the bureaucrats must strictly refrain
from deceptive stopgap measures designed to protect their prerogatives. At
the same time, Japan must be forthright in stating its position to the United
States. The problel can never be solved if Japan does not succeed in making
the United States understand its special circumstances. As ﬁaruo Suzuki and
marnr others pointed out with respect to the issue of opening the market, for
the time being Japan should liberalize symbolic items such as tobacco as fast
as possible. As Koichi Kato suggested, Japan is the country which stands to
gain the most from free trade. If that is true, Japan should take the lead
over other countries as a champion of free trade and make an active effort
to open its market.

Toshihiro TaJima and Hei Yoshii emphasized the point that the U.S. dasand for
liberalization of the Japanese market is gradually coming to focus on the
service industries. As Toshihiro TsJima stated, the great issue now is whether
the idea of an open financial system in Japan must be defended no matter what.
Certainly, it is natural for the financial system of a country to be peculiar
to that country. It is nonsensical for the United States to demand that Japan
make its financial system the same as that of the United States.

However, sincethe Japanese econasy is advancing internationally, it is wrong
for foreign companies to have difficulty issuing bonds on the Japanese'market
even if Japanese companies are placed under the same conditions. Whatever

may be said about complete liberalization of the financial market, the Ministry
of Finance should make an effort to gradually liberalize the Tokyo market and
internationalize the yen. Also, excessive administrative guidance should be
eliminated sooner or latter.

The fifth suggestion is that Japan undertake a shift in foreign policy which
combines the four areas mentioned above. In other words, it should shift from
its traditionally passive foreign policy to a more active approach. Haruo
Suzuki and others pointed out that the U.S.-Japan tensions were a problem of
perception. However, it is a fact that although Japan comands 10 percent of
he world's GNP, it is making no international contribution as a great econanic
power. This has caused not only the United States, but the whole world, to

see Japan as a ”peculiar, selfish country." In order to change this perception
of Japan in a fundamental way, it will be necessary to break away from a
passive style of foreign relations. As Jiro Tokwsma said, it is necessary to
create a "grand design” and take positive action as we move into the uncertain
future.

However, as Jiro Tokuyama emphasised, how can the "cowardly" Japanese bureau-

crats comeup with such a design? As Takashi nosomi and many others stated, the
establishment of political leadership will be necessary. In this respect, it

is a good thing that some politicians have "taken blows" over this problem.
88

[0. WM US! ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Only on the basis of such aggressive diplomacy can Japan secure a position
from which to state its case properly to the United States and other countries.
As long as Japan remains passive and self-centered, it cannot say what it has
to say. The 0.3. fears about Japan in the area of high technology pointed out
by Atswoshi Ouchi are certainly self—centered on the part of America, and the
there are other prohless in the Aurican claims which were pointed out by
others. However, if Japan does not make aw effort to establish a clear posi-

tion for itself in international society, its complaints will be seen as self-
centered sephistry.

At the same tins, we should be aware of the danger involved in more active
Japanese foreign relations. There is no tradition in Japan for the ”construc-
tive, positive diplomacy” spoken o.‘ by Nagoya Home. [a professor of the {hiver-
sity of Tokyo]. we have sufficient experience with the way in which aggressive
foreign relations can be connected to warped nationalistic emotions. However,
Japan is no longer the kind of "small presence" which can afford to rely on
passive foreign relations. In view of this, a more active foreign policy is
imperative. The only way to insure the survival of Japan is to work steadily
and patiently at building the foundations of a "new diplomacy."

COPYRIGﬂ'l‘: The "Shokun 1982

9651
(so: Mos/95

lawman“
FOIOFF'ICIALUSEONLY

“ERICA! LEFT-HARD DRIVE SYNDRODB
Tokyo SEC!!! in Japanese Apr 82 pp 168-179
[Article by Keitaro ﬂasegwa, intarmtional economist]

[Bxcerpts] America Has leglected Industrial exam and has No my". to
Criticize Japan

Is a Real Effort Being Made?

The "left-hand drive syndrome" is a phrase used in American companies in
Japan. What does it mean? It is a phrase that makes fun of the marketing
efforts of 0.8. auto makers in Japan. In 1981, American auto manufacturers
sold 7,7162 cars in Japan. This is only 20 percent of the imported cars sold
in Japan. In contrast, Japanese auto makers sold 1.8 million cars in the 0.8.

market in the same year. -

The reason American cars do not sell in Japan is that they do not have the
steering wheel on the right to suit the Japanese practice of driving on the
left side of the road. Like the British, the Japanese drive on the left-hand
side of the street, so all Japanese cars have right-hand drive. In America
where cars are driven on the right side of the road, the steering wheel is on
the left. The 0.8. auto makers ignore these road regulations and attempt to
sell their cars in Japan with the steering wheel on the left, so how can they
expect them to sell? herican businessmen who are succeeding in the Japanese
market laugh at this stubborn marketing policy of the auto makers, calling

it the "left-hand drive syndrome.”

In response to this, the 11.8. auto makers argue that "because of the small
volume of sales to Japan, there would he no profit even if we made the effort
to move the steering wheel to the left." But the successful Americans laugh
at the auto makers. "So what did the Japanese auto makers do? They began to
manufacture cars with the steering wheel on the left the moment they began to
market them in the United States." -

90

IOIOWICIALUSEONLY
Plainly stated, the American auto makers have no intention of making a serious
marketing effort until the Japanese adopt the Merican system of driving on
the right-hand side of the road, so herican businessmen say that they have no
right to talk about the insularity of the Japanese nrket.

Contempt for the Japanese

The 0.3. auto makers do not show the ”left-hand drive syndrome" in Great
Britain, which also has the system of driving on the left side of the road.
There is even a feeling that this shows that they look down on the Japanese.

In contrast to the strictness of Japanese industry's attitude toward quality,
0.3. industry is much more tolerant. As a result, "more than half of the
0.8. companies operating in the Japanese market cannot deliver products with
the quality necessary to satisfy Japanese standards." For example, a U.S.
semiconductor manufacturer delivered an 10 which did not meet the Japanese
customer's requirements for performance under high temperature. When the U.S.
head office was asked to explain the cause of the defective performance, it
took 3 months to reply. As BUSInBS Hm put it: ”It is not surprising that
this canpany lost customers."

It is often pointed out that there are many cases of 0.8. companies in Japan
with poor management. This will also be seen in the examples of ﬁmerican
banks in Japan, which will be referred to later. One influential 0.8. semi-
conductor manufacturer was completely fooled by the Japanese person who was
head of its Japan branch. The company sold its saniconductors to the dealer-
ship which he established at cost and the dealership delivered them to Japanese
customers at a huge profit. As such examples demonstrate, U.8. companies have
continued to operate very carelessly in the Japanese market.

0.8. companies either fail to stuw the Japanese market and discover the
trends of Japanese demand, leaving everything up to local employees, or they
repeatedly interfere in every small detail. It seems that they are unable
to use anything but an extreme management policy: either laissez-faire or
excessive interference. This fact is closely related to the lack of ration-
ality in the strategies of 0.8. industry for doing business in Japan.

Successful U.S. businessmen know that "do as the Romans do" is an inflexible
rule of business and that following this rule is the onny secret of success
in doing business in Japan. Looking down on the Japanese or even treating
them as an inferior race is out of the question.

If v.8. companies would take this rational attitude, they could succeed in
expanding their business in Japan.

91

FOR OFFICIAL L68 ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“hat About Banking?

Recently, the United States has been making a big issue of the imbalance in
finance, insurance, and other services as well as the imbalance in ordinary
trade. The United States is making an especially big issue of the Japanese
treatment of banks. How are foreign banks operating in Japan?

The author has referred to the fact that the share of foreign banks in the
Japanese market is diminishing. The operations of foreign banks becane greatly
liberalized by the revision of the Foreign Exchange Control Law in December
1980. In spite of this, the assets of foreign banks as of the end of Burch
1981 were 10,372,600,000,000 yen, Just h.3 percent of the 239,069,000,000,000
yen total for all banks in Japan during the same period.

One year ago, their assets were 9,212,100,000,000 yen, h.l percent of the
222,320,100,000,000 yen held by all banks in Japan, so there has been sane
growth in assets.

However, this is not true of lending. At the end of hrcb 1981, there was
h.68 trillion yen in loans from Japanese branches of foreign banks, 3.); per-
cent of the total for all banks in Japan. The amount in the previous year was
b,loh9,200,000,000 yen and the percentage of the market was Just the same, 3.10
percent.

Since the Foreign Exchange Control Law was revised in the direction of
liberalization, the activities of foreign banks should have expanded greatly,
but they have not increased their share at all.

The Japanese financial market is seen by most observers as having the greatest
capacity for growth in the world. However, the foreign banks here do not
seen to be increasing their growth capacity at all.

The reason for this is clear. Foreign banks are making no attempt to "do as
the Romans" in Japan. This is the long and short of it. In 1950, three
knerican banks which had been in Japan since the occupation, Citicorp, Bank of
America, and (base Manhattan; two British banks, the Hong Kong and Shanghai
Bank and the Chartered Bank; the Deustch Bank; and three Asian banks including
the International Commercial Bank of China, were given approval to establish
branches in Japan. They already have a history of 32 years.

In spite of this, they are still not firmly established in the Japanese
financial market. Even the largest Citibank, has only 913.3 billion yen in
assets. This scale does not compete with even the medium-size regional banks,
let alone the city banks, in Japan.

A particular weakness of foreign banks is deposits. Their balance of deposits
at the end of lurch 1981 was only 1,318,200,000 ,000, only 0.13 percent of

92

FOIOI'IICIALUSIONLY
total assets. For the same period, Japanese banks had lS?,T95,600,000,000
yen in deposits, 66.0 percent of total assets, so the difference is tremendous.

Foreign banks lack the ability to gather deposits in Japan, so their main
sources of funds for use in Japanare Japanese yen obtained on the Japanese
call market and foreign currencies obtained overseas and converted to yen.

lot Following Local mstoms

In such a state of affairs, there is no stability in bank operations. In 1980
Citibank had the best income of any foreign branch in Japan with 8.3 billion
yen. However, this was only 0.83; percent of the total assets of 987.3 billion
yen. Sumitomo Bank, the top earner among Japanese banks, had an operating
profit of 29.2 billion yen during the same period. Its total assets are
16,721,500,000,000 yen, so the rate of profit was only 0.17 percent, an
example of the extremely slim profits of Japanese banks.

The top foreign bank had deposits of 29h.“ billion yen, only 30.2 percent of
total assets. The amount of lending was also small, 51016.3 billion yen or 55.9
percent of total assets.

then these top class foreign banks with their 32-year history cannot compare
with the better savings and loan banks and credit associations, to say nothing
of the regional banks, in terms of the amount of deposits. There are even
some of the lower ranking foreign banks, such as the large Swiss bank.

Credise Suisse, with as little as 363: million yen in deposits.

why is this? Ibreign banks do 'not work desperately like the Japanese banks

to get deposits. The foreign banker does not have phrases like "work day and
night" in his dictionary. Even if the Japanese employees suggest to the branch
manager from the head office that the bank take an aggressive operating policy
similar to that of Japanese banks, he would probably Just stare and shake his
head. Japanese practices are completely different from those of other coun-
tries.

There are 69 foreign banks with 9h offices in Japan. In addition, there are
101 other representative offices. So the Towo financial market is counted as
one of the most important financial centers in the world. However, almost
none of the foreign banks operating in Japan attempt to "do as the Romans do."
For example, the branch manager of all branches of foreign banks is, without
exception, sent from the head office. Almost all of them never even try to
learn Japanese after taking their posts. Also, they seldom go out to make
sales efforts in Japanese companies. Even if a discussion with the Ministry
of Finance becomes necessary, they usually have a Japanese employee go in
their place.

93

sosomcuiussonu!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They live in luxurious apartments in the city with high rents of 500,000 or
700,000 yen a month which comes fral bank operating expenses. They have a
car with chauffeur to come to work in the morning. During the morning, they
look over documents prepared by the Japanese employees and meet with one or
two customers from their own country. Then they have lunch at a city hotel
or expensive restaurant. Then they do about the same thing in the afternoon
and go home exactly at the appointed time. On Saturday and Sunday, they play
golf or spend time with their families.

They go back to their own country after 2 or 3 years, but when they arrive at

their posts in Japan, they have already done a big favor to the person in
charge of personnel at the head office. There are no executives who want to

go to a "strange land" like Japan, and the personnel officer has a hard time
making the appointment. Therefore, Just by taking the post of Japan branch
manager, they make the personnel officer greatly indebted to him. What will I
have to do in Tokyo? There is nothing to do. Just sit there until your time
is up.

This is the actual attitude of most branch managers of foreign banks in Japan.
Their only hope is that no problems occur while they are serving here. These
branch managers lack incentive and naturally have no intention of conducting
aggressive operations.

It is inevitable that the foreign banks will gradually lose out in the tough
competition in the Tokyo financial market. Also, in recent years, money has
become more available and good Japanese companies are being very careful in
selecting financial institutions.

The era for this lordly way of doing business of the foreign banks has passed.
However, there are almost no people in charge of the Japanese operations of
foreign banks who are aware of this. The resident branch managers in Japan,
who are their source of intonation, have little comprehension of the actual
situation in Japan, so it cannot be helped if their view of Japan is warped.

What Is Trade Friction?

The United States has made harsh denands on Japan to open its doors, but real
trade problems involving the United States center on Europe and the developing
countries more than Japan.

For example, the top 0.8. steel maker, U.S. Steel, has made a claim to the
Department of Commerce, with 3 million pages of supporting documents, that 1&3
companies in ll foreign countries are dumping steel in the United States.
However, no Japanese steel manufacturers were on the list. There have been
serious tensions over steel between Japan and the United States since the
early 1970's.

910

”WMONLY
In 1977, the so—called trigger price system went into effect and the lower
limit of the import price was set on the basis of Japanese steel manufacturers'
production costs. When the import price went below this standard, the Depart-
ment of Commerce would investigate for dumping.

The Japanese accepted this trigger price system. Beginning around 1968, steel
was a major source of friction in U.8.-Japan trade. There were repeated
discussions between the lhited States and Japanese steel industries, and self-
restraints on exports to the United States were used from 1968 on.

The Japanese steel makers were able to raise the export price of steel to the
United States market with the institution of the trigger system and to raise
the export price to other markets becmxse there were prospects of maintaining
sufficient profits even when operating at 10 percent capacity in the recession
following the first oil shock.

The reason for this was that Japanese steel makers' production costs were
reduced far below those of their herican coapetitors because of thorough-
going rationalization. hr exnple, as a result of Japanese manufacturers'
efforts at conserving energy, the energ consumed per ton of steel was reduced
to half that used in the United States.

with this difference in cost, the Japanese were actually able to maintain
stable profits because of the trigger price system. The establishment of the
trigger price system was a big plus for the Japanese. Therefore, the Japanese
felt that it was very much in their interest to observe the trigger price
system. naturally, the main focus of trade tensions moved to niropean,
Korean, and South African steel manufacturers. Japan succeeded in eliminating
trade tensions with the United States. As far as steel was concerned, Japan
overcame the problem of trade tension.

With respect to cars, the thited States was hit with a severe gasoline panic
due to the second oil shock. American consumers suddenly began turning to
small Japanese cars with good fuel economy, and this soon dealt a serious blow
to the herican auto industry. In 1978, 12.9 million cars were produced, but
this dropped to 11.168 million in 1979, 8 million in 1980, and 6 million in
1981.

Japanese auto production, on the other hand, grew from 9.2? million cars in
1978 to 9.63 million in 1979, 11.010 million in 1980, and 12 million in 1981.
There was a total reversal of the U.S. and Japanese positions. The 0.3. auto
industry, with the cooperation of the Ihited Auto Workers, made a strong
appeal to President arter and an agreement was made with the Japanese in May
1981. The Japanese agreed to voluntarily restrain exports to the United States
below a level of 1.68 million cars per year. low the view is growing in the
United States that the Japanese export effort is not a direct cause of the U.S.
recession.

95

“NEWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The U.S. auto industry is going through the worst recession in 50 years and

is beginning to advocate a total ban on imported autanobiles. However, the
unprecedented recession itself is the cause of the slump in the auto industry.
And a growing number of observers are saying that the lack of effort by both
management and labor to raise productivity was a more long-term cause of the
slump. Just as in the case of television, the Japanese auto industry is likely
to be able to avoid friction as long~-as it observes the voluntary export
restraints which were determined by‘lissan, Bonds, and then Toyota.

The United States is also being severely criticized as a source of trade
friction in certain industries, and these are becoming serious problems in
Japan, too. They are petrochemicals and synthetic fibers. Because of the
second oil shock, the price of naphtha, an important raw material for the
petrochemical industry, leaped drantically. This created a tremendous cost
advantage in the United States where natural gas is used as the raw material.
According to the London ECONOMIST, the price difference for ethylene, an
intermediate product in the petrochemical industry, is three to one. With the
weapon of low material costs, the 0.6. petrochemical industry launched a
tremendous export effort and quickly dealt a fatal blow to its competitors in
Europe.

In the accounting for 1981, Imperial musical Industry, the largest private
company in Great Britain, showed a loss for the first time in 50 years, and
there was a change in management. hay other European petrochemical and syn-
thetic fiber companies areoperating in the red, and critical eyes are being
turned on the advance of 0.8. exports.

In Japan also, the petrochemical industry is counted as a "structural reces-
sion industry," and it has completely lost its traditional markets such as
those in Southeast Asia to the advance of knerican exports.

ho Appeal hon Aluminum

Aluminum refining is one of the most troubled industries of the "structural
recession industries” in Japan. In 1977, 1.31 million tons of raw aluminum
were produced, but this fell to 1.11 million tons in 1980 and 800,000 tons in
1981. It is expected to fall below 1000,000 tons in 1982. The refining
capacity, which was 1.38 million tons in 1980, is scheduled to be cut to under
600,000 tons.

The~production costs of the Japanese aluminum refining industry are approxi-
mately a dollar per pound, almost double the American cost of 50 or 60 cents.
Because of this, there is a big difference between the domestic price of
150,000 yen per ton for raw aluminum compared to the import price of 310.000
yen.

MOI'IICIALUSIONLY
The import volume of aluminum ingots was h60,000 tons in 1977, 680,000 tons
in 1979, 9h0,000 tons in 1980, and more than 1.1 million tons in 1981. The

cumulative debt of the Japanese aluminum refining industry is running above
1 trillion yen.

American aluminum exports were 107,b32 tons in 1979. In 1980, they tripled to
326,557 tons. In spite of this, the Japanese aluminum industry made no appeal
for import restraints against the united States. The aluminum-related labor
unions complained of their difficult circumstances to the U.8. labor unions.
However, they were treated very coldly. The American side did not listen to
their complaint. Their response was: "That is no concern of ours."

It is a little-known fact that Japan is the only advanced industrial country

which has not concluded a mutual fiber arrangement (MFA) to restrict imports
of fiber products.

It is well known that the United States concluded a fiber export agreement with
Japan in 1972. It was an agreement forced on Japan by the Nixon administra-
tion in connection with the reversion of Okinawa. However, since 1978, Japan
has had a huge trade deficit in fiber products and raw materials. The United
States still has not followed the example of Europe in carrying out the mutual
fiber arrangement. It is notable that the industry has not called for pro-
tectionist trade policies, and even the labor union has not asked for import
restrictions.

Japanese industry is making an effort to maintain free trade in terms of
actual policies, not Just as a pretense.

Even when an industry such as aluminum is badly hurt, it maintains a policy of
”keeping the company alive even if it means eliminating plants," and actively
moves into overseas operations in order to survive. The same thing can be
said for the fiber industry.

This is a consistent pattern in Japanese industry, and it differs greatly from
the attempt of the 0.8. auto industry to use protectionisn to cover over its
mistakes in operating strategy such as the long-term neglect of rationalization,
the failure to introduce robots, and the failure to perceive the consumer

shift from large to small cars. This is a strong statement, but I do not

think it is excessive.

Nontariff Barriers and the Bureaucracy

The government has taken an active position in abolishing nontariff barriers,
adOpting 67 specific measures such as simplification of import procedures by
the end of January and the acceptance of test results from foreign countries.

97

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The L1)? established a special study committee for international economic
measures with Masumi Bzaki as chairman. It has gathered specific examples of
nontariff barriers from related industries and made a strong appeal to the
government to take the present measures. Ordinarily, separate proposals are
circulated from the bottom up through the bureaucratic system, requiring
approval at each level and final approval by the cabinet minister before being
carried out. This time, the proposal went straight from the top to the execu-
tion stage. Such measures would be unthinkable under a tight bureaucratic
system.

The Special Study Committee for International Economic Measures is considering
90 items in all. The 69 items are only those which are clearly irrational and
do not require extensive revision of laws and regulations. However, there
are 20 different laws involved and it will still take quite a bit of time
before the necessary revisions are passed.

In any case, the effort made by the government was quite extraordinary. Prime
Minister Suzuki himself gave directions for "formulation of improvement
measures to simplify import inspection procedures by the end of January."

Unfortunately, this government action is scarcely recognized abroad. U.S.
Secretary of Commerce Baldridge said that it "eliminated $200 million of a

$20 billion trade deficit with Japan." The only praise was little better than
none at all.

That is to be expected. The real intent of the United States and Europe in
demanding the opening of the Japanese market is to get the greatest effect
with the least effort. It is only natural that their reaction would be the
opposite of that expected by the Japanese.

For example, with almost no exceptions, the barriers which made operations
difficult for import dealers in Japan have been eliminated. The improvements
extend to representative nontariff barriers such as inspection standards for
cosmetics, designation of dosestic sporting goods, and the customs inspection
system.

Actually, most of these nontariff barriers were the result of the conservatism
of the bureaucrats, who attempted to preserve old rules which had failed to
keep up with technological progress. Japanese importers had been hindered oy
this bureaucratic resistance for some time.

One example is double labeling with the metric system and the yard and pound
system. In 1961 MITI made it obligatory to put labels on imported products
which show the contents in terms of the metric system. It gave directions to
the prefectures and metropolitan areas to paint over the parts of the label
not using the metric system. Therefore, import dealers had to take the time

98

MOI-“CIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to ink out parts of labels and paste on metric system labels on each imported
product which was labeled in ounces or inches. Of course, this increased the
cost and raised the domestic price of imported goods. The image of ”expensive
foreign goods" was created in large part by such excessive costs which were
unrelated to quality.

At a time when there was a large difference in quality between foreign and
domestic products, imported products sold well because people thought that
they were high in quality as well as price. Now that the competition in the
Japanese market has become tougher and the quality of domestic products has
risen to equal or surpass that of imported products, it is only natural that
sales of imported goods have fallen off.

Now import dealers are forced to work desperately to cut costs in any way
possible. One example of this is that labels without the use of the metric
system are becoming more common with the "tacit approval" of local government
offices.

HIT! actually decided in 1968 to accept labels without the metric system
measurements or double labeling, but this decision was only given verbally.
So it is quite vague in comparison to the prohibition of double labeling
which was announced in an official notification document. This imediately
led to confusion in local government offices which handle these matters
(ASAHI snnsuu of 21 January).

The prohibition of double labeling was .an administrative measure to insure

the establishment of the metric system. However, now that the metric system
is firmly established, it is meaningless to black out labels which do not

use the metric system. This is certainly a reason for criticising "government
practice" for applying old rules to new situations.

The Problem Is With the (hited States

This sort of "governnent practice" exists all over Japan. We can understand
the anger of Americans, who think of government officials as "civil servants"
working for the public good, when they one into contact with a legalistic
"government practice" which conceives of the function of a government official
as "faithful application of the law." The Japanese people feel the same way.

However, let us think about this, Japan is an independent country. The
goverment officials of developing countries which have recently gained

independence are incredibly arrogant. In all of these countries. the customs
office is obnoxious. Ordinary travelers as well as businessmen are given a

great deal of trouble when passing through customs even when they have no
intention of smuggling. The difference with Japan is the intent of the

99

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

officials in being so particular. In many cases, the reason for making an
excessive search is, if not to obtain a bribe, to get a tip or gift. This is
not true in Japan. Here the reason for obnoxious behavior is an attaIpt to
faithfully uphold the law. That is a big difference.

Paying a bribe makes things easier, so businessmen can simply count it as

part of their costs. And they can Justify it by saying: "After all, it's an
undeveloped country.” However, this is not possible when troublesome require-
ments are made on the basis of law. It is impossible for private individuals
to change the laws, so they must "respect" troublesome laws. This is much
more expensive than bribing a customs official to keep his eyes closed to
something. The nontariff barriers have become a big problem because of a
delay in correcting laws and regulations to fit reality. These corrections
will make it easier to do business domestically also and will be a big plus for
the Japanese econonnr.

However, there are problems with the claim that the abolishment of nontarifi‘
barriers on the Japanese side will lead to improvement in the trade balance
and import expansion. As I have stated, the reason for the delw in foreign
participation in the Japanese market is the ”left-hand drive syndrome," the
fact that 0.8. and European manufacturers have ignored the actual circum-
stances of the Japanese market. Lyen if the Japanese eliminate the nontariff
barriers, it will not have the effect of expanding imports unless the manu-
facturers make more of a marketing effort. But in spite of this fact, the
Japanese will probably receive the usual criticism of "lipservice only" if
they announce the elimination of nontariff barriers with great fanfare as

part of an import expansion policy.

The Japanese approach is not the problem. In the midst of a world recession,
U.S. and European manufacturers are searching for every possible way of
expanding sales. However, they dislike going to any trouble and there is
little hope that they will stir themselves into action.

United States Lagging Behind

Trade tensions between the United States and Japan began with textiles in the
1960's and continued with steel, television, and automobiles. There has been
a problem with the 0.8. demand to open the market to agricultural products, but
Japan has been able to avoid further serious difficulty with advanced tech-
noloy industries such as semiconductors and optical communications up to now.
The United States did not create any problems in the 1960's and 1910's when it
had absolute superiority in the IC and IBI fields.

There was a brief ”U.S.-Japan semiconductor war" but it cooled down at the
beginning of the 1980's. The reason for this development is that companies

from both the United States and Japan are establishing facilities in the other

100

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
country. large 0.8. manufacturers such as Texas Instruments and Motorola have
established plants in Japan and maJor Japanese companies such as Nippon
Electric and Toshiba have done the same in the United States. With such

mutual extensions of business, there is no other course but to maintain free
trade.

However, the Japanese side has rapidly built up force and is beginning to put
pressure on the 0.8. market. For example, the Japanese have been able to
take over 70 percent of the 0.3. market for the 61m RAM (random access memory)
integrated circuit which is thought of as a first-generation V181 (very large
scale integrated circuit).

The Japanese mass-production system is moving ahead quickly with the second
generation circuit, the 256K RAM. A production capacity of 5.5 million chips
per month is scheduled to be in operation by 1982. The 0.8. production
capacity is only 700,000 per month, so a huge difference of one to eight

has developed in the relative strength of the limited States and Japan. Japan

is planning to start mass production on the third-generation megabit RAM in
19815, and the U.S. lag is becoming even more evident.

Hhen Japan goes into large-scale mass production, the market price of these
VISI's will drop abruptly. At one time the 610K RAM cost 20,000 yen per chip,
but the price dropped to one-tenth of that very quickly. Because competitive-
ness is supported by cost reductions achieved through mass production, manu-
facturers which are slow in starting mass production will eventually be left
out of the competition.

Japanese semiconductor manufacturers are all general manufacturers, so if

they decide on semiconductors as a strategic division, they can use the profit
earned in other divisions to move into mass production. However, in the
United States, most of the manufacturers are specialized, so they are seriously
hurt by price reductions which result from mass production.

In 1981, because of the combination of price reductions and the worst recession
in 50 years, Texas Instruments' profits were cut in half and Motorola showed

a decline of 70 percent. Once applauded as growth industries, they have
deteriorated rapidly.

Because VLSI's are very important as essential parts in modern weaponry, the
U.S. Goverment is very concerned over this decline of 0.8. manufacturers. It
is beginning to provide active cooperation to support the steady advance of
technological development. low it has taken the approach of restricting low-
cost imports from Japan, and the Japanese side is showing great concern about
this tendency.

101

MOFFICIALIBSONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are many different types of integrated circuits. There is not a large
number of specific products which are used on a large scale, but the elec-
tronics industry needs many different varieties of semiconductors. In terms
of making a profit, it is impossible for any manufacturer to produce all of
them, so a horizontal division of labor develops naturally.

This horizontal division of labor also rules the semiconductor trade between
the United States and Japan. Both the United States and Japan export a large
volume of semiconductors and integrated circuits; there is no onesided excess
of imports or exports. Also, because of rapid autanation in the production of
integrated circuits, it is behind the times to rely on low-cost labor in the
assembly process. The U.S. manufacturers which had built assembly plants in
the countries of Southeast Asia are now building plants in Japan where there is
a work force with high technical skills, and corporate strategies are being
adopted which focus on production in Japan. Therefore, indiscriminate
restriction of Japanese-made products would seriously hurt these 0.8. ventures
in Japan.

It would also mean protection for Japanese companies in the United States, and
they would inevitably come to doninate U.S. companies in the domestic market
Just as they did in color television. An attempt to protect American industry
would backfire and giVe extra benefits to Japanese industry.

Here we can see the effects of reciprocal business ventures. There will
probably be no abrupt move to restrict imports in the semiconductor industry
for some time.

World Recession and the Japanese Response

The world is in a serious recession. There are more than 10 million unemployed
in the United States and the BC. If it continues at this rate, the unemploy-
ment will be greater than that in the early 1930's. It is rapidly becoming

the worst recession in 50 years.

There are trade tensions throughout the world over such itus of general use as
steel, petrochemicals, synthetic fibers, and fiber products. ObJectively
speaking, it is not too much to say that Japan is gradually moving away from
the center of tension.

Right now world trade is shrinking. The volume of trade in 1980 was 0.1; per-
cent less than that of the previous year. A reduction of 1.3 to 1.5 percent is
estimated for 1981, and a greater shrinkage is inevitable in 1982.

Internationalization grew in the 1960's and the 1970's and there was an
increase in mutual interdependence between all countries. As the tendency
toward reduction in world trade takes definite form, it may be inevitable for

102

MOMMONLY
all countries to break away from interdependent relationships. During the
Great Depression of the 1930's, there was a reduction in world trade Just as
there is now. Most nations took protectionist trade measures, and the results
of this led to World War II. This bitter experience is still fresh. It would
be very wrong for all the nations of the world to implement protectionist trad.
measures at the same time.

There are certain conditions that make Japan an easy target for trade friction.
As is evident from the cases of fibers, petrochemicals, and aluminum, Japan

is a country which will maintain free trade even while making great sacrifices.
Therefore, other countries, especially the United States, can rest on the
assumption that no matter how much Japan is attacked, it will never resist
strongly and shut out the products of other countries.

In other words, Japan's hands are tied by the principle of free trade. It is
the only country that is not expected to fight back no matter how much it is
kicked around. Therefore, even though there are other countries with which
there are greater trade problems on specific products, it is still possible to
make Japan the target of criticism.

Also, Japan has an amazing capacity for response which is never seen in other
countries. In the case of color television, when exports to the United States
were restricted, Japanese companies established production facilities in the
United States and took over the market. The same thing can be expected for
automobiles. Pram previous experience, it is natural to draw the conclusion
that simple import restrictions cannot suppress the vitality of Japanese
industry.

The United States is now demanding that Japan open its market to agricultural
products which is considered impossible for domestic political reasons. Even
in the area of agricultural products, the Uhited States is actually having

worse trade problems with the EC. The BC had a $13 billion surplus of imports
from the United States in 1981. If the trade war over agricultural products
becomes worse, there is a danger of retaliatory measures from the 30.

Japan has an $18 billion surplus of exports to the United States, and Japanese
food prices, without even considering the famous example of beef, are well
above other world levels. However, if Japan actually liberalized agricultural
products on a large scale, the United States would soon be in trouble. Fbr
example, if citrus fruits were compactely liberalized, there is a danger that
American oranges and grapefruit would soon be shut out by citrus fruit from
Israel and Africa where production costs are lower.

The same thing can be said for beef. U.8. consumption of beef is rapidly
declining because of the terrible recession. The unemployed and people with
reduced incomes are switching to chicken and pork rather than beef in order to

103

FOI‘DFFNJAI.USE(HWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hum down their liviru expenses. The U.S. livestock industry is attempting
to escape trail a difficult situation by expanding exports to Japan. however,
if liberalization is forcemlly carried out, it is very likely that 0.8. beef
will be dominated by cheaper beef from Australia and Argentina.

Also, if the Japanese livestock industry is destroyed by import liberalization,
it will be a serious blow to 0.8. farmers who export feed grain to Japan. In
spite of this, the Ihited States is demanding liberalization of beef and
orange imports to Japan because it is aware that Japan cannot implement this
liberalization because of domestic political concerns, and it can use this as
basis for obtaining Japanese concessions in other areas.

Nontariff barriers are spoken of, but in reality, they do not exist. It is
undeniable that there are some bureaucratic practices which cling unnecessarily
to old rules, but this is not the whole problem. The main problem is the
presence or lack of incentive. The main cause of trade friction is the dif-
ference in vitality betveen Japan and other countries.

COPYRIGHT: The Shokun 1982

9651
030: MOS/95

10!:

FOB WI. US! ONLY
AMERICAN "A! 0? BIBIIES

Tolwo IBAHI JANARU in Japanese 26 lhr 82 pp 18-23

[Article by Pmitoshi Takahashi, reporter from the ASAKI slums economics
department]

[Excerpts] The U.8.-Jspan economic war that surfaced conspicuously in the
early 1970's has been called ”a war with no declaration of war” from the
Japanese side. However, it has become clear in the recent demands on Japan
that it is an attack on Japanese culture, traditions, and language--in short,
an attack on "the Japanese being Japanese." In Japan, ”people walk on the
right and cars are driven on the left,” so the steering wheel is on the right
side of the car. The present danands are like asking us to change the rules
of the road so that herican cars with the steering wheel on the left can be
used Just as they are. They are a gross insult to a sovereign state. In
addition, Japan is threatened with becoming an orphan among the nations of the
world if it does not comply.

However, the "strong herica" policies advocated by the Reagan administration
have also created problans with its allies among the free nations of Europe.
Is it not herica which is creating a feeling of alienation among the members
of the ”tripartite alliance" of the United States, Europe, and Japan?

The basic problem is the failure of the Reagan economic policies. He must not
react to the American provocation and repeat the mistakes of Pearl Harbor.

It is a common political practice to find a scapegoat on which to shift atten-
tion when a weakness appears in one's own country. There is the additional
factor of off-year elections this fall in the United States. Therefore, we
must be careful to avoid mistakes and take a cmpletely rational approach.

Working level consultations between the United States and Japan, in which dis-
cussions are held between bureau chiefs of the various government ministries
and agencies, are held fairly frequently, and ordinarily they do not attract
much attention. However, the third meeting of the U.S.-Japan Trade committee
held on 9 and 10 March in Kasumigaseki, Tokyo, attracted a great deal of
attention from the political and business sectors in Japan.

10 5

“WWW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The leader of the [1.8. contingent, Deputy U.8. Trade Representative McDonald,
called together a group of Japanese reporters Just before his visit to Japan.
He told than: "The United States side will show a list at the trade comittee
meeting of demands to remove nontariff barriers which will lead to several
billions -of dollars in increased exports to Japan." He took a very high-
pressure attitude. The Suzuki government wants to resolve the trade tensions
between the United States and Japan before the Versailles summit (eighth summit
meeting between the maJor advanced nations) to be held in the beginning of
June, so it placed a great deal of importance on this meeting of the trade
committee as a forum for understanding the specific demands of the United
States.

However, contrary to plan, the United States did not present a list of demands.
It simply asked for "a decisive opening of the market befitting a great
economic power." It never used an expression such as "some dramatic measures."

01‘ course, after the meeting, the United States representative voiced his usual
criticism before returning home. "As usual, the Japanese are trying to get by
with a minimum of concessions and no continuous effort at opening the market
could be seen."

The fact that the United States did not take the tough approach expected
probably shows the use of a diplomatic technique of alternating hard and soft
approaches. Before the McDonald group came to Japan, a series of tough state—
ments by Congressmen and government officials had already stirred up the
Japanese media so part of the 0.8. objective had been accomplished. However,
there may have been some concern that the flood of anti-Japanese criticism from
Washington, which extended to unique Japanese systans and practices such as
administrative guidance, the election system, and the p1..ctice of retired
bureaucrats taking influential business positions, had stirred up anti-merican
feeling in Japan. In other words, they may have had second thoughts about an
excessive manipulation of information in the informtion society of which we
are a part and pulled back a little.

Just as the Japanese effort to open its market is underrated, the American
pressure on Japan has been amplified beyond the reality. A false image exists
on both sides. The danger is that this ixlse image may take on an independent
existence and the reality may be lost from view. And until a decisive Juncture
is reached, everyone may forget that the image is false.

The Cause of Tension Is the Reagan Military Expansion Policy
The greatest reason for increased trade tensions is that Japan's economic
position has risen, while that of the United States and Europe has shown a

relative decline. For this reason, tensions between Japan and the United
States and the EC (European Commnity) became evident, especially in the latter

106

I0! OFFICIAL l3! ONLY
part of the 1970's. However, looking back, we notice a pattern of temporary
relaxation of tension after 1978 followed by another flareup. The yen rate
rose to 180 yen to the dollar for a short time, and this led to a decrease in
exports. ﬂow, however, the change in the exchange rate that should occur
with a surplus of exports from Japan has not appeared.

Simply put, the mistaken Reagan economic policy which aims at military expan-
sion has accelerated a domestic recession and growing unemployment, and this
has led to a large Japanese trade surplus with the United States.

Some time has passed since the American economy began to decline and lost its
power to protect the world economy, but now America has become the cause of
agitation in the free world. Because of high interest rates in the Uhited
States, the countries of Europe have lost the possibility of using lowered
interest rates as a means of overcoming their economic difficulties.
Chancellor Schmidt or West Germany has pointed out that the Reagan economic
policies have led to a world economic crisis and has warned that the European
countries are in danger of falling into political and social instability.

There are already 2 million unemployed in Heat Germany and France and 3 million
in Great Britain. And because unemployment is especially severe among young
people, there has been an increase in terrorist incidents.

This is not all. Hhen the European countries criticize the high interest rates
and government deficit in the united States, the United States charges that the
European countries are weak in implementing economic sanctions against the
Soviet Uhion and Poland. Trade tensions have occurred not only between the
United States and Japan. The U.S. steel industry has charged the BC with
dumping, and problems have appeared between the Uhited States and Europe also.

The failure of the Reagan economic policy is causing a rift in the alliance
between the United States and Japan and between the United States and Europe.

The Danger of Denying Identity

The result of all this is the propaganda which holds Japan to blame for every-
thing. Hhile the Europeans point to the errors of Reagan economic policy,
they go along with the United States in treating Japan as the bad guy. As a
result, everything from Japanese customs procedures, inspection standards,
administrative guidance and the distribution system, recession cartels, and
the government monopoly corporations to problems of the ”weighting of votes"
of Japanese voters, the integration of the lowest social class, and the use
of retired bureaucrats in business have been held up as causes of the shutting
out of foreign goods.

Certainly, if the Japanese changed to the American system of driving on the
right side of the road, it would be much easier to sell American cars with the

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

steering wheel on the left in Japan. Japanese manufacturers build cars with
the steering wheel on the right for domestic use, but they also build cars with
the steering wheel on the left to fit the customs of the country to which they
are to be exported. The Japanese think that it is natural for the purpose of
export to adapt the product to the consumers of the country of destination.

But the knerican attitude is: "It's strange to use right-hand drive, so
change!"

The actual occasion for the renewed flareup in U.S.-Japan trade problems was
the visit to Japan of Secretary of Commerce Baldridge in October of last year
when he pointed to the increasing Japanese trade surplus with the United States
and asked for the elimination of nontariff barriers. When he returned to
Washington, he made a statement to the effect that the problem was the struc-
ture of the Japanese economy and Japanese culture, traditions, and language.
This comes down to a matter of him not liking the Japanese themselves and

their language. Of course, the Japanese Government protested and the statement
was withdrawn, but Judging from the recent statement in a Congressional hearing
by Under Secretary of Comoros Olmer, this is the true position of the depart-
ment.

To hold up the culture and customs of an allied country to ridicule in this
way is to deny the identity of that country. This is the great danger.

With respect to the reciprocity bill which has repeatedly appeared in the
0.3. Congress, the Reagan administration says: "The problas lies in the
Japanese market which has touched off thinking about reciprocity." However,
the present U.S.-Japan trade problems cannot be solved simply through conces-
sions by Japan.

The decline in the vitality of the 0.8. economy and the rise in Japanese
strength became clear to everyone in the early 1970's. Since then, trade
tensions have occurred over a number of products, the main ones being textiles,
steel, color television, automobiles, and now sasiconductors. The Americans
have decided that no progress can be made on specific products, so they are
asking Japan to do something about the chronic trade imbalance (Japanese
surplus and herican deficit). They are demanding that Japan take corrective
measures, but that "Japan should decide what to do!" However, although the
American balance of trade shows a deficit with Japan, it shows a surplus with
Europe. Since the 3C has protectionist measures in place against the agricul-
tural products which America is eager to sell, it does not make an issue of
the deficit with the United States. Therefore, the United States has adopted
the strategy of one-sidedly attacking Japan. The EC, however, has taken a
clear position against the 0.8. reciprocity proposal.

108

m OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
FOR 0FFICIAL USE ONLY

Chronic Pressure To "Strengthen Defense Capability"

The U.S.-Japan trade imbalance has become rigidly structured. It is no longer
the kind of problem that can be solved by a little effort from both sides. It
is the same sort of problem as the chronic Japanese deficit with the oil-
producing countries of the Middle East and resource-rich Australia. Even
though Japan bmrs oil and raw materials from these countries, the amount that
Japan can export to them is limited. There is no way to fill in the gap and
there will always be a deficit. This is set off by the surplus in trade with
Europe and the United States. Also, American consumers have come to rely on
Japanese products.

Secretary of Commerce Baldridge has said: "If Japan completely opens its
market, the deficit with Japan will be reduced by $8-15 billion in 5 years."
This is no more than $3 billion a year. However, the deficit for last year
alone was $18 billion. Since in reality a debt or more than $10 billion per
year has become permanent,opening the Japanese market will have little effect.

The attempt to adJust a trade balance bilaterally is itself inappropriate among
advanced industrial countries, but the United States does not seem to think

so. However, it is clear by now that the (3.5. trade deficit with Japan would
not disappear even if Japan opened its raw-ht can-pl o1’ -'~ly. That means a
pattern in which herica continuously puts pressure -n Japan. This is why
Japanese concessions give rise to more pressure from the United States.

On the other hand, since there is no immediate prospect of eliminating the
trade deficit with Japan, the pressure on Japan to strengthen its defense
capability will also become chronic. Japan made a large increase in defense
spending in the 1982 budget, but this did not make any difference in the trade
imbalance. It is no use complaining about this, because it was clear from the
start that this is what would happen. We cannot choose between the defense
problem and trade problass. America must have concessions in both areas.

And now that the trade deficit with Japan has become permanent, it is taking
the position that it is a natural right to danand both. In fact, while the
U.S.-Japan Trade Comittee was meeting in Tokyo, on 9 mrch, an extraordinary
special debate on the Japanese defense problem was held in the U.S. House of
Representatives and the insufficiency of the Japanese defense effort was
criticized. It is doubtful that the U.S. pressure on Japan to strengthen its
defense capability will weaken with the 1983 budget or even after that.

Equal emphasis on the demands for "an open market befitting a great economic
power" and "a defense effort commensurate with economic strength" will continue
to create a disturbance in Japan.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI. USE ONLY

Puform Should Be Undertaken by the Japanese Themselves, Not under Outside
Pressure

What aroroach is best under these circumstances? First we must make changes
in a diplomacy that has been like an extension of domestic relationships and
develop a foreign policy that corresponds to the rapid changes that have taken
place in Japan.

Ten years ago, at the time of the U.8.-Japan textile negotiations, the Japanese
textile industry as well as public opinion did not have an objective awareness
of Japanese economic strength. However, at the time of the auto export
restrictions last year, the difference in international competitiveness

between the 0.8. and Japanese auto industries was recognized, and we ultimately
agreed to voluntary restrictions. Some tension with foreign countries may be
the fate of the Japanese economy, but our basic awareness has switched 180
degrees in the last 10 years. If we continue to hold back what we want to say
and say something inoffensive and use a lot of energy to keep things going
well, we cannot maintain friendly relations in any real sense. It is the
proper function of foreign relations to frankly discuss potentially explosive
situations building up inside our respective countries and eliminate problems
before they reach the crisis stage.

For this, political leadership is necessary. Because of the involvement with
economic policy, there has recently been an evident rivalry among the Ministry
of Finance, MITI, and other bureaucratic organs as well as with the Foreign
Ministry. As a result, a difference of opinion has emerged within the govern-
ment. In addition, it is the usual practice for a bureaucrat not to deal with
a problem unless it is placed on his desk. With this approach, there will be
a repeat of failures like the mission to the United States headed by Nasumi
Ezeki, the chairman of the LDP Special Study Committee for International
Economic Measures. Although he went to present the 2-year speedup of tariff
reduction and the abolishment of 69 nontariff barriers as gifts to the United
States, he ended up failing to get credit for the effort and being subjected
to new demands for concessions.

Second, we must reform the "Japan Incorporated" system by ourselves. It is a
fact that the Japanese business world, which distinguishes between "insiders"
and "outsiders" and is based on harmony and loyalty only between the people
inside, is not an open society. For this reason, behind-the-scenes consulta-
tions are the lubricating oil of the business world. Such consultations have
the function of ”directing the traffic of complicated business talks and
'fairly' distributing contracts to bidders."

The practice of hiring retired bureaucrats for important positions in business
leads to a cozy relationship between business and the bureaucracy which has
the authority to grant approvals and licenses. It is a fact that foreign
enterprises cannot enter into such relationships.

110

IIIICINHCJAI.UBE‘0NLN
Behind-the-scenes business comultations and the hiring of bureaucrats in
business are practices which are continually being criticized among the
Japanese themselves as a domestic problen unrelated to trade friction. Even
the "weighting of votes" which was pointed out by the United States is some-
thing that we ourselves consider illogical. It is incidental, but a fact,
that the present electoral system provides support for maintaining the 22
restricted import categories of agricultural products. It should be reformed
to create greater fairness for the voters rather than for the purpose of
eliminating trade friction.

Third, an effort must be made to raise our standard of living. The average
wages of Japanese workers have surpassed those of Britain and France and have
drawn even with Heat Oemaw. They are still a step below those of the United
States. However. when we consider the systems of paid vacations and 5-day
work week, it is undeniable that Japan is behind these other countries. It is
also necessary to improve the overall living enviroment including housing.
parks. and sewage. This will cause the cost of Japanese products to rise, and
naturally, the international competitiveness of Japan will not be as great as

it is now. In both tangible and intangible forms. the gains should outweigh
the losses.

If these reforms are all achieved one way or another, before we know it we
should discover ourselves living within a framework of international harmow
without creating a disturbance. I am advocating a new kind of "expel the
barbarians” concept. The Japanese thanselves should make reforms. not because
they are demanded by foreign countries but for the benefit of Japan.

111

FOIOW'IOALUSEONLY
Key:

.\
31“.

(3 £3 €5(¥Téi)>lih§

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FIGURE APPENDIX

B -

  
 
    

  

mfg 53) ' (023‘ng ”#9)
g! 5' i? r 55-
Ezé ES
1) €13 & : (5) . "l g
/' g 5 (96)
A

.as—eee=rega=re:==re::s—e::s—e=2¢~e::s—e::s—e::s
19m 1971 1972 1973 I974 IWS 1976 1977 1% 1978 1980(5)

Fluctuations in the 0.8. Economy and U.S.-Japan Relations

Trade balance (in hundred million dollars)

Mping arbitration against Japanese television sets
Conclusion of intergovernment agreement on textiles
Second voluntary restraints on steel exports to the United States
U.S. unemployment

Agreement to maintain order in color television exports
Implementation of steel trigger price system
Provisional signing of Tokyo round agreement
Ushiba-Strauss Joint statement

Unemployment rate

Total

with Japan

112

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
)(6)

nnese Trade with Marie: and the Yen Exchange hte
Jon dollars)

rxchenge rate

4:: to Inez-ice

'ts from America

')

113

POIOFFIGALIBEONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

The 0.8. Balance of Trade (tron v.3. Department of Connerce statistics)

Key: 1. (hundred million dollars)
2. with the sc
3. Surplus
u. Deficit
5. (year)
6. With Jspsn

mammal!“
(1?" (5) ("/17

7

unﬂinc- mamas ‘3’ a
@ ' i Z 5‘ ’5 '°‘ :9
(Iowa) (1) a (”1.158“) II
I s I i
ll 1 g ..

a L‘ n

1

s

            

13572 N 3 '1! I HEN ‘5 1. D

Mket Share of Japanese Autos and Color Television Sets
in the United States
(from the 1981 Economic Hhite Paper)

Key: 1. (million vehicles)

2. Jsganese automobiles sold
Total automobiles sold

3. lurket share
16. Total automobiles sold

5. Jaanese television sets sold
Total television sets sold

6. (million sets)
7. Market share
8. Total television sets sold

COPYRIGHT: Asmhi Shimbunsha 1982

965.1
(30: bios/95

1.15

'0. omcuu. US! ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

U.S.-JAPAI Economc nut-nous
Tokyo KOOYO snmwu in Japanese 10 Mar 82 p 3

[Interview with Yoshizane Iwasa, chairman of the Keidanren Foreign Relations
Comittee; interviewed by Akio htsumoto, member of the editorial staff]

[Text] Explanation of "Steady Effort"; Flexible Response Necessary

[Question] Because of the huge 0.8. trade deficit with Japan, trade tensions
have flared up again between the United States and Japan. In particular,
protectionist trade legislation has repeatedly been presented in the 0.8.
Congress in the name of reciprocity. now do you view the stony state of
U.S.-Japan relations?

[Iwasa] The irritation and frustration felt by the United States toward
Japan is quite severe. I have been working for dialogue and harmony in 0.8.-
Japan economy from the standpoint of the private economy for the last 20 years,
and the present situation closely resembles the tension between the United
States and Japan in the 1970's. I am now in the process of reviewing the
minutes of meetings between 0.8. and Japanese businessman in the early 1970's.
The present attitude of 11.8. businessmen and government officials toward Japan
is no different from that 10 years ago.

In the early 1970's, President Nixon was having difficulty in handling the
end of the Vietnam War. The aftereffects of the Vietnam Var weighed heavily
on America. Corporations had lost faith in the future and the entire country
felt frustrated. The heavy burden of war expenses had resulted in a loss of
confidence in the dollar, and the deficit in international trade was getting
worse. There were disturbances in the universities and increased drug use.
It was a time of apprehension and confusion. In the midst of these conditions,
the Japanese trade surplus with the thited States reached a peak of $18.2
billion in 1971. The people of the United States were already frustrated by
the effects of the Vietnam Var and this rubbed them the wrong way. In terms
of the overall scale of trade at the time, this was the equivalent of $10

billion now, so the effect of the imbalance was severe.

116

”NEWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the present situation as well, the Mericans are shoving increasing
frustration at a combination of unfavorable circumstances. In addition to a
huge trade deficit with Japan last year of $18 billion, there is recession and
mass unemployment and a slump in major industries.

The reciprocity bill submitted in Congress is the response of politicians
facing elections in November who are sensitive to the problems and feelings of
people in their electoral districts. We could say that Mstration directed
at Japan has resulted in a political explosion.

[Question] Washington responded sternly to the LDP Bzaki mission (headed by
Masumi Ezaki, former minister of international trade and industry) which
visited the United States representing the prime minister. Secretary of
Commerce Baldridge threatened: "There is no time left. If you do not take
some dramatic reasures quickly, it will be impossible to prevent passage of a
reciprocity bill."

[Iwasa] I heard the phrase ”Japan should take dramatic measures" many times
during the period of U.8.-Japan trade friction 10 years ago. Japan should not
panic or put up emotional resistance in response to this pressure. He should
take it calmly and take definite action in response. In contrast to the
situation 10 years ago, the remaining import restrictions have been cut down
to 27 categories. With the exception of agricultural products and two or
three special areas of industrial products, there are almost no restrictions
left. Because tariff rate reductions have been carried out 2 years ahead of
schedule, Japanese tariff rates are among the lowest in the world. The
schedule for capital liberalization has also been moved up, and there are no
business categories which are off limits to investment. Our defense spending
has been criticised in terms of a "free ride ," but a great effort is being
made in this area also in spite of difficulties in administrative reform and
criticism from the opposition parties of excessive military buildup. Of
course we are implementing self-imposed restraints on auto exports following
similar action in textiles and steel. This continuing steady effort should be
clearly explained.

[Question] When the government implemented improvements in 69 nontariff
barriers, it felt like it was the same as taking a leap from the platform of
Kiyonizu Temple, but the Utlited states said that this was insufficient and did
not approve at all. Also, the list of Japanese trade barriers presented to a
Congressional hearing on Japan by the administration included such things as
the electoral district system and administrative guidance and other things
which constitute excessive interference in Japanese internal affairs or items
which have already been taken care of. We seem to be poor at public relations

and it seems that we have failed to make an effective effort at dissolving
misunderstanding.

117

MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Iwasa] Perhaps it is the Japanese or the Japanese mentality or our tradi-
tional customs, but we do not stand up for ourselves enough. We are very
poor at advertising our own efforts and strong points. Since ancient times,
we have been good at importing culture from overseas and adapting it to Japan,
but we have not been skilled at exporting Japanese culture overseas. This
situation cannot be changed overnight.

As you have pointed out, Japan has taken substantial measures such as making
improvements in 69 nontariff barriers, but unfortunately it is not suffi-
ciently recognised. It is a fact that many of the nontariff barrier problems
involved details of procedure such as import inspection procedures and stand-
ards. However, the fact that Japan has responded with small measures and has
been slow in making decisions has given the unfortunate impression that
"Japan is a sneaky, sly country that will not do awthing unless you apply
pressure." We need to reflect on the way our approach has increased the mis-

understanding of Japan as a closed society. We should do what we can, but
there are things that we cannot do, and we should not give in to demands that

will destroy or destabilize Japanese society.

[Question] One can understand that maintaining relations with the United
States is essential to Japanese security, but when it comes to negotiating
with the United States, we fall in line totally with Washington. In the
present U.S. economy, the snow belt in the north and east is a very strained
region with mass unemployment and saw industries in a structural recession.
This is where there is strong criticism of Japan. In contrast, the sun is
shining on the sun belt region of the south and west. There is low unemploy-
ment and great prosperity and a good feeling toward Japan. Looking at this
map of changes in the U.S. econow and society where the south and west are
high and the north and east are low, don't we see the need for a ﬂexible
approach to the United States?

[Iwasa] Certainly, the United States is a large country and it is dangerous
to evaluate and respond to it only in terms of the political power in
Hashington and the economic power in New York. The United States is now

going through a period of revolutionary historical changes and there are
growing differences of success and failure between regions and industries.

The basic industries of the snow belt, especially the Detroit auto industry,
are losing their footing and are faced with almost 20 percent unemployment.

In the sun belt of the south and west there is a rush to advanced technology
industries. The region is in a period of prosperity and unemployment is around
5 percent so there is almost tun employment. If we take measures for Congress
with this regional difference in mind, we will find differences in the degree
of frustration felt by the Congressmen facing elections this fall. In the

sun belt region, Japanese industry has a good reputation. Also, when we appeal
to hericans who are experts on Japan, we must carefully gear our approach to

118

MMUSEONLY
the individual. There are experts on Japan who are friends or Japan and
others who know Japan yell but who are responsible for many anti-Japanese
statelents and actions. There are other: who do not. know Japan well but are
friendly to Japan. He must analyze this carefully and make our approach

accordingly.
COPYRIGHT: linen Kogo Ski-humane 1982

9651
(SO: MOS/95

119

”WIRONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NO IMDIATE REMEDY FOR-TRADE FRIGI'IOIIS
Tokyo YOHIURI SHIDBUN in Japanese 3 Apr 82 p 7
[Article by RinJiro Sodei, professor at Hosei University]

[Text] In common terms, the present relations between the Lhited States and
Japan are like those of the head of an old merchant house and a chief clerk
who has succeeded with his master's help. America is like an old store with
an established reputation which is declining because of many years of poor
management but cannot give up its paternalistic attitude and pride. Japan, on
the other hand, received help in the beginning, but now it is convinced that
its present prosperity is the result or its own hard work. Because of its
quick rise to success, Japan has the narrowness of vision and the vulgarity
comon to the nouveau riche.

If this analogy were pushed further, we might conclude that the difficulties

in U.S.-Japan relations would likely be solved to a great extent if Japan
would only comply with America's requests and repay its obligation. However,
the actual situation is not that simple. The basic cause of the problem is the
decline of the American economy produced by policies from the great historic
mistake of Vietnam to the present military buildup and other factors such as
high interest rates and a decline in the will to work, which have nothing to
do with Japan.

In spite of this. Japan was singled out as the enew because it was the
perfect scapegoat for American politicians. Congressmen who are up for
reelection this tall are in a mood to do anything to protect their seats in
Congress. When we look under the paternalistic attitude America has taken
toward Japan since the occupation, we find an attitude of racial prejudice
coiled up there.

Therefore, if the Japanese side reacted in the same way by making charges of
a "new yellow peril policy" or a "return or the anti-Japanese sentiment of the
1920's,” matters could get out of control. For this reason, there is no other
course but to show understanding of the American position and speak softly.

MWUSEONLY
:zi-u-u- tlu- causes of the problem lie on the American side, there are no
"dramatic measures” available for Japan to take. It is necessary to implement
the measures such as abolishing import restrictions on agricultural products,
which America is demanding as a way of covering up the real problems, and make
this clear as soon as possible.

The LDP is said to be planning to send Diet members who have confidence in
their linguistic ability to the United States to explain the Japanese position,
but it is doubtful that this could be effective. Learning to understand
American feelings might be educational for the Diet members, but the Americans
to whom they would be speaking would not be the same as the support comittees
in their own electoral districts. There is a good probability that they would
repeat the mistakes of someone like Foreign Minister Sakurauchi who used to
use the puzzling self-introduction: "W name is 'Cherry'." The embassy and
consulates in the United States would have to waste a lot of time taking care
of them. If Japan has something to say, it would be much more effective to
send someone of the caliber of Chief Cabinet Secretary Miyazawa, who has a real
comand of English, and have him make an appeal to the Merican people on a
morning television news program.

In any event, a last-minute patching up will not work. If has often been
pointed out that Japan has a weak "transmitter" for explaining itself to the
outside world. Japan's public relations with regard to foreign countries are
far inferior when compared with the scale of American activities. There are
U.S. Culture Centers located in all the maJor Japanese cities to dissminate
information about the United States. An official Japanese Culture Center was
opened in Hashington only last year, and it is only recently that MITI began
to publish an English-language magazine to explain the actual circumstances
of the Japanese econow.

While there is a flood of information from the United States coming into
Japan, the Japanese system for correctly analyzing this excessive mass of
information and using it to make policy is still quite weak. The system for
receiving information is weak, and the exchange of information between the
vertically organised government ministries and agencies does not go smoothly.
Even though there are more foreign correspondents in Washington from Japan
than from amr other country, we are still starving for information and for
the analysis of information.

I believe it is necessary to have observers in Washington from many different
fields, in some other capacity than that of foreign correspondents, who stay
there for 5 or 10 years. Otherwise, we will always have a lot of "current
affairs experts" with uncertain credentials who Join with special interest
groups and promote things that the Merican people do not necessarily want,
such as making the security treaty bilateral or imposing a security tax on
products imported into Japan.

121

POROFFICIALIBIONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

I-iually, I understand that there are people in the goverment who are convinced
that the trade tensions between the United States and Japan can be eliminated
if wc comply with the Reagan administration's demand for taking an increased
share of the defense burden. This is an extremely dangerous, near sighted
approach. "any people in the limited States are charging that the present
administration's plan to expand defense, especially by expanding nuclear
armament, will destroy the Merican economy. Japan should take the path of
providing economic aid to the developing countries and seeking detente with
the Soviet Union, not that or Joining the anti communist movement of the Reagan
administration and buying expensive weaponry. It would ultimately be to the
advantage of U.S.-Japan relations if Japan could cool the ardor of the United
States.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1982

9651
cso: bios/95

1.22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
THINKING PROCES IS ROOT OP FRICTION
Tokyo SW TOYO IBIZAI in Japanese 20 Mar 82 p 1.].

[Interview with Kiyoshi Sakai, executive director of the Optical Industry and
Technology Promotion Association, by editor]

[Text] The flames of trade tension are burning higher and there is even a
sense that Japan is the subject of persecution. Isn't there something
fundamentally wrong about this situation? When Mr Sakai was serving in run,
he was involved in international economics for man years, and he served in
the Japanese consulate in New York for almost 15 years, so he is well versed in
U.S.-Japan trade issues.

[Question] What do you think is the core of the U.S.-Japan trade problem?

[Sakai] I believe a difference in ways of thinking is at the root of the
problem. Mericans and Europeans think that alvthing that is good for them
will go over in an other country. The Japanese have the opposite preconcep-
tion: that foreign countries will always be different from Japan. iherefore,
when the Japanese try to sell something in a foreign country, they make
changes in it. When the Europeans and Americans cannot sell something in
Japan, they think that it is because Japan is doing smething suspicious.

This difference in approach has remained the same from the past to the present.

[Question] What should be done?

[Sakai] It is necessary once and for all to clarify the balancesheet of
responsibility for both sides. If Japan is found to have certain responsi-
bilities on this basis, then it must carry them out. However, as long as we

continue to make small, one-sided concessions, it will be impossible to solve
the overall problem.

[Question] What is the responsibility of the American side?

[Sakai] It will take time, but the United States must make plant and equip-
ment investment to increase its supply strength both qualitatively and

123

“MINOR!”
POI ONCIAI. USE ONLY

quantitatively, and make a full effort to increase productivity and improve
labor relations. men if it takes time, there vill be no solution to the
problem unless herica moves in this direction. The same thing goes for
Europe. There is an even greater need there than in America for increased
productivity. Also, they must make a greater effort in exports.

[Question] What About Japan?

[Sakai] As quick measures for the time being, it is natural that Japan
should voluntarily restrain concentrated outpourings of exports, abolish the
remaining import restrictions, and simplify import procedures in addition to
expanding domestic demand. Also, the foreign exchange rate should be made
more active. If the yen rate increased, it would absorb a large part of the
trade imbalance. Therefore, we should repeatedly press the Japanese position
against Merican policies which keep the yen from rising.

As long-term measures, ve should promote local production abroad to help
expand employment in other countries and contribute to the world in the areas
of neat technolog and culture. As Japan grovs larger, it is important that
we have the people of the world feel that it has good things to offer.
COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyokeizai 1982

9651
(so: nos/95

12h

momaALussomx
DIMREN® II SITUATIOIS
Tolqro JITSUGYO N0 NIKON in Japanese 15 Apr 82 pp 82-86

[Article by Jiro Tokuyama, executive managing director and president of the
Nomura hnagement School]

[Text] American Pressing for Repayment of Debt

Everyone knows that the recent tensions over trade and defense have reached

a deplorable state, but be that as it may, this year is marked by an ominous
groundswell building up all over the world.

The ”household affairs" of the Soviet bloc countries, Europe, and the develop-
ing countries, as well as the United States end Japan, have become extremely
difficult and complicated and are getting worse. Although there were some
minor conflicts before now, there was still a margin of prosperity in the
world so lam-ica's attitude toward Japan was not so severe. Even though it
talked tough, the threats were seldom carried out to the letter. However,
this year the limited States is in a recession, and although the fundamentals
of the Japanese econonv appear to be all right with Just a glance at the

domestic situation, there is a creeping recession that is not so benign as it
seems.

Previously, the Imerican negotiation tactic with Japan was to talk tough in
the beginning and later to work out some sort of compromise. m1; year, there
was a total change. Of course, the United States has haw misunderstandings
and misconceptions about Japan, but it understands Japan much better than does
Europe. However, this time the United States is taking a firm position of not
allowing "selfishness" on the part of Japan. It seems to be demanding
immediate repayment of all prior debts.

As always, both sides have reasons for their positions. However, before Japan
attacks its opponent, it needs to reflect on its own past actions. First of
all, it is a fact that Japan is not making a contribution to the world befit-
ting a great economic power.

125

”WWW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since: the United States is in an election year, there are people making
strongly political statements, and the present situation is characterized by
the large number of frustrated people among the general populace. Japan must
take appropriate action with sufficient attention to timing.

Time for the Prime Minister To hits a Decision

Certainly, Japan has moved up the schedule of promised tariff reductions and
has made improvements in 69 nontariff barriers. And it is announcing that it
will make further efforts. However, I do not believe that this alone will
satisfy the United States. The U.S. market is taking 25 percent of Japanese
imports and it is supplying a large amount of Japan's food and livestock feed,
as well as protecting Japan under the terms of the Mutual Security Treaty,

especially by providing a nuclear umbrella. It is clear that Japan could not
go on if any of these things were out off.

The United States is having difficulty with the problem of relative military
superiority with regard to the Soviet union, and its economic recession is

getting worse. It cannot afford to be as indulgent toward Japan as it has
been in the past.

Regardless of the position of the administration, the U.S. Congress will not
be satisfied unless Japan takes the "drastic" action called for by the United
States. In other words, Japan must do something about the quota system for
oranges and beef, the symbols of the closed Japanese market, as well as a wide
range of items including tobacco, advanced technology fields, finance,
insurance, distribution, and data communication.

Japanese consumers cannot understand win they must eat beef, rice, and wheat
which costs several times the price on international markets. They cannot
agree with something that is so wound up with vested political interests.

Up to now the Japanese Government has taken only stopgap measures which put.
off the problem a day at a time. low it is necessary to take more drastic
measures. This cannot be done with the bureaucrats' usual time-consuming
consensus system of making decisions in which the decision is built accumula-
tively through a strict process from the bottom up. Also, nothing can be done
if it is obstructed by the group ego of a few politicians. The only solution
is for the prime minister to make bold decisions in a "top down” manner on the
basis of strategic thinking from a broad point of view.

Unfortunately, however, I do not believe that. it is possible to expect
”drastic" action fras Japan's top leadership. At any rate, it is necessary,
for better or worse, to ask why a dramatic "opening of the country" is not
possible for Japan. We should put a spotlight on the realities of the
Japanese society and econow and deepen- our own understanding.

126

MOFHCIALMONLY
:xpe-cial Japanese Understanding of Peace

First let us consider why Japanhas become so insular. Although the discus-
sion may be somewhat roundabout, let us reflect on the reasons for the total
system in Japan being that way.

First, after being defeated in the war, the Japanese promised the world that
they would renounce war, cease to attempt expnding their territory through

war, and live in peace within their island country. I believe that was fine
as far as it went.

lowever,the problem now is the difficulty of defining ”fairness." If the

United States and Japan both had the same land area, population, and resources,
it would be easy to define fairness.

However, the United States has twice the population of Japan but 27 times
the land area. Also, it is rich in resources. If the 0.8. ratio of popula-
tion to land area were applied to Japan, only 8 million people could live in
this island country. However, almost 120 million Japanese live here. In
other words, the given conditions are much worse for Japan in comparison with
the United States right from the start. Japan and the United States did not

line up at the same starting line and begin running with a shout of "Ready,
set, go!"

I am afraid that “W Anericans are not aware of this difference in the given
conditions and unconsciously act on the assumption that the "nited States and

Japan both started under the same conditions. There are probably new
different views of Japan. Be that as it may, modern Japan built up its unique

system after the war by thinking up ways to live in harmony under the strained
conditions of a train filled to capacity.

Under conditions of a lack of opportunity and ways for losers in society to
make a comeback, "packages" were created within the total systan of Japan
such as the national railways family, the MITI family, and the Mitsubishi,
Mitsui, and Sumitomo groups. mtual tacit agreements that "we will not touch

your territory” were made, and the Japanese were somehow able to function
harmoniously.

Also, the Japanese are not the kind of people who could lie under the palm
trees in the South Pacific, eating bananas and taking it easy. They like to
work and are bright and energetic. Therefore, if the type of competition
found. in the United States and Europe were suddenly implemented in Japan, a
fight would break out in the ”crowded train” that would lead to bloodshed. If

we started having open duels like the Americans do, there would be many
casualties.

12’!

”MUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore, the Japanese prise peace and hesitate to interfere in each other's
territory. The large companies use the system of lifetime employment, so the
employees work together and-she sure that no one gets off the train until
they get to the destination. These groups naturally consolidate and become
stronger while at the same time they become insular and exclusive.

The Japanese are accused of being unable to say "yes" or "no” clearly and of
making decisions which are "irridescent." however, this is a logical method

of avoiding friction built up from the living wisdan of may years. From
outside Japan, it seems very irrational, but is very sensible under Japanese
conditions.

Japan on the Verge of Sinking

When Japanese leaders speak, they always urge their employees to become inter-
national or to have international awareness. however, when these employees of
the top companies go overseas, they preside over workers who are clearly dis-
criminated against in status as "local hires." They work with their eyes on
Tokyo and do not adapt to the local society. They send their children back to
Japan to receive the education that will equip them for life in Japan's closed
society. If the leaders really want Japan to becone more open, rather than
using words they should take action on the system under their own feet.

However, this entire system is based on Japanese-style logic and designed

for functioning without trouble under the strained conditions Japan has been
under. low that international relationships have become more closely inter-
dependent, this Japanese system has become a problem, and the situation is not
as simple as before. It cannot be entirely changed overnight, but to begin
with, it is at least necessary for us to become aware that we are living in
this kind of Japanese system.

The Japanese elite go from college to certain government offices and large
corporations. They spend their whole lives in the same group, cmpeting with
and comforting their fellows, so they never know what it is to be alienated.
Although they may have a conceptual understanding of the feelings of peeple
who are alienated or outsiders, they have no real understanding of then at all.
Therefore,the Japanese elite can proudly and ingenuously say that Japan is
making great progress in liberalisation and is no longer closed at all.

Group solidarity and insularity can be seen in the strength of group solidarity
among veterans of the old army and navy, the abnormal practice in the univer-
sities of excluding foreign professors, and the insularity of bureaucratic and
political cliques. Group solidarity and insularity are two sides of the same
coin. To put it in extreme fashion, the Japanese groups not only exclude
foreigners, they also exclude each other.

128

summon“
I have already stated that this propensity is the result of the particularly
desperate conditions found in Japan. If this is correct, our measures for
internationalisation and the shift to a more open system which America is
demanding cannot be undertaken impetuously. These changes will require quite
a bit of time.

Although it my be an exaggeration, we can say that Japan is on the verge of
sinking. But in spite of this, most of Japan's political leaders have their
attention taken up with domestic matters and do not understand the importance
of Japan's position in international society.

Aim at International Constituency

Probably what I have said is vaguely agreed upon by most sensible Japanese.
He are placed in difficult conditions. However, we cannot change the trend
toward internationalisation, so some action must be taken.

There are probably new methods which could be used. For example, in order to
get free from Japan's strained conditions, Japanese politicians should have
long-range vision and, forgetting the national boundaries of Japan, cultivate
a ”Japanese constituency" in other countries, including at least Australia

and New Zealand, the Anglo-Saxon countries which have the most vitality of any
countries on the Pacific perimeter; tbxico, which has a population of 70
million people, is beginning to produce oil, and is interested in Japanese
technology and business methods; the ASBAI countries, the semideveloped
countries of Asia; the Ihited States and Canada. If the politicians can
spend as much money and effort as they do in their domestic electoral dis-
tricts, they should be able to make an effort to build a constituency in the
arena of international politics. Ehren though Japan has become the second
largest economic power in the world, it does not now seen to have any bargain—
ing power or power of persuasion.

In an election for a temporary seat on the United National Security Council,
Japan is even defeated by countries like Bangladesh. When lagoya was a
candidate for the site of the Olympic games, there was not one country which
voted for Japan.

If we think of this in terms of the relationship between executives and their
subordinates in a compamr, the problem is quite clear. Unless you have some
authority yourself it does no good to argue with your boss. If you are a
computer expert and feel that "the company computer system could not function
without me" you may have some bargaining power. If you are not too arrogant,
your opinion may have some effect in the company.

Japan may have certain opinions about the emergence of trade tensions, but the
other side has its own views, so it comes down to the matter of bargaining
power.

129

”WWW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even though it is necessary for Japan to build an international constituency,
it is not necessary to do so in far away and hard-to-understand places such as
Africa and the Middle East, poor countries like India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh
or the countries of South America where there is extreme inflation and frequent
changes of government. W "Pacific perimeter thesis" holds that this can be
done best among the Pacific nations with which we are most familiar. However,
I do not advocate Joining together with the Asian nations alone.

A "Living" Sense of Defense

There have also been tensions over defense, and it has been char-yd that
Japan's defense effort is not comensurate with its economic power when com-
pared with the antiqgoviet military buildup of the United States. However,
this argument depends on differences in viewpoint on the Soviet threat.

In both Japan and Europe, there is an antiwar philosophy and a strong dislike
for war. However, European eXperts on Japan say that, compared to the move-
ment in Europe, the antiwar movement in Japan is still on a sentimental level.

Japan was bombed by B-29's and atomic bombs, but it did not have the same
"bloody" experience of war as Europe. In Bin-ope, haw peOple had the experi-
ence of seeing enew soldiers tramp into their own homes, rape their wives and
kill their daughters with a bayonet. The horror of places like Auschwitz
staggers the imagination.

Japan, however, surrendered unconditionally, and although there have been a
number of little spats since the occupation, Japan has prospered greatly since
the war ended. Some people say sarcastically that it was a good thing that we
lost to America. There are even some people who have forgotten the hardships
of the war. If northeastern Japan and Bokkaido had been occupied by the Soviet
Union, Japan would probably have the same concern with defense as West Germany.
The Japanese who were taken prisoner in Siberia and ”prayed to the dawn" are
very serious about defense. Those Japanese who had bitter war experiences

feel the necessity of defense very strongly.

I do not know the Soviet people well. However, both Kissinger and Brezinshi,
even though they do not get along well personally, said that Secretary of

State ﬂaig should not have talks with Foreign Minister Growko at this point.
They have a strong distrust of the Soviet Union. When I see the sincere con-

cern of these two men, I feel that there is something extraordinary in the
American fear and distrust of the Soviet Union.

The Japanese are surrounded by the four seas and did not have a raw, bloody
experience of war, so it is natural that they do not feel the same fearful
threat as the hericans in their view of the Soviet Union. Also, it is said

130

MOMCIALUSEONLY
that the sea around Japan is the equivalent of to am divisions, and the
Japanese do not understand the fear felt by West Germaw, which is adjacent to
the Soviet bloc on land.

In considering Japanese armament, the potential chew should be identified,
but Just like the recent Diet debate over a 1 trillion yen tax cut, it is
considered sensible for domestic reasons not to make this clear. As long as
the Socialist Party continues to advocate the position, rare in today's world,
of unarmed neutrality, it will be difficult to clearly unify domestic opinion.

Obtain a Commitment from Aaerica

I make this explanation to Anericans: "Please remember the Vietnam War when
the soldiers on the front could not fight effectively because public opinion
was divided in the United States. At least ’00 percent of the Japanese, those
who support the opposition parties, have different views on defense fraa those
in the ruling party. Therefore, even if we had a greater military capacity,
we could not use it effectively." However, recently, they have taken this as
nothing but an excuse.

From the American point of view, when a 0.8. aircraft carrier is patrolling
the Indian Ocean.Japanese tankers pass through those waters one after another,
almost no ships but the Japanese. So they say that they wonder who they are
doing this for. Then when they come into port at Yokusuka, they are greeted
with "Yankee, go home!”

Now an oil pipeline is being constructed and the United States and his-ope will
no longer need to pass through the holmes Straits. From their point of view,

it will no longer be necessary to protect the Holmes Straits. If worse comes

to worst, Just what is Japan going to do?

Another very important thing is that Prime Minister Suzuki recently met with
President Reagan and promised to make a greater defense effort, using the
words ”greater effort." The next day in a speech at the Washington Press Club,
he said that Japan would protect the sea lanes within 1,000 nautical miles of
Japan. These two statements by the prime minister constitute a public com-
mitment.

In foreign relations, credibility is of absolute importance. The free nations
want the United States to be strong, but do they desire a strength that is
mostly military? or course, according to America, strong military power is
necessary to back up diplomacy. But from our point of view, the credibility
of [merican diplomacy is the most important thing, and we are troubled when
American foreign policy changes or when Secretary of State Haig and Secretary
of Defense Heinberger make differing statements. For example, the United
States at one time showed clear displeasure at Japan moving closer to BeiJing.
Then, one day, Nixon and Kissinger suddenly shook hands with Beijing. This
was a bitter experience.

131

MOWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Now the United States is asking Japan to build up its defense. If the mited
States and the Soviet Union suddenly decide to undertake arms reduction
because of economic difficulties in their "household affairs ," we wonder Just
what position Japan will be left in. Trustworthiness is important in foreign
relations. I believe that it is important for Japanese and American leaders
to discuss this matter with intellectual courage, obtain comitments fras
each other, and make a record of the agreement.

He cannot stand for our leaders continuing to go to America and pleading
"please take care of this matter" as if they were coming from a local to a
national government office to lobby for some concern. We would like them to
have serious discussions and make Judgments on the situation based on a sound
understanding of the international situation and a sense of history. We can-
not stand for diplomacy which is like the singsong reading of documents
prepared by "the staff" which often occurs in the Diet.

Proposal for "Dramatic Action"

I have stated a number of views on trade and defense aspects of U.S.-Japan
relations. As a concluding opinion, in tens of a specific strategy for
Japanese survival, I believe that "dramatic action" must be taken in all these
areas even if it means extensive domestic sacrifice in Japan.

working-level trade discussions were held between u.s. and Japanese officials
on 9 and 10 lurch. As a result, the Foreign Ministry decided that separate
reports would be made to the chief cabinet secretary by June rather than a
comprehensive proposal. I believe that it is necessary to reflect on the
effect on the usual practice up to this point of acting in small increments.

In past history, Plenipotentiary Jutaro Komura (foreign minister) concluded a
peace treaty with the Soviet Union even though he was called a traitor by the
people of Japan. Even before World War II, Prince Saionji and other brave
patriots counselled avoiding trouble with the United States and Great Britain,
even though they were attacked by young reformist bureaucrats and restless
young army officers, because they were concerned about national survival.
Recently, MITI Councilor hays (serving at the time) concluded negotiation with
the United States over automobile exports in line with the national interest
although he was sharply criticized by certain people.

Emotional views are usually well received, but in spite of this, I believe
that we should make a rational, calm assessment of Japan's position in the

world and its actual power, and take bold measures to insure our national
survival.

In the present situation, can Japan survive if it makes enemies of the United
States and Great Britain? It is time to consider carefully whether it would

132

MOFFICIALUSEONLY
be good for Japan to take the isolstionist path min. The matter of beer and

oranges has hecans s large symbolic problem. why not take drastic measures to
eli-inste this problem in consideration of the nations]. interest? Of course,

the minus sid should be given to those people in Japan who would be hurt by
such measures. Positive measures should also be tsken in the fields of
finance, insurance, and dsta comiostions.

COPYRIGHT: Jitsuyosha no lihonsha 1982

9651
0.30: nos/95

133

”WISCONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEED FOR JAPAIESB 83L? NIKKI“
Tokyo TEE JAPAE ECONOMIC JOUEIAL in English 23 Mar 82 p 20

[Interview with Toshihiro Tonabechi, resident of Mitsubishi International
Corp and concurrently president of the Japan mamber of Comerce of New York,
Inc by NIKON BIZAI SHIBUll's senior staff writer Akira KoJima, who until
recently was a correspondent in New York]

[Question] what do you think of the protectionist moves in the United States
from the viewpoint of a man actually doing business in herica?

[Tonabechi] For a man living in the United States for a long time, the
current protectionist moves in Inerica feel highly abnormal to say the least.
The situation is completely different fro: that in 1971, when frictions
developed over textile products and that in 1978 when color TVs, steel products
and motor vehicles got involved in trade disputes. In those tines, trade
frictions were caused by specific comdities and both the Japanese Government
and private circles were able to pinpoint their problems and take measures
specifically designed to solve them. At present, however, Japan has to deal
not with any specific problems, but with an imponderable sentiment that "Japan
is unfair." Any stopgap measures under the circumstances will be of no use.
When some Americans talk about the closed nature of Japanese markets, they are
guided not only by simple misunderstanding but by perverse willingness to
embrace distorted views.

[Question] What do you think are the reasons for the rapid ballooning of
anti-Japanese feelings in the United states?

[Tomabechi] It is only two years since former President Jim Garter called
Japan the closest of his country's allies. The speed with which the hericans'
sentiments toward Japan have changed is simply staggering. Sone of the most
conspicuous reasons for the drastic change are: 1) election year politics in
strong need of a handy scapegoat for the country's ills, 2) huge unemployment
running up to 9.5 million, 3) $18 billion deficit in trade with Japan, and

1:) growing niagiving about the Reagan Administration's economic policies.

13‘:

MWUSIONLY
l‘u‘pvr down, the Merit-um; are now firmly convinced mat, in order I." funrv
Japan to change its policy, they have to tighten their pressure sore strin-
gently than ever. Another reason obviously is the Japanese peoplefs notorious
sense of use (dependence). having been helped to their feet by the United
States in the immediate post-war years, the Japanese unconsciously consider
the Americans their big brothers or teachers. So, they often tend to depend on
the United States, thereby unwittingly touching off the belief among the Ameri-
cans that "Japan is a free rider."

[Question] Are "Japan hands" also riding on the crest of protectionism?

[Tomabechi] That certainly is a problem. Although they personally sympathise
with Japan's predicament, many ”Japan hands" are unwilling to express their
true feelings in the face of the powerful anti-Japanese feelings whirling in
the United States. At a meeting in Washington, 0.0. an herican scholar deeply
versed in Japanese affairs told as that the Mericans and the Japanese are now
in two completely different mental states: the former, frustrated and angry
from mounting troubles both within and without the country, are getting so
hysterical that they are losing their reason, while the latter, still largely
complacent and self-centered, are paying too little attention to others'
troubles. The dominant feeling in the lhited States is that, if Japan does not
properly respond to the Americans' distress signals, it will have to willy-
nilly follow the road to retaliation by way of the reciprocity principle and
isolationism. The trouble is that such a sentisent is by no means limited to
Washington but is rapidly spreading all over the United States.

[Question] How should Japan cope with the United States 1: 1+. is really
losing its reason?

[Tomabechi] Japan should first of all shed all the vestiges of its sense of
dependence on the United States. It should have strong confidence in itself.
It is because of the lack of confidence that Japan often fails to act swiftly
and positively, thereby giving the impression to foreign observers that Japan,
in spite of its economic superpower status, refuses to take responsibility and
a leadership position in world affairs. True confidence in itself leads a
nation to become relaxed, enabling it to make candid statements of its position
rather than to make poor attempts at self-Justification.

[Question] Hhat concrete measures do you propose?

[Tonabechi] I have been in the thited States for many years and in the recent
year and a half, I have observed a strong and rapidly expanding mood along
leading Japanese corporations to seriously plan for co-prosperity with the
United States from a long-range point of View. Short-term economic frictions
between Japan and the United States are bound to crop up one after the other.

If the two countries go into truly long-term relationships based on close

135

MWLWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

business cooperation, Joint ventures and technologies]. exchanges, however,
they will be able to prevent the problems fron adding up to the present
serious state.

[Question] Americans are apparently impervious to the logic that Japanese
products are selling well because of their superior quality?

[Tomabechi] There is no denying the fact that Japanese products have strong
competitiveness anywhere in the world. The fact, however, must not be forgotten
that Japan will be the first to suffer if protectionism gets to such an abnor-
mal pitch that the Americans and other foreigners refuse to buy Japanese goods
regardless of their high quality and low prices. When trouble starts, Japanese
industries, be they manufacturing or services, will be too late to respond, as
they certainly try to Justify their positions and lose their opportunities for
timely solutions. Japanese leaders are strongly urged to solve the problem
from the national point of view before the problem gets out of hand.

[Question] What do you think of the Americans' demands to Japan to open up
its service sectors, including money?

[Tomabechi] When the Americans talk about the closed nature of the Japanese
money market, they do not mean individual controls and regulations. They refer
to a far more basic problem-namely, internationalization and opening-up in the
true sense of the words. The Americans believe that, if the Japanese market

is open enough, they will be able to easily float their bonds and, freely pur-
chase Japanese stocks. They further believe that, if they can do so, demands
for the yen will increase appreciably, greatly stiffening the exchange rate of
the Japanese currency.

[Question] The United States resains a truly formidable country, although its
economic prowess is a little bit on the bearish side at the moment. Don't you
think that the Americans are unnecessarily worked up over Japan.

[Tomabechi] The Americans have an uncanny power to get really united once a
problem gets to a certain point. That's the true strength of the United
States. The United States is a unique society where idealism and practicality
lead a mixed existence. Americans are liable to go out of their way to get
themselves in trouble because of their strong devotion to idealism. Strict
environmental regulations and antitrust policies are two examples in point.
Although these two policies are seriously hurting them, the Americans are
unwilling to forsake them because of their idealism. Pre-war Japan was
largely ignorant of this special trait of the Americans and comitted a fatal
error. The pre-war Japanese simply believed that a nation agog with decadent
Jazz music would not be able to rise up to a real fight. The United States
has not lost its capacity to get really united when there is a true need. The
Japanese should never take the hericans lightly.

COPYRIGHT: The Nihon Keizai Shinbun Inc 1982

9651
cs0: Mos/95 - END .-
136

FOIOI'F'ICIALUSEONLY