APPROVID FOR R-LIAOI: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-0005080001000.0007-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050007—8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8436
3 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 15/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050007-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no wsy represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT BAGS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mas wuss
a May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(rouo 15/79)

Couraurs

POLH‘ICM. AND SOCIOWICAL

'AKAHNM' Comatnry Criticizes U.S.-HIC Relations
(JPS, 21 Apr 79) esIssue-nosesass-o-nosssosssssosoov

'AKABATA' Describes Si iricance or JCP-CPSU Agreement
(M’ 16 A” n OOOOOOOOOIIOOOI.OOIOIIOIOOOOQOOICOO

'YCMIURI' Welcom Carter Energy Policy as 'Approprinte
Decision'
(Editorial: m mm 20mm, 8 Apr 19)

Japanese Reactions to Carter's New Energy Palicy
(Editorial; various sources, various dates) ........

'MINICHI‘ Cements
'ASABI' Editorial Views

JCP Statement Denounces PRC for Abrogating Treaty With USSR
(JR, SAW 79) IDOIIOOOIDO000.000.0000...00.0.0.0...

'Age of Localism' Called a 'Mirage'
(Hideo mtsuoka; MINICHI DAILY IBIS, 17 Apr 79)

Japan Conunist Party Greets [WUFNS on Kanplcbean National
Day
(3P5, 17 A” 79) oneness...s-osseoooosaeoooossooossss

'AKAEM‘A' Hits War Criminals Enshrinement, Ohira Shrine
Visit

(JPS, 20 Apr 79)

'YMIRI' Raps thahrinenentof Japanese Var Criminals
(Editorial; was my YOHIURI, 20 Apr 79)

.101”; Human, M's metallic Hold Talks
(m, 12 A" 79) soosoasosoeoonossssnslssseo-eesoooe.
l’Ok OFFICIAL USE ONLY

com-Ems (Continued)

Okinnva Develoment Agency To Start Survey on Senkalcu
Islands
(Asm sum, 16 Apr 79)

'mnucm' Comments on Tokyo wade Negotiations
(Editorial; mm: mm uses, 15 Apr 79)

'YOKIURI' Cements on Geneva Trade Talks
(Editorial; m my mum, 13 Apr 79)

#:0ch

NIT Resins 'Political ﬁressure'
(Variouo sources, various dates)

Competitive International Bidding (hunted
Ranger to Subcontractors

Equipment Procurement Issue

Rear of Unemployment

Rumors of 0.8. Intent

SCIENCE AND TWIN!
Dissatisfaction With Japan-0.8. Emery Developnent

mused
(W, hb D) OD.IDIIC0000IOOOI0000050000000l

-b-

FOR OFFICKAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIJOGICAL

IMHATA'CWARY CRITICIZES U.S -PRC RELATIONS
Tokyo JPS in English 0616 GMT 21 Apr 79 OH

[Text] Tokyo, 21 Apr (JPS)--HWSHINGTOR POST reported on April 20 that
Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping in his meeting with the delegation of
the 0.3. Senate Foreign Relations Coo-ittee said china would approve the
construction of 0.5. telecosnunication facilities.

The April 31 issue of AKAHATA carried the following counsntery on this
report (giat).

"If the report is right, China will actually approve u.s. military facili-
ties. This report is worth drawing our attention. These telecoanunication
facilities--will naturally have Iilitary features. The fact that China is
about to approve the construction of these facilities suggests that the
relationship between China and the 0.5. ia also closely linked with quasi-
nilitary affairs.

"Deng's rersrks are also worth drawing our attention in the sense that

Vice Premier Deng refrained from asking fundamental criticirl of actual
continuation of the 0.5. policy, "one China and one Taiwan." but that Deng
made reserved remarks on the conventional continuation of U.S.~Taiwan aili-
tery relations. the conventional continuation which is reflected in a new
0.5. Taiwan act. Deng'a remarks also provide evidence that China has an
unprincipled rapprochement with the U.S."

C80: 6120

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

WHATA'DESCRIBES SIGNIFICANCE OF JCP-CPSU swam
Tokyo JPS in English 0930 cm 16 Apr 79 W

[Text] Tokyo. 16 Apr (JPS)-AKAHATA carried an editorial on April 16. en-
titled "The Great Significance of Agreement Between the Japanese Coal-unis:
Party and the Gin-mist Party of the Soviet Union.”

The editorial said that in the agreement reached in the preliminary talks be-
tween the J0? and the CPSU held in Moscow on April 11-12. and made public on
April 15. the Soviet aide states that "all maneuvers done in the name of the
coamunist movement, by ex-JCP members or by groups of various sorts. are
manifestations of anti-party activities, whatever flag they may carry or
whatever excuse they may create. and that the Soviet aide will not have any
relation at all with activities of those groups."

"Needless to say. the Shiga clique is included in the 'ex-JCP members or
groups of various sorts' mentioned in the agreement. This agreement goes
further to say that 'the Japanese side especially gave an affirmative esti-
mation to the constructive position expressed by the representatives of the
Camnist Party of the Soviet Union in the Tokyo preliminary talks on the
problen of the past relationship between the two parties.‘ As was made clear
in the Nishisawa (JCP vice-presidiun chairssn-ed) statement in March, the
JCP 'estinated' the Soviet statement in the preliminary talks that the Soviet
side 'will not justify the post publication of articles in PRAVDA supporting
the Shiga clique. and that was not corre-t....“ This eventually carried a
realistic meaning [as received] at the conclusion of these preliminary talks.

"Viewing this point reflect in the agreement. it is plainly indicated that
the position of the Shigs clique, who subverted democratic centralism—the
organizational principle of the Conunist Party-was naturally expelled from
the JCP for violation of the party constitution. and has been spending their
days in raising troubles in the revolutionary movement in Japan. by making
obeisance to foreign forces their duty. do not get any support in Japan.

and internationally as well. [Grsf as received]

"This is entirely pertinent. looking at it free the standpoint that the rela-
tions between each Co-uniat Party must be estabished on the principles of

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL UBE ONLY

independence, equal rights, and non-interference in each other's internal
affairs. But in the post 15 years, in connection with the complete clarifi-
caton of the pest problems which wrecked the relations between the two parties.
it holds the great historic significance that such point is sade clear in

the present agreement of both parties.

"Taking this basic position, the Moscow preliminary talks agreed to continue
discussions on preparations for the caning official talks between the two
parties. From the basic position of opposing imperialicn and reaction, de-
fending world peace, democracy, and the rights of self-deternination of na-
tions. and working for the social progress. and also from the position of
genuine friendship between the peoplesof Japan and the Soviet Union, the JCP
will sincerely work hard for preparing for the official talks between the

two parties.

"As the party of self-reliance and independence, responsible to the Japanese
working class and working people, the Japanese Communist Party has resolute-
ly rejected all interferences from outside, and the anti-con-unist party
activ!cies of the blind followers of foreign forces, and at the sane time
worked hard to develop international solidarity on common tasks agreed upon
from the cause of anti-imperialisn, peace, democracy, and social progress.

"From this consistent basic position, we are glad that both parties' vigor-
ously sustained efforts have solved the past problen in a correct and prin-
cipled way, in accordance with the correct way of being of today's inter-
national communist movement. [as received] We confirm that in the light of
the present situation of the international communist nrvement, this holds
great significance for the development of friendly relations between the
Japanese Coamunist Party and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and
internationally as well."

080: 6120

3

m OWTPTGI II'RI‘ nmv
ma OFFICIAL I53 ONLY

POLITICAL m SOCIOLOGICM.

'YOHIURI' "31111188 CARTER ENERGY POLICY AS 'APPROPRIATB DECISIQI'
Tokyo 1118 DAILY mum in English 8 Apr 79 p 2 W
[Editorialz "Carter's Energy Policy"]

[Text] President Carter has announced a new energy policy in which the
price ceilings on U.s.-produced crude oil will be gradually lifted from
June 1 to allow them to approach international levels by the end of Sep-
tember 1981, and about half of the windfall profits to be gained by the oil
companies will be sopped up by a tax.

This new policy. which over the long run will curb domestic demand in the
0.8. and help reduce crude oil imports, is to be welcomed by Japan.

Hany energy experts have argued that only a return to a free market would
prove effective in curbing demand and increasing the supply of domestically
produced oil. The new policy effectively acknowledges this.

Carter failed in an attempt to impose a tax on domestically produced oil
last October because of strong opposition from congress and the oil industry.

Stimulating New Production

In his new energy blueprint. Carter proposes to take only half of the in-
creased revsnues in tax. though it is the business of congress to determine
tax ratios.

Carter apparently aims at stimulating the oil industry to explore for new
oil resources and to increase oil production.

his previous surcharge on domestically produced oil was criticized as being
aimed at only curbing demand. doing nothing for expanding supply.

In the case of natural gas. whose price was lifted by last October's energy
act, supply is now abundant, indicating that the same may be the case for
oil.

h
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IBB ONLY

As regards the demand for il. this depends on the price elasticity of oil
products, which is low in the 11.8. but considering that the price of do-
mestically produced oil is as low as 89 per barrel. conpered with $16 for
imported oil, the effect of this policy is expected to be not too smell.

Toward Global Energy Conservation

In Japan and Rest Europe. imports of crude oil have not yet even returned
to the pro-Mideast war level. Hhile the 11.5. imports 8 million barrels of
oil n day and consumes 7.6 million berrels of geaoline, Japan imports only
6 million barrels of crude oil.

Unless the ".8. reduces its oil imports somewhat, global energy crnserva-
tion plane cannot be expected to function well.

Them policy introduced by Carter is expected to control the asount of im-
ported oil eventually. though in the short tun the reverse night he the
case during the petiod when domestic prices are still rising to world levels.

This new policy is an appropriate decision to asks if international con-
flicts over oil are to be avoided.

COPYRIGHT: Daily Yonluri, 1979

C50: 10120

5
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

JAPANESE REACTIONS TO CARTER'S NW WGY POLICY
'HAINICHI' Col-tents
Tokyo MAINLCHI DAILY N598 in English 8 Apr 79 p 2 0!
[Editorial: "Carter on Energy Crisis")
[Text] "The energy crisis is real. Tine is running short."

This statement of President Carter most eloquently epitosizes the essence
of his new energy policy calling on Aaericana to produce more oil and con-
serve more.

In his setter, 2,600-word-addreas. President Carter unveiled on April 5 the
second major energy plan of his adninistration in the "stern manner of a
Dutch uncle delivering a tought lecture" as a foreign dispatch consented.

Carter's decision should be considered a timely warning not only to his
country-en but also to Japan in view of the fact that oil consumption is
steadily on the increase while oil producing countries are all lined up to
raise their oil prices.

In his new plan. Carter announced that he is decontrolling oil prices as
from June 1. so that domestic prices will rise to world levels by the autum
of 1981. The world price now is $16.64, coepared to the average 0.5. price
of $9.60.

The United States legislated the oil price control in 1973 for the purpose
of restraining inflation and conserving domestic oil resources, but-.the
development of the situation in the meantime proved that the control has
failed to serve the original purposes. Cheap doeestic oil has only helped
Americans to consune sore while the oil development at hole cans to a stand-
still. resulting in increased imports of oil free abroad. Last year alone,
the United States imported $60 billion worth of oil, aggravating its inter-
national balance of pay-eats position and accelerating inflationary trends.

6
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pal OFFICIAL USE ONLY

President Carter proposed in April 1977 a drastic "national energy plan" but
the related energy bills were completely watered down in the course of a year
and a half long deliberation in Congress and chances for restraining the im-
port of oil were then lost.

Carter at the time wanted to promote development of oil resources at home and
restrain consumption by raising the prices of domestically produced oil. His
ides of raising prices by an equalization tar while maintaining price
control to some extent was a total failure in face of the strong opposition
raised by the producers who called for complete decontrol and consumers

who were up against the price hike. Carter was attacked from both sides.

Carter invoked presidential authority in lifting the oil prices this time
and it does not require the consent of the Congress. The prices of domesti-
cally produced oil will eventually go up and thoil industry will step up
its efforts to develop new oil fields at home. As hoped by the 0.3. Govern-
ment. the decontrol may result in a decrease of oil imports, thus fulfilling
part of the 0.5. pledge made at the Bonn SlllIit last year.

There is no denying the fact also that the current measure entails many risks.
To begin with, we must point out thepossibility of worsening inflation. The
0.8. Goverment estimates that gasoline will go up about 7 cents per gallon
and that inflation will rise by about 0.1 percent this year, and 0.2 or 0.3
percent in the following years as a result of the decontrol. The same sources
do not seem to be taking a serious view of the inflation elements.

However, it must be noted that one outstanding feature of the American economy
is that everything goes up when the gasoline price is raised. Hence the of-
ficial view of the 0.8. Government is highly political.

Another problem is what to do with the "huge and undeserved windfall profits"
the oil companies will reap from decontrol. Carter proposed a 50 percent
windfall profits tax as a companion piece to decontrol. so that oil companies
will not reap a bonanza of more than $10 billion in higher prices by the end
of 1982. as well as an energy security fund to aid low income families who
wold be hardest hit by higher prices under decontrol. The fund, he said.
will be financed by the windfall profits tax. He also said such a tax bill
will be used to develop alternative energy resources.

In the United States, about 55 percent of the total oil consuption is for
the people's livelihood. With the presidential election scheduled for next

year. we can read the strong determination of Carter in announcing the current
step which is certain to hit the people's household economy.

COPYRIGHT: hsinichi Daily News. 1979

'ASAHI' Editorial Views
Tokyo asmt mmuc Ntws in English 9 Apr 79 p z ow

[Editorial]

[Text] ".8. President Carter has announced a new energy policy. As .a sys-
tematired energy policy, the latest one is the second following the 'national

energy plan” unveiled in April 19717.
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ORLY

The main pillars of the new policy are the following: (1) price controls
on U.s.-produccd petroleum will be abolished in stages in two years and four
months starting from this June: (2) 50 percent of the profits of oil com-
panies resulting from the price increase will be absorbed by a windfall
profits tax and diverted to an "energy stabilization fund," and (3) the

fund will be used to aid low-income families (average $100 a year per house-
hold), for the construction of an efficient nsss transportation system and
the development of technology for a long-range solution to the energy prob-
les.

President Carter has also devised various measures to economize on the con-
sumption of petroleum. He wants states to set up progress to curb gasoline
consumption. He warns that filling stations could be ordered to close on
weekends in states that do not achieve certain goals. In connection with
the nuclear power generation plant accident on Three Mile Island, Penna.,
he has ordered the establishment of a presidential comittee to determine
the causes of the accident and reconend safety measures.

The five national energy bills which President Carter presented to the 11.5.
Congress in 1977 underwent rough sailing for a year and a half. They were
finally approved by Congress last October but without the crucial bills

forming the core of the policy, such as those on the crude oil equalization
tax, the petroleum and gas utilization tax and the emergency gasoline con-
sumption tax. The outstanding feature of the latest policy is’ that it has
made use of that bitter lesson and has been given a realistic fecelift.

Ever since the so-called oil shock, the 0.5. had made frantic ineffective
policy efforts to step up its supply of dmstic energy sources, economize
on consumption and reduce imports of crude oil. Among these endeavors were
the "energy self-supporting plan" of the Nixon administration and the
"energy policy and conservation law" of the Ford goverment. The results

of these measures have been almost invisible, and the country's reliance on
imported petroleum continues to grow. As pledged at the Bonn sunnit, Ameri-
ca's oil isports last year, in terms of the annual total volume, decreased

a little. however, the: rose sharply again from around November, and accord-
ing to President Carter in his address, the country will import $50 billion
worth of petroleum this year.

The u.s. is the world's foremost energy-consuming and top petroleu-import-
ing nation. Whether Asericans can conserve petroleum and curb imports will
greatly affect the international energy and currency situation. But if

oil imports continue to expand the economic situation of the whole world is
liable to be exposed to uneasiness forever. In this context. success or
faiiure of the u.s. energy policy is a matter of great concern to us.

A fact that is particularly important is that in America, domestic petroleum
production and natural gas output hit the ceiling respectively in 1970 and
1972. If the consumption of energy rises four percent a year as a result,
the burden will fall almost in its entirely on petroleum imports, asking it
inevitable for imports to increase by 20 percent. The big task is how to
promote the development and increased production of domestic energy sources.

8
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RB OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore. because of controls on domestic petroleum prices since the oil
shock. the 11.5. Cavement hss been seeking ways to adjust the difference
uith imported petroleum prices. The oil conpsnins strongly opposed the
bill for the crude oil equalization tax which was shelved lest year because
it would vent halt of the profits generated by decontrol to be handed over
to the goverrnent as tax. Opposition of the petroleul industry is not ex-
pected to be as strong as last year.

However. so long as decontrol pushes up petroleun prices. fesrs of infla-
tion will ressin deeply rooted. snd opposition on the pert of the consuoers
is expected to become quite strong. 0n the other hand. if the policy proves
effective and the vslue of the dollar increeses. the policy hss the advent-
oge or curbing inflation. Free the viewpoint of the difficult enviroment
both st hose end abroad in which the 0.5. is pleced at present. the Carter
policy is believed quite reasonsble. He look forward to seeing how Congress
hsndles the utter.

COPYRIGUIT: Asnhi Shinbun Tokyo Honshe. 1979
(250: 6120

9
RR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
M Ol’i‘IOIAL IBE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICM.

JCP sum DBNOUNCBS PRC roa ABROGATING TRIM? um: USSR
Tokyo JPS in English 0914 GMT 5 Apr 79 0"

[Text] Tokyo. 5 Apr (JPS)--Horishi Tachilti, acting chairman of the inter-
national relations and foreign policy comiasion of the Japanese Conunist
Party. issued a statement on April 3, on China's decision and notification
to the Soviet Union of the abrogation of the Sine-Soviet treaty for friend-
ship. alliance and mutual aid on the sane day. The statesent said:

1. Although the Sine-Soviet friendship alliance treaty has been a treaty in
name only, the abrogation of it is clearly Iotivated by China's strategy
against the Soviet Union, not eerely a matter of form. It is a paradox in
history that China now recognizes the Japan-0.8. military alliance, and is
taking steps toward a relationship which has been observed to be a quasi-
nilitary alliance between the United States, Japan and China.

2. Needless to reiterate. China's attitude to approve the imperialist elli-
tary alliance hostile to socialism and national liberation movements is con-
nected with its deviation fro. the socialist cause, uhich constitute the
same root as the one of its aggression against Vietnal.

CSO: 6120

10
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND :EWIOWICM.

'AGE; OF LOCALISM' CAMEO A 'MIRAG 2'

Tokyo MINICIII DAILY Ill-3:} In Eng]. [till 17 Apr 79 p '0

lamina-In column by lllrteo mhsuoku: "Who :luys Mac or mentally

E]

Whoeverstartedaaylol lt.the
"Age ol Localtont" mos. have
heen a phraae dealgned to
arouse In Individual cltloeoa a
aenae ot partlelpatton In thelr
local at a tuna
when the recent local electlooa
were corn“ on. It could have
been devlaed to lltlltate voter
prlde. When the votln; was
over. It hecante :lear that the
phrase was a rnlreee. wlth the
voters rematnla; rather tuned
etItromtheelectlon.

Voterturnomhltthelrlooest
level In many preterm In
rnoat other molecules. the
larnoats were near the worst In
behest.

Most gubernatorlal can
dldatea handled ahoot Inch
down as “Creation ot an
Altloent and Pleasant local
Cornntonlty" and “Data at
Potlatlont‘rce Garden Cltlee."
l was unholy surprlaed that
they had practlcally nothing
else to say. The almllarlty ol
slogans meant roan. Ior one to
not whstaatlatly dlllerent front

rates.

11

Whatever mod promises
uhernatorlal candldates may
atalte. the voters know a
prelecture la ahout ”as percent
sellwernlng." The “Age ol
locallarn” sotmds hollow. The
sense ol voter oartlclpatlon In
local admlnlstratlona can he
real It. as In Amerlca's states
thecttlaenscanvoteacutlnthe
real eatate tax or Ila tax ln-
creaoe renulm two-thlrds oI
votee In the local assembly.
ﬂatmantoredlreetvoter
aartlclpatlon democracy In
localadtnlolatratloo.

Local electleos cannot be
heatedtpvhenthevoteralroov
what they are electb: I: a
Inlnor part at the mantle
central government. In recent
yea”. caodtdateatorgovernors
stooped entphultlng thelr
comectlon wlth the central
government. 'I'hla to slowly
because such houts no longer
go over well rub the voters.
anddoeeaotrneananlncreased
deuce ol sell-government la
localadtnlnlstratlono.

Thelntportancelorpvernora
to have cometlons at rlpt
placer In the central m-
rnent ls evidenced by to the
advance Into the abernatorlal
electlomollortnerhereaocrats
ol the detract Illnlatry at the
lnterlor and the present
Illntw'y ol Hone Allalra ln-

ﬁll: OFFKIIM. IYSI‘. t\.\‘l.\'
eluding the eeveneleeteiilninr
telnet election. the preiccturei
governors who were iormeriy
bureeuerete ot either the
Ministry oi the interior or the
Home Allelic Iiinletu now
total to or to peroent oi ell
governors. ii the “Age oi
hoeeiisni" wee meant lowers
the domination oi locet eo-
rnlnistretion by inrmer
bereeucrets oi the interior or
Home Aiieire Iiinistrthcould
not he more hppmprtete or
timely.

Cei'eerziitlete

Tinieireewheneereerelitists
oi the Ministry at the interior
look ii for grenieo thei they
maidendwbetngeppentede
preteeturel governor.
Unanimously the neonates oi

suiiicientlytotiveliheltlntstry
of Finance hi d the
elite-to-he university
grudueies. i hed been iotelly
imerantahwtthutitlsueoild
tecitodeythetthei‘lnenreend
lioinehtieiiominlstrleenrehy
tor the biggest job lures ior
greduoles oi the 1okyo
Untrei‘sly Lev School \rho
hove posed the senior cede
test oi the civil service
eneminstion.

lion long hes the eitiietlon
been like this? The corner
allots. eiterioinlngﬂle Home
weir: Ministry. ere in turn
leesed out to preieciiirel

Moments-urethane":

FOR iWi-‘iiillil. USE ONLY

in key punts. There ere ohout
no such llome Iiiielrs Ministry
workers on tense to local
povernrnente “intently et ell
times 2:. the met“ This is
exactly wey intstry oi
the interior plented its in-
ﬂuence in local governments. It
should be e ehetlenging
eestgnrnent for young elitists to
come into direct conteei with
locel citizenry end hendle the
p'e end o'e oi loeel edmhistte-
tloo. But it wold be lees then
cricket ier these young people

hy the unchenging slin-
W trend oi the
greduetes oi the Tokyo
UniversityLeichhoothlchis
nothinghetrniedleee eepiretlon
iocttnihthesecielpyreihiii.liie
heer :hout theY Moonl-
eepto vetoes. mug e.
tied thought. choose their
corner on their on end dit-
ierent concept oi veluee. end
ihet the careers chosen ere es
direreiiied so their tndividuel
veiue concepts. Nothing oi this
eort hes heppened to the
students oi the Tokyo
University Law School. Their
concept oi veluee he: never
ehenged. They unanimously
elite either it entering the
Pinence illeistry. hoping to he
uitlmeteiy pleated in the
oi e big book or
business or en-
tering the itome Aiieirs

“Mufﬁmtomlw

mathemaihetr
weer oi the ministry. This is

the meeielity oi the Aogrede
students oi the Tokyo
Universityquohooi.Aodthe
sitiietionishechtotheolddeys
\riththePtnsnce end
the liome Aiielre lilelstry

12
Fill! ﬂh‘FiClM. [SSE ONLY

being the top timing pouere
tor these young things with
strong tropism ior sociel ed-
vnnce.

Condultltole

Why do pneieehtrel govern-
ments keep so may on no
lioine Aiieh's Ministry writers
on loose mind the yeer? it is
certeinty not out oi the
preiecturet governmenti'
kindneee to the leeeed writers
to let them leern locel ed~
mlolstreilonilrsthend.mthe
preiecturel governments to
ehortonvethertelemihstthey
nced imports item the Rome
Aiieirs Mlhldtry?¢tlu;ﬂyllot.
The locel edmiolstrettonr must
expect the ministry-tensed
workers to helheir conduit
pipelines to the eeotrei
government. poitttceity end
thieoeieliy. ‘i‘he tropoitenee oi
the conduit role hes been
demonetmed by the presence
oi it ex-oureeucrets oi the
interior end Home Alieire
ministries emong the pretee.
iurelpvernore‘i‘his mustbce
vetyievoruieclimetenotonly
tor the Home Atteirs Ministry
but else tor the Liherel-
Deinocreiic governing) The
perty'eregeinlngthe oeno
Oeehe governorehips tn the
Intent election most here in-
ereesed lte sell-continence.
Alreedy. there ere tsliis oi o
general election being
schedulediorthieeutunin.

But eirnost sit the ex-
hureeuerete elected to

governorehip were booked
jointly by the Liberel-
Democratic Petty end its
middleni-the-roed stiles. ti
they we elected on e slope
Liherei-Democretic ticket
met candidates heched

ironwork“!!! by
oppoeitionpenteehiehheni
pemocrets eertetniy here

reesontoloohia’vsrdioe
mmmmmy
went.‘l'heiectis.honever.thet
they could not here been
Myeiected'ithootheip
igscxrsuSiﬁ
a... :5 8% 8 .825 .9...
33833859393233

.3... 3-. .89. 5 .X .5
28:813—3385533.
= .8. as. 8.: s 5.2%. 2:.
8832.8 5. = 5 so «.2.
=8 2 : 3.32:3. £83.
2.8. was. a. 9: .8. 13.3
5... 8:235. 3.2.. :5
«i=3. 382:8. 8.81:2.
33 835 8 8258 5
a...»

a... 23.192 8. .83 3 8
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

JAPAN CWIST PARTY caters KNUPNS 0N WHOM NATIONAL DAY
Tokyo JPS in English 0908 cm 17 Apr 79 09

[Text] Tokyo. 17 Apr (JPs)-0n the occasion of the national day of the
People's Republic of Caabodia on April 17 the Japanese Cmnist Party Can-
tral Co-Iittee sent a congratulatory nesssge to the Central Co-ittee of the
National United Pront for Ss1vstion of Caabodia.

The message says: "The Cambodian people. rallying around the National United
Front for Salvation of Cambodia, overthrew last January the autocratic rule
by the atrocious and sntipeople Pol Pot regine and established the People's
Republic of Caabodia. upholding the banner of genuine independence. sovereign-
ty. neutrality and nonelignaent. thus opening up a new era in the history of
the Cadaodian people.

"He earnestly hope that you will achieve great success in your cause. by
overconing every difficulty, for the reconstruction of the national economy
and culture, the establishment of freedom and desocrstic rights, and for ad-
vance in the line of national self-determination, international solidarity
and peaceful coexistence.

”He hope that internationalist solidarity between the Japanese Columnist
Party and the National United Pront for Salvation of Canbodia and Friendship
between the Japanese people and the Caabodien people will be developed con-
tinuously."

(:50: 6120

1';
FOR OE'HCIAL {BE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND 800101.06!an

'AKAHATA’ BITS UAR CRIMINALS BNSthNEHENT. 0813A SHRINB VISIT
Tokyo ”8 in English 0935 an 20 Apr 79 OH

[Excerpt] Tokyo. 20 Apr (JPs)--On the secret anshrinenant of 14 class-A
var crininals. including Ridalti 70,10. in Yasukuni shrine in Tokyo last
autumn. together with 2.600.000 war dead in the Pacific var and other oars.
mu carried a report on its front page on April 20. The report said:

The enahrinenent "uenns an approval of the pest war of aggression, and
acquits the responsibilities of the war crininals. we must pay attention
to this fact as a reflection of the recent political reaction.

"Hhst is especially serious is that Prim Minister Hasayoshl 0hira. who pro-
fesses to he a non-church Christian. said that he will visit Yasukuni shrine
on April 21. clearly contradicting his own religious stand and violating the
principle of separation of religion and government stipulated in the consti-
tuion. Even after the grave truth can to light that Yasukuni shrine has
enshrined “rojo and other class-A war criminals. Prime Minister ohira be-
conns defiant and says he 0111 visit the shrine anyway, saying "criticis-
of my visit should be left to those who utilize as." [as received] No
room hes been left for doubt any store that Prine Minister Ohira follows the
reactionary line of the previous Pukuda government, and stands at the fore-
front for the promotion of it."

080: 6120

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDGICAL

'YWIURI' MP3 BNSHRIW OP JAPANESE WAR mm
Tokyo nu; mm mum: in English 20 Apr 79 p z ow
[Editorielx ”honoring Var Criainalsy

[Text] It was disclosed Thursday that lb men who were tried as class-A
war criminals by the Far East Military Tribunal after the Pacific war. in-
cluding wertise Prile Minister Oeneral Hidelti Tojo. have been enshrined in
the Yasukuni shrine in Tokyo. which is dedicated to the war dead.

Considering that war is the greatest crime of mankind. this is ‘ighly re-
gretteble.

Religions institutions do. or course. have the freedo- to enshrine eny deity
or deceased person they choose. but still we should ask ourselves whether
the Yasukuoi shrine should have enshrined these 16 men.

It has not been proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that they did co-sit war

crimes. but they are generally believed to have been the aen aost responsible
for the war.

'Hartyrs of Shows '

The Yasukuni shrine chose to enshrine the 11. non es "Martyrs of Shows (the

reign of the current eaperor)." along with the men who fought and died in
the war, without asking the relatives of either the 16 non or the other
war dead what they thought about it.

We suspect the shrine staff were not sure that the bereaved families of the
1‘ men and the war dead would agree.

This event is related to the loves to place the shrine under the protection
of the goverment again, the Shinto religion having played a special role in
prewar days as a sort of state religion.

The principle of separation of politics and religion should be guarded vigi-
lantly. however. and for this reason we have repeatedly opposed any sore
to put the shrine under the protection or support of the government.

16
FOR orncm. use om:
NR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Oslnoue Sign

The eteff et the ehrine end many other people might think it quite natural
to enehrine threes 16 men et Yeeukuni, but to us it looks like en ominous

eisn indicating e renewed tie-up between the shrine end netionelien heeed
on Shinto.

Nobody events to believe thet their loved onee died for nothing, but the
feet thet the bereaved fenilies of the uer deed visit Yeeujuni shrine end
offer preyer does not seen thet they epprove of the var.

Since the deyn of Prime Hinieter 'l'ekio Niki, eucceeeive premiere heve visited
the shrine in the cepecity of privete citizens. Prime Minister mire report-
edly plens to visit the shrine on Seturdey.

The government end the Liberel-Demooretie Perty (w?) ere trying to restore
the m neme eyetem beeed on the emperor's reign.

These etteepte to turn the clock beck to prever deye £111 us with enxiety.
COPYRIGHT: The Deily Youiuri, 1979

cso: £120

17
roe omcuu. use 0qu
1'!!! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND 806101.061 CAL

JCP'S NISHIZAHA. W's VLASKALIC HOLD TALKS
Tokyo JPS in English 0915 GMT 12 Apr 79 0"

[Text] Tokyo. 12 Apr (JPs)-Tonio Nishims. vice chairmen of the Presidiu-
of the Jspeneee Couunist Petty. on April 10. in continuation iron the
previous dey, held talks vith Tihonir Vlsskelic, sesber of the Presidiun of
the League of Co-uniete of Yugoslevie (cheirnen of the Centrle Omittee
of the Leegue of Conuniets of Serhie). The telks centered on en exchange
of views on the internel situetion end perty ectivities in both countries.

Vice cheirnen Nishizewe telked shout the results of the first half of the
eimlteneoue local elections in Jepen. eepecielly on the JCP'e edvsnces in
the prefectursl sssenbly elections, end explained the reactionary trend in
Jepsnese politics. the e11inece of the consemtives with the Centrist for-
cee. moves of the Jepen Socielist hrty, the Jepenese econonic situetion end
petty ectivities.

Presidium nesbsr Vleskelic referred to the internel eitueion in Yugoslavia
end explsined the recent ectivities of the lesgue, including the teeks for

the «utility of the econony, development of the representstive syeten,
end strengthening of the role of the m to echieve those teske.

050: 10120

18
an OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

OKINAHA DMLOMNT AGENCY TO START SURVEY ON SBNKAKU ISLANDS
Tokyo ASAHI samun in Japanese 16 Apr 79 morning edition p 3 ON

[Text] The Okinawa Development Agency [ODAI will begin a basic survey of
the Senksku Islands in Hay to work out a plan for their effective develop-
ment and utilization. The survey will represent the first government un-
dertaking since Chinese fishing boats intruded into the coastal waters of
the Senksku Islands 1 year ago. Based on the data to be collected by the
survey. the govern-ant plans to spend several years to up out a blueprint
for the developnent of the islands. Sons of the govermaent officials and
Liberal De-ocratic Party net-bars still have the deep-seated notion that
permanent facilities should be built on the islands to establish Japan‘s
practical rule over then.

Due to the strong request of Ishigski City in Okinawa Prefecture right after
the incident involving theChinese fishing boats, an aaount of 30 million yen
has been earmarked in the 1979 fiscal budget to carry out the survey. After
the 1-year survey of the ocean currents, winds, waves, weather, and other
natural conditions in the area. the ODA will conclude how the islet“
should be developed.

As to what steps should be taken after the survey. the Foreign Hinist’y
seen to have a rather discreet view. The ninistry authorities say: ”The
Senksku Islands are practically under Japan's rule now and the development
survey is purely a dosestic affair; therefore, it is unnecessary to hastily
build structures to symbolize Japan's practical rule over the islands."

COPYRIGRT: Asshi Shinbun Tokyo lionsha 1979
050: 4105

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'HAINICHI' counts 0" mo TRADE NBOOTIATIGS
Tokyo MINICRI DAILY NEWS in English 15 Apr 79 p 2 0‘!
[Editorial: "future of Tokyo Round“)

[Text] After five and a half years of marathon bargaining, the Tokyo Round
of multilateral trade negotiations has been finalized with major trading
countries initialing a set of agreements designed to govern world trade in
the coming decade.

The package was initialed by several East European and developing countries
as well as most industrial nations. including the United States, Canada.
Japan. theasuropean Common Market. Austria, Switzerland, the Scandinavian
nations. Australia and New Zealand. Host of the developing states. however.
refused to initial the pact.

The Tokyo Round. so called because it got underway at a ministerial meeting
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Tokyo in Septesmer. 1973
aimed at reconstructing the world economic order then torn asunder by var-
ious economic impacts including the Nixon shock.

It may be highly arguable whether or not the current package has lived up
to the spirit of the Tokyo declaration, which called for improvement of
lifesndwelfare through expansion and liberalization of world trade. At
least several important issues have been left unsettled for negotiations
at a later date. including international codes concerning safeguards pro-
tecting dosestic industries from imports.

The Tokyo Round was initiated against the background of a long drawn-out
world recession touched off by the oil crisis inediately after the Tokyo
Declaration. and at a time when protectionist moves are gaining momentum in
various countries. In this regard, the package should be considered highly
valuable in that it may serve a role in slowing the trend toward a shrinking
world trade scale.

20
I’d! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL LBE ONLY

An agreement is only an agreement. The question is to what extent the signs-
tory countrieu are determined to take joint action on the basis of the
agreement. It goes without saying that their actions will hold the key to
the future of the world economic order in the 1980's.

The world ecommic environ-ant surrounding such "joint action" is extreme-
ly grin. ho optimisn is warranted ot this otage. The zigzag negotiations
of the Tokyo Round. as witnessed during the past years, reflected obvious
structural changes in the world. economy. Those concrete nessures taken
by countries concerned, to cope with structural changes. indicate difficul-
ties ai.ead-as is evidence by the aver-nounting economic friction between
Japan end the United States as well as between Japan end Europe.

The structural changes in the world econoey were caused by the relative
downward curve of the u.s. economy, and an increased trend toward diversi-
fied polarisation.

The world economy increased in interdependency. in line with the progress
of sultipolarieation. There are far too many problems for one country
alone to be able to settle.

It is certainly a very difficult task to make respective national interests
coapetible with the idea of cooperation within the framework of nultipolari-
ration. and to build up s systes of international division for the next de-
cade.

The present floating exchange systes is a byproduct of the decline of the
dollar, or the 0.8. econony for that matter, and there is a limit to expand-
ing trade scale by tariff cuts under the floating system. It is nail won—
der attention at the Tokyo Round was focused on the easing of so-called
nontsriff barriers, such as govarment procure-ant and import procedures.
rather than on reduction of tariffs.

Since the agreement called for reduction of nontariff barriers, the coun-
tries concerned will be obliged to probe their own domestic industrial sys-
tens. In the course of the adjustment they may encounter difficult problems
of how to avoid a frontal clash with national interest. The terns of the
Tokyo Round could be used to justify trade protectionism. depending upon the
circumstances of actual implementation.

The Tokyo Sueit scheduled for this June will consider world trade since the
Tokyo Round. but Japan will be one of the greatest beneficiaries of the
world trade system based on the GATT. This country must strive to work
out best possible measures for coping with industrial structural changes.

COPYRIGIIT: Hainichi Daily News. 1979

(:50: 6120

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOMGICAL

'YOKIURI' owns 0” GENEVA TRADE TALKS
Tokyo 1113 DAILY YMURI in English 13 Apr 79 p 2 0'4
(Editorial: "Toward Free Trade")

[Text] At last, a package agreusent conpleting the Tokyo Round of nultina-
tional trade talks was initialed in Geneva Thursday. about six years after
the talks began. so the rules governing world trade in the 1980s have nov
been set.

This does not lean. however, that all probleus have been solved, and a con-
stant battle against protectionist is to be expected.

The Tokyo Round. aimed at raising living standards and welfare throughout
the world, started in Septesber 1973.

This oil crisis soon after caused stagnation in many countries and suspension
of the talks until progress began again in January last year.

A further deadlock occurred, however, because of the negative attitude of
the European Conunities (BC), and the agree-en: still falls short of what
was originally aimed at.

Reduced Nontariff barriers

The sgreenent to reduce tariffs by slightly less than 30 percent is being
hailed as the main feature of the package, but this is not really so inport-
ant considering that the market pricws of goods fluctuate greatly under the
floating exchange rate system.

The really inportant part of the agreesent is that calling for a reduction
of nontariff barriers, for it is this that will mke world trade free.

Even this section does 'not go far enough. especially with the trend touard
protectionism against the so—called more developed of the developing coun-
tries, which can be expected to go all out to break their way into world
markets during the 1980s.

MOMCIALUSBOIH
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The BC has called strongly for selective safeguards or emergency restrictions
directed against specific countries with this problem in mind.

Oil Price Rise Danger

The 86's proposals were not accepted because of objections from other ad-
vanced countries and the developing nations. but it was decided to discuss
this issue further. and the EC did declare that it would ilpose such inport

restrictions whenever necessary even if this was not officially accepted
internationally.

There is also the danger that some parts of the agreement will be used by
some countries to protect their om domestic industries.

Moreover, if oil prices continue to rise. this night break the balance
between the developed and the developing countries' economies and accelerate
protec t ionisn .

The countries which will benefit most free free world trade are Japan and
the more developed developing countries. a nuaber of which are near Japan.

Japan should new deal with two major problenaugoverment procure-cat from
foreign producers and the advancement of the dates for the tariff cuts—not
Ierely to ease the trade friction between Japan and the 0.5. but for the sake
of Japan's real national interests.

COPYRIGHT: Daily Youiuri. 1979
C80: 6120

23

W “WT/‘76? "CF AWV
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

NTT RESISTS 'POLITICAL PRESSURE'
Coopetitive international Bidding Unwanted
Tokyo NihON KEIZAI SHINBUN in Japanese 13 Feb 79 p 10

[Text] In the fall of 1973 the so-celled nultileteral trade negotiations
of the GATT Tokyo Round began. The original target date for conclusion of
the negotiations was sometime in 1975: but. because of many points of
conflict between Japan and America. Japan and the ac and America and the
BC. the negotiations encountered difficulty upon difficulty and have
already extended over more than 5 years.

Expansion of world trade. cooperation of the advanced countries in the
economic development of moderately advanced and developing countries. and
removal of obstacles to these ends are extremely meaningful items to
global prosperity on a larger scale. These negotiations have proceeded

to deal with government procurement as one of the measures toward such
ends with the ides that the various governments will procure items which
they purchase through competitive international bidding. The negotiations.
howevor. ran into a deadlock and a serious problem arose which involves
the future of Japan's telephone system.

This problem is the strong American demand that in order to improve the
imbolance in Japan's trade. Japan include government related agencies.

in addition to the government. in a broad range of international competi-
tiVe bidding and. accordingly. that NTT procurement be opened to inter-
national competitive bidding.

we apologize for bringing you this disturbing news so soon after the
holidays.

In combined efforts with NTT. the member countries of the Telecommunica-
tion Machine Industry Association and the Telecommunication Cable and
Other Related Industries Association have developed Japan's electronic
communication system. This giant system which covers the entire country
demands highly specialised operation with machinery planned according to
consistent concepts. standardised norms. efficiency to guarantee long-
term stability and so forth. These requirements. however. would be
extremely difficult to meet under competitive international bidding.

2%
FOR 0??!CIAL US! ONLY
u ova eon «- e.“ 0.
....... mo» v A 00‘ " I \\

Jepeneee teiephoue eyeten in In dagger.

 

“WWW 4
ﬁt“ it?” “W.“
my Oar-as. 59;” in:
it$252?stawtuﬂéﬁezmsgig l‘ \
1:}! .,..i1§§%l§‘a/\a we"
1:; 55‘!¥‘:§§% MM
B, M 5 m. ‘. \\ “‘3‘
' ‘ 1“ $33! I". '\‘ \3 .
iii? ‘1" /_{\ \Heere introuble:

2mg! w.qi‘x‘s;\\:\x\\\‘ix\\\ OH
35%” ((94%: \\\\\\\‘

‘ ‘ u

\w "* bk? 3 bkkkb“
mmmw uxzw-uxﬁsaamau wmmm

In order 9.0 protect our cttleee' e telephone. we expect you «mad Jude-eat.

   
  

lemlceuon Nechlne Industry Aeeocleuon

‘kleromuntcouon cable end
‘b Vite Industries Aeeocletton

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

if prucuteaent were carried out through competitive international bidding.
many types of equipnent of different composition. nanufactura and design
concept would be sised together and the efficiency of design. construction
and all other services. particularly oeintenance operations would decline
conspicuously. Furthermore. there would be probleae such as extended
pay-eat dates and lowered quality with tho result that the electronic
connunications systeo would becone run down and it would be iapoeaible

to naintain the service which the people expect. or in the long run ser-
vice costa would rise. incidentally. procure-ant methods similar to
Japan's have been adopted everywhere in the advanced countries. Procure-
ment in the EC countries is by private contract and the sane is true in
the United States where there are private telephone corporations. This is
because teleco-unicstiona is a very iaportant service for the people and
this is the only way to keep a national telecomunicatione system always
in the best condition.

The American descend can be called an unreasonable order which would force
Japan alone to accept a method which is not used by advanced countries.

Certainly. the balance of trade between Japan and the United States is a
problem.

Our industries want to cooperate even at the cost of making sons sacrifices.
Even so. to invite the collapse of the talecosasunications systea which
could be called the nation's central nervous system would be too such of

a sacrifice. how much worse would it be if this were to lead to the de-
cline of the electronics industry which should be nurtured as one of
Japan's core industries in the 1980's. 1990's and into the 21st century.

Japan's telecommunications systes is now at the world's highest level.
If parts which are difficult to adapt are later incorporated into this
unified and completed system. the hemony of the system will be daasged
and it will be impossible to asks full use of the efficiency which is
annifest only with integrity of the system.

Furthermore. production planning would becoac difficult because of coupe-
titivc international bidding and. as a result. employment would become
unstable and this would have a great effect on the national livelihood.
Furthermore. the will to invest in research where there is no certainty
of a return would be reduced. This would invite a decline in the level
of technology and would shake the foundations of the developing elec-
tronics induntry.

In March the entire national telephone system will be autoosted; that is,
at any tine, from any place. to any place. it will be possible to reach
any corner of the country by dialing. The telephone system which had
only 560.000 subscribers at the end of the war has developed to the point
where it has 6 aillion subscribers and. of course. installation can be
done i-aediately upon request. The progress and aaplification of the

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 outr

annnene teleconnunirotionu system are shown by the feet that our daily
lives are supported to o great extent by the telephone and that it is
possible to reley television over national netvurks.

Our two industries are keenly aware of our responsibility to further
nnplify and develop the telecommunications system on behalf of the people.
He sincerely hope for a pro-pt. sensible decision on the pert of the
United States and Japanese governments and, st the sane tise. we ask for
the understanding of you. the people of Japan.

We are in trouble.

we rely on your sound judgsent to protect our people's telephone systes.

Teleeoonunicetion Machine Industry Association
8th Floor Sankei Bldg Annex

1-7-2 Otto-Hachi Chyoda-Ku

Tokyo 100

Tel: 03 (231) 3156

Teleconnunication Cable and Other Relations Industries Aesocietion
3d Floor Torenouon Bldg

1-1-12 Toranonon. Minute-Ru

Tokyo 105

Tel: 03 (50‘) 3681

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keixai Shinbuneha I979
Danger to Subcontractors
Tokyo suntan SHIRCRO in Japanese 1 Her 79 p 19

[Text] A rather strange full page ad bearing the words, "we are in
trouble.“ in extremely large print appeared in the earning edition of

six nationally circulated newspapers on I3 March. In the corner of the
page was n small print expletation which said. "Japan's telephone system
is in danger." The sponsors of the ed were the Telecoenunication Machine
Industry Association and the Teleco-sunicetion Cable and Other Related
Industries Association.

These are not fsnilier names but upon closer reading it turns out that
these are groups of subcontractors for NTT and their message is "The
United Stetee tells us to open equipeent for NTT to conpetitive inter-
national bidding. For us this is a life or death issue. Some of the
320 subcontrsctor co-panies would probsbly go bankrupt. Efficiency will
decline and service costs will increase."

Reading between the lines it see-s. in short. that it there were free
competition those businesses which so far have been idling elong with a
"let the govern-en: foot the bill" attitude nould be in danger.

27
PO! omcuu. est ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The word is that the cost of this ad was “100 million yen" and a know-
ledgeable source tella us. "At one time the beef and orange industries
tried to block liberalization and were treated like traitors by the mass
media. Hhsn business made its countermove. the papers which had made the
attacks continued to take an ambiguous attitude. NTT struck first

before similar charges were made against NTT."

Certainly. the ad seems to have been effective. Although it is still
early to say. the little editorialising in the various papers seems to
have tended to favor NTT.

0n the other hand. it seems that in the United States. which is calling
for "liberalisation." IBM. which wants to liberalize computers. is behind
the stage pulling the strings. if it is impossible to liberalize
computers then the tactic is to take a slightly roundabout way and use
parts for NTT as an opening. The reading is that NTT which is a semi-
official. semi-private entity. will have to take orders from the Japanese
CoVernment which is distressed over friction between Japan and the

United States.

The question is whether or not they will be able to carry things off
according to their intentions. The biggest reason for concern is that
Prime Minister Ohira has no "present" to carry with him to the United
States.

COPYRIGHT: by Shinchosha 1979

Equipment Procurement Issue
Tokyo ShUKAN SthCHO in Japanese 8 her 79 p 27

[Text] "Whatever may be done in the case of telecommunications machinery.
a firm decision should be made to liberalize at least a part of tale.
communications csbles and service parts." This statement was made in

the economic ministerial level conference which met on 12 February and
executives of the telecommunications cable industry seemed to hava
virtually leapt up in astonishment at what went on in that conference.

The issue of releasing NTT's equipment procurement had been regarded as a
symbol of the friction in Japanese-United States trade. whatever might
have been the reaction to making telecommunications cable alone the prime
target of this move. business seems to have been taken aback by the idea
of telecommunications cable being give the same treatment as service parts.

The business people spent 100 million yen on the large advertisement which
said that they are in trouble and so forth: it can be considered only
natural that business’ discomfiture would become more intense as the

issue becomes more specific. If. however. telecommunications cable were
imported from the United States and. as a result. telephone bills were

to go down. the people would not be bothered a bit. On the contrary.

it would be a matter of at least benefitting in telephone service now that
good beef and oranges have finally proved out of reach.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

Secretary General Hitsutake Kunanoto of the Telecommunication Cable and
Other Related Industries Association says this: "Which is cheaper

United States or Japanese cable? Since neither the United States nor

any of the other countries which are able to build their own communica-
tions networks hold coepetitive bidding. there is. in any case. no way

to culpare prices. However. hardly any electrical cable for power trans-
eission or hoee use cases into Japan. furthereore. since we are on nearly
equal footing in international bidding in developing countries even though
the high yen is a disadvantage. their cable is probably not cheaper than
ours. Since freight charges would have to be added to the cost of their
cable. we would probably not lose out even with coapetitive bidding."

with such self confidence there should not be any great uproar. Could the
outcry be due to a ”business ego" which is unwilling to change the current
situation in which the industry is innereed in the were bath of the

”NTT family?"

"No. we speak in sieple terns of electronic cable but eeong the itees of
high additional value in which the United States is interested is know-how:
i.e.. industrial secrets. If the United States is allowed to participate
in bidding. we will have to publicise detailed eethods concerning tools
for copper refining. etc.. in order to have the United States eaha cable
for Japan. Ultimately. technology on which Japan has spent eoney would
flow out of Japan. In this process Japan would be learning nothing free
the United States. Consequently. only the United States' level of
technology would go up. Japan's industry would lose out in coepetition
overseas and then in Japan. In the end the industry would be ruined.
But. it would be fine if all the countries in the world were to have
coepetitive bidding.” (Hr Xulanoto)

If this is the case with telecos-unications cable. one can probably
conjecture what would be the case with other teleconnmnication equipeent.

Of course. it is probably undeniable that one of the reasons NTT will
adamantly resist opening up the door is that N11 has in eind the pre-
servation of the ”NTT family" where people froe NTT can be placed.
Nevertheless. since it is the United States which is eaking this un-
reasonable deeand. how is the Japanese Governaent to respond to it?

An expert in economics gives this explanation.

"Opening up NTT is one of America's demands. but it is not so strong a
dceend. It is being taken up on a grand scale because of the "family
situation" on the Japanese side. The icons of greatest interest for the
United States are beef and oranges on which a tentative compromise was
reached but this left a great deal of dissatisfaction in the United States.
For success in the Tokyo Round and for Prime Minister Ohira's trip to the
United States before the end of the round. Japan needs soee sort of
“present.“ However. since the “beef and orange fereers" cannot be angered
before the unified local elections and the House of Councillors election.
NTT has been taken up."

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The NTT family" is being made the scape goat to protect the "beef and
orange farmers." how many sacrifices will these unusually privileged
farmers require in the future?

COPYRIGHT: by Shinchoshe 1979
Fear of Unemployment
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHINBUN in Japanese 22 Feb 79 p 3

[Text] Since the war many Japanese organizations and groups have become
known all over the world. Some of these are the General Council of Trade
Unions of Japan. the National Federation of Student Self-Government
Associations. the Agricultural Cooperatives. MIT! (The Ministry of
International Trade and Industry) which until recently was opposed to
liberalisation of imports. The Japanese Red Army is also famous and now
NTT (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation) has become
thoroughly famous. At any rate. because President Akigusa and other NTT
executives have said publicly that ”the only things they can buy overseas
are nope and buckets" they have fallen into the villain's role and have
been sharply attacked in a United States Congressional report on Japanese-
American Trade (The Jones Report).

Dissatisfied with Japan's heavy surplus balance. the United States is
using NTT instead of the beef and oranges it had been using until only
recently as the symbol of the closed nature of Japan's market and is
pressing for liberalization of equipment procurement. Prime Minister ohire
and other government leaders tend to think with the prime minister's

visit to the United States coming up in May some compromise will have to

be made but resistance from NTT is strong. There are, of course, some
fairly convincing points in what the corporation says.

Some of the corporation's counter arguments are: "Uhen we introduce
telecommunications equipment we develop this equipment in conjunction

with domestic manufacturers from the research stage on. If we were to
change from the current private contract method to competitive bidding

we would be forced to make public detailed manufacturing methods and know-
how would flow out to foreign countries.”

"Japan's telephone service boasts the lowest breakdown rate in the world.
This is because we even go into the factories to make our checks. Such
stringent checks would not be possible in foreign firms.”

The situation. however. is too complicated to have the United States
understand these excuses from NTT. Besides. there have been some weak-
nesses in the corporation's handling of the matter; the export promotion
delegation. the group of United States Congressmen and the people from the
United States Government who have visited Japan on this matter since last
autumn were received in such a way that they were left hanging. Thus.

the persistent thinking within the government is that whatever else may
be said. the corporation's best counter-argument is that the 200 companies

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0?PICIAL USE ONLY

in the "NTT family" are probably in danger in that they “will be overcome
by United States manufacturers who are strong competitors in computers
and these other fields.”

To back up their view. labor unions such as the All Japan Telecommunica-
tions workers Union. the All Japan Federation of Electric Machine Workers'
Union and the All Japan Electric Hire Labor Union stand ready to form an
opposition front on the grounds that "capital orders from NTT account for
30 percent of the total sales of the 200 manufacturers specialising in
electronic cable and machinery: if this were grabbed by foreign firms a
problem of employment of 620.000 workers would develop."

However. to make this "fear of unemployment" a reason for keeping Japan
closed as far as NTT is concerned would give the United States an excuse
for inport restriction against Japan. Even without this excuse, because
of the trade deficit with Japan there are growing demands within the
United States Congress for an import surcharge against countries showing
a trade surplus. Government representative for the Tokyo Round (of
multilateral trade negotiations) says. "If the NTT issue is straightened
out. the Tokyo Round will somehow be settled." If the Tokyo Round can
be brought to a conclusion. it may be possible to avoid what the govern-
ment leaders are secretly worried about. i.e.. a movement in the United
States Congress to legislate an import surcharge prior to the Tokyo
Summit (conference of the leaders of the advanced countries). If debate
on a bill to assess import surcharges against Japan. west Germany and
Switzerland begins before the Tokyo Summit. the conference would be
under an oppressive atmosphere and there would be no chance of success.

From this point of view. it is desirable for Japan's economy as a whole
that friction in Japanese-American trade be kept to a minimum by making
NTT'a procurement of machinery as open as possible. Nevertheless.
friction in Japanese-American trade relations will probably not disappear
even if the NTT question is settled. Even if NTT were to buy from the
United States 10 percent of the nearly $3'billion worth of equipment it
procures annually. this would come only to $30 million and this would be
only a drop in the bucket in light of the total trade imbalance (the
United States deficit in trade with Japan last year was $11.6 billion).
Judging from the difference in productivity. the difference in efforts

to export and the relationship between growth rates and exports in

United States and Japanese industry. Japan's surplus trade balance can

be viewed as “structural" and the surplus will continue in the near
future even if the surplus in the ordinary balance declines somewhat.

The United States also sees its trade deficit with Japan as "structural”
and looks for its causes in Japan's "unfair trade" and insufficient
efforts to cooperate overseas. Consequently. the United States will press
for increasing the Japanese growth rate and changing Japan's system and
practices. Our side's real inclination is to reply that "we are distressed
that the United States will not accept the fact that the surplus will
continue."

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If stated clumsily. this unfair trade argument and this demand that the
surplus he accepted can only lead to anti-American and anti-Japanese
feelings. For this reason. careful handling of the issue is important.
Japan in particular makes relations with the United States the pivotal
consideration in foreign policy and must give special consideration to
maintaining the Japan-United States security system. Japan. therefore.
should hasten to build a balanced system by responding flexibly to
individual requests and compensating with direct investcent (exporting
employment) when the surplus exports unemployment.

COPYRIGRT: Nihon Keisai Shinbunaha 1979
Rumors on 0.8. Intent
Tokyo NIKKBI BUSINESS in Japanese 12 Her 79 p 76

[Text] The current point of focus in the attempt to avoid economic friction
between Japan and the United States is the question of opening up NTT

in which it is demanded that NTT admit foreign firms to participation

when the corporation procures equipment. From the technological point

of view. however. most business people feel that "there is little equip-
ment which NTT can import."

NTT's yearly capital procurement comes to about 600 billion yen. Out of
this 200 billion yen is spent for high technology intensive products such
as electronic switching equipment and coaxial cable with a life span of
20 to 40 years. The level of Japanese technology in this field is very
high and only a handful of the largest American companies. such as AT and
T can contend with the four giant communications firms Nihon Denki.
hitachi Seisskujo. Pukitsu and Oki Denki. Since. however. the large
American communications manufacturers have no intention of coming into
Japan. there can be no equipment imports.

Even in the case of types of equipment which belongs technologically in
the second rank. it seems that Japanese firms would win out if “11 were to
implement competitive bidding. In the field of public pay telephones.

for example. one firm. Tamura Denki Seisakujo says, "we are the firm that
controls the Third world markets. such as Southeast Asia." Ultimately
what Japan can import can be narrowed down to telecommunications cable and
some tereinal items such as in-house switching equipment and telex which
are employed at the user's end of the system. Even for these items it
seems the precondition would be "if the American firms sell cheaply to
gain a market." For «mample. NTT showed a liberal attitude toward intro-
duction of the pocket ball on which the American Motorola mounted a sales
campaign.

Nevertheless, even ‘2 these items. with their small scale markets. are
combined they woulc not be of too much use in reducing the surplus in
Japan's international balance.

32
roe orucm. use 0qu
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

What then is the real intention of the United States in calling for
"liberaliting NTT?" A convincing view is that the intention is to "delay
the progress of Japan's semiconductor technology." At the heart of the
Japanese-United States semiconductor war is development and practical
application of ultra-LS! end it is none other than NTT which, along with
the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, is taking the initiative
in development on the Japanese side. The interpretation is that the

United States side's strategy is to try to obtain NTT's technology or.
otherwise. to weaken the solidarity of the NTT group through liberalization.

Another persistently circulating tuner is the "story of the le plot."

In the United States there is growing sharp coepetition between IBM and

AT and T over casputer networks. According to the runor. since IBM is be-
hind ATsndT in communications technology, ran wants to obtain advanced
comeunicetions technology from RT? which has a record of cross-licensing
with AT and T and IHB has therefore worked politically to liberalize NTT.

The telephone companies of Europe and America rely on domestic procurement
for aleost all of their equipment. Their main reason for this is to

retain their technology: in puzzlesent. NTT asks. "th should Japan alone...“
Some are saying that perhaps the United States aies to liberalize communi-
cations circuits.

9111
CSO: 4105

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DISSATISPACTION HIT“ JAPAN-U.S. BﬁBRGY DEVELOPMBRT EXPRESSED
Tokyo KAGAKU in Japanese Vol ‘9 No 5 Feb 79 p 127
[Science Times column: "whither Japan-0.8. Science and Technology Cooperationﬁl

[Text] The future of Japan-0.8. science and technology cooperation. which be-
gan with the advocacy of former Prime Minister Fukuka. has become uncertain
with the change in political power. Prime Minister Ohirs. holding off on the
detailed previous arrangements of secretariat officials from both countries.
has assumed a cautious attitude toward its continuation because originally

the cooperation question was decided politically and because it has too much
of Pukuda's hand in it.

when visiting the United States in May last year. Prime Hinister Fuhuka an-
nounced his concept for Japan-0.8. science and technology cooperation at the
Japan Club in New York. The prime minister had two things in mind: first of
all. nuclear fusion for energy development in the 21st century. and secondly.
hydrogen utilization from photosynthesis. However. last summer. at the offic~
isl level negotiations. the 0.5. brought up only energy technology for this
century. such as coal liquefaction. geothermal energy and wind power genera-
tion. what each country was asking was completely contrary to the other;

but. finally. both countries compromised. giving cooperative support to nuclear
fusion and coal liquefaction. They decided concretely on the following three:
1) Japan will participate 251 in America's Gulf Oil Company's coal liquefac-
tion technology. "SRO ll." 2) the 0.8. will invest 25! in the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry's (HITI) Agency of Industrial Science and
Technology's ”methods for direct storage of liquefied hydrogen" technology;

3) the 0.5. and Japan will Jointly invest 50! each in the remodeling plan

of America's General Dynamics' nuclear fusion experimental equipment. "Doublet
3."

Among these. "SRC ll" will require an extremely large amount of money; the
total cost for the 5-7 year period is anticipated to total about 700 million
dollars (130 billion yen). Japan and West Germany will each participate 252
to the 0.S.'s 501. But. the disadvantage is that "sac It" will be able to
use 0.3. coal and Heat German coal. but not Japan's coal. HITI's explanation
is that since Chinese coal and Australian cosl can be used. it has signifi-

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE WLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE?

cance as a resource diploaacy. But when "sac It“ is completed and plants are
exported. it can he concluded that naturally Gulf. which has aaasssd the tech-
nology. will be in an unchallenged position. Actually, even though it is said
that Japan will invest 25! (about 33 billion yen). Japan will not receive 251
of the coapleted technology since Japan's investment is for Nissan plants

that have a proven output of 200.000 barrels and since Gulf is already piling
up large sums of investment money in sxparinental plants and the like. Also,
it was the 0.8. and Vast Germany that first decided to cooperatively develop
"sec 11;" Japan simply rode along. It can he said that Japan. which is in
the black as far as trade goes. was artfully taken in. Until now. coal lique-
faction was not considered seriously in Japan as one source of new energy.
Nevertheless, this suddenly jumped to the forefront in Japan-v.3. science and
technology cooperation. A question has arisen that this kind of policy change
was decided without much discussion in this country.

Prise hinister Ohira has not yet clearly set forth a plan on this question.
he wants to erase its Pukuda coloring. but it is difficult to do so openly.
Inquiries have been sent to the government by the U.S. through its esbassy:
and progress is being watched.

COPIRIGHT: lwanani Shoten 1979

9600
050: 4105 3ND

35
FOR OPPCIAL USE UNIX