FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/1-0695

28 July. 1982

Japan Report

Hmcnrs' CORPORATE: STRATEGY: EXAMINED

(F000 46/82}

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

I“ WHOM. USE ONLY
NOT!

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT

(P000 46/82)

HITACHI'S CORPORATE STRATEGY EXAHINED

CONTENTS

Personnel Strategy
(Sotsuo Hito) ....... . ....... . ....................... . ..... .....

Perfornnoe of Subsidiaries
(Mitsum Ronni, Yumori Intenhi) . . . . . . ......................

Corporate Strategy
(Mango Ivai) ............................................... .

Overseas Strategy _
(Inna Ila-nu) .................................................

-a- [III-ASIA-ll

me WN‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIIIC! m m

HITACII'S CORPORATE smrscr mm

Personnel Strategy
Tokyo ZAIKAI T3130 in Japanese Jul 82 pp “-66

[Report by Bcononic Journalist Setauo Hits]

[Excerpt] Hitachi Ltd is a representative international
enterprise of Japan whose growth has reached the point where
it boasts that "General Electric is our rival." Under the
slogan ”Hitachi for Technology," it prov-ates total
efficiency in nanagenent and prides itself on its superior
financial manage-ant. But does Hitachi nerit a superlative
rating as an "ideal enterprise?" Our special ten of
reporters will ettenpt to analyse the facts concerning
Hitachi's type of business nsnagenent.

"the Man" of Hitachi Ltd; Dedicated to Nurturing Human Resources in Private
Sector

Nanihei Kodaira (1876-1951.), founder of Hitachi for his ”nobushi" [soldiers
of fortune], devoted his entire life to the develop-lent of donestic technolog:
of Japanese origin. The early mtachi enterprise was born in an abandoned
mining site, overgrown with grass, where Kodaira led a nacho existence as
boss of the "nobushi."

His ideals were grandiose and his achievenents were solid. Be gathered
around hie nen of sidlar aspirations on the backwoods site and was
deter-ined to succeed soneday in training a group of technicians who could
acquire and practice world-class science and technology.

The boss of the ”nobushi," Nanihei Kodaira, had a dress. when he was a
student in the electrical engineering departnent of Tokyo University (in
1898). he wrote in his yearend notes as follows: "I have traveled this
year to various plants and factories. and have been perturbed by the
insanity of Japan's industrial technology. I have also read foreign
nsgazines and been a-zed by the advanced industrial standards in Europe
and Anerica. when I graduate and enter society, I do not intend to becone
the keeper of a stall electrical fire. If ny country's industries are not

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

flourishing, it is my duty to make them flourish. I feel strongly that i
am not destined to spend my life as a coapany keeper. As for achieving my
purpose in life, I would sacrifice everything to be able to travel to
America and seek employment in a major electrical firm there. I would
endeavor to overcome any hardships and plant my feet there, resolved if
necessary to spend my entire life there in order to succeed in my
profession. This is the plan I have formed in my mind this year. In
effect. I have been disillusioned with Japan and have begun to entertain
a desire to use my talents on the world stage." [See Kenichi Iida's '
"Pioneers of Technological Philosophy"]

The boss of the "nobushi" was a romantic at heart. And as a member of
society, he was also a rare realist who laid one brick on top of another in
order to achieve his dream in building the foundation for Hitachi Ltd.

Namihei Kodaira, the founder of Hitachi, was a romantic and a realist. This
is an indispensable factor in gaining worldwide success in an industry where
workers are trained and their talents applied.

Namihei Kodaira made the development of independent technology by the
Japanese his lifework. He secured the location in order to realize his goal
and above all concentrated his efforts in fostering the most important
human resources. Kodaira was himself an excellent technician and scientist.
but from the moment he began to repair electrical mining machinery in a
corner of the fledgling hitachi Mining Company in 1908, he became an
organizer and provided guidance to younger men, striving to create a work
environment with suitable conditions. Despite his modest means. he never
hesitated to obtain the latest information the world had to offer. He
constantly educated his subordinates cancerning the facts of science and
technology. which constitute the base of modern industry. He promoted
rationalization of the production shop and did not forget to foster talent
for research and development.

Namihei Kodaira was a great producer of men of strong individuality at
Hitachi.

It is difficult to believe that Kodaira, who had aspired to studying in
America. died without once setting foot in Europe or America. But his
unchanging credo was: "Rather than go myself, use the Ioney to let yOunger
men study abroad." If he were an artist or a composer, it might have
sufficed for him merely to arrive in the west, regardless of the hardships
he might have encountered en route. But as an industrialist in charge of
an enterprise, he was not in a position to do so. Faced with the realities
of the business. he had no alternative than to relinquish to his subordinates
any such opportunity, and to stay behind to Cultivate human resources for
the future. The Hitachi for the "nobushi" became a training school for men
of talent .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kodaira’s Drea- and Hita's Realis-

Hss Haeihei Kodaira, working in the private sector to cultivate huasn talent
and applying hinself to the developlent of independent technology in a
spirit of freedon and deter-instion, a stubborn and inflexible person? He
was not. He was at heart a muntic, as we have already pointed out.

Kodaira also had s sense of humr. In his later years he reportedly referred
to the Agriculture and Co-ercial Depart-eat as the "Amzing and Perplexing
Departeent.” [a play on Japanese Pronunciation]

‘l‘o Kodaira, who steadfastly pursued his grand purpose in the fields and
hills of Hitachi outside of Tokyo, this was his view of the bureaucracy,
where there is a wide discrepancy between "intent" and "reality." There was
a basic difference between the bureaucracy and the private sector in the
clltivation of sen and the application of talent. A bright college graduate
could enter the rigid bureaucracy and exercise immediate authority. but

in the private sector he could not advance. nor could he survive, without
constructively destroying such influence. Kodaira's cultivation of sen was
truly based on a spirit of "freedon and self-reflection" as a neuter of the
private sector.

He shall now turn our attention fron Hanihei lodaira, the founder, to
Katsushige Hits, the present boss of Hitachi.

Katsushige Hits is the fifth president of Hitachi. He assumed the position
of coepany president in June 1981, after Chikara Kurata, Kenichiro Kauai,
and Hirokichi Yoshiyana, in that order.

Ironically, the new boss of Hitachiuthe most typical private enterprise
located in a rural setting--had aspired as a young nan to enter the
Hinistry of International Trade and Industry (H111), which was the object
of Kodaira's pun. It is surprising that Katsuahige Hits, who like Kodaira
studied in the electrical engineering depart-eat of Tokyo University, should
have dreamed of beconing a bureaucrat who oversees the private sector.

In a different sense, however, it eight have been a greater challenge for
him to be involved in the develop-ant of a new econo-ic systen from the
macro standpoint of detenining the direction of Japan's industry, rather
than unobtrusively building his own ”castle" in the nicro world of the
private sector. Horeover, in 1969, when Hits entered society, Japan was
struggling to find a new direction said the postwar confusion. The "Dodge
stora" determined Japan's economic stabilization pol icy in the midst of
poverty conditions, and the unified exchange rate was 360 yen to the
dollar.

That spring, Katsushige Hits tried to beco-e an HIT! bureaucrat and failed.
He also applied for esployaent in a general trading company and again was
rejected, so he bees-e an engineer at Hitachi. It is a testimny to the
development of a going concern that Katsushige Hits as a Hitachi elployee
was able to fulfill the dreaa of Ha-ihei Kodaira, who once wrote: "I would

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sacrifice everything to be able to travel to America. to seek employment with
a major electrical engineering firn, and strive to overcome every hardship
to set down my roots there."

Importance of Keeping Half a Step Ahead

In 1958, Kataushige Hits began his apprenticeship at General Electric in the
United States. He lived for 8 months in Schenectady, where 63 was founded.
For Hits. who saw the America of a blessed era-~in the 1950's when it was
powerful, full of confidence, and the undisputed leader of the world--it

was an original experience which perhaps determined his way of life as a
businessman. "

In any era, it is important to have experience, which puts one even half a
step ahead of the others.

Soichiro Honda went to America in early 1950 and closely observed the
modern, industrialized society there. In early 1951, Konosuke Hatsushita
flew to America on a fact-finding tour and received his inspiration for a
future in electronics. Both obtained experience a half step ahead of
others, and this had a tremendous impact on their respective organizations.

In any transitional period, early experience stirs the imagination of those
who would challenge the times, bringing their foresight into full play.

Such examples are plentiful throughout history.

In the great transitional period of the Meiji Restoration-~the age of the
topknot hairstyle--Yukichi Pukuzawa (1835-1901) sailed to America on

Katsu Kaishu's ship the Kanrin Haru at the age of 25 in 1860). Biichi
Shibuzawa (1840-1931), who established the first stock corporation in Japan
and helped to lay the f0undation for capitalism, traveled to France as the
Tokugawa Shogun's retainer at the age of 28 (1867).

why did the early experiences of Yukichi Pukuzawa, Biichi Shibuzawa, and
more recently Soichiro Bonds and Konosuke Hatsushita, prove to be a plus
in their activities? first of all, the opportunity to study abroad when
not many had a chance to do so served to strengthen their determination.
Their preparation, resolve, and sense of mission must have been equally
strong.

Gaining experience ahead of the tines undoubtedly proved to be an advantage
in comparing the capabilities and characteristics of foreign countries and
Japan.

The early travels of Soichiro Honda and Konosuke Matsushita must have proved
to be as shocking an experience for them as it was for Yukichi Fukuzawa

and Eiichi Shibuzawa. However. there is no doubt that, as industrialists,
they were not intimidated by the conspicuous difference in the level of
development. They calmly observed the situation. acted with composure to
narrow the gap. and provided important directiOn.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the same period that Soichiro Honda and Konosuke Hatsushita sojourned
in Americaubetween 1950 and 1951--Biji Toyoda (present president) and
Shoichi Saito (former chairman) of Toyota Motors separately studied the
Ford Company's production shop in Detroit. They utilized their rich
experiences at the time to guide today's "Toyota production for-11a" to
perfection.

Incidentally, what did 36-year-old engineer Katsushige Hits learn during
his stay at General Electric? It is only natural, in view of the
difference in the timing and in their positions, that what he learned was
probably different qualitatively from what the two founding managers had
learned. The latter two were desperately trying to close the gap between
Japan and the United States, and they searched for a tangible formula.
Soichiro Honda bought up high-precision machinery as long as his funds
lasted, whereas Konosuke Hatsushita had his eye on technological imports
fron advanced firms in America and Europe, and he signed an agreenent with
the Dutch Phillipa Conpany in 1952 on cooperation with regard to capital.

Katsushige Hita's purpose in staying at General Electric was to study
firsthand Anerica's system engineering. At the tine. Japan's electrical
industry centered on heavy electrical nachinery. and Kits, who was the
switchboard design manager at the Koknbun plant, naturally studied the
application of system engineering for heavy electrical nachinery.

however, Hita's true forte appeared in another form. what stimulated him
met at 63 was its personnel strategy.

The training systen at GE was not limited to conpany employees. but was
extended widely to users at home and abroad. The company also instituted
an ideal curricula for nembers of society which provided reeducatiOn in
basic theory for employees with experience in actual production work. In
an ideal era and in an environnent, with the greatest emphasis on education
of all Anerican companies, Hits asked hinself: ”what is business education?
What kind of education could a business enterprise offer?" He probably
pondered further about the essence of education fron the human viewpoint.

If one were to give high marks to Katsmhige Hits. the fifth president of
Hitachi, as an industrialist with a special concern for education, he would
probably reply. ”This is nothing to be surprised about. It is a well-known
tradition at Hitachi."

Meets Challenge of Lasting Personnel Strategy

Four presidents successively led Hitachi Ltd after the war after Nanihei
Kodaira, the founder, was disnissed in 1967 by the GHQ directive purging
public employees. The four have been: Chikara Kurata (1967-61), Kenichiro
Konsi (1961-71), lliroltichi Yoshiyan (1971-81). and Katsushige Nita (1981-
present). The postwar purge of public eqloyees resulted in a sweeping
change of leadership, ranging fron politicians and bureaucrats to artists.
The so-called "third-class directors" (fro. a novel by Keits Genji) included

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

Shigeo Hagano. Toshiwu Dolxo, and Takeshi Sakurada, who are still active.
This younger generation of mnagers, huﬂaly aware of their lack of
experience, faced a new age of upheaval, and their success in overconing the
challenge has been highly evaluated.

The unrelenting efforts of Chihra Kurate, one of the "third-class directors,”
is widely recognized as having largely contributed to the establish-mt of
postwar Hitachi's operational base.

Chikara Kurata grappled head-on with major issues concerning rage hikes and
reductions in force in 1967 and 1950, and he survived several postwar
crises. Heanwhile, he eaphasized "harmony sung the eaployees" and "the
sharing of knowledge" taught by Hanihei Kodaira. He learned through
unimaginable trials and tribulations how imrtant it was to believe in
man's sincerity and to reject tricks and ruses.

In 1961, when the Japanese econoaly entered an era of high growth. he .
relinquished his position as president to Kenichiro Ronni. Thereafter. the
tern of office at Hitachi began to follow a pattern without any instruction
by (‘hikara Kurata or any stipulation by his successor. of course, neither
was it based on any decision by any najor stockholder.

A "10-year presidential tern of office" was enpirically and tacitly
recognized. In order to enable a president to "do his best to acconplish his
goals," it would require that many years. In order to fully exercise nanage-
nent strategy and survive in the free and cospetitive narket through
"complete preparation, detailed planning, and bold execution." a president
would require imagination, conceptual ability, and foresight in exercising

a decade of control at his will, as well as leadership to solidify and guide
a group of individualists. At the sane tine, it would require a decade to
cultivate a successor who would be qualified as pilot of the next-generation
nanageoent. At Hitachi. it becane custosary to allow sufficient tine for the
selection of its leaders.

The secret of Hitachi's stable top manage-en: lies in the selection of its
leaders, the deep and mutual trust between a successor and his predecessor,
and the strong sense of duty felt by both.

The "10-year presidential tern of office" at Hitachi is a decade with time
to spare and a decade of rigorous pressure. Both Kenichiro Ronni and
Hirokichi Yoshiyana coapleted their terms of office after Chibra Kurata.
Of course, if they lacked ability as president, they would have been
compelled to step down before their tine expired. Even Katsushige Hits,
who has passed his first anniversary as president. is not guaranteed 10
years in office. It is up to his ability and endeavor.

The terns of office of the four presidents at Hitachi were mentioned before.
Their sense of duty in fulfilling their respective terns with achievenent
and their trust of their employees constitute the chief traits and strengths
of Hitachi unageeent.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For emle. if we look at the succession of presidents at their rival
cowany, Toshiba, during the sane period, Toshiba had eight presidents:
Toyoham Tsmri. lirosalm Shinkai, Taieo lshizaha. Punio Iwashita,

Shigeo Dob. [ciao Tenechi. Tsugio Iwata. and Shoichi Saba. At Hitachi there
were only five. including Ianihei lodaire. In addition, the top personnel
showed contrasting traits. while the litachi leaders have atrived for
stability under their own power, a confused situation existed at Toshiba,
with s repetition of reconstruction through the hiring of "inputted”

leaders.

Najor labor disputes occurred during the late 1960's and early 1950's at
bOth Hitachi and Toshiba. At llitachi. Chikara Kurate survived by laying

his job on the line, while at Toshiba, Taieo Ishieaka (of Daiichi Insurance
Co) was brought in as troubleshooter. Also, when econonic difficulties arose
in 1966 and 1965. Hitachi surmunted then through a joint effort by Chaimn
Chikars Kurata and President Kenichiro Ko-ai, while Toshiba brought in
Toshiwo Doluo (Ishikawaji-a-llarias Heavy Industries). It is also well known
that during this period Hatsushita Electric survived the crisis by having
Chairman Konosuke Hatsushita hisself taking charge as acting nanaging
director. These facts indicate the more solid type of nanagenent at Kitschi.
AlthOugh regarded as conservative and lacking in color, it has the scat
orthodox style.

what is at the base of Hitachi's nanage-ent? As the "10-year presidential
tern of office" synholizes, it is probably the philosophy that a minus of
10 years is required to bring out s leader's capabilities and enable hin

to denonstrate than; that it would require a decade for the president hinself
to fully utilize his rich experience and huanisa: and that it would take

a decade to cultivate his successor. Additionally, top nanagenent mat be
prepared to reforn and restructure the business organization with 10 years as
a cycle.

Especially in the case of Hitachi. the manage-ant approach of the successors
who inherited Ralihei Kodaira's basic ideas on ”develop-ant of independent
technology” and "acquisition of science and technology" had to be bold

and detailed. In order to achieve their objectives, they had to return to
the mtto of "the enterprise depends on the nan."

Production Shop Is Starting Point of Science and Technology

Chikara Kurata. who rose fron president to chair-an in 1961, becane a
consultant in 1957 and retired fron the front line. Ilia severance pay after
55 years with Hitachi was 200 nillion yen. Kurata donated the entire sun

to the "Society for the Prowtion of Japanese Technology" as a scholarship
fund, hoping to see the birth of young and proaising researchers.

"hat was Kurata's outlook on life and the business enterprise after 55
years with Hitachi?

"Although I was engaged in what night he, in a sense, an extremely narrow
field of industrial ecomny, I cannot forget about independent econo-y. It

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was my fortune to spud my life career at Hitachi, where the goal has been
to build an industrial nation through research and the development of
homegrown technolgoy initiated by the deceased and venerable Hr Kodaira.

One of the primary purposes of my 55 years in the shop was, of course. to
discover ways of promting science and technology. After I was appointed
company representative in 1967, my ambi tion grew stronger. I decided that
in order to survive the upheaval of the global technological revolution and
to come out ahead in free competition with other nations, the raising of
the level of Japan's science and technology in conjunction with a strong
economy was vital not only for a single enterprise but also for the improve-
ment of national life in general. I therefore advocated my ideas at every
opportunity. As a result, I received frequent criticism to the effect that
"life is not just technology" or "this is not what management is about."

I offered little explanation in answer to such criticism. At the time,
there seemed to be a coumaon tendency to leave things up to others 'without
thinking, without suffering.‘ and I felt that the only answer was to act
and execute. Of course, I have never thought of boasting about my
accomplishments or making than public. Nor have I thOught about them in
that light. The only thing I can boast of is that I have persevered 'toward
the attainment of my goals and walked straight ahead in earnestness."

("A Life Full of Plaws"--1969)

In reality, Chikara Kurata's great objective of promoting science and
technology turned out to constitute spending endless days in the production
ship, managing with limited funds, and manufacturing machinery, equipment,
and products with his own ingenuity.

Namihei Kodaira's development of independent technology of Japanese origin
is aptly described by Naosaburo Takao. Kodaira's right-hand man.

"In my opinion, technological ability is most important in the production
of electrical machinery and appliances, and most of the money involved goes
to research, technical expenses, and the cost of experience. Therefore,
such production is extremely difficult. Hhen machinery is manufactured by
technology purchased from a major foreign coapany through a joint venture,
it cannot be considmcd purely domestic production, although the materials
or wages may be of Japanese origin. Here at Hitachi, our purpose, beginning
in 1925. is to develop independently the mast difficult electrical machinery
for the sake of Japanese pride, to endure all hardships, to directly obtain
experience and perform research with a sense of awareness. and to enter
serious competition. I do not think there has evern been such an interesting
and challenging year." ["History of Hitachi. I" in HITACHI HYORO'H, 1925.
Vol 8. No 1 issue]

One could visualize the fierce air of determination among the "nobushi" of
Hitachi led by Hamihei Kodairs.

It goes without saying that the basic philosophy of postwar Hitachi manage-
ment always embraced the development of independent technology. of course.
this did not mean the total rejection of foreign technology. Foreign

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technology was inorted occasionallynfor example, the cooperation with

RCA and GE--but basically, and for the system as a whole, the "Hitachi
spirit" of creating an original and independent technology by Hitachi people
was never forgotten. Therein could be found the underlying power of
Hitachi's management.

Today, 20 years after Chikare Kurate set the goal of a 3-percent investment
in research and development, no costs at Hitachi, with its sales volume of
2 trillion yen, amunt to 6 percent, with prospects of a further increase.
There evidently has been a reversal in real substance compared to Western
nations, while the technological revolution involving electronics and other
areas shows no signs of ending.

Primcy of Fleming Strategy

Katsushige Hits stated his position at a roundtable conference held at the
beginning of this year (sponsored by the Electronic Industries Association
of Japan and attended by Sadakazu Shindo, Tadahiro Sekimoto, Shoichi Saba.
and Toshio Tekai), as follows: ”GB, which is a general manufacturer, gave
up computers and semiconductors around 1970 because its management is
profit-oriented. Eleven years ago, it didn't foresee the present growth
of the electronics industry. With a view to making a new start in this
field, it is now buying up semiconductor companies and design automation
companies.

We have never departed from this field. It was probably rough sailing at

the beginning. That is. the general manufacturer has its peculiar weaknesses
and characteristics. and one weakness is that we cannot concentrate our
workers like the specializing manufacturer in one production category. we
cannot avoid being generalized. Therefore we had a rough beginning.
However, at this juncture our electronics technology is not limited to
semiconductors and cowuters but evolves in many directions, so that
products which were considered outdated are being transformed into new
products.

He therefore expect to improve our status in the future. Nonetheless,
since we are involved in numerous project areas, we cannot afford to
concentrate our workers and funds in a particular category and ignore

the other categories. Our problem is to guide the other categories without
hurting the morale of the employees."

Accuracy of Katsushige Hita's Diagnosis

Led after Chikara Kurata by Kenichiro Komai, Hirokichi Yoshiyama, and
Katsushige Hits amid the epochal progress of the technological revolution
and the market revolution (globalization and segmentation). Hitachi manage-
ment has stressed the development of independent technology and the
production shop. planning a multiple effect in management strategy.

If we look at Kenichiro Komai's management skill in raising the capital
turnover rate to improve the overall capital profit rate, or the total

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rationalization of man..gement planned by Hirokichi Yoshiyama in coping with
the Nixon shock and the initial oil crisis—the so-called "reduced scale
nnagement"--they all required thoughtful and farsighted management

strategy.

In any case, true management strategy is possible only through an accurate
grasp of marketing news. This would be one weakness if any, at Hitachi,
and Katsushige Mita has pointed this out.

The trinity of ”hamny," "sincerity," and "pioneer spirit" which constitutes
the Hitachi spirit is strengthened and perfected in combination with an
insatiable thirst for social news, consumer news, and business news.

Pe rformmce of Subsidiaries

Tokyo ZAIKAI TEHO in Japanese Jill 82 pp 67-82
[Report by Mitsuru Notani and Yumorl Tateishi]

Sales Outstrip Parent Company

Japan's top three makers of heavy electrical achinery are Hitachi, Tokyo
Shibaura Electric [Toshiba], and Mitsubishi Electric Corporation. 0f the
three. Hitachi is by far the leader, with Toshiba and Mitsubishi Electric
comprising the second group at a much lower level.

Toshiba, which outstripped Hitachi in sales and profits in its March 1980
account, recently has been proclaiming its "pursuit of Hitachi." However,

it is probably more correct to interpret it as a tactic to boost its internal
morale. Although it did improve its profits by cutting down its operations
when it transferred its deficit-ridden sales division for major electric
computers to the Hichiden-Toshiba Informtion System, that alone would not
suffice to overtake powerful Hitachi.

The reason is that Hitachi is far ahead of Toshiba in current profits due to
the large gap in financial balance accounts. There has always been a

cOnsiderable gap between Hitachi and Toshiba in earning power, and it would
be very difficult for the latter to catch up in real terms. The difference

becomes more decisive when the profitability of their respective enterprise
groups is compared.

The Hitachi-affiliated companies are far ahead of their competitors.
resulting in the overwhelming strength of the Hitachi group as a whole.

Let us look first at the size of the Hitachi group. At the end of March
1981, a total of 531 companies, including 67 chain subsidiaries and 484
affiliated companies, under the parent holding company were listed in the
consolidated closing account. Compared to Toshiba's 303 companies and
Mitsubishi Electric's 90 companies, one can visualize the large size of

the Hitachi group. As for the percentage of sales by the chain subsidiaries
in relation to total group sales, Hitachi shows 73 percent, while Toshiba
shows 36 percent and Mitsubishi Electric only 10 percent. These indices
alone indicate the significant role of chain subsidiaries in the Hitachi
group.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Hatch 1981 consolidated closing account showed 3,359.2 billion yen

in sales (Hitachi parent comny: 1,967 billion yen), 306.1 billion yen

in current profits (ditto: 1.17.7 billion yen) and 129.1 billion yen in

net profit (ditto: 61.8 billion yen). Incidentally, in Hatch 1978, sales
were 2,377 billion yen (parent company: 1,388.6 billion yen), current profits
were 177.2 billion yen (ditto: 65.4 billion yen), and net profits were

77.8 billion yen (ditto: 31.6 billion yen).

As for the profit contribution rate of the chain subsidiaries, it was
overwhelningly higher in Harch 1978 and lower in Hatch 1981.

This was the result of the parent conpany'e higher profit growth rate,
however, rather than a decline in the profit growth rate of the subsidiaries.

The profit growth during this period greatly outstripped the sales growth
of both the parent company and its subsidiaries. (Jo-pared to Hatch 1978.
sales in Hatch 1981 increased by 60 percent for Hitachi and 43 percent for
its subsidiaries. Current profits increased by 80 percent and 67 percent,
respectively, and net profits increased by 97 percent and 65 percent,
respectively.

The main reasons for the low growth rate of net profits for the chain
subsidiaries were: first, the public subscription offer of shares held by
the subsidiaries resulted in a lower proportion of shares held by the parent
coapany; and, second, the tax rate increased. However, the real profit rate
rose considerably higher, as shown by current profits.

The characteristic of the Hitachi subsidiaries is, above all, the large
number of enterprises with high earnings. Looking at enterprises listed

on the stock exchange alone, chain subsidiaries like Hitachi Haxell, Hitachi
Credit. Nissei Sangyo, Hitachi Electronics, Japan Servo, Hitachi Home
Appliance Sales, Hitachi Plant Construction, Hitachi Metals. Hitachi Cable,
Hitachi Hachine and Electric Industries, and Hitachi Chemical are all
outstanding enterprises with high earnings.

There are also nunerous subsidiaries under the parent holding conpsny which
are recording high earnings.

A recent najor change along the subsidiaries is that, in response to the
Hitachi parent company, which has posted achieve-ents in advanced branches
of electronics such as coaputers, semiconductors, Ma and robots as well
as in nechatronics, these enterprises are growing rapidly as they share a
larger role in the growth of the parent coqany in those categories.

Representative subsidiaries are: Hitachi Haxell, which is expanding rspidiy
in the production of VTR tapes and floppy disks; Hissei Sangyo, which is
making progress in semiconductors, conputers, and physical chenical machines
and instrunents; and Hitachi Credit in the credit field. They are the
so-called "Three New Pillars of the Hitachi Fanily," replacing Hitachi
Metals, Hitachi Cable, and Hitachi Chenical, which had a high reputation
inside and outside the group.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although all Hitachi subsidiaries are considered outstanding enterprises
with high earnings. the trend among the subsidiaries under the parent
holdings company is attracting special attention.

The profits of the minority shareholders included in Hitachi's consolidated
net profits totaled 22.2 billion yen as of March 1981. They were 8.9

billion yen in 1978, which means a 2.5-fold growth. The ratio to consolidated
net profits was only 11 percent in Hatch 1978, but it rose to 17 percent

in March 1981, indicating a drastic increase in the earning power of the
holding company subsidiaries. In this category. the robot-producing Shin
Heiwa Industry and Tokico. and the semiconductor-related Kokusai Electric

are sone of the fast growing companies.

One of the reasons for the large number of affiliated companies with high
earnings equaling the parent company's is the hardnosed management policy.
Although 531 companies are listed as chain subsidiaries ("keiretsu kaisha"),
including holding company subsidiaries, only one had a deficit in Harch
1981, which is proof of their excellent business management.

Another factor for high earnings is the quick response to trends in demand,
and a mobile and flexible organisation which is receptive to changes in
business makeup. The recent trend is to evorve group strategy for full
conversion to electronics and mechatronics.

Instillation of Hitachi Spirit a Source of High Earnings

why are there so many outstanding Hitachi subsidaries with high earnings,
and why is the level of the Hitachi group as a whole so high that there is
virtually no subsidiary with a deficit. despite the large family of 531
companies? A major factor probably is Hitachi's posture toward its
subsidiaries .

When the consolidated closing account system was introduced in 1978, many
enterprises preferred to adopt the method of consolidated settlement, which
is not affected by the holding company subsidiary law. Thus they gave a
better appearance to their business by decreasing to less than 50 percent
the share ratio of enterprises with less favorable records. In other
words, they tried to "put a lid on anything that had a foul smell." But
Hitachi took a different approach.

Hitachi has actively adopted the consolidated closing account system. Its
strategy is to focus on the management record of the Hitachi group as a
whole, to look for problems if any. and to improve the weaknesses in order
to build overall strength.

In 1960, Hitachi had already introduced the consolidated formula. It did
not simply introduce it because the formula was there or because the other
enterprises were adopting it. Nor did it try to improve appearances of
profitability or hide the existence of subsidiaries with bad earning records
by removing them from the account. They adopted a positive approach by
improving the related enterprises through the consolidated account and

by seeking growth as a grOup.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF1C1AI.US£10NLX

Additionally. the parent Hitachi actively sends its talented people to the
subsidiaries. They do not, as many enterprises do, send people who are
castoffs of the parent company. In fact, capable people in their prime are
sent to the subsidiaries. At the same time. the purpose is to train these
people. If they build a good record in the subsidiary, they are permitted
to return to the parent company, but they must remain with the subsidiary

if their record is bad. As a result. the subsidiary company naturally puts‘
great efforts into its operations.

There are three types of Hitachi subsidiaries: former Hitachi divisions
which have become independent companies; new divisions established as
independent enterprises; and existing enterprises which were purchased under
capital participation. The special trait of Hitachi's strategy concerning
its subsidiaries is the separation and independence of its strongest
operational divisions.

It is general practice for companies to release its stagnant divisions in
order to strengthen the management.ofthe parent company, or to absorb
outstanding subsidiaries. There are few companies where superior divisions
are actually separated to form new subsidiaries. In Hitachi's case, the
purpose is to accentuate the nature of the business through independence

and to give it a completely autonomous management. Because it is difficult
for the large Hitachi group to function with mobility, the various enterprises
are allowed to specialize with separate personnel and capital, and to

operate independently.

The basic concepts of Hitachi's policy regarding its subsidiaries are: to
provide completely independent management to each business category, to
establish an optimum management system, and to secure mobility in management
and strengthen overall management.

Representative subsidiaries which have become independent are: the metal
and cable divisions, which made a new start in 1956 as Hitachi Metals and
Hitachi Cable, and the chemical products division which became independent
in 1962 as Hitachi Chemical. In addition, Babcock Hitachi, Hitachi Seiko
(precision industry) and Hitachi Kenki (construction machinery) were former
outstanding divisions of the parent company.

Also, among the affiliates, Haxell Electric Industry, which specializes in
batteries and tapes, became independent as Hitachi Haxell; Nippon Colurbia.
which was suffering from bad management, was reorganized as a high earning
enterprise. Nippon Servo also became an affiliate in 1964 and was rapidly
expanded, adding further strength to the Hitachi group.

In addition to the independence of the Hitachi divisions and expansion
through affiliation with related companies in the manufacturing field.
similar efforts were successful in the field of sales and service.

A background factor for the strong showing of Hitachi's affiliates was of
course the clear strategic goal of the parent Hitachi company to strengthen
the entire group. In order to realize this strategy. the Hitachi philosophy

13

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fiﬂl13FF1C1AL USEICNHLY

was instilled by delegating personnel. In addition, joint seminars were
held between the division directors of both the parent company and its
subsidiaries to educate them in ”Hitachi-ism." Such thorough inculcation

of the Hitachi form of management through personnel exchanges and interchange
of awareness was extremely effective in evolving group strategy.

As indicated by the thoroughness of independent management, Hitachi policy
demanded stringent effort on the part of the independent enterprises
themselves. A good example is the "principle of market pricing." Hitachi

covers every type of enterprise, and a high percentage of products and
parts are procured from within the group.

However, prices are not simply lower because they are procured within
Hitachi itself. If the products of other manufacturers are better and
cheaper, they are purchased instead. Hitachi is hardnosed in this respect.
It is the same not only between the plants within Hitachi but also between
Hitachi and its affiliated companies, and among the affiliates themselves.
Pierce competition is thus encouraged within the group. Recently, the
strategy has changed to put priority on intracompsny and intragroup
procurement, but any softness in management as a result is strongly cautioned
against. These could be the reasons why the large enterprise group, with
as many as 531 companies, shows such business strength throughout the
group.

Rush of New Software Companies

The formation of an enterprise group centering on the separation and
independence of divisions, or the "cellular" type of establishing
subsidiaries. is a trait of Hitachi's subsidiary policy. However, there
has recently been a new aspect, which is the rush of newly formed software
companies.

Also, with the sudden advance toward electronicization, systemization has
made rapid progress. In this connection, utilization technology or software
has become vital.

Actually. Hitachi has always emphasized systemization in production, and
each plant has built up its own software for its products.

In the past, however. various experts were called together from different
fields or divisions to create software for a given product or project.

The software task force wOuld disband as soon as the project was completed,
and a new team would be formed for the next project. In other words, the
stockpiling and systemization of software information was lacking, resulting
in a failure to utilize the achieved results efficiently.

It was therefore decided to establish a software subsidiary with intensive
investment in personnel and deveIOpment technology. The demand for

software has skyrocketed in recent years, and the ability to develop software
has become an important weapon in evolving company strategy. Software
companies have been established early for atomic energy, thermal power

14

FOI.0$1NC1AI.US£1DNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

generation systems, cowuters, and co-unications systems. Since 1978,
however, the trend has accelerated to establish software subsidiaries for
sicroconuters, automotive electronics, design-automated systems, industrial
robots, measuring instruments/nedical nachines and instruments, and office
automation (0A). At nitachi, this is called the "software rush."

Today there are 15 subsidiaries, and no other company has established
software firms in such an ambitious nnner. The total personnel of 7,000
equals the nunber of ewloyees at the parent cowany who are engaged in

developing software for coquters. Sales continue at a double-digit rate
of growth.

In addition to the separation and expansion of software divisioas as
independent subsidiaries, Hitachi is working on large-scale systemization
enbracing the entire group. In the past, vertical expansion of the
separate operational branches was com-on, but with the recent progress in
electronics, horizontal connections between the branches have increased.
It is the responsibility of Hitachi's systems division to promote such
horizontal linkage. ‘

The systems division has already undertaken a mass control system for
environment and transportation. In April, the systens division was instru-
nental in forming a promotional group for factory autonation (PA) by
mobilizing all of Hitachi's project divisions and research institutes as well
as related groups, and the entire promotional group has set out to cope with
FA‘

It is the first tine such a large-scale group has been asseﬁleduand
sonething that cannot be imitated by other conpanies. The pronotional
group is the focus of attention as being indicative of the depth of
Hitachi's affiliates.

hitachi's establishsemt of subsidiaries will continue space by separating
pronising divisions as independent subsidiaries, and it has the nerit of
facilitating the active shift of personnel. It is one reason why Hitachi
does not becone a rigid organization despite its huge size.

Furthermore, the personnel sent to the subsidiaries include top quality
employees who are full of anbition, and the strong enphasis on achievenent
fosters management strategy among the affiliated conpanies. Therein lies the
secret of Hitachi's strength as a group. The threat of the ﬂitachi group
exists in the fact that llitachi is ahead of the other coqanies in making
such moves and promoting then forcefully.

Thoughts on Hitachi's Personnel Strategy; Signs of a Breakdown in "nitachi
Family" Awareness .

"No out of three division directors at Hitachi Ltd are waiting for their
heads to fall (to be shipped out to a subsidiary). Personnel administration
there is quite bureaucratic. If some in your class are promoted, the rest

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are weeded out, and so competition is fierce. And if you go to a
subsidiary, the retired former bureaucrats and the "institutional cadre“
group are there ahead of you, so you are sandwiched in between them.
Instead of facing a second career, you are likely to become a leftover.
Hitachi is really a hot spot." (economic reporter)

The foregoing is a typical view indicating that, seen even from the outside,
the shift of personnel to the subsidiaries is not based on "sending people
out to pasture," but on Hitachi's strict policy concerning its subsidiaries.

Hitachi Ltd has managed and nurtured its subsidiaries under its motto of
'Mitachi is one" on the one hand, and under its slogan of "independence" on
the other. Let us take another look to clarify Hitachi's strict management
policy toward its subsidiaries through shifts in personnel.

At Hitachi, the term "chain companies" [”kairetsu haisha") means its
"subcompanies" ["ko-kaisha”l--which include 57 ”interlocking subcompanies"
["renketsu ko-kaisha") and 365 "unlinked subcompanies" ["hi-renketsu
ko-kaisha") (as of March 1981) and the "affiliated companies" ["hanren
kaisha") under the parent holding company. The special appellations, unique
to Hitachi, are based on the fact that there is no superior-inferior
relationship between the parent company and its subsidiaries, but a horizontal
relationship; they are all equal members of the group. In other words, the
aim is to enhance group awareness in order to strengthen solidarity among
the subcompanies and affiliated companies, and to boost morale. The joint
seminars held for cadres (division and section chiefs) of the chain
subsidiaries and the parent company at the Hitachi General Management
Institute is a concrete example.

State of Personnel Transfers

Let us take a look at the transfer of personnel to enterprises listed on the
stock exchange, centering on the chain subsidiaries and others.

A total of 212 officials were transferred to 23 chain companies. Among
them, 58 officials or about 27 percent, were sent to the "big three" alone--
i.e., Hitachi Cable. Hitachi Chemical, and Hitachi Metals.

Fifty-six persons were sent to companies other than chain coapanies listed
on the stock exchange. The two groups, totaling 268 officials, were sent

to 40 companies listed on the exchange. It is a personnel network worthy of
the mammoth Hitachi. Moreover, only two chain companies--Hakayo Tele-
communications and Horiba Ltd--have top officials who are not former Hitachi
men. Even in the listed (on the exchange) companies other than chain
companies, 9 out of 17 companies, or 50 percent, are managed by former
Hitachi officials.

There is another noteworthy point: Hitachi's subsidiaries are known for

their excellence, but the subsidiaries of the subsidiaries--that is, the

grand offspring of the parent company--have grown to be listed on the
exchange, and Hitachi's "human solidarity" is alive among the third-generation

16

FOI.0F‘IC1AL USEGDNLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

companies. For mule, such relations exist between Hitachi ““818 and
Nippon Kogu (industrial instruments), between Hitachi Cable and Kyosan
Electric Hire 6 Cable. between Hitachi Chemical and Hitachi Condenser, and
between Hitachi Chemical and Shin Kobe Electrical Machinery. This is
Hitachi Chemical and Shin Kobe Electrical Machinery. This is Hitachi's
strongest point and what its competitors fear the most.

Another Hitachi characteristic which emphasized accounting is that Hitachi
not only sends top officials as subsidiary presidents to enterprises
which have become chain conpanies through reconstruction or joint ventures,
but also sends accoun:ing experts to then. The; Eenterprises] include
Tokico, Yagi Antenna. Shin Heiwa Industry. Nippon Servo. Nippon Columbia.
Nskayo Telecolmunications, Hitachi Haxell, Jidosha Denki Hogyo, etc.

"Office of Chain Companies" Is Feared

The management, promotion and liaison/coordination of chain companies
(Hitachi holds 51 percent or more of their outstanding shares and is
therefore in a position to take a leading role in their management) are
handled by Hitachi Ltd's "office of chain subsidiaries."

In effect. the office of chain subsidiaries singlehandedly manages
financial affairs for the various subsidiaries. of course, as a principle,
the office does not have any binding authority over the chain companies,
but in reality “it has complete authority. It is a fearsome office which
does as it pleases with the subsidiaries." (head of a chain subsidiary)

Therefore, it is difficult to accept the explanation by the Hitachi public
relations office that "the office of chain subsidiaries is merely a
secretariat type of office."

If the office of chain subsidiaries is chiefly in charge of "auditing" the
various chain companies in order to check figures. the Hichibokukai (society
of principal chain companies which are major enterprises) and the Hichiwakai
(society of small-scale enterprises with greater dependency on the parent
company) are probably places where visiting officials from the parent
company are received. of course, both the Hichibokukai and the Nichiwakai
were organised for the purpose of pronoting friendly relations among the
chain subsidiaries, and their stated purpose is "good ventilation."
Nonetheless. in view of the custom of presidents of chain subsidiaries
"reporting" business results :5 the presence of Hitachi's president, chair-
man. and sanaging director. it see-s to be lore of a systen of "paying
homage."

Possible Change in Personnel Pattern of Transfers?

The retiresent age for top officials of the chain companies is 70. The
youngest presidents of (exchange)-listed companies among the principal

chain subsidiaries include President Shinji Tamagaws (S7) of Shin Heiwa
Industry, and President Shiro Nakanishi of Kokusan Denki (59). The rest
are in their sixties.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further-ore. since the oldest chain subsidiary was established as recently
as in 1947. it will be sons tine before a "veteran” appears. However. it
will not be long before a large number of "inside" directors are born.

A najor change will then take place in the ”Hitachi family" and in the
awareness of "Hitachi is one” which has supported the Hitachi group.

When employees hired directly by the chain subsidiaries are pronoted to the
positions of director and president. the conpanies nurtured under Hitachi's
policy of independence will "learn to walk by the-selves." Hhen cadres begin
to say, "I don't know anything about Hitachi Ltd." it is questionable
whether the present pattern of "Hitachi is one" or "nsnbers of the Hitachi
group" will cantinue to apply. Regardless of how superior a chain conpany
enployee nay be, he is undoubtedly "surplus" and dispensable in Hitachi's
eyes. There is no reason why a chain company which can walk on its own feet
should ignore its own excellent elployees and accept ”handout" officials from
the parent conpany. Hitachi, with no place to transfer its surplus officials,
will then face the serious proble- of an "aging society.”

As Hitachi pronotes independence for its chain subsidiaries that grow in
strength. are listed on the stock exchange, becone najor enterprises,

and begin to train their own excellent staffs. a trend toward "disassociation
fron Hitachi Ltd" will take place. contrary to Hitachi's wishes.

Hitachi's present pattern of transferring its officials will then change
drastically. The effort to consolidate the Hitachi group through a policy
of "independence" and to enhance cohesive strength is actually a "two-edged
sword" for Hitachi.

Corporate Strategy
Tokyo ZAIKAI TEPBO in Japanese Jun 82 pp 86-109

[Report by Hmagenent Journalist Huakasu lwai]

 

Japan's Major Enterprise Hithout a “Top Product"

Japan's No l enterprise. one of the world's largest producers of electrical
machinery, does not have a "top product" which appeals to the public.

Furthermore, what is known to the public is its nanagenent concept,
management style. organization. and enterprsneursl clinate. Generally
speaking. it is its own image as an enterprise.

Notwithstanding this, the fact that Hitachi is Japan's representative
enterprise was underscored by its listing on the New York Stock Exchange
[NYSE] in April 1982. Beginning with its listing in 1972 on Heat Gernany's
Frankfurt Exchange. Hitachi stocks have been listed in Luxenbourg,
Ansterdan. Paris. and Hong Kong.

The NYSE listing is literally a "passport" to beconing an international
enterprise.

l8

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hitachi itself had aimed for NYSE listing since its Frankfurt debut,
following Sony and Hatsushita.

The: wish has been fulfilled, but actually it was already a foregone
conclusion 2 years ago in June.

The American authority on corporate stocks, Standard and Poor's (S 8 P) gave
Hitachi the sane AAA or Triple A rating as it did to Hataushita Electric
Corp. The Triple A rating it received from the Moody Company in January last
year was a preclimactit victory. Companies which have received a Triple A
rating, the highest condition for issuance of corporate stock, are few even
in the United States. Except for financial and public works projects, there
are aore than 20 coapanies including Bell, Dupont, Exxon, General Electric
(GE), General Foods, General Motors (GM). 13H and 3!. Outside of the

United States, there are only three coapanies: ICI, Britain's global
chemical producer, and Hitachi and Hatsushita of Japan.

or course, a Triple A rating for a stock issue does not automatically mean
it dill be listed on the NYSE, but it is practically guaranteed if so
desired.

A rating firm conducts detailed investigations concerning various indices
such as company regulations, financial makeup, growth potential, and
management skills, and the evaluation is severe. lbreover, an AAA rating
is given only after "all conditions” are met. The rating is considered
acceptable by the NYSE, whose listing qualifications are said to be the
toughest in the world.

Unexpected Triple A Rating

Truthfully, however, aside froa Hatsushita, Hitachi's acceptance was
"surprising." At the tine, a director of a aajor Japanese securities fir-
analyzed the event .

"Hitachi lags begind the American General Electric in heavy electrical
machinery, behind the American I!" in coaputers, and behing Hatsushitn and
others of Japan and RCA of the united States in home electrical

appliances. However, Hitachi has semiconductors and computers which even

GB does not have. By the same token, IBM and Texas Instruments do not have
heavy electrical machinery or home electrical appliances, and Hatsushita
does not have heavy electrical nachinery. In effect, Hitachi's comprehensive
technology covers a variety unequaled by other manufacturors of electrical
machinery and electronic equipment, which is the reason for its high rating."
or course that is not all. In terms of products. it is no different than

the other two of the "top three general producers of electrical aachiney,"
Toshiba and Mitsubishi Electric.

Is it then because of the content of the consolidated account? In the 1980
closing account, the b7 principal chain subsidiaries in which Hitachi
has at least 50 percent of the direct or indirect stock holdings, had

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

total sales of 3,339.2 billion yen, with total net profits of 129.1 billion
yen. It is sixth in sales among the world's producers of electrical
machinery and electronics, and fifth in profits.

Those aspects were certainly evaluated highly. however, the stock rating
experts were still not convinced.

"In the United States, : cOmpany's financial makeup is strongly emphasized.
Recently in Japan, also, debt-free management, the financial balance, etc
are mentioned, but [Japan] still lags behind in concern about financial
charts and tables. In that respect. Matsushita Electric has no problem
because it is debt-free and its owner capital ratio versus its public
subscription for capital increase in 1980 exceeded 50 percent. however, the
Hitachi parent company alone has long-term and short-term debts of under
332 billion yen and consolidated debts of 800 billion yen, while its owner
capital ratio is under 28 percent. Therefore, no matter how favorably you
may look at it, it rates Class A at best.” (analyst of a large Tokyo
metropolitan bank)

There is no doubt that its management indices are outstanding among the top
three general electrical machinery manufacturers in Japan.

According to the TOYO KEIZAI Statistical Monthly (August 1981). Hitachi was
222nd among all Japanese enterprises, followed by Toshiba (247th) and
Mitsubishi Electric (286th). Their owner capital ratios were 25.23 percent,
17.93 percent, and 16.98 percent. respectively. Their sales and current
profit ratios were 6.93 percent, 5.66 percent, and 6.24 percent,
respectively. Therefore, except for its debts. Hitachi outperformed its

two competitors (comparisons made between the parent companies).

Viewed as a single enterprise, however. without reference to industrial
categroy or enterprise group, it is only 222nd among 910 companies listed on
the stock exchange.

High Potential in Technology and Management

American analysts have given Hitachi a Triple A rating, unexpected by
Japanese analysts and reportedly based on its potential-with its potential
for both technological growth and its management potential especially
outweighing any concern over its safety or financial handicaps.

In fact, when we look at Hitachi, its technological potential and management
posture give the impression that nothing is left to be desired.

0f c0urse. it is beyond the layman's ability to evaluate technological
potential. Nonetheless, one cannot help being convinced by the following
explanation:

"Since its beginning, Hitachi has stressed research and development under
the basic concept of respect for independent technology, and it embraces

20

F0!!DFFN]AL.US£IDNLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

a research and development force which is ranked among the world's top
electrical achinery manufacturers.

In addition to the eight research \mits--Central Research Institute. Hitachi
Research Institute. Machine Research Institute, Energy Research Institute,
Production Technology Research Institute, System Research Institute, Hone
Appliance Research Institute. and Design Research Institute—we have the
developeent divisions of our various plants conducting MD that is directly
related to their respective products."

A total of 9.000 technicians are engaged in I‘D. which is are than 12
percent of the total nulber of eeployeea. Punds invested in R60 enunt to
115.6 billion yen. which is more than 98 percmt of the 111.7 billion yen
in current profits, and 6 percent of toal annual sales.

Industrial rights at hole and abroad total 39.73‘ ite-auof which 26,068
iteea are patent rights. 6,1092 are utility aodel rights, 4,026 are tradeeark
rights, and 5,168 are design rights. "ith the investeent of personnel,
noney, and materials in technological developeent as a backdrop, 27

domestic production plants and 25 overseas corporations sell over 20,000
kinds of aitachi products, for the most part electric power eachinery and
instruments/heavy electrical eschinery. infomtion/conunications systens.
electronic devices. hone electric appliances, industrial Inchinery/plants,
transport eachinery and instmnenta/eutoeotive nachines and instruaents,
etc.

21

mammamr
QNREQH z .4 n.”

, Em

  

mommumomv
to

15.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
2’0.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30e
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
60.
«’01.
62.
1.3.
lob.
“Se
106.
b7.
«'08.
69.
50.

Organizational Chart of Hitachi Ltd
Board of Directors

Chair-an

Presider:

Executive Board

Industrial Medicine Promtion Center
International Finance Center

MI Promtion Center

Ibaraki Hospital Center

Mito hospital

Hitachi Hospital

Kodaira Me-orial Tokyo Mitschi llospital
Mitschi Keihin Industrial College
Mitachi Ibaraki Industrial College
Hitachi Production Technology Institute
Hitachi Technology Institute

Zhief auditor's office

General Affairs Division

Labor Division '

Personnel and Education Division
Accounting Division

Finance Division

Public Relations Division

Materials Division

VA Pro-scion Center

International Procurenent Center
Patent Division

Planning Division

Production Technology Division

Q h A Center

Soft Technology Promotion Center
Production Technology Pronotion Center
Engineering Promotion Center

RED Division

Ran Pronotion Center

Technology Control Division

Trial Manufacture Assess-en: Center
Infomtion Control Division
Business Affairs Division

Chief auditor's office

Office of chain subsidiaries
Planning office

Office of the President
International Projects headquarters
Office of overseas operations
Overseas Cooperation Operations division
Business office for exports to China
Second export business office

First export business office
Shikoku branch office
Sl .
52.
53.

55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
6’0.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
71..
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
86.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
96.
95.
96.

97.-

98.
99.
100.
101 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chugoku bra -:h office

Hokuriku " "
Tohoku " "
Hakka ido " "
Chubu II I!
Kyushu u u
Kansa 1 n n

Infomtion Systeas Business Headquarters
Machinery and Electricity Business Headquarters
Electric Power Business Headquarters
Systems Operations Division

Measurement Instrusents Operations Division/ﬂats plant
Electronic conponents business headquarters
Seniconductor Operations Division

Takasaki plant

Musashi plant

Electronic Tube Operations Divisions/Shibehara plant
Computer Operations Headquarters

Asahi plant

Software plant

Odawara plant

Kanagawa plant

Device Development Center

Telephone and Telegraph Business Division
Cor-unications Bquipnent Operations DiviaiOn
Business Affairs Division

Totsuka plant

Hone electronics operations headquarters
Hone Electronics Operations Division
Toyokava plant

Tokai plant

Yokohana plant

Home Blectrificaton Operations Division

One plant

'rochigi plant

Tags plant

Hone electronics research institute

Design research institute

Automotive nachine and instrulent operations division
Business office

Saws plant

Cornercial Products Operations Headquarters
Nagoya products business office

Osaka products business office

Tokyo products business office

Tags plant

Narashino plant

Chujo plant

Yanai plant

Shinizu plant

Foundry OperatiOns Division/Katsuta plant

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

102. Machine Electronics Operations Headquarters
103. Kasado plant

106. Hits plant

105. ‘rsuchiura plant

106. Electric Power Operations Headquarters
107. Onika plant

108. Kobubun plant

109. Bitachi plant

110. Atomic Energy Operations Division

111. Electric Power Operations Division

112. Systems Developnent and Research Institute
113. Production TechnOIgoy Research Institute
116. Energy Research Institute

115. Kachine Research Institute

116. Hitachi Research Institute

117. Central Research Institute

Stake on ”No B's"

New and advanced technology, new products, and new systeas include the
following (carried in TOKEI Statistical Honthly, Hay 1981):

Pocket-size automtic biochemical analyzer, energy-saving refrigerator,
automatic water supply unit: Hitachi ai Pack Ace 20, 03-01! data retrieval
systen, heat-storing oil-type hot water supplier, energy-saving electric
mter heater, control unit for hot water supplier and heater with internal
nicroconputer, latest color diagram indicator tereinal, new absorption
cooling and heating system. voice alarI syste- for autonobile, super-high-
speed coquter for scientific and technological uses, world's fastest
calculating supersize conputer H-280ﬂ, new piece-electric ceramics, energy-
saving systen for shops and stores, voice-synthesized sutosatic announcing
systen for elevators, supersonic nicroscope, electronic scanning microscope,
preventive uintenance system for power-generating facility. spectrophoto-
Ieter, high-efficiency power-generation electromtor system, high-output
carbon dioxide laser, progras language version It linear detector element,
control technology for undulatory transistor-type electric current, high-
output high-efficiency luninous diode, super-precision plane tester/all-
purpose lathe, si-ulation progren for the 8m asnagenent plan, and
supernicro video csnera-Iag canera to fit inside a m.

This lengthy list gives an indication of the ntnetous products, technology,
and systens node by the general mnufacturer.

Actually, nerely looking at the list does not reveal the "future potential"
or narketability [of the itens]. but in any case it is certain that they
are a "group of future trunp cards" developed, announced, and held in
readiness by Hitachi.

A second look should indicate that many of the listed itens involve the
"two B's" which general Ianufacturers of electrical nachinery such as
Hitachi, Toshiba, and Mitsubishi eqhasise.

25

FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0f the two "B's." the first stands for electronics. For a period of 5

years since 1976, Hitachi devoted nearly 50 percent of its total MD costs
of 645.3 billion yen to the electronics field. which includes
semiconductors. integrated circuits. cowuters. and co-Iunications equipment.
It also diverted 60 percent of its plants and equip-ant and 63 percent of
its key personnel and developeent specialists. As a result, sales in 1980
grew to 800 billion yen, topping all the other categories.

Additionally, technological transfer of electronics into the areas of hole
electric appliances and heavy electrical nchinery resulted in direct
profits.

The second "E" stands for the field of energy as represented by the Nuclear
Energy Operations Division, which was organized independently of the
Electric Power Operations Division in August 1980. Of course. electric
power projects constitute the core of energy. but the nainstreas of hydraulic
power has shifted to the water-pumping method, while the nainstreas of
thermal power has noved fron oil to LNG and now to atonic power generation.
However, the age of the boiling water reactor (M), which now holds center
stage, is said to be over, and a new-generation M is under developnent as
a nenber of the "GB" group with a very fluid rate of contribution in
earnings.

Large Orders and Ship-ants $19802

(Procured Products)
Customers Product/Volume

Kansai Electric Power 600,000 KB thermal power generating
plank-couplets set

Nippon Steel Corp hot strip finish rolling machine and
receiver/transforner electric power
facility—couplete set

Japanese National Railways 38 electric trains, 48 direct current
trains, and coqlete set 0f products
for the Shinkansen ["Bullet train")

Nippon Telephone & Telegraph Crossbar switchboard—150,000 circuits;
electronic switchboard—366.000
revolutions

High-Energy Physics Research 3 sets HITAC H-ZOOB and other systeas,

Laboratory complete
Australia lo boilers for 350,000 l0! theml

power generator

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sunioom Chemical Industry 120.000-ton. low-density, high-voltage
Singapore Plsnt polyethylene plant-conplete
Shipm Products
'rohohu Electric Power 600,000 at ther-l power generating
plentuconplete
Japanese Nationel Railways 161,000 n! codained-cycle power

generating plant-cowlete: integrated
control eyeten for trensforner
station on Tohohu-Joetsu Line--cOIplete

Nippon Telephone 8 Telegraph Crossbar switchboard—155,000 circuits;
electronic switchboard-«436,000
revolutions

Harubeni Corporstion muc 14-4008 and other systm—cmlete
(for accounting/information system.
etc)

Venezuela 1 boiler facility for 600,000 I“ thereol
power generstor

PRC 1 steel ore loading/unloading port
facility

Romnticisn of Nedhei Kodsire. Founder of "llitschi for Technology"

in any case. it is true that an assessnent of Hitachi technology is node
easier by boiling it down to the "two B's."

First of all, since its origin es the engineering section set up to repair
nschinery for the llitschi Mining Co-pany operated by Pusanosuhe luhera.
ﬂitschi hes net the chellengss of independent manage-en: end donestic
production by using foreign facilities end nchinery as nodels.

There are nsny episodes concerning the late Nanihei Kodsira, founder and
first president. One is as follows: In the early days, an order for a
large notor was received. At the tine, Japen depended alsost entirely on
inports for that clsss of mtore. hitechi was promting independent
develop-ent. but it had difficulty naking mtors turn-mnlike today, when

a mtor can easily be switched on. It was therefore grateful for the order,
but even lodsira had no idea whether he could conply with the requested
specifications.

After greet pain end effort and trial by error, the conpsny finally succeeded
in developing and naking a notor which worked when the electricity was

turned on. Kodaire and his workers were reportedly overcone with enotion

and tears.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is an illustrario. of the technical level of electrical machinery in
those days. and of the spirit of the Hitachi technical team led by Kodaira
which struggled for "independent development" despite those conditions. It
could also be said to symbolize Hitachi's technical direction, which sought
technological development in completely unknown areas, or rather the

independent development of existing technology-«hat is, the development
of modification technology.

A woman of low birth could marry into nobility, but many people cannot
escape their birth and origin as long as they live.

This is doubly clear in the case of Toshiba. a rival of amny years and led by
a born contriver, which has produced "original" and sonetimes
"self-complacent" technology and goods.

Significance of EleCtric Power Link

Of course, this does not in the least detract from Hitachi'r meaning of
independent technological development.

The efforts of Kodaira and his workers to successively develop "Hitachi
originals" of electrical machinery such as power generators, transformers and
distributors, and general machinery such as water wheels, pumps, and lift
cranes are certainly praiseworthy.

Also, Hitachi's challenge of foreign facilities and machinery eventually
led it to a different approach from Toshiba on the road to diversified
management. And yet. unfortunately, "Hitachi for technology" was not
popularly known.

One reason was that. in the prewar days, Hitachi did not have a proninent
product worthy of being called a home electrical appliance.

It had produced a fan in 1916, a pump for hone use in 1918, and an
electric refrigerator in 1928, all of which rates Hitachi ahead of Toshiba,
but its products seldom appeared on the market.

Secondly, among the two prewar pillars-"electrical machinery and general
machinery--Hitachi had a mchinery plant in Kamedo, Tokyo, but the main
plant was in Hitachi, Ibaraki Prefecture, which was rather inconvenient in
terms of transportation. Although known to users of machinery and
facilities, it was little known to the general public, but this tact
apparently did not bother the Hitachi bosses.

Actually, when the Kuhara Hining Cowany's Hitachi plant became independent
in 1920 and was renamed Hitachi Ltd, it lagged far behind Shibaura Ltd
(which later merged with Tokyo Electric to form Toshiba) and Mitsubishi
Shipbuilding'a electrical machinery plant (which later became Mitsubishi
Electric Corporation). However, in the late 1930's and early 1940's it

racked up the largest sales and profits among the competitors to become

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

-ne top enterprise. Therefore, the "image of a general enterprise "could
have been unnecessary.

Such conditions continued after the war.

The Japanese economy. including the electrical machinery industry, was
devastated by the war, and it took time for the Hitachi plants, which had
lost 80 percent of their facilities and production capacity through repeated
air raids and bombardment by offshore battleships, to restore their produc-
tion facilities and functions.

Many steelmakers produced such home goods as pots and pans and plows. But
soon they began to make such consumer items as radios, electric stoves.
grain threshers. and marine diesel engines for fishing, thus regaining their
status as "manufacturers of electrical machinery and general machinery.‘
Above all, it has been products for professional users which have sustained
Hitachi since the war.

"Policy demands" for electric locomotives, freight cars, and coal ore
machinery, in line with the economic recovery policy. contributed to the
reconstr\.tion of many Japanese enterprises, including Hitachi, and after
many ups and downs, power generators, electric motors, transformers, and
hydraulic/thermal/nuclear energy power-related projects have become the
main pillars for Hitachi.

Lack of Original Products Hurts Hitachi Image

Today the development of power resources--mainly atomic power plants--
constitutes a broad social problen.

however, in the age of hydraulic power. coal thermal power, and oil thermal
power, it was a problem limited to those involved in electric power
enterprises. manufacturers of machinery and equipment, and plant sites. Of
course, no one was concerned about the problem except the parties dealing
with machinery and equipment used for powerplanta and power transmitters.
or transformers and distributors. Therefore, ”Hitachi" "technology"
continued to exist on the ”other side of a thick glass window," as far as
the general public was concerned.

Not that Hitachi was completely inactive in the home electric appliance
field.

After the war, the radio played a key role in opening the age of home
electrification. The age came into swing with the TV set, washing machine,
and refrigerator.

Hitachi also manufactured radios and eventually TV sets. washing machines,

and refrigerators. lt presented a similar line of goods on the market as
other ”home appliance manufacturers." In a nutshell, however, it was not

until the first all-transistor color TV sets appeared in 1969 that there

was an eye-opening product on the home narket for the general user. Moreover,

29

FOR OIWWCJAI.USEIDNLY
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

new Hitachi products were buried in the avalancheof products by rival
manufactuers like Sony that had a strong sales netwrk and effective
marketing methods. Hitachi was therefore unable to cut a clear image for
itself.

It was similar in the case of washing machines and refrigerators. and
although a aeasure of "reputation" was gained. it left only a fleeting
impression on the market.

Of course, due to the weakness of Hitachi's home appliance sales network
in depending on the order system and professional users, it lagged behind
Hatsushita Electric and other home appliance manufacturers. Aside from
that, however. Hitachi was undeniably overoptimistic regarding products for
"amateur users."

Therefore, as a backdrop for the couercialization of transistor radios
and transistor TV sets. there is the forgotten (by the public) fact of
Hitachi's start and growth in electronic technology, which today shows
tremendous progress in saiconductors, integrated circuits. and coquters.

Hitachi 's True Power

Although there is no room for doubt regarding its earning power and its
reputation as a general manufacturer of electrical machinery—especially of
the quality and functions of the "technology of Hitachi”-it must be
repeatedly stressed that lack of ”first-class products” or original products
was responsible for Hitachi's being ignored by the general public, as
mentioned before.

In that respect, Hitachi today is able to prove its rich technological
potential to anyone.

As for heavy electrical machinery represented by nuclear power generation
--which is at center stage as far as the energy portion of the ”two B's" is
runcerned-—domestic production of the boiling water reactor (BUR) developed
by 08 has ended. With the decision to develop a new-generation BRA, to
inport a new converter reactor and a high-speed breeder reactor. as well

as the recent decision by main consumer Tokyo Electric Power to import the
KHU reactor developed by Hest Germany, Hitachi has begun joint research
with Toshiba and Fuji Electric.

Unable in the past to escape from the shadow of 63, Hitachi is now able
with its nuclear power to boast of its challenge of the new theme. ”the
safety of nuclear power generation."

The sane thing could be said of the other "B"--that is, electronic
technology.

During the past 2 years. Hitachi has embarked successively on themes concern-
ing the development of new technology based on electronics.

30

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They are medical electronic nachinery and equipment (MB). phototechnology.
defense technology, and office automation (0A). It is interesting that
although some of these theses are definitive, a cos-and order has been
issued to "catch up and pass" Toshiba, as if Toshiba were one or two steps
ahead in defense, 0A, and MB.

In other words, Hitachi's technological ability will be tested by its
speed, timeliness, and reach.

Of course, the same principle applies not only to futuristic technological
themes, but also to the existing consumer market. Public interest regarding
computers, seniconductors, and integrated circuits has heightened, and they
are easier to understand. It is not an overstate-cut to say that global
interest is focused on how soon Hitachi will outstrip IBM. Fujitsu, and
Nippon Electric in those fields.

Today. the various conpanies are abreast as far as mass consuuer items,
including personal computers and microcomputers, are concerned.

He are at the stage where the out:ora of the race with readymade home
appliances such as home VTRs, TV sets, and washing machines will depend on
how electronics can be transferred technologically and its functions
expanded. Just as Hitachi developed and conmercialized the portable VTR in
1979 and closed the gap, the race could change anytime in this age of
"technological reform."

 

2 Oﬂﬁﬂlulma) 1

l
a
1‘1:
as:
#111:
to?
$0

Bastions «mam

  

 

 

 

31
FOR‘OFF1C1AI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hitachi's Record of Achieve-ants (chart)

at: 1. Hitachi' s record of achieve-ants

2. Ratio of orders received by category (1980)

3. Electric power uchinery and instrunentslheavy electrical
nechinery-27 percent

6. Transportation uchinery and equip-endantomtive nachinery
and equip-ent/others-lz percent

5. Industrial nechinery/plents-13 percent

6. Bone electrical appliances-22 percent

7. Infomtion systens/comnicstions system/electronic devices-
26 percent

8. Record of sales (unit: 100 aillion yen)

9. 1976 - 12.969

10. 1977 - 13,886

11. 1978 - 15.096

12. 1979 - 16,981

13. 1980 - 19,670

Hitachi-Type Hanagenent Is Key to "Growth”

Compared to the motto: "Hitachi for technology." "Hitachi-type nnagenent“
has always been easier to understand. In a word, ever since the coweny 's
founding [asnsgenent] has consisted of "delegation of authority" and coaplete
“independence and self-support." Some refer to it as "Vertical nanagenent."

As is usual with founders, Naaihei Kodaira was reputed to I. .n with a
strong individuality." This is illustrated by an episode in which he
reportedly subnitted an opinion to the equally individualistic Fussnosuke
Kuhera. Although Kuhara rejected his opinion and even threw an ashtray
at hin. Itodaira refused to bend and persisted in his original idea.

However. it was Kodaira who established the unwritten rule at Hitachi that
”top eanagenent will render the final judgnent after ascertaining the
opinions of the entire staff." Of course. in the beginning Kodaira hiaself
assuned the "role of listener."

Such a concept is naturally tied to the delegation of authority and
self-support. because each m10yee met have his own rights and responsi-
bilities so that the entire staff can have its respective opinions. Kodaira' s
for-ula of "aggregate knowledge" could be said to have given birth to

various terns in describing Hitachi nanageaent. such as "bottoa—to-top
nnagenent," "plant systea of independent profitability," "intraconpany
capital eysten" and "Andean-type aanagenent.”

Of course. the independent profitability systen for plants ate-ed largely
fron Hitachi's early days. when advance invest-ants were nada, anid
Pusanosuke Kuhara' a suspicious looks. as a plan for progress. Kuhera was
a great industrialist and enterpreneur, but he was said to be conpletely
nervous regarding the independent develop-ant and donestic production of

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcm. use on“

electrical eachinery begun by Kodaira. And there are many episodes to prove
this .

In any case, it has been a "tradition" since [the company's] founding to
demand "independent profitabilty" by any "operating entity”-that is. any
plant or subsidiary of the Hitachi group.

A Hitachi plant or subsidiary considers it normal to operate under its own
individual ”prof it goals . "

Strict Management of Subsidiaries

Some may argue that. plants aside, it is natural for a subsidiary to be
self-supporting. He don't know about the future, but until the early 1970's
the parent conpany of eany enterprises was quite indulgent and less strict
toward its "subcompany." In contrast to such coepanies, Hitachi's excellent
"consolidated accounting" is the result of its strict policy.

Hitachi's independent profitability policy toward its plants is derived from
a certain distinctness added to its system of operational divisions.

Hitachi is ude up of M operational divisions, under operating headquarters,
for co-ercial products, electrical eachinery, home .appliances, computers
and electronics. with each jurisdiction clearly defined. In this sense,

it is no different from the systems of operating divisions in general. but
each plant constitutes a "company within a coapany." It was planned that way
from the beginning and was further clarified by the start of the "individual
capital system” for each plant in 1968, whereby capital assets for the
plants and the overall accounting for the group are subdivided into separate
accounts for each plant. And as a principle, each capital increase is
subdivided in proportion to the original assets of each plant. Like
conpanies in general. capital for the individual plant earns not interest
but "dividends." A certain percentage of ”dividends" is received. In
addition, each plant must share its burden of the management expenses and
no costs of the parent coqany, and management control is similar to that
of regular enterprises. In effect. it is a prerequisite for each plant to
become a "profitable mnagement entity."

That is why it is simplified as "vertical managenent.” Like ordinary
enterprises. each plant has its coqetitors.

No matter who the cowetitors are, [each plant] must win its race.
To lose leans to end up as deficit nanagement. If it does, it must face
severe decisions and choices under its own responsibility regarding the

lowering of production costs and. prior to that, the problem of what to make
and where to sell then.

There is no time to look back and watch the "other companies" within the
Hitachi group.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. it has certainly helped to improve Hitachi's earning power as a
"prurit center."

Although Hitachi does not have any top product, the "system of capital
assets for each plant" offers an easily understandable explanation as to
why it ,is the No 1 general Ianufacturer of electrical mchinery in Japan.

Another point which shOuld not be overlooked is that, while carrying out the
decentralized system of authority. Hitachi is outstanding in its establish-
nent of a unified "vector."

Hitachi is like Hatsushita in this respect.

An episode is told where in Kodaira the "listener" collected opinions fro.
every employee and finally rendered a decision which was really his own fro-
the start. This is significant in Hitachi's case.

Kodaira. Chikara Kurata. Kenichiro Noni, uirokichi Yoshiyana, and Katsushige
Hits were all such adroit nnagars at Hitachi.

 

1 «9::me
2 0‘”!&R'(Imll

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m: 1. International Operations
. 2. Ratio of Orders Received. by Region (1980)
3. Africa - lo percent
5. Australasia - 8 percent
5. Central and South America - 9 percent
6. Middle East - 10 percent
7. North America - 16 percent
8. Europe - 20 percent
9. Southeast Asia - 33 percent
10. Ratio of orders received, by category (1980)
11. Transportation uchinery and equip-entlautomotive machinery
and equipment/others - 7 percent
12. Industrial machinery and equipment/plants - 12 percent
13. Intonation systems/comaications system/electronic devices -
23 percent
16. none electrical appliances - 33 percent
15. Electric power machinery and equipment/heavy electrical
machinery - 25 percent

Up Against ”Acid Test" of Internationalization

It is easy to agree with the evaluation of the aforelentioned American
analyst that a glimpse into Hitachi's technology and hunan potential sure
then makes up for its financial handicaps.

In fact, Hitachi has fulfilled its potential and improved its financial
charts during the past 10 years.

In March 1971, Hitachi's owner capital ratio was 23.0 percent. Its loan
ratio was 65 percent. In Harch 1975, however. the forner rose to 26.3
percent while the latter dropped to 63.1 percent. Furthermore, in Hatch
1980 its owner capital ratio improved to 27.7 percent and its loan ratio

was a acre 26 percent, as we mentioned before. This say not sound imressive
at any given point. but as a trend it will probably continue to improve
rather than decline.

If there is a past, there is a present. One csmot ignore the empirical
law that past and present do not guarantee a future. For exaeple. avoiding
the great hurdle of politically mtivated econonic friction in overseas
narkets is not a problem canfined to ﬂitachi. However. with a weakness in

hone electric appliances, Hitachi has tended to lag behind its conpetitors in
terns of exports. but it has finally increased its total sales to the 30-
percent ratio level. Horeover. its principal battle today involves the
semiconductor market at a dimension exceeding that of its previous problem
(control over color TV exports to the United States).

Hitachi has already activated a production beachhead in the United States
for seaieonductors. This was considered an epochal event for Hitachi,
which had concentrated in the past on the developing countries for its
overseas advancenent and was rather negative about establishing plants in
advanced countries.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI'IGAL USE ONLY

Pro- a different viewpoint. it shows Hitachi's posture concerning seni-
conductors. which represent the most basic technology and products supporting
the "age of nechatronics." llwever. Japanese semiconductor asnufacturers.
who foresaw "semiconductors as the target after hon electric appliances

and cars." have one after another followed Nippon nectric in building plants
in the United States. Yet past emplss indicate that although such a
perception nay be valid ﬁne the standpoint of "econoaic theory." it is not
valid free the standpoint of "political theory."

Yoke of ”Vertical Manage-ant"

Just as the Japanese "nschatronics industry." including Bitachi. places
importance on aenicoaductors. it is considered a "strategic industry" in the
United Stator-perhaps even are so.

Actually the semiconductor, which is vitally important to the space industry
and nilitary technology, including autonbiles and aircraft. could be said
to "hold the key to the national security systen." Moreover. unlike Japan,
it is publicly stressed in Anerica.

It would be a Iajor crisis. not only for Hitachi but for all Japanese
nanufacturers of seeiconductors. if the growth of the semiconductor industry
were to be constrained.

Not only would the estimated annual growth during the next decade of 30
percent in volune and none 20 percent in sales be thwarted. but it would
unmistakably cast a heavy shadow on technical develop-ant.

lbreover, in Hitachi's case. there are other questions. There is the
question of how not only the development of seniconductors but also its
independent develop-eat could change front posture of catching up with
technology to a leading position. and Inw it could prove its technological
potential.

Reportedly the overseas asrket is pinpointed as the central target regarding
the "two 3's.” Ior giant Hitachi. with its sales of 3.36 trillion yen
through its consolidated accounting system. the 33-percent export rate

of its products. including its overseas production. is unsatisfactory.
After all. the rate of growth of the GI? at house is stagnant at zero. while
a minus growth is anticipated.

Hitachi is to sell 50 percent of their aerchandise in the international
aarket and would like to build a anti-national enterprise like GM. IBM.
and Heat Ger-sny'e Sieaens 8 Halske. LG.

"In 1986 our sale will double and our profit will triple." said Hitachi.
To achieve this goal. the export nrket has to be expanded, however. this
cannot be done with existing technologies and nerchandise.

Hitachi says it will coisine the individual technological potential of the

entire oonpany and work to create new and advanced techmlogy and products
acconpanied by a stable reputation.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we use the example c E the portable m, which made a hit in the V11! nrket.
it is easy to understand Hitachi's claim. In this case, develop-mt was
handled by the Tokai plant, basic semiconductor technology by the Central
Research Institute, the materials by the Hitachi Research Institute, the
mechanisms by the Machinery Research Institute. and production technology by
the Production Research Institute. Meanwhile, the group enterprises.
including Hitachi Maxell, provided special technology, and the home Electrical
Appliance Research Institue consolidated all the research. As a result. it
is true that within a short period nitachi succeeded in loving froa develop-
ment to Inrketing of the product.

Of course, it is easy to coordinate separate research efforts when there is

a prior target such as the us. When a completely new, hypothetical product
is involved. however. it is doubtful to what extent the plant's profit center,
which has been taught to emphasize profits and econolic feasibility, should
take on the risks of prior investment.

Nevertheless, in order to set down roots by expanding its share of the
international market—in this sense the heavy electrical machinery field

is actually a pioneering effort--secondary products, as marketed in the past,
will not suffice. The only way is to nuke a breakthrough with premier
products and top technology.

Of course. these will probably end up as groundless worries, since "Hitachi

management" cannot possibly slip up. Organizational moves and training of

personnel reportedly are underway to prepare for internationalization and

coordination of technology and products. Meanwhile, attention is being

focused on how such change can be made by the Hitachi people, who have become

accustomed to a risk-free type of management, when they face the acid test.
:8 0.1111313 (sezsm

1 (Iﬂiiﬁil'ﬁ)
I
:9 manual |sm

2 03“.!3 (Is : sm_

    
  
   
 

 

3—:—

 

FOR OFFICIAVUSE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KEY: 1. International Operations
2. Overseas Investment (unit: 100 million yen)
3. 1976 - 82
4. 1977 - 97
S. 1978 - 123
6. 1979 - 165
7. 1980 - 165
8. Export Orders
9. 1976 - 3593

10. 1977 - 3621
11. 1978 - 3503
12. 1979 - 10503
13. 1980 - S810

Ove rseas St rategy

Tokyo ZAIKAI T2380 in Japanese Jm 82 pp 110-116

[hport by Yasua Nomra]

16 April 1982: This day will long remain in Hitachi history. It was the
day that financial operations for the Hitachi landing on u.s. shores, planned
for 3 years. culminated. On this day President Mite. witnessed by Chairman
William Batten (phonetic) of the NYSE, President Setsuya Tabuchi of the
Hours Securities Company. and others, issued an order for 1,000 shares of
Hitachi ADR's (0.8. trust securities). Hith this initial transaction. the
NYSE-«he world's largest exchange—began to sell and buy Hitachi shares.

Of course, liitachi me not the first Japanese corporation to have its shares
listed on the NYSE. Five companies, including Sony and Hatsushita, had
already been listed. and aitachi was the sixth. Nonetheless, [listing] with

the NYSE was an epoch-making project. and Hitachi spent 3 years for its
realization.

It was done because Hitachi perceived the United States as "the largest
future nrket for its products from the standpoint of procuring funds."
From the standpoint of its broad range, wealth of capital, perfection as a
market, and variety of aethods for the procurement of funds. Hitachi's

financial experts uniforaly stress, "the iaportance of the 0.8. aarket
cannot be overstated."

Hitachi has always emphasised careful preparation and ample understanding
among everyone concerned in whatever it has undertaken. For exaaple,
regarding foreign exchange policy, not only the offices directly in charge
but also general employees involved in exports and overseas projects conduct
study sessions on the ABCs of the exchange nrket. formnlate company policy.
and discuss measures to cope. It seems that it would merely take tine and
effort without such effect, but once a start is eade everyone concerned
would understand better and things would work out smother.

Cautious Landing Operations

How then did Hitachi's operations for the 0.8. landing start? The objective
was to obtain a stock rating. In the United States. a rating by body or

- 38
”WIMMY
FINI()FFIC1AI.I£SE£(MVLY

Standard and Poor's (68°) is a prerequisite to issuing corporate bonds for
the purpose of increasing capital. Of course, it is not at all a legal
stipulation, but in many cases there is an unwritten law among institutional
investors in America that purchases cannot be made without a rating by the
two firms. Therefore, in order to amass a large amount of capital, a
precondition is to obtain the highest rating possible. Together with the
complicated procedure of the 0.8. Securities Exchange Commission (SEC),
that is why it is so difficult for Japanese enterprises to procure capital
in the 0.5. narket. Moreover, it is a factor in the Japanese tendency to
turn to the less complicated European market for bond issues.

However, since it judged "the 0.8. market as the prime target," Hitachi was
determined to pass the difficult test. The reason for the importance of the
"rating" is that, although it is directly a rating for bond issues on the
0.5. market, it is actually used as a reference for any projected advance
into the 0.8. market, such as joint ventures and technical cooperation, where
the rating of the company concerned is questioned.

Of course. everyone knows that Hitachi is one of the super companies in Japan.
However, this may not necessarily be true in the United States. Especially
the financial ratios are considered most important by the rating organiza-
tions-~for example, the ratio of owner capital which was 25.2 percent (March
1981) in Hitachi's case.

Undeniably this [figure] lags far behind the 61.6 percent (December 1980) of
IBM, the superclass U.S. company, and the 51.5 percent of GM (ditto). ‘
Moreover, in the case of Japanese enterprises, the contract exchanged with

a bank during a transaction is very important. Whenever a loa1 fro. the

bank is involved, there is a clause which permits the bank to claim collateral
with top priority when necessary. The Moody firm, which is noted for its
strictness regarding legal problems. has pointed this cut in rating Japanese
bonds, stating, "The priority of the creditors is lessened," and it uses

this as a reason for lowering their ratings. For example, Matsushita, which
has made virtually no loans, was the only Japanese enterprise prior to
Hitachi to be granted the highest Triple A rating.

Off To Acquire a "Triple A" Rating

Hitachi first approached $6? for a rating. After obtaining a Triple A rating
in July 1980, it next submitted a rating request to ssP'e strong rival, Moody.
Not only Hitachi's chairman and top executives but also representatives from
financial institutions such as the Japan Industrial Bank. the Finance
Ministry, and the Bank of Japan joined in persuading Moody that, since the
bank contract has never been invoked against any major conpany. it does not
pose any threat to the creditors. Such efforts succeeded, and in January 1981
Moody awarded Hitachi a Triple A rating. enabling it to join the ranks of some
30 companies of the AAA club.

Also, ever since the rating was given to Hitachi, Moody has regarded the
signing of bank contracts with Japanese firms in a less negative light.

This was a boOn to Japanese companies seeking a 0.5. rating for purposes of
increasing capital.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬁCIAL USE ONLY

Thus armed with the Triple A rating, Eitachi proceeded in April to issue
150 million dollars in convertible bonds in the 0.8. nrket. It originally
planned to issue 100 million dollars, but due to the rush of foreign
buyers into the Japanese stock market and the large volume of subscribers
attracted by nitachi, it was decided at the last minute to increase the
bonds as a "hot issue."

The lSO-million-dollar issue is the largest amunt of convertible bonds ever
launched overseas by a Japanese enterprise. Subsequently. the value of the
Hitachi bond rose to 947 yen per share with a convertible value of 688 yen.
which made investors very happy. In fact. despite the large volume of
issue, 310 percent had already been converted to regular stock by the end

of February this year.

This advance in hitachi's operations reached a climax with its full-fledged
capital increase (ADE issue) and listing on the NYSE. hitschi had previously
increased its capital with 75 million shares of ADR's in 1963 at a
subscription value of 100 yen per share. Therefore, the procured amunt was
only 7.5 billion yen. This time, however, the value per share was several
times higher, and the procurement amunt was incomparably larger. The
company accordingly took more precautions in issuing the Ann's. Especially
after the August 1981 peak, the Japanese stock nrket went into a decline
and falling value of Hitachi's stock called for a difficult decision. Of
special concern to Hitachi was the miserable result of coapetitor ‘lbshiba's
public subscription.

Toshiba 's Fiasco

In late Deceder 1981, Toshiba issued the unprecedentedly large value of
200 million shares of stock at 408 yen per share to increase its capital on
the domestic market. however, encountering a stagnant market following the
"Granville shock.” it was forced into large support buying to stabilize the
stock just prior to the date of payment (30 September). Its misfortunes
have multiplied since 1 October, because the stock has never recovered its
original value. For Toshiba, this means that until the stock regains its
original value, it will be iqossible to issue the next subscription at
current market value. and this has taught a lesson to the other companies
regarding the difficulty of detersining the issue price. Moreover, there is
both a debate pro and con amng njor investors such as life and casualty
insurance companies regarding the increase of capital at current lurket
prices.

Research Task Forces Sent Overseas

witnessing such actual enqles. Hitachi dispatched study groups to Europe
and America in October 1981 to observe conditions among institutional
investors there. Except for a few cowanies like Sony and Hatsushita.
Japanese cowanies do not 9) directly to the investors and take a poll
concerning their interest in their stocks when increasing capital or

issuing bonds. Such marketing research is usually entrusted to professimal
securities fires.

to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In contrast, Hitachi's perception is that "capital is a product which is sold
only after the buyer understands it." It therefore conducts its own research.
At the tine, Hitachi's stock was 720-730 yen per share. but the response
overseas was cool.

"He know Hitachi's stock is good, but the 700-yen level is too high" was
the reported response anong overseas institutional investors. At the ties.
the selling spree of superior stocks by foreign investors in Japan under-
scored the validity of this response. The valid price of Hitachi stock was
600 yen. according to informtinn obtained by a Hitachi executive. 0n the
basis of this infornation, President Hits of Hitachi instructed a tenporary
postponement of the ADR issues.

"60" Sign Is Given

The following February [1982], the stock value, which temporarily regained
the level of 737 yen (in January), gave signs of falling to the 600-yen
level, approaching the "valid price" indicated by foregin investors.
Hesnwhile, there is a great demand for capital, with continuing heavy
investment is. equip-eat and facilities in growth sectors such as semi-
conductors and conputers. President Hits made the decision to ”go" at a
subscription price of less than 600 yen.

The Hitachi ADH's were issued at 581 yen, with psyunt due on 31 Hatch.

The steep narket decline following the price decision resulted in a taporary
drop to under 500 yen a share. and it has continued to show instability.
fluctuating around 581 yen. The securities firm handling the capital
increase (Morgan Stanley and Anerican Honura Securities) have experienced
big headaches. It was quite different fron last year. when the subscription
for dollars in convertible securities easily exceeded the expected value.
Also, the actual sales of Ann's in the United States remained at the 60
percent level while 60 percent were sold in Europe and the Hiddle East,
which was "unsatisfactory" to Hitachi. However, the responsible executives
at Hitachi are cheerful. They are confident that they have done the best
they could.

The basis for this project which took 3 long years was actually laid in
1973 when Hitachi held its first periodic briefing regarding its achievements.
Beginning in 1979, company executives have periodically toured the United
States, Europe, and Southeast Asia to conduct briefings on its consolidated.
accounting system. Because of such groundwork, the issue of ADH's was
possible said severe stagnation of the Japanese stock market. Hitachi has
already dispatched a resident vice president in charge of securities to

its American subsidiary. It is admittedly lagging behind Sony and
Hatsushita, which took sinilar steps 10 years ago, but it is typical of
Hitachi that, once it sets its sin, it moves ahead aggressively and makes

a positive aove even if it any be initating others.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFF1C1AL.USIZ(NVLY

Has Era of "Hitachi Finance" Arrived?

3
Hitachi is often referred to as the ”Hitachi of technology." Hitachi itself
is fond of using this catchprase. However, an enterprise cannot survive
on technology alone. Naturally, business management, which gives life to
technology. and sound finance are indispensable. In this respect, Hitachi
is unhesitatingly rated No l by the experts for its sound financial and
accounting policies, at least along general manufacturers of electrical
machinery. There are no former bankers seong Hitachi's management
executives. They are all manufacturing specialist. Moreover, the top
managers are all engineers. The highest executive to come from the
financial field has been the vice president. and the first to reach that
position was the present chief auditor. Yagi. Until then, the highest
financial expert had been the eanaging director or the executive director.
Even today, the person responsible for finance and accounting is Executive
Director Hiyauchi. th is it, then, that the financial and accounting
divisions are said to be the most powerful among the general electrical
machinery manufacturers who have surplus financial balances (profit receipts
and dividends less interest discount fees paid)-that is, higher interest
and dividends than interest on loans? (Incidentally, in March 1981,
Hitachi's financial balance showed a surplus of 6.8 billion yen. coapared
to Toshiba's deficit of 5.9 billion yen.)

"After all, everything begins with cost accounting." (Executive Director
Hiyauchi) Hitachi has completely adopted a profit-by-plant unit system.
Sales and costs are calculated by plant. and profitability is figured out.

In that sense, the plant superintendent is actually a "president." “at

only the plant superintendent but also all the employees working in the plant
are evaluated on the basis of periodic profits. They are denied excuses such
as "Our products are less profitable” or "We give more emphasis to investment
for the future." Therefore, a cost analysis is made for each part and
coaponent, each production process, and each item of raw material. It is
sometimes said to be carried to such extremes between plants and divisions
within the sane company that some wonder: "This is really strict cost
control. Are we actually employees of the ease company?" It has also won
for Hitachi the reputation that ”Hitachi is week where several plants are
involved."

New Image of Top Management

However, it is certain that such strict cost control was instrumental in
creating the "unsinkable ship Hitachi" which is unaffected by the
recession. And in Hitachi's case, its managers of finance and accounting
never appear on center stage. Nonetheless, their authority within the
company, especially in the plant. is quite powerful, and they are superb

in their supporting role. Another trait at Hitachi is that. whether an
engineer or a manager, he is a seasoned veteran in finance and accounting--
and expecially in cost accoanting. Even the plant superintendent cannot
submit a plan for a new project to the head office without persuading the
director of accounting, so he inevitably becomes quite knowledgeable.

42
INIR!0ITWCJAI.1MSEE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1980 and 1981, Hitachi nanagers held long discussions with analysts

of Moody and of Standard 6 Poor's in order to obtain a rating, and the
analysts were reportedly amazed at the language ability and in-depth
financial knowledge of the Hitachi managers. One csmot become a president
at Hitachi on the basis of his technological knowledge along. Partly due

to the present recession. the weight of finance and accounting in business
nanagenent has continued to increase. It is the so-called ”era of finance."
In View of the value of overseas strategy. it is first necessary to build an
"international finance center" and to restudy foreign laws, tax affairs,

and accounting. Hitachi's financial affairs are based on such a fire
foundation.

This aa-soth enterprise, with sales of 2.13 trillion yen and current profits
of 137 billion yen (anticipated as of March 1982), intends to double sales
and triple profits in FY 86, and it has actively launched an expansion
progral. What will be the next step by the cospany, which has node a
financial landing on America's shores? It should be cause for worry song
its competitors.

S884
650: 4106/106 END

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY