NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS- L/10694

28 July 1982

Japan Report

Nippon Telegraph; Telephone- Public Corporation
Reorganization

(Fouo' 45/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

spas publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Englishnlanguage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate now the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
aation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT

(P000 45/82)

NIP'PON TELEGRAPH. TELEPnONE Punuc CORPORATION
REORGANIZATION

CONTENTS

NTT Family's Uncertain Future
(Kenichi Kmhuhi; SHUKAN TOYO KBIZAI, 24 Apr 82)....... ..

NTT Labor Union's View _
(Kazuo Oikawa Interview; HONOHISUTO, 27 Apr 82) ..... . .....

View of Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications
(SENTAKU, May 82) ................... .......... ..... .. ......

Impact of NTT Reform Discussed
(NIHON KEIZAI SHIHmUR. 11-13 May 82)......... ............. .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m PAHILY'S UNCZU'AIN FUTURE
Tokyo SHUKM TOTO KEIZAI in Japanese 24 Apr 82 pp 82-85
[Article by reporter Kenichi Konahashi]

[Text] The situation in the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation
(N11) has changed greatly during the past year so, with liberation of mater-
ial procurement as of 1 January and changes nade by the new president, Shinto,
who took over his new post on the sale day. The effect of the rough waves is
surging toward the so-called "NIT family" of approximately 300 fine which
supply equip-ant to m.

The NTT fanily is also called the "eighty closed society." Comnication
circles have been upgrading their technological know-how through joint re-
search with NIT. Specific manufacturers are given orders through private
contracts. Outsiders are able to achieve official status in HTT through the
reco-endation of the business concerned. It is an extra-sly difficult feat
for anew participant to break into this bastion.

It is a fact that in achieving a quick reconstruction of the Japanese telephone
network, which was devastated by the war, it was more efficient to concentrate
orders with specific firms. In the actual contracts today, the first order
depends on the degree of contribution in the joint development. The alloca-
tion of next year's orders is decided after the assessments have been made as
to thequality of goods, condition of conservation system, delivery tine. price
offer, and magenent situation, including the previous year's performance.

In other words, "The principle of competition is working, to a certain degree,
and there is absolutely no allotment of an entire order to one single Ianufac-
turer. In addition, Ieabers of m do not take 'gifts.‘ Inthat sense, things
are working well" (according to a party connected with N'l'f). Nevertheless, a
"coquettish structure" continues to thrive in the long closed society. Even
the cost of telephones is set by the "accumlative systel" of adding the cost
of parts of rigid quality standards and a fixed profit nargin. Ilene appliance
manufacturers say that telephones "can be made nuch cheaper."

Moreover, the "rights" of the four neubers--consiating of m, the Ministry of
Posts and Telecomnications, the postal group, and private enterprises—have

been functioning. Thus, the power to crush the family never developed fro-
wltuin. In the final analysis, the door was finally opened by "external

—1-

POIOI‘FICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

7)..)aana.aneaeau : r.

Leading m Demands. Talecosnanicatione Machinery Industriel Association

Key:

(1) In 100 million yen (5) Civilian delande

(2) Total orders (6) m

(3) Other gavennsnt (7) Note: Broadcasting equip-ant.
(4) External denende radio equiplsent not included

pressure," through the participation of foreign enterprises nade possible by
the government-level procure-ant negotiations at the Tokyo round of GATT.
This changed the whole situation.

Tiae-Consuaing Overseas Procurement

Through an agreeaentbetween Japan and the United Staten. the uterial procure-
nent method van divided into three stages, of Tracks 1. II and 111.

Track I includes those [item] which are not directly connected with the tele-
co-anication netvork, but bide can be placed for readily usable goods on the
narket which can he worked into the network. Bidding and purchase of about
one-half of the annual procurenent. or about 1.5 billion dollars including
paper and pencils, can be made according to cm. An annual purchase of
over No million yen vill be announced in the official gazette.

Track II refers to those products on the market that require slight changes.
These will be announced in the official gazette. and purchase can be made
through a private contract with a manufacturer selected tron applicants for
joint devalopuent (with m).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These new methods are well received by the 0.5. Messy and USTR, but procure-
ment from foreign enterprises has not progressed substantially.

Specification study of 56 products and 258 coapanies under Track I was com-
pleted at the end of March. Among these were 15 foreign products and 27
foreign companies. Bids for 65 products by 56 companies totaling 19.5 billion
yen were received, but [bids for] only 9.3 billion yen for 9 products by 11
companies were from foreign firms, and many were for magnetic tapes and exper-
imental LSI manufacturing equipment.

0n the other hand, the only product announced in the official gazette under
Track II was the digital echo suppressor. A Japanese firm was selected. As
for Track 111, 10 products were announced. A bid for automobile telephones by
Hatorola and a bid for satellite-use echo eliminators by the U.S. A'l'l‘ were
received. An examination for selection is being made in each case, but the
fact 1.3 that the number is ranch smaller than anticipated. (Motorola was
approached for the sale of pocket bells prior to the liberation of procure-
ment, and [Japan] will purchase 2 billion yen worth during this year.)

10 Best Procurement Firms for J?! 1980 (in 100 million yen)

Nippon Electric Company Ltd 1,274
Fujitsu Ltd 81010
0H Electric Industry Co Ltd 1083
Hitachi Ltd 415
Smite-o Electric Industries Ltd 176
Furukawa Electric Co Ltd 156
Fujikura Cable works Ltd 156
Iwatsu Electric Co Ltd 166
Dainichi-Nippon Cables Ltd 140
Tamra Electric Machinery 113

However, all the products cannot be announced immediately, and it requires
time to rewrite the specifications. Among the 101 products for Track II,
slightly over 60 percent of those expected for announcement have been com-
pleted. The plan is to announce all the products by December. The situation
with Tracks 11 and III is: "Normally, the time required from research to
testing and test manufacture is l to 2 years for short-term items and about

5 years for long-term items. Procurement takes time." (Shiro Hatauo, chief
of Materials Bureau)

An orientation for U.S. firms, held in Tokyo last June, drew 56 participating
firms. Application forms were simplified. andthrough the instruction of
President Shinto, bidding instructions and specifications were translated in-
to English and distributed free of charge. Those conveniences by NTT were
rather unusual. Since then, over 100 firms have arrived to make inquiries
or a sales pitch through the Japanese firms or by other means.

However, there is no denial that "foreign manufacturers do not fully under-
stand the procedures." (Ichio Kada, chief of the international procurement

room. Materials Bureau) There is a plan to send mail directly to co-unica-
tlon equipment manufacturers for double PR work.

-3-

FOR OFFICIAL "‘8 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE MIN

On one hand, under the instruction of President Shinto to "take positive steps
to buy good products cheaply," a study group was dispatched to the United
States in the middle of March. The group visited ITT, GTE, Bell System (ATT),
and others to find ways to participate more readily in the Track II and Track
111 levels.

"Exemplary manufacturers have made a thorough study of m's procedures,
but they do not understand fully the patent rights know-how in Track III"
(Kada); therefore, explanations were made about this. As a result, ATT
placed applications for Track III, showing some progress.

0n the other hand, problems also exist within the foreign manufacturers them-
selves. Especially, smaller u.s. commnicatiOn equipment manufacturers tend
to submit applications without changing specifications or configurations, as
they have been doing with local telephone companies which do not possess their
own technology. There is also a difference in the way they make their sales
pitch to NTT.

Talks with various comanies are moving along, however, and there is a gradual
understanding. A good example is the approval of private switchboards after
a year of negotiation with the Rohn Comany.

In any case, an improvement in getting good results through PR takes time.
"Pull—scale participation of foreign manufacturers will exist from here on."
(Kada)

Stringent Environmental Changes for Smaller Manufacturers

whether there are gains in procurenent from foreign manufactuers or not,
small and medium-size manufacturers will be affected the most from the
liberation. This was visible even before the liberation.

The bidding for facsimile equipment last fall is a typical case. Up to then,
Nippon Electric Company and Hatsushita Denso had made deliveries through pri-
vate contracts, but the bids last fall were based on Track I. Over 10
companies responded, and Toshiba won orders for 570 electrostatic high-speed
equipment and 5,520 thermal-sensitive medium-speed equipment items, while NBC
received orders for 1,900 thermal-sensitive high-speed equipment items.

However, the problea was in the prices of the successful bids, which were con-
siderably lower than the market price. 'A certain source said, "Toshiba set
the price at one-fourth to one-fifth of the market price in order to make in-
roads into the NTT market, and NBC emulated them." There is a rumor that
"NTT's responsible persons have made inquiries regarding the excessively low
price." (NTT has denied this)

Toshiba disregarded this, saying, "Delivery to TNT does not require distribu-

tion costs or inventory charges. Since a fixed quantity was assured, mass-
production efficiencies can be utilized to lower the cost."

FOIOFFICIALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a

Regarding the above, executives of medium-size manufacturers could not conceal
their bewilderment, saying, "He believe competition is the flow of time, but
large companies which can produce in volume have the advantage in making bids.

If they keep this up to become the price setters, smaller companies can only
throw up their hands in despair."

In actuality, the trend in achievements of medium-size communication equipment
manufacturers shows a con:picuous difference between the top~level and lower
level companies. NTT's investment was reduced to cut down on telephone inven-
tories which in turn out down on orders for telephones.

The top-level companies, which were able to read this situation early, made
gains by exporting pushbutton telephones or by succeeding in diversification
into other fields so as to decrease their dependence on NTT. In contrast, the
medium-level companies, which were unable or were too late in getting into the
right track away from the NTT's projects, show a trend toward stagnant sales
and profits due to depressed NTT investment.

Moreover, the all—out review of material procurement and construction invest-
ment under the instruction of President Shinto has added to their apprehensions.

In a normal year, a primary contract for 60-70 percent of the next fiscal
year's budget is drawn in January and a contract for the year is concluded in
August after the budget is completed. However, through the recent reconsidera-
tion. contracts were not concluded even in February, when the budgets should
have been fixed by the manufacturers, and it is already April.

The result is the suppression of equipment. for example, by reducing the
installation of new public phones, according to the slowdown in real income
growth rate, instead of adding new phones.

In contrast, new equipment such as autophones and pocket hells has increased.
Orders were switched from the old family enterprises to new manufacturers.

Moreover, the main object of the review is on INS (high-level information com-
munication system). Hhat can be accomplished now is to change to a digital
system and promote a more efficient investment. However, many small and
medium firms cannot keep up with the new digital technology, and a maldistri-
bution of orders to majors is unavoidable.

In like manner, the structural changes of using LSI in equipment or moving
into a nontelephone line have pushed the smaller firms into a rather austere
environment. A certain trend in the introduction of new technology corres—
ponding to the technological development of middle and lower-level firms has
been seen, but such a luxury is no longer admissible.

Horeover, as seen in the facsimile case, NTT must compete for price in the
event of a sales competition between NTT and private firms. Procurements are
to be made by the lower market-oriented price, rather than by the purchase
price set by the system of adding-on, as was the case previously. Soon,
"cheaper products can be sold by competitive bidding even though private
contracting continues." (Hatsuo)

FIIIIIHNCIAI.USE¢NVLY
nunication Equipment Manufacturers Which Have Been Affected

 

Depen- Affilia-
dence tion
Main Procurement Items on m (financing Prospec
(percent) (percent)
Black phones. pushbutton 33 __ Increase reV
phones exporting pl
Black phones. pushbutton Broad incre:
phones 33 “8“”) proved expo:
:ion Pocket bells. etc. Increase prt
2° “C(43) sales of in!
equipnent
Black phones. pushbutton Revenues ant
phones 60 “Cum sale
Works Black, pushbutton phones 50 01:1(22) Revenue and
through exp¢
: works Black phones. public phones, 100 “C(18) Sales stem
private-use facsiniles onus)
Black, pushbutton phones 40 Fujitsu Recovery all
(12) profits reel
uni- Black. pushbutton phones 50 Hitachi Recovery Hit
(24) lover profil
Lc Public phones, ship-use 25 NEC Revenues. p1
phones information
ric Black, pushbutton phones - Fujitsu --

(55)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under these various factors, crustal movements are rising within the small
and medium manufacturers of conunications equipment

Dissolution of Cooperative Group After 9 Years

At such a time, the cooperative group of middle-size enterprises dissolved at
the end of March. This cooperative group had been established in May 1970 to
support medium-sire manufacturers through cooperative production of rotary
dial phones, or the so-called black phones, by transferring the production
from the majors.

The group consisted of six companies: Heisei Denki, Taiko Electric Dorks,
Tantra Electric Horus, Kanda Tsushin, Nakayo Telecomnication Works, and
Ilasegawa Electric and Engineering Company. At the time, none of these com-
panies had the capability to produce a complete set. Under the guidance of
m. each cmany supplied different parts (not sales) to be assembled and
delivered to “11'. This method improved their productivity and technology.

however, whenthe pushbutton phones became producsble by a single company, the
cooperative group became meaningless. In contrast, closer ties with new
affiliated firms would only hinder their progress. It was decided that it
would be better not to rely on the cooperative group, in order to establish

a firmer administrative base, and this led to the dissolution.

Up to now. orders have been placed through the group, but starting in 1982,
individual orders will be placed to the nine companies, which include lwatsu
Electric Colpany, Nitsuko and Tokyo Shibaura Electric Company. Transactions
of parts will probably remain among the former cooperative group members but
there will be a gradual and stronger move toward independence. This will
sweep each coqany into a mre vigorous competitive world.

NTT. on the other hand. has stated soberly, "This will mean that an order can
be placed or received by an ordinary person, and NT! is no longer in a posi—
tion to provide detailed guidance." (Kada)

However, it does not apply to all small and medium firms. Under the GATT
provisions. enterprises with capitalisation of less than 100 million yen and
with fewer than 300 employees are excluded, and private contracts for small
parts such as connectors and fuses are being carried out. Moreover, over
20 percent of the procurement is allocated to smaller enterprises. under the
"law on assuring orders for goverment needs by smaller enterprises."

"Although it is said to be small in quantity, they cannot take any more or—
dcrs because of technological limitations." (Hatsuo) Thus, the Con-mica-
tions Institute has decided to offer training in digital calmnications, etc..
with a view toward a cooperative association of small and medium enterprises.

The problem is with the lower level medial-size enterprises. N'l'l' has the
earlier [goal] of "reducing dependence on N‘l'l‘ to 30 percent and striving

toward civilian demands without missing out on the new technology." In
actuality, however, things are not going too well, as mentioned earlier.

-7-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE(NVLY

An attempt can be made to follow up the sudden rise in exports of electronic
pushbutton phones to the United States during the past 2 or 3 years. but there
is a delay in development, and the market will cool off by the time it is
completed. Aiming for domestic sales will also result in severe competition
between sinularindustries, due to delays in operational structure and sales
network resulting from their past dependence on NIT. They also do not have
design specialists for civilian goods.... Many problems such as these exist.
There is a strong move toward seeking protection for the alfiliated new firms

to replace the NTT.

However. the environment is turning all the more severe. A wrong move will
produce dropouts. It is said that "If a functional, and cheap product is
available, we will buy it" (Hatsuo), but things are not that simple. How they
can remove themselves from NTT in the future will be the crucial point in the
next 2 to 3 years. The “NTT family" which has been glorified in the spring of
our society is being compelled into a complete turnaround at "dusk."

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1982

9218
C50: 4106/10?

IN)I OIWHCJAI.IIBI:CI'LV
FOR‘OFFK)AI.USE(NNLY

NTT LABOR UNION'S VIE"
Tokyo BKONOMISUTO in Japanese 27 Apr 82 pp 52-55

[Interview with Kazuo Oikawa. chairman of the All-Japan Telecommunications
workers Union by EKONOHISUTO reporter; date and place not given]

[Text] The Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public
Corporation (NTT) introduced three proposals regarding
reorganization of NIT to the Emergency Administrative
Group. These show fully the feelings of President
Shinto, who came up from the civilian ranks. 0n the
other hand. the All-Japan Telecommunication Workers
Union, consisting of NTT elployees. expressed its
basic concept on Ianagerial improvement to the Central
Committee meeting held during March. It appears that
both labor and manage-est are cool toward support of
the NTT systel, but what is their intention? Hr Oikawa
was born in Hiyagi Prefecture in 1929. He is 52 years
of age. and has served his entire life with the union,
starting as chief secretary of the Sendai Telegraph
Office chapter. He has been in his present position
since 1976.

Return Profits to the People

Interviewer: Both NTT management and the union have agreed to disavow the
present NTT system in the reorganization disputes. Proposals have been made
for a special company and a special corporation. respectively, but the common
point is in the for: of management. Is it over how it can operate efficiently
as a business?

Oikawa: Yes, that is true. Telecmmmunications work is part of an industry
with a promising future, but projects which should maintain civilian ties

are growing steadily. I believe that if corporate management continues to
place importance only on the public interest, with no regard for business. an
irrationality will develop. From now on, even public corporations cannot
neglect efficiency. In the final analysis. the question is over harmonious
promotion of telecommunicaticn's future, expansion, and business and also how
we can nurture the telecoa.4nication industry in the world market. The
problems lie in the reorganization of the nanagerial form, based on its role

- 9 -

IIIIGDIIICIAl.llﬂE(N'LY
FOR OFNCIAI. USE ONLY

as protector of the benefits of all the Japanese people and of corporate man-
agement. There are criticisms against this position taken by the union, but

the points to be rectified cannot be rectified if the government undertakings
continue the way they are.

In this sense, I believe the article by Hitsuharu Ito,professor at Chiba
University (in EKONOHISVTO of 2 March, entitled: "Truth or Falsehood in

Talks on Monopoly-Private Management of NTT"--which advocates the necessity of
certain "government control" but opposes completely private management) shows
a constructive view.

Interviewer: The union's proposal is aimed toward a special public corpora-
tion financed by the government and subscribers, but how are you accepting the
NTT’s concept?

Oikawa: Frankly, the most important point is the form of ownership, and there
is a conspicuous difference from our view. If a special company in the form
of the Japan Airlines Company is established, many problems regarding stock
ownership will arise.

A limited stock ownership system may be adopted, but be that as it may, stock
for a new business body can be issued to thepublic. Even if the government
should be asked to own one-third of the stock [for a while], this stock will
be sold within a certain time. we are opposed to it because it is different
from the Japan Airlines system and can be shifted into a private operation.
It means that public control will be removed completely.

in contrast, we are not proposing stock ownership but a special corporation.
Regardless of how we obtain efficient management, we cannot avoid the public
interest in telecommunications. In the management of a public entity, the
effects of the fluctuations of stock prices and dividends should be avoided.
Stock ownership means strictly private management, and that is why we are
opposed to it.

A change to private management means selling the present enterprise for pri-
vate capital, but there is no need to sell a profitable enterprise. Therefore,
we want it to operate profitably for the people and pass the profits on to the
people. This can be accomplished by a reduction in rates, andthere is also

a merit of converting the present payment system for tax benefit. Perhaps as
a means of financing, a voluntary investment by subscribers is possible, so
that profits can be returned in the form of dividends. In such manner, it is
believed the profits from the NTT operation should be distributed fairly.

There is no reason why the enterprise should be sold wholly to private capital-
ists and let them benefit alone.

Unclear "Corporate Proposal"

Interviewer: However, as shown in the nine electric power system, an invest-
ment by. for example, the Tokyo Electric Power Company can be huge. A change
to a stock company does not necessarily make management easier.

- 10 _

INDR 0iﬂﬂ€1Al.llﬂE(ﬂULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oikawa: There is that view, but the makeup between electric power and tele-
comunications is entirely different. All the electric power company has to

do, in an extras sense, is to keep the electricity flowing, or in short, keep
the col-odity moving.

However, there are senders and receivers in telecmnications. Moreover,
there is an exchange of information through conversation, and the secrets of
individuals and management Inst be protected. This is where the significance
of going public or expansion can be mentioned, but to pursue a moneymaking
corporation freely brings out the contradictory side.

I feel that if making money is the foremost objective, going public or expan-
sion will be negated and great confusion will arise...including the problem of
privacy.

Interviewer: It seems that career members of NTT are opposed to the NTT's
proposal for a special company.

Oikawa: You mentioned career mabers, but it is more soamong the outsiders
who were appointed into the so—called "NTT family." There are some of the
"A"-c1ass college graduate elite who are definitely opposed to it. In other
words, their goal is for reemployment into the "family"; therefore, the attrac-
tion for NTT as a public corporation or as a special corporation or privately
operated company would not be the same.

Another point is that, no matter what is said, the A—class members in our
corporation are, after all, bureaucrats. Some classmates are in the Ministry
of Finance and some are in the Ministry of Posts and Telecomunications.
Bureaucrats have the consciousness of belonging to the first-class bureau-
cratic domain. A change to a private management would eliminate the future
positions [in NTT] for those who are now, for example, in the Ministry of Posts
and Telecomnications. To state it explicitly, since President Shinto came
up from the private sector. he tries to push civilian logic. There are some
who are not happy about this. From our viewpoint, President Shinto is going
too far, and there is criticism over how long he is going to remain as a
"civilian" president. lie now should act as the president of NTT. He don't
know whether he is forever talking as an ”outsider" or as a responsible NTT
u... be

As a good example, President Shinto submitted three proposals (special company
system, private managed system, and reformed public corporation system) to the
Energency Administrative Investigation Group, but none is designated as final.
This is on the premise that the decision should not come from NTT. It was in-
tended that "I only submitted the material," but I feel that he is not a person
in charge unless he says to the investigation group: "we want to do this."

He did not submit a proposal. We are just offering "our views."

In any case. the investigation group will be issuing reports, but if the “11's
intention is shown too soon in the Shinto's "three proposals," a free discus-
sion by the investigation group can be impaired. Although the underlying
tone scene to point toward a special company, the goal is for private manage-
cent.

-11-

FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Interviewer: In the event the union's special corporation plan is to be imple-
nented, will theentire capital of the corporation be returned to the government?

Oikawa: This is a controversial [point]. The government says that it invested
18.8 billion yen when we became a public corporation and explains that this

would be 680 billion yen at the present price rate. It can be said that all

one has to do is to return this amount, but the problen is in future investment--
whether to have the subscribers put up the new money or not. It will have to

be done on a voluntary basis.

There is also the problem of capitalisation. As for the type of management,
many problems such as the establishment of an investor~represented committee

to decide on intentions, an inspection comaittse, ctc., remain to be discussed.
we are thinking of getting knowledgeable persons together to discuss these
issues. In any case, even after the investigation group issues its report,

the reorganization will not progress immediately because of the pending legis-
lative work. It will probably reach a climax by the ordinary session of the
Diet next year.

Interviewer: The corporation's proposals and the union's proposal for having
the government hold the stock "for a while" seem to agree in the joint invest-
ment portion.

Oikawa: Strictly speaking, there is a difference, but the form of management
is quite similar. In essence, it appears that our views have been incorpo-
rated. After all, we have been advocating reorganization for 8 years.

off-the-Hark Statement by HPT

Interviewer: Returning to the basics. a truly private conpany such as ATT in
the United States is operating quite well. why not the NIT?

Oikaws: The background is completelydifferent. The size of the land is not

at all the same. In the U.S. case, monopolistic control by a powerful person
is strongly despised. At any rate, if a company is determined to be monopolis—
tic, it is split up by the Antitrust Law. Moreover, in reality it is impossi-
ble for a single enterprise to cover such a wide territory. But the size of
Japanese islands is insignificant.

In the case of Japan, a look at history shows that talks on the private manage-
ment of telecomunications came up before. It required money and could not
compete as a private entity. Therefore, the decision was that it should be
operated by the government. and it has continued to this day. Because of this
background, it is outrageous to say that the United States can and Japan cannot.

Re are against private control, but if it should come about, there is a method
for changing the entire system to private control. In such a case, however,

the Antitrust Law can be applied, and as a result, a split of private control
will be included.

- 12 -

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USI(MULY
FOR¢NHHCJAL.USE(NVLY

If it should be split, a new facility will be needed for senders and receivers
of information. This requires huge sue of money. Pbreover, [the need for]
different technology to suit regional situations would make consistently good
service difficult. In fact, second and third telephone companies are being
established in the United States, and this is viewed as an invitation to con-
fusion. For example, telephone rates would rise in the depopulated areas and
be lower in the densely populated areas.

Interviewer: The HPT has been stressing reduction of personnel and rationali-
zation within the framework of the present corporation systen as part of the
“IT reorganization. Does President Shinto include such "nuances" in his
statenent?

Oikawa: The HPT (Ministry of Posts and Telecommuﬂcations) can be called irre-
sponsible. By and large, inportant personnel of NT! require first of all the
approval of the “PT. Without approval from the NWT, Ministry of Finance

cannot decide on the budget, either.

Such views can emerge if one considers that the president has had experience
in rationalization of a private shipbuilding firm. This is one way to look at
it in a restricted sense, and it can be viewed affirmatively. But there are
330.000 employees in NIT, and their workload differs according to their place
of employment. In some areas. an absolute value of personnel is lacking.

Frankly, therefore, the rationalization has been carried out through talks
between labor and management in the redistribution of essential personnel

to busier areas. Thus, there shouldn't be any surplus of essential personnel
to be called lazy. The union cannot accept labor intensificationonthe
grounds of working a little harder to become essential.

Rationalization isnot simple, but consequentially, they should have cooperated
in the corporation plan. The problem of wages tied to working hours cannot be
worked out readily, because they are regulated by the budget. Despite this,
rationalization has been carried out. It is believed the corporation has
shown its good faith.

interviewer: It seems that the HPT is not aware of such a scenario.

Oikawa: That is correct. Despite many restrictions, negotiations must be
carried out inthe live labor and Ianagelent relationship; therefore, I cannot
understand the seemingly critical state-ant, though it is a supervisory agency.

There are 330,000 personnel working in NTT, and the president and outsiders
nay see other weak points, but in actuality, the workers want to work, and new

services are being proposed by labor and manage-eat.

However. under the fraaework of the present systen, nothing can be done with-
out the approval of the HPT, even if they are agreed to by labor and manage-
nnu. After going through various deliberation councils and committees, a
reply will take at least a year. In some cases, it has taken 4 years. The
world situation can change by that time. That is why I like to say "nonsense"
when a surplus of workers is mentioned.

- 13 -

FOIIOFFKJA1.USI(IVLY
ITMICHHNCJAI.lﬂﬂE(HVLY

Interviewer: Is that the reason the union is proposing that NTT be reorganized?

Oikawa: Yes. At present, weakness depends on the point of view. At any rate,
a reorganization of the system will provide work, which in turn will improve
the enterprise and provide better services to the people. I feel there are
many things which can be put into practice. This is what we think and I feel
that if they can place importance there, the HPT cannot be critical. It is
often said that an enterprise with 330,000 people is too large, but the

issue is tied to inequitable cases. The administrative structure....

Interviewer: Cannot see them....

Oikawa: They occur in a sense from not being able to see, but this is one
view and I believe that it is an indication. However, if the split theory is
effected, cases such as these can be prevented through a change in authority.
That is why we are proposing decentralization of authority.

Hereafter, leadership from a central office is no longer valid. At the same
time. a change would provide closer services to the regional subscribers,
since telecommunications will penetrate into the people's lives. Unless deci-
sive authority is given to chiefs of telegraph and telephone stations or to
chiefs of communications departments that will maintain prefectural control,
the needs of the people in the regions cannot be met. It is a good idea, and
we want to go ahead with it, but it must be heard by the head office. A
system where a reply takes 2 or 3 months after going through the communica-
tions department, the communications bureau, and the main office is hopeless.

Authority should be transferred decisively. The NTT leaders are thinking
along this line, and we have submitted our demands for this.

Repeating the Errors of the NRC

Interviewer: The reorganization of NTT, the National Railways Corporation
(NRC), and the Japan Monopoly Corporation is said to be the target of "Doko's
investigation group"; therefore, a substantial reorganisation can be expected.
Is there a "preparedness" for this at this time?

Oikawa: If Mr Doko were questioned politically, he would probably deal with
the issues on three corporations. Unless a clear-cut reply is made on the
NRC issue, one's ability [to carry it out] will be questioned. Therefore,
the NRC is number one [issue].

With regard to the NTT issue, there are quite a few bureaucratic outsiders in
the Fourth Subcmmsittee, which is in charge of the investigation group. They
will probably take a conservative view, and so I believe that the discussion
will evolve on keeping the present NTT system intact. Those who used people
as a basis will probably counter by taking the stand of split and private
management. The question is for those who are taking the neutral stand....
There are also mass-conunication people, although their number is small.

- 14 -

FOItOFFKJAl.USl(IVLY
FOR OFIWCJAI.USE|MNLY

I doubt that any of the mass-communication people feel that the present situa-
tion is good. Hhen the problem of efficiency is taken up, they will insist on
putting the scalpel to the abuse of "having the good government foot the bill."
In that sense, Ibelieve the decision will be closer'tothe people's viewpoint.
That is the situation...I believe.

The most critical [issue] at this time is on the present and future of the
telecommunication information industry, as was mentioned at the beginning.
The question is whether the report to be issued will be based on the discus-
sions from their true meaning.

Interviewer: "hose telegraph and telephone work will it be?

Oikawa: This is not yet a pressing issue. It will be related to the inter-
national economic activities and industrial activities.

The type of lsnagenent must be formed after taking a hard look at 5 years to
10 years into the future.

Under the existing conditions. speculation presents the concern that the cor-
poration will be chopped up because of superficial conclusions that there are
too many employees or the scale of the enterprise is too large, or that the

corporation after all relies too much on the good government to foot the bill.

Interviewer: It seems that the investigation group is saying thutthey need
further investigation.

Oikawa: That is in the proposals. The president has not mentioned which of
the three proposals he wants. That point will be questioned. when that ques-
tion is posed. the president should respondclearly as president. This is

how I feel. irrespective of whether the proposal will be adopted by'theinves-
tigation group or not.

Interviewer: Earlier, you mentioned the three corporations. Do you sense that
the mistake seen in the case of NRC should at least be avoided?

Oikawa: Yes, I do. If NTT performs the entire work on the national tele-
coIInunication network and lets the private enterprises do the rest, it can
lead to another NRC mistake. [A mistake] also can happen by having the data
coununications sector take over the depopulated areas.

In short, by taking over the red-ink portions.... The second NRC mistake is
definite if they say the good portion will be handled by the private sector
and the poor portion by others because of the public interest.

COPYRIGHT: Nainichi Shimbunaha 1982

9218
cso: k106/107

- 15 -

FOI‘OIIICJAI.IIHE(NVLV
IN).‘0!11(JAI.I£5I1(HULY

VI!“ 0? HINISTRX 0P POSTS ARD TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Tokyo SENTAKU in Japanese May 82 pp 72-75

[Text] The Second Emergency Administrative Investigation Group (chairman,
Toshio Doko) has entered the final stage of work toward issuing its basic
report on 10 July. Various subammmittee reports will be consolidated in
mid~Nay to be reported to the Investigation Group. Active "intervening ope-
rations" are being developed for this report by the Liberal Democratic Party.
concerned government agencies. business circles, and organizations with their
underlying interests.

Above all, a violent "counterwind" is raging from the Fourth Subcommittee
(headed by Keio University Professor Kan [or Hiroshi] Kata), which is working
on "ways of the three corporations and five agencies." The National Railways
Corporation is the symbolic topic of this subcommittee, but the Nippon Tele-
graph and Telephone Public Corporation (NTT) is pushing for a change in
management structure. Fro: the deliberations, it appears certain that the
report will favor the private management line of changing to a special company
aimed toward greater nobility of the enterprise and competency of the persons
involved.

As this line of thinking became apparent. the LDP, Ministry of Posts and Tele-
communications (HPT), the “It family, and even the corporation started blasting
with their counterheadwind. The postal group in the LDP, which is trying to
bend the report. is working on NTT to go against the Investigation Group at
this time. In reality, the postal bureaucrats, who are maneuvering to gain
control over personnel and supervision of NTT in the event of a change in
management, the NTT family's enterprises, which are afraid of losing their
rights and interests. and certain technology firms, which have been spending
development funds extravagantly as part of the NTT "technology kingdom," all
have different views. But the "countsrwind" has started to gyrate over the
“green" of the Investigation Group. The Investigation Group is in a precarious
situation.

Advancing the "Shinto Concept"
"To correct the improper administration."... Under this project, ﬂisashi
Shinto. who came over from private enterprise (Ishikawajima harima Heavy

Industries). assumed the presidency of NTT about 15 months ago. He has
complained. "I accepted the position because I was told to correct the improper

- 16 -

EOC‘DFFIJAJ.USE¢IULY
IN)! OIHWCJA1.\ISE.(HNLV

administration. But I have been drawn into a preposterous thing called the
Investigation Group." His reputation up to a year after his appointment had
been good.

Through "reporting to work early," he drew the mass media’s attention by
straightening out the la: regulations found in the corporation, has drawn the
union to his side through dialog, etc. His greatest achievement has probably
been the opening of NTT to society by breaking the secretiveness which had been
NTT's the "special quality." He left voluntarily for the United States and
met with Secretary of Commerce Baldridge and Brock, a representative of USTR
(United States Trade Representation), to raise the overall assessment of NTT
within the U.S. Government. When the procurement of telecommunication mater-
ials was about to become an issue in the 0.8. House of Representatives during
the time of increasing trade friction in March, USTR representative Brock and
others reproved the Congress that there is "no problem" with NTT. ‘

NTT was looked upon as a stronghold of the Tanks faction and the Miki faction,
but the Shinto style of operation captured both factions. and persons such as
former prime minister Kakuei Tanaka spurred on "to take the private management
route by providing capital of 1 trillion yen and support funds of 3 trillion
yen." At least from the present situation, leaders of the Tanaka faction, the
Hiki faction, and of course the Suzuki faction are solidly behind Shinto's
concept of private management.

Up to now, Shinto has refrained from issuing his views publicly on the problem
of changing NTT to a privately managed enterprise. In response to the re-
port, issued last July, "to carry out a drastic review of the forms of manage-
ment, including private management," he submitted three proposals for a special
company. private management, and a reorganized public corporation on 26 Febru-
ary of thisyear. This is merely a way of entrusting the [final] selection to
the Diet, the government, or the Investigation Group.

However, there is no doubt that the intention of Shinto is private management,
even if it means taking the route of a special company. The basic coacept of
Shinto is that "a public co-aunications work which can be of service to the
people and users cannot evolve in the absence of efficient management." But
in actuality, the prize pupil called NTT has reached its peak in telephone
demands, and the difference between revenues and expenditures has turned to

a 2-3 percent minus factor and carries a loog-term-debt of 5.3 trillion yen.

0n the other hand, it is being pressed with the problems of rectifying long
and short disparities (presently at l to 60) and meeting new needs, such as
an expansion of the data bank and other nontelephone services. The INS
(high-level information communication systenD concept. to be promoted by NTT
under the 20-year plan with an investment of 20 trillion yen, is a typical
example.

However, a situation of continuing persistently with the current rates or rely-
ing completely on rate hikes, as seen in the National Railways Corporation case,

must be avoided. To attain this, efficient management and a stable financial
base are indispensable. Since Shinto assumed his position, "industrial efforts

- 17 -

inliofFKJAl.Uil10NlN
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(N§LY

such as a reduction of expenses by the monthly settlement of accounts, which

Is normal in the private sector, increased revenues through sales promotion,
and reduction in the interest payment burden have been carried out. However,
NTT is stymied by budget control, the Public Corporations and Government Enter-
prises Labor Relations Act, the public corporation law. public telecommunica-
tion laws, etc., all of which create difficulties in the performance of its
own operations. Unless government controls are removed and it becomes an
active, self-supporting corporation. its downfall into becoaing "second
National Railways Corporation" is inevitable. This is the logic Shinto is
using in his concept of private management.

HPT, the Ringleader for Scrapping

President Shinto appears "short-tempered," and his maneuvering for private
management of NTT is rather impetuous. For this reason, there are increasing
signs of "stopping private management" in opposition to his hastiness. as well
as annoyance at his popularity as the conclusion of the Investigation Group
draws near. For exarple, “PT-aligned freshmen Diet members are saying, "Shinto
will bow his head to executives, but he does not even look at us."

However. as you well know, NTT, along with its family, has built a solid ”struc-
ture of rights and interests" around the rights and interests of NTT in the

30 years since the war. If it changes to a private management system, con-
siderable shaving will take place, and it will be devoid of "sugarly" indul-
gence. The "structure of rights and interests" up to now has been very con-
servative. But there is opposition, as suggested, for example, by certain
firms to Diet members that "we can no longer continue to associate if NTT

comes under private management."

Even if this were not the case, the result would be preeminent. This line of
argument has become the center of the "counterwind." A look into the chorus
of"Stop NTT from coming under private management" and "Crush Shinto" shows
that the HPT, a supervisory agency, is behind it. Hiroshi Aaao, adninistra-
tive vice minister of the MPT, said at one of the meetings: 'Nk can even have
about one-half of the NTT executives occupied by the members of the HPT."
This is the underlying intention of the “PT. The HPT feels that NIT is a
subordinate public corporation, but in actuality it does not possess that
much influence. The NWT and NTT were split from the prewar Ministry of Com-
munications (NTT was then known as the Ministry of Electric Communications),
and NTT feels that they are of equal level and has resisted strongly the HPT
intervention regarding personnel, labor affairs, accounts, etc. Hhen it is
time to draft a budget, the HPT sits in as a supervisory agency, but NTT can
only remain silent in the sorrow of being a "third-rate agency." The Inter-
national Telegraph and Telephone Company (KDD) also is embroiled in this situ-
ation. Although it is a private enterprise, it is subjected to thorough
intervention.

In a scnse. it is the desire of the HPT to have NTT, in name and in reality,
under its supervision. Additionally, if NTT became a truly private enterprise.
the HPTwould lose the 60 billion yen in contract funds received each year from
NTT and may even have HIT! take over the supervision. This already is evident
in the problem involving data communications.

_ lg -

INDI.OIFIC1A1.USIICIULV
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Since the Investigation Group wants to replace postal savings, which is one of
the important parts of the MPT, there is a fear of losing even this if NTT

turns private. As the mood toward private management of NTT heightened along
with the popularity of Shinto, a sudden change toward counterattack developed.

Its basic strategy is in countermeasures through the Diet and the mass media.
Vigorous countermeasures are being planned by having Norimasa ﬁasegawa, an
inspector with the Secretariat's Docunents Section, in charge of the project,
with Hiroshi Ramada, deputy chief of the Second Section of the Telecommunica-
tions Policy Bureau assisting. They have made candid requests. such as by
saying, “The private management view given by NTT is peculiar. If you can
print articles to refute this, we can provide you with materials." However,
except for a certain industrial publication, this did not work, probably be-
cause it was too candid.

Vice Minister Asao's attack against NTT is also appalling. He takes every
opportunity at the press conference to say, "NTT's view that it is unable to

do anything unless it changes its managerial system is ridiculous. Those who
say that the present budget system is quite elastic yet lacks elasticity do

not know anything about the budget. Labor conditions are better than in the
other two public corporations and agencies. A revenue gain of 3 percent and

an increase of 6 percent in expenditures are wrong. A drop in labor conditions
can reduce the increase in expenditures to under 6 percent. At present,
330.000 personnel are taking it easy and the MPT is now carrying out rigorous
personnel management." He becomes indignant about the union's queries. He
also makes statements which betray his personality, such as: "There are voices
saying that there is opposition within the public corporation, and there are
five or six party meters who are stuck together in the opposition."

The argument of the MPT, headed by Vice Minister Asao, is that "It can be done
through efforts. even within the current framework," and "your mental attitude
is bad." However, there is an indication of a doubt astothe sincerity of the
MPT's counteroffensive. Vice Minister Asao and other postal executives say
repeatedly, "If NTT becomes privately managed, anenterprise tax and a fixed
property tax will be levied. It would be disadvantageous." In addition,

MPT Minister Noboru Minowa has stated, "A reevaluation of assets would have

to be made if it were to become privately managed. This would mean a payment
of 600 billion yen in fixed property taxes each year."

An investment in kind without necessarily a reevaluation of assets can be
made under the present system; therefore, the above statement reveals the
government official's sorrowful lack of knowledge about private enterprise.
Furthermore, there is uncertainty in their basis for calculation. They can-
not give numerical explanations at the press conference and end up apologiz-
ing, to be sneered at by correspondents. Finally, Prime Minister Suzuki
became infuriated by the haphazard figures and prohibited further publication.

Tug-of-Uar with Postal Group in L0?
A maneuver toward politicians seems to be progressing steadily. After all,

the MPT is a gigantic family, backed by 16,000 postal offices throughout
Japan. It is not only large in numbers, but there also is much energetic

- 19 -

INJI10iIWCIAI.lEIE(MULV
MWLIBEONLY

young blood. The feature of the postal faily is that each faction has a fresh-
man and second-year Diet me-ber assigned to the co-Inicatiom emittee.

Since the popular cal-ittees for budget. cuerce. agriculture, and forestry
are usually occupied by meders who have been elected at least four times,
younger were are sent to the less popular co-unicatisns com-ittee. but there
are any who become that much acre vocal.

In contrast to the popular co-ittees. mm treats Diet'menebers on the
col-unications co-ittee with care: therefore. those who leave the mines
have an indescribable nostalgia and they become easily rekindled backers of
the EFT.

The Teleco-aunicetion Basic Problem Study Group (headed by Taunetaro late)
of the Policy Research Omittee of the Liberal Democratic Party is the body
which is underlining the private management issue of m. The group has
forcefully "taken over” the discussion on private menegaent of m which
had been carried out by the Subco-ittee on Teleco-mications Bork (headed
by Ken Barada) of the Policy Research Omittee since 2 hatch.

The "subco-ittee" takes the position that the problem of changing the form
of management is "being handled by the Investigation Group, and the party
should not express its views." (Chairman Baroda), but the "Basic Problem
Study Group" has taken the opposite view-that "the party's views should be
expressed positively to the Investigation Group." (Chaimn Rate)

The arguent of the "Basic Problem Study Group" has many faults. and a slightly
lower dimension is seen, but at any rate its distinctive feature is its
thrashing of N11. Executives of the HPT have stated. "Re are politicians, and
we represent the people; therefore, we should express our intentions to the
Investigation Group. A takeover of m by financial circles is preposterous,"
(connittee under Io Suite), and a "negarding the problel of private manage-
ment. a fixed direction established by having the party call in concerned peo-
ple is one thing. but tohave the president of the public corporation any that
the trend toward private manegeaent is unifora is a problem. It lacks suffi-
cient study." (Diet member Bijiro Eats)

Moreover, on 7 April a neutral collective view that even Chairman Ksto did not
know of spread within the "Basic Problem Study Group." The neutral collective
view of "what fans of NIT nanagemsnt should take" is literally an antiprivate-
unagenent proposal. It clearly states. "The majority of cos-ittee were
have doubts about private menagsment and also about the tramition to a spe-
cial coopany and [feel] it should seek rationalization and efficiency under
the present public corporation system. There is no positive view on the
transition of a specisl company."

The grounds for opposition are identical to the doom-ant on "How NTT Should
Be Hanaged." put together by the EFT in March, which leads to the suspicion
that opposition views were prepared by the HPT. Recently, this postal group
strongly opposed the private management and split of the National Railways
Corporation and started associating with Kato and transportation group in the
Diet who are trying to stop m from becoming private. In addition. issue

-20-

“WISE“?
FOR‘OFFKJAL.U§E(HNLY

Tamaki and other members of the House of Councilors have started to demon-
strate creepy activities. Thus, the moves "to torment Shinto" have been
growing steadily.

At any rate, the "WT and the postal group have achieved a certain success in
the tug-of-war match. Although the Shinto concept may not be squashed com-
pletely, the HPT's final goal, upon the Investigation Group‘s proposal for a
special company, is to obtain indisputable rights and interests (supervision
of personnel), as in the case of the Inn, when NTT is reorganized legally as
a special company. The present administrative reform movement is nothing
more than the first wave of the reorganization.

Group for Preservation of Status Quo Regarding NTT

The term NTT family is becoming obsolete, but the annual procurement of over
1.6 trillion yen is still attractive to businessmen. ﬂhat about the relation-
ship between the corporation and the family enterprises? NTT is not neces-
sarily monolithic. It is said that those who control the Technology Bureau,
the Facilities Bureau, and the Materials Bureau also control NTT. Vice Presi-
dent Yasusada Kitahara and chief engineer Kaisei Yamaguchi are at the top in
building a technology kingdom. Their feelings are to preserve the existing
system; Yamaguchi. especially, is furiously opposing Shinto's concept. This
corporation support group and the family enterprises will probably mesh
together both openly and secretly in the future.

The NTT engineers form a solid group through personnel, materials, and

money but this myth has gradually been crumbling ever since the liberation

of material procurement by the so-called three-track system. Moreover. the
introduction of monthly settlements and the squeeze on facility investments
by Shinto are diluting the "sweet gravy“ of the family. If NTT becomes a
completely independent enterprise, be it in the form of a special corpora-
tion or a private enterprise, rationalization will follow, and the invest-
ment which has been the source of "sweet gravy" and the procurement orders to
specific firms will surely change. Apprehensions will keep rising among the
family. Large diversified manufacturers of equipment, machinery, and wires
are better off, since they are not totally dependent on NTT, but the con-
struction business, which has to cling to NTT, will be seriously affected.

In any case, it is reported that Shinto was infuriated when certain construc-
tion businessmen brought him money when he assued the presidency. However,
for the sake of preventing private management, it is not unusual to see money
thrown in the direction of politicians. NTT officials who have been assigned
to the family enterprises are said to have been meeting once a week at the
Imperial Hotel to formulate countermeasures. They denounce Shinto and are
studying a concrete political maneuver.

NTT executives have also participated in these meetings at times; therefore,
with "unexpected enemies." the change in the form of management will not be
easy as believed by the pro-Shinto group. Indeed, Shinto has been maneuvering
among the factions and pulling to his side young administrators and persons

of practical business knowledge mohave been cold-shouldered in the kingdom
of technicians. The great current. under the banner of the Investigation
Group, is turning toward private management. The question of the future
effectiveness of the "counterwind" will become the crucial moment for the
popular Shinto.

9218
080: 6106/]07

- 21 -

FOR‘OFFKJA1.U831MNLY
FOR!)FFK]AI.USEZONLY

IMPACT 0? NT? 3330!! DISCUSSED

Tokyo N130! IBIZA! SBIHIUN in Japanese 11-13 May 82
[11 May 82 pp 9-11]

[Text] Impact of NTT Reform (Part 1)

NT? (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation), a mammoth
organization which can be said to be the "central nerve" of the Japanese
Archipelago, is about to be transformed. The report by the nth Sub-Committee
of the 2nd Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council, which report
will be made public soon, is expected to incorporate such reform plane as a
"change to private management" from the present public corporation system,
"separation off of some business operations," and "regional division." As to
whether or not these will go as planned by the Research Council, we must note
their whereabouts in the future. 0n the other hand, however, NTT itself
also is showing various moves toward self-reform, in response to the new age.
They are typified by its positive challenge to the field of advanced
technology. Such moves over NTT will have an impact on the industry circles
in general, at any rate.

Is NTT a Superior Enterprise?

In the middle of April, the figure shown by the Postal Services Ministry
varied greatly from that shown by NTT, over NTT's change to private management.
In a tentative calculation to see how far expenditures will increase due to
taxes, dividends, etc., when the present NTT is assumed to be a joint-stock
corporation with a capital of ¥l trillion, the Postal Services Ministry
cnitulated the increase as V600 billion, and judged that it is impossible for
hTT to be placed under private management. However, NTT asserted that it
rJn hv placed under private managment because the increase can be limited to
V350 billion.

This is because prior conditions are different between the Postal Services
ministry, which puts in question what should be done to conduct manage-
mcnt which is desirable for an enterprise, while paying lO—percent dividends
and securing sufficient internal reserves, too, and NTT which expects 8-percent
dividends (no dividends for the shares held by the Government). the receiving
of measures to reduce some taxes, and future efforts for management. As can

-22-

FOI‘OFIWCIAI.US£1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be seen from this example. too, NTT. which is said to be a superior
Government-affiliated enterprise, "is by no means a good company, when it is
assumed to be a private company" (President Hisashi SHINTO). Moreover,

uni sst is beginning to as seen as to the future. too.

Future of Telephones, which Are Relied upon, Is-Dark, Too

NTT's income includes that from telephones, telegrams, data communications,
etc. Of these, the income fromtmlephonesaccounts for 88 percent. Horeover,
of the balance between income and outgo (surplus -- equivalent to the
before-tax profit) in the case of N11. amounting to vaaa,ioo million,

V538,200 million is earned by this sector. In other words, management is
supported by the telephone sector, with the deficits in other sectors offset.

in the telephone sector, where the income showed an increase of more than
10 percent at one time, growth is likely to stop at 2 or 3 percent in the
future, because the spread of telephoneshasrun its course. The future of
telegraph, which causes a deficit of more than V100 billion, is quite dark.
and data communications, too, have not grown so greatly as desired, because
of the severe competition with private enterprises.

while the growth of income is slowing down. there are many factors for an
increase in expenditures. The financial expenses accompanying the long-term
debts (most of them are NTT bonds, amounting to VS,3OS,900 million as of
the end of March, 1981) account for about 10 percent of the income, and these
expenses will increase further. The increase in the personnel expenses for
330, 000 persons, which expenses account for about one-third the total ex-
penditures, are also _a“heavy burden. when the increase in non- personnel

expenses is estimated, it is found that t..\ situation of the increase in
expenditures exceeding that in income is approaching. President SHINTO also
admits this, saying that "There is the danger that if this situation continues,
NT? will become a second National Railways."

Under such a situation, SHINTO assumed the post of President.from private
circles (former President of Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industry).in January;
1981. He cynically referred to NT? people's way of speaking, "He will install
a telephone for you," which way was brought about amid monopoly, as "NTT
language instead of the Japanese language." He embarked upon drastic measures
including the reduction of expenses and investments, while inspiring the
concept of a private enterprise in the form of pre-empting the
recommendation by the Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council.

Reflecting such an intention of the top-ranking leader, the fiscal
1982 budget was epochal. The number of personnel has decreased by 1,000
compared with the preceding fiscal year. and the construction investments have
decreased by V50 billion. Both have fallen below the level of the preceding

fiscal year for the first time since the inauguration of NTT.

-23-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR4OFFKJAL.USE‘0NLY

0n the other hand, enthusiasm about "trade" has budded, too. Last fall.
Toshiba received an order for about 6,u00 telephone facsimile sets from NTT,
accounting for 80 percent of the total. This caused tig repercussions in
the industry circles concerned, because Toshiba, which has not so far been
very friendly with NTT, received such a big order, and moreover, because
its bidding price was exceptionally low, reportedly one-fourth to one-fifth
the market price.

Familv Has Collapsed?

Such an occurrence is due to the fact that a formula of competitive
bidding, in which both Japanese and foreign enterprises can participate,
has heen adopted on a large scale, from the traditional equipment procurement
system centered on specific manufacturers constituting the "NT? family."
This was occasioned by the opening of the doors for the procurement of

materials. which opening was realized from January, 1981 after the matter
became a political problem between Japan and the US. however, as it occurred
when the NT? market itself had become smaller because of the curbing of
investments, it accelerated the intensification of competition among the

manufacturers.

The unrest of the industry circles concerned is not limited to this
alone. NTT itself, which has so far been their customer. is about to become
a strong rival. NT? is also engaged in-the sales of such terminal equipment
as telephones and facsimiles, which are connected with circuit networks
including telephone lines. However, the share of its equipment which comes int
competition with that produced by private manufacturers is falling steadily,
except for the main telephones (first telephones to be installed for telephone
subscribers).

Partly because of the shortage of business efforts, it has become unable
to compete favorably with private manufacturers who mcve quickly. In the
case of telephone facsimiles, for example, which are being spotlighted as a
new means of communications, NTT's share in the number of those installed in
fiscal 1975 was nearly uo percent. but it has dropped to nearly 1 percent

recently.

To vitalize this terminal equipment sector, President SHINTO intends to
open main telephones also to private manufacturers, on the one hand, and on
the other, he is trying to roll back by establishing an "Inhouse Equipment
Business Headquarters" where the related sectors are combined, as early as
next year. NT? has no manufacturing sector, and it purchases all equipment
from private circles. However, in the fields which come into competition
with those of private circles like in the case of terminal units. it is trying
to purchase products at low prices by issuing orders for large amounts
through competitive bids, on the basis of its own technological development.

-2“-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and stand up against private circles' offensives in real earnest by adopting
the selling-out system and price reductions, too.

At the same time. it is trying to make the data communications sector
more efficient. This sector has continued to have a deficit since it was
started. If NTT's activities are strengthened, its competition with private
circles will come to the fore, inevitably. In the report by the Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council's Sub-Committee. separation of the
terminal equipment and data communications sectors is scheduled to be included,
and therefore, it is inevitable that an impetus will be given to such moves.
The stirs of "re-organization" of NTT. which has approached a period of a big
reform. are spreading as big swells, both in and outside "71.

[12 May 82 pp 10-12]

[Text] Part 2

The ”My Prank Account of NT? (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public
Corporation)." which is NTT President Hisashi SHINTO's writing put on sale
in January, became a best seller. and SHINTO. pleased with this, will soon
contribute the royalties to the Japan Scholarship Society, etc. SHINTO‘s
views on the management of NTT. which views are included in that book, are so
bold that they could not have been considered by the NT? Presidents in the
past. However, even President SHINTO was unable to agree to the plan for
"dividing NTTintoregionalgroups." As far as this point is concerned. he
entertained uneasiness as to what conclusion the nth Sub-Coumdttee of the 2nd
Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council will form.

Taking over Development from Private Circles

In early May, the Sub-Ckwmdttee's.plan for reforming NTT became clear.
In this plan. the following item was included: "Placing NTT under private
management should be pushed by dividing it into the central company unitarily
holding the nationowide key circuit networks and the research and development
sector. and 8 - ll regional companies providing telephone communication
services. etc., in various areas." President SBINTO is said to have express-
ed usanNTT leader his dissatisfaction with the plan for division, saying as
follows: "If it is divided into regional companies, NTT may lag behind in
international technological development."

In regard to division of NTT. not only NTT leaders but also electric
machinery manufacturers and university research organs are entertaining
apprehension, saying, "I wonder if NTT's research and development structure
can be maintained."

This is natural. NTT has extremely important roles, being the general
manager of telegraph and telephone services in Japan and at the same time the

general headquarters for Japan's electronic and communications technology.
As to the development of advanced technology. including VLSI's (very large-

- 25 -

FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE1DNLY
non OFFICIAL USS ONLY

scale integrated circuits). computers, optical communication. and picture
comunication. m is carrying it out jointly with domestic electronics
manufacturers and influential research organs, and entrusting them with manu-
facture. 8y so doing. it is producing iueasursble benefits for the fostering
of advanced industries in the form of eventually taking over the moving of
advanced technology and expenses for research and development.

Moreover, such technology is on the top level in the world. m is
exchanging technology with ATT (Merican Telephone and Telegraph Corporation).
which is termed the biggest enterprise on earth. and US 18!! (International
Business Machines). which is a world giant in the computer industry circles.
This is because RTT has technology ranking with that of these two companies.

rear of Research Expenses Decreasing

In view of its high technological power and its power of influence on
private circles. m is called the "RASA (National Aeronautics «and Space
Administration) of Japan." Such a position has been built up by the plentiful
research expenses. The expenses for fiscal 1982 are estimated at 888,500
million. and this is because huge business yields. amounting to “.166300
million. are expected.

however. if NTT is divided into the central company and a plural number
of regional companies. as planned by the Sub-Couittee of the Provisional
Administrative Affairs Research Council. the income of the central company.
which has the research and development sector. will decrease. as a matter of
course. Will it be possible to maintain the same research expenses and
technological level as in the past in such a situation? The uneasiness of
PITT and electronics manufacturers steam from this.

Another focal point for private enterprises is the problem of procurement
of materials. As NTT has no manufacturing sector. it purchases most
communications and information-processing equipment from outside. and purchases
the remainder through joint development. The monetary amount of this procure-
ment was ”76,800 million in fiscal 1980. This amount is so huge as to
exceed by nearly I200 billion the amount of sales by fujitsu. which is an
influential member of the m family. in Harch. 1881. This is by far the
largest among the three public corporations. .

The materials procured by 1011' are of the following three kinds (fiscal
1980): (1) Materials procured by the head Office (automatic switchboards.
transmission wireless devices. cable. data communications equipment. etc.);

(2) things procured locally. on the local comaunications bureau level (telephone
directories. wood poles. steel strand wires, etc.); and (3) things procured
at actual scenes (consmr goods. fixtures. etc.). The materials procured

by the Head Office account for 81.5 percent of the total.

if NTT is divided into regional companies. the items now procured by

the Head Office. excluding the key circuit networks. will come to be procured
by regional companies. If so. "There is the fear that the advantage of

-26-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

making unit prices low by package orders of large amounts of materials will
become small." So saying, NTT leaders knit their brows. As NTT gives big
orders under monopoly, it faces the manufacturers side with a firm attitude,
and there are even voices saying that "N11 is high-handed," at times. However,
if the advantage of collectively purchasing large amounts of materials becomes
extinct, and if the purchasing cost rises as a consequence, this may drag down
on the feet of management rationalisation, which is the chief aim of placing
NTT under private management.

Intensification of Competition in Bidding, Too

Conversely, it is possible to take the view that if the authority for
procurement is dispersed to local areas. NT? will open its doors further, at
this time when it is carrying out the opening of the doors for the procurement
of materials, and competition. which will become vigorous, will lead to the
lowering of costs on the part of NTT. Moreover, regional companies will
become strict about costs. under a self-support accounting system, and bidding
competition will possibly become severe.

The plan by the nth Sub-Committee of the Provisional Administrative
Affairs Research Council does not as yet refer to what to do about procurement.
The plan calls for effecting the division within five years. and there still
is enough time. At any rate, it is likely to press the NTT family and the
enterprises concerned for a new posture to cope with the problem.

NTT's Research and Development Structure
husashino Isle-Communications Research Institute --

Located in Nusashino City, Tokyo; number of personnel: l,900 *;
contents of research: electronicswitchboards.VLSI, data exchange,
and memory devices.

Yokosuka Tele-Cbmmunications Research Institute --

Located in Yokosuka City, Kanagawa Prefecture; number of personnel:
1,100; contents of research: data communication, picture cosmunication,
optical communication, and satellite communicationu

Ibaraki Tele-Communications Research Institute --

Located at Tokai-mura, Ibaraki Prefecture; number of personnel: 300;
contents of research: optical cable, transmission lines, and civil

engineering.

uth Research Institute (tentative name) ** --

boosted in Atsugi City, Kenagawa Prefecture; contents of research:
VLSI.

ﬂote: * Includes the personnel at the Research and Development
Headquarters.

** :xpected to be opened in the spring of 1983.
- 27 -

FOI!0FFKJAL.USE‘0NLY
FOR‘OFFKJALIENZONLY

[13 May 82 pp 3-6]

[Text] Part 3

"A telephone by which what has been spoken in Japanese becomes a foreign
language and what has been spoken by a foreigner becomes the Japanese
language;" "a facsimile which can transmit a message in two or three seconds;"
and "a TV picture which was televisedeﬂr11.¢'appears on the Braun tube in an
instant, with the pushing of a button.? If the INS (information network
system -- high-level information communications system) project. which is
being drawn up by NTT. is completed. such devices will be used at home. and
we will become able to receive various information services. Even working
at home will become possible.

Industry Circles Also ﬂaking Vigorous Responses

This is by no means a dream. From the fall of 198“. the first test
services are scheduled to be started in the Hitaka area in Husashino. Tokyo.
with the surfacing of NTT's future strategy, such influential manufacturers as
NEC. Fujitsu, and Oki Electric Industry have recently established special
organizations for INS measures. one after another. 0n the other hand. some
enterprises have already applied for participation in the testing of work at
home. Thus. industry circles' moves to cope with INS have suddenly become
vigorous.

Since its inauguration in 1952. NTT has been pushing its business with
these items as its goals: "Telephones which are installed immediately;" and
"telephones by which people are put through immediately." Now. however. there
are 56 million telephones, and one out of every two persons. including babies,
has one telephone. It has become possible to make a telephone call anywhere
in Japun. immediately. by dialing a number. As far as telephones.ere concerned.
the dream at the time of the inauguration has already become real. Succeeding
this. iNS is being tackled by staking the existence of NT? in the future.

At the same time. the INS project includes the aim of correcting the
present fare system on which it is constantly pointed out that "It is not
harmonious." As to telephone charges by distance, they are low in the case
of short distances and high in the case of long distances. compared with retual
costs. partly because of the historical circumstances. with the city charge
as l. the fee for a telephone call to an area more than 750 kilometers away
is 60. However. in the case of DDX (new data network). which is a public
network exclusively for data communications. the ratio of charges is l to 12,
and in the case of the network exclusively for facsimiles. the ratio is l to
1.5. Thus. the charge systems among various circuits are disorderly.

Charge System AlsoCan Be Unified

Under INS. however. it is possible to unify the networks of telephones
and data communications. which cannot ride together at present. and to make
all kinds of information pass through the same circuits as numerical digital

- 23 -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

signals. Therefore, it is possible to measure the amount of information

in the same unit (bit -- the smallest unit of information), and to unify the
charge systems.

with the creation of INS, double investments will disappear through the
unification of the plural number of networks, and the costs per unit 0f information
will fall, too, due to technological progress. Therefore, it will be possible
to lower the charge level from the present level. Moreover, the difference
according to distance will also finally become 1 to less than 10, and all this
will greatly contribute to the promotion of information society. This is
NTT's synopsis. INS is steadily heading toward materialization through the
brilliant results of research and development by NTT which leads the world, such
as the optical fiber which makes long-distance transmission possible, and VLSI's
(very large-scale integrated circuits) consisting of about 600,000 transistors
in a basic plate several millimeters square.

According to NTT's plan, commercial services, covering l0,000 houses,
will be started in Tsukuba Research and Education city where a Scientific
Exposition will be held in 1985, with experiments in model areas taken into
account. The networks of telephones and data communications will be unified
in the cities where the Prefectural Government Offices are located.in1987,
and throughout the nation by 1995. In the year 2000, NT? is planning to
unify the picture networks (moving pictures) which require 1,000 times es
much information as that by telephones, and complete all the networks.

In the middle of February, there.occurred an incident in Hokkaido in
which an NT? employee stole information from data communications circuits.
forged a cash card, and drew out cash. "Cril. in Japan has come to
this point." So saying, an NT? leader recognized "maturation" of
information society, and at the same time felt as if he were made to look at
the reverse side of the communication and information society which is
progressing limitlessly. -

Effects of Division Unknown

Vice-President Yasusada KITAHARA, who is a promoter of the INS project,
emphasizes: "From the standpoint of natural science, including technological
development, we have acquired prospects for the achievement of INS. In the
future. we must tackle the sociological and cultural scientific fields."

There is an increase in the number of computer crimes, uneasiness over controlled
society, and information public nuisances. As to problems which are closer

to us, there is such a question as whether or not salaried-men's work will go
well even if there is "no drink on one's way back" to work at home. Such
problems which are expected when INS society has become real "cannot be settled
only by technology" (Vice-President KITABARA).

0n the other hand, what will become of the INS structure when the
"division into the central company and a plural number of local companies,"

- 29 -

FOR OFﬁCIAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which division is scheduled to be included in the report by the Sub-Conuittee
of the Provisional ministrative Affairs Research Council, is carried out in
the future? As to this, persons connected with m are avoiding making any
content, and it seems that they are unable to gather actual effects. too. There
is also arising the vague fear that the charge system among various local
companies and their efforts will becone uneven, and that this will put a brake
on the construction of INS on a national scale. however, if the theory of
competition works and if aanageaent becomes more efficient, as aimed at by the

Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council, this will become material
for proaotion. too.

Of course. apart fro. such problems as what to do about such "non-
natural scientific" fields and NTT's structure. "NT? has sufficient power to
undertake the information and co-Iunications revolution which is synbolised
by INS" (President Hisashi SHINTO). whether or not it will be able to display
this capability fully depends upon how an itself will tackle self-reform in
the stream of the m reforn which seeks greater efficiency.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shiwunsha 1982
680: 6106/11!) END