FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10284
26 January 1982

Japan Repoﬂ

(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/102E

26 January

JAPAN REPORT
(pouo 5/82)

CONTENTS

MILITARY

Socialist, Scholar, Former General Discuss Defense Issues
(Masatsugu Ishibashi, et 31.; HOSEKI, Nov 81) . . . .. . .- .. .. -

SCIENCE AND TRHNOIDC-Y

Development of Independent Space Industry Said Difficult
(mu N0 mm, NW 81) 0....IOU.....OO.IOIOOIOOOOOOIOOOCOOCIOI

Auto, Auto Parts, Semiconductor Makers Vie in Minicar War
(Yukio Suzuki; CHUO KOPON KEIEI MONDAI, Winter 1981) ... .. ... ..

Themes, Enterprises Selected for lO-Yesr Technology Project
(DEN'ﬂ SHImU'N, 10 sep 81) IOIIOIDOOIOOOOIOOOOO......OOOOOOIOO.

- a - [III - ASIA - 11]. Pl

FA“ Ammo. can” not...
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

SOCIALIST. SCHOLAR, FORMER GENERAL DISCUSS DEFENSE ISSUES
Tokyo HOSBKI in Japanese Nov 81 pp 86-103

[Statements and debate by three experts--Hasatsugu Ishibashi. socialist. Hiroharu

Seki. University of Tokyo professor. international politics; Goro Takeda, former
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Self Defense Forces: Parts 1 G 2: "Defense
Debate: Neutrality Without Armament?. Antinuclesr Campaign2, or Deterrent Force?"]

[Text] Is Japan threatened by the Soviets or Americans. or is there another threat?

A heated discussion by three contemporary participants on the strategy for defense
or peace in the new nuclear age!

Part I. Statements by the Three Participants

Hasatsugu Ishibashi: It is unrealistic for Japan to try to defend itself militarily
against the U.S.-USSR nuclear strategy.

Last year I wrote a book entitled. "Neutrality Without Armament." and in it I
repeatedly stated that there is no course toward an absolute security guarantee.

It is strictly a relative matter. Concretely. the question is whether to rely on
military power to defend national security or to use nonmilitary means. mainly
diplomatic measures. such as to establish friendly relations with various countries.
particularly neighboring countries. so as to create an environment which dissipates
the distrust or anxiety about attacking or being attacked. Needless to say. I
think that the latter course is preferable. The spirit and the stipulations of the
present Constitution. which incorporates strong promises emanating from the
experience of defeat in war. aptly points toward that course.

However. there are doubts that it is easy to maintain friendly relations with all
countries. I. myself. have recently gained greatly increased confidence on this
point. because there is proof of a positive achievement before our very eyes. That
is none other than Japan-PRC relations. At present. the potential enemy istheUSSR.
Hardly a day goes by without the Soviet threat being mentioned. However. looking

back to 10 years ago. what was the situation? Although the military might say that
the PRC threat and not the Soviet threat was strongly emphasized.

when the U.S. Government changed. the Japanese Government changed and the Japanese
people changed. Japan-PRC friendly relations materialized. Hasn't it possible?
Even with the Soviets. wouldn't it be far better to establish relationships such
as those with the PRC at present than to try to oppose them by increasing the
military Strength?

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90R 0F$1C1AL.USEIJNLY

First of all. is it possible for Japan to think that it can defend itself by means
of military power? As you are aware. Japan is a trading nation and depends on
foreign countries for raw materials. energy sources and even foodstuffs. How can
it be possible for such a country to think of conducting a war? Even without the
experiences of Horld War II. it can be said that security of the maritime
transportation route is absolutely impossible.

Is It Certain That the United States 9111 Come to Our Aid?

1 have neverhearJthe opinion that Japan can defend itself alone. Since Japan is
an independent country. it is only natural that it should defend itself. This
argument sounds fine. However. when you probe into the matter. you learn that you
are not going to defend yourself alone. Those who advocate increased military
streneth inevitably insist on the necessity of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty. In
other words. they are saying that Japan is helpless alone and that Japan's national
security must be guaranteed through strengthening Japan-U.S. relations. Therefore.
the argument is not acceptable. This being the situation. Japan cannot complain
even if a submarine hits and runs or cuts the net of a Japanese fishing boat.

Then. is Japan secure as long as it has the security treaty with the United
States? The question has been raised as to whether the United States is certain

to come to the rescue in the event Japan is attacked and invaded. I have no
confidence at all on this point. i cannor entertain such easy-going expectations
that the United States will hurry to Japan's aid if it expects its own homeland to
be devastated.

Next. even if we should make great concessions and assume that the United States
would rush to Japan's aid. there is still the question of whether Japan could hold
out alone until then. National Defense Council Secretary-General Kaibara. who was
once called the "emperor" when he was at the Defense Agency. wrote: "If the Soviets
attack, the Air Self-Defense Forces [ASDF] will be wiped out in 10 minutes. while
the Maritime Self-Defense Forces [HSDF] and the Ground Self-Defense Forces [GSDF]
might be able to function as organized units for 2-3 days and 3-4 days. respective-
ly." In this connection. when I interpolated him in the Diet. Kanemaru. the
director-general of the Defense Agency. replied that "we can hold out for l or 2
weeks." Even if this is somewhat exaggerated. if they can hold out alone only for
that limited period. will 0.8. rescue arrive on time?

Let's make another big concession here. Let's assume that the rescue would arrive
on time. If the United States and the USSR used the Japanese homeland as the
battleground. what would be left? Only millions or tens of mii.ions of casualties,

or people starving and despondent. destruction. etc. "hat would really be pro-
Lected? If the United States and the USSR should engage in warfare, it would become

a nuclear war. and therefore a desperate situation such as that described above
would have to be expected. In other words. a defense that is dependent on military
Strength is not realistic.

Another matter that should be kept in mind is that military power is always

self-proliferating. Military men will never consent to the argument that more
troops are unnecessary. that only a few troops are needed. that modern weapons
are not needed, that this or that action is restricted, that you cannot possess

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWDR()FFNJA1.USEi)NLY

this. etc. Civilian control is casually mentioned. but the military will not
accept the control that "this is the limit and nothing more is required."

If there is a restraint an the proliferation of military power. the most effective
restraint is the economic or financial power of that country. This applies to
Japan. If there were no Peace Constitution and if we did not have the power to
insist that Article 9 be obeyed. Japan's military strength would not be limited to
seventh (some say eighth) place in the world today. Since the GNP is third highest
in the world. it can he said that the military power would be certain to be
comparable. i.e.. third largest in the world.

Mr Takeda. who will speak later, stated in a magazine (HOSEKI) that "Military

power equivalent to 1 percent of the GNP is not useful but power equivalent to 3
percent would be effective." I think that that is a natural demand if you assume
that military power is necessary. At the same time. if you take the positic. hat
military strength is required. it is only logical to think of establishing a
conscription system. enacting secrets preservation and emergency laws. setting up

a national mobilization system. placing controls on the economy and also on the
transportation system. It is natural to have comprehensive planning. Thereasoning

that military power is needed but not a conscription system or a secretspreservation
law is illogical.

Please think about it. Out of consideration for the constitution. Japan has a
passive defense. Since he is a military man. Hr Takeda stated how difficult a
strategy passive defense is and warned that if only passive defense has to be relied
upon. the people must be prepared to expect a rain of bombs and be temporarily
occupied. I do not have confidence in passive defense. but if that is the factua1
case. the battleground will always be Japan and I do not think we can relay upon

the Self-Defense Forces [SIP] to fight alone. whether or not there is a conscription
system. unless there is determination of the national populace of 100 million persons
to carry arms and fight. the strategy will fail.

In other words. although the military is necessary. civilian control is impc..ible
if there are limitations as to your actions or there are constitutional restrictions.

etc. It is true that the system itself might be considered flawless but I do not
think that that alone makes control possible.

To mention another item. I think that if military strength continues to be
self-proliferating. the course will lead directly to Japan's becoming a boundless.
great military power and similarly. if the necessity of the security treaty is
recognized. it is only natural that it will lead to a military alliance. Through
Prime Minister Suzuki's visit to the United States. the word "alliance" was
mentioned for the first time in a joint communique, and I think that this is only
natural. The line of reasoning will not hold forever that the security treaty is
necessary and Japan wants aid in case of emergency but that it will not concern
itself with any warfare that the United States conducts elsewhere. While the
United States was overwhelmingly strong militarily and could boast of its national
strength. the situation could be overlooked. However. at present. when the United
States has lost its superiority. it is desperate to regain it through combined ,
power with an allied country. The United States is not willing to let Japan have
its own way and is proposing that the treaty be made one of mutual responsibility.
Japan has so agreed. and this situation is reflected in the new "alliance" which is

3
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

actually progressing rapidly. Also. preparations are being made to alter the
constitution. if possible, to officially recognize the right of collective defense.

Then, without a constitutional revision, is it impossible to dispatch troops
overseas? That is entirely false. Even in this respect. developments are rapidly
advancing. Last year's RIHPAC--a joint maneuver of countries rimming the Pacific
Ocean-~13 a concrete example. Another fact which must be mentioned at this time is
the fact this is the nuclear age. It is said that with the United States and the
USSR as the central powers, atomic bombs equivalent to over 1 million of the bombs
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki are now available. Strangely, people who claim
that "there is such a possibility as an unlikely emergency and one can never tell
which country might attack," do not have any doubts that there is the possibility
that over 1 million atomic bombs might be used and that mankind might be wiped out.

Efforts for Total Arms Reduction and Disarmament

I personally think that if the chances are 10,000-to-l that a country with which
Japan tries earnestly to become friendly would stage an unreasonable attack, then
the chances of a nation being destroyed by atomic bombs are 1.000-to—l or lOO—to-l.
Recently, there has been a lot of talk about the neutron bomb. This is a weapon
which links up conventional weapons with the so—called hydrogen bomb. thus making
it easier to use the hydrogen bomb. You are aware that western countries in which
they are to be placed have become sensitive and are opposing the action.

When one considers all these factors, it must be said to be wishful thinking if one
believes that by acknowledging military power centered on hydrogen bombs, one is
assuring not only the national security of Japan but the continued existence of
mankind. No matter how difficult it is, there should be complete arms reduction
internationally anddisarmamentdomestically. I firmly believe that we cannot
abandon Our efforts toward the realization of this end.

However. this does not mean that if the JSP should take over the reins of government,
there would instantly be neutrality without armament. A conservative party has run
the government for a long time and created unfortunate conditions, such as adopting
hostile policies toward the USSR, withholding diplomatic relations with the DPRK up
to now, etc. In the event that we take over the realities of such existing inter-
national relations and abolish the SD? immediately. The initial action we should
take is, as i said at the beginning, to improve Japan—Soviet relations to the level
of the present Japan-PRC relations. This is the priority item. Even with the
Japan-U.S. Security Treaty, it is not simply a matter of unilaterally nullifying the
treaty on the basis of Article 10. We want to cut off military relationships. but
friendly relations with the United States should continue to be carefully nurtured.
In other words. I want to make it clear here that we intend to utilize diplomatic

means, as well, in carrying out our plans.

with the Increase in the Risk of Limited Nuclear Warfare Paced Today, the National
Security Policy of the Past Is Not Applicable

Hiroharu Seki: I want to focus my remarks on the issue of the realities of nuclear
weapons and the national security of Japan, and point out that at present, Japan
together with Europe is being placed in an extremely dangerous position.

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basis of the classic pattern of national security policy of the past has
noticeably weakened. and because of that. advocates of the so-called "hawk" faction
have appeared in great numbers. The classic national security policy of Japan was
to rely on the 0.8. nuclear umbrella and to try to get by with small-scale military
strength. This is the type of thinking typical of Inoki Hasamichi. but now the

basis for such thinking has become dubious. Speaking frankly. this means that Japan
has come to the crossroads regarding whether to possess nuclear armament or to

switch completely to the diplomacy of peace.

within Japanese political circles, although in small numbers. forces have begun to
infiltrate which think that the "three“ non-nuclear principles should be changed to
"two and a half" to permit limited entry of nuclear arms. or who advocate "two"
non-nuclear principles so that nuclear weapons can be emplaced within Japan. I
think that is a very dangerous development. I think that it is necessary to consider
why such a situation has occurred.

I believe that Mr Inoki. who has been called a "dove" within the "hawk" faction. is
being severely criticized because very recently the classic national theory has

become extremely unrealistic. In that sense. there is some truth to the arguments
of those who advocate nuclear armament for Japan. However. what is the truth? At

this point, I would like to analyze this point in detail-

As you are aware. Japan was defeated in the Pacific War. Japan's final defeat was
brought about by the atomic bomb disasters of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The
destructive power of the atomic bombs at that time was approximately 13 kilotons.
however. by that single blast. 80.000 persons died instantly. and eventually a total
of 200.000 persons suffered death. What would happen if the powerful nuclear
weapons of today. e.g.. a l-megaton-class bomb. should be dropped on Japan with its
dense population. According to my calculation. with about eight bombs, nearly 30

million persons would die. In World Var II. Japan surrendered after suffering
3 million casualities. Would it have been possible to start'a war if it had been

known that the risk was the death of 3 million persons? That national security can
be guaranteed is doubtful. Rather. it can only be said that the best course is to
abolish war.

The present national security policy is fundamentally mistaken. It seems that the
Defense Agency is planning a strategy based on the assumption that such a nuclear
attack will never be made on Japan. If strategy is based on the condition that
nuclear attack is possible. the director-general of the Defense Agency cannot be
thinking of such easygoing strategy.

The Dauueroux Race for Emplncement of Nuclear Theater Weapons

Looking at the overall situation today, I think that the risk of nuclear war has

increased tremendously. The reasons are that the accuracy of nuclear weapons has
improved and nuclear theater weapons [NTH] have appeared. A race has begun for
emplacement of NTH's between NATO countries and Soviet-controlled countries.
Against the Soviet 55-20 and Backfire aircraft. NATO has decided to position over
100 Pershing-2's. which possess the same destructive power as the Hiroshima-type
bomb. in five western European countries. along with 460 cruise missiles. The
cruise missiles are of the ZOO-kiloton class. so they have over 10 times the
strength of the Hiroshima-type bomb.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If these weapons are emplaced and their accuracy is good. what does it signify?
Europeans are beginning to think seriously about this matter. Japan, which
experienced the disasters of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. conceived the progressive idea
of "neutrality without armament" which Mr Ishibashi advocates. However, that is an
idea that is difficult to sell to peoples of the world. The various countries of
the world have not tried to imitate Japan and attain neutrality without armament.
Therefore. the Japanese Government claims that it is foolish for Japan alone to
make such a statement. that it is unrealistic, and therefore, Japan should follow
the rest of the world. To follow the world means to adopt the logic of guaranteeing
national security by increasing military strength. The Japanese Government is
suggesting that Japan do likewise. The United States is putting strong pressure on

Japan. but because Japan is following such reasoning, it cannot help but receive
such U.S. pressure.

However. the world situation today is completely the reverse of that of yesterday.
Europe has begun seriously to learn from the atomic disasters of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. In Europe, for the first time in history. antinuclear opposition
movements have begun to increase. The reason is that they have begun to feel
personally the seriousness of the risk of becoming the battleground of a limited
nuclear war.

The agitation started in northern Europe and SPIEJd via Netherlands and Belgium to
West Germany. There was a rally of 100,000 persons in Hamburg, West Germany. Will
only the Germans be annihilated by a nuclear war or will they survive? Arc nuclear
weapons to be positioned even at the risk that only West Germany will be destroyed?
Confronted with these sober questions. Chancellor Schmidt was placed in a dilemma.

That is to say, in the age of limited nuclear war, only those places where nuclear
weapons are placed will be attacked. The present U.S.-Soviet strategy is steadily
moving in that direction. The U.S.-Soviet Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty was
concluded in 1973 and it was at that time that both parties first realized. to a
certain extent. that both countries would be destroyed if all-out nuclear attacks
were launched against each other. The concept then developed that the United
States and the USSR alone should be made sanctuaries. The position was then taken
that nuclear theater weapons could he built. and as confidence in their accuracy
developed, the United States and the USSR could mutually oppose each other
strategically in a limited nuclear war, using other countries as the battlegrounds
lnr nuclear war. The United States took the lead in adopting this strategy.

Thur action would still have been tolerable if it had been the detente period when
international tension was eased. Changes in military capabilities would not
necessarily have led to the start of a limited nuclear war. However. since 1979,
international polities have retrogressed. The situation is the some as the period
when the cold war started. without regard to the impression he might create,
President Reagan began to increase nuclear strength. As you know, President
Reagan's administration has again started nuclear arms expansion and is clearly
stating that it would be victorious in nuclear warfare. By victory. it is talking
of a limited nuclear war. We can no longer rely on the United States because it
has become extremely dangerous.

Ir Japan were to introduce nuclear weapons, it would assume the same risk or even
a greater risk than Europe of becoming a battleground. Non-nuclear and antinuclear

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
movements have increased in Europe. How about Japan? As is well known. the JSP,
which would become the leader, had the record of first advocating a non-nuclear
stance and because of its influence the "three" non-nuclear principles were passed
by the Diet. In spite of such a past glorious achievement, the JSP is floundering
at this most crucial time. Even with Mr Ishibashi beside me. I can boldly say

that I cannot stand watching the JSP. Now is the time for the JSP to spread its
network worldwide and work for peace....

As a whole. the Japanese people are not alert to the changes taking place in the
world situation. Within the faction that advocates the strengthening of military
power. some echo the national security policy drawn up by the U.S. Pentagon and have
increased their attack on people who favor the policy of peace through diplomacy.

As part of the attack. those who advocate the classic national security theory
mentioned at the beginning, i.e.. the "doves" within the "hawk" faction which
believes in relying on the u.s. nuclear umbrella and in maintaining a small regular
military power, are being isolated and coming under criticism.

Create a New National Security Policy

Then. how should we think in these dangerous circumstances? First of all, the
Japanese people must completely discard the Pentagon-made national security theory
and create a new policy based on Japan's historical traditions. The Japanese should
have that much intelligence.

Japan has become a powerful economic nation and, except for military science and
technoloSY. is the world leader in the SET field. UtilizingthisSGT knowledge and
economic power. Japan has the capability to bring peace to the world. Unfortunately,
that capability is not being used toward the right goal. This capability must be
diverted, somehow, toward a new direction, and 1 want the JSP to strive to assist.
The time has arrived for the SDF and the JSP to work together. If those in the
SDF truly think of their country. I do not think that they will join hands with
those in the "hawk" faction who talk of military threats. It is not strange for
them to join hands with the JSP. i think that now is the time when the Japanese
populace should rise above political parties and work for peace through diplomacy.
The time has come when it is necessary to unite with the "dove" faction of the
Liberal Democratic Party and think carefully about what type and how much of an
effort is needed for negotiations for arms reduction.

The activity of the Palms Committee is an example of the type of arms reduction
efforts about which we are thinking. Hr Palme. who was formerly the prime minister
nr Sweden. has created a secretariat in Vienna. in neutral Austria. That office

In working on a new arms reduction plan in preparation for next year's UN arms
reduction special assembly. There is a movement afoot now in Japan to have a
member of the [Palme] committee hear the statements of Hiroshima victims, to have
the commmittee sponsor a roundtable discussion in Hiroshima with citizens regarding
nuclear problems and to have the comments included in the proposal by the Palms
Committee. Hiroshima city, United Nations University and Hiroshima University are
jointly working on this plan. These movements must take place everywhere.

Various ideas are needed to establish a new pace and simply to halt the movement
toward military expansion. How can such ideas be cultivated? Such concepts must
be researched mainly at universities. To do that, a peace department is needed.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Ul'flLIAL USP. UNLI

There is none yet in Japan, but in the UK there is a Peace Department at Bradford
University. In Japan. education toward peace is conducted by a limited number of
teachers on the elementary, middle and high school levels. However. education
toward peace is hardly carried out at all in universities. There is an urgent
need to consider what is best for establishing an education toward peace in
universities. At the next stage, there should be a citizens' college—-i.e., it
is necessary for us citizens to voluntarily establish a new university. Under
those circumstances it would become possible to establish a meaningful. new
education toward peace. Ultimately. peace is something that has to be created.

Peace Will Not Come Through Prayer Alone; SDF and Japan-U.S. Security Treaty Are
Deterrent Forces

Goro Takeda: To create a world which will abolish war and which will not resort to
force to solve international conflicts is the hope of mankind, as the two previous
speakers stated. This is not a new development but the ideal and prayer of mankind
from the past. In any country in the world, there are probably no people who say
that they like war. In Japan. there is the Peace Constitution. and efforts are
being made to preserve peace. I think people in general believe that "we should
depend on the justice and faitn of those who love peace to protect our security and
existence" and that "no country must think only of itself and ignore other
countries."

However, even if the wish for peace is important. I do not think that the real
world is that idealistic. During the 36 years since Vorld War 11. 72 big or small
wars have occurred. Even now. conflicts are raging constantly in the Middle

East, Southeast Asia and Africa. At present many people in the various BC countries
reportedly are fearful of a third world war. Everyone loves peace but wars still
continue. This is a fact. I think it might be said to be the "inevitable deed" of
mankind.

There are over 160 countries in the world today. but each has its own sense of

value which differs from others, and all countries pursue their own national
interests. Even if utmost efforts are expended on attaining peace through diplomacy,
sad to say. in the pursuit of national interests, conflicts arise between countries.
History shows that even in the midst of cooperation. confrontations have taken

place. If there is for certain a sure way of preventing such confrontations-~and

of course. we must try ourselves to conceive such a method--we will naturally abide
by such means. However, there is no brain trust which can immediately think up

such a good method. and sad to say. the reality is that cooperation and
confrontations have continued.

Confrontations have been the cause of conflicts. and conflicts have developed into
wars. In the pursuit of national interests. there is the temptation of aggression
if the gains seem large compared with the efforts expended. Therefore, countries
in the world place priority on building up their defensive power to protect
themselves and to prevent aggression. Japan is now thinking of national security
in terms of overall national security policies. including nonmilitary means. but

if there should be an unfortunate invasion, military power would be the decisive
factor.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Deterrent Force Capable of Countering Aggression

Both previous speakers stated that it is important to halt aggression. but even if
efforts are made to stop invasions from occurring. world history proves that
aggression can occur. It is necessary to possess the power to counter such an
invasion, if it should occur. The strength to counter aggression serves as a
deterrent force. I think that emphasis should be placed on that point in our
thinking.

Now. in surveying Japan's surroundings. the neighboring countries are the USSR,
the ROK. Taiwan and the PRC. Among them. I think that the country posing the
biggest threat and making us feel uneasy is still the USSR. Why is that? First
of all. the sense of value is different. In advocating com-unism. it extols the
communization of the world and continues to follow expansionist policies. Since
World War 11. the USSR has acquired a huge territory of 500.000 square kilometers.
and Japan has the bitter experience of having the Kuriles Islands occupied. The
recent increase in military strength is shocking. During the past 20 years.
defense expenditures have amounted to 11-13 percent of the GNP. According to one
reference. it has reached 14 percent. Not only nuclear weapons but the ground.
naval and air forces have been greatly strengthened. and from the standpoint of
quality and utility. the forces have changed from the defensive to the offensive

type.

If military power increases to such an extent. it can be said that the Soviets now
possess the power to act simultaneously at several places in the world. Using
detente as a mask. the USSR is advancing to various parts of the world. supported
by this enormous military force. As you are aware. the Soviet strength has
gradually infiltrated into the vacuum areas created by the withdrawal of weakened
Western forces. such as the United States. Europe. etc. Starting with Angola in
1975. there are a number of cases such as Ethiopia. Yemen. Afghanistan. etc.

Let us consider the Far East situation. and in particular. Soviet strength in the
Far East. Regarding nuclear weapons. the Soviets have placed one-third of all the
weapons they possess there. In 10 years, the army has doubled its previous
strength. In the past 3 years the navy has added 270,000 tons. Since the total
strength of the Japanese MSDF is 200.000 tons. one can realize what the figure of
270,000 tons means. The air force has 2.200 aircraft. of which over 800 are attack
aircraft. It is a (act that the Backfire supersonic heavy bomber has already been
stationed in the Far East. As the Soviet Far East force increases its strength. it
is only natural that its activities become more intense in the vicinity of Japan.
At present. the number of warships which pass through the Soya. Tsugaru and
Tsushima straits number no less than £00. The number of large aircraft which
approach Japan proper is 200. There have been incidents in which aircraft armed
with AS-6 missiles. with a range of over 200 km. approached to within several tens
of kilometers of the Not: Peninsula in broad daylight and approached to within 100
km of the coast of Shakotan. Hokkaido. Hereafter. if MiG-23‘s and SU-Zh's are
stationed in the Kurilcs, all of Japan will come within the attack range of these

aircraft.

if the Soviet Far East forces are strengthened to such an extent. what should be
done to protect Japan? it is questionable whether Japan can really be defended.
As mentioned earlier in this discussion. Mr Kaibara has stated siaply that Japan

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN "fl-11 'IAI. USE ONLY

would he crushed. True. that might happen if. in the present situation, war should
start tomrruw. The basis of my thlnking is that efforts should be made to avoid
just such a situation. Basically there is no policy without faults, as Mr lshibashi
pointed out earlier. I think that out of a number of proposals, the one with the
most advantages and the least defects should be adopted as Japan's policy. This
applies to defense policy: the one with the least disadvantages should be selected,
and the government should strive to decrease these disadvantages as such as
possible. simultaneously, the government should recognize as risks the defects

that remain. and I think that it is important that the people be thoroughly informed.

The Four Pillars Which Protect a Country

What measures are available to protect Japan? I think that there are only the
following four measures. If there are other better ideas, 1 would like to be
informed. from Mr Seki, too. The four are: l) neutrality without armament;

2) armed neutrality; 3) join the Soviet camp; and 4) defend the country with the
SDF and the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty. The best measure should be chosen from
among these. First, regarding neutrality without armament. i read what Mr lshibashi
wrote and there were many points with which i could agree. however. after reading
it through. 1 could not help but experience the following doubts: If it is such a
good method. some country in the past or some country now should be depending on
neutral ity without armament to protect the country's security and making progress.
Regrcttably. no such case exists. No matter how intelligent and outstanding a race
the Japanese are. it is a bold adventure and a test to try a method never used by
any country or without any precedent. 1 cannot approve it. The Japanese people
are not necessarily in favor of neutrality without armament. According to a survey
made only 3 years ago, only 6 percent were in favor of this. Data also appeared
showing that some in the .15? also had doubts about the theory of neutrality without
armament.

Next, let's consider armed neutrality. Since this will lead to the conscription
system and nuclear armamnt. and since defense expenditures might reach staggering
amounts. it cannot be adopted. Join the Soviet camp. This measure is not
acceptable to the Japanese people.

'I'hen. although there are many flows as well as doubts, the only means left for the
present is reliance on the SD? and the Japan-0.5. Security Treaty. I think that
this policy has the greatest deterrent effect and that the reliability of the
deterrence is the highest. As I have said repeatedly. everyone has the same
feeling of hatred of war. However, peace will not come simply through prayer.
Hhil.» squarely fac ing reality. we met think of policies which will not create
war. but will deter war. and in the event of aggression. measures that will repel
it and preserve our independence. In that sense, I think that to protect our
country now, the following four pillars must be firmly implanted. The first is
the minimum necessary defensive power. The second is a reliable Japan-0.5. security
setup. The third is the preparation of the domestic organization. There might be
problems involved. but if the fighting is to take place in the homeland or within
the vicinity of Japan with the homeland as the base, preparations of a proper
domestic order are necessary. I would like to see a draft prepared on this item
and thoroughly debated in the Diet. As for the fourth point. and this is the most
important. it is the will of the people to defend Japan by themselves. Since those

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we are going to fight are our enemy. there is no one else except the Japanese. in
actuality. to stand in the way of the invaders.

"hen I make these statements. there might be those who think that the minimum
necessary defensive power might become one of preposterous proportion and that
Japan would become a great military nation.

A while ago. what I wrote in the periodical HOSBKI (March issue) was misinterpreted.
and there were some who thought that I suggested that a defense expenditure of 3
percent of the GNP was necessary and that 1 percent was meaningless. Actually.
that is not what I really meant. If one read the entire text of my statement in
HOSEKI magazine. the misunderstanding should be corrected. What I wanted to say
was that to defend Japan. locking up the doors was necessary just as we protect our
homes. If burglars should enter the neighboring villages or towns and commit arson.
naturally the local government councils. vigilante groups or police would conduct
night rounds and increase the number of streeet lights. In that sense. i.e.. to
associate equally, we must contribute an appropriate share. The United States and
European countries are contributing from 3 to 5 percent. in spite of their
difficulties. and from the standpoint of "equal association." I mentioned earlier
that 3 percent might be proper and that 1 percent might be too little. I do not

think even now that 3 percent is necessary. To me. the main problem is always the
most important.

The foregoing is my thinking regarding defense and to summarize. I think the
foremost problem is to prevent war. Of course. for that purpose. we must exert
all-out efforts for peace through diplomacy and try other means. However. in
spite of that. emergencies arise. I think we should prepare the minimum power to
counter such emergencies and that power will contribute to the deterrent effect.
I do not think that will become such a burden that the people cannot bear it nor
will it become a threat to foreign countries.

Part II. Defense Debate
Japan Cannot Be Defendcd With Your Strategy

Takeda: I wish to ask a question of Mr Seki. Abolition of nuclear armament must
certainly be carried out. and it is a fact that in democratic countries. since

there is freedom of speech. the outcry for nuclear elimination is getting stronger.
ls the previously mentioned Palme Committee even thinking of staging a demonstration
in the Moscow square? I think that to advocate it only in democratic countries is
a simple matter.

Seki: In fact. the Palme Committee recently held a meeting in Moscow. When it

holds the next meeting in Japan. it will have a representative from Moscow. For
the United States. former Secretary of State Vance is also a member. That is to
say. both the United States and the USSR are represented on the Palme Committee.
Because of such members. the items discussed can be upgraded to policy level.

Therefore. rather than demonstrations. the formulation of definitive policies is
the most important function.

It is a fact that when it comes to freedom of speech. it does not exist in the
communist sphere. However. even countries which we have chosen as allies. such as

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the ROK and the Philippines. cannot boast of such freedom. Essentially, to protect
freedom of speech. there are many political conditions which are required. To make
the communist sphere free. international exchange is needed rather than a race for
military expansion.

1 wOuld like to turn to Mr Takeda. Although you said that there is no country in
the world with neutraility without armament. actually there is such a country.
Costa Rica is one. You might say that it is a very small country but it has even
established a Peace University.

Ishibashi: I would like to have a correction made. first of all. Mr Takeda said
that the people supporting neutrality without armament was only 6 percent, but I
would like for him to read a recent newspaper. The ASAHI SHIHBUN. which conducted
the survey. discovered that those supporting neutrality without armament had been
only 6 percent but that the rate had since increased to 30 percent, and was

surprised and came to us for comment. I should like to ask that the newest figures
not be ignored purposely.

Also. he said that there is no one who likes war. but I do not think you can say
that. True intentions and official stances must be differentiated. and although

it says that no one likes war, isn't the current Japanese political powers and
government creating a trend which favors a prowar atmosphere? This year's "Defense
white Paper" will be decided upon at the cabinet meeting day after tomorrow, but in
it, an increase in defense awareness and patriotism have begun to be stressed
strongly. The social climate from which we suffered before and during the war is
again beginning to overwhelm us. What I really wanted to question Hr Takeda about
is how he views the 15 years of war. i.e.. the Pacific War. Does he think it was
inevitable. after all, for the sake of Japan's security and defense?

What To Do if There Is an Invasion

Takeda: I know that. as Mr Seki stated. there are about 12 countries now that try

to protect their countries through neutrality without armament. For example, there
are countries such as Costa Rica. Monaco and Liechtenstein, but these are consider-
ably different from Japan. Their positions in the world. geographical factors, etc.

differ, and I do not think Japan can be compared in the same light.

Next. 1 agree with Hr Ishibashi tlat neutrality without armament is still an
idealistic idea. In reali-y, whal would we do in case of aggression? Naturally,

we should try to prevent it. Everyone wishes this. However, if it should happen,
what should we do?

Ishihashi: Please answer my question first. How do you view the 15 years of war.
the Pacific War?

Takeda: At times. war cannot be prevented, even if one wants to do so. However,
there might still be the accusation that in the name of "defense." actions lead

to "aggression." It is true that the Great East Asia War could be interpreted in
that way. However. I consider that there is something inexplicable about wars. 1
think we must consider the public opinion of that time, the development of events
in past wars and the result of being forced into it. As compared with the
Sine-Japanese and Russo-Japanese wars, however. I think that the last war appeared

to be much more aggressive on our part.

12
FOR 0FFNJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oshibashi: I think that only by frankly admitting that it was an aggressive war can

one begin to reflect and adopt the proper attitude. Since you unexpectedly admitted
that there was the appearance to some extent of aggressive warfare. I will say no
more.

You ask what we should do in case an invasion takes place. but as I have said
repeatedly. I cannot imagine at all that there will be aggression if Japan makes
the utmost efforts to establish friendly relations.

If there is to be aggression against Japan. the only reasons would be the formation
of a military alliance with the Uhited States. sanction of 0.8. military bases and
the creation of a prowar atmosphere by assuming that the USSR is a potential enemy

and clamoring daily about the Soviet threat. If these problems are resolved. I
cannot imagine that Japan would be attacked.

Specifically, I am most worried about the talk about the three straits that came

up earlier. There is much discussion going on about closing the Tsugaru. Soya

and Tsushima straits. but if that is done in compliance with a U.S. request. what
would happen? I think that we would be faced with a great crisis. That is because
the Soviet Navy would be like a "mouse in a trap."

He must become worried only if we commit such actions. and if we do not. there will
be no aggression.

Furthermore. I would like to ask specific questions. According to the intentions

and official stances of the security treaty. "the United States will come to our

aid if Japan is attacked. however. Japan will not participate if the United States
should be engaged in war elsewhere. Through the mechanism of prior consultation,the
entry of nuclear arms can be prevented. In case there is prior consultation on
starting warfare, Japan will say 'no.'” Would such selfishness be tolerated?

Hhile stating that Japan cannot be defended unless Japan and the United States
conduct joint warfare, it is claimed that the unified command cannot be implemented
because it is unconstitutional. However. men in uniform say after their retirement

that Japan will not be able to defend. nor conduct joint maneuvers without
considering the constitutional issue. Hhich do you think is correct? I would like
to know which are the real intentions and which are only official stances.

Takeda: Before that, I would like an answer to my question on what we should do
in case of an invasion. Although you stated that it would not occur....

Ishibashi: It will never occur. If we eliminate the causes that I mentioned.
Takeda: Although Mr lshibashi says so. he has visited various foreign countries
and talked with many VIP's but I believe that none of them agreed with the theory
of neutrality without armament....

Ishibashi: Then. has Japan ever been invaded?

Takeda: I am talking about the future.

Ishibashi: No, there has been no case in which all of Japan has been invaded.

13
FtﬂltﬂﬂHCJAl.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Takeda: There has been no such case in the past. I think that because of the
Japan-U.S. Security Treaty setup and the 80?, no such aggression has taken place.

ishibashi: I am talking about what has happened since the Sine-Japanese war. Since
the Sine-Japanese war. the Russo-Japanese war, World Her I, the dispatch of troops
to Siberia, the 15-year war and the Pacific Har...has there ever been an occasion
when Japan was invaded? In all the wars, Japan was the aggressor.

Takeda: Events are decided by power relationships existing at the time, and Japan
had military forces then. If events had transpired without the Sino-Japanese or
Russo-Japanese were. I think that Japan would naturally have been invaded. I
think that we took action first.

lshibashi: It is useless to talk about "if" in history. what is important is the
facts.

Seki: i want to bring up a point here. The question has been raised as to what

Japan would do if it was invaded. but has any thought been given to the event of
Japan becoming involved in a limited nuclear war?

Takeda: I think that Japan would be annihilated if there were nuclear warfare.

Seki: Then. I would like to ask why you don't discuss such possibilities. and only
take up cases of invasion without nuclear involvement.

Takeda: Just because you possess nuclear armament doesn't mean that it would

lead immediately to nuclear war. Conventional warfare would take place first. and
then it would escalate.

Seki: I am saying that you are behind the times. At present nuclear theater
weapons are being emplaced. and hasn't the threat of limited nuclear war increased
with the Reagan administration? Furthermore, isn't he saying let's have a nuclear
war. It is strange that you are not aware of this. You have no qualifications as
a former responsible official of the Defense Agency and you should have resigned.
You are not thinking seriously of Japan's national security. We cannot entrust
Japan to people like you.

Takeda: I do not think 30. Conventional military strength is needed so that
nuclear weapons need not be used. Because there is a great possibility of
conventional warfare escalating to nuclear war. we should have the capability to
cope with conventional warfare.

Views on the Introduction of Theater Nuclear Weapons

Seki: That is a basic mistake. Conventional and nuclear warfarea are interrelated.
Because of the close ties. if the introduction of nuclear weapons is gradually

permitted. eventually a nuclear war will envelop everyone. Furthermore, at present.
because of the introduction of theater nuclear weapons, the danger of nuclear

warfare has never been so great. I would like to ask what your views regarding the
introduction of theater nuclear weapons are.

1h

FOR 0F1W(]Al.USEl)NLY
Takeda: With regard to nuclear weapons. the countries which possess them know beat
their fearfulness. and they want to use them. first of all. as political tools and
only God knows what will happen. I believe that they do not truly want to use
nuclear weapons. There is nothing absolute about defense policies and as I have
said from the beginning. the important factor is what measures should be taken to
prevent nuclear war. The final measure. I think. is the abolition of nuclear
armament.

Seki: If nothing is absolute, you should consider that Japan has not been invaded
hypothetically. Isn't that the same?

Takeda: No. I don't think so. The past history proves that.

Seki: Since Japan has never been invaded in the past. isn't it all right to think
of it as a theoretical question? Then. why do you only bring up the instance of a
possible invasion of Japan and not consider the possibility of a nuclear attack?

A nuclear attack against Japan would occur because of the Japan-0.8. Security

Treaty and because Japan is part of the 0.8. nuclear strategy system. Japan could
become involved in a limited nuclear war.

Unless you consider such problems. I think that you are a complete failure as a
responsible official of the Defense Agency. You do not have the capability to bear
the responsibility for Japan's national security. You are a complete failure. I
want to become the director—general of the Defense Agency. I am so inclined.

Takeda: Then. if you were the director-general of the Defense Agency. what measures
would you take?

Seki: I would clearly proclaim Japan's diplomacy for peace and open up a new path.
I would adopt an entirely new course.

Takeda: Speaking concretely. what steps would you take?

Seki: First. I would tie up with the "dove" factions of northern Europe and other
European countries. It is necessary for Japan to open up foreign diplomacy by

following a diplomatic course which is close to that of northern Europe. That
should be the very first step.

At the UN arms reduction special assembly, a plan should be drawn up that would
make possible an across-the-board arms reduction. On that subject. an exhaustive
symposium should be held with 0.5. political scholars. Before the UN special
assembly is held, with the UN University as the center. the sons of all the world's
politicians should be made to live in Japan as hostages. Then neither the USSR.
the United States or any other country could attack Japan. The funds for such a
purpose must be created. Then, a peace department should be established in all
Japanese universities. The contents of the Civil Service examinations must be

completely changed, and more "peace warriors" must be nurtured in Japan. The SD?
would be totally switched to that program.

As for the UN peace maintenance forces. unlike the JSP. I am willing to send some
Japanese troops. However. in order to do that. Japan must become neutral and pursue
a peaceful policy. It is a fundamental error to dispatch the SD? to the UN peace

15
FOR OFTWCJAI.USE!0NLY
I'UI WPILIAL UBI'. UNLY

maintenance forces under the present Japan-0.5. Security Treaty. This is not
neutrality. To remain neutral in such conflicts is the least we can do. but at

present there is practically no case where neutrality can be maintained in such
conflicts. As a rule. unless we become neutral, we cannot transfer our SDR to the

UN peace maintenance forces.

Takeda: From what you have just said. I agree heartily that a UN university should
be established and foreigners should be invited to Japan. However, I do not think
that such actions would make defense capability unnecessary.

Groping for World Arms Reduction

Seki: Haven't you ever thought of gradually decreasing defensive power and
eventually bring about nonarmament or arms reduction?

Takeda: That is because reality is not so.
Seki: Then. why don't you work toward it?
Tukeda: Naturally. I'm making the effort.

Seki: You have never tried it. The SD? has done nothing about it. It is
proceeding in the reverse direction. You are advocating that it go in the opposite
direction.

Takeda: That is not the function of the 50?; its duty is to increase the power
that it possesses. Such general plans must be considered elsewhere.

Seki: That is why we should not head toward military expansion. At least. we
should stop.

Takeda: I do not think so.

Ishibashi: I want to return to the previous question. As a policy. "when we fight
together with the United States. a unified command is not possible because of the
constitution." Those in uniform are asking how we can fight under such circum-
stances? 1 think that it is proper as a military theory. Mr Takeda. which course
are you choosing? Are you saying that the constitution should be ignored and that
since victory takes precedence. a unified command is absolutely necessary. as the
men in uniform say? I think that is the proper argument for the military men.
However. if you are determined to defend the constitution. then you should defend
it completely. as we are saying.

As for the 1 percent or 3 percent question. while you were saying earlier that 3
percent was necessary, you are now becoming vague about it. If I were a military
man. I would think it only natural to advocate the 3 percent.

Takeda: I do not think so.

ishibnshi: Then. you were saying 3 percent was necessary just to be sociable?

Takeda: i already spoke my piece earlier.

16
FOR OFI-TCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ishibashi: All NATO countries are expending from 3 to 5 percent of their GNP.

If you are going to keep company. the United States and the EC are saying to pay
out as much as other countries. Only Japan is making the excuse that "No. 1 percent
is enough," and not keeping up with the other countries. I think that the military
men's argument should be: "Please pay as much as the other countries. Please
assist us financially. as we shall try our best militarily." However, because of
the constitutional problems their true intentions might be that. but they can only
make sociable arguments. I think that this is not right for military men. Hhat
are you going to do with such halfway military power? If you are going to defend

a country with military power, then let us strive for completeness in armament.
strategy and other aspects. This is the proper attitude of the military. I insist
on an answer to this matter. '

In connection with this subject. there is a question I would like to ask of you
military men. I do not say that all are involved. but when the higher ranking
officers resign. they enter the armament industries. The arms industries and
high—ranking officers seem to have a strange relationship of interests. what do
you think of this setup?

ls Military Power Self—Proliferating?

Takeda: First, I want to express my views regarding the constitution. I want it

understood that I am speaking as an individual and not as the former chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

As far as the constitution is concerned--and probably all laws are the same--but

even if there is a defective law. as long as it is recognized as the law. I think
that it must be obeyed. I hope this viewpoint will not invite further misunder-
standing.

However. laws are made by men and as the world changes. various distortions take

place. Therefore. a lot of research and discussion are needed on defects in the
law in their problem areas. It was pointed out that there are a number of problems

concerning the constitution. There should be further discussions. and based on
the talks. the people should be asked whether it should be changed. I am sure that

there are certain problems connected with it. However, I believe that as long as
the law is in effect. it must be obeyed. In essence, the constitution exists for
the safety and development of the country.

Next. there was mention of professional military men accepting other jobs in the
private sector after retirement. and that is a fact. I believe there is a
considerable number of such men. However. they are not all in operations divisions.
They are not in special positions where they are asked to divulge intelligence
information or to speak on military affairs. The truth is that they are treated

as casual consultants.

lshihashi: Military power is self-propagating. Once military strength is accepted.
a country gradually becomes a great military power. Especially. military men's

logic works in that way. i do not want to mention his name but I talked to another
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and he revealed his true intentions by saying:

"we should have our own nuclear armament." I believe that military theory will lead
to that conclusion. 0n the basis of such thinking. the possibility becomes strong

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of following the erroneous path of militarism. For the moment, with our political
power and party responsibilities. we must put a brake on those who try to build up
a big military nation through self-propagation.

I want to conclude by saying that the most effective restraint is to say repeatedly
that we should protect our constitution and not be so boastful; after all. it's
our constitution and we should try our best to comply with it. That is our only
restraint.

Sekl: It has been learned recently. as a result of scientific research. that the
national securit) theory of the present military experts, including the Defense
Agency. has been completely mistaken. I want to mention the most concrete example.
The United States has made an effort toward military expansion to defend its own
country. However. the end result is that in the past 36 years since the end of
World War 11. the safety of the United States has never been in such a dangerous
position vis-a-vis the USSR. In other words. as a result of an increase in
military power. national security has fallen into a crisis. The cause is not the
Soviet threat.

Furthermore. according to various studies. when great pow rs confront each other
with military power. in 70 percent v! the cases war has r»sulted, according to
history. The casualties amount to 70 percent--that is a terrible disease. The
fact is that the military expansionists theory has been proven fundamentally
wrong.

Thus. what is necessary for Japan is to resist the demands for an increase in
military strength by the Reagan administration. He should give all our considera-
tion....

Takeda: Self-proliferation of military power--possib1y. history will verify such
tendencies. Particularly in Japan's case. such a tendency appeared in World Her
11. but the military organization is not the same today. At that time, the military
had an independent command authority and could act alone. but at present I think

there can be civilian control. In the future. I believe that if we reflect upon
the past and make an effort. the good conscience of the Japanese will be able to

solve the problem.

COPYRIGHT: Kobunsha [981

9l3ll
cso: 4105/15

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEVELOPMENT or INDEPENDENT SPACE INDUSTRY SAID DIPPICULT
Tokyo TOKI No KEIZAI in Japanese No 302 Nov 81 pp 33-35

[Excerpt] It is true that with the success of the space shuttle, space industry
has achieved reality, but in what ways will it develop hereafter?

There is a report concerning this ("A vision of space industry") prepared in April

of this year by the Round Table Conference on the Fundamental Problems of the Space
Industry, which is a personal advisory organ of the head of the Machinery Information
Industries Bureau of HITI. This is the first time the Japanese space industry has
been treated systematically as an independent industry.

A One-Trillion-Yen Market in the 90's

According to this report, the space industry is "a powerfully creative, knowledge-
intensive industry, and it is expected that there will be a resulting broad spin-off
of technology." Emphasizing its spirit of growth, the report forecasts that the
space industry in Japan will in the 5-year period of 1981-85 reach a level of about
1.1 trillion yen, and in the 5-year period of 1986-90 about 2.1 trillion yen. Its
also predicts that annual production, presently at a level of 100 billion yen,

will in 10 years reach 500 million yen; by the middle of the 1990's it will be on

a scale of 1 trillion yen. Incidentally, this report estimates that the size of
the world market for the period 1986-90, taking all 5 years together, will be 36
billion dollars (about 7.6 trillion yen). It is estimated that Japan will obtain

a strong one-fourth share of it during this period. Exports for the 5-year period
1986-90 are seen at about 650 billion yen.

However, in order to achieve such goals, it will be necessary for Japan to solve
numerous problems.

One is to establish an independently developed technology. In the case of
"Himawari 2," which is said to be the first working satellite launched into station-

ary orbit independently by Japan, the ratio of domestic production of the N-II
rocket used for the launch was 69 percent and that of the satellite itself 28 percent.
In fact, more than half of it was dependent on foreign countries.

Certainly, the percentage of domestic production is increasing year by year. when
we considered that the "Himawari" launched by the United States in 1977 was only
11 percent domestically produced, it is safe to say that the ratio in "ﬂimawari 2"
was much better. Since the relay transmitter and antenna of the number two

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL!

communications satellite to be launched next year will be supplied from domestic
production, the overall ratio of domestic production will be 65 percent, well over
half, considering only the launch rockets, the ratio of domestic production of the
next generation H—l rocket will reach 85 percent in one jump.

However, the difference in quality compared to European and American technology is
still large, as shown by a survey of the current situation prepared in the autumn of
last year by the Federation of Japanese Machinery Manufacturers. It says, "In the
field of space industry, such as satellites and rockets, items of imported technology
number 57, those of exported technology only one."

A good example of this is that of the apogee motors which are the essential power
source for putting satellites into stationary orbits. Japan at present relies

100 percent on American products for these apogee motors, so when we speak of
independently launched stationary satellites we are ignoring the part that gives
life to the whole. Moreover, the apogee motors imported from the United States

to Japan are made as "black boxes" and cannot, naturally, be disassembled, nor can
we obtain their plans, so Japanese technicians must grapple with the development

of apogee motors literally blindly. If the space industry is to grow in the future,
it is well expected that a move may be stirred up in the United States to not only
designate certain components as 'black box" items but also to stop supplying these
components to Japan altogether in fear of Japan's ability to absorb technology. if
Japan does not establish an independently developed technology, the space industry
will be considerably retarded. And, since there are space industry spins-off to
other industries, it follows that delays in the space industry will affect other
fields as well.

Next, in aiming at the establishment of such an independent technology, it goes
without saying that a large amount of development capital is required. However,

at present, Japan's space industry is largely dependent on the sponsorship of
government and public agencies. 0f the space industry which is described as being
worth 100 billion yen, the satellite made up 15 million yen and the rocket 38.2
billion yen (1979) the scope of the market was small and the makers of the satellite
expresaed dissatisfaction that "the amount of work is too small.“ Subsequently,

they urged an increase in the budget for space development, saying, "There is no

other way for satellite manufacturers to become established than through the efficiency
of quantity production."

Howevur, when we look at the 1981 budget, it shows 99 billion yen for the National
Space Development Agency and 11.2 billion yen in development capital for the satellites
and rockets of the institute of Space Science (formerly the Tokyo University Institute
of Space and Aeronautical Science). Moreover, a stringent financial restructuring
is being urged, and it seems that the 1982 budget will be a step sideways, at best.

Since the United States' space development budget. when Defense Department related
items arc Included. is 2.6 trillion yen, funds 26 times the Japanese budget are being
pourrdilﬂtlchc space industry. The BSA [European Space Agency] budget, too, is

about 3.5 times that of Japan. This being the case, the dissatisfaction coming from
Japanese manufacturers is most understandable. Hereafter, it will be essential to
increase private demand, including overseas exports.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Consdierable Spin-offs from Space Industry

Recently the Japan Aeronautical and Space Manufacturers Association carried out”"A
Survey of Space-Related Industry in Japan in 1979," directed to space related
manufacturers.

According to this. of 83 companies responding, 70 replied that they had accepted
space-related orders. Looking at these by type of industry, there were five chemical
industry companies, including Nippon Oils and Fats (mostly rocket fuels), 32 manu-
facturers of electrical machinery and devices, including Oki Electric Industry and
Toshiba (devices aboard rockets and artificial satellites), three general machinery
manufacturers, including Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (rocket construction), three
manufacturers of transportation machinery, including Nissan Motor (rocket construction),
seven makers of precision instruments, including Shimsyzu Seisakusho (instruments
used aboard and in ground installations), one rubber products manufactuerer, Yokohama
Rubber (rocket parts) and wholesalers and construction companies. The breadth of

the space industry was evident.

The sales value of these 70 companies was 103.2 billion yen. Since sales in 1978
were 105.4 billion yen. sales remained sluggish at over 100 billion yen for 2 years
running.

Looking at the breakdown of sales, rockets were the largest item at 34 billion yen,
next came ground installations at 32.8 billion yen, while artificial satellites
amounted to 16 billion yen. Of this, 22.1 billion yen, or 21.4 percent were exports,
the greater part being ground installations. including data retrieval and processing
instruments. These ground installations are a Japanese strong point of the space
industry, and for the future, too, this area has bright prospects. However, imports
were 25.3 billion yen, greater than exports.

Additionally, there were about 4,700 persons employed in the space industry. Comparing
this number of workers to those in Europe and the United States in the same year,

the United States had 99,000 including the missile field, and Britain, France and

West Germany, taken together, had 12,500. It is clear that in terms of human
involvement too. the scale of the space industry is still rather small.

A Rough Road for Japanese Space Industry

Considering the subject in this way and in view of the findings in the report of
the Round Table Conference on the Fundamental Problems of the Space Industry of
Japan the establishment of a firm foundation for the space industry within 10 years
seems considerably difficult.

However, within NIT! it is felt that we can catch up with those countries that are
advanced in space within 10 years, and that the Japanese space industry will be
independent by about 1990. The reason for this is that in ground installations and
the area in relation to satellites where electronics and precision manufacturing
technology combine, Japan will be able to catch up with other countries. Thus,
taking this round table conference report into consideration MITI intends to develop
the space industry enthusiastically.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.vn v...v-l|u vvu VMHJ.

First is the planning of "space factory systems.‘ As already mentioned, because
weightiessness exists in space, it is possible to make materials unobtainable on
earth, such as ideal alloys and high purity crystals. Here, the meaning of "space
factory systems" is the establishment of manufacturing techniques for factories in
space and. at the same time, the research and development of production machinery
for factories in space. Naturally, it goes without saying that this will be based
on the Japanese space shuttle, a "small, winged, recoverable craft" of whose research
and development have been pushed since 1978. The United States, as a matter of
course, and several nations of Europe are enthusiastic about the space factory
project. The space lab to be carried aboard the American space shuttle will be
developed by the ESA.

MITI hopes to start this project in 1982 as an 8-year plan. The budget is anticipated
to be on the level of 50 billion yen, which will certainly give a new complexion to
Japan's space industry.

However, ideas aside, it seems that such a scale of budgeting is too small. Since
it is an 8-year plan, this project will be completed in 1990 precisely. This year
is also the year in which NITI expects Japan to catch up with the United States and
Europe in space industry, but this really assumes that European and American space
development will halt at their present points, whereas. as related previously, when
budgets for space development are compared, those of Europe and the United States
are incomparably greater than that of Japan. Therefore the catching up is not only
very difficult, but it may very well be that their superiority will be much greater
in the future.

The above-mentioned report emphasized the necessity of developing private demand,
including overseas experts, for the Japanese space industry, which is presently
strongly dependent on the sponsorship of government and public agencies and which
is naturally limited by their budgets. Certainly this may be one way out, but in
practice it seems rather difficult.

Furthermore, the establishment of an independently developed technology is urgent
to place the space industry on a solid footing. However, since this, too, requires
large amounts of research and development capital, it seems highly dubious to think
of the space industry as comparable to household appliances or automobiles. Rather
it is better to consider it in terms of cooperative international development.

Whlrhever way one looks at it, the prospects for the Japanese space industry to
realize the vision given in that report are not too bright.

9898
C30: 4106/20

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

AUTO, AUTO PARTS, SEMICONDUCTOR MAKERS VIE IN MINICAR "AR

Tokyo CHUO KORON KEIEI MONDAI in Japanese winter 1981 pp l3b-lb5

[Article by Yukio Suzuki of the Nomura Research Institute of Technology and
Economics]

{Excerpt} Improvement of Engine Performance

Only 20 percent of the fuel energy in a gasoline engine is actually used for pro-
pulsion. There is accordingly a great deal of research aimed at improvement of
fuel efficiency of engines. Interest is centered on the use of car electronics,
diesel fuel and turbochargers; the sale of automobiles equipped with such features
has begun.

Electronification of automobiles is a broad field which includes such things as:
1) engine control systems aimed at fuel economy and pollution control, 2) gauge
display systems, 3) safety systems such as antiskid devices. and 4) systems

related to comfort and drivability, such as air conditioning and cruise control.

In particular, full-scale efforts are under way to develop engine control systems
using microcomputers. ,

General Motors equipped some of its 1977 models with a "miser" system, and Ford
began to sell electronic engine control (EEC) systems in its 1978 models; both
were designed for control of engine ignition timing. In Japan. Nissan Motors

developed an engine central control system (3068) using a Hitachi 8-bit micro-
computer; this was adopted for mass-production models. In addition to control-

ling ignition timing. it provided the world's first microcomputer control of fuel
injection and improved fuel economy by about 10 percent. After that Mitsubishi

Motors. with the cooperation of Mitsubishi Electric Corp and Mikuni Kogyo Co,
developed the BCI engine control system. In 1980 Toyota Motors equipped its

Mark II with the chs control system. which uses a Toshiba Corp 12-bit micro-
computer.

This progress in electronification of cars is expected to be accompanied by a
great expansion in demand for related products. The companies involved are mak-
ing active efforts to meet this demand. Nippon Dense Co. a member of the Toyota
group and a world leader among automotive parts manufacturers, has put full effort
into research in this field since about 1970; it began inhouse production of
integrated circuits (IC) in the fall of 1976. Technical innovation is rapid in

23
FOR 0F11C1AI.USEINNLY
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

the field of electronics; planning and the development and accumulation of pro-
duction technology are indispensable. Nippon Denso has turned its hand to both,
and by leading the industry, it is building a base for growth in the field of

car electronics .

Development will require full cooperation among the automobile manufacturers,
auto parts manufacturers and major semiconductor manufacturers. There is, how-
ever, fierce competition among the three. As seen in the case of Nippon Denso.
it is important to cover replacement of existing mechanical parts and to main-
tain internal production of high-added-value parts required by improved func—
tions by keeping a firm hold on production technology and sofeware related to
basic design. On the other hand, a large new automobile market is unfolding for
major semiconductor manufacturers, and there will be great opportunities for
profit if they enter that market quickly. Automobile manufacturers can also make
full use of the IC technology at which Japan excels; this will have great sig-
nificance in terms of the minicar competition with Europe and the United States.

Conversion to diesel engines has progressed rapidly. The history of diesel pas-
senger cars in Japan goes back to before 1965. when full-scale motorization

began. But it is only in the past few years that the economics of diesel passen-
ger cars has been reconsidered. Because of good fuel efficiency at high compres—
sions and the low cost of diesel oil, the fuel economy is more than twice that of

gasoline-powered cars .

Diesel engines are gradually being made smaller, and there is hope for the
appearance of minicars suited to the class of users who demand truly economical
automobiles. As part of its moves toward diversification of products, "est
Germany's Volkswagen (W) announced its epochal Golf diesel (1500 cc)

in 1975; this enabled rebuilding of the business. In Japan, in the fall of 1979
Isuzu Motors Ltd announced the Gemini diesel (1800 cc), which was highly rated
and was in no way inferior to the W engine performance. Isuzu Motors, which is
a member of the GM group. made dieselization a mainstay of its product strategy.

The demand is increasing rapidly.

With advances in the use of diesel engines, Diesel Kiki Co, a producer of diesel
fuel injection pumps (accounts for 70 percent of domestic production), decided to
introduce technology from Robert Bosch, 3 West German company which is the world's
largest. and began production of high-performance injection pumps for small cars.
The very same move was made by Nippon Denso, which ranks number two in this indus-
try. For these companies. the growth potential of new injection pumps is quite
large. But in the case of diesel passenger cars. there is a good chance that
mission control regulations will be strengthened at home and abroad. In order
to meet emission control requirements while maintaining the economic superiority
of diesel vehicles. the manufacturers involved are making every effort to develop
technology. including microcomputer control of diesel engines.

There is activity in regard to adoption of turbochargers to reuse the energy in
automobile exhaust gases and increase the power. Turbochargers were first used in
Japan in Nissan's Cedric at the end of 1979. Nissan has increased the number of
models with turbochargers, and Mitsubishi Motors has begun to sell dieseI turbos.
Toyota Motors recently announced the Crown Turbo. Both Nissan and Toyota import

2;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their turbochargers from America's Garret Co (Air unearch Division). In the case
of the Toyota Crown, the retail price of the turbocharger car is 150,000 yen
higher than others of the same class, but the fuel efficiency is 9 to 16 percent
better. ‘mis cannot be called a complete success in terms of economy, but much is
expected of research to apply turbochargers to the minicsr class. Moreover, in
terms of marketability strategy, the turbocharger serves as an "image leader"
because of its good performance at high speeds.

Promotion of Smaller, Lighter Cars

Improving engine performance is one way to improve fuel consumption; another is
development of smaller and lighter cars.

It is said that cutting the current weight of cars by 10 percent would ilprove
fuel efficiency by 8 percent. But it is impossible to meet the needs of diverse
users by sinply reducing the size of the automobiles. Thus preservation of space
utility, by making the body smaller and lighter while keeping the passenger com-
partment as roomy as possible, has become a fundamental of product developmnt.
The CM Citation (an X-car), which went on sale in the spring of 1980 and has sold
well, is 31.0 kg lighter and about 50 to shorter than the old Nova. but there is
slightly more interior space and the fuel efficiency is some 30 percent better.

In line with that thinking, there has been a great increase in PP (front-wheel
drive) cars lately. Four or 5 years ago FF cars made up 15 percent of the
passenger cars produced in Japan, but this year they will make up nearly 30 per-
cent. 'lhe figure is expected to approach the 60 percent level among European
cars. In the spring of 1981 Toyo Kogyo switched to front-wheel drive for its new

Familia (1300 cc); it is 25 kg (about 3 percent lighter than the old model) and
front-wheel drive contributed 80 percent of the reduction.

FF cars differ from the standard rear-wheel (FR) drive in that a long drive shaft
is not required. 0n the other hand, the transmission is replaced by the transaxle.
and even with a larger oblique angle for the front axle, a synchronous ball joint
which maintains a uniform rate of rotation is necessary as a major component. Each
of the automobile manufacturers has begun large-scale investment in facilities to
convert from transmissions to transaxles. Honda Motor Co and Fuji Heavy Industry
are in an advantageous position in tens of investment because their small passen-
ger cars have all been FF cars for sone time.

in the 1960's NTN “royo Bearing Co formed a technical linkup with Britain's GKN
group, and it now nonopolizes the supply of synchronous ball joints to domestic

manufacturers. The increased demand for synchronous joints accompanying the shift
to front-wheel drive will be a strong growth factor for this company. Toyota and

Nissan, on the other hand. have gotten the technology from 610! to begin their
own production of synchronous joints. Honda has succeeded in developing its own

synchronous joints without using the technology of CKN. which has become the world
standard; more weight is being given to internal production of this item.

Another factor to be noted in regard to smaller and lighter cars is the conserva-
tion of materials and use of alternative materials.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LSI‘Z ONLY

The raw materials used to produce an automobile are, for a car weighing 1 ton,
780 kg of steel (including specialty steels), 60 kg of aluminum and other non-
ferrous metals, and 160 kg of nonmetallic materials such as plastics, rubber and
glass. The proportions of nonferrous and nonmetallic materials have increased
from those of 3 years ago, and this trend will continue. Less material is used
because of design changes such as reducing the thickness of engine walls, and
larger quantities of new and lighter materials are being used; this is an active
effort to improve fuel consumption.

The weight of steel materials used can be reduced sharply by using sheets of high
tensile strength steel, which can be made about 10 percent lighter than ordinary
steel sheets.

Although high tensile strength steel sheets are stronger than ordinary steel sheets,
they are also harder to work with and their use is limited. But recently steel

makers have succeeded in producing cold-rolled steel alloys which have twice the
standard ductility and thus have superior processing characteristics. 0f the

latest models, the Nissan Leopard uses 70 kg of high tensile strength steel and
the Toyota Mark IT uses 57 kg; it is expected that with each model change more
cars will use it for lightness. Moreover, Japanese steel makers, which are in
the top class worldwide, are developing new, high-value-added tactics in order to

lead the world in terms of product development as well as competitive technical
costs.

Among the nonmetallic materials, there will be increased use of plastics.

At present about 50 kg of plastics are used in each passenger car. But through

the end of the 1980's there is expected to be a steady increase in the use of
fiber reinforced plastics (PEP), composites using carbon fibers, and high-

performance polyuers called engineering plastics.

Carbon fiber reinforced plastics (CFRP), for example, are characterized as being
"stronger than steel and lighter than aluminum," but the present cost is over 10

million yen per ton. At this level, CFRP cannot be adopted by the automobile
industry, which has stringent cost constraints.

Toray Industries Inc, which produces 50 percent of the world's CFRP, has done
research in this field since the mid-1960's. This research has been fruitful:
there has been a sharp rise in demand for use in aircraft, and Toray is in a
position to export technology to America's UCC. There are active efforts to
dcvvlop uses in automotive parts, and new developments can be expected when
quality and performance technology is built up and the cost is reduced through
mass production.

improved Productivity

The major issue is how to quickly put new products that meet the user's needs on
the market and at the same time build efficient cars.

lbre is a comparison of the labor productivity of Toyota, Nissan, GM and Ford.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Based on 1979 figures. there is a great discrepancy in the numbers of cars pro-
duced per worker per year, with 71 for Toyota, #6 for Nissan, 11 for GM and 12
for Ford. If annual productivity is compared on a value-added basis there is
still a gap: $53,000 for Toyota, $39,000 for Nissan, $33,000 for GM and $27,000
for Ford. However, a simple comparison cannot be made because: 1) the 0.8.
companies produce their own parts and have a higher rate of internal production,
and 2) Toyota differs from Nissan in having a separate sales company (Toyota
Motor Sales Co).

Even though a strict comparison cannot be made, the important point is that in
terms of the number of vehicles, the productivity of 0.8. manufacturers has not
increased at all (see Figure 2). According to a study by the ITC (0.8. Inter-
national Trade Commission), the productivity of the 0.5. automobile industry
remained unchanged from 1975 to 1979, at a level of about seven cars per thousand
manhours. Wages increased 9.4 percent per year during this period, more than
could be covered by price increases. The sane study found that the average hourly
wage in the U.S. automobile industry was over $16/hr in the first half of 1980;

this is 30 percent higher than the average for 0.8. manufacturing industries and
50 percent higher than Japanese wages.

One more point is the difference in labor-capital ratios (acquisition basis)--the

amount of equipment per employee. Using the previous basis for comparison, there
is a large gap: $115,000 for Toyota, $82,000 for Nissan, $29,000 for CH and
$29,000 for Ford. Again, it is not possible to make a simple comparison because
of different ratios of overseas production and production by subcontractors. For
all four companies there was steady growth (on a nominal basis) in the labor-
capital ratio during this 5-year period: 50 percent for Toyota and Nissan, 30

percent for GM and 40 percent for Ford.

in 1977, U.S. manufacturers began to greatly increase investment in facilities.
They plan to invest $80 billion in the 6 years from 1980 through 1985; the average
annual investment of $130 billion is more than double that of the past 5 years.

If overseas investment is excluded. the 10 major Japanese automobile manufacturers
will also nearly double their investment.

As for a breakdown of facilities investment, the greatest emphasis has been put

on new products aimed at the need to conserve energy, but greater effort has also
begun to be put into making the production system more efficient. The basic goal
is to move ahead with a flexible manufacturing system (FMS) which is automatically
adjusted to production of different models. FMS actively involves highly flexible
technology so as to achieve high production efficiency while quickly responding

to model changes and changes in demand.

Because of this, there are prospects for a major advance in the introduction of NC
(numerically controlled) machine tools and industrial robots. Orders from automo-

tive manufacturers to Japan's machine tool industry have increased sharply. Orders
received in 1980 were up 50 percent from the previous year, and the 1981 workload

has been assured all through this year. Accordingly, dependence on automobiles
for domestic orders will rise from the 30 percent of the past to 40 percent next
year. The proportion of NC tools within the total production of machine tools in

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’UK UH'ILIAL USE ONLY

1979 was 42 percent, double the figure for 1976. As FMS progresses, there may

well be a sharp rise in the use of numerical control for single-purpose machine
tools.

Industrial robots have also begun a period of growth. Rather than automation of
single-purpose facilities, there is a generalization of automated machinery with
a diversity of computer controlled functions. This will bring a reduction in

labor costs and iaprovement of working conditions. High-performance machinery to
meet such needs is being developed. Robots will be adopted in large numbers for
body welding and painting processes.

With progress in technological development, the use of robots is expected to
extend to appropriate parts of the assembly process. The adoption of new mate-
rials and changes in production methods to make lighter cars will increase demand
for die-casting and injection molding equipment.

An increase in exports is also expected. For the tool manufacturers which support
Japan's superior minicar production technology, there is much room to develop
demand in the European and U.S. industries, which are undergoing a facilities
investment boom. Thus, the various machine tool manufacturers involved can be
expected not only to contribute to the strengthening of the Japanese automobile

industry's ability to compete internationally, but also to be active in the world
market.

Moving Into the Overseas Market

Trade friction among automobile producing countries has taken on a complicated
aspect as minicar conpetition between Japan, the United States and Europe has
intensified. The automotive industry is a strategic industry which occupies an
important position within the national structure of major countries like Japan,
the United States, West Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada. Automobiles
made up the following percentages of total national exports in 1977: 18 percent
for Japan, 10 percent for the United States, 14 percent for West Germany, 12 per-
cent for France, 7 percent for Britain, 8 percent for Italy and 21 percent for
Canada. In all seven countries, automobiles have the top export volume within
the machine industry.

The issue of U.S. import restrictions is coming to a climax, and trade friction
with Europe is also becoming increasingly severe.

According to a survey by EUROFINANCE, the European automobile market at 10
billion vehicles per year is about the same size as the U.S. market, and in 1983

the balance between imports and exports is expected to turn to an import surplus,
in terms of number of vehicles.

And so even though competition among Japanese, U.S. and European automobile manu-
facturers is becoming more intense, the winning and losing companies will no

longer be decided just on the basis of former conditions of competition. As a
result. the major Japanese automobile manufacturers face the necessity of bring-

ing into their company strategies in response to the difficult task of "seeking
the path of coexistence while maintaining coupetitive relations." In this

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘(

instance, provision of technology and capital in the broad sense will be funda-
mental. It will be important to foster international cooperation while joining
together capital and technology through technical agreements, licensed production
or through local production using joint ventures. capital participation or 100
percent direct investment.

Moves in this direction have already begun. Examples include: 1) Hondafs plan
to produce passenger cars in the United States and the licensed production with
Britain's BL; 2) Nissan's production of minitrueks in the United States, its
capital participation in Motor Iberica (Spain) and its passenger car joint

venture with Alfa Romea (Italy); and 3) the idea of joint passenger car produc-
tion by Toyota and Ford.

while Japanese automobile manufacturers are expanding procurement of parts from
overseas, foreign manufacturers have also moved to enhance their own competitive
positions by making use of companies in Japan's automotive industry. GM, Ford
and Chrysler have invested in Japanese partners (GM owns 35.2 percent of Isuzu
Motors, Ford owns 25 percent of Toyo Kogyo and Chrysler owns 15 percent of
Mitsubishi Motors). and are trying to purchase major parts for minicars. Isuzu
Motors provides GM with minicar diesel engines and manual transaxles (MTX) for
FF cars. Toyo Kogyo exports MIX for Ford's PP minicar (Erica), and is also to
begin providing automatic transacles (ATX) and diesel engines. This year
Mitsubishi began exporting engines for Chrysler's F? minicar (K-car). Of course.
this will expand the demand of these three companies with respect to companies
which manufacture automotive parts.

There has been an increase in cases of parts manufacturers themselves exporting
directly to automobile manufacturers. worldwide passenger car production is in
excess of 30 million cars per year. so if there is a shift to minicars. there is
potential for expansion of the market for Japanese automotive parts. U.S. manu-
facturers are actively engaged in international parts procurement with an empha-
sis on quality and performance, and there are many deals with Japanese parts
manufacturers.

Japanese companies are eagerly exporting parts which can be used in their own
product lines with existing technology, but there are many parts manufacturers

which are wary of exporting new products developed jointly with automobile manu-
fncturers.

As seen by parts manufacturers, the overseas market falls into three categories.
Illustrating with the U.S. market, there are: 1) the large after-sales market for
Japanese cars, with ownership expected to pass the 9 million level, 2) the new
market for parts supplied to U.S. manufacturers which are switching to minicars,
and 3) the parts market for Japanese cars built in the United States. if Japanese
manufacturers do decide on local production. If a certain level of demand in
these markets can be guaranteed, it will be quite possible to advance into them.
For example, the U.S. plant of Nippon Oil Seal Industry Co is aimed at U.S. auto-

mobile manufacturers, and NGK Spark Plug 00 is looking at the after-sales market
for spark plugs.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

within the Nissan group there are plans to build up Mexican operations by sending
in such subsidiaries as Nippon Radiator, Atsugi Automotive Parts and Kinugawa

Rubber Industry Co. There are also parts manufacturers such as Akebono Brake
Industries which hope to play roles as partners with 0.8. parts manufacturers

rather than sending in wholly owned subsidiaries and which are considering enter-
ing the 0.8. market through joint ventures or licensed production.

Thus the overseas strategies of parts manufacturers are taking a variety of forms,
but they are becoming more concrete.

New Long-Term Strategy Necessary

It is said that a period of a years is required to develop a new car. Recent
improvements in computer-assisted design (CAD) technology may allow the develop-
ment period to be shortened somewhat. But if a years is taken to be the model
cycle in principle, it will be some time yet before models using the technology
being developed now will appear on the market. All-out competition with 0.5.
minicars will reach a climax in the middle of this decade when the new models
are lined up.

West Germany's Volkswagen (VU) has unveiled the concept of a VH 2000 passenger car
in the 1990's. It cannot be called a complete departure from the Golf. VH's lead-
ing model at present, but the company is pursuing long-term research and develop-
ment with a clear objective. Moreover, a distinction is made between research and
development, with the development division responsible for cars to be produced in
the 1980's and the research division handling car concepts for the 1990's. This
point is not limited just to V“; it is seen in automobile manufacturers throughout
the world.

If peripheral industries are to find new market opportunities in the automobile
industry, it is important that they become involved in the early stages of research
and deVelopment and develop needs into actual products. The research and develop-
ment system of automobile manufacturers has gone full cycle and now depends to a
great extent on the development abilities of related companies which have superior
technology. As seen in the examples of car electronics and new materials, it is
necessary to synthesize from basic technology. Representative Japanese companies
with the ability to synthesize should be able to take a greater part in the devel-
opment of new fields in the automobile industry. Microcomputers, high tensile
strength steel sheets, NC machine tools and industrial robots all show that
improved technology in related fields works to strengthen the ability of Japanese
automobile manufacturers to compete.

0n the other hand, the present automotive parts manufacturers will have to try to
escape from the "number of vehicles slide." That is, parts manufacturers have

poor prospects for growth it they are completely dependent on automobile manufac-
turers in the sense that their own sales can slide up only with increases in the
number of automobiles produced. Even if the competitive strength of the Japanese
automobile industry, which is forced to maintain a competitive interdependence,
is further demonstrated. it will be almost impossible to bring about the steady
high export growth seen in the 1970's. It will thus be necessary to further

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

u.

rationalize in order to enhance the competitive position of the group and to aim
for profit and growth supported by independent product development. ~

me course will differ from one automotive parts manufacturer to the next. The
courses can be roughly categorized into two groups: 1) improvement of product
perfornance and development of new parts within the automobile industry. with its
1.6-trillion-yen scale of production; and 2) diversification away from the field

of automobiles, using the production and development technology fostered within
the automobile industry. Few conpanies have taken the second course in the past;

the reason has been the high growth rate of automobiles. The key will be the
possibility of developing overseas markets and opening up new automotive fields

as fuel-efficient cars are developed. It is important for automotive parts manu-
facturers, which are highly group-oriented, to upgrade their status within the

group while developing markets outside it. In fact, such moves can be seen very
clearly in companies such as Nippon Denso.

The worldwide automotive industry faces a period of change. Related industries
have also entered an era of opportunity for growth and of severe trial. It is
hoped that steady implementation of new long-tern strategies will make a success
of the 1980's.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-Technology--Technology sharing and licensed production
Trade friction---[

-Capital ------ Joint ventures, capital participation (takeover),
direct local production
-Safety

-Emission Controls

Export expansion -Comfort
International Hinica1--Product improvement "Velopment of Pue -------------
I Competition and differentiation Efficient Cars

   

U.S./Euerean minicar Market homogeneity Improvement of

strategy production
technology
Changing competitive --------- -
conditions
-H1nicar production-Design
scale investment
-Style/design Productivity--Promotion of

universal car
-Quality/performance Procurement

of funds -Automation
-Fuel consumption
Flexibility
-Price competition -
Precision
-Harketability

---Industrial robots

---CNC (computer
numerical control)

Fig. 1. Framework of International Minicar Competition

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electronics

Inproved combustion efficiency—E
Diesel

Engine - -Ileuse of waste energyn'rurbocharaers
efficiency
-- -Inproved uchsnical and transnission efficiency
Front wheel drive—Transaxle, ball joint

-Snsller-— Material conservation (design changes)

lighter High tensile
cars Alternative naterisls—ilev materials strength steel
-Engineering
plastics
-Conposites
-Fiber rein-
[ forced plastics
-Csrbon fiber
reinforced
plastics
Ceramics
-Air resistance (styling)
Reduced---—
road/sir dialling resistance (radial tires)
resistance

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IJ' -

 

l
in: I (..z annual settlement. 1903-79)
' i ‘ j
(I‘. I ION]
:i;‘ ::| .::.\
o, .
8~ 41.5560 lnvota
:‘ ...--- -‘- ,,_._./ .
9,, ... -'—“ ~--—,—
V; --—--—-— “—1—... ..
k
3 Production (cars/worker)

Pig. 2. Productivity of Major Japanese and 0.5. Automobile Manufacturers

Labor productivity - W): “Vehic::ke:soduced -Added value per

vehicle at vehicles produced per worker
COPYRIGHT: Chuo Koronsha 1981

9601
C50: 8129/0418

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Text] HIT! Unofficially Decides on Enterprises To Develop Next Generation Basic
Industrial Technologies; 10~Year Contracts To Be Signed in Early October

Next Generation Industrial Technology Develop-eat Department (chaimn, Isanu Yanashita,
vice chairman of the Federation of Economic Organizations), and determine the plans

to carry out the Next Generation Basic Industrial Technology Research and Development
System. which will begin during the present fiscal year. Prior to this. however,

it has unofficially decided on the enterprises which will be connisaioned to work

on the R G D for this project. It had previously announced the recruitment of enter-
prises. and it recently concluded the evaluation and selection of the principal enter-
prises based on three developmental areas: new uteriala, biotechnology, and new
function elements. The contracts will be signed as early as the beginning of October.

Three Areas of New Materials, Biotechnology and New Function Elements

independent technologies. something which it had previously neglected. HITI's aim
is to waste no time in carrying out R G D on advanced basic technologies essential
for the establishment of next generation advanced industries, in particular, the
space. nuclear power, marine, new energy and biochemical industries, i.e., those
whusc full development is expected in the 1990's.

Originally. MIT]. selected a total of 16 themes in the three areas-mew materials,
biotechnology, and new function elenenta-as basic technologies comes to the next
generation industries, and planned to budget about 120 billion yen for 10 years of
R & D. However, because at the time when this fiscal year's budget was being set

35
ran omcm. USE ONLY
FOP. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Because of this, the technologies applicable to the present system are: six themes
in the area of new materials: 1) fine ceramics, 2) highly efficient separation near
brane, 3) conducting high particles, 4) high crystal high particles, 5) high per-
formance crystal control alloy, and 6) compound materials; three themes in the area
of biotechnology: 1) application of volume cell culture technology. 2) application
of gene splicing technology, and 3) application of bioreactor technology in en-
gineering; and three themes in the area of new function elements: 1) super lattice
electronic elements, 2) three dimensional electronic elements, 3) environmental
hazard resistant devices.

In line with tnese 12 themes, HITI has established a "Next Generation Department"
within the Industrial Technology Council so as to consolidate the promotion structure
nationally, and in order to promote participation of the private sector it has con-
solidated the preparations to consign research work to private enterprises. Recently
it announced recruitment of the consignees.

0n the 9th, as a result of its evaluation of the applicants, MITI unofficially de-
cided on the enterprises shown in the table below. As soon as MITI made its
announcement, these enterprises began establishing associations and foundations to
handle the consigned projects; it will be these organizations that will in fact pro-
mote the research activities.

The newly established organizations are: a High Particle Basic Technology Research
Association, a Fine Ceramics Technology Research Association, and a Next Generation
Compound Materials R 8 D Association (foundation), all in the area of new materials;
a Biotechnology R a D Association in the field of biotechnology; and (foundation);

and a New Function Element R a 0 Association. in the area of new function elements.

The contracts with the enterprises are expected to be concluded by early October,

at which time a 10—year research on basic technologies aiming at the 1990's will
begin in conjunction with the national research agencies. Since the development
themes are focused on 12 topics for the time being, the consigned amount is expected
to total about 80 billion yen. A meeting of the Industrial Technology Council's
Next Generation Department will be held on the 11th, at which time actual plans

are expected to be revealed.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USE ONLY

  
    
      
 

    

__—_—-——

 

    

    
     
    

   
 

3': 333
5333?:
3:33:51.
3:33 :
g‘gﬁ‘g:
5.. i335:
' "an

I

 

 

33'l 25 “'3 1’07 11“

if a :23 3 a

. ~° , 32¢ v.
9:.51. w a i
are . a mm .2 am
.322 gr .22: .3 g
-I.._r'. .__ -. - £33.. ___E______J
__.__..., -____. .____

Table. Technological The-es. Enterprises, and Major Organization Wanioned Under
the Next Generation Basic Industrial Technology Research 8 Develop-ant System

1 . Technologies

2. Enterprises comissioned

3. Major organizations responsible for development
lo. New materials

J. Highly efficient separation mlbrane

6. Toray, Teijin, Asahi Chemical, Kuraray, Toyobo

37
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

Conducting high particles

Sumitomo Electric, Daisel Chendcal, Asahi Glass, Mitsubishi Chemical
High crystal high particles

Toray, Teijin, Asahi Chemical, Sumitomo Electric, Sumitono Chemical
High Particle Basic Technology Research Association

Fine ceramics

. Toshiba, Kyoto Ceramics, Ishiknwajima-Harim Heavy Industries, Kobe Steel, Shows
Donku, Sumitomo Electric. Asahi Class, Denki Kagaku, NGK Insulators, NGK Spark
Plug, Kurosaki Refractories, Toyoda Machine Works, Shinagava Refractories,
lnoue Japacs Research Institute, Toyota Motor

. Fine Ceramics Technology Research Association

. High performance crystal control alloy

Compound va terials

1) High performance crystal control alloynﬂitachi, Kobe Steel, Daido Steel,
Mitsubishi Metal, Hitachi Metals, Sumitono Electric, Ishikavajima-Harima

2) Processing technology development--Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Fuji Heavy
Industries, Toyota Motor, Toshiba Machine. Ishikawajima-Harima, Mitsubishi
Electric, Kawasaki Heavy Industries

3) High particle related cospound materials--Torsy, Teijin, Mitsubishi
Chemical Industries, Nippon Carbon

. Foundation. the Next Generation Compound Metal Materials R 5 D Association
. Biotechnology

. Large volume cell culture technology

. Biorcac tut

. Ccne splicing technology

Asahi Chemical, Ajinomoto, Kyowa Hakko Kogyo, Takeda Chemical Industries,
Toyo Jozo

. Kao Soap, Daisel Chemical, Denki Kagaku, Mitusi Petrochemical, Mitsubishi
Gas Chemical, Mitsubishi Chemical

. Sumi tom Chemical, Mitsui Toatsu, Mitsubishi Chemical Life Science
Research Institute

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘.’

25. Blutuchnulony Developmental Technology Research Association
26. New function elements

27. Super grid elements

28. Fujitsu, Hitachi, Sumitomo Electric

29. Three-dimension circuit elements

30. Nippon Electric, Oki Electric, Toshiba, Mitsubishi Electric, Sanyo
Electric, Sharp, Hatsushita Electric

31. Anti-environment reinforcing elements
32. Toshiba, Bitachi, Mitsubishi Electric

33. Foundation, New Function Elements Research and Developmental Association

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1981

9711
cso: 4106/1 3"”

39
FOR omr‘ul. us: om v