FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/106S3
13 JULY 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 41/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
nevspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sOurces are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and encloaed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FUR (II-‘Hl'IM. “SI-Z "NLV

JPRS L/10653
13 July 1982

JAPAN REPORT
(90110 41/82) .

Cou'reurs
HI LITARY

Patterna of Strategic Thinking Analyzed
(Riaahiko Okazaki; mmcn 8mm. Apr 82) 1

Changed Nature of U.S.-Japan Security Treaty Diacuaaed
(Nobuo Kurokaua Interview; EKONOﬂIS‘rO, 1 Jun 82) . . . . . . . . . 16

ECONOMIC

Areas of Friction With United Statea Studied
(NIKON KEIZAI SHIMIUN, varioua datea) ............... 23

Finance Hiniatry Plans 5 Percent Budget Cuta in FY 83
(HAINICHI DAILY ms, 20 Jun 82) 41

Japan To Continue ASEAN Aid
(“I“Icut DAILY ms. 19 Jun 82) 0.0.0.0...OOOOOOOOOIOOOOI ‘2

ASEAN "ants EC To Take Bigger Role

(mntclu DAILY ms, 19 Jun 82) M
Briefs

Induatrial Output Decline 105

Farm Output To Riae [55

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Space Dew. lopuent Program in Diapute
(“Imﬂ KOGYO SHINE“, 9 Jun 82) noaaoaoaeoaanaoooooaooooo “6

MIT! Works Out Plan for Nuclear Fuel Cycle
(NIHON mm: sammm. 21 Jun 82) as

JDA To Develop Optical Fiber Guided Hiaaile

(“IRON KEIZAI SHIN, 17 Jun 82) oaaaaaoaaaooaaeooaanocoo 50

m Conilea Report on Future Effect of INS on Society
(«1303:10ch salmon, 5 May 82) .r. 5.1
- a - [III - ASIA - 111 FOUU]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PATTERNS OF STRATEGIC THINKING ANALYZED
Tokyo BUNCEI SHUNJU in Japanese Apr 82 pp 362-374

[First of serialized articles by Hisahiko Okazaki, former JDA councilor and
presently minister to the United States: "What Is Strategic Thinking?"]

[Textl Introduction

0n the subject of Japan's national strategy, for the first time I feel that
somehow the discussion should not end in polemics.

Despite the many postwar debates on defense, with allowances for gains and
losses of strength for both the supporting and opposing arguments, there is
hardly any meeting of the minds. This phenomenon has intrigued me for many
years, even making me wonder if there is some flaw in the democracy of Japan,
but in the course of listening to sociologists and cultural anthropologists,
I have learned that the Japanese people have somewhat of a weak line of
thinking with regard to logical subjects.

From the standpoint of designing and improving an established product, the
Japanese people can be said to be the world's greatest in displaying their
talents, but if they cannot feel with their skin, the Japanese cannot readily
understand; thus, if they are asked to build a structure with logical confor-
mance in a vacant place, they will show tendencies of being perplexed in the
midst of others. Worse yet, if construction is undertaken after a consensus
vote, then it is practically an impossible task.

Japan's defense setup and its supporting doctrines were totally abandoned
with the surrender. and a fresh start was made. Because relations with the
former military were totally severed, the concepts were considered anew. And
regarding war, its time of occurrence, and the course of events, the thinking
was that it may not occur for many years, so a considerable amount of logical
abstract thought became necessary.

And for this, we must backtrack to discuss such points as “what are we defend-
ing?" and "defending against what?" These questions per se are not trouble-
some, but there were tendencies on the one hand to formulate theoretical con-
sensus by dialog, like the Greek philosophers, but on the other hand to first
define an individual political stance and, for its justification, to self-
propagate the structure of "logic."

1
POI 0Fi1C1A1.lEﬂ£(HULY
’ros omou. use omx

Recently there haVe been two situations which have caused me to reanalyze what
is meant to the Japanese by logic.

One situation involved a noted political scientist who shocked me with the
statement: "If Japan cannot furnish the defense effort that is expected by the
United States, it should not agree with the United States on the estimate of
the military situation in the Far East, which is the prerequisite." I asked
him, "In other words, your estimate is that Japan, in its present state, can
muster a defense strength of a size that can counterbalance that of the poten-
tial Soviet threat?" And after partying with him, I was doubly shocked to
learn that this is what he meant. His explanation was that, if such action
were not taken, "the logical adjustment would be gone."

This cannot be thought of as "logical adjustment." Rather, with this sort of
thinking, in the present international situation, an objective Japanese defense
strategy that can be considered to be adequate could never be formulated.

Acknowledging the severity of international relations and lamenting the inade-
quacy of military preparedness because of domestic limitations are phenomena
that have plagued all countries in both ancient and modern times. At the
U.S.—Japan high-level meetings held today, while recognizing the severity of
the situation, Japan has explained that it cannot attain the level expected by
the United States, but in the long run, honestly citing such reasons as the
constitutional limitation, the need for national consensus, and the economic
situation will be healthy for the relationship of trust between the two nations.

he other situation involved a noted economist who remarked: "In my estimation,
Japan's defense budget will eventually reach 1.5 or 2 percent of the GNP, and
as a result I think that Japan's defense system will be in good shape and that
cooperation with the United States will be excellent. However, I shall continue
to emphasize 1 percent of the GNP. Unless a balance is maintained in this
manner, the grip on the defense budget will be lost, leading to unlimited and
huge figures."

Even while reasoning that the appropriate point for achieving balance can be
reached. this individual instead thinks of hanging onto the other party to
achieve a balance for the entire country. While boldly tolerating the spiritual
insult of the accusation that "your position is illogical," made by one who is
for attaining propriety, this individual, would fulfill the role of assuming
the balance for the entire country. This might even be considered to be a

noble attitude; however, by holding on to this view, the concurrence of the
people, which is dependent upon logical adjustment, will never be achieved.

After all. by stating only that which everyone believes to be the whole truth,
national concurrence with objective adequacy will naturally spring forth within
which the brakes can be made, based on true democracy. Such remarks as "truth-
fully. this is the way, but if presented, the public will riot," or "the public
will be fearful of the Soviet Union, and the nation will become like Finland,"
lead to a "sense of balance" because "nothing further should be said," but this
is a mistrust of the people's judgment and a contradiction of the basic rule of
democracy. The late Etsusaburo Shiina had a favorite saying, "0f the people, '

FOIJOFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the wise are foolish and the foolish wise," and the sincerity of the masses
cannot be ignored. By self-righteously manipulating information with an
elitist complex that "the situation is okay because I am an intellectual, but
the others will turn rightist," there is the danger of missing the point.

Even by reviewing the above two situations, the feeling of hopelessness per-
vades on the difficulty of solving problems only through discussions that are
based on objective facts and logical adjustments here in Japan.

As a trial, I'd like to begin with Japanese history and geography, which are the
most basic realities in strategic theory. This means rendering a deliberate
study of Japan's strategic environment by reveiwing Japan's history.

of course, my interpretation of history can lead to various counterarguments,
which I welcome. There will be some common ground, but the discussion will be
from the basic standpoints of history and geography, which no one can avoid
when pondering Japan's security.

Even from the standpoint of the importance of intelligence ("The Nation and
Intelligence," published in BUNCEI SHUNJU), which is my pet theory, this is
the frontal attack. It is true that "if the points at issue are all under-
stood. then it‘s the sane as the issue's being half solved." Thus, if the
objective situation is minutely analyzed and evaluated, its countermeasures
will naturally be formulated.

In studying the big problem of Japan's national strategy, the conventional
methodology is to gain a complete understanding of the most basic subjects,
Japan's history and geography.

The strategic environment of Japan, up until the modern era, was one of
stabilization, which is considered rare in the annals of world history.

But the situation of its Asian neighbors underwent all sorts of changes. As
for tne history of China, the 18th Chronicle accounts for the fall of the Sung
Dynasty, and the subsequent Mongol, Ming, and Manchu dynasties are covered in
the let Chronicle, which repeats the rise and fall of governments. During
that period, aside from the conquest of the country by the gods' chosen
people, said to he in the days of prehistory, Japan was_not once aubjugated

by a foreign invader, and the imperial lineage was never changed. Before the
war, this was historically viewed as being unparalleled in the history of all
nations. and the matter of this being one of the bases of Japan's ultranation-
ullsm is still fresh in my memory.

The premodern era is defined as that period before the occurrence of two large
strategic environmental events. One is China's loss of its dominant role in
the Far East, and the other is, as a result of the incursion of the Western
powers in the Far East, the Western countries' domination of the Pacific Ocean
and Siberia, which until then had strategically been a vacuum.

As for the factors which allowed for peace in Japan as an exception in the
environment of the premodern era, the geographical location of Japan is, with-

FOI‘OFFICIAI.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

out question, prominent; added to this were the peculiar nature of the Chinese
Empire and the role performed by the peculiar ethnicity of the people of the
Korean Peninsula during the same period. I hope to describe these events in
sequence.

An Island Country

As for geographical peculiarities, I shall dispense with such stock descriptions
as Japan's being surrounded by water or hit by many typhoons, which is common
knowledge, but in discussing Japan's geographical peculiarities it would be
instructive to compare the experiences of the Korean people, who closely resemble
the Japanese ethnically, with that of the Japanese people at historically about
the same time on the continent.

To do this, it would be most practical to recount the Mongol invasion, which in
history was the single formidable invasion against Japan.

The Mongol invasion of Koryo was a totally unjust act. for at the time of the
annihilation of Khitan [the Tartars], which lay between the two countries, the
Mongols were allied with Koryo, but after the annihilation of Khitan, the Mongols
ordered Koryo to submit and furnish tributes, and the attitude and actions of

the messenger at the time were extremely insulting, for the Koryo king was not
even treated as royalty. Even so, Koryo was tolerant and maintained peace by
offering large tributes annually, but this was practised only during the period
when the Mongols attacked India and to the west of China and for gold, after
which, in defiance of the incident 6 years earlier, they began the invasion of
Koryo and executed a great massacre. Tokimune Hojo's slashing of the Mongol
envoy may be seen as an outrageous act that flaunted international etiquette,

but if the actions of the Mongols toward Koryo 80 years earlier were accurately
transmitted, it was either to submit and be treated like animals and be pillaged,
or to resort to war. Cornered in a point of no return situation, it was a
reasonable choice to unify public opinion for resistance.

The government of the Koryo regime entrenched itself on Jianghua Island, and

the Mongol forces, which could not wage sea warfare, became disheartened at
conducting a siege for 30 years. But outside of Jianghua Island, the Korean
Peninsula was subjected to violence and pillage by the Mongol soldiers, and for
30 years the people of Koryo were subjected to cruelties that defied description.
According to the record of the invasion of 1252, "The Mongols captured 206,800
men and women, and those to be shot should not be counted. Lands traveled over
will be burned to the ground.“

Citing the above as an example, a South Korean remarked: "Regardless of his
quibblings. a Japanese person is indebted to his country, but this relationship
is lacking for South Koreans. Even in the above situation, the people were
forsaken. It follows that the people's outlook on nationalism will naturally
change. People from different countries will have a history, traditions and,
therefore. nationalism that differ. Dissimilarities vis-a-vis right and wrong
are two separate values, but the Japanese have a bad habit of mixing the two."

The fact that Japan has not even once been subjugated by another race, compared
to the cruelties suffered by the people of the Korean Peninsula, has been the

F!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1kl.lEﬂI(MMLY
basis for the optimistic and easygoing attitude of the Japanese, despite the
severity of international politics.

I have received letters from various people on basic defense arguments, and
these letters indicate that those who hold the deepest fear of the Soviet
threat are the ones who experienced the occupation of Manchuria by the Soviet
Army at the time of the surrender. But because the vast majority of the
Japanese people experienced only the U.S. occupation, their image of surrender
and occupation is a mild one.

"Learning from experience is only for the fool: others will learn from history."
said Bismarck, but in reality what is difficult is not learning from history,
but learning from one's countrymen during the contemporary period.

During the Mongol invasion, the people of Tsushima Island were captured, and

it was related that the women had their palms pierced and were strung alongside
the ships, leading to the conjecture that "mugoi," which means atrocious, was

a homonymous derivation from "Mongoi," or related to the Mongols; however, as
with the experiences in Manchuria, this was not a totally national experience.
Even during the Korean war, when the American and Korean forces were driven to
the beachhead of Pusan, the people in Tokyo hardly reacted, whereas the feeling
of danger was reportedly heightened in northern Kyushu and Yamaguchi Prefecture;
some people regarded this as a throwback to the Mongol invasion. It is probably
true that the memories of a war will linger for many centuries.

The probability of an invading army's being totally annihilated by a typhoon is
really not great, but when historically the only two formidable invasions of
Japan both met such disasters, then it is understandable why the Japanese are
so confident of being lucky. Nationalistic differences exist, just as some
individuals are confident of being lucky while others are not.

South Korea‘s high-level development started at the beginning of the 1970 decade,
and its actual performance up until October 1973 showed astounding_statistics,
such as a GNP which was 20 percent greater than that of the previous year and
inflation of less than 3 percent, but in October the Middle East war and the oil
shock occurred. I recall being deeply struck at that time when a South Korean
bureaucrat remarked, while looking skyward: "The people of South Korea have
never been favored by the gods. These events occurred just when South Korea had
started its high-level development."

I have even heard the remark that South Korea is unlucky in that, had the

Japanese surrender taken place 3 months earlier, South Korea would have been
spared being partitioned.

There is a vast difference with a people who hope for the divine wind to blow
someday. Even now, the Japanese understand the expression of the severity of
the international environment, but they cannot grasp the true feeling. Their
optimism is found in the deep-rooted feeling that "things will turn out right."

At a symposium on the 75th anniversary celebration of the Japan Society in New

York. an American scholar remarked, "The United States is not that vulnerable,
yet feels insecure, whereas Japan is vulnerable, yet shows no insecurity. Hhat

FOI‘OFFKJAI.U821NMLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is the explanation?" I thought his statement truly hit the nail on the head.
The statement made by the Japanese political scientist whom I mentioned earlier
is, unreasonable from the standpoint of the objective assessment of the Soviet
threat's being countered by Japan, but it is also accurate as a statement
reflecting the feeling that "like the Americans, the Japanese people do not
feel the threat of the Soviet Union." Whether or not a challenge can be made
to this statement of feeling is a separate problem.

Compared with the rest of the world, the Japanese people have an extreme lack
of experience. An individual and a state both become wiser with experience,
and the fact that the Chinese and even the South Korean people look down upon
"the Japanese as being iummture" calls for self-discipline.

Yet it can't be helped if one lacks experience, and there's no other way but
to learn from history.

There is no guarantee how long good fortune will continue. and there's no such
restriction that Japan will experience in the future only what has already
occurred in her past. Therefore it is essential to refer to the history of
all ages and countries.

"In the document containing a discussion between Hizennokani Tsutsui and Saemon
Kawaji on the policy toward Russia during the late days of the Tikugawa Shogunate,
with reference to the situation on the Russian entry into Sakhalin it was
written, "There are no precedents on this matter in Japan. There is no other
way but to follow the example of the Tang Dynasty." The example given was

that the Han and Tang dynasties, when weak, adopted a policy of appeasement
with the aliens and, upon becoming strong, conquered them, thereby inferring
that Japan can be friendly only until she gains strength. Even with this sort
of historical theory, Japan was above having a doctrine of expelling foreigners
while operating under a geocentric theory of Japan's being the center because
it had never received any contemptuous act by a foreign country since its
founding.

As for thoughts on strategic theory. the assertion that strategic theory means
the study and interpretation of military history is accepted popularly as the
orthodox way of thinking. Napoleon stated, "One should repeatedly read the
tactics of the great leaders from Alexander to Frederick." Sun Tan and Clause-
witz compiled their historical experiences in abstract form, but in the case of
Clausewitz they were so full of German idealism that on several matters, doubts
such as "some of the ideas are incomprehensible" were expressed by strategists
in later generations.

Even to this day, I have held the belief that politics cannot be theorized or
quantified. Since war certainly is "an extension of politics by another means,?
as Clausewitz stated. it is the same as politics. Although I talk here of dis—
cussing a strategic theory. I have no intention whatsoever of introducing a new
theory, and I only want to mull over and ruminate on war and the environment
surrounding Japan from the strategic viewpoint.

FOII€IWNCJAl.lﬂiB(lVLY
Pax Sina

It is said that the long period of Japanese stability up until the modern era
was attributable not only to the geographical environment but to the interna-
tional order in East Asia. with the Chinese Empire as the focus.

The expression Pax Sina (the state of maintaining peace under Chinese supremacy)
has never been used, but it can be said that the period in which peace was
maintained in Japan and the Korean Peninsula. because it worked effectively,

was far longer than theperiodof effeCtiveness of Pax Romana or Fax Britannica.
and, moreover, was more stable.

The first qualification of Pax Sina was China's overwhelming supremacy. The
magnitude of its land and population, cultural standard stemming from its long
history, political strength, economic strength, and military power overshadowed
any of its neighboring countries. Chinese supremacy gave no room for argument;
unaware of this. some of the roguish countries that were absorbed by the Han
Dynasty, until later years, threw their weight around without knowing their

real ability. thereby remaining in history as examples of ignorance and self-
conceit.

The second qualification was the suzerain—clan relationship peculiar to China;
because of its complexity, requiring specialized research. I shall abstain from
deep involvement. With the various races in the area, China generally stepped
at requiring suzerainty. and as long as China was not threatened, conquest was
not resorted to. Except for a short period, Japan was never subjected to
suzerainty. but the blessing was that China did not favor mounting foreign
expeditions.

When, at the beginning of the Meiji Bra. Japan prohibited the ruler of the
Ryukyu Islands from paying tribute to the Manchu Dynasty, in tears he sought help
from the Hanchus. Manchu Minister to Japan Ho Ju-Chang counseled, "If Japan is
allowed to take the Ryukyus, it will seek Korea next. Right now, Japan is ex-
hausted from waging the Southwest War, and so China will succeed if it inter-
venes." Li Hung-Chang replied, "A country which is absorbed in expeditions to
seek fame will win insignificant tributes from small countries." (Note: Hang
Yun-sheng, "60 Year History of Sino-Japane. Foreign Diplomacy." Same reference
work for Li Hung-chang hereafter.) Even at is time, war between Japan and
China could have occurred if talks between tLe two countries had failed and
China had used force. but China exercised self—restraint and the Ryukyu problem
was settled on the basis of Japan's fait accompli. This was an example of the
organization of Pax Sina.

Nevrrthelcss, the Manchu Dynasty gradually began to lose its neighboring terri-
tory and realized this loss during the final stage of Pax Sina. In 1885. after
the clash between Great Britain and the Soviet Union on the Afghanistan issue.
Great Britain asked for the lease of Keomunto. located south of the Korean
Peninsula, with the intention of bottling up the Russian fleet in Vladivostok.
Asked for guidance by the Korean Government, Li Hung-Chang replied: "That
island is referred to as Arejima. Your country may think nothing of it. but at
one time even Hong Kong had only a few fishermen's huts, while today it is a

7
FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
Hill OFFICIAL “SI-2 ONLV

prominent center commanding a key position in the South [China] See." He told
Korea to decline the request, with the warning that if the lease were thought-
lessly given, Russia and Japan would make similar requests. This judgment was
indeed correct. but then China itself should have been aware of it much sooner.

At any rate, a large country possessing overwhelming strength knows about self-
restraint. If so. then it is a self-evident truth that stable peace can be
maintained.

Prevailing among scholars of international politics is the thinking that an
effectiVe means of maintaining peace is to have a balance of power, but from
way back and up to the present. 1 have doubts as to its applicability to the
present world situation. it is true that there have been periods in which
peace was maintained by a balance of power-~such as in Europe during the 19th
century, Italy during the Renaissance and, according to the Chronicles of Lu,
with the warring States of China, when several equally strong states formed a
confederacy. whenever possible--but in each instance peace was maintained only
for several decades.

A truly long peace la3ts only when there is an overwhelming difference in
strength. like the Pax Romans; I think the postwar Pax Americana was the same
kind of thing. For this reason, 1 have been concerned recently about the
narrowing of the gap in strength between the United States and the Soviet Union.
But let us consider this topic later.

As for a large country's exercising self-restraint, this was not practised con-
sistently in the case of the history of the Han race. Originally the Han race
had its base in the middle reaches of the Yellow River, and from there it con—
quered the different races in all directions and assimilated them. It is a
race that expanded by adding its conquests to its domain.

Ancient China saw its peak in expansionisn with the era of the Han Dynasty.

The Han feudal empire struck at Mo Psi, subjugated Ling Nan, and conquered the
territories where most of the descendants of the Han race presently live. As
for the Korean Peninsula, the northern half was conquered and, instead of being
made a tributary state, was divided into districts and provinces under direct
supervision.

Historical precedents are indeed frightening. The Korean intervention by the
Tang founder was reportedly made in order to revive the district and province
system of the Han Dynasty. In 1882. Chang Pei—lun advocated for an expedition
to the east (conquest of Japan). but at the same time. in a letter to L1 Hung—
chang. he urged the abolition of Korea as a country and its subjection into
districts and provinces. in the manner of the Han Dynasty.

In other words. China of the Han Dynasty was one of the conquering empires
found throughout history, and the only reason the southern half of the Korean
Peninsula and Japan were not conquered was because of the long geographical
distance.

8
FOR'OFFKJAI.USEIDN1N
IN3310ITWCJAL.UGIICNNLY

Resistance of the Korean Race

China's thoughts on the unworthiness of foreign expeditions were established
from around the Sui and Tang eras, when Japan appeared as a unified nation, but
it is not an exaggeration to say that the main reason for the establishment of
this thought was the resistance of the Korean race.

Events during that era can be understood by reading accounts of that period in
the abbreviated 18th Chronicle.

According to Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty, “In the 7th Year of the Great
Achievement, the emperor became a general, recruited soldiers, and attacked
Koryo. Several hundred thousand laborers worked ceaselessly day and night to
ship rice, and the dead piled up like pillows. The masses were destitute, and
for the first time, gangs of robbers operated." The rest was devoted to a
description of the rapid decline of the Sui empire, in the unique tempo of the
abbreviated 18th Chronicle.

The military prowess of the Kokuryo at this time was indeed admirable. General
Eulchinundeok attacked. *hen deceptively escaped; he then lured the Sui forces
deep as far as Pyongyang Castle, and when the battle-weary Sui forces retreated
from the secure Pyongyang Castle and were halfway across the Changjin River,
the general attacked and won a great victory, reducing the expeditionary army
of 305,000 soldiers (reported to be a million) to a were 2,700.

The conquest of Koryo by the founder of the Tang Dynasty was described in the
abbreviated 18th Chronicle as follows: "The expeditionary force captured 10
forts, brought 70,000 prisoners back to Tang, and beheaded lore than 40,000
soldiers in three great battles; but 7,000 of their own troops were lost and
7 or 8 of every 10 horses died, and still the objectives were not fulfilled.
The founder was deeply regretful and remarked that if Wei Cheng were alive,
he wOuld not have approved the expedition." Thus, honor was restored to the
famous lord Wei Cheng. who had previously lost favor.

The founder of the Tang Dynasty was such a great leader chat he is considered

to be the greatest among all the emperors in the history of China. Even in the
abbreviated 18th Chronicle. praises are lavished on him for his achievements,
character, and stature, but added to the conclusion of the chapter on the founder
is the statement: "At the time of the Eastern expedition, taken in his decli-
ning years, he did not heed the admonition of Chu Sui-liang."

Poems dcploring foreign expeditions are found in Tu Fu. The thinking that
foreign expeditions are unworthy was established in China just about the time
of the beginning of genuine international relations between Japan and the main-
land. This again, for Japan, was an extre-ely fortuitous event.

Excellent Defensive Capability

The Koreans, in many respects, are a strange race. First of all, they are an
extremely introverted race, and historically they have never undertaken an ex-
pansionist policy. According to their records, Silla, during the five centuries
after its founding. was attacked by the Japanese on 20 occasions. There was no

9
IN)! (INHCJAI.UEI:(MNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEZONLY

record of any plan by Silla to attack Japan. After the failure of the Mongol
invasion, on the contrary, the country was so heavily ravaged by Japanese
pirates that this was considered to be one reason for the downfall of the Koryo
empire. It was on the defensive throughout, and the only offensive was the
Tsushima Island attack in 1419.

Feelings of grievance were deeply expressed when patriot Park Chung-hi remarked:
"Our 5,000-year history, in a nutshell, is one of conservatism and stagnation.
was there ever a time in our history when we crossed the border to rule others?
This sort of history is fit to be burned."

On the other hand, when it came to defensive war, they demonstrated an amazing
capability.

Ranked alongside the previously described victory gained by Eulchimundeok of
Koryo over the Sui army was the victory gained by General Kang Kan—Chan when
he confronted the invading Khitdn force of 100,000 in the years 1018 and 1019
with the clever strategy of damning the river with cowhide, defeating them with
one swift action and leaving them with only a few thousand sur.ivors. Stated
in terms of Japanese history, it was comparable to the Japan Sea naval battle,
and this significantly decisive victory has remained deep in the hearts of the
Korean people.

Also outstanding for its fighting valor was the Silla army, which confronted
the Tang away for 7 years and survived without yielding victory to the Tang.

What is the explanation for all this? It is probably attributable to the mold
assumed early as a nation from among the various Eastern barbarian countries
and the ability to wage organized resistance against invading forces because

of [the people's] high cultural level, but, as is often quoted in the treatises
and other writings of the great scholar Choi Nam-sun, who drafted the 3-1 de-
claration on the peculiarities of the Korean people, there is something special
about the belief in the purity of a race; in other words, in the exclusion of
other races.

One is probably the difference in language. The languages of the people located
south of China and down to Thailand are of the same strain in tonal consistency
with the Chinese sound, and are therefore easily assimilable with that of China,
whereas the Korean language, like Japanese, has a monotone pronunciation and
cannot be mixed with Chinese. With this sort of people, the Han race would fare
best by banishing them to the northern deserts, like the Huns and the Hongolians,
or, as happened to the Kokuryo people, to deport them to various sections of
China; otherwise, the best solution would be to maintain a suzerain-ti-“utary
state relationship.

0n the other hand. this was a country with a geographical environment indispen-
sable to a part of Fox Sina, and so it was under terms from the standpoint of
international politics in which foreign conquests were unthinkable. The repar-
ations the Kokuryo gained after defeating the Sui army were returned as tribute
to the Sui. as was the case with the reparations Silla obtained on achieving
victory in the Tang-Sills War. The same thing happened with the reparations

10
FOI'OFT1CJAI.USE(3VLY
Vietnam gained when it repulsed the great army of the Mongols. Since an attack
on China meant the conquest of more than 400 provinces and of eventual defeat
and death, the import thing was to reach peace at the earliest moment and to
establish a stable national relationship.

Because of such dangerous conditions, whereby defeat would mean destruction
of the race and a victory for the suzerain-vassal relationship, venturing out-
ward was almost unthinkable.

What Marshal Hannerheim, hero of Finland, stated during the latter part of the
Russo-Finnish War is the same thing: "Cease-fire is the supreme order. If
the Finnish Army collapses, there won't be any cease-fire." A defeat would
spell the destruction of free Finland. whereas the victory gained from heroic
resistance led to the so-called Finlandization. Such a vast difference in the
strength and size of countries can mean a suzerain relationship or the birth
of a form like Finlandization.

Such being the facts. a country having no plan or capacity to wage a foreign
invasion. but on the other hand having the will to fearlessly resist any threat
from the north, lies between Japan and the mainland. What better conditions can
he found for the security of Japan!

I firmly believe that, even if the events have not surfaced in the pages of
history, there have been cases of the Korean race's having saved Japan from
potential danger. If Kokuryo had collapsed and the Sui forces had overrun the
entire Korean Peninsula, imagine what could have happened. Prince Shotoku

said: "To the emperor from where the sun rises. to the emperor to where the

sun sets. 1 send calligraphy. In good health.“ (Wang Yun-aheng wrote that in
defiance to China, Japan said: "oeginning with what appeared in the enterprise
for equal customs.") One could readily imagine the attitude toward Japan taken
by the angry Emperior Yang of Sui when he replied, “The writing of the barbarian
is impudent." Even after victory over the Sui forces, the strong Kokuryo ex-
tended vassal courtesies with tributes in order to maintain peace in the strate-
gic environment of East Asia, whereas Japan's naivete was fraught with danger.

The same thing can he said about the resistance of the Koryo toward Khitan.
Because Khitan was not inferior to the Mongolians as an expansionist country,
the possibility existed that the same thing that happened to the Mongol in-
vasion would occur if the Korean Peninsula had been totally conquered. At that
time, the Toi bandits were connected with the Jurchen tribe along the maritime
province. which had been subjugated by Khitan. The extent of the connection
between the southern drive of Khitan and the T01 invasion was not known, but
Kyushu had been attacked, in the same year and with the flourishing of racial
activities in Northeast Asia the situation was filled with danger, and so it

is said that the Koryo resistance saved Japan.

The collapse of the strategic balance that Japan enjoyed under these conditions
urcurrcd after the Paik Chon River event, and during the 1,200 years up until
the modern era, there were only the 10-year period before and after the Mongol
invasion and the 10-year period of Hideyoshi's expedition to Korea.

11
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NQLY

As Iur the Mongol invasion, a: least two of the conditions for maintaining the
balance with Japan were broken. One was the irrefutable fact that in the 1,200-
year history, this was the only time that a major power did not exercise self-
restraint.

The other reason was that the Korean Peninsula did not fulfill its role as a
buffer state.

Actually, in the history of the Far East, this was the only time that the main-
land China force ever reached the southern section of the Korean Peninsula.

After the defeat at Vaih Chon River, Japan prepared for the Tang invasion by
manning Tsushima, lchigi, and Chikuji with military guards and signal flares,
and building forts in various areas. But after defeating the Paekje forces in
southern Korea, the Tang army went northward to meet and defeat the Kokuryo
forces. after which it was engaged in disposing of Paekje territory. Then the
war between Tang and Silla began; just north of what is today's demarcation
(cease-fire) line, the Sills forces pinned down the Tang forces and thereby did
not permit them to enter the southern part of Korea. As related pieViously,

in the beginning the Tang empire was an ordinary expansionist empire, and there-
fore if Tang had conquered Sills, it is reasonable to imagine that Japan would
have been next. Even today, it is said that there are records on the repairs
of military ships for use by the Tang forces in striking Japan after Paik Chon.
It is said that the battle between Tang and Silla was a propitious event for
Japan that surpassed even the divine winds.

After that, none of the continental forces during the Sung, Khitan. Hing, and
Manchu periods ever reached the southern part of the peninsula. The forces
during the Korean War went almost as far south as the Mongol invasion, and,
like the Koryo during the Mongol invasion, Syngman Rhee's government could not
put up a speedy resistance in the face of overwhelming odds and was driven by
the North Korean Army to the western half of the beach in the south, but after
that, the UN Forces held the beachhead at Pusan and counterattacked.

From this, therefore, [we can see that] if a major power on the continent with
expansionist thoughts or an ordinary major power with no scruples about sending
a foreign expedition should appear and, after the collapse of resistance in the
southern party of the Korean Peninsula, if the forces of that major power should
reach the southern part, the balance in the Far East would collapse and Japan
would be threatened with danger. "hat would then be considered as a matter of
course would remain as a truth in Japan's strategic environment.

Ultimately we return to the strategic importance of the southern half of the
Korean Peninsula. I shall delve into the subject later, but prior to the Russo-
Japanese war, estimates as to whether Japan would truly engage in war with
Russia hinged on one factor. and that was whether Russia would advance to the
southern part of the peninsula. This geographical condition was tied in with
the thinking during the return of Okinawa when the Sato-Nixon joint statement
mentioned; "The security of South Korea is essential to the security of Japan;"
and this is still valid today.

12
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
IN}! 0F!ﬂ€1Al.lh§ElJNlN

Of course, seizure of the southern part of the peninsula does not mean the
destruction of Japan. but the crucial situation for Japan would then begin.
Artunlly. when the continental power is overwhelmingly strong and defiance is
dirlluult. the lass of the southern part of the peninsula as a buffer becomes a
realistic situation, but in such a case, as with the Mongol invasion or after
the Paik Chon event, western Japan should be fortified and the need would arise
for mobilization preparedness throughout the nation. The inauguration of the
police reserve force, predecessor of the Self-Defense Forces, was ordered by
General MacArthur 2 weeks after the outbreak of the Korean war.

Past or present. it is the same, for in the event the naval and air bases on

the southern part of the peninsula should fall into the hands of a nonfriendly
force, then the capacity for air defense for supremacy of the sea, and for
prevention of a landing, and in turn the entire defense setup, which Japan would

have to supplement, would have to undergo a drastic change in both quality and
quantity from that of the present.

Lack of Strategic Thinking

Hideyoshi's dispatch of an expeditionary force to Korea was an example of an
offensive abroad emanating from Japan, and it has no direct bearing on Japan's
defense strategy, which is strictly defensive, so coverage of that will be
omitted until later, but one thing that must be pointed out is that, in the case
of both the expeditionary force to Korea and the Paik Chon event, Japan was
overconfident of its combat capabi; ty, while its strategy was astonishingly
crude; in other words, there was a total lack of intelligence and strategy.

As for the use of Korea, Yukinaga Konishi had wanted to deceive Hideyoshi by
talking at an appropriate place, and Hing supporters had succeeded with their
plot; therefore, from the beginning Hideyoshi was blind, as far as strategic
intelligence is concerned, which was regrettable. But be that as it may, with
only a force of 150.000 troops, his strategy was just to keep advancing in order
to destroy the great Hing empire. Pitifully, this [strategy] lacked policy

and substance. At home, a Japanese force would display its abilities with a
superior field battle or siege, depending on the situation, but in waging a
full-scale war, it placed importance on its fighting capabilities and neglected
intelligence and strategy. At that time, a King spy wrote a report to the
Imperial Court that the Japanese possess dauntless courage, but in all matters
they lack planning ability--an unavoidable situation.

According to historical records, the reason for dispatching a force to the Paik
Chon River was merely, "Since ancient days, when help is sought, it is only
natural to render help." As [this force] was engaging the allied forces of the
great Tang Dynasty and Sills, however, this explanation was obviously naive.

Even on the battle front, without considering the situation, the Japanese met

the Tang army head-on. using the tactic; "If we take the initiative and attack,
the enemy will naturally run away." If it should end in defeat, then it couldn't
be helped; but even afterward, nothing was done to cope with the international
situation. Strengthening the defenses of the western provinces after the defeat
was to be expected, but Japan made no effort to take advantage of the fact that
after the invasion, it took Silla and Tang 5 years to defeat Kokuryo, after which

13
FORlHHﬂC]Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Tang~Silla War raged for 7 years. Japan was in no mood to take advantage
of it. From the standpoint of power politics, the opportunity was there to
mount a pincer attack with Tang against the archenemy Sills, but no sooner had
the Kokuryo been defeated than Dae Kak "00 Kim Kyung Shin of Sills made the
diplomatic move of offering huge gifts as tribute to Japan, which was so
flattered that it abandoned its peninsula policy.

The Strategy of Fulfilling One's Duty

The end result was that Japan got a respite when Sills and Tang fought each
other, and since it had maintained friendly relations with both Sills and Tang,
diplomatically the mOVes were said to be excellent, but it is hard to believe
that decisions were based on deep thought. In other words, after that, Sills
won in the Tang-Sills war, received an imperial decree from Emperor Hanan, had
its national boundary establisfzd south of the Ta Tung River, and no longer had
to kowtow to Japan. Silla negl cted maintaining relations with Japan, whereupon
Japan became infuriated and prepared to send an expedition. The expedition was
abandoned after mobilization, but if the expedition had been sent, it would
have encountered trouble, because the Tang-Sills relationship was one of a
honeymoon. and the disturbance at An Lu Shan had been quelled, on top of which
the relationship with the Tang could have been ruined.

When the power relationship is to Japan's advantage and the other country
blunders, Japan is gleeful and does not send an expedition. But if there is a
turnabout in the power relationship and the other country assumes an overbear-
ing attitude, then Japan gets irked and wants to attack. There's no estimate
of the situation and no strategy, but only frightfully naive thinking.

It's a wonder that Japan has lasted for 1,200 years. Such a history would be
unthinkable with a country having a tough international environment. Even
today, this sort of historical tradition must be in the background of concepts
that crop up periodically vis—a-vis the building of Japan's strategy, which

is centered on domestic affairs and is unrelated to the objective military
balance in the environs of Japan.

It is pointed out that, in general. the fault withthe former military of Japan
was in not having the Anglo-Saxon type of strategy of emphasizing intelligence.
hut in adopting the Ploysen-type strategy of the execution of duty. In other
words, instead of fighting after determining whether victory was attainable.
the strategy involved how best to execute one'a duty with the given military
strength. The details will be omitted here. but during the Pacific "at, be-
cause of the utter disregard for the differences in the combat strength of the
opposing forces and in the supply capabilities, several tens of thousands of
competent soldiers participated in thoughtless battles in the execution of
their duties and were killed.

In retrospect. the lack of regard for objective analysis may already have been
present as part of the thinking even at the beginning of the Pacific Har--"that
of crossing the Rubicon": this is attributable not only to the Ploysen influence
after the Meiji era. but possibly also to the Japanese race's being nurtured in
the favorable environment of an island country, to its being uncommonly inex-

lb
FOR'OFFNJAI.USE(NHLY
pvrlonccd compared with the [rest of the] world, and to the naivete stemming
therefrom. which led to disinterest in foreign intelligence, and which in a
bigger sense resulted in a lack of strategic thinking.

It is said: “The world's strongest military force is one which consists of
American generals, German officers. and Japanese noncommissioned officers."
Along with complimenting the average height of the Japanese people, this state-
ment is critical of the lack of strategic thinking based on intelligence--even
worse than the Germans in this respect-and therefore warrants self-disciplining.

(This series represents the writer's personal views and in no way reflects
the views of the government.)

Strategic Significance of the Korean Peninsula

Sui

Kokuryo
Paekje

Silla

Tang

Kokuryo
Paekje

Silla

. Yalu River

- 10. Tuman River
11. From Shanung Peninsula
12. Tang

l3. Silla

' 14. Khitan

15. Jurchen

l6 . Koryo

. 17. T01 Bandits
18. Yuan (Mongols)
l9. Koryo (Yuan)
20. From Jiangnan
21. PRC

22. North Korea
23. ROK

  
         

i
i “(5) Almse-es¢

COPYRIGHT: Bungei Shunju
Ltd 1982

9510
080: 6105/112

15
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂChULll§B(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY JAPAN

CHANGED NATURE OF U.S.-JAPAN SECURITY TREATY DISCUSSED
Tokyo EKONOHISTO in Japanese 1 Jun 82 pp 26-29

[Interview with Nobuo Kurokswa, Representative of the Foreign and Domestic
Policy Research Institute: "The Nature of the U.S.-Japan Security System Has
Changed"; date and place not given]

[Text] The Reagan military expansion line is developing and
the USSR will not yield an inch-—it seems the danger of var
continues to increase. In this situation, Nobuo Kurokawa
points out that the road Japan should take in the face of

the qualitative changes in the U.s.-Japan security system is
to establish an independent defense concept based on disarma-
ment. Kurokawa was born in Kyoto in 1916. In 19b3, he
graduated from the Army Academy. At the end of the war, he was
army staff officer with the Sumatra Airborne Division. Since
1953, he has conducted research in international politics and
Japan's foreign relations and security policies.

What Japan Should Take Note 0f

Interviewer: The theory which permeates the Reagan military expansion line--
that of Japan and the United States sharing a military role-is popular. The
pressure from the United States has become fairly strong; how do you understand
the present situation?

Kurokawa: U.S. Secretary of Defense Ueinberger visited Japan in April and left
behind rather strong statements insisting on fulfillment of the promise that
Prime Minister Suzuki made regarding the sealanes. We cannot be silent any
longer. It is necessary to reconsider thoroughly at this time Japan's previous
pasture of "yes sir, yes sir." That feeling is extremely strong at this time.
From the perspective of military strategy. a second look at the Security Treaty
is necessary.

In the long run, I want the people to know that Japan has not been carried one-
sidedly by the United States. My basic understanding is that we should take a
hard independent look at the international situation, especially the inter-
national military situation, and not make our judgment from the position of
having relied on the United States for everything.

16
FOI‘OFFNJALIIHEONIN
FIJI‘OIWWCJAI.U§II(MVLY

Interviewer: When the international military situation is looked at, U.S.-
Soviet competition in nuclear arms development is still the greatest point.

Kurokawa: Frankly speaking, I have a feeling of crisis that the danger of war,
whether limited or total, is little by little becoming a reality. I think the
Reagan administration is an administration we should be wary of. His policies
have changed very little from the time of his presidential election campaign
until his annOuncement of plans for a military buildup in October; he had in—
tently emphasized the nuclear gap with the USSR, but since then it can be seen
that he has toned down the emphasis on the nuclear gap.

For example, we can look at the Laroque report carried in the newspapers in
January of this year. In short, my analysis is that the Reagan administration
does not truly think there is a nuclear gap, but rather that the Reagan admin-
istration's aim is nuclear superiority and that it takes the position that it
can deal with either a limited or a total nuclear war. I think that the United
States, of course, and the whole world can see that the United States has
nuclear superiority.

l visited expert research agencies in East and West Europe both last year and
the year before in order to examine the "nuclear awareness" in both the Eastern
and Western blocs. I also met the director of the NATO information agency

and the former NATO military commander, and toured various U.S. strategic re-
search institutes. The result I obtained there was that in the 80's there is

a definite nuclear balance between the United States and the USSR, and that

the deterrent capability will not collapse.

Despite such recognition, if the Reagan administration does develop some 17,000
new nuclear weapons over the next 10 years, it seems that the danger of a
partial or full-scale nuclear war draws nearer moment by moment.

In terms of Reagan's understanding, the active deployment of Soviet intermediate-
range missiles and submarines around 1985 will be the most critical point, and

at that time the U.S. Pershing II and missile deployment will not be completed.
Consequently, I think Reagan understands with a sense of crisis that this is

the best opportunity for the USSR to start a war.

At that point, with a strongly unified West, he will gradually try to press
hard for completion of the encirclement of the USSR by the West. It can be
said that his aim is to diminish the USSR's desire for military expansion and
to make the USSR abandon its desire for military expansion.

Interviewer: A movement calling for the unilateral character of the U.S.-Japan
security [system] to be rectified and made bilateral has appeared in both the
United States and Japan. The danger that Japan will be pulled into part of

the U.S. anti-Soviet nuclear defense strategy is increasing. Hasn't Japan's
role in the U.S.-Japan security [system] changed qualitatively?

Kuroknwa: Considered from the Reagan administration's position, in a situation
like the present. in which there is excessive nuclear stockpiling and the U.S.-
Cuviet mood for confrontation is increasing, the United States, after all, will
think about the security of its own territory first. Then, the result of the

17
FKMRCHWNCIAI.USEINHUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

U.S. attempt to avoid becoming a nuclear target of the USSR will be for the
United States to plan the dispersion of nuclear strikes and to form a plan to
bring about the isolation of the USSR. I think this is the most common stra-

tegy.

In the past, the military target of primary interest to the USSR was NATO.
Because of that, since the time of the Berlin blockade. the United States
strengthened its posture of lavishing military aid if war should break out
in Western European countries. It could be called excessive. Now, however.
the greatest interest for the USSR is an attack on the U.S. mainland.

When one thinks about that. from the viewpoint of the U.S. defense against the
USSR, the Pacific Coast is open and there is no defense line. No one has yet
clearly said so. but perhaps for the Pentagon it would be a grave threat if
five Soviet nuclear submarines were quietly submerged off the U.S. western
Pacific Coast-~it seems they are doing so now. Moreover, because of such
short range. SLBH's, launched only 200-300 kilometers away, would reach the
U.S. mainland. Within 7-8 minutes. they could be dropped on the West Coast or
the East Coast; there is no defense for this. If five or six submarines each
launched an HIRV, the entire United States would be destroyed in an instant.

Assuming I were a responsible person in the Pentagon, this would in fact be

the greatest threat and would cause apprehension. Japan's politicians and
Defense Agency personnel have to look adequately at U.S. defense strategy.

The United States has such a major weak point. Therefore. I want it quickly
inferred that since the U.S.-Japan security [system] has qualitatively changed,
the sense of value of U.S.-Japan security has changed very much both for

Japan and the United States.

Blockade of Straits Possible
Interviewer: How do the Japanese defense authorities see this?

Kurokawa: I think that recognition of this is practically nil. Such a concept
will not come into exiatnece. That is because Japan's thinking is that. as in
the past, Japan will be supported militarily by the United States. Consequent-
ly. the Defense Agency and Self-Defense Forces say, "Who do you think is
responsible for Japan's 37 years of peace?" In short. they impudently say

this because we have clung to the U.S.-Japan security [system] and, at the

same time. because of the Self-Defense Forces.

It is tnhoo to admit the qualitative changes in the U.S.-Japan security [system].
because the reasons for the existence of basic self—defense existing in U.S.-
annneso ties would be lost under the cloak of such an immovable concept.

ﬁenerally speaking, the present-day Self-Defense Forces cannot be trusted. Both
senior officers and younger men in the Self-Defense Forces come to my place,

and I tell them. "Keeping in mind Japan's geographical features. for example.
keeping in mind the Japan Sea, have you ever independently [considered] any
developments even once, hypothesizing the use of weapons suited to these
features? It is no good ignoring this and trying to barely defend Japan with

18
FOIiDFFKJAl.USE(M§LY
1.8. weapons. Likewise, I will not believe you until you want to make such
requests, because they are necessary for our own defense of our country."

Interviewer: It is said that the U.S.-Japan security [system] is more harmful
than beneficial. Concretely speaking, is there any danger that Japan will be
taken into the U.S. anti-Soviet nuclear encirclement net?

Kurokawa: This is what Weinberger said during his visit to Japan. We have
started to blockade three straits (Soya, Tsugaru, and Tsushima) besides the
sealancs. I think that if a tense situation occurred in the Mideast or Europe
between now and 1985, perhaps the United States would make strong demands,

in all seriousness, for a blockade of the three straits.

The strait with the strongest possibility of being blockaded is Says. This is
the shortest course to the United States for Soviet warships and submarines.
Likewise, conversely, Shishirita, Reibunto and the northern edge of Hokkaido
are topographically easy for the USSR to cover. If these were blockaded. the
Soviet Pacific Fleet would be completely useless strategically. Such a hypo-
thesis reflects a grave threat to the Soviet Union on the eastern front.

Therefore, for Japan to carelessly participate with the United States in shutting
down the Soya Straits is nothing else than expressing hostility to the USSR.

This must be avoided. The United States will not hesitate to do it on the
strength of U.S.-Japan security.

Interviewer: But how do you think Japan should respond?

Kurokawa: I think the U.S.—Japan security [system] has to be done away with
shortly. Moreover, I feel strongly that if U.S.-Soviet nuclear military ex-
pansion competition progresses feverishly, the harm from the U.S.-Japan security
[system] will increase much more than the benefits. I think that as soon as
possible in the near future, we should do away with the provisions of the
U.S.-Japan security [system] to the extent that they relate to military aspects.
and that we should change to our own individual defense as an independent
nation.

in order to do that. we will faithfully defend the pacifism of Japan's consti-
tution by developing a "hedgehog" defense with Japan's independent self—defense
structure on the firm basis of Japan's position in relation to geopolitics.
Likewise, in order to prevent the nuclear destruction of the Japanese race,
Japan itself has to politically create and substantially possess a "sense of
self-defense" that is not dependent on the power of a foreign country. Since
even the format of a special defense would be fine, I think Japan ought to have
a defense structure of its own.

I made frequent speeches, especially about policies relating to security ques-
tions. for about 8 1/2 years as a policy adviser to the late Prime Minister
Masnyushi Ohira. When I met Ohira for the very first time in 1973, Ohira said,
“I don't have much confidence in myself concerning Japan's defense policies.
Won't you write something about that without any scruples?“ And so I wrote
“Theory of New Japan's Self—Defense."

19
F03‘0FFKJA1.USE¢NNLY
"JR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From that time on, I have consistently thought that a self-defense which does
not know whether it is under 0.8. direction or is a mercenary soldier is iso-
lated from the people. If the Self-Defense Forces hypothesize a self-defense
wnr within Japanese territory, they cannot consider it cut off from the people.

During the Vietnam war, I spent some time in Indochina and investigated the

war in detail. The Japanese people should have the strength of those Viet-
namese to resist through self-defense. Since I have habitually felt that we
could not fight off the mighty power of the USSR unless we were to bind Japan's
self—defense to such resistance. I wrote that. This was in no way a foreign
policy position like that of Mssatsugu Ishibashi of the Japan Socialist Party,
nor was it a comprehensive policy.

We have to be wary of the world policies of a strong, intimidating country
like the Soviet Union. On account of that, we must somehow make Japan a
"hedgehog." That is my fundamental thinking.

Emphasis on Three Principles of Denuclearization

interviewer: You say that we must abandon the U.S.-Japan security [system] in
terms of its military aspects, but looking at the present political movements
in both Japan and the United States isn't early realization of that difficult?

Kurokaws: Yes, and precisely because it is a period in which Japan—U.S.
economic friction has heated up. If there were a time when both could make
clear judgments, even though Japan would bring up the issue of doing away with
U.S.-Japan security, the United States would say, "Alright, let's do away with
it." But there is a tense atmosphere over various problems, starting with
economic problems: moreover, to start talking about doing away with it at a
time when Reagan has clearly included Japan in 0.5. world strategy would rub
U.S. sentiment the wrong way.

Therefore. through what kind of process and procedures would Japan do away with
the Security Treaty and get approval for its position? That would be extremely
hard work for Japan. Since the reaction from the United States would be ter-
rible if Japan negotiated from a posture similar to that of the Socialist Party.
making demilitarized neutrality its objective, perhaps no one will take such a
bold course.

In such a situation, the best way to avoid a reaction from the United States
would be for the Japanese Government to fortify itself and negotiate with the
United States on the grounds of the three principles of denuclearization. Do-
ing so would let the Soviet Union know that no nuclear weapons are placed in
Japan and, in turn, would soften the Soviets' viewing Japan with hostility.

interviewer: As the dangers of nuclear war increase, the grassroots anti-
nuclear movement has become popular both in Europe and the United States as
well as in Japan. There is the viewpoint that these movements "benefit the
Kremlin."

Kurokawn: i would never underestimate them. There is evidence that not only
the intellectuals but. through a natural development. ordinary citizens, es-
pecially in Europe, feel strongly about the danger of nuclear war. On the

20
FOIIOFFKJAI.USIZONLY
other hand, the government frowns because it is a movement which interferes
with U.S. world policy, especially the 1 1/2 policy (commit military power on
the basis of l for a full-scale war, 1/2 for a local war). Nevertheless, the
voice of this grassroots movement has grown louder, even in the United States.
It is a movement in which Japan should originally have taken the lead, but the
LDP government went around with its hands tied behind its back regarding the
movement because it was wary of offending the United States, since Japan's
reliance on the United States is so great. I think it is a movement which
should be evaluated.

That is to say, i don't think the actual effect of this series of movements on
disarmament will have that great an influence on international politics, and
in particular on U.S.-Soviet politics.

The more 1 study the UN Disarmament Conference and the Geneva Disarmament
Conference, the more i cannot help but have a feeling of powerlessness in the
proposition Japan will put to the United Nations (a proposal developed by
Japan's committee for drawing up a proposal-headed by Chairman Zentaro Kosaka--
of the United Nations Association of Japan, Inc). however, we are still com-
pelled to do something. Moreover, I think we will make an appeal on the
authority of the UN conference, but we are repeatedly discussing how to give

a place in the proposal to the antinuclear voices and grassroots citizens'
voices and how to let these voices take root at the disarmament conference.

Interviewer: 0n the one hand, the U.S.-Soviet arms expansion race causes the
economic burden to increase, but from the economic viewpoint. isn't calling for
a halt completely out of the question?

Kurokawa: That is right. First of all, the USSR has not such inclination. I
tnink that in this century there is the possibility that the USSR's internal
contradictions will explode. However, it is not possible to apply pressure .
from outside and force Soviet policy to change. There can be no hope except
for a collapse because of internal contradictions. If outside pressure is to
be applied, there is no other way than to let the people feel hungry one by
one.

Consequently, as China pointed out, no one could understand what Reagan was
doing when he easily lifted the food and grain embargo against the USSR.
Actually. what he has done has been irrelevant and inconsistent from start
to finish.

If he feels the USSR is a threat, why doesn't he move in a direction that will
allow the Soviets to invest large amounts of money in "Gosplan" (USSR Planning
Committee) and not make them invest in military expenditures? This is not
something that had been unsaid until China pointed it out. It hardly needs to
he said by China; we have been saying that for a long time.

Start Nith Possible Disarmament

Interviewer: In the 20 April issue of EKONOHISUTO, Hiroyuki Maruyama, a re-
searcher on military questions, analyzed U.S. military thinking (Transformed

21
INDR‘OFIICJAI.IEHE(HULN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

".3. Military Thinking") and pointed out that Reagan's aim is to gain victories
in battles with the USSR one at a time in a long-term limited war not leading
to an all-out war. and to try to destroy the strategic balance. In that case.
various options, ranging from a nonnuclear conventional war to a limited—
threater nuclear war, are being hypothesized.

Kurokawa: That is the logic behind both countries' constantly escalating both
qualitatively and quantitatively. It is natural to think that war would change
from a conventional war to a nuclear war. In considering disarmament, that
possibility is greatest in Europe.

If a conventional war occurred in Europe. there are tactical nuclear weapons

in the regions where the Soviets would make their advance. If those tactical
nuclear weapons were about to be captured, those weapons most certainly would

he fired before that happened. If there are tactical nuclear weapons and cruise
missile bases when the Soviets advance, they will most certainly be fired. be-
cause they cannot be pulled back. The strategy considered by France's Hitter-
rand was a problem. After all. the Haginot Line was broken through in such a
manner. At that time, retreat was possible because there were no nuclear
weapons.

Now, however, nearly 5.000 nuclear weapons have been placed in West Germany.
When that many are placed in the small area of west Germany. they cannot help
but fire the nuclear weapons, since they would be there should the Soviets
charge in. Therefore. a war would occur most easily in Europe.

What I think is most interesting about Europe's disarmament is that the reason
for it is the excessive military concentration there. To lessen the possibil—
ity of war in Europe. the advance capability of conventional forces would be
pulled back to European Russia. And in exchange for that, NATO troops would
return to their own countries.

In short, when one tries to control a certain region. one cannot control it
simply with nuclear military might. In the final analysis. one occupies a
region with conventional military forces first and then takes control. This

has no: changed even today. The specific characteristic of nuclear power and
the specific characteristic of nuclear military power are that they can control
by the use of a threat. A threat as a threat is one kind of power. but although
that threat is advanced, this doesn't mean that definite control would begin.

A large advance capability accompanied by tanks and a conventional-war capa-
bility are still the basis.

Consequently, the start of a war in Europe wOuld surely be a conventional strat-
egy. The sudden firing of nuclear weapons would be impossible. That is be-
cause firing nuclear weapons first would invite isolation by world governments.
Therefore. the Harsaw Pact Organization and NATO would be dissolved simultan-
cously. At the same time, the 15,000-man Soviet divisions stationed in East
Germany and Czechoslovakia should be pulled back once and for all.

1r this were done, since the threat of ground troops alone would not be that
great for the Heat. the United States would also say let's withdraw. I am
proposing that this should he done first; and then shall we start real disarma-
ment?

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Shimbunsha 1982

9400

(:30: 41051113 22
roa omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC JAPAN

AREAS OF FRICTION HIT“ UNITED STATES STUDIED
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SRIMBUN in Japanese 30 Apr, 1, 2, 6, 5, 7 May 82,
[30 Apr 83 p 1]

[Excerpts] Five "Explosive" Crises: Unemployment Rate, Market Share, Influ-
ential Enterprises Pinched, etc...

Textiles, steel, color televisions, atuomobiles, semiconductors-although the
list of items has changed one after the other since the early seventies, the
source of Japan-v.8. friction is never-ending. when attempts are made to
track when and under what conditions these frictions over export industries'
goods occurred, five crises come to the surface.

First Crisis: 7 Percent u.s. Unemployment Rate

Unemployment is high in the United States and the trade deficit with Japan is
large. Moreover, when the Japanese economy grows relying on exports, 0.8.
dissatisfaction increases. Concerning the 7-year period from 1975 to 1981,
in examining v.3. irritation by means of three indexes, there were two peaks;
and in that period, there appeared strong “.8. demands of Japan concerning
individual products (See Figure l)

The problem of dumping of color televisions and steel appeared in the period
of the first irritation in 1976 and 1977. Then, in the present period of
irritation, beginning in 1980, friction over automobiles, semiconductors and
communications equipment revived and came to the fore.

The fact that the 0.3. unemployment rate reached 7 percent and the slump
reached serious proportions is the common ground in the periods of increased
u.s. irritation with Japan. Although the trade deficit with Japan is large
and Japan's economy has grown by relying on exports, that alone is not the
reason for 0.8. demands of Japan to become harsh. It is the U.S. unemploy-
ment rate which holds the key. "hen-unemployment jumps up, dissatisfaction
with Japan explodes.

The Japanese government and business world hope that "if 0.8. business
improves and the unemployment rate drops, the harsh treatmmnt of Japan will
weaken considerably," and there is a basis for that hope.

23
FOR10FFEJA1.USE(MVLY
Key:

14.

16.
17.

H DI! {WI-11 1N. I'va' UNI \'

' deem

_~_;3‘)
Q
w

ii?

(9.72,

-I

m
..

Jaw-5m”. x3 rm 2-3
' . t . .2 . «3:9an v
seas-5338.»: .wcw:

<.

345‘ Bi

\
A

l
v
nttlb
anti
IIII
TiBT
vyzv
menu
$>tw
Big:
III.:
“in
in
‘3
I

MW\\%H§E¥.SCKSQ\Mm .

v °§3FMINHS (
3

H
I
P
9
ﬂ
I
I
5
M
g

ﬁnu>ﬂlﬁlﬂlhll

3%
aa

a:

.mmmsmmum

3(5):“: 0:—

:n(¢:;eza:éxmkzr2§‘

tnﬁgi

'; .
m

 

Figure 1: Degree of American Irritation with Japan

0.8.: Ford Administration, Carter Administration, Reagan Administra-
tion.

Japan: Hiki Administration, Fukuda Administration, Ohira Administra-
tion.

Degree of irritation with Japan

Degree of irritation with Japan

1975, 1976, 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, 1982

Start of 0.8. Color TV Industry Protection Committee

Frequent occurrences of U.S. steep dumping lavsuits

Formation of 0.8. Semiconductor Industry Association

Consecutive beginnings of color television production in 0.8.

Start of steel-triggered pricing system

Regulation of Japanese automobiles proposed by “AH President Fraser.
Decision to regulate passenger car exports to United States to 1.68
million.

Japanese made 66 K RAH holds 70 percent share of 0.5. market

SIA demands USTR regulations for Japan

1) degree of irritation with Japan is comprised of three indexes--
U.S. unemployment rate, ratio of Japan-0.8. trade income/expenditure
balancesheet to (Japan's) nominal GNP, and the degree of Japanese
economic growth's export reliance; 2) the dispersion of costs of the
various periods is sought based on the average of the period (1975-81)
for the various indexes, the range of change is standardized and the
figures are given the same Height; 3) the graph's zero line curve
indicates the average degree of irritation for the period.

2h
FOR OFF1C1A1.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Second Crisis: 15 Percent Share in United States

At the time the U.S. home appliance industry's labor and management formed
the "U.S. Color TV Industry Protection Committee" and launched a counterst-
tack against Japan (September 1976), the share (market share) held by
Japanese-made color televisions in the United States jumped from 15.7 percent
in 1975 to 30.1 percent in 1976. Since the time when automobiles reached a
16.6 percent share (1979), labor and management in the U.S. automobile
industry joined hands in regulating imports of Japanese automobiles; and
when Japan and Europe's combined steel share grew to 17.8 percent (1977). a
case against dumping was made.

Agreement has been reached to allow passenger car exports to the United
States-which had been regulated not to exceed 1.68 million cars since 1980-
"to be raised 16.5 percent, the amount of increase in U.S. demand above the
1.68 million, in 1981 and after." "This may be the upper limit of Japanese
goods' share permitted by the United States.” This is the impression of
Katsuji Kawamata, chairman of Nissan Motor Co Ltd, who has been familiar
consistently with the United States ever since he began handling passenger
car exports to the United States for the first time after the war in 1958.

The history of the export of color televisions, steel and automobiles to the

United States has taught us that when the U.S. share exceeds 15 percent, be
ready for friction.

Third Crisis: Export Rate of 40 Percent

Besides the increase in the share of the U.S. market, the list of items re-
sulting in friction up to this time, without exception, has accompanied an
abnormal increase in the degree of export reliance. The degree of export
reliance for various products at the time when friction originated (the ratio
exports occupy in total production) was at its highest level for all pro-
ducts--steel was at 38.3 percent (1977); color televisions, 67.1 percent
(1976); automobiles, 49.1 percent (1979).

In 1977, Hirokichi Yoshiyama, chairman of Hitachi, Ltd, (at the time, he was
president) who fought desperately as the chairman of the Electronic Indus-
tries Association of Japan with the color television dumping problem, ex—
plained as follows: "Since Japan alone had the capability in reserves to

supply the table-model portable color televisions which had begun to be sold
in the United States, the export ratio increased." The result of the two
oil crises was that small to medium-size vehicles which do not consume much
gasoline became popular; the same was true of passenger cars.

However, such "special circumstances" do not have much persuasive power in
United States. It was interpreted that "because Japan directs the majority
of its production to exports, it is, in effect, exporting unemployment."
(UAR President Fraser)

Four Crisis: Business Slum for U.S. Enterprises

25
IWJR OMINCJAI.IH5EZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm products over uhich trade friction has come into the open, there are
many Instances of powerful 0.5. enterprises reaching a management crisis,
such as Chrysler. At the time of the case against steel dumping in 1977,

the number two 0.8. steel manufacturer, Bethlehem Steel, had a severe deficit
end at the time of the color television lawsuit, Zenith, a top 0.8. manufac-
turer, was in such an emergency situation that it laid off one-fourth of its
employees.

0n the other hand, no friction has been experienced in V'l'R's, motor hikes or
calculators, although a rather high share of the 11.8. market is held, and the
export ratio is high. (See Figure 2) The col-Ion bond is that no powerful
enterprises in the United States which would be affected can be found. On

account of this, these nonfriction products have a rather high export share
and ratio compared to the friction products.

7572L1)._______
illllllﬂﬂlﬂto‘a7twlt!

7)”-”‘E{5K\)\\\\\%g
8) xx“. 0)

“5213* “

 

(14) mm lecture—wows. ms
um.“ cumsmuacmmw.
3-.“ I “155"" ‘ MI ‘09:?
man rmzmnmertu.

1. Figure 2: Important Industry Products‘ Share of 0.8. Market and
Export Ratio

2. Share of 0.8. market as a percentage
3. Motor bikes
4. Group of nonfriction items
5. Calculators
6. Group of friction items

7. Color televisions (1976)

8. Steel (1977)

9. Cameras

10. Hatches

ll. Automobiles (1979)

12. IC's (1977)

13. Export ratio of Each product as a percentage

14. Calculated on quantitative base for various products. Trade friction
items are listed as they were in the year the friction occurred;

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nonfriction items are as they were in 1981. The share for some of the
items was estimated by NIKON KBIZAI SHIHBUN; steel includes the
European portion.

The opinion of Bishiro Saito, chairman of Shin Nittetsu, regarding the steel
industry, which has reached the stage of live and let live after a 10—year
period of friction, is: "Aside from whether or not the 0.8. steel industry's
slump is due to the influx of Japanese-produced steel, from the viewpoint of
Japan-0.8. relations up until this time, we must export with consideration
for our counterpart's situation."

Fifth Crisis: Invasion into Strategic Fields

The trade friction which has continued in steel, color televisions and auto-
mobiles for the present has focused on the form of artificially "managing"
the friction finally with such measures as regulating the amounts. However,
it is the view of Yuji Hasuda, chief researcher at the Economic Laboratory
of the Machinery Promotion Association that: "If exports are simply
moderated, future friction cannot be resolved."

The friction products have changed to more strategic, high-technology fields.
Besides this, since the tempo of technological innovation is extremely fast,
there is a great possibility that the ultimate situation will be one in which
they will receive a crushing blow and be destroyed if they lose in the compe-
tition with Japan.

It is semiconductors which have already reached the combustion point as the
number one "new type of friction." IC's at: nor only the bearer of the
electronics revolution embracing the whole of production, but are strategic
technological commodities deeply connected wihh national defense, satellites
and aviation. The reason the 0.8. national military establishment is asking
for exercise of the provisions of the 0.5. commerce law and national security
with regard to Japanese-made semiconductors and is trying to curb imports is
perhaps because it is extremely afraid that Japan will gain supremacy in

this field.

Moreover, taking ultra LSI's as an example, because it is necessary, if
carried to the extreme, to reinvest plant and equipment for every step in-
crease in the degree of integration, it would be difficult to resurface if
the industry once falls because of this investment cycle. It is possible to
continue production with supersnnuated facilities if one is talking about

steel or automobiles, but this is not possible in the high-technology fields
where the tempo of technological innovation is fast. Therefore the competi—
t ion is f ierce .

The list of high-technology products, such as computers, aircraft, bio-tech-
nology and the like, which are seen as following semiconductors, have a high
strategic character, and it may be said that they possess the almost perfect
element for becoming the products of new friction.

27
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR (ll-1"" 'IAL USE ONLY

[1 May 82 p 1]

[Excerpts] Bitter Experience with "Curve Ball" Barriers; Out of Pear of
Retaliation, Difficult To Complain

Within the protective measures surrounding the domestic market, if tariff
barriers are spoken of figuratively as the "straight ball," then nontariff
barriers are the habitual curve bell.

Perplexed by Criticism?
Third-Class Hail (Postal Law)

There are publishing companies which cannot use this lowbcost system because
they would have to print the wording of the third-class permit on both the
front and back of the publication. ("Trade and Investment Barriers" in
Japan by the 0.5. Chamber of 0mmnrca and Industry)

The explanation of the Hinistry of Posts and TelecoI-Imications Postal Bureau
Business Office is: "Even the u.s. postal regulations are rather complicated.
We do not consider there is discrimination against foreign publishers, and
although it is said that Japan's regulations are nontariff barriers, we
consider that is a desultory comment."

The third-class mail permit standards are prescribed by postal law and postal
regulations. There are many points on which foreign publishers are request-
ing changes, and one of those changes is the method of showing the permit.
They want to have stickers or stamps allowed in addition to a printed permit,
as in the United States. That is because if it is printed especially for
sale in Japan, the cost is too high. whether or not the permit is received
greatly influences the price of the publication. Por example, if a 100 gram
publication obtains a third-class permit, the cost is 28 yen; but if not, it
is 170 yen.

Office for Promotion of Treatment of Problems and Complaints for Open Market
(0T0)

"We have to give our names, addresses, everything. If one complains careless-
ly and is retaliated against. one's standing in Japan, built up with effort,
collapses overnight. It is possible for the 0T0, set up to eradicate non-
tariff barriers, to become, in fact, a nontariff barrier. (0.8. enterprise

in Tokyo)

The explanation from 0T0, the Economic Planning Agency's International Economy
First Section, is: "If the name is unknown, we cannot make contact even if
the complaint is handled. A public office should not retaliate, and we do

not think they do. On the whole, results are being obtained."

On 31 January this year, the government set up 0T0 as one measure for
eliminating trade friction. It is housed in the Economic Planning Agency,

28
FIII(HWWC1AI.lEﬂ!(HVLY
FOR 0F?1(1Al.USE(MVLY

and it has set up desks in 11 ministries and agencies. Complaints are coming
in at the rate of 12—13 per month.

"Accessories" Hon‘t Pass?

Imported Cars (Drugs, Cosmetics and Medical Instruments Act and ﬂihh Pressure
Gas Regulations)

"In September last year, when I tried to import a Ben: from West Germany,
Narita customs said the first-aid kit and fire extinguisher attached to the
Benz could not pass customs. Because I had heard the government had set up
0T0, I telephoned them. But they replied arrogantly and did nothing." (Mr
A, a foreign car importer)

The explanation from the Ministry of Finance, Customs and Tariff Bureau,
Import Section: "The automobile passed customs, but since Mr A doesn't have
the necessary permits for two items in the first-aid kit, such as adhesive
plastic, and for the fire extinguisher, it still remains in a bonded area at
Narita."

Permits for the import sale of pharmaceuticals and import sale of fire

extinguishers are necessary. Import sale permits for the two items in the
first-aid kit, considered pharmaceuticals, are required by article 22 of the

Drugs, Cosmetics and Medical Instruments Act, and the import sale permit for
the fire extinguisher is required by article 22 of the High Pressure Gas
Regulations. First-aid kits are equipment on all Benz cars; so other
importers, such as Yanase, remove the equipment from each car and pass cus-
toms. The fire extinguisher was put in on Mr A's orders. Mr A insists

that "both first-aid kits and fire extinguishers should be considered as
part of the car and allowed to pass customs. Hr A's complaint was the first
right after GTO was set up.

Sporting Goods (Authorization System)

"When I asked if it was ready yet, he said 'Don't rush me' and became angry.
I've been waiting quietly. I submitted the authorization application for
tennis balls more than 3 months ago." (Importer of U.S.-made tennis balls)

The explanation from the Japan Tennis Association is: "He received authori-
zation applications from two u.s. companies. The authorization is close to
being given to one of the companies; and we're in the midst of testing the
tennis balls of the other company."

There is much dissatisfaction with the sporting goods authorization and
recommendation system of Japan's various sports associations. The Japan
Tennis Association changed its regulation on authorizing only domestically
produced tennis balls on 16 December last year, and opened its doors to
foreign made bells. Both Wilson, the number one 0.8. manufacturer in terms
of the market share of tennis balls, and Penn, number two, are in the process
of applying for authorization. Importers are anticipating that "sales will
increase considerably when authorization is received." As for the problem
of sporting goods authorization, regarding metal softball beta, the

29
l1)R‘0F1ﬁ(1Al.UEIB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All-Nippon Softball league opened the door to foreign-made bats on 1 February
of this year. However, the United States is working on improvement of the
authorization system for volleyballs and basketballs.

[2 Hay 82 p l]

[EXCerptsl Aluminum Industry Protection Theory; "Spell" of Economic
Security Is Decisive Factor

It is anticipated that Japan's reliance on imported aluminum will be about
70 percent in FY-82; it is necessary to be sufficiently concerned about the
magnitude of the effect in the event instability comes about in imports.
Domestically possessing a stable source of supply is a primary factor in
deterring import price increases. Looking at the form of aluminum supply,
since domestic production is the most stable, it is necessary to retain
domestically a production capability of about 700,000 tons annually.

For a Stable Supply

The economic security theory of "domestically insuring a fixed quantity of

production for a stable supply" has started to be applied to various produc-
tions.

The United States has been critical in the following manner since last year.

Here are some recent newspaper articles which took up the efforts of the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (HITI), which seeks the reorga-
nization of the aluminum refining industry which is suffering a slump.

These articles are worth reading because they suggest that Japan can use
various measures to plan for the maintenance of this one industry, which could
be taken over completely by imported products from the United States and

Canada without government protection. (Report from the trade subcommittee of
the 0.8. House Budget Committee)

Indeed, various measures as pointed out by the United States were considered
in HITI's aluminum policies, which are in line with the suggestions of the
Industrial Structure Council's aluminum subcommittee (advisory organ of MITI)
in October of last year: 1) reduce domestic aluminum refining capability
from the present annual production of 1.1 million tons to 700,000 tons by
1985; 2) eliminate tariffs on aluminum are which refineries import and apply
the lightened cost to a fund for doing away with plant and equipment; 3) con-
cerning the reduction of energy costs, maximum support and cooperation are

'hoped for from those involved, such as banking institutions and the energy
industry.

Why is protection of the aluminum industry necessary? I visited the Tomakomai
factory in Hokkaido, which is the main plant of Nippon Light Metal Co. Ltd.

The plant is located on the north side of Tomakomai harbor. When the raw
material bauxite is unloaded, it is moved to the aluminum oxide production
process where it becomes a semiprocessed product, and from there it is put

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

into the electrolysis plant which produces the aluminum. It began operating
in 1969 as Japan's only full-scale refinery; it has the biggest facility

in Japan, with an annual production of 130,000 tone, at an immense site in
excess of 2 million square meters; and it has left enough room for future
expansion. Light, rustproof, anti-use aluminum had hidden its high growth
character until just before the first oil shock when the plant began opera-
tions.

Now, there is absolutely no feeling of a production plant's characteristic
enthusiasm in this plant. There are almost no lights on and only scattered
human silhouettes in the electrolysis plant, where there are four buildings,
25 meters wide by 600 meters long, lined up. No wonder. At present, only
one out of the four buildings is in operation, and furthermore, production
is going on in only half of that building.

The 1,300 employees at the height of prosperity have been reduced to 800
employees now, and it has been decided to cut back 300 more employees. At
an annual production of 15,000 tone it is at one-ninth of total capacity.
Going along with MI'l'I's policies, which aim at a national production system
of 700,000 tons, this plant has decided to scrap a 60,000-ton facility;
even so, a 70,000-ton plant will remain. If present production remains as
it is, can this plant really be independent under the 700,000 system?

"well, we would like to merely maintain somehow the 70,000-ton facility which
will remain after scrapping the others," replied Takashi Mitsugi. plant
superintendent: he didn't say, "we can maintain." In short, there is not
guarantee this industry will recover simply with mn'o present'relief
measures.

Very Low Competitive Powu

It is generally said that it is necessary to use about 15,000 kilowatt hours
of energy in order to make one ton of aluminum. The Tomakomsi plant made
efforts to curtail energy to the point where 13,500 kilowatt hours were
enough. Even so, nothing can be done about the coat difference where, in
contrast to Japan's energy cost of 16 yen per kilowatt hour. the ".3. coat is
2.5 to 6 yen per kilowatt hour. Japan's energy cost per ton is 120,000 to
160,000 yen higher.

Even with Japan's superior production technology and efforts, a lead beyond
Japan's reach has already been opened up in terms of competitive power.

These are support measures on which the government and the involved industry
are united. Aside from the signification of helping a depressed industry,
when it is reduced to a matter of why it must be preserved by exhaustive
relief measures, the idea of those connected with aluminum is that, in the
final analysis, it converges on the following point.

"Aluminum is a necessity and we will be in trouble if Japan-cannot secure the
necessary amount when worldwide demand recovers. Domestic prices for the

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iorclgn product will rise sharply if domestic aluminum production is at
zero.” (has-Ii Ogava, nanaging director of the Japan Alt-11mm Federation)

   
  
  

murmur!

was: mama
E

    

mtwmm

«m :unuu

   
  
 

i;

    

._ _———_—.

canoemsmm» )5

( Xi! D‘é. O? .0 .NIbllI

(

  

(zsyﬂmmmuummsannmrme)

Key: Figure 3:
1. In order to nurture one industry, it is necessary to protect all
industries.
2. Technological connection of major industries

3. Degree of technological connection (Large:e ; mediun: 0; small: a ,

minute: 6 , unknown: x

6. Material

5. Machinery parts, electronics and electrical parts
6. Mechanics

7. Hechatronics

8. Steel

9. Pig iron manufacture
steel manufacture (regular steel)
(special steel)
10. Ferro-alloys
11. Aluminum
12. Aluminum oxide production
Aluminun refining
Aluminum processing
13. Copper, lead, etc...
16. Mining
Refining
Processing
15. Salt electrolysis
16. Petrochemicals
17. First stage (raw material)

32
MOMCIALUSEONLY
FIN!(NWW(]AI.USE€JNLY

Middle stage (monomer, polymer)
Resin processing
18. Nitrogen fertilizer
19. Synthetic fibers
20. First stage (thread)
Medium stage (cloth)
21. Paper pulp
22. Pulp manufacture
Paper manufacture
23. Ceramic industry
2“. Cement
Glass
25. (From a report by the Industrial Structure Council's special subcosr
mittee on economic and security questions)

Certainly, such an economic security theory has a strange power to create an
"atmosphere" in which every industry needs protection, like a hypnotic spell.
However, there are interesting materials for breaking this spell. One is the

booklet. "Aiming at the establishment of economic security," recently pub-
lished by MITI.

”Standards" Are Ambiguous

"It is important to design harmony in commercial problems and to accommodate
requests for international cooperation by means of opening up domestic
markets as much as possible. It is inappropriate to discuss all agricultural
products in an identical way in the name of insuring food security."

"In the case of production occupying an important position, isn't it rare to
have a situation of no international competitive power at all at some point
in time? Creating appropriate countermeasures in which production activity
of a fixed scale can exist within a set time may be said to correspond to
concurrence with market principles, looked at over the medium and long
terms."

Although difficult to express, the former statement is insisting that ”it

is not good to preserve agricultural protection by waving the security
theory," and the latter statement is saying that "protection of the aluminum
industry is justifiable from the standpoint of security" and is skillfully
using "economic security" in a proper manner. when I asked a MITI official
about this contradiction, he said, "economic security is an ambiguous
standard." It is extremely convenient to be able to use this at one's con-
venience in order to speciously theorize on policies.

The following occurred when Senator Danforth visited Japan in January of
this year. At a press conference after meeting with this senator, MIT!
Minister Abe was critical. saying: "The doctrine of reciprocity bill which
the U.S. legislature is considering is an ambiguous standard of activity
for opposition steps which the United States is about to take regarding the
large increase in imports. It is a dangerous bill which can be used

33
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(HMLY
FOR OFI-‘KIAL USE ONLY

arbitrarily. However, if HlTI, which is essential, were to abuse the
ambiguous standard of economic security theory in order to protect domestic
industries, this also could be called a dangerous policy.

[6 May 82 p 1]

[Excerpts] Suffering froa "Fellowship Society" Barrier; Vertical Relation-
ships Reign Supreme in Sales

In Japan, the major enterprises have formed groups and are hindering the
advance and iaport of foreign enterprises. ("List of Japan's Trade Barriers,"
put together by the 0.8. Department of Commerce)

Even the distinguished U.S. enterprise, Otis Corporation, which has more than
a 20~percent share of the world's elevator Iarket, continues to fight desper-
ately in Japan. Its withdrawal was even being rumored. But after cooperat-
ing with the Sumitono group and Hatsushita Electric Industrial Co, Ltd,
which did not have an elevator conpany in their groups in 1973, Otis made a
comeback in less than no time. The present share in Japan, which had fallen
to the 2 percent level just before cooperating, is 7 percent.

"Nearly all Smitomo Bank, Ltd and Sumitomo Reality Co, Ltd buildings are
using all Otis elevators." (Kareshige Nagashima, director of Japan-Otis
Company) This is the power of the giant groups.

In the SO—story Shinjuku-Nomura Building in the Shinjuku area of Tokyo,
completed in 1978, there are 24 passenger elevators; the elevators used

are made by four conpanies-eight each by Mitsubishi Corporation and Hitachi,
Ltd; and four each by Toshiba Corporation and Japan-Otis. Those involved
say: "As for the Nomura Securities Co, Ltd, it could not help but consider
its connections with each group.

01d Relationships Viewed with Suspicion

The vertical system control by the major manufacturers reaches as far as the
distribution stage and has worked in the direction of excluding foreign
goods. (Ec's committee on reasons for GATT conference on Japan)

At a street corner in San Francisco, there is an automobile dealership with
too signs out front: one says "Ford," the other, "Detsun." When the owner
was asked, ”Won't the aanufacturers complain if you sell two Ianufacturere'
cars?," he gave a puzzled look: "Don't you sell Toyota and Nissan together
in Japan?" "He will handle any car if it's a car we can sell."

European automobile manufacturers have asked Japanese manufacturers to be
allowed to use their sales n works. Of course, the Japanese manufacturers
flatly refused. The Japanese manufacturers say: "He put in the capital,
provided the land and nurtured ths sales dealership over many years. It is

selfish of them to ask to join our network."

The vertical formation has been appeared in many fields, such as home
appliances and cosmetics, although not to the same extent as automobiles.

35
FOR OITWCLAI.lEﬂE(NVLY
"Even in free markets like the one in Akihabara in Tokyo, our products are
pushed into the corner, since the major Japanese manufacturers send their own
salesclerks to help out." (Phillips Home Appliance Co, Ltd, a Japanese
corporation affiliated with the Netherlands Phillipa Corporation)

Japanese companies follow the "buy Japanese” policy. This means that they
do not trust foreigndmade products. (Testimony of Under Secretary of Commerce
Ormer before the legislature)

At the beginning of April, the Heat German publication HANDBLSBLATT carried
an article headlined, "Thiessen Discriminated Against in Japan." The content
of the article was as follows. Thiessen Corporation a major West German steel
manufacturer, had been continuing sales negotiations for automobile parts
(crankshafts) with Hino Motors, Ltd for a year and several months, but it
lost to a competitor even though it could match Sumitomo Metal Industries,

Ltd in quality and price. It is thought that this was the result of the
relationship of Japanese enterprise fellowship.

President Tahler of Thiessen-Japan, Thiessen's Japanese corporation, grimace
and said: "At any rate, Japanese enterprises are cold toward imports." In
the latter half of March, he visited MITI's 010 along with other people
connected with the West German Embassy and the German Chamber of Commerce in
Japan, and protested that "raw materials are imported, but we are distressed
over the tendency of supplying only domestically manufactured goods."

Hino Motors took no notice, saying, "Ha have simply chosen the better terms.
This was no different than any normal business talks." But this reflects

to West Germany that "it is the result of giving priority to the long-stand-
ing relationship between Rico and Sumitomo." (Japan-German Chamber of
Commerce, Survey Department Director Schaper)

Japan's distrubution structure is extremely complicated because it is rooted
in long-standing human relationships, and 0.5. manufactured goods have had
great restrictions imposed. (Report by trade subcommittee of 0.8. House
Budget Committee)

Dissatisfaction with Substance of wholesaling

H.K Cheese is a cheese manufacturing and sales company that was created
through a 50/50 investment by Horinaga Milk Industry Co, Ltd and Kraft
Corporation in 1970. Kraft took charge of marketing, such as planning and
advertising, and Horinaga took charge of sales. However, this three-legged
race did not do well because sales did not develop as expected. Kraft,
which saw that the "reason the world's number one Kraft cheese cannot sell
is there is a problem with the Japanese-style sales organization selling
wholesale," tried the American style formula of selling directly to retail
stores; but it did not go well because of defiance by wholesalers and retail
stores, and so it withdrew from Japan in 1977 with a parting shot of "we
cannot understand Japan's distribution structure."

There is foreign capital which repeatedly changed wholesalers and was

completely despised by the wholesalers, who said: "They disturb the humanity
and justice of our fellowship," and sales dropped. "0.8. manufacturers

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consider how to sell their goods, but in Japan it is more important to con-
sider how to have then sold." This is the conclusion finally reached by
Robert Connery, who has owned an import grocery business in Tokyo for 6 years.

"Exaggeration." “A selfish claim for their own convenience." "They forget
their own lack of effort." of course, there are many Japanese counterargu-
ments, but this "fellowship society," which the Japanese do not find particu-
larly strange, presents a thick wall to foreigners. In this, even though
the government removes import regulations, perhaps the situation will be:
"The gate is open but the front door remains tightly closed."

[5 May 82 p l]

[Excerpts] Futile Shot-Tariff Reductions Earlier than Schedule; Even U.S.
Department of Commerce High Official asked: "Has It in the Newspaper?"

About the time I visited the Department of Commerce in Washington, Mr A, a
high-level official, made the following comment:

"The Japanese government announced an earlier than scheduled reduction in
tariffs at the end of November last year. Actually, I didn't know that until
recently.

In November of last year, Prime Minister Suzuki advanced the schedule of
customs reductions which was planned for the 3~year period from 1981 to

1984 at the Tokyo round, and directed the Ministry of Finance to put it into
effect on 1 April 1982. This was a measure aimed at impressing the United
States with the Suzuki cabinet's determination to resolve Japan-0.8. trade
friction. There were 1,053 targeted items. Ne lowered the average duty rate
on these from 8 percent to 6.75 percent. MITI exclaimed: "Since Japan is
giving this much blood, we think the United States will evaluate it highly."
But...

Reported Quietly in United States

I checked on whether the earlier than scheduled tariff reductions were
accurately reported in the United States and compared the reports with those
of Japanese newspapers. The Japanese newspapers I checked were NIHON KEIZAI
SHIMBUN and ASANI SHIMBUN; and the U.S. newspapers were the financial publica-
tion HALL STREET JOURNAL, which reports the Japan-U.S. trade friction pro-
blems comparatively well, and the general publication the New York TIMES.
Since it is easy to put one'a own subjectivity into it when looking at the
difference in content of the articles, I simply compared by measuring the
total space given to headlines, copy and photographs.

Japan: NINON KEIZAI SBIMBUN: 370 square centimeters
New York TIMES: 0
Total: 610 square centimeters

0.8.: HALL STREET JOURNAL: 97 square centimeters
New York TIMES: 0
Total: 97 square centimeters

36
FINICMHWCLALIJSEGMNLY
The ratio is 6.3 for Japan to l for the United States. It seems that such
a difference in Japanese and American newspaper reporting is behind the
Department of Commerce official's comment, "I didn't know that until
recently."

why were the earlier than scheduled tariff reductions, for which Japan must
make considerable sacrifice, only quietly reported in the United States?

MITI official Kurihara recently gave the following example in relation to
Japan-U.S. friction. "when a U.S. election draws near, this "wolf" of
Japanese-directed criticism urges an opening of markets. This has been the
pattern for several years. It is necessary to throw a bone to this wolf,
but if possible, it is more efficient to throw a bone with some meat on it."

In saying this, Kurihara pointed out that two steps are necessary in order to
make the countermeasurers Japan is pushing effective: 1) the appearance

of giving what the other party wants or making it look like it has been given;
and 2) the calculation of the timing of the giving. Unless these two points
are given consideration, no matter how much Japan works out an opening of its

markets, it will be an "attempt sure to misfire" and it will all be a futile
shot.

Complete Reverse of Dramatic Effect

In terms of results, the earlier than scheduled tariff reductions set forth
by Japan are a futile shot. The first major factor was that not enough
consideration was given to timing.

The government decided on the earlier than scheduled tariff reductions on 30
November last year, at the time of the first cabinet meeting of the reorga-
nized Susuki cabinet. This was a total surprise decision and the reason it
could not help but be made was because there was no other way besides
brazening it out with the decision on an earlier than scheduled tariff
reduction related to all ministries and agencies even though the ministers
were unaware of the situation. (Leader of the Liberal Democratic Party) In
short, this decision was a shot fired after considering only Japan's circum-
stances, and not measuring the effect of how the United States would evaluate
it. It is natural that there was no effect.

The second reason that the earlier than scheduled tariff reductions had no
effect was the lack of Japanese presentation. For example, at present, when
"such and such a white paper" is going to be announced by a Japanese govern-
ment office, they choose a day when there is no other major news, and explain
courteously to the mass media beforehand and elaborate a plan so that it will

be accepted to the greatest degree possible as news. However, this is also
exclusively domestic, and there is no indication they are cognizant of
foreign correspondents in Japan.

The staff of a certain public relations agency which aids in the news-gather-
ing activities in Japan for U.S. correspondents in Japan made the following
comment.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Hell, they purposely announced news of the formation of a cabinet and news
of the earlier than scheduled tariff reductions on the same day... . Compar-
ing the value of the news, it was evident that the news on the tariffs would
be blurred. This way of handling it was as much as to say we do not want
you to konw too much about the earlier than scheduled tariff reductions."

Japan-U.S. friction is the current problem between the United States and
Japan. Cherry blossoms, Mount Fuji, Geisha girls are not enough to have the
United States understand presentday Japan. Even though it is an era in

which information about Japan is relayed to the United States on the same day,
Japan still lacks the wisdom of effectively relating its own ideas to the
United States.

[7 May 82p 1]

[Excerpts] Absence of Key Persons Among Politicians; Without Pipeline,
Cannot Press for True Intentions

People holding important posts in the U.S. Government are divided roughly
into two kinds. The first is the brain group the President brings with him
from his home state. And the second group is of those appointed from among
lawyers, consultants, lobbyists and scholars in the Washington area. Of
these, the number of people of talent in the appointed group is extremely
limited persons of above a certain level, such as those from the Brookings
Institute, the Democratic Party's think-tank, the Republican Party affiliated
American Enterprise and Georgetown University's Strategic Research Center
employed according to the government of the time.

If one keeps contact with the limited number of people from the environs of
Washington, some day they will become an influential pipeline to the U.S.
government. Of course, there are instances where individual friendships are
formed with U.S. legislators and administration leaders and a pipeline is
developed by exchanging information periodically.

Former Prime Minister Kishi had a strong connection with the Republican Party
and had a strong pipeline to former President Nixon, who was vice president
at the time of the Japan-U.S. Security Treaty revisions. Therefore, "at the
time of the Sato government, he had more influential power than Sato in
problems involving the United States." (Cabinet member at the time of‘the
Sato government)

But even so, it is an old pipeline. Even the HITI minister who performs the
role of new leader of the LDP and who is said to be a future party presiden—
tial candidate would not help but rely on the Kishi Pipeline.

Strauss, former special U.S. envoy to the trade negotiations. who was a
negotiation window at the Tokyo round (multilateral trade negotiations) ut-
tered the following during his visit to Japan in early April:

"The friction has become more complicated than necessary because there are
no mediators in either Japan or the United States at present."

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘QI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A negotiator is not only soneone who can mediate domestic issues, but who
can be influential with the United States and can speak his real feelings
with the other side. He can be called a key person. The more severe Japan-
U.S. friction becomes, the more noticeable it becomes that there are no
political key persons with a pipeline to the United States.

The few key persons who cone onto the stage in the history of Japan-0.8.
friction are primarily private persons and bureaucrats.

In Septenber 1978, when there was an off-year election in the United States
as there is this year, the Japan-v.8. agricultural products negotiations,
held in Washington as part of the Tokyo round, had tough going over the
import liberalization of neat and oranges; after talking for 10 hours over
3 days, both countries announced a "breakdown." However, the next day, this
was modified to "a continuation of negotiations" and in December of that
year, they finally concluded with an expansion of the import framework.

Sony Chairman Akio Morita was the one who overnight changed the ”breakdown"
into “continuation of negotiations" by standing between the two men involved
in the negotiations, Strauss and Minister Nakegawa of the Ministry of Agri-
culture and Forestry. Morita is the one who newly introduced Strauss, with
whom he got along well after he happened to ride on the sane plane in 1977,
and Nakagswa, with whom he was close through the "Free Society Research
Association," a group of new leaders in the political world and young
executives. And, Nobuhiko Ushiba, minister with responsibility for foreign
economy, who has a widespread reputation in the United States and who has
the trust of legislators, is the one who was able to bring the "continuation
of negotiations" to a "conclusion."

Why are Japan's politicians, who should be standing at the head of the
resolution of friction, not very zealous about creating these pipelines?

Money is necessary to create a pipeline with the United States and it isn't
linked to election votes. 50 minor politicians repeat the "pattern of
returning home on Friday and coming back on Tuesday" from their election
districts, and influential people within the party, rather than creating a
pipeline with the United States, first of all, strengthen their real power
within the factions and influence within the party. So the comon pattern
for politicians who are said to have a relatively good pipeline with the
United States, such as former Prime Minister Pukuda and LI)? Secratery Nikaido,
is that when their sin of success has nearly acquired a firm footing, they
set about creating a full scale pipeline with the United States.

Organizations for legislator exchange have come into being one after the
other-~Japan-U.S. Legislators League, Japan-0.8. Legislatures Political
Council, and Japan-(1.8. Sunbelt Legislators League-but many are in the
situation of "having the door open, but no business going on."

Voice of Self-Examination in ID?

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI? OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As may be expected now, a call for self-examination has begun to appear
within the IDP. A certain young Diet member has devoted himself to

admonishing that this is not the time to be riding piggyback on the old pipe-
lines of private individuals and bureaucrats.

"With Japan-U.S. relations having become so strained, politics directed
solely to domestic issues up to now will certainly reach their limits. In
an era when Japan's moves are raising discord in the United States. it is

necessary for Japan to willingly probe and consider 0.8. thinking. Just as
the United States helped Japan's revival after the war...".

Up to now, whenever Japan-U.S. friction has occurred, domestically, the order
of reac'ion was from the industrial world and then the related ministries and
agencies; the Diet members did not more until just before the blaze.

Although politicians may have moved, they were only the spokesmen for the
industrial world which was about to be hurt by the friction. However, it is
necessary to deal in advance. quicking perceiving the true intentions of the
U.S. legislature and government-not take measures after the fact. To do

this, Japan cannot fail to create not only a formal diplomatic route, but
also pipelines at various levels.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbun 1982

9400
cso: 6105/106

60
IIHICHUWCIAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ONOﬂIC

mu rm: . swung at national Meme“
Apnmas b) a lean» cooperam with W
In principlelromthealloca' countries he mid

W

'while reporting the minis‘ry‘s I; mm: more and no}!
decision 10cm 3! lemspucenl dutﬁcnlt. the sources sand.

(”I'Yklcll’l‘: Hainichi Daily News 1982

(.250: A120/318

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FI”!(HNJ(]AI.USEGDNLY

ECONOMIC

JAPAN 10 CONTINUE asm AID
Tokyo mmwu DAILY NBUS in English 19 Jun 82 p 1

[Text] Singapore (KYODO)--Poreign Minister Yoshio Sakurauchi said here Friday
Japan will continue to provide economic assistance to five noncommunist South-

east Asian countries which form the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

Sakurauchi told foreign ministers of Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia,
and the Philippines Japan will give positive support to the five nations' eco-
nomic and social development efforts.

"rhe ASEAN is the highest priority region in Japan's economic cooperation," he
said.

The Japanese foreign minister delivered the speech in an hour-long meeting
with his counterparts--Supphiah Dhanabalan of Singapore, Siddhi Savetaila of
Thailand, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja of Indonesia, Muhammad Ghazalie of Malaysia
and Carlos Romulo of the Philippines.

The ASEAN foreign ministers discussed with foreign ministers of Japan, the
United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and the European Community on
Thursday, following a three-day meeting Monday through Wednesday between them-
selves only.

In Friday's Japan-ASEAN meeting, Indonesian Foreign Minister Mochtar delivered
a keynote speech and called on Japan to open its market wider to ASEAN coun-
tries.

Mochtar strongly urged Japan to increase imports of tropical products and in-
dustrial goods, arcing that Japan's imports from ASEAN countries are raw mater-
iala and oil at present.

Japan should contribute to development of medium and small business corpora-
tions in the ASEAN countries, he said.

Sakurauchi told the ASEAN ministers that Japan and ASBAN have worked together
to further their mature partnership, which will mean a great deal for stabil-
ity and development of Asia.

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Ieeting went into closed-door session after Sakurauchi's speech.

Sakurauchi explained Japan's efforts to stem mounting trade protectionism and
to open its Isrket wider to imports, Japanese officials said.

The Japanese foreign sinister, who flew into Singapore Tuesday, is scheduled
to visit Malaysia Saturday and return hone Tuesday.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News, 1982
CSO: 4120/319

k3
Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂCJAl.lﬁﬂi(ﬂWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOHIC

ASEAN WANTS 8C TO TAKE BIGGER ROLE
Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY ms in English 19 Jun 82 p 1

chxt] Singapore (AFP-Jiji)--'rhe Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASBAN) Friday called on the European Economic Co-mity to play "a very im—
portant role" in international colnodity issues, which are of vital concern
to ASEAN.

Opening the ASEAN—BEC dialogue session, attended by BBC Council of Ministers
President Leo Tindemans and Vice President Hilhelm Baferkamp, 'i'hai Foreign
Minister Siddhi Savetsila stressed the importance of North-South interdepen-
dency as "fundamental to the world's economy and well-being."

"The South's call for a more equitable international economic order is just
and reasonable. It is aimed at creating North-South balance," he said,
adding that its successful implementation would result in greater harmony,
which was essential to world peace.

Air Chief Marshal Siddhi said, "The conunity's recognition of the i-portance
of the stabilization of the international market for sugar, or the signing
of the international rubber agreement and of the international tin agreement,
are warmly appreciated by ASEAN."

They are examples for other developed countries to follow, he said, in an
obvious reference to the negative attitude of the United States to the sixth
international tin agreement, which Washington decided not to sign.

Siddhi said ASBAN was the fastest growing region in the world today, with its
abundant natural resources and a market of more than 250 million people.

"But the full potential of our relationship can be realized only if you open
your market wider to our goods. He must be able to sell to you in order to
buy from you, and your investments should be accompanied by a bigger transfer
of technology," the Thai foreign minister said.

Tindemans said that the EEC-ASBAN collaboration constituted a "remarkable exam-
ple" of work in support of peace and international security between two group-
ings in different continents.

He noted that the cooperation was growing more natural and deeper every year.
COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News. 1982

C50: “120/319
bl;

FOR OFI'KJAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

BRIEFS

INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT DECIDE-Japan revised Thursday an April decline in indus-
trial output downward by 1 percent to 1.9 percent fron March to stand at
147.3 against the 1975 base figure of 100. April shipments also decreased
2.8 percent from the preceding month instead of the originally projected

drop of 1.9 percent to 137.5, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry
said in a revised report. The April shipments represented a 0.9 percent de-
cline to mark the first yearly drop since May 1981 when the index showed a
1.3 percent decrease from a year before. HITI said the downward revision in
April output and shipments was necessitated by snaller production and ship-
ments of chemical fiber machinery, shovel bore equipment, tape recorders,
record players and auto bodies. Inventories in April rose 1.1 percent in
reality instead of the original 0.9 percent frol the previous month to 117.5
due to inventory increases in the mining, coal. food, precision instruaent,
general machinery and other sectors. The inventory rate for April stood at
93.2 after seasonal adjustments, up 2 percent fro: a year ago. It was the
first year-to-year gain in the rate since July, 1981 when the indicator of
inventories in relation to total output grew by 1.8 percent over July, 1980.
A HITI official noted that the transport machinery, metal product and electric
Iachinery industries sustained drops in both output and shipments in April
while the precision instrument, paper and pulp and chemical industries posted
gains in production and shipments. [Text] [Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEWS in
English 18 Jun 82 p 5] [COPYRIGHT: Heinichi Daily News 1982]

FARM OUTPUT T0 [USE-Despite an expected decrease in the War of farmers and
the acreage of land under cultivation, Japan's total agricultural output will
record an increase of some ’0 percent—the largest growth in the past four
years—in fiscal 1982, according to an estimate by the Agriculture, Forestry
and Fisheries Ministry. The ministry said the nation's farming population,
which totaled 4.88 million in fiscal 1981, was expected to decrease by about

I. percent in fiscal 1982 ending next March, following a 3.6 percent drop in the
previous year. The total acreage of farmland under cultivation will also de-
crease by about 22,000 hectares fro. 5,462,000 hectares in fiscal 1981, it said.
But agricultural production throughout the country in fiscal 1982 will show an
increase of some lo percent over fiscal 1981. the ministry said. As a result,
Japanese farming households' income solely from farming will increase by about
6 percent this fiscal year, far surpassing an estinated 2.6 percent growth in
the previous fiscal year. it said. The cost of fertilizers and farting equip-
nent will become stabilized in fiscal 1982 and denand for farm products will
increase 1 percent following a 0.5 percent decline in fiscal 1981, it added.
[Text] [Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 20 Jun 82 p 5] [OOPYRIGHT:
Hainichi Daily News 1982]

C80: 4120/321

(05
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

SC mucs AND TEGRDLOGY

SPACE DEWPHENT PROGRAM IN DISPUTE
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Jun 82 p 1.

[Text] The Space Development Special Connittee (Chairman Taro Nakayama) of

the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) has made "a proposal for space development."
With regard to this proposal, many space related officials heartily "81“!“
the LDP's move to increase the space development budget. although they feel
that launching a military satellite may not be possible. It seems that the
issues on the revision of the Basic Space Development Program and the moving-
up of the space development programs may arouse arguments centering on the
Space Activities Commission.

The launching of commercial-use artificial satellites is entering an era where
the 0.5. space shuttle and Arianne rocket of the European Space Agency (FSA)
will compete with each other 'for customers and enjoy the world demand
exclusively between themselves. The United States, Europe and the Soviet Union
are the only ones that can place l-ton satellites into stationary orbits at
36,000 km above the earth. Therefore, it is undoubtedly a matter of grave
concern to Japan to be left 10 years behind by ESA at this very moment.

With the current speed of development, it is unavoidable that the gap between
Japan and Europe will grow wider, and the Science and Technology Agency (STA)
and the National Space Development Agency (NASDA) have a great deepening
sense of crisis about this.

Comparing Europe and Japan's space development, opinion had it that Japan was
leading around 1978. In fact. it seemed that Japan was ahead of Europe
because of its rocket develop-ant program which had made step-by-step progress,
from the Lavbda and the ﬂu rockets (both by the Tokyo University) to the

N-l rocket, the "-11 and the H-1 rockets.

ESA has finished technological development of the Arianne rocket and l-ton
satellite in whose development each country had a share. As of now, therefore.
Japan has clearly been left behind because it can launch satellites of only
350 kg. It is estimated that around 1992 or 1993 Japan could launch l-ton
satellites if it speeded up development. Compared to this, Europe will launch
l-ton satellites on a commercial basis next March.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11n-,wp between Burope and Japan derives from differences in the establishment
nl goals and from the sequence of develOpment. One cannot ignore, however,
that it also derives from the fact that Europe centered its development on
independently developed technology while Japan imported almost all technology.
such as rocket production, artificial satellites and guidance systems, from
the United States.

He will have to wait until 1987 for a solely Japanese domestic space rocket
to be developed. At that time, the H—lA rocket with a second-stage liquid
oxygen and liquid hydrogen fuel rocket and a third-stage solid fuel rocket
and an inertial guidance system will be developed.

In addition, there is the problem related to developmental funds. Most of

the 2,700 artificial satellites that the United States and the Soviet Union
have launched are used primarily for military and defense purposes. Therefore,
it is said that in these countries a great amount of funds is allocated for
space development in the defense budget. Besides, Japan's space development
budget is restricted to peaceful uses, with the amount barely reaching

100 billion yen in 1982. It is much too small compared to Europe's space

development budget, of which the science budget is estimated to be about
160 billion yen.

Host advanced space technologies using artificial satellites include communi-
cation satellites, broadcast satellites, weather satellites and earth
resources satellites, and the use of these satellites is expected to expand
rapidly in future. The era of l-ton satellites is quickly approaching, and
it is expected that the era of 4-5 ton satellites will come in 3-4 years.

Even if Japan starts development of a rocket for l-ton satellites promptly

in FY 83, NASDA estimates that the development would take at least 9-10 years
and that an annual average 30 billion yen (a total of 300 billion yen for

10 years) for the rocket development would be needed on top of the current
budget. This is a pretty stiff demand, but it is certain that if Japan
undeniably lags behind in the space development race, it will suffer great
setbacks in the most advanced fields of communication, broadcasting, resources
detection and defense.

For this reason, as the LDP's Space Development Special Committee has proposed,
it is considered necessary to develop as quickly as possible a lift capability
suitable for the era of large-scale satellites and large rockets and to
establish a system through which Japan would not yield to others in the space
development race. as well as to promote space development and the improvement
of technologies.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

C80: 6106/13?

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HITI WORKS OUT PLAN FOR mm FUEL CYCLE
0H230639 Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 21 Jun 82 Morning Edition p 3

[Text] On 20 June, the HITI announced a cowrehenaive progran it had pre-
pared to establish Japan's own nuclear fuel cycle. The progran, designed to

neet the requirements of the nation's nuclear power technology, which has
entered a couercialization phase, contains these salient points: 1) uranium

ore development and ilport system centering on private businesses will be
established and new conpanies set up thereafter as joint ventures with over-
seas capital in Australia and other countries; 2) preparations will be
expedited to build land custody facilities for nuclear waste with low radio-
activity, and a reserve system will be introduced to grant nuclear fuel
processors tax eertions for waste disposal expenses; and 3) an atomic power

international cooperation center will be inaugurated, tentatively in fiscal
1983.

me HITI also plans to work out the necessary rules to decrease Japan's
dependence on overseas facilities for uranium enrichment and reprocessing of
spent fuel. It is going to speed up coordination with the Science-Technology
Agency and related businesses on this program.

"Nuclear fuel cycle" means a series of processes from the development and
refining of uranium ore to enrichmnt, processing, generating, reprocessing

of spent fuel, and waste disposal. While Japan's nuclear power technology
has entered a phase of full-scale preparations for comercialization fron the

experimental phase, it still depends on overseas facilities for considerably
large parts of the cycle, as facts show. In order to promote the development

and utilization of nuclear power smoothly and with stability, it is required
for the nation to end its dependence on overseas facilities and establish a
nuclear fuel cycle of its own. This has become a major task for this country.

The MITI progran lists neasures to be taken, focusing on areas where the work
of waking systems has been lagging. The ministry believes that Japan will be

able to establish its own nuclear fuel cycle by carrying the program into
practice step by step. beginning next year.

As a leans of ensuring a stable supply of uranium ore, the ministry plans to
maintain a development-import system with private firm serving as its
nucleus. At present, Japan purchases 80 percent of its requirement for

(08
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
urnniun--about 200,000 tons (on a crude ore contractual basis)--from overseas
under long-term contracts and only about 20 percent from Niger and Australia
in a development-import program. The MIT! thinks that increasing the per-

centage of this development-import program is essential to a stable supply
of uranium. In this connection, it plans to continue and expand the program

by turning over the overseas uranium mining projects being undertaken by the
Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation (Donen) to Japanese

electric power and mining companies and putting them on a commercial basis.
The MITI's study calls not only for joint surveys and mining by overseas

subsidiaries of Japanese businesses and Donen but also for the establishment
of new companies with the capital jointly invested by Japanese businesses and
overseas capital, like the one in Australia, for instance.

As regards radioactive waste, the ministry plans to promptly work out con-
crete steps for disposing of those low-level ones emitted in large quantities

from atomic powerplants by keeping them in overland facilities. It will
expedite the selection of candidate sites for these facilities and put laws

and decrees prescribing the rules for overland custody in good order. In
building the facilities, the ministry says it will see that low-interest-

rate loans are made available from the Japan Development Bank and measures
taken for the development of the local areas concerned. As a measure for the

disposal of wastes produced in the stage of processing enriched uranium, the
MIT! plans to take a taxation measure by exempting the expenses spent for it
from taxable objects.

The ministry also plans to inaugurate an "atomic power international center"
(tentative name) next year, if possible, to help developing countries in
building atomic powerplants and carrying out other projects for peaceful
use of atomic energy. This reflects Japan's consideration for a rush of

requests from deve10ping countries, mainly those in Southeast Asia, for help
in building the foundation. Specifically, the ministry plans to render

cooperation in working out atomic energy development plans, training person-
nel, managing operations and putting laws and decrees in order. The HITI's

calculation is that through such cooperation, Japan will be able to expand
its atomdc energy-related exports, currently limited to accessory equipment

and parts. to reactors or even complete plants. In addition to all this, the
MITI is also preparing for the establishment of a nuclear fuel facility

planning department under the Agency of Natural Resources and Energy.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

C80: 4120/317

49
FOR 0FFK]AI.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TEHNOLOCY

JDA T0 DEVElDP OPTICAL FIBER GUIDED MISSILE
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 17 Jun 82 p 1

[Text] It was recently disclosed that the Japan Defense Agency (JDA) has been
engaged in research on a new missile which uses optical fibers in its guidance
systan. Electrical wire manufacturers, including Purukawa Electric, are
involved in this JDA effort. Research on the new missile still remains in

the basic stage. but if the missile proves to be practical, JDA will launch

RGD efforts to produce a follow-on to the "Heavy HAT," an antitank and antiship
missile. Optical fibers have a larger transmittal capacity than copper cables
currently used in telephone circuits. They are also characteristically very
free from electronic interference. Therefore, they may come to be widely used
in the future in such major military equipment as tanks, airplanes and warships.

The new guidance systen that the JDA is studying consists of optical fibers

and CCDs (charge-coupled devices). A CCD is a semiconductor used as a new
electronic eye in VTRs for home-use. It will be installed in the missile head
and will pick up target images. These images, converted from electronic signals
to optical signals, will be transmitted to the controller of the missile,

who will be able to see the target as if he were watching a TV screen and will
be able to correctly guide the missile to the target.

Because this new missile uses optical fibers instead of wires and the "images"
the CCD picks up are transuitted through optical fibers, the missile can even

be guided to targets hidden behind obstacles. Thus, this will be the birth
of an epoch-making weapon.

However, in order to use optical fibers in a missile, they have to be ande even
finer and lighter. It seems that JDA has entered into the technical study of
these aspects along with the study of how to increase the strength of fibers.
Large electrical wire manufacturers. such as Furukawa Electric, Sunitomo
Electric and Fujikura Cable works, are working jointly with ma in these efforts.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kelzai Shiliaunsha 1982

080: 4106/138

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NTT COMPILES REPORT ON FUTURE EFFECT 0? INS 0N SOCIETY
Tokyo NIHON KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 5 Hay 82 p 1

[Article: "Industrial Reorganization in Various Fields; Hark at Home, and TV
Conferences"]

[Tcxt] As a result of the industrialization of equipment in the primary indus-
tries, including agriculture, and simplification of the circulation mechanism,
productivity has increased so rapidly that industrialization is underway in
various other fields. It was revealed on the 6th that a report that gathers
the expectations concerning this kind of "highly informationalized society" has
been compiled by the INS (intensive information and communication system) work
group of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation (NTT) (president:

Mr Tsune Hafuji). This report deals with the impact on society if INS is built
on a global scale; the report was compiled by culling the free discussions among
the young staff members of NTT. Although the bold assumptions made in various
places are not without questions, the report has already caught the attention
of the public, including those inside and outside NTT. as a document comparable
in value to the Japanese version of "The Third Wave" by Irvin Toffler (United
States), who predicted the fifth information revolution.

"Maturation" on a National Scale in the let Century

In predicting the impact of INS on society, the group assumed that if construc-
tion of INS is started in 1982 with an inVestment of 20—30 trillion yen for the
entire undertaking, the desired services can be provided to the person who
desires them in 10 years (1992) or 15 years (1997), and INS will "nature" on a
national scale in the let century, in approximately 20 years (2002).

In an INS society created under these assumptions, the industrialization of
equipment and the secondary industrialization of primary industries are quite
advanced, and the automation and informationalization of the secondary and
tertiary industries are well advanced. As a result, changes in the industrial
format will take place rapidly.

For example. in agriculture, an I'optimum nature-utilization system" will be
realized. Diseases related to precipitation, temperature and density will be
controlled by predicting their outbreak period and their prevention and eradi—
cation periods. Increases in productivity will be achieved through such mea-

51
FOR OFFKJAI.USB(HNLY
roe OFFICIAL us't ONLY

sures. 0n the stock farms, an "unmanned feed system" will be in operation,
while in the ocean, "unmanned fishing boats and transport ships" will applaud
big catches. It is figured that the foodstuff self-supply rate will be in-
creased significantly.

In secondary industries, take the fiber industry, for example. A consumer
will be able to choose a design pattern through TV image communication and
place an order directly with the manufacturer, who will produce it for you in
a robot-operated factory even if it is the only piece of work. In this sense,
the tertiary industrialization of secondary industries has already made pro-
gress. Using INS, a data base containing all sorts of engineering information
will be constructed, and the engineering indsutry will be in full bloom. At
the same time, international INS should also have been established, and the
internationalization of Japan will have made further progress. Japan will
move in the direction of fewer country risks.

The changes in tertiary industries will be also quite significant. A "com-
pletely unmanned goods distribution system" that is controlled electronically
will have been perfected. If this transportation route is utilized effectively,
progress can be made in "compound industrialization," in which all aspects of
distribution, from manufacture to retail, are handled. As shopping at home
becomes widespread, the circulation mechanism will be transformed from the

"dark continent" into a simple one.

Information on shopping will also change from the traditional one-way traffic.
The consumer will be able to obtain the desired information freely whenever he
wants it. Therefore, the big question mark will be the proper future of mass
media advertising. Home banking, called "at-home approval system," will become
widespread, and we will see the day when the traditional image of banks will
"vanish."

The fields which are to be affected most drastically include printing, pub-
liahing, newspapers, and broadcasting.

An "electronic printing technology" which will render the conventional print—
ing process unnecessary will be developed, so the printing industry will be
obliged to reorganize. Newspapers will be printed simultaneously everywhere
nationwide. Delivery of newspapers is also expected to become unnecessary as
a result of application of the facsimile.

INS will also have a role in easing the traffic hell. Working at home will
become very popular, and business travel will become unnecessary through in-
expensive TV conferences using the public network. Thus, the traffic volume
will decrease considerably.

Establishment of Automatic Energy Supply System

Energy conservation also will be undertaken by INS. Local energy such as solar

and wind energy will be connected to the network through INS, and a system will

he established by which the required amount of energy will be supplied automati-
cally to whoever requires it. Moreover, overall energy consumption will be

52
IND! OWWHCIAI.IEHE(NNLY
reduced significantly through the increased productivity and rationalized
transportation and communication that INS will permit.

0n the Other hand, as for social life, an "at-home voting system" for political
matters and "CAI" (computer-aided instruction) will come into being and affect
our daily lives. Therefore, the right or wrong of the present system will
become problematical. Furthermore, individual ways of thinking and culture will
be affected, and the realization of an INS society will pose new global pro-
blems, including numerous international problems.

However. the report also pointed out the negative aspects of INS besides those
”good aspects" described above, and efforts need to be exerted to eliminate
these negative aspects during the process of building INS: For example, com-
puter crime, leakage of business secrets, invasion of privacy, outflow of
national secrets, etc. The report recommends that countermeasures, including
appropriate legislation, be established as soon as possible.

INS: Telephone, data transmission, and facsimile transmission systems today
use different modes of transmission. These systems will be combined and unified
into a single system through digitalization of the information. As a result.
various forms of comnmnication will be able to be used freely by a single
network, and colorful services, including communication of images, will become
available. A new uniform charge system based on the amount of information will
be applied, and differences in charges based on distance will disappear. In
order to realize INS, NTT will, starting in 1982, construct a model system in
the Hitaka and Musashino areas of Tokyo. Depending on the results. construc-
tion of INS will be carried out in earnest starting in 1985.

Primary Industries Will Be Changed by INS as Follows
INS rag-runway); Key:

(1) Present condition

(2) Finite land and resources
(3) Problem points

(6) Low productivity; outflow
of labor force to secondary
and tertiary industries

(5) Reduction in youthful
labor force

(6) Reduction in resources

(7) Supply uncertainty due to
resource nationalism (such as
ZOO-mile claim, mineral re-
sources, forestry, etc)

(8) Capital and technical co-
(9) INS (including international INS) operation with industrializing
(10) Optimum nature utilization system nations

(11) Environmental control system
(12) Production management system
(13) Unmanned feed system

(14) Feed management system

(15) Unmanned fishing boats and transport ships

 

(16) Unmanned mining system

(17) Various data banks

(18) Newspaper and magazine as supplier of
information

53
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOI‘OFIWCJAI.USEGMNLY

Key continued:

(19) Technical cooperation system

(20) Operation management system ‘

(21) Industrialization of agriculture, industrialization of equip-eat
(22) Equipment industrialization of animal husbandry

(23) Ocean as stock farm

(24) Development of yet utilized marine resources (deepsea fishing, open-sea
fishing, Antarctic Ocean euphasia, etc)

(25) Gasification and liquefaction of coal

(26) Development of ocean floor resources (such as manganese)
(27) Efficient use of paper resources

(28) Assist development of industrializing nations

(29) Increase in surplus labor force

(30) To tertiary industry

(31) Changes in industrial structure

(32) INS society

(33) Stable supply and demand of resources

(34) Image of INS society

(35) Secondary industrialization of primary industry

(36) Increased self-supply rate

(37) Conservation of resources

(38) Assurance of stable imports

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunsha 1982

9113
CSO: 4106/109 END

INDIJOFIICJAI.IEHE(NWLY