FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10671
20 July 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 43/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NT!

JPRS publications contain informtion primrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was suamarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGH’ LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10671
20 July 1982

JAPAN REPORT

(P000 43/02)

Coursurs
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

ranaka-l’ulmda Conflict Analysed
(Taro Ahaaka; m1 swam, Jun 82) .... l

ECONOMIC

Stagnation of Aaian Icono-y Deepena
("IRON IIIZAI SHIHBUII, varioua datee) ..................... 7

Aapecta of Japaneae Yen Studied
(smm'o "tut. 1m, 82) 00...........OOOOOOO'O'OOOO. ‘3

Yen Exchange Rate Bpaculationa
Liberalization of Yen

Three Year Decreaae in Net Ioraign Clai- Reported
("Inonnlut snm’m. zsmaz) CO...OOOIOOOOOOOIOQOOO... 27

Smaller Firm Plan Drop in lnveat-ent
(MINE!!! DAILY ms, 25 Jun 82) .......................... 30

Briefa
Freezing of Pricea 31

SCIENCE AND newcomer

Heada of 0.8. Coapaniea in Japan View Soniconductor liar
(Nakano; NIKKI! SANGYO snmun. varioue datea) . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

Different luaineaa Cuatoaa
(implicated Circulation Nechanian

Hydrogen Energy Reaearch , Develop-ant Diacuaaed
(Varioua aourcea, varioua datea) ...... . 39

Manufacturing, Storing ‘l’eehnologiea, by Y. 0mm
Hydrogen Occluaion Alloy, by Y. Ariga

- a - [III - ASIA - 111 P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mmmmv

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

TANAKA-PUKUDA CONFLICT ANALYZED
Tokyo BUNCH SHUIUU in Japanese Jul 82 pp 232-236
[Article by Taro Akaeeke: ”The Curtain Raiser of the Fifth Pukude-Teneka Her"!

[Text] "If Mr Pukude is stopped and can do nothing it is clear that you.
Mr Koeoto. are the only person left. but in order not to create unnecessary
trouble at that tine. would you leave it to Pukude for e while?“

This happened eose tine ago. but one day in March e "representative" of Takeo
Pukude visited Econoeic Planning Agency Director General Toehio Konoto and
felt hie out in this way. he presented the idea of en interin Pukuds
govern-cut. Koeoto replied. "I appreciate your consideration. but....
expressing thanks for the offer in a roundabout way.

This report has been going around recently. sending a shock thrOugh the red
carpets of the Diet building.

Tskeo Fukuda was born in 1905 and is 77 years old. he refers to himself as
"the Konon of the Shows Period. deputy Shogun of the country." He has said
that "the deputy Shogun does not do such foul things as trying to take power."
and he speaks of "e well-seasoned state of mind." But everyone who hears the
talk says. "So that's it. Fukude's real sis was to cone beck as interim
Shogun." In 1978, prior to the election for LDP president between Fukuda end
the late Hassyoshi Ohira, known as the Fukude-Ohire var. Pukude shouted the
slogan: "The world is seeking Pukude." This self-confidence hes not
diminished one bit.

Foreign Minister Yoshio Sakureuchi, who is related to Fukude by marriage, nsde
a atatenent when he was chief secretary of the LDP that "Mr Pukuda hes always
cane forth when there was a struggle in the psrty ever since the time of the
Ikcda cabinet." Rokusuke Tanake, chair-an of the LDP political coordinating
committee, who is known as "tricky Rokusuke” and pretends to be a bed guy.
says. "It is frightening whenever Hr Pukuda begins talking about political
ethics. A great disturbance is bound to occur."

Fukuda has stepped onto the political stage at every opportunity under the
'bsnner of justice." calling for “purification of the political world" and "an
end to noney politics." he could be thought of as either a crusader or a
troublenaker. Furthermore. a cherecteristic of Pukude's words and actions is

IOIICIHNKJAI.UBIiINLY
Hill ill-'9'“ ML USE ONLY

that they grow more extreme with the passage of time.

Because of this, Fukuda's actions and statements are always at the center of
things in the political world. Wen Fukuda moves, it creates a stir in
political circles.

Maneuvering in Preparation for a Terrible June

The first critical period for politics this year will be in June. A huge
revenue shortfall. said to amount to 2.5 trillion yen, will become certain.
The first trial decision for the Lockheed incident will be handed down for
defendants Tomisaburo Hashimoto and Takayuki Sato. Trade tensions will
increase. The Paris Summit. where Japan is expected to be attacked on this
issue, will be held. There will be an explosion of all the difficult issues.
Furthermore, the temporary administration study committee will make its
report in July and Zenko Suzuki will be hit with a series of punches that will
not give his time to breathe. There is maneuvering going on to remove Hr
Komoto from the cabinet during this "terrible June" on the pretext of
maintaining cabinet unity in forming economic policies, and this will create
a great col-otion in political circles. Of course, the idea of "not
removing Koa0to" has gained acceptance. but in any case, June will be a
month full of problems for Zenko Suzuki.

What concerns Fukuda and the Pukuda faction most right now is the revenue
shortfall that will become apparent in June. Pukuda predicted at the first
of the year that this will be "a year of great trouble in the country." As
early as the end of January, he cautioned that "a movement will arise to
ascertain political responsibility if a large revenue shortfall occurs."

On 9 April, Finance Minister Michio Hatanabe clearly forecast that the
revenue shortfall would be greater than 2 trillion yen. That night, Fukuda
stated: "The amount is larger than expected. It cannot be handled with
clever arguments. In 1982, the problem will become worse. There are three
possible countermeasures, a cut in expenditures, increased issue of

def icit-covering national bonds, or a tax increase. Suzuki has made a public
comitment not to issue deficit-covering bonds or increase taxes, so the only
thing he can do is cut expenditures drastically."

0n the 13th, in explaining this problem, watanabe said, "In making ends meet.
the sources of many other problems could be created. It would not be right
to use stop-gap tricks such as diverting debts from general accOunts to
special accounts or using the national debt adjustment fund or the
settlement adjustment fund. Then it would be impossible to come up with a
budget for 1983." Also. he emphasized that "it would be a mistake to go
light on administrative reform because of the idea that it would lead to
deflation. Drastic cuts in expenditures should be made."

Pukuda added: "There is a proposal for issuing more national construction

hands. However. construction bonds are debts just like the deficit-covering
bonds. It would just be window dressing."

WWWONLY
POIIOFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

0n the night of the 6th when the 1982 budget was passed. both older and
younger members of the Pukuda faction. including Minister of International
Trade and Industry Shintaro Abe and LB? national organization chairman

Mutsuki Kato held a meeting in a Tokyo restaurant. At this meeting. Abe began
by saying. "The 1981 revenue shortfall will be huge. Rebuilding finances
without a tax increase and reducing deficit-covering bond issues to zero by
1984 will be difficult. June will be full of problems such as trade tensions
and an attempt to restore U.s.-Japan relations. It will be terrible."

Those present responded by voicing strong views. "If the deficit-covering
bond issue is increased. the Suzuki government's main drawing card will be
destroyed." "It is time to take action. If things are left as they are.

the people will desert the LDP." The main body and the younger members of the
Pukuda faction. as well as the boss. are fired up with the idea of a "June
crisisJ

Suzuki and Tsuchimitsu Conflict Expected?

Let us analyze Pukuda's argument. He says that "the problem cannot be handled
with saall tricks" and "there are only three possible c0untermeasures--a cut
in expenditures. increased issue of deficit-covering bonds. and a tax
increase." He emphasizes that Zenko Suzuki is holding tight to the banner of
"getting away from a system of dependence on deficit-covering national bonds
by 1984." Fukuda concludes: "Construction bonds and deficit-covering bonds are
both debts. If more and more national construction bonds were issued. the
issue of deficit-covering bonds could be reduced to zero by 1984. however,
this is sophistry and window dressing." when it comes to a tax increase. in
other words. the introduction of a large indirect tax. he makes the point

that "Suzuki has said that he will not do it." Suzuki's predecessor.
Hasayoshi Ohirs. introduced a large consumer tax in 1979 just before the LDP
presidential election and was overwhelmingly defeated. Fukuda's statement is
based on the supposition that Suzuki observed this "nightmare" from the
sidelines and there is no chance that he would make use of a large indirect
tax.

However. as Suzuki advances along this path there is a trap waiting for him.
It is easy to talk about a "drastic reduction" in expenditures. but it is not
easy to carry out in reality. The leading members of the Pukuda faction say:
"It is false to say that it will be easier to reduce expenditures now that the
revenue shortfall has grown so large. There are many complainers in the

party and it will be impossible to repress them. The local government offices
will not keep quiet." And if only saall reductions are made. it will not
escape the sharp glance of Toshio Tsuchiaitsu, chairman of the temporary
administration study committee and the emperor of administrative reform.
Ultimately. they are expecting an "inevitable clash between Suzuki and
Tsuchiaitau." The boss of the faction. Pukuda. is certainly aware of these
views. Fukuda's orders are made in anticipation of the idea that "a large
scale reduction of expenditures cannot be made by Suzuki."

A Revenue Shortfall of 3 Trillion Yen Also Occurred in the Past

Zenko Suzuki is also taking a tough approach. "I an partly to blame. however.
we are in difficult circumstances and no one has any good ideas. Doesn't

IIII(INNCJAI.UIIICHULN
FOIiOFF'CIAI.lEﬂE(HVLV

unyunv have any good ideas? Be that as it may. there has been a 3 trillion
yen revenue shortfall before." He remains unperturbed: "Even if there is a
shortfall of 2 trillion yen in 1981, 1982 is still a year away. Hr Pukuda has
a lot to say, but he has not said what should be done at all."

One reason for Zenko Suzuki's "confidence" is that. as he points out. there
has been a "3 trillion yen," even a 3.8 trillion yen, revenue shortfall in

the past. The 3.8 trillion yen shortfall occurred during the period of the
Hiki cabinet and the 3 trillion yen shortfall referred to by Suzuki occurred
under the Pukuda cabinet. Hr Komoto who was responsible for finances under
the Niki cabinet takes a cautious posture. '1hx revenues cannot be guessed to
the penny. During the first oil shock there was a shortage of 3.8 trillion
yen. Some things cannot be helped."

However. Fukuda proudly asserts: "when it happened to me. it was during the
oil shock and a period of great economic changes so the people understood."
He takes the position that those circumstances were different from the

present ones. An official in the prime minister's office interprets his
position as follows. "Fukuda is saying that Mr Suzuki cannot make excuses
because he made a public commitment to financial rebuilding. It was all right
for Hr Pukudn because he did not make such a commitment."

One economic commentator wryly says: "Fukuda was known as the economic

prime minister in the Miki cabinet so he was responsible. Also the system of
dependence on national bonds was started by the minister of finance in the
Sato cabinet, Hr Fukuds. The fact that he seems to have forgotten such things
shows that Pukuda is also rather brash."

Fukuda has used tactics which take advantage of an anticipated failure on the
issue of national electoral district reform as well as the issue of the
revenue shortfall. The "hidden Shogun of Heijiro.“ Kakuei Tanaka. issued a
directive to begin working on this issue. But when Tanaks's influence

began to decline, Pukuda began to shout. “National electoral district reform
is absolutely necessary!" At the beginning of April, he went into the office
of the chief cabinet secretary in the Diet building and told Susumu Nikaido.
“I want national electoral district reform to be passed no matter what."
Sources close to Suzuki, with a view to the little remaining time in the Diet
session. say "Fukuda is saying 'Do it!‘ because he knows that it cannot be
passed." If it is not done, this also will become a "violation of a public
commitment” for Suzuki. Fukuda has begun saying. "I will do it. I will do
it." Ironically, since Fukuda began making these statements, Tanaks faction
leaders such as Noboru Takeshita. deputy chief cabinet secretary, and
Hasakiyo Gotoda, election study committee chairman. have begun actively
working bruind the scenes.

Hr Fukuda a Champion of Justice?
Hr Fukuda's distrust and dissatisfaction is really not directed at Zenko
Suzuki but at the man who stands behind him. his rival. Kakuei Tanaks. In the

cabinet reshuffle and personnel changes in party leadership last November,
chko Suzuki abandoned the balance which had been maintained between the

INII!0I1ICIAI.IEI!(IUL!
FOIIDFFKJAI.US£(NNLV

Tanaka and Pukuda factions and moved sharply toward the Tanaks faction.
After that. Fukuda raised a clenched fist and vowed to ”overthrow the Tanaka
government. He clearly shouted "Tanaka government." not "Suzuki government."

His fear and distrust of Tanaka are very strong. Recently, a group of
reporters asked his. "'Kaku-san' has begun talking about constitutional
reform. Hhat do you think this neans?" He replied irritably. "Why has
Tanaka started talking about that now? He did not in the past. I do not
know." His feelings were apparent in the fact that he called Mr Tanaka
"Tsnaka" instead of the usual "Kaku-san.“ This year's politics will be
dominated by the "fifth Tanaka-Pukuda war," following the original
Tannka-Pukuda war. the renoval of Pukuda fron the Tanaka cabinet, the Chira-
Fukuds war. and the 60-day war. For Pukuda. who always wants to take the
position of a champion of justice. it is easy to take a position against this
opponent. The subject of the Lockheed trial is taboo inside the [09. However.
Fukuda has frankly stated: "If Tanaka is convicted before the lower house
elections next sol-er. it will be the end of the LDP. If there is a double
election, it will mean total destruction." In a sense. Fukuda is paying more
attention to the Lockheed first trial decision on Tonisaburo Hashimoto and
Takayuki Sato on 8 June than to the revenue shortfall. Leading Fukuda-fsction
Diet nenbers predict that "if Toni Hashimoto is convicted, it will create
shock waves in the political world." And they also state emphatically that
"if the name of Hikaido cones up in the Lockheed decision. it will involve
the responsibility of Prime Minister Suzuki who used hin as chief party
secretary."

Through the intercession of Hitsuo Setoyams. Fukuda had a "S-ninute meeting"
with Tanaka on 23 October last year. Setoyana made this move in order to
promote Fukuda in the event that Zenko Suzuki failed midway through his term.
Fukuds naturally understood this. Subsequently. Pukuda was told that

"Tanaks will never support Pukuda. Fukuda himself should know the reason for
this." After that. it is reported that Pukuda's fighting spirit suddenly
blazed up.

So then, what sort of tactics will Pukuda use in the "fifth Tanaka-Pukuda war?"
The best he could hope for would be an early retire-ent by Zenko Suzuki and the
emergence of an "interim Fukuda government" through negotiation. Fukuda
himself cauld not take the role of renoving Suzuki. After being beaten out by
Takeo Hiki when Tanaka resigned in 197$ through "Shiina's arbitration," Pukuda
is well aware of this. He must wait for Zenko Suzuki to wound himself

through the revenue shortfall or wait for someone else to pull the trigger.

The “removal of Komoto" may be one effective neans of pulling the trigger.
However. observers close to Konoto say that "Komoto feels that he is partly
responsible for the revenue shortfall. so he will probably not resign." If

that is the case. it is hard to inagine Suzuki "co-nitting suicide." There is
very little possibility of this happening.

Another possibility is for Fukuda to be elected through negotiation because
of confusion in the election for party president. Fukuds has said. "The
Supreme advisory council should play a coordinating role in selection of the
president. In such a case. the oldest advisor, Hr Kishi. should do the

coordinating." He is planning that he would be selected by his mentor.
Nohusuke Kishi.

FOI‘OFFIJAI.U§E¢IVLY
INMIlOIINC1A1.USEIINLY

However. there is little likelihood of this happening in reality. It is
doubtful that much authority will be given to the suprele advisory council.
If that is the case. the election for party president will be a contest of
power. Then the situation will vary decisively depending on whether there
are three or four candidates. If there are four candidates. a public
election will be held among the general party sembership. If there are three.
such an election will not be held. Fukuda has said. "If a public election

is held. Komoto will get half the voter." The "young officers" of the Pukude
faction such as Hutsuki Kato are conspiring. "There is no other way to win
than to get four candidates and hold a public election where Kosoto will

cone out on top." However, while Suzuki end Konoto sight emerge imsediately
as candidates. it is possible that Administrative Management Agency

Director General Yashuhiro Nakasone could stay out of the race and back
Suzuki. Then there would be no third or fourth candidate. There are sole
who would support Kazuro Tamsoki of Shuseiken on the premise that it should be
"someone who will not be a future candidate for party president." Even so,
there would still be no fourth candidate. Science and Technology Agency
Director General lchiro Nakagawa enthusiastically says. "If neither Abe nor
Takeshita run. I might borrow ease of their people and run.“ But this would
bring a cry of "hold on!" fro. the Fukuda faction. A leader of the Pukuda
faction says. "If Nakagawa becale a candidate for party president. it could
sean a reversal of position between his and Abe who is in the position of an
'elder brother' to his."

Almost no one believes that Pukuda himself has abandoned the dream of an
interim government. Even if he had. it is a fact that "he has not
definitely decided to support Konoto."

If Konoto does not have support, there is the possibility of bringing up a
"new leader."

It is reported that Pukuda's close associates asked his. "Nakagawa is
straining at the bit. how about having Abe run?" and Fukuda's reply was.
"Who is this Abe?" Both Pukuda and Tanaka feel that ”a 'new leader' would be
someone of colonel or lieutenant colonel rank." The canon feeling of both
men is that “if one of them became commanding officer. it would seen a change
of generations. That is what we fear lost." Shin Ksneuaru declarea‘ "You
can talk about changing the pitcher, but there is no one to substitute."

There are also sole outsiders hoping for a split like Ikko Kaauga of the
Democratic Socialist Party who says: "Four candidates must be fielded one way
or another. If there is trouble in the final contest. it will give strength
to the Fukuda-Koento-Nakagawa-Deeocratic Socialist line." however, ultimately
Fukuda will have difficulty recruiting enough people.

Pukuda now says: ”There is half a year left. It is from now on that the
heavens will love." For the sake of this aging "golden bat" we should pray

that events do not turn out as they did after the Ohira-Pukuda war when he said.
"the voice of heaven sometimes says strange things."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Bungei Shunju LTD

9651
CSO: 6105/116

IIIICIHHIIAI.UIE(HULY
STACNATIOK 0? ASIAN ECONOMY DEEPENS
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SBIMIUN in Japanese 28, 29 “ay 82
[28 Hay 92 p 5]

[Text] Conditions have recently becone poor for the econoaies of a number of
Asian countries which had. up to now. achieved relatively uniforn growth. '
With the prolongation of the recession in the advanced countries of Europe
and Anerica. in addition to the collapse into stagnation of the exports of the
N105 (newly industrialized countries), the Southeast Asian region, including
the oil producing countries. cannot escape a slowing of growth due to the
decline in prices for prisary products. under the influence of the surplus
supply of crude oil. Re have sun-urized the present state and prospects of
the Asian econoaies based on reports free special correspondents on-the-spot.

South Korea, which had taken the lead in econolic develop-ant along the Rica.
is at present very unconfortahle. In 1980, the real GNP (gross national
product) experienced 6.2 percent negative growth due to the effects of the
second oil shock. but in 1981 achieved 7.1 percent growth. and the
government expected 7 percent growth again this year. However. entering 1982
the South Korean econony again displayed stagnation and for the first
quarter (January-March) the G“? was held to a b.2 percent growth rate. Even
though recovery is expected in subsequent periods, 1982 will be limited to.
at nost. the 5 percent level. The fifth 5-Year Plan (1982-1986) put forth
last year by the Chun Do Ewan government is already on the point of being
revised. The government plans to extend the tine franc of enterprises
involving heavy investment and reduce the anount of borrowing fro- foreign
countries. Thia is because with the stagnation of exports and donestic
demand intended capital expenditures in the private sector are also reduced.

Taiwan expected that the 5.5 percent growth of 1981 would be followed by a
jump to 8 percent annually for the period 1982-1985. However. according to
predictions nade by the Bank of America. growth will remain at 5.5 percent for
1982 and become 6.5 percent in 1983. There are those among Taipei econonists
who think that this year will see a growth rate lower than last year.

Even in Singapore, which had sustained smooth developnent despite the second
oil shock. the 7.2 percent rate of growth of the GDP (gross donestic product)
in the first quarter was the lowest quarterly growth rate recorded in the

last 6 years. There is also no sign of an end to inflation. and the rate of

IOI‘OIIIJMI.UIICI1BY
FOI‘OFFKIAI.USE¢IVLY

increase in the price of consumer goods of 8.3 percent in 1981 was followed by
an even higher 9.2 percent for January-March of this year. For Hong Kong also.
the 10.6 percent growth (real GDP) of 1981 was followed by more restricted
circumstances, with a probable 8 percent increase this year.

The Recession in the Advanced Countries is Painful

Uhy are the "108. which had showed themselves the most able students among the
deveIOping countries. in recession at present? The most immediate cause is
the stagnation of exports due to the world wide recession centered on Europe
and America. Exports have come to be the engine of growth for the N165. which
have small internal markets. In the case of Taiwan, they amount to a

powerful 50 percent of the GNP, and in South Korea they comprise 35 percent.

However. beginning this year. NICS exports uniformly showed distressing rates
of growth. In South Korea. the total for January-March was held to a slight
growth of the level of 5 percent compared to the same period of last year.
Given that South Korean exports had increased annually in the range of

15-30 percent over the last 5 years, the fall off is striking. Moreover. it
is expected that for Hay a minus 0.2 percent will be recorded. For Hong Kong
also. the 29 percent increase of 1980 was followed by 26 percent in 1981 but
dwindled to a 10 percent rate of increase for January-March 1982.

On top of the recession in the advanced countries, the beginning of restraint
on imports by the Middle Eastern oil producing countries, which had been a
large. growing market. has a considerable influence. For this reason, even
South Korea. which has earned foreign exchange by rapidly expanding the
export of construction services to the Middle East. has been working in
recent years to diversify the destinations of its exports in Southeast Asia
and Africa. Even so. structural factors allow no hope of an early
significant improvement in the stagnation of NICS exports.\

Effects Extending to Earnings Leader Textiles

The NICS. which have achieved their desired economic development, have also
experienced in the last few years a rapid increase in wages and their
competitiveness in the export of labor intensive products has rapidly fallen.
There is a report on "The present state of the international competitiveness
of South Korean manufacturers as seen by the buyers." prepared in April by the
South Korean Chamber of Commerce. In 1979, 65 percent of those planning the
purchase of South Korean manufacturers considered them "less expensive." but
this year the number fell to 54 percent.

Among the buyers those who responded "we are switching our source of imports to
another country" increased from 10.7 percent last year to 15.2 percent this
year. As beneficiaries of switching. Taiwan was neat common. followed by

Hong Kong and China successively.

There is no cause for complacency in Taiwan or Hong Kong. Textile exports have
been the flag bearer for NICS' development. but their decline in the last

year or two has been spectacular. For Taiwan, 1981 textile exports surpassed

a 15 percent gain and cracked the 20 percent level, but this year there are

InliolFKJAl.Uﬁl(lNLV
inliofFlﬂAl.USEIIVLY

rcslrirtlons on Imports under the new MFA (Hultinational Fabrics Agreement) and
lhvy will evidently decrease abOut 5 percent.

For Hong Kong also, orders on hand for textile products, its largest export.
declined for 3 months in succession through February. The group of industries
comprising spinning, weaving, and dyeing can no longer pay their way under
pressure from the underdeveloped countries of Asia. Apparel makers must
import their raw materials from places where land is cheaper, and their
competitive advantage with respect to delivery dates is decreasing.

The Raising of Productivity is not Progressing

0n the other hand. the movement to try to increase productivity through a
shift to technology intensive production is not progressing as hoped. Prime
Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore has been calling in recent years for a
'second industrial revolution" involving enhancing the technology
intensiveness of production and improving productivity. In order to make the
wages of workers appropriate for this they have been increased by about 20
percent each year for the last 3 years under government leadership. however,
basic productivity has not increased as expected. Tony Tan, Singapore's
minister of trade and industry, had said, "From January through March
productivity has increased no more than 1 percent. Hereafter it will be
necessary to hold the rate of wage increases to the scale of the increases in
productivity," so there has begun a change to a policy of restraining wage
increases. Over the last 10 years wages have increased between 31 and 39
percent, after discounting inflation, and this has engendered a satisfied
mood currently among the workers. The government is presently trying hard to
figure out a way of motivating the workers.

South Korea vigorously promoted in the second half of the 1970's a

revolution in science-intensive industry and this was a major factor in the
recent expansion of exports. However, even the greatly favored export of
shipping has become insecure as there is the prospect of a decrease for

April, on the basis of letters of credit in hand, of about 0.7 percent
compared to the same period of last year. Overall, science-intensive products
are down 13 percent.

According to a study prepared by the South Korean Government at the end of
Inst year, the result was that for color televisions, steel products,
passenger cars, and others. fob prices were uniformly lowered and export
carried out at a loss. Even for South Korea, which among the NICS is
farthest along in changing to high technology industry, conditions are poor.

The NICS have come to a major plateau in economic development. And, the

world recession is aggravating their discomfort. Even if they do raise
productivity, when the overseas markets are weak they cannot increase the

rate of factory operations. Japan, first, but the advanced countries of
Europe and America also will fight desperately to avoid being overtaken in the
area of technology intensive industry. As the ferocious struggle between

the developing and the advanced countries intensifies in a world economy that
resembles a zero-sum game, there seems no chance of bright prospects opening
up in the short term.

l!"l(lﬂﬂ(1kl.lﬂl!(ﬂﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I29 May 82 p 5]

[Text] "In order to weather the present world recession, the most urgent
problem is to tighten cur belts." So Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir,
taking no time to enjoy his landslide victory in the elections at the end of
May, launched an appeal to rebuild that country's economy. Malaysia, which
exports valuable primary products including excellent quality oil and has
progressed in industrial development, last year for the first time in 20 years
became a trade deficit nation and is being obliged to modify the fourth

5-Year Plan begun last year. The Malaysian economy, which had in recent years
maintained close to double digit growth while avoiding any slowing in the
rising value of its porducts and which has won the prize as the "star pupil

of ASEAN (Association of South East Asian Nations)," has ”exposed its

softness (FAR EASTERN ECONOMIC REVIEW."

Substant ial Decline Everywhere

The most important factor causing the Malaysian economy to stumble is the
anticipated fall in the prices of primary products. Primary product prices,
which held relatively firm in 1979 and 1980, continuously declined in 1981
under the influence of the prolonged recession in the advanced countries of
Europe and America, and prices have fallen significantly.

For example, in terms of prices as exported from Kuala Lumpur, the 1981
average price of natural rubber was down 15 percent compared to the previous
year, of tin down 12 percent, and of palm oil down 5 percent. Petroleum was
on a yearly average basis higher than the previous year, but at the end of
the year it declined substantially.

In sum, Malaysian exports of agricultural primary products for last year were
down in total value 10 percent compared to the previous year, and exports

of mining products, including oil. were down 1.7 percent. In addition the
export of electronics and other manufactured goods was also greatly lower,

by 17.3 percent, and the total value of exports was 5.6 billion Malaysian
dollars (about 10 billion U.S. dollars), 10 percent lower than the previous
year.

At present the trade deficit is still small but as the flow of imports remains
at its former high level the outflow of capital is severe. Because of this
the reserves of foreign exchange at the end of March at $3.6 billion were
about $600 million less than at the end of last year, and this gives the
government much concern.

The fact that the worsening of economic conditions due to the recession in the
advanced countries has even extended to oil producing nations is a
characteristic of the recent East Asian economy. OPEC member Indonesia is no

exception. Among the decisions made at the OPEC general meeting in Quito this
May lndonesiu determined to continue holding down production and will fall
short of its targeted income from oil by some $3 billion annually.

And. as with Malaysia, exports of coffee. rubber, and other agricultural
products are depressed. The end result is that the expenditure boom. once

10
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
INIICIWWCIAI.US£13‘LY

hacked by ever increasing oil revenues, is beginning to exhaust itself.
Going into this year the production of textiles, automobiles, and other
Japan-related enterprises had fallen to 20-30 percent less than the
comparable period of last year, and outcries have arisen that this is the
"contraction following expansion."

Among the non-oil producing ASEAN countries, the economy of the Philippines.
which had felt the most severe consequences of the oil shock, has, without
being given a chance to start to recover, been even further depressed. As for
the value of Philippine exports of primary products for last year, sugar was
down 5.9 percent, lumber 15.6 percent, cooper 19.9 percent, and nickel 35.6
percent compared to the previous year, and there is no sign of recovery so far
this year.

With the fact that the manufacturing sector has also not grown this year as
much as expected, the trade deficit for the first quarter of this year was
more than double that of the same period last year ($312 million) at $639
million. -

Prime Minister Virata recently announced that "the rate of growth of the real
GNP for 1981 was 3.8 percent in terms of fixed values." This is one point
lower than the 4.8 percent provisionally reported, and is the lowest rate
since 1973. The Philippine economy seems compelled at present to follow a
downward curve.

Thailand Also Proclaims "Recession"

In contrast, Thailand, also a non-oil producing developing country but one with
a primary export of rice, was lightly affected by the downward trend of

prices in 1981 and, according to government announcements, the rate of growth
of the real GDP was 7.6 percent better than predicted. At worst, lately, auto
sales. which were expected to be good, declined, and textiles were forced to
cut back operations, which did give a disquieting complexion to the lavishly
celebrated bicentennial of the Chakri Dynasty in April.

Finance Minister Sommai at a press conference on the llth following the
cabinet meeting to determine the budget for the 1983 fiscal year (October
l982-September 1983) issued a "declaration of recession," saying, "Hereafter,
government expenditures must be substantially restricted due to the
deterioration of conditions."

ﬁre ASEAN countries, excepting Singapore, are alike in depending fundamentally
an the export of primary products, but here. too, industrialization has made
progress recently and the proportion of manufactured goods among their exports
has increased. The prolonged recession in the advanced countries has hit
these nations with a double blow of declining prices for primary products and
stagnation in the export of manufactured products.

As a result, the ASEAN countries, which had maintained real growth through the
second half of the 1970's and 1980 that approached double figures and was never

less than 5 percent are also compelled to slow down to some 2-3 percent for this
year and next.

11
itlltlﬂﬂCJAl.lEI!(l¥LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Imwevcr. if we compare then to the NICS, their dependence on exports is less
so that the effects should be less. Malaysia, with the highest percentage
of exports in the GDP at 38.2 percent is the hardest hit. and the good
showing of Thailand, where this percentage is only 20 percent, also
illustrates the point.

Propping Up Construction, Etc.

Amidst anticipation of a recovery in the United States in the second half of
the year, it goes without saying that these primary product nations along
with the NICS are hoping that "American recovery will be early and strong."
The view is frequently expressed in Malaysia and elsewhere that "If we seek
the root of the present recession it is the high interest rates in the

United States and the strength of the dollar, and if the recovery of the
European and American economies is not far off we should see a clear period."
The optimistic thesis is deeply rooted that when conditions in the advanced
countries inprove double digit growth will again be possible.

However. it is undeniable that there will be a time lag of "about half a year
(Malaysian Central Bank)" in recovery in Europe and America bringing about
increased demand and higher prices for Asian primary products and restoring
life to the Asian economy. The Philippines recently established a policy of
stimulating demand in the farming villages by raising the price at which

the govern-est purchases hulled rice and lowering the price of fertilizer,
and other Asian countries are also planning to prop up areas where the boon
to some extent continues such as construction. seeming to be just waiting for
EurOpean and American recovery.

Commmm: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1982

9898
cso: 4105/125

12

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
ASPECTS OF JAPANESE YEN STUPID

Yen Buhange Rate Speculations
Tokyo SHOW TOYO K312“ in Japanese 1 Hay 82 pp 16-19

[Text] Last week. the yen exchange rate underwent a rebound following a

period of weakness. On April 23, it cloud at 263.10 yen, and a brake to

the yen's slide seene likely. At the turn of this year, a high yen in the
first half and a week yen in the second was predicted. but the actual situation
was just the opposite.

There are two reasons for the unexpected yen'e weakness. first, due to high
U.S. interest rates, the interest rate differentials at hone and abroad did

not decline, and the outflow of long-tern invest-once continued, leading to
a shortage of dollars.

Second. with gloomy prospects of the yen exchange rate, contracts for future
imports (purchase of futures in dollars) accunulated, applyilg pressure on
the comodity rete. Retinates are that contracts for future imports out-
standing at the end of March exceed the contracts for future exports (future
sales in dollars) by 3 billion yen.

The acctnulation of contracts for future imports represents the upfront
nature of dollar requirenents. Thus, it works as a factor for a weak yen at
that tine. but at a subsequent time, it leads to a drop in dollar densnds
and a strum yen.

The cumulative amount of contracts for future inorts has a plus effect on
the yen exchange rate as it acts as a factor for a strong yen. In short,
there are mounting signs that the weak yen naterial fro. January to nid-April
will show a reverse effect hereon.

Incidentally, the yen exchange rate. anon najor currencies, is known for
its wide range of fluctuation. It is like "high peaks with deep valleys."
What is the reason for the overshootin?

why the Yen Exchange Rate ﬂuctuates So Widely?

Nornally, there are three deternining econonic factors in the yen exchange
rate: (1) balance of payments, (2) wholesale couscdity prices. and (3)

l3
POIOFHCIALISIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interest rates. The first and second are termed fundansntals. Up until now,
the yen exchange rate has been discussed mostly around the fundanentals.

An extension of the views on the exchange rate indicates that such views are
linked to the theory that the weak yen, until recently, has been a "reflection
of weakenim funds-entals in Japan's economy." It cannot be denied that the
current "theory on Japan's economic deterioration" is firmly linked to the
keynote of a weak yen.

However, the yen exchange rate does not nave on fund-entals alone. A major
factor is the interest rate differentials. home and abroad. lapecially,
after December 1980, exchalue transactions were generally liberalized under
the new Foreign exchange Law. As a result. it becans possible to apply
long-tern funds kept in this country to other countries, taking advantage of
interest rate differentials. ‘lhis is the point that has been overlooked.

According to the "savings propensity survey' (1981) by the Prime Hinister's
Office. personal savings (worker's households) anounted to 115 percent of
annual incase. In other words, total personal savings exceeded annual in-
come by 15 percent. In 1980, it was 105.6 percent. The diversified foreign
application of such savings deposited with financial institutions is natural,
o course.

Real Interest Rate Differentials Scrutiniaed

In the Ministry of Internstional Trade and Industry's "1981 Production Trend
in the Mining Industry," an analysis into factors for changes over the previous
quarter looks at the weight of Japanese-v.8. real interest rate differentials
with utmost concern. This is followed by Japanese-0.8. balance of payment
differentials (seasonally adjusted value) and thirdly. the fluctuation in
Japan's foreign currency reserves over the previous quarter.

The analysis covers the period from January-March quarter of 1975 to the
July-Septeaber quarter of 1981. But with the enforcement of the new foreign
exchange law fro. December 1980. the actual view is that the Japanese-11.8.
real interest rate differentials would weight lore heavily than indicated
in the analysis.

A greater importance is placed on the real interest rate differentials than on
the nominal for the following reason: If the escalation of noninal interest
rates in the United States is a reflection of rising inflation, the interest
rate rise is an unavoidable one in the midst of the worsening fundanentals.
Hence. there would be no great outflow of funds from Japan.

However. since l98l, high 0.8. interest rates have persisted, notwithstanding
lower wholesale con-sodity prices. For instance, while the federal fund rate
remained in two-digit figures, the real interest rate was 4.6 percent, 8.5,
14.9 and 14.1 in the first, second third and fourth quarters of 1981
respectively, and 10.6 percent in the anmry-l'ebruary period this year.

Outflow of Long-Term Investments

In such a way, u.s. real interest rates began to escalate. But with Japan
lowering its interest rates. the Japanese-v.8. real interest rate differentials

lb
WWWMY
reflected a minus position from April-June 1979 to April-June 1980. by minus
is meant that the 0.8. real interest rates were higher than Japan's. ‘lhe
real interest rate differentials again showed a minus from April-June 1981
to January-February this year.

Again refer to the chart and note the movement of the yen exchange rate
(primary exchange rate during term) and the Japanese-0.8. real interest rate
differentials. An examination of the period after 1979 where the Japanese-
0.8. real interest rate differentials shows a minus reveals that the yen
exchange rate is under the 200 yen range. In other words, it runs between
220-260 yen. An exception is during the April-June quarter of 1979 when it
was 218.43 yen.

It can be observed that whilea close relationship exists between Japanese-0.8.
real interest rate differentials and the yen exchange rate, Japan's exchange
rate policy was no policy at all. It see- thet the argument "Japan's interest
rates ought to be lowered in line with the U.8.'s" was unduly emphasised.

Another point is that some industries are still unfamiliar with the floating
exchange system. In the oil industry, for instance, there is a lack of aware-
ness about changes in the exchange rate and the creed there is that a "strong
yen is normal." Such a creed utilimately led to a great shakeup in the yen
exchange rate.

"hat Lack of Buchange Policy Led ‘Io

Those sensitive to the interest rate differentials, at home and abroad, are
institutional investors such as life insurance and trust companies. To
institutional investors who compete for interests on their assets, the world

is the scene for application of funds.

Recently accused of being the "chief reason for a weak yen," institutional
investors have cited the following as grounds for application of their funds

OVGI'ICOI 2
I

First, from the standpoint of diversification, investments need to be spread
out for reasons of safety. Second, while domestic application of funds is
desirable and without exchange risks, the slack demand has made overseas
application necessary.

At one glance, the first and second reasons appears to be inconsistent. The
former can be regarded as a structural reason and the latter a cyclical reason
From such a point of view, any diminution of domestic and foreign interest
rate differentials should apply a brake to fund application overseas based

on the cyclical reason.

Operating Stance of Life Insurance and Trust Companies

Delicate changes have been noted between life insurance companies and trust
companies in the manner of application of foreign loans. In the application
of funds. they would watch both foreign interest rates (bond market) and
the exchange (yen exchange rate). The life insurance companies, however,

15
POI OFFICIAL LB! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

would not have to be overly nervous since, for example, a capital loss owing
to exchange rate fluctuations can be treated as an integral process of ap-
plication of total assets.

In the case of trust conpaniee, because they involve the use of annunity
funds, working profits or losses nust be handled as annunity accounts. Seps-
rate from the trust account. the annunity account must bear any losses in the
use of the annuity fund. Since interest received by the annunity fund would
decrease to that extent, utnost caution is required.

In the application of funds overseas, a certain trust bank has followed the
"a percent rule" as a standard. A short-tern application, it would be applied
when the interest rate differentials between the Buroyen and Euro currency
opens 0,; ‘: rarcent or above. This lo percent rule would "ensure 80 percent
success in application" (certain trust company). An 80 percent assured rate
is considerable.

What is the policy of inatituticnal investors with respect to application

of funds overseas hereafter? They can aim at capital gains on bonds when the
yen is strong as 0.8. interest rates would then be moving downward. But as a
strong yen means a weak dollar, there would be rope-pulling between the amount
of this weakened dollar and capital gains.

For institutional investors, the nest ideal tine would be when 0.8. interest
rates fall drastically. But the advantages will vanish as tine passes. That
is because the bond narket enbreces the decline in the interest rates. Over
the long-tern, the outflow of long-tern investments fron Japan should gradually
ease up through the diminution of Japanese-0.8. real interest rate differenti-
ates.

Oil Conpanies' Deep Faith in Strong Yen

As opposed to institutional investors sensitive to doaestic and foreign
interest rate differentials, the oil industry can be classified as a case
of failure owing to overconfidence in a strong yen. A tabulation of the oil
industry's profits and losses from exchange rate differentials from fiscal
1972 to 1980 shows a profit of 1,288,300 million yen and a loss of 507.600
million yen (refer to this journal of Hatch 13, 1982), leaving a profit of
780,800 nillion yen.

This would invariably make one wish to wait for a kuikaze (strong yen), but
exchange policies have completely fallen behind. The ratio of crude oil and
low-grade oil to the aount of imports cleared through custons in fiscal

1981 was 37.1 percent. worth some 52,900 trillion dollars, or a nonthly average
of 4,500 million dollars. Carrying such a weight, whether the oil industry
will issue contracts for future inports smoothly will have a large impact on
the supply and demand for dollars in the exchange narket.

The oil industry's contracts for future iaports cover a very snail amount,
less than 10 percent of the value of oil inports. Compared to about 30
percent for other industries, the amount is minimal. but in view of the
continued financial distress, it is understandable that the oil industry

16
”MEMORY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wants to avoid a aituation of coat and loaa confirmation through early iaaurance
of contracts for future inorta.

However, it ia choking ita own neck, for it brought about "nixed errora" which
became aaaociated with a weak yen. All of Japan would atand to benefit if
the oil induatry realioea the failurea of ita exchange policy and acta to

stabilize the yen enchenge rate through a gradual incroaae of contracta for
future inporta.

Yet, for contracta for future exporta and for future iaporta to accuulate
unilaterally would be undeairable. If there ia a balance. it ahould not be a
factor for diaruption of due exchange rate. for a major iaporter like the
oil induatry to conatantly ehy away free contracta for future inparta in

not praieeworthy.

Around 220 Yen in April-June Quarter

Several pointa of aiaunderatanding hover over Japan'a exchange market: the
thoughtleea promotion of low intereat ratea in diaregard of Japaneae-U.8.
real intereat rate differentiala, and reluctance to iaaua contracta for future

imports. hang the najor currenciea. the yen exchange rate undergoea the
largeat fluctuation.

The yen exchange rate can be expected to atabiliee gradually if there points
are recognized and corrected. But even if inter-adieu end long-tern atability
were to be achieved, the crux is whether the fabric of last week'a yen re-
bound will be euatained.

In the chart, a pattern can be noted in the trend of the yen exchange rate,
Up until 1978-1981, the prinary exchange rate during April-June cloaed at
about 220 yen. Even during a change fron a atrong yen to a weak yen or vice
veraa, the 220 yen level of April-June war obaerved in each year.

why it renaina around 220 yen during the April-June quarter is unknown. It
may be that thia level ia “coufortable” (appropriate) for the yen exchange
rate. We exchange dealer (a leading exchange bank) aaya "around 220 yen
in poaeible in the April-June quarter thia year."

17
roaomaatuseumr
mu OFFICIAL USE MIN

Pactora for Yen Bxcha tion

 

ﬁg‘m paw-3k )

Vibnv ~v-p- IOIII
Key: “IIIIIOGIMNI' M'Ill' .-
l. Yen 8. 1975
2. Yen exchange rate (primary rate 9. 1976
againat dollar during period) 10. 1977
3. In 100,000 dollars ll. 1978
lo. Janna-0.8. current trana- 12. 1979
action differential (aeaaonally 13. 1980
adjusted value) 14. 1981
5. Japaneae-U.8. real intereat rate
differential

6. Foreign currency reserves, in-
creaae or decreaae (conpared
to previoua period)

7. (By Quartere)

".3. Real intereat rate differential- (Japan'a call rate - rate of yearly
increaae of uholeaale co-odity pricea) -(U.S. federal fund rete - rate
of yearly increaae of wholeaele co—odity pricee)

Current tranaactiona differentiala- (Jap n'a current transaction - 0.8.
current aaaignenta); aeuonally edjuated valuea

COPYRIGHT: Shukan ‘l'oyo Keiaai 1982

18
roaouncutuatmv
Liberalisation of Yen
Tokyo 8111mm TOYO IBIZA! in Japanese 1 May 82 pp 20-23
[Text] Resolution by Stronger Intervention

Sinilar to econonic nanagenent distressed at having to cross a tightrope,
the foraulation of counter-assures against the weak yen is pressured under
numerous impediments.

0n the point of blasing the U.8.' high interest rate policy for the "abnornal"
phenonenon of a strong dollar, Japan and the no nations are in agreenent. But
when it cones to the natter of a weak yen, the m nations are hard on Japan.
The leaders of BBC nations have frequently charged Japan with "following a
policy to induce a weak yen" and do not lend an ear to Japan's rebuttal of
"biased thinking based on nisunderstanding."

As logic, that nay he true. But unforttmately. Japan's policy nakers' true
intent may be that to have a realistic policy, reverse neasures are needed.
This is because they cone under the yoke of unclear econonic prospects, in-
creased trade friction and financial revitalization.

As a result. some even clai- that until there is improvement in the level of
u.s. interest rates, nothim can be done eascept to step up yen buying and
dollar selling activities. But it does not appear that a reduction of 0.8.
deficits or budget revision will occur in May, and there is no tine to waste,
siqu relying on the United States. Purther, strong policy neasures for

a strom yen are needed prior to the suit. Also, should a weak yen continue
over a long-tens. there could be concern over the energence of import in-
flationary symptoms caused by price hikes of imports.

In view of such conditions, there is little time to confront the issue of

a week yen. It seesas that the bank of Japan intervened in Hatch with over 1
billion dollars and again in the first 10 days of April with under 1 billion
dollars. It has been intervening increasingly to prevent the yen from rising
above the level of 250 yen to 1 dollar.

Opportunity For Making Doubly Sure ‘l‘hru ﬁnergency Restrictions

Hhether intervention alone can prevent the yen from rising above 250 yen and
renewing the weak level or nave downward to the 230 yen level does not rule out
skepticism. Also, the Ministry of Finance is apprehensive over a drop in
foreign currency reserves for It consecutive nonths, and there is no definite
assurance that ”stirring intervention” would continue.

Slightly prior to March 31, the day the yen fell once again to the low level
of 268 yen and renewing this year's low, a proposal had been nade on short
notice to invoke "emergency restriction" neasures based on the Foreign
Exchange Law. The Ministry of Finance's International finance Bureau Chief
Kata had hinted at its possible invocation in the Diet, and even Bank of Japan

President Haekawa who previously had oppoeed the emergency restrictions
changed his nind and concurred.

19
maomaatustmv
90! 09510“. USE ONLY

Through greater intervention coupled with anticipated action. the yen exchange
rate steadily rose. and around last week, observations were growing that
"emergency restrictions may not have to be invoked."

It is canon knowledge that a false statement is permissible up to the last
minute in the case of invocation of emergency restrictions as is with yen
revaluation. From the nature of emergency restrictions, the nost effective
method is to strike hard at the other party and persist when the exchange
rate is about to change. In that sense, this nay be a good time.

when To Draw the Heirloom Sword

The emergency provisions, aimed at supporting the yen against the foreign
rate. provides for several methods. First is the "non-standard loan system"
created by the bank of Japan at the time of l-percent cut in the official
rate in March last year. This is a measure designed to pad the Bank of
Japan's loan rate to financial institutions above the conventional official
rate in an emergency situation of excessive outflow of short-term investment
due to wider domestic and foreign interest rate differentials or a weaker
yen. Though the term runs 3 months at most, s such shorter term is desired.
The targets are all financial institutions having contracts for loans on
notes with the Bank of Japan (largest effect on city banks).

If one of the major reasons for the currently weak yen lies in the Japanese-
U.S. interest rate differentials, nonstandard loans can be termed as ep-
propriste. Interest rates can be adjusted with interest rates. however.
the Bank of Japan does not have "confidence" that the non-standards' in-
vocation will prove effective because the weight of outflow of long-term
investments is a vital factor in the yen's weakness and there are signs of
anxiety abroad over Japan's economic situation.

If the intent is to bury Japanese-v.8. real interest rate differentials, non-
standard interest rate amounting to about 3 percent can be added. But in
this case, there will be violent reaction fro Japan's exponents of economic
priority. A mere 0.5 percent or 1 percent nay be too little to expect
results, and the timing for lifting emergency measures would be difficult to
grasp. At any rate, a dileua would occur.

At the massnt, the feeling is that there is no choice but to continue with
intervention through "Operation H." (Initial of President Kaekawa; used
in Hestern circles to mean bank of Japan's weal: yen measures).

Nevertheless. a step similar to the non-standard loan is now being followed.
It is a measure being pushed vigorously since the latter part of March in
order to realise high, short-tern money market interest rates. ‘l‘o absorb

the surplus funds of comsercial banks, a great quantity of bargain notes were
issued. As a result, the call rate climbed to the range of 7 percent and
reverted back to the high level that prevailed before the official rate was
lowered in December last year. Further, on four occasions since April 9,

TB (government short-term securities) worth an aggregate 2.1o00 billion yen

20
mammal“
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were sold. Another sale is scheduled soon, amounting to about several hundreds
billion yen.

A measure which calls for high. short-tern interest rates in a time of low,
long-tern interest rates (0.2 percent reduction for long-term bonds and
others from April) is unprecedented.

The Bank of Japan's strategy appears to be to reduce domestic and foreign
interest rate differentials through such means, monitor the movmaent of
short-term investments and the yen exchange rate, and if this does not work
out. to resort for the first time to the "heirloom sword."

Difficult Decisionmaking lnviromsent In Spite of Emergency

If the non-standard loan system is the means to counter a weal: yen from an
interest rate aspect, the emergency restrictions under the Foreign bochange
Law does so from the quantity aspect. Further, the emergency restrictions
are more stringent than non-standard measures.

With the enforcement of the new Foreign Exchange Law in December 1980,
Japan's exchange end trade policies took a major shift toward ”general
liberalization." But excepted conditions under emergency restrictions were
legally prescribed for invisible trade end export-import transactions.
Extending to 22 pages and concentrating on capital transactions, the neteriel
covered the scope of restrictions and numerous methods.

Free capital transactions in normal times can be changed into a permit
system in an emergency, while the pre-notification system of transactions
can be changed or tensinsted upon advisement. To effect compliance, the
Minister of Finance is enpowered to issue "orders."

As abnormal conditions, there are seven, to include: (1) a balanced inter-
national balance of payments running into difficulty; (2) sudden changes in
the yen's foreign exchange rate; (3) a greet shift of funds, dmeetically end
externally, adversely affecting Japan's financial and capital markets.

In view of the above, the invocation of emergency restrictions will not be
unusual under the present situation of “sniping at the yen."

Outflow Restrictions on Small 8m

Though not an invocation of emergency restrictions under the Foreign Exchange
Law, there are a number of measures designed to stem capital outflow and pro-
mote capital inflow.

One is the notification to securities companies in early March to suspend
zero-coupon bond investments, a typical case of capital outflow. Since the
counencement of sales from April last year until this February, they have been
popularly received. with sales reaching 1,120 million dolh rs (780 million
dollars in February) until halted by the Ministry of Finance.

21
M OFFICIAL MONEY
PO! 05110“. USE ONLY

Also, on April 9, it directed the financial institutions and securities
companies to hold back on foreign loans in yen and yen-denominated bond float-
ation. Hitherto. total limits had been set up on a half-year basis (560
billion yen for the first half and 790 billion for the second), but under the

revised system. individual business plans will be checked starting the first
half of 1982.

In actual terms, it implies an effort to hold the figure to under 560 billion
yen. Also, the period of loans and floatation were shortened.

Further, the domestic sales of foreign CP and CD slated for were postponed.

In previous periods of s weak yen, capital inflow measures were constantly
inplemented, but there are fewer such moves now. It is because there is
little left to do, and impact loans have been expanded and interest rates
on free yen deposits liberalized.

Possible measures are expanding the sovereign tax exempt system granted to
foreign governments and central banks to include stocks and relaxing res-
trictions on foreign stocldnolders in specific category or companies. However,
not much expectation can be placed on this. One measure relatively effective
is to expand the yen conversion limit at foreign banks, but as these are
outside the control of the Bank of Japan. there are limitations, especially
when couidering the adverse effect on future policies in a period of tighten-

ing.
Administrative Guidance Not Understood

In the accowanying table, there are many items under the headings of permit
system and reportingsystem. But an examination shows that, individually.
none provides an imediate resolution.

A realisitc judgment is that they can only restrict the acquisition of
foreign securities by residents and check the outflow of invesments. Strong
measures will probably be taken against securities cospsnies, life in-
surance firms and some companies dealing with real estate investments abroad.

In actuality, where banks are involved, it would be a simple matter to make
them comply with the Ministry of Finance's "guidance," and the merits of
preserving the exchange bank system can be demonstrated.

however, there still would be a problem. For, as evident in the “prohibition"
of sales of zero coupon bonds, the substance of restrictions remains vague
and obscure. Although the innovation of emergency provisions was warranted
in light of developments and the aftermath, the reason for such action is un-
clear under the old type of administrative guidance.

It is natural for foreign sources unfamiliar with Japanese practices to
cast a suspicion. Also efforts against a weak yen and for a strong yen

22
me OFFICIAL US! MY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are suspect. If emergency restrictions are needed, it is important to clarify
the policy, method and its basis and then implement them. Otherwise, even a
"treasured sword” will tarnish.

Clarification of the Road Toward the Yen's Internationalization

Another important point concerning the lore-term stabilisation of the yen
exchange rate is the relation of liberalisation of Japan's financial and
investment markets and the internationalization of the yen.

The Ministry of Finance finds itself unable to come out strongly with emergency
restrictions. This is because of fear of attack as being counter to liberal-
ization and its desire to guard against expanding the battlefield of economic
friction.

west Germany's Economic Minister Lambsdorff stresses: “The yen share of
fore-3n currency reserves in the world's central banks is 6 percent and the
mark's share 16 percent. from the standpoint of economic power, it is the
reverse. ‘lhe yen should perform its function as currency reserves, the means
of international account settlements."

French leaders, including President Mitterrand, have proposed a tri-sxis cur-
rency stabilisation concept: "A fixed exchange rate within a specific floating
range after getting the yen, dollar and European currencies together on some
level." Even in the United States, frequent suggestions made are "a shift

to the fixed exchange rate among countries having overcome inflation, with
Japan's level at one dollar to about 170 yen."

The concepts and future plans all vary, but there is one point in counon.
That is, as "Japan enjoys a high status with almost 10 percent of the inter-
national economy, it should make sacrifices connensurate with it. he yen
should reinforce the three functions of account settlements, reserves and
intervention and perform the role of international curremy."

The Effective Tokyo Offshore

Much of these assertions amount to pressure. But is is a fact that the yen's
internationalisation has proceeded at a pace faster than Japan had realised.
For instance, the loan balance of Buroyen is estimated at nearly 5 billion
dollars, and demand for yen for financing and applications is very high.

Against this. it cannot be denied that "Japan's capital market has been
liberalized legally, but not liberalized with respect to application."

(Hr Lambsdorff) It amounts to: ”a Tokyo offshore banking center should be
established and the market opened widely." (Taku aosomi, president, Overseas
Economic Cooperation Fund).

23
M OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, against the demand for yen funds. long-term loans or Buroyen
and the issuance of Buroyen bonds could be liberalized. Or as a plan to limit
fund demands to export-import transactions involving Japan or intermediary
trade, a yen-denominated bank acceptance discount market could be established.

Further, with respect to desires for an arbitrage between the yen and other
currencies, a Tokyo offshore market could be developed.

Of course, many kinds of disadvantages are possible in the yen's inter-
nationalisation and change to a currency reserve. Over a long-term, the
liberalization of the market and internationalisation is a stabilizing factor,
but over a short term, it is a disruptive material and the exchange market

could act wildly. Also, it can become a constraint on invocation of domestic
financial policies.

Nonetheless, a slow response due to apprehension over making the you a currency
reserve could hurt U.S. and Burcpean trust. We must not forget as regards
trade friction that Japan's response, lacking long term concepts and in-

variably fragmented, was responsible for the gradual retrogression and deeper
fissures.

The most effective "yen measures" would consist of formlating a long-term
strategy on the yen's general role. to include the problem of how to return
the surplus in current transactions to foreign countries, and offering a tine
schedule.

2!.
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
Regulations in Force Under General Liberalizatior

nit System for Capital Transactions (Arts, 20, 21, Poreigr

Exchange bank is party Ordim

rest:

Others Permit

s Ordinl
rest

ures Exchange bank is party Ordim
to rest
Others Permit

ns- Exchange bank is party Ordim
snts rest
Others Per-it

ities Through designated Ordim
securities companies reel

stion of (Except Buroyen bonds) Ordim
rest

ation of Pen-it
citation

pal estate

anes tnsn ts

:ocks of
I

Issuance abroad by
foreign currency so

Issuance in Japan b
rcsident

Acquisition in Jena
resident

Acquisition of stoc
by foreign investo

Roqueot for verific
acquisition of sto

Acquisition of stoc
SOI‘OC‘NC1A|.UIIIMULY

BCONOHIC

THREE YEAR DECREASE 13 NET FOREIGN CLAIMS REPORTED
Tokyo NIKON KBIZAI SBIHBUI in Japanese 25 May 82 p 1

[Text] On May 25. Finance ﬂinister Hhtanabe submitted to the cabinet a
"Report on Foreign Loans" (as of the end of 1981) describing the loan
situation between Japan and foreign countries. This report can be called the
"Japan version” of the balance sheets prepared by enterprises at the time of
account settlements. According to the report. Japan's net foreign clains
outstanding. calculated by substracting liabilities from assets. amount to
$10,918 million or 616 million less than at the close of 1980. a drop to
one-third of the peak level (at the end of 1978). This means a decrease of
net foreign claims for 3 consecutive years. Although the 1981 balance of
payments showed a surplus for the first time in 3 years. the net foreign
claims continued to decrease.

Japan's net foreign claims at the end of 1981 totaled $209,257 million,
exceeding $200 billion for the first time since statistics came to be taken at
the end of 1971. On the other hand. foreign debts totaled 5198.339 million.
As a result. the net foreign claims. the difference between those two.
decreased slightly from the end of the previous year. Such a decrease of

net foreign claims. said to equal the equity of enterprises. is an

indication of Japan's worsening external finances for the government and
private sector.

Also. when compared with Europe and the United States. Japan's net claims of
under $11 billiOn are on the level of one-fifth that of the United States and
one-third of West Germany (both as of the end of 1980).

In the past. Japan's net foreign clains outstanding varied. depending on the
trend of balance of payments. For example. in 1979 and 1980 when the balance
of payments showed a huge deficit because of the oil crisis. foreign
borrowings were stepped up sharply to cover the deficits. resulting in greater
foreign debts and decreased net claims.

The decrease of net claims at the end of 1981 despite the surplus in balance
of payments is due to the inflated assessed value of external debts owing to
changes in the yen rate.

27
FOIIOIFICIAI.UBI1DNLN
FOR1OIINCJAI.IIIECIULY

The yen was stronger by 32 yen when compared betveen the end of 1980
($1.00 - 262 yen) and the end of 1981 ($1.00 - 210 yen). As a result, the
assessed value of Japanese stocks held by foreigners leaped.

Because of stronger yen, the assessed value of net foreign cleias also
increased. As for the alount of increase due to change of valuation, the
external liability is greater by about $5.9 billion. 0n the other hand, as
the 1981 surplus in the balance of paynents, even after considering errors
and omissions, is about $5.3 billion, the difference of about 600 sillion
represents a decrease of net claias.

Foreign Assets 8 Liabilities as of End of 1981
(In sillion dollars; ( ) denotes decrease or liability over-run)
Increase or decrease

 

Assets End of 1981 in 1981
(Long-tern assets) 117,090 29,209
Private sector 89,269 22,765
Direct investsents 26,506 6,896
Deferred export pay-ants 13,225 3,652
Loans 18,966 6,105
Securities investments 31,538 10,099
Others 1,056 215
Govern-ent sector 27,821 6,666
Deferred export pay-eats 1,168 659
Loans 19,936 6,629
Others 6,737 1,556
(Short-tern assets) 92,167 20,668
Private sector - 62,912 16,865
Financial accounts 61,076 15,916
Others 1,838 969
Government sector 29,255 3,603
Financial accounts 29,252 3,606
Others 3 (1)
(Total assets) 209.257 69.677
Liabilities
(Long-tern liabilities) 76,205 26,636
Private sector 53,608 18,386
Direct invest-ents 3,915 665
Deferred export payments 5 (l6)
Loans ' 1,678 (165)
Securities invest-ants 67,852 17,628
Others 358 272
28

FOD1OI'IJM1.USI1MNLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080045-9

FOR/OFFIJAI.UBE(HNLY
Government sector 20,597
Loans 178
Securities invest-ents 20,619
Others 0
(Short-tern liabilities) 124.136
Private sector 117,110
Financial accounts 100.619
Others l6.b9l
Government sector 7,026
Financial accounts 3,922
Others 3,102
(Total liabilities) 198,339
(Total net assets) 10,918
Private sector (18.537)
Government sector 29,655

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Ksizai Shinbunsha 1982

9097
CSO: 6105/128

29
-00I‘OIIICIAI.UII1DNLN

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600080045-9
:ziggég'EEEEEE;
iii: 3!”

53353:; 323.!
sum

mm: or mm-mculwro, Porootry ond nohodoo muotor uchtro
rm“ 'rburodoy ookod on odvtoory body on otudy tho odvtoobtltty of bio
dutotry'o plot: to oot tho producor prlcoo of 1932 cropo of Iboot, borloy
oud ryo at the one lovol oo in tho provlooo yoor. I! tho pun to opprovod
1: will bo tho ftrot duo in 22 yooro tint tho prtcoo of the groin hovo
boon trozoa. Tho producor prtcoo ot Mob tho 3mm: buyo tho grotto
tron doIoottc for-on hove boon mood ovory yoor otnoo 1955. rho producor
pricoo for 1981 cropo voro 11.067 you ($63.3) por 60 kilogrolo for moot,
8,328 yon (332.6) for borloy ond 11.396 you (“10.6) for rye. The odvioory
body, tho luco Prtco Council, to apoctod to coqloto tho otudy of tho pun
later ﬂmrodoy. ‘ﬂlo union-y 0111 for-11y ammo tho 1982 producor
prtcoo Frtdoy. Tho duoery boo docidod to froooo tho prtcoo boauoo of o
memo; dam: in tho food oooouut. [rue] (tokyo Human um um in
Englioh 25 Jun 82 p s]

COPYRIGEI: Mich! Dotly Hm 1982
080: 4120/32?

31
10R WPICIAL USE MY
1 “WWW?

3mm All) newcomer

HEADS 0P 0.8. coomrs IN JAPAN VI!" smtcounuc'ron m
Different Business Gusto-s
Tokyo Nil!!! SANGYO 83mm in Japanese 20 Apr 82 p 5

[Article by reporter Nakeno: "Desperate Battle Due to Differences in
Business Custons; Understandings on the 'Differences' Veried”]

[Text] “There is no danger of rekindling the semiconductor
friction between the United States and Jspsn" (Vice
President Atsuyoshi Ouchi of Nippon Electric Conpany).

The trade incone and expenditure of both countries are
roughly in belence end the tariffs have also been on an
equal footing since April. As for capitsl invest-eat and
technical exchange, both countries hsve actively extended
their routes into each other's territory. "He are not
doing anything wrong. so why does the United States

repeat anti-Japanese criticise so passionately?” Ouchi's
opinion represents the consensus of Japan's eeliconductor
business circles. However. 11.8. seniconductor
nenufacturere are strongly irritated by the "closed" nature
of the Japanese nsrket. So the views of the presidents of
large 0.8. companies in Japan. which constitute the
spearhead‘ for capturing the Japanese Isrket were sought on
the subject of "whether the Japanese nsrket is really a
closed nsrket."

There is only one investigative report through which one csn understsnd the
true strength of 0.8. seniconductor nsnufacturers in the Japanese nerltet.
This report, conpiled by the Bank of Merica, is titled "The Actual Ststus
of Japanese Seniconductor Busineu Circles." The sesiconductor products
”made in USA" which were sold in 1981 in Japan's trillion-yen seniconductor
nsrket anounted to 85 billion yen. or no nore than 10 percent of the share.
Moreover, this was a reduction fro. 90 billion yen in 1980. Although this is
nuch better than imported cars. which have s share of only about 1 percent of
the Japanese Isrket. the conetitive edge that the 0.8. seniconductor
products had several years ago has fest becone a "bygone Iyth.”

32
”WMMY
Strong Consumer Demand

President Roy Seals of Japan NS (National Semiconductor) was interviewed
first. hr Seals took up this post last June after working as the managing
director of an English plant. Although he was stationed at Tachikawa for 1
year as a member of the 0.5. Army when he wee 19 years old, "Japan was absent
from my mind until I was ordered by Charley Spoke (president of US) to become
president of the Japanese company." he said. "hen asked "whether it is really
so difficult to invade the Japanese market." according to the report compiled
by the Bank of America. President Seals replied: ”There is a 'thick barrier'
in the form of differences in business customs." He felt keenly. after

10 1/2 months' experience in the semiconductor business in Japan. that "the
consumer is strong and the manufacturer is subordinate to the consumer--in
the 'poaition of a elave.'" Japan's business customs are quite different
from those in the United States, where the consumer and the manufacturer deal
with one another on an equal footing.

"In any case. the consumer's demand for service is very strict. The lead time
on the product delivery date is extremely short. The response to the

technical problem is pressed very hard. Demand for a discount is also very
strong...." the trade conditions for semiconductors represented by the
household electric appliance industry are extremely strict. however, precisely
because there are consumers who make such severe demands. the Japanese
manufacturers are used to the discipline and produce quality products, and.

as a result. they are able to develop their competitive edge so much that

they threaten the 0.5. manufacturers.

Theraupon I asked President Seals: "If you give up because the consumer
demand is harsh. then the 0.8. companies cannot expect to increase sales.

In Japan, you must adopt the Japanese style of marketing." He appeared
somewhat offended by this question. but excused himself by saying. "I learned
the first time I came to Japan to 'Do in Rome as the Romans do,'" and he
went forward to make a fierce countarsrgument.

"Please do not misunderstand; N8 is practicing a quality control which is as
good as any Japanese rival's. let me ask you a question. Suppose there are
Japanese and 0.5. semiconductor products which are completely identical in all
aspects. including price, quality. and delivery date. which product would the
Japanese consumer buy? Unfortunately. no Japanese consumer would sign a
contract with the 0.8. company. I personally inquired about a few large
enterprises whose internationalization is quite advanced (he named specific
names) and was told plainly we would never do such a foolish thing as to buy
0.5. products if they are only comparable to the Japanese products."

Critical of Insufficient Effort

President Sadakiyo China of Hostec Japan was visited next. Mostec ie a

leading manufacturer in the field of memory products. However, it was late in
developing the 66 Kbit RAH (random access memory) and allowed the Japanese
manufacturer to get ahead. The details of the 1981 settlement of accounts

were said to be quite miserable, so "the budget this year for the main office
as well as for the overseas companies has been curtailed to a zero growth rate."

33
IOI¢OIIICIAI.IEI!(IVLY
“OFFICIAL!“ONLY

before taking up with Hostec Japan, President China worked as the product
marketing manager for Intel Japan. lie is a veteran of 15 years in the

semiconductor business. Having also worked for the 0.8. Amdahl Co. he is
well versed in computers. when asked about "the differences in business
customs represented by the manufacturer-consumer relationship," as pointed
out by President Seals of Japan as. he said flatly: "I agree with President
Seals' opinion. because there is no concept of contract in Japanese society."

To be sure. there are contracts between manufacturer and consumer in the
Japanese semiconductor business. what President China wanted to stress was
the business custom practiced in Japan in which. ”after the contract is
signed. the consumer often breaks it without a qualm, and the manufacturer
does not complain about the consumer's having broken the contract." It is
difficult to explain such a state of affairs to the parent company. which is
accustomed to a business atmosphere in which "contracts must be filled
coupletely," and try to make them understand.

Ihereupon I asked: "Do Japanese consumers discriminate against products made
by foreign companies?" President China's reply was: "No." The business
custom of Japanese semiconductor firms characterised by the nonexistence of
contracts (or. more correctly. in which the contract. if it exists, may not
always be fulfilled) applies equally to the Japanese manufacturers. "It is
nonsense to complain that 'Japsn is a closed market' without making a
reference to the insufficient efforts of the foreign-capital manufacturers.
Companies such as ours, which do not have a plant in Japan and are troubled'
by the exchange rate. are quite helpless via-a-vis the consumers," he added.

President (Katabiki) Kamo of Intel Japan has a different opinion from those
of the two gentlemen interviewed previously. Intel was the company that
developed the first microcomputer. President Kamo, who was a coemercial fir-
man (Nissho-Iwei Company Ltd; Tokyo Electron), has been acquainted with
Chairman 6. Moore and Vice Chairman R. Nois of Intel since the time these two
gentlemen became independent of Pairchild. He was scouted to be the
president of Intel Japan when it was started 6 years ago. They began
preparing for the production of semiconductors in Japan last year by
transferring various main office departments to the Chikuba Research and
Educational town in Ibaraki Prefecture.

Superior Technology Goes

"Speaking of Japanese consuaers being harsh. the situation is the same in the
United States. In Japan. as in the United States, if one holds onto such a
narrow viewpoint. he cannot be victorious in dealing with 10 products. which
demand a worldwide viewpoint and marketing strategy." President Kano stated
clearly: "It is evident that the 1c import business will be affected by the
fluctuating exchange rate for the yen, and it is rather natural that Japanese
consumers should prefer Japanese products, because they have had a much
longer association with them in the past." He added: "I have never thought
of the Japanese market as being closed."

so
IIIIIINHIIAI.UGIIIVLY
Intel has captured the Japanese market in its world strategy. "It is always
difficult for foreign products to make inroads in other countries, no matter
what country it may be. It is the same in the semiconductor business. Intel
is a technology-oriented company. He believe that we can win the race of
ever-advancing seeiconductor development if we can introduce products which
are technologically advanced. This can be seen from Intel's success in
winning the lead and share struggle in the continuous development race since
its commercialization of the microcomputer." stressed President Kano.

Japanese Companies Receive Subsidies and financial Tavors

NS President Charley Spoke rates Japan highly as a rival. Japanese
semiconductor manufacturers have made the best use of mass-production
technology and concentrated their investments in the field of memory, thus
earning huge profits. However, Japanese manufacturers have been able to
accomplish this feat because of the government subsidies they have received

and the financial favors bestowed on them. Three concrete examples will be
cited.

First of all, on financial matters: Usually the interest on a loan increases
rapidly. However. Japanese financial organisations are very generous

toward Japanese semiconductor manufacturers, allowing low interest rates over
an extended period of time. Moreover, the interest rate is even lower for
equipment investments over an extended period of time.

Secondly. the government subsidy: The Japanese Government helped establish
the semiconductor industry and, during the development period, conducted
cooperative research and development activities.

Thirdly, the Japanese Government cooperates with the semiconductor industry
in the fight against 0.8. manufacturers.

(Note) These were the written responses to the questions asked by this
reporter. President Spoke, who is at the forefront of the anti-Japanese
critics in connection with the U.$.-Japanese semiconductor friction. has
consistently avoided Japanese reporters.

Complicated Circulation Mechanism
Tokyo NIKKEI SANCYO SBIHBUN in Japanese 21 Apr 82 p 7

[Article by reporter Nonaks: "Troubled Because of Coeplicated Circulation
System; Strong Controls by 0.8. Main Office Are Shackling"]

[Text] "Look at the successful example of TI (Texas Instruments)." As a rule.
the name of TI is sentioned whenever HITI wants to stress the fact that Japan
is not a closed market by pointing out that there are nuerous foreign capital
semiconductor manufacturers which are successful in Japan. TI is the world's
largest manufacturer of semiconductors. with headquarters in Dallas, Texas. and
b0 overseas plants in 19 countries.

35
IIIICINHIIAI.UBKIIHLY
PIIIIJFFICIAI.IISE:CHVLY

Nippon TI was established in 1969, capitalized entirely by TI. Today there
are four plants, including the Miho plant in Ibaraki Prefecture which

started operation last January as the super LSI (large-scale integrated
circuit) sass-production stronghold. The fact that all aspects of Nippon TI,
including productivity. profit rate, and quality, are unsurpassed by any
other plants in the TI group has been recognized by the parent company.

The mass-production tempo is quickening at the Miho plant. which is the
supply base of the 64 Kbit RAM.

Nippon TI has certainly taken root securely in Japan. The Matagoya plant in
Saitama Prefecture was started at the time [of Nippon TI's establishment],

and in 1973 the Ninode plant in Oita Prefecture went into operation. In 1979.
the Noyama plant in Shizuoka Prefecture started turning out products related
to control machinery. and then the Miho plant in Ibaraki Prefecture started
operation. The confidence of Nippon II, which is entrusted wholeheartedly by

the ”.8. main office with the mass-production of advanced technology products
such as the 66 Kbit RAM and 16-bit microcomputer, it quite enormous.

This Nippon TI "success story" can also be interpreted to mean that it is
necessary to take this long in order to succeed in Japan. Many presidents of
0.8. companies in Japan are unanimous in their opinion that one of the
difficulties encountered in conducting business in Japan is Japan's
complicated circulation mechanism.

The "Gibbons Report" compiled last December by the Trade Subcommittee of the
0.8. Congress Finance Committee (chairman, S.M. Gibbons) argues "the

necessity to caunter Japan's challenge." It describes Japan's circulation
mechanisn as "utterly incomprehensible" and states that "the simplest way to
join the Japanese market is to purchase an enterprise.“ I asked Vice

President Kenichi Yoshida of Nippon Motorola to explain the differences between
the Japanese and American circulation systems.

Too Many Intermediates and Too Much Expense

Nippon Motorola was started on 1 January when three subsidiary companies
capitalized entirely by Motorola merged. Although George Needham. who is in
charge of the Asia-Pacific Region of the Semiconductor Business Department
in the 0.5. main office, was appointed president. Japanese staff member
Yoshida. who had worked as a resident Motorola representative in Japan

until last year, is for all practical purposes in charge. He was originally
a banker (from the Bank of Tokyo) but was scouted in 1963 to work for
Motorola Service in charge of supplying materials.

"The biggest difference between the Japanese and American circulation
mechanisms is the fact that there are very many intermediate operators in
Japan. Moreover, old personal relationships and debts of gratitude have
taken root. It may be an exceptional example, but in some districts no
product can be sold unless it is handled by a certain wholesale boss. who
keeps a firm grip on the area." In the u.s. market, too. there are
intermediates, called distribution representatives, who handle semiconductor
circulation, or large electronic parts sales firms such as Hamilton Abnet
which cover the entire United States.

36
IOI409FIJAI.UBBIIWLY
Vice President Yoshida considers that there is "too much power in the hands of
the intermediate operators in Japan who engage in marketing activities." It is
"unbelievable" to a 0.8. manufacturer that 95 percent of the semiconductors
sold domestically by Nippon Electric. Japan's largest manufacturer, are
handled by 13 agents. Moreover, the circulation expenditures, including the
commission paid to the intermediate operators are too voluminous.

In the semiconductor business, in which the effect of mass production can be
significantly demonstrated. it is also a race for cost-down. To knock down

your rival company, you must be able to sell cheaper, even by l yen.

Another reason why it is difficult for 0.8. companies to operate in the

Japanese market is the fact that in negotiating the price with the consumer.
they have to consult their main office in the United States via telex and obtain
approval. In doing so, some may have lost the opportunity to win out.

I asked President Yoshida whether the 0.8. company in Japan has the right to
make decision on matters related to price.

V 0.8. Companies in Japan Have No Rights

”Nippon ﬁotorola was granted the right to negotiate the price with the
consumer 5 years ago. However, strategic products are still under the control
of the 0.8. main office." It must have been very difficult to gain the

right to make decisions on matters concerning the price in the Japanese
market from the 0.8. enterprises, which are especially nervous over the price
policy because of "the Antitrust Law."

The strong control exerted over 0.8. companies in Japan by their respective
0.8. main offices is a phenomenon common to all companies. An interview with
Fairchild Japan, the 0.8. company in Japan that is the world's seventh
largest semiconductor manufacturer. which decided to build a plant at

Isahaya City, Ragasaki Prefecture, in February, did not materialize precisely
because of this "wall." President Robert Scaco of the company was so
thorough that he even refused to answer questions concerning "production
capacity and sales volume" at the press conference when the announcement of
the new plant was made.

A certain semiconductor consumer pointed out: "Negotiations with a 0.8.
company in Japan are quite different from negotiations with a Japanese
company. First of all, the procedure is troublesome. because the 0.8. company
in Japan does not have the power to make decisions. There is no room for
'maybe.‘ And there is some sort of secrecy." The more successful that 0.8.
companies such as TI and Intel are in Japan, the more independent these 0.8.
companies are from their respective main offices in the United States.

Human Rescurces Hho Talks Back to the ﬂain Office

what must foreign capital semiconductor manufacturers do in order to be able to
break through the "narrow gate" of Japan's semiconductor market?

(Atsuhiko) Kohars, who resigned as an acting director of the business
department and as director of business strategy from Motorola's company in

37
FOI‘OIIICIAI.U§II(IULM
)1). OFFICIAL USO: ONLY

Japan and became the president of Krestonix (phonetic), a subsidiary of
Electronix, was then asked to appear. 'anortunately, the 11.5. Iain office
does not understand the Japanese narket very well. If they attach any
importance to the Japanese market at all, they should install soleone who
can clearly talk back. So many presidents are led by the nose by their 0.8.
Iain offices. First of all. therefore, it is a question of personnel.

It boils down to how talent should be cultivated. On the side of business,
the Japanese conpanies have just caught up with the 0.5. companies in the
fields of memory, nicroconputers, and H06 (metal oxide semiconductors).

The 0.8. companies are a cut above Japanese fir-s in the bipolar field.

The 0.5. firms also have a day's lead in software technology. Paths can be
opened if the 0.5. companies will compete in the Iarket of superior
technology," Hr Kohara suggested.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1982

9113
C50: 4106/105

38
IKHICIHHCIAL.USI¢NNLY
FOI1DFFﬂJA1.USE(HNLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HYDROGEN ENERGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT DISCUSSED

Manufacturing, Storing Technologies
Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI in Japanese 3 Apr 82 pp 76-81
[Article by Y. Ohtori. scientific commentator]

[Excerpts] In the Sunshine Plan. which was inaugurated upon the first oil
crisis. the research and development of hydrogen energy technology was chosen
as one of the projects to be solved on a long-term basis.

Even prior to the oil crisis. however. the major problem of ever-increasing
pollution related to the increased use of fossil fuels was affecting the living
environment. The origin of the concept of hydrogen energy which is currently
being developed, and which is attracting attention, can be traced back to that
time. It was initiated in the United States.

However, a leading proposal for the hydrogen energy era was published 2 years
prior to that. in 1970. in an article "Liquid Eydrogen, Fuel of Tomorrow" by
Professor T. Ohta of Yokohama National University in Japan. Also in Europe

about that time. a new method to decompose water by means of nuclear heat was
proposed by Dr Maltecci [phonetic], who was then chief of the materials division

of the Ispra Research Laboratory of the European Atomic Energy Community.

Thus. the two parties ahve come to cooperate toward the realisation of the new
energy system using hydrogen as the energy medium. The eddy that was stirred
up in Japan. the United States. and Europe aiming for hydrogen energy is about
to become a rushing flow.

The Horld of 33 That Exceeds Electrical Energy

Hydrogen is the substance with the simplest structure. It is the lightest of
all the gases. and its weight is approximately one-fourth that of air. Because
it is light. hydrogen (generally called light hydrogen) has the greatest diffus-
ibility among all the bases. and it rapidly diffuses even into substances such
as metals. This [diffusion] property is very important for the utilization of
hydrogen.

39
FOIiﬂlIIC1A1.USIIINLY
FOIIOFEKJAI.US£(NVLY

Electrical energy, like hydrogen. is secondary energy processed for the con-
venience of use as a primary energy. It has been used fully as good quality
energy because it is (1) clean and (2) readily convertible to other forms of
light, thermal, mechanical. and chemical energies.

However, there are also some drawbacks. They include the fact that (l) the
transmission loss is high; (2) it is difficult to store and the storage loss

is high; (3) its area of utilization as a substitute for oil is limited due to
low efficiency, as in batteries, and due to uncompleted technical progress, etc.
On the other hand, hydrogen energy holds great expectations as an energy that
covers the shortcomings of electrical energy.

The reasons are (l) the raw material, being water, is not restricted as a
resource; (2) when the combustion temperature is controlled. the combustion
product is water; it is a clean energy and emits no pollutant gases, since it
cycles by returning to its original form; (3) in the case of fossil fuels, the
constituent element. carbon, has a long cyclic period, whereas the hydrogen
cyclic period of hydrogen forming from water and returning to water is fast.
and the cyclic system of substances on earth is not disrupted; (6) transporta-
tion and storage are relatively easy, and their losses are small; and (5) it is
usable in areas where oil is being used as a heat source-such as for power
generation fuel. city gas, industrial furnaces, jet fuel. etc.

If we cite additional merits, (6) it has a high output, as seen in its use as
second- and third-stage rocket fuel for launching Saturn rockets or space
shuttles; and (7) price stability can be expected in hydrogen fuel (the raw
material is water; if solar energy is used for the process, the hydrogen cost
includes only the amortization of the facilities and operational expenses-un-
manned operations are feasible).

These are the advantages of hydrogen as an energy medium. Professor Ohta points
out that "the diversified application of hydrogen will produce an overall econom-
ical condition as an economic system," and “the characteristics of hydrogen
energy system can be enumerated by combining the "32's"--"ecological,“ "energet-
ic," and "economical."

The basics of a hydrogen energy system are (l) to manufacture hydrogen from
water through a primary energy process, and, in order to develop the produced
hydrogen into an industrial system. (2) mass storage and transportation must be
realized easily, safely. and economically. Furthermore, it is necessary to
ensure the effective use of power, chemical, and energy applications at the
final destination.

When items (1) through (3) become technically feasible, the hydrogen energy
system, whose goal is a hydrogen economy, will be realized for the first time.
Aiming for that realization, the Sunshine Plan has since 1976 been advancing
research and development of "elemental technologies" of technical systems, as
shown in the figure.

50
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USB(NNLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEINVLV

Hydrogen Energy Technology (Research) Structure

5(1)” sad; WW“ . .
is»
t-ll [it I! asses sauna

 

an (I! I
my . . . . .
(1,9. 2.! (mzuau— 7mm [—3 g
3am -
(mm

‘m.

 

I n l :
‘I I I
1"].le

(25) Iuouvunemwwmn

Key:

1) prinery energy sources 16) high-teaperature direct pyrolysis

2) nuclear power of water ’

3) solar 15) solar photolysis of water

6) light water reactor 16) storage and transportation technology
5) feat breeder reactor 17) (secondary energy)

6) high-te-perature gas-cooled reactor 18) hydrogen

7) nuclear fusion reactor 19) netal hydrides (hydrogen, storage.
a) heat transportation)

9) light 20) application technology

10) generation of electricity 21) conbustion technique (catalytic bon-

11) hydrogen aanufacturing technology bustion, hybrid coubustion).

12) electrolysis of water (high-tenpcra-22) power application (prise lover)
ture. high-pressure slkelins technique. 23) fuel cell

solution type. solid high-eolecular 2‘) chemical applications
electrolytic type) 25) is for research itens of
13) thernochelical technique (iodine ass echnology in the Sunshine

systea. bro-ins systen. hybrid cycle) Project
26) hydrogen syste-

South Pacific Raft Project

The current status of the "hydrogen manufacturing technology" will be discussed
next.

(1) Electrolysis of water: It is an old aethod. but there is a problsn cost-
wise.

(2) Thermocheaical process: The reaction is carried out under thernal condi-
tions of below 1,ooo’c. Iediated.by compounds of iodine, bronine, etc. by con-

51
HOR‘OFIIJAI.UUI(IULY
lillflﬁWCJAl.lﬂﬂi(lVlV

bining several thermal chemical reactions while cyclically using the above
substances and decomposing water into hydrogen and oxygen as a whole.

(3) High-temperature direct pyrolysis of water: Since electrolysis of water
is carried out through a three-step conversion of thermal energy-mechanical
energy-hydrogen energy. the overall efficiency is about so percent. Therefore,
the goal is to upgrade the efficiency drastically by developing a one-step pro-
cess of thermal energy hydrogen energy.

Hater breaks down into hydrogen and oxygen at a high temperature. However, it
is difficult to separate hydrogen quickly from water vapor at the high temper-
ature of 3,000’0. Currently. studies are being conducted using various kinds
of separation membranes such as ceramic membranes that endure superhigh temper-
atures .

(6) Solar photolysis: This is a process for manufacturing hydrogen in vhich
metallic catalysts that allow high absorption and utilization of light energy
are used along with micro-organisms such as algae and photosynthetic bacteria.
"hen the light energy of the sun is converted to electricity with a photo-
electric converter element (light-sensitive semiconductor) such as a solar cell.
voltage of stut 1 volt can be obtained. This low voltage can be used very
efficiently to decompose Hater.

Thus, studies are being made on various processes using soft energy. One of
them is the "PORSHE Plan." The official title is "Plan of Ocean Raft System
for Hydrogen Economy." It is a joint U.S.-Japanese development project pro—
posed by Professor Ohta and Professor T. N. Bezeroglu [phonetic] of the Univer-
sith of Miami. among others. '

The substance of the plan is to float a giant raft measuring 2 square kilometers
for the purpose of collecting solar energy in the South Pacific just below the
equator, and to manufacture hydrogen from seawater by using the above energy.

In Japan. a model raft is being used for research at Yokohama National Univer-
sity. and studies are being advanced with the Electrotechnical Laboratory of

the Industrial Science and Technology Agency in the lead.

According to Professor Ohta. "In a sea area twice the size of the Japanese
archipelago centered at latitude 8' south and longitude 138‘ west, where there
are the highest nuber of partly cloudy days. a world economy of complete inde-
pendence from petroleum can be materialized by obtaining proper efficiency in
the conversion ofsolar energy poured on the area. The method of energy con-
version is very important. 0n the ocean. the urgent need is to change the sea-
water to hydrogen and oxygen with the electric power generated. to establish a
concrete energy conversion process that utilizes the above products as energy
media (secondary energy). and to provide for an ultimate energy system.“

However, standing in the way of the development of a hydrogen economy is the
hitch in storing and transporting hydrogen.

Presently. transportation and storage of hydrogen are generally carried out in
the gaseous state. This is inefficient, since large-capacity tanks and cylinders
that are very heavy compared to their contents are being used. Although pipe-

52
FOI1OFFHJMI.USEGHVLY
lines are promising for mass transportation. it is necessary to develop an in-
expensive. high-strength material that has little chance of becoming deteriorated
by the hydrogen.

Metals That Occlude and Release Large Amounts of Hydrogen

On that morning, the materials laboratory of Hateuehita Electric's central
research laboratory (director: Dr s. Hayakava. managing director) in Horiguchi
City. Osaka Prefecture. was enveloped in excitement and joy. The research staff
had discovered, upon coming to work, that the pressure in a sealed container,

in which a small amount of titaniuI-mengenese alloy and 10 atmospheres of hydro-
gen had been placed the night before, was down to less than 1 atmosphere. Care-

ful inspection revealed no trace of hydrogen leakage. The alloy had indeed
occluded the hydrogen. This occurred at the end of 1976.

The metal that occluded the hydrogen is called a "metal hydride." It was first
developed by Phillips in Holland in the late 1960's. It is a compound in which
hydrogen atoms enter the spaces between the atoms that constitute the metallic
substance. Hydrogen atoms readily penetrate and move about in metal, and because
of that property of hydrogen. a unique phenomenon occurs.

A metal hydride is literally a compound of metal and hydrogen. For about 10
years, research has been in progress on two unique properties of metal hydrides:
(l) the relationship of pressure-temperature-composition in the processes of
occlusion and release of hydrogen by metals or alloys. and (2) characteristics
with respect to the velocity of chemical reactions in those processes. As a
result, it has gradually been revealed that various possibilities in engineering
applications are in store by the skillful incorporation of such characteristics.

The maximum amount of hydrogen that can be occluded in a certain type of metals

is unexpectedly large, and it was revealed that the density is very high even in
comparison to hydrogen packed in a heavy cylinder compressed at a high pressure

of over 150 atmospheres, or hydrogen liquefied at an extremely low temperature.

Furthermore. the speed of occlusion is as rapid as several minutes; under ideal

conditions it can be as fast as several tens of seconds.

wonders of Lanthanoid Alloys

Metal hydrides having such various characteristics can be used for new storage
and transportation methods of hydrogen as well as for a separation process to
separate and purify only hydrogen (since metals occlude only hydrogen) among
other gases. for energy storage and conversion based on chemical reaction, and
in other versatile ways.

There are various kinds of metal hydrides. Those that can occlude a large
amount of hydrogen were developed almost simultaneously toward the end of the
1960's: first, a lanthanum-nickel alloy at the Phillips Research Laboratory

in Holland, and an iron—titanium alloy at the Brookhaven National Laboratory

in the United States. They allowed hydrogen occlusion in densities of at least
1.3-1.4 greater than the density of hydrogen atoms in liquid hydrogen. ﬂawever,

b3
FOIIOIIMC1A1.US£IONLY
ma OFTK'IAI. USE ONLY

the practical application did not materialize: in the former case because of
the high coat of lanthanum, and in the latter case because of the troublesome
pretreatment required for occlusion.

Regarding the mechanism by which hydrogen is being incorporated into alloys,
there is a study by Professor 0hrus [phonetic] of the Department of Chemistry.
University of Pittsburgh. on the subject of lanthanum-nickel alloys.

According to the report, lanthanum oxide (La203) and lanthanum hydroxide
(La(0ﬂ) ) are clustered at the thin-layer surface of the alloy, and the spaces
are filled only with nickel. Lsnthanum—S-nickel (LaNis) alloy lies beneath
that.

First, external hydrogen molecules (8-H) approach the surface of nickel or
La203. As the pressure of hydrogen gas is increased. the spaces between hydro-
gen molecules are reduced and the number of adhering molecules increases. Using
pressure as the propulsion, hydrogen is adsorbed first in the nickel layer in

a type of chemical adsorption (chemical adsorption is a phenomenon among those
of solid surface adsorptions that are caused by chemical bonding forces).

The hydrogen molecules thus chemically adsorbed into nickel returns to the
atomic state subjected to the surrounding La 03 and La(0ﬁ)3, and the hydrogen
molecules' bonds are broken. This hydrogen n its atomic state diffuses deeper
inside, through the border areas of nickel and La203 or La(0h)3.

Hydrogen atoms that approach LaNis in this manner settle in the positions of
lattice spaces of alloys (elements composing alloys occupy the lattice inter-
sections) in their atomic form.

Development of Various Alloys

In sut-ary, the important facts are that the hydrogen molecules change from
molecules to atoms in the process of penetration from the surface to the inside,
that chemical adsorption shifts to diffusion, and that hydrogen finally occupies
the positions of lattice spaces. The speed of this three-step process is none
other than the hydrogen occlusion speed of the alloys. How much this speed can
be upgraded is related to the practical application of the metal hydrides, and
is the big project in metal hydride research.

To have hydrogen released from metal hydrides, one needs only to change temper-
ature and pressure, and the hydrides then return to the original metals or
alloys by the release of hydrogen.

The requisites of hydrogen occlusion alloys are: (l) a large occlusion and
release rate for hydrogen; (2) the ability to occlude and release hydrogen
without high temperature and high pressure; (3) maintenance of performance and
long life, even with repeated hydrogen occlusion and release; (6) a rapid
occlusion speed; (5) high occlusion stability; and (6) availability at low
manufacturing cost.

The metals used for hydrogen occlusion began initially with s unary system--
namely, one kind of metal component--then shifted to binary alloys such as

66
IIIICHHHKIAI.IEIBCN'LY
tltanium-iron. and now have reached quinary alloys. The appearance of a sextet
system is expected in due course. In all cases. the work centers on the selec-
tion of the proper elements to alloy and how to vary their ratios.

Specifically. available alloys include iron-titanium alloys. lanthanum-nickel
alloys, magnesium-nickel alloys. misch metal (mixture of rare earth elements)
systems. titanium-cobalt systems, etc.

The iron-titanium systems have the advantages of being the most inexpensive and
repeatedly usable. At the time of the initial hydrogen occlusion. however. its
speed of reaction with hydrogen. is slow. and thus it has the disadvantage

of requiring pretreatment to activate the system by allowing long hours of
contact with hydrogen under high-temperature and high-pressure (£00'C. 65 atm.)
conditions. however, Japan Hotels a Chemicals Co, Ltd. in collaboration with
the Ulvac Corporation, has successfully developed new iron-titaniua alloys.
This is an unprecedented system which can be pretreated at normal temperature
and 35 atmospheres.

0n the other hand. the National Research Institute for Metals, of the Science
and Technology Agency. has developed a system that does not require pretreat-
ment for activation by adding a small amount of niobitn to the titanium-iron
alloy. New alloys of an inexpensive titaniu-iron system that do not require
activation pretreatment are being developed competitively all over the world.

A magnesium-nickel system is inexpensive, and the hydrogen occlusion volume is
large. But it does not release hydrogen unless heated to above ZSO'C, and the
activation treatment is also difficult.

"Epochsl" Achievement by Hatsushita Electric

Among the Japanese research achievements recognized as top-level products, there
is the titanium-manganese alloy of Hatsushita Electric. Since about the time
hydrogen occlusion alloys were first studied in Europe and the United States in
the late 1960's, the above company has been in touch with research involving
hydrogen occlusion of natals, but not with the intention of studying metal
hydrides.

In the process of studying thin-film formation techniques by sputtering (a
phenomenon in which atoms of metal heated in low-pressure gas sputter into the
gas and adhere to nearby solid surfaces), Director Bayakawa and others of the
above-mentioned materials laboratory discovered that a marked hygroscopic effect
is displayed by some thin-films among the titanium oxide thin-films formed

under certain conditions.

With this as the turning point, research has been advanced. and partial results
were published in September 1970 in the journal of the Japanese Society of
Applied Physics. An indirect result of the research became the lever for the
development of a new hydrogen storage system, and in the sum-er of 1978.
Hatsushits Electric Industrial Co announced that it had “successfully developed
an epochal solid hydrogen storage substrate in which a gas can be electrically
stored in metal."

(.5
mmuseouu
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to trial calculations, the volume of hydrogen that can be occluded in
1 cubic centimeter is 2,000 cubic centimeters at 1 atmosphere. In other words.
it is possible to hold 20 times more hydrogen than with the loo-atmosphere
cylinder then being used. Wer. this method of hydrogen occlusion is
different from that of the so-called hydrogen occlusion alloy, and because it
requires a high temperature of 400-500’6 to release the hydrogen. there has
been no practical application.

However, this development was not in vain. but helped the research group of
Hatsushita Electric to be alert for the development of hydrogen occlusion alloys
before any other fins. and the energy conversion technique research laboratory
was established in affiliation with the central research laboratory.

In 197‘. they achieved good results with the abovedmentioned titanium-manganese
alloys. By making further progress in development. they discovered that 1.5
titanic-manganese alloy is the optimal composition of titanium-maganese alloys.
and the quinary alloy of titaniua-sirconim—manganese-chromim—vanadim. with a
unique composition ratio among the titanium-maganese multielemsntel system alloys.
has superior characteristics as a hydrogen storage material.

The titanimn-manganese binary alloy which was developed by the company in 1976
occludes hydrogen very readily. even at normal temperatures. The quinary alloy
is a further improved alloy over the binary alloy.

Hydrogen-Fueled Engines and Fuel Cells

On 11 March. Hatsushita Electric revealed that it has entered into a collabora-
tive agreement with Daido Tokushuko [Daido Special Steel] to consercialise
hydrogen occlusion metal technology. [Hatsushita] will supply the titaniu-
manganese alloy technology and Daido will produce the alloys, using a plasma
melting furnace of its own design, and market the product. Industrialization of
this type of technology is the first in the world. and they are aiming for
co-ercialization within 2 years.

The 1.5 titanium-maganese alloy can theoretically occlude 1.400 cc hydrogen per
1 cubic centimeter. Moreover. both occlusion and release are possible at

normal temperatures. This is approximately equivalent to 1,400 atmospheres. and
it means that the size of storage vessels can be reduced to a fraction of the
conventional high-pressure cylinders. The collaborative agreement of the two
firms allows for speculation that. although in part. the "era of effective
hydrogen application" and the "era of metal hydride application" are near.

Such signs are also appearing e'lsewhere. Smitomo Hetal Industries. Ltd has
begun. producing hydrogen gas. Production of hydrogen for the manufacture of
iron began in June of last year at its Kashima plant. and a hydrogen production
plant will be completed in July of this year at the Hakayama plant for full-
scale distribution to the outside market. For that reason. technical develop-
ment in the use. storage, and transportation of hydrogen has been advanced.

Along these lines. it was revealed that three firms of the Sumitomo Metals
Group—Kyodo Sanso. Sumitomo Seimitsu Kogyo. and Chuo Denki Kogyo—collaborated

b6
MWWONLY
IIIICIWWCJAI.[£IZIHNLY

in the development of a bike that uses gaseous hydrogen as fuel, and that a trial
run was successfully completed last January. It is a modified 69-cc Honda Super-
cub using a dilute hydrogen coebustion systen. hydrogen was occluded in an
iron-titenius alloy and loaded as a metal hydride.

It has been proven that hydrogen can be stored in a light, safe, and efficient
manner compared to conventional cylinders. The hydrogen fuel container with as
internal volume of SOO-cc that has been used can store only 5 liters of hydrogen
when the gas is packed at 10 atmospheres. Compared to that. a SOO-cc iron-
titanium alloy can store 200 liters. a 60-fold increase in hydrogen storage
capacity. This has made it possible to nount the alloy container on the bike.

In Japan, the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory of the Industrial Science and
Technology Agency has for 4 years been developing automobile engines that use
hydrogen fuel. In addition, Professor 8. Puruhana of the Husashi Institute of
Technology began developing a hydrogen-fueled car that was developed and won a
prize for covering 3,000 kilometers in 5 days. It has also been proven that
hydrogen fuel is more efficient than gasoline and that the exhaust gas is also
much cleaner.

Japan Behind in Basic Research

In the United States, its use as an aircraft fuel is also being planned. Be-
sides as engine fuel, the use of natal hydrides is extensive. They are expected
to play a major role in the practical application of electric generation using
fuel cells--for which a large-scale trial application has been begun by Tokyo
Gas Co and Osaka Gas Co. Its uses are versatile in areas related to industry
and daily life, and include driving and cold-storage application systems for
heat pumps with a static compressor of metal hydride application, the hydro-
genation reaction of organic compounds. etc.

Along with such trends, it has become urgent to upgrade the performance of metal
hydrides; this is the cardinal point in the application of hydrogen energy. In
keeping with these steps, competition in the search for a new alloy to break

the shell of the currently used alloy for storing hydrogen has become fierce
among the top-level organisations in this field, such as the Brookhaven National
Laboratory in the United States. Philips in Holland. and Battelle in Switzerland.

To make a big leap, basic research must first be substantiated in depth and
breadth. All leading overseas research organisations that are engaged in
hydrogen energy work have outdistanced Japan in taking steps in this regard.
Partly because of the delayed start, Japan has been leaning toward search and
study in order to catch up. It has apparently become necessary to alter this
posture considerably.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizsi 1982

57
FOI4DIIICLKL.USE{MNLY
FUIIOFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

Hydrogen Occlusion Alloy
Tokyo SHUKAN BIRION in Japanese 2} Apr 82 pp 39-61
[Article by Y. Ariga, scientific commentator)
[Excerpts] hydrogen Energy To Shoulder Next Generation

On that morning. the materials laboratory of the Matsushita Electric's central
research laboratory in Horiguchi City, Osaka Prefecture. was filled with joy
and excitement and tension over what was to come. Upon coming to work, the
research staff had discovered that the pressure in a sealed container. in which
a small amount of titanium-manganese alloy and 10 atmospheres of hydrogen were
placed the night before, was reduced to less than 1 atmosphere. Careful in-
spection revealed no trace of hydrogen leakage. Thus, as expected, the alloy
had indeed absorbed the hydrogen. The experiment was clearly a success. The
time was the end of 1974. '

Eight years later, in March 1982. a related source revealed that Japan had begun
ahead of other countries to undertake full-scale commercialization of a "hydrogen
occlusion alloy" that can adsorb hydrogen gas in a large quantity for storage

and release as needed. This caused a big r1pp1¢ among related sources for hydro-
gen occlusion alloy research both at home and abroad.

This was the news that Hatsushita Electric and the leader in the special steel
circles, Daito Tokushuko, had recently formed an agreement whereby Hatsushita
Electric will provide Daido with the leading technology of a titanium-manganese
system hydrogen occlusion alloy that it had developed, and Daido will manufac—
ture this "hydrogen occlusion alloy" by using a plasma melting furnace of its
own development. Daito obtained the related patents and marketing rights at
home and abroad, and plans to move on to commercialization within 2 years to
market the hydrogen occlusion alloy at S,000-6.000 yen per kilogram.

Hydrogen is a well-known clean energy source. and its advantage is that the
combustion exhaust material is water, as long as the combustion temperature
is not unduly high, and that, unlike carbon system fuels, it does not produce
carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide.

It has become commonsense for knowledgeable people to view the real, long-term
energy source that is to follow fossil fuel energy to be hydrogen. while atomic
energy (except nuclear fusion energy) is merely for provisional use to bridge
the two energy sources. The representative proponent of this concept is Pro-
feaaor T. Ohta of the Faculty of Engineering, Yokohama National University.

Ten years ago, a "hydrogen energy system" was evaluated as part of a series on
national economics at the "Seventh Conference on Energy Conversion." It is
feasible to convert the existing facilities that use fossil fuels, ranging from
vehicles such as automobiles to industrial and household energy sources and
power sources, to hydrogen energy use. The director of the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, A. H. Heinberg predicts that "in the end. civilization will depend
on hydrogen for energy."

68
FOI1DFFNJAI.USE(M‘LY
Thus, even the term "hydrogen economy" has appeared, and the arrival of the
hydrogen era has now become a matter of time. Accurately speaking, hydrogen

is not an energy source. It is an "energy carrier," and to make hydrogen, we
need solar energy (primary energy), thermal energy, and electric energy. There-
fore, hydrogen energy is called "secondary energy" along with electric energy.
In the case of electric energy, electric wires are used for transmission, while
hydrogen energy can be transported in pipes. The big problem, however, is how
to store the hydrogen.

As a gas, even when it is packed in a high-pressure cylinder at 150 atmospheres,
a heavy cylinder weighing 55 kilograms can hold only 57 liters of hydrogen. In
this state, there is no prospect for a general practical application.

Even though hydrogen is clean and may be manufactured inexpensively in large
quantities, it cannot be used as a power source for passenger airplanes. auto-
mobiles, motorcycles. and at worksites unless it can be stored and transported
in a stored, package form. It is not impossible to convert it to a liquid fuel;
however, this is not cost-effective unless it is for use as a fuel for space
rockets, etc. Even with the currently used LNG [liquid natural gas], the re-
quired temperature is -l62'c, and in the case of liquefied hydrogen, it is
-252°C, which is nearly absolute zero (-273'0). "hen the cost to lower the
temperature and the cost to maintain that temperature in a container are added,
it is not economically profitable. Hydrogen as a liquefied fuel has no raison
d‘etre unless it wins the competition against petroleua, LHG, alcohol, etc.

hydrogen is being transported and stored for the most part in a compressed gas
form, using high-pressure cylinders or tank trucks. However, as mentioned
above, the efficiency is low and this has been a big barrier to the realization
of a hydrogen energy era.

Therefore, the competitive development of a new technology to store and trans-
port hydrogen in large quantities by occlusion in special metals has been in
progress in the United States, Europe, and Japan. At any rate, hydrogen is a
substance that has the simplest structure and is the lightest among all gases;
entering into substances such as metal, it rapidly diffuses. This characteris-
tic is also the key to the occlusion of hydrogen. The metals that can occlude
hydrogen well are called "metal hydrides."

Comparison of Hydrogen Storage Volumes

Name Hydrogen Storage Energy Density
Volume (gram/ (hydrogen combustion
milliliter) heat) (calorie/mil-

liliter)

Metal

Hydride Tin 0.152 5153

Examples HgHz 0.106 3593

Liquefied Hydrogen 0.07 2373

Compressed Hydrogen 0.007 240

(100 atmospheres)

#9
'0]k(lﬂﬂ(1hl.lﬂl£€l§t¥
FOCIOFFKJAL.USE(NHLY

Hydrogen Occlusion of Superior Metal Bydrides

The requisite properties for a superior hydrogen occlusion (metal) alloy in-
clude (l) a high hydrogen-occlusion ability; (2) an activation (a pretreatment
to enable hydrogen occlusion and release at any time) process that is simple
and easy; (3) small heat production of metal hydride (chemical reaction heat
produced in the process of metal and hydrogen reacting to form a metal hydride);
(A) conditions (temperature. pressure, etc) for releasing hydrogen at near room
temperature that are mild and easily achieved; (5) conditions for manufacturing
the metal hydride (pressure. temperature, etc required) that are mild, and (6)
sufficient durability (performance not degraded after repeated hydrogen
occlusion-release cycles).

Currently. research and development are underway for alloys based on the so-
called rare earth metals, such as magnesium (Hg). titanium (Ti), vanadium (V).
and various other alloys.

The table (p 40) shows the superiority of metal hydrides in comparison with
liquefied hydrogen in the hydrogen storage volume per unit (milliliter). It is
clear that the use of hydrogen energy depends on the practical application of
metal hydrides with high energy densities using superior hydrogen occlusion
alloys.

Hydrogen occlusion metals started at first with a unary system. namely one kind
of metal, as in the table. than shifted to binary alloys such as titanium-iron,
and have now come to quinary alloys.

Evaluated as a high-level achievement among the Japanese research results is
the above-mentioned titanium-manganese alloy developed by Hatsushita Electric.
Interestingly, at about the tine when the hydrogen occlusion alloys were first
being studied in Europe and the United States in the latter half of 1960's, the
above company unwittingly happened to become involved in research on the
hydrogen occlusion of metal from a different research angle that is not at all
related, and without being aware of the research being initiated in Eueope and
the United States.

In the process of studying thin-film formation techniques by sputtering (a
phenomenon in which atoms of metal heated in low-pressure gas sputter into the
gas and adhere to nearby solid surfaces), Director Hayskawa and others at the
above-mentioned materials laboratory discovered that a marked hygroscopic effect
is displayed by some thin-films among the titanium oxide thin-films formed under
certain conditions. The totally new achievement of this development which was
advanced was subsequently published in part in the journal of the Japanese
Society of Applied Physics in September 1970. Such indirect results of the
research became the lever for the development of a new hydrogen storage tech-
nique, and in the summer of 1978 Hatsushita Electric Industrial Co announced
that it had "succeeded in an epochal invention that can store hydrogen gas
electrically in metals." According to trail calculations, the volume of hydro-
gen that can be occluded in 1 cubic centimeter is 2,000 cubic centimeters at 1
atmosphere. In other words. it is possible to hold 20 times more hydrogen

than with the loo-atmosphere hydrogen cylinder then being used. However, this

50
INHICNHHCIAI.1EIECMULY
method of hydrogen occlusion is not the same as the so-cslled hydrogen occlusion
alloy method. and because it requires high temperature to release the hydrogen.
there has been no practical application.

Development of hydrogen Occlusion Alloys Making Progress

However, stimulated by this development, the research group of Hatsushita
Electric became alert for the development of hydrogen occlusion before any

other firms. and the first energy conversion technique research laboratory in
Japan in the industry was established in affiliation with the central research
laboratory. In 197‘. they began to achieve good results with the above-mentioned
titanium-manganese alloys, and more recently, they succeeded in developing a
quinary alloy with special composition ratios of "titanium-manganese-zirconium-
chromium-vanadium" among the alloys of titanium-manganese multiple element sys-
tems and attracted attention for their achievement of a superior hydrogen
occlusion alloy.

Hydrogen automobiles are operated at the Billings [phonetic] Research Institute
of the United States. lens of Heat Germany. and Husashi Institute of Technology
in Japan. The application of hydrogen to aircraft fuel is being studied in

the United States. For motorcycles, three firms of the Sumitomo Hetals Group--
Kyodo Sanso, Sumitomo Seimitsu Kogyo. and Chuo Denki Kogyo-collaborated to
modify a Ronda 49-cc aupercub which was test-driven this past January. Hydro-
gen was occluded in an iron-titanium alloy. A metal hydride of iron-titanium
alloy with occluded hydrogen was loaded. and hydrogen fuel was released to run
the machine. Sumitomo Metals has been reportedly advancing the development of
hydrogen occlusion metals.

On 8 April. Nisho-Iwai revealed that it has signed a contract for a sales
representative in Japan with Canada's INCO group, the world's largest nickel
manufacturer, to market the hydrogen occlusion alloy they develop. hissho-Iwai
states that it has been decided to begin a full-scale. long-term undertaking.

In addition, among the Japanese firms, Japan Hotels 6 Chemicals Co. Shows Denko,
and others are beginning to undertake the development and production of hydro-
gen occlusion alloys. The start of a hydrogen occlusion alloy business is
near.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Birion 1982

7722
cso: 4106/ 112 END

51
FOI10FFKJA1.UBE(HVLY