I‘\ll\ \II'O'Ot .I‘I. “at. Ul‘h.

JPRS L/10295
2 February 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/I

2 Februa

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 7/82)

Cou'rems

POLITICAL AND socmmc ICAL

Internal Problems of Foreign Ministry Analyzed
(CHUO KORON) (”L 81) oceans-cooooocoocaoenosooa-ooocon-o

Suzuki's Basic Positicn Re-Exanined
(Taro Kamaklﬂ‘ai SEIKBIJIN, Dec 81) OQOOCOOOOOOInOQOIOOO.

MILITARY

LDP Plan To Launch 'Security Satellite' Discussed
(Saneyuki Kodachi; SANKEI SHJHBUN, 1 Jan 82) ...........

ECONMIC

Nation's Trade i‘rietions Discussed
(Editorial; “lam KEIZAI sHmUN, 8 Jul 82) OOOOIOOOOOIO

Opening of Japanese Market Advocated
(Editorial; THE DAILY YMIURI, b Jan 82) ...............

Nation's Rule in World Economy Viewed
(l-klltorial; MAINICHI DAILY NEW, 5 Jan 82) .............

Future Course of Trade Problems With U.$., EEC Viewed
(BURGEI sle'lU, mt 81) ODOCOOOOOOUOCIIOOOQOOOOOIOIIOOOO

Nissan Motor President Interviewed on Company Plans
(Shun lSlxihara Interview; NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN.” Dec 81)

Government Decides on External Economic Measures
(NIUON KBIZAI SHIMBUN, 17 Dec 81) ........... ...........

- a - [III - ASIA - 111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SC I" ENCl-Z AND TECIINOLCXIY

Increasingly Large Royalties Received for High Technology
(SHUKAN DAIYmon, 7 "0V 8].) op...ooooooonopuoogcooooo'oo

Results of Investigation
Evaluation of Technological Standards, by Hiroo Wakai

Lowering or Tariff on Electronic Computers Termed Unavoidable
(NIHON KOGYO snmsuu, 1? Dec 81) .

Nissan To Expand Production of Defense Equipment
(NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN, 17 Dec 81) .......................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTERNAL PROBLEMS OF FOREIGN MINISTRY ANALYZED

Tokyo CHUO KORON in Japanese Oct 81 pp 294-309

lrext] The Foreign Ministry "sickness" continues: the terrible fear of being trans-
ferred to a less developed country. the feeling of extreme distrust of the Suzuki
cabinet. the breakdown in the ability to gather information, and the strain of ever-
work due to a shortage of personnel. In Japan's diplomacy of the eightiow all right
like this?

Unable To Voice a Sincere "Congratulations"

in the first place. let us look at the position the Foreign Minisrry is in now by
starting with "the bitter tale of the Foreign Ministry."

Great changes are made in the Foreign Ministry every summer. lhis year as well,
beginning with the decision to transfer Deputy Vice Minister Katori as ambassador
to China, quite a few people in the ministry proper were transferred overseas. ln
the case of domestic officials, every change is a step up the ladder of success.
Thus. farewell parties are joyous occasions. However, in the case of the Foreign
Hinistry, it is difficult to voice a sincere "congratulations" to someone appointed
to a post overseas. Why? The reason is that among the approximately 150 foreign
postings. 30 at most are in developed countries; the rest are in less developed

-uuntries.

If one goes to a developing nation, livlng conditions are bad compared with Japan.
One is apt to get sick due to differences in climate. And if one does get sick,
death often results due to a lack of complete medical facilities such as are avail—
able in Japan. One official whose transfer to Africa was decided showed us instruc-
tions that carried the title "To everyone traveling on official business to unhealthy
-uuulries." It was handed to him by the Foreign Ministry's Bureau of Health. It

Luuins;

"Tho territory to uhivh you have been assigned is an unhealthy country. where
:iundurds oi health and nutritional hygiene are poor. You must be very careful of
«isnl hepatitis, hartorlal gastrointestinal sickness, amoebic diseases. parasitic

_ wur<cs, cholera, intestinal typhus. dysentery, and so forth. Thus, you must adhere
t- the following warnings."

Among the warnings are: i) do not drink tap water; 2) do not mix whiskey with cola
or use ice. because the water is not safe; 3) avoid raw fish; 4) raw oysters. sea

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill (DH-N1“. USE ONLY

urchins, and shellfish are dangerous; 5) we must warn you to eat broiled munt—-stenk
should he well-done; 6) av«!d raw eggs; 7) avoid strawberries, figs and other fruits
that may be infested with worms; 8) in remote areas, it is dangerous to use unboiled
water--even for gurgling; 9) in areas where there are blood-sucking insects, do not
set foot into lakes, swamps, rice fields. and so forth.

Moreover. there are other warnings, such as: 1) maintain restrained behavior so that
you won't contract a venereal disease; 2) if you are bitten by a dog, wash the wound
well with antiseptic soap; 3) to prevent hepatitis, have immunization shots. In
areas where there are outbreaks of malaria, it is dangerous not to have preventive
quinine immunizations. However, frequent immunizations may result in hepatitis.

This is how one diplomat died.

It's not just health problems. When posted to a less developed country, one may
encounter guerrilla fighters, rebellions, and wars. Embassies have been occupied
by Red Army factions. In the Iran—Iraq war, the living Quarters of personnel
serving in Jordan were bombed. 1n Cambodia, a promising young embassy couple was
attacked and killed by a burglar.

1hc ordinary person wants to flee at the outbreak of war. When the lran-lraq war
broke out, a Foreign Ministry emergency order to return to his post went out to an
embassy staff member at a certain station who was on temporary leave. However, he

was reluctant to return to his post. When the personnel chief said "it is the mission
of the diplomat," even the person's father resisted. In the end the staff member did
not return to his post and he left his job.

Talk of such matters lowers morale. However, the majority of diplomats endure the
fear of air raids and remain at their posts in wartorn countries, even after their
fellow countrymen have been called home.

Until recently, no special compensation was paid for those who died on duty at their
posts, even when working in such a harsh international environment. Due to talk about
such a bad situation, several years ago a special public service disaster system was
set up. However, its authority is very strict. "hen the Soviet Union invaded
Afghanistan, the designation "dangerous compensation" was extended to diplomatic
personnel serving in that country. However, when the street fighting settled down,
the Finance Ministry declared "there is no longer danger" and removed the “dangerous
territory" designation.

When that happens and a diplomat receives his orders, he must proceed to his post.
Moreover, when a member of the bureaucracy is transferred abroad he almost never
goes back to his ministry post. For about 10 years, between the ages of 50 and 60,
a person is moved around various foreign countries. The possibility of returning as
a section head remains for only a few among the bureaucratic class. However, some-
one who leaves as section hend may later get a lower-ranking post in the ministry;
only one in 40 or 50 at a time can be a section head, and without strength and luck
one cannot be honored with such a post. It is no wonder that the less developed
country transfer-fear sickness is widespread.

FOR ()I-‘I-‘K'MI. USE ONLY
Hnuhlv to Visit u Dying Parent

when one is about 50 years of age, one's older child is in college and the younger
one is preparing for college entrance exams. Ono's transfer orders come at that
point. Is it all right to go off leaving a high-school-age daughter by herself?
One leaves Narita Airport shaking off the worries that any .parent would have.
After reaching one's post, except on business one will only be able to return to
Japan for a visit once in 2 years. One won't be able to attend a daughter's or
sun's wedding or visit a dying parent.

Japanese Ambassador to Iran wads Tsutomu was in Iran at the time of the Student
takeover of the American Embassy and at the time of the Iran-Iraq war. The Japanese
Government supported the United States, and the ambassador reduced personnel in order
to carry out sanctions against Iran. There was a protest from the Iranian Government
and some unpleasantness. The ambassador had tr arrange matters so that future
relations between Japan and Iran would not be damaged. On top of that, there was

tne Iran—Iraq war. The few remaining embassy staff members were overwhelmed with

the work of those who were sent home. There were many Japanese who harshly criti-
cized the embassy's way of doing things at that time.

Furthermore, the staff was caught up in the storm of criticism concerning Hitsui's
petrochemical project in Iran. Ambassador Vada probably considered that working in
Iran at that time shortened his life. During that period, his daughter, who had
remained in Japan, became engaged. the ambassador could not attend the wedding
ceremony because it was right after he implemented Japan's sanctions against Iran.
At that time, too, his mother became ill and died. He could not even return to
Japan for that. it is nothing less than cruelty that a person who has worked until
nearly 60 years of age cannot attend family ceremonial occasions. A diplomat, who
at first glance appears to lead a glamorous life, works with much pain in his heart.

To leave is Hell, To Stay ls Hell

Thus. a tendency has recently emerged among college students to stay away from
careers that require service in foreign countries where the standards or living are
lower than in Japan. It is enougl to carry out one's foreign travel on a honeymoon
l:ip. Provincial civil servants, whose salary is higher than state workers, do not
have money worries. Hireover, job seekers throng to work in the convenient halls
nf medium size cities, where the chance of transfer is slim. Diplomats, seeing
this, grit their teeth.

harunvcr, the workload of diplomats tends to be heavier. Every time Prime Minister
Lunukl visits the ASEAN nations, the United States, or Europe, or attends an Ottawa
sunmit, Foreign Ministry offices and local embassies have workloads that require

aiinn through the night for several nights running. Does Pritn Minister Suzuki
{now that each year, thanks to the prime minister's dipolmacy, numerous diplomatic
t-rhors roilapse due to overwork?

rininmuts of developed countries usuall} leave work at 6 pm, have dinner at a

tvntnurnnt with their families, go out to the theater, and so forth. if Japanese
diplomats were to do that. our diplomatic functions would immediately be paralyzed.

\

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISF. ONLY

When foreign wives who have made international marriages with Japanese diplomats
come to Japan, they are amazed at their husband's overwork. when the prime minister
is planning to travel or there is an international conference, for days in a row

the husband comes home very late, or not at all. Among the foreign women who have

a strong sense of rights, there are those who resist and tell the section chief that
"it is an infringement of a person's rights." But the situation does not change at

“11. Rather, it erupts in a domestic dispute, with the foreign wife ending up
divorced.

Hvun though it is such exhausting work, when diplomats are asked, ”Are you satisfied
with your work?", many admit "There is much that is painful, but because there is
a sense of duty that one is doing it all for Japan..."

However..., in the Foreign Ministry there is an increasing number of people who bit-
terly complain that "no matter how hard we work, the politicians use us." "Being
used by the politicians? obviously refers to the blame Prime Minister Suzuki put on
the Foreign Ministry regarding the joint U.S.-Japan agreement. It is more a danger
signal for Japan than for Prime Minister Suzuki personally.

At recent diplomatic farewell parties, there have been many cocasions when the sake
was passed around and habitual resentments burst out. Almost always there is criti-
cism of the politicians. At a recent party. one person left saying: "To leave is
hell, to stay is hell"; "it is better to dig a deep trench where the bullets won't
get you"--such things were also said during the great Mitsui vs Miike dispute in

the late 1920's. Now such things are coming from the mouths of Japan's superelite.
This is very unusual. ‘

Foreign Ministry Officials Are Shocked

Why do Foreign Ministry officials resent Prime Minister Suzuki? when one asks for
the inside story, one begins to see that it is understandable. when Prime Minister
Suzuki visited the United States in May, the process of preparing the joint U.s.-
Japan agreement was being diplomatically negotiated and thus kept secret; almost
nothing was announced to the press. At the same time, however, the Foreign Ministry
was doing things in its own way. Moreover, in the event negotiations succeeded,
Prime Minister Suzuki and Foreign Minister Ito had agreed to announce it. A certain
Foreign Ministry official who took part in the negotiations revealed the trouble to
the author as follows:

"Actually, in Japan‘s original draft the word 'ally relationship' was not used;
'joint responsibility and cooperation' were used as catehwords to express the Japan-
U.S. rclatlnnship. However. when it was handed over to the Americans, they rewrote
'the Japan-U.S. relationship' as 'ally relationship based on the Japanese-American
protection treaty.‘ At that point the Foreign Ministry considered from various
angles the propriety of using the term 'ally relationship.‘ It concluded that:

I) former Prime Minister Ohira used it when he visited the United States in May
I980; 2) if Japan rejected the use of the term 'ally relationahip,’ it would give
the impression that, on the contrary, the Japan-American relationship is not one of
allies, and this would be undesirable for Japan. Thus it agreed to leave the word
'ally relationship' in the joint agreement, judging that to do so would be better
this time for international relations.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"However, domestically there would have been a misunderstanding over the expression
'ally relationship based on treaty of protection.‘ Therefore, it took out that part
and negotiated with the Americans to change the wording so that it would symbolize
the Japanese-American relationship. As a result it came out 'the allied relation-
ship between the two countries is built on the value both countries put on freedom
and democracy.‘ When the negotiations for this were complete, Foreign Minister Ito
made the announcement. In New York, Prime Minister Suzuki was given a detailed
explanation. I hear he agreed with it, saying: 'I have nothing to change.'"

Even so, after Prime Minister Suzuki returned to Japan, on learning that the joint
agreement was getting unfavorable reviews and on receiving complaints about the
agrecnent he had consented to, he pushed off the responsibility on to the Foreign
Ministry. It is natural that the Foreign Ministry officials should resent him.

At the conference of LOP advisers, Prime Minister Suzuki said: "Because the joint
agreeuunt was drawn up before the prime minister's second talks began, a gap developed
between the contents of the agreement and the announcement made at the prime minister's
interview--without sufficiently incorporating my intentions." Furthermore, even at

the cabinet meeting the prime minister said: "foe problem is that the agreement was
concluded before the discussions were over. ha 11 have to look into the way things
were handled.“

Foreign Ministry officials, hearing what the prime minister said, were in the first
place shocked that Prime Minister Suzuki lacked international commonsense and did
not even understand the nature of the joint accord. It is too awful--he is the
prime minister chosen by the LDP. Prime Minister Suzuki thinks of the joint agree-
ment as something on the level of the minutes of a conference.

What would happen if the minutes of the conference were announced as a joint agree-
ment? Instead of Japan's points being published, America's strong anti-Japanese
demands would be stated. If both made statements with an eye toward legislative
and domestic opinion, far from expressing the conference's "fruitful Japanese—
American relationship.“ only the points of opposition between Japan and America-
would he recorded. and this could not but result in damage to Japanese-American
relations. For this very reason it was decided to express the joint agreement of
friendly understanding between the two countries softly, and to play down as much
as possible the points of contention, expressing how well the cooperative relation-
ship is going and showing that there is a solid relationship between the two countries.
Prnm-tﬁnister Suzuki did not understand that at all.

ercover. it saddened Foreign Ministry officials that Prime Minister Suzuki. who had
consented to the joint agreement, later criticized it. They said: "The shock this
has given thu United States cannot be calculated." Because the Americans are adults
they will not frankly reveal their dissatisfaction. But there has been a great shock
wave that will make the American power elite think: "Is Prime Minister Suzuki that
kind of person?" It won't be easy to remove this stain. It's not a problem that will
u: solved by shutting the mouths of Rareign Ministry officials. It is essential for
the prime minister himself to show the world that he is dealing seriously with
diplomatic problems.

')

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IS}: ONLY

However, according to the newspapers at least, Prime Minister Suzuki gave over his
summer vacation to golf. Of course, Prime Minister Kichida and even Prime Minister
t]:ira—-when they secluded themselves in the mountains at a summer resort-—read books
and thought about the future of the country, giving the Foreign Ministry a pile of
paperwork that needed to be done. Prime Minister Suzuki wanted to appear to be making
an effort, and he summoned Foreign Ministry officials to Karuizawa every day. The
Foreign Ministry, with extreme lack of faith in the Suzuki cabinet, thinks that "the
saying, 'work first play later,’ no longer holds true for politicians.“

Symptonm of the Sinking of the Base of the War Group

When Foreign Ministry officials who criticize politicians look at what is going on
around them. they get more and more gloomy. That is because signs of the immanent
destruction of the foundations of the Foreign Ministry war group (those who came
into the ministry during Hbrld Hat ll)--which should be the highest group-are clear.

bunistry officials had complex reactions regarding vice foreign ministerial personnel
at the time former Ambassador to Korea Sunobe Ryoji was chosen, following Takashina
Masajiro. In the first place, they thumbed their noses at personnel choices whereby,
in many cases, the rules of seniority were ignored. Thus, it was said: "It may

be more typical of Sunobe than the war group of the Foreign Ministry." After all,
they became pacified under Vice Minister Sunobe.

Why would it be more typical of Sunobe? Mr Sunobe was a prewar group diplomat. After
joining the ministry, he had language training in England, then America. He received
strict training from his senior colleagues and served in China. By comparison, war-
period diplomats, on joining the ministry, were immediately drafted into the military.
Even after the war, there was no opportunity to be assigned abroad until the overseas
office was set up in 1950. Moreover, after 1941, the language training prog-am was
phased out and there was no adequate language instruction. The 1902 group was
selected from those who took the standard high school examination; the diplomat test
had been abolished. With the 1944 group, even the high school test was eliminated,
thouyx there was some testing in special cases. In terms of language ability, diplo-
matic education, and techniques of diplomacy, there is a noticeable difference be-
tween the prewar and later groups.

Thus. signs have appeared in the Foreign Ministry that give cause for anxiety. Al-
though we have reached the point when the wartime group of diplomats occupies the
vice ministry and the ambassadorships of major foreign countries, it is obvious that
the nunbcr of capable perSonnel is decreasing. There are almost no candidates for
vice minister. If things were as they used to be, Vice Minister Takashima would have
been succeeded by Deputy Vice Minister Katorl. For a long time it was the practice
in the nnrviun Ministry to rnisu the deputy vice minister up to vice minister. 8e-
rnusc an amateur politician becomes foreign minister with each change of cabinet, it
has bucn established that the highest ranking person from the ministry itself becomes
forciuu minister-—uut of the necessity for maintaining an unbroken line of diplomatic
responsibility. If a person were to assist vice foreign minister for 2 years as
deputy vice foreign minister. and then serves as vice foreign minister for 2 years,
the rhythm of Japan's diplomacy wOuld not be interrupted. Moreover, ambassadors from
various countries in Tokyo have said: "This [continuity] is what we want for the
Foreign Ministry to keep in mind.

6
FOR OFFICIAL ISSF. ONLY
However. having Deputy Vice Foreign Minister Katori accompany Prime Minister Suzuki
on his visit to the United States, after the most recent change in vice minister,
raised questions--the issue of raising the status was evaded. The responsibility
for the confusion surrounding the Japan-0.3. joint agreement is attributed to Prime
Minister Suzuki's lack of diplomatic commonsense. Tb put the blame for the con-
fusion on the Foreign Ministry is exceedingly far from the mark. But the power of
appointing the vice minister rests with the cabinet. If the Prime Minister's Office
was dissatisfied with Mr Katori, even the Foreign Ministry would not have the power
to oppose the appointment.

lhe problem arose afterward. At present there are 12 people from the 1942 group.

1ho 1943 group has 22, the 1944 group 11. Despite that, no names from among the 45
were proposed to succeed Mr Katori as candidate for vice minister. It was said that
there was only one-~0kawara Yoshio, ambassador to the United States (from the 1942
group)--an ace. However, he took up his present post only a year ago and has a
2-year assignment to fill. It has been said in the Foreign Ministry, which gives
top priority to diplomatic relations with the United States, that the post of
ambassador should not be reassigned after a mere 2 years. If the wishes of the
Foreign Ministryshouldbe ignored and Ambassador Okawara should be called back to
the ministry. no one will be found from the war group to replace him.

Personnel Unable To Act

Even the ambassador to the Soviet Union is in the same situation. The Soviet Union

Is a superpower whose institutions are different from ours. Although the Soviet Union
is our geographic neighbor, it is particularly important to keep an eye on trends
there. Fbr that purpose the Foreign Ministry has invested much effort in diplomatic
channels in the Soviet Union since the war. Former Vice Minister Hogen Shinsaku,
former Ambassador to West Germany Sono Akira. former Ambassador to the Soviet UniOn
Shigemitsu Akita--a11 were capable diplomats from this group. Diplomats in the Soviet
section are required to be able to observe night and day the goings-on in the Soviet
Union. to glean keenly what is happen’ug politically, militarily and economically.

It is not something that can be done in a single day.

A diplomat assigned to the Soviet Union must learn Russian, he must live in Moscow,
in an environment where it is difficult to collect information. He must carefully
search through PRAVDA. IZVESTIA, and the Red Army organs, and draw from them minute
rhnnncs in the Soviet Union. He must check his information by making contact with
Soviet diplomats in the party. Diplomats in the Russian section undergo rigorous
Irwinlng. However, since the time of Ambassador Shigemitsu. diplomats in the Russian
Avrilnn, in u surprising degree, have not aanunted to anything.

:Juen Ambassador Shigomitsu retired from the service, he left a bad situation behind.
Fu'mer Ambassador to Egypt Uomoto Tbrakichiro was then recruited. Ambassador Uomoto
nut trained in English. and he did not know Russian. He had never worked in Moscow.

make up for his weak points, the Foreign Ministry got the number one person of the
'_ :wnr group in the Russian section to help Ambassador Uomoto adjust to the Soviet
:v'11nn. 1hus. the weakening of the enbnssy was nvcretd. Ambassador Uomoto has
been in the service a long time. and there are indications he will retire at the end
“r the your.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE "VLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

however, we cannot find, among the wartime group of diplomats, any who can speak
Russian, to say nothing of people who can run an embassy, “fence" with the powerful
Soviet Foreign Ministry, and find out the Soviet attitude toward Japan. According

to the press, former Vice Minister Takashima's name is being mentioned as the next
ambassador to the Soviet Union--indicnting the fear within the ministry of going

with someone from the midwar group who has not demonstrated his ability as ambassador.
Hr Takashium, an well, does not have Russian experience. But he handled the arduous
negotiations [or the Japan-China normalization and for the Japan-China friendship

and peace treaty, and knows the technique of negotiating with a socialist country.

when he was deputy foreign minister he participated in Japanese and Soviet Foreign
Ministry-level discussions and in periodic Japanese-Soviet foreign ministerial dis-
cussions. He was also part of the off and on discussions with the Soviet Foreign
Ministry head. If Mr Takashima is chosen. the feeling of hope will be the basis of
his ambassadorship-—hope that he can tie together Japan—Soviet relations in the
increasingly harsh eighties.

what about the ambassadorship of that other communist country, China? The former
minister, Yoshida Keuzo, of the 1939 group, was in the China service. Howe\er,
Deputy Vice Foreign Phnister Katori, who has been assigned there next, has German.
not Chinese, training. he has never served as Asia section chief, nor has he
experience in China. His being assigned to China stemmed from concern about some-
thing outside the ministry--he was not chosen because he is the most suitable person
for the post of ambassador to China. In terms of suitability. the ambassadorship to
West (brmany would seem more appropriate for a person trained in German. This shows
that aside from Mr Yatori, there was no one else from the war group suitable for

the ambassadorship to China.

Thus the Foreign Ministry vice minister and the ambassadorial personnel of major
countries are in a situation where all doors are closed. The Foreign Ministry cannot
forever turn back time. Diplomats from the war group will be made vice minister and
ambassadors to major countries in a year or two. Can we weather the stormy eighties
with these people? it's not just the dismal feeling of the postwar group in looking
up to the war group as their superiors, but also for the Japanese people it raises
serious questions.

The Higher Cost of Defense Raises the Cost of the Insurance Premium

in the Foreign Ministry, the postwar group of diplomats are at the center of the
debate on how to survive in the eighties. The major topics are Japan's security and
the policy oi strengthening the information network. Japan is a nation committed to
peace, but around it are countries with strong military establishments. In an
emergency, 3 country with military power will be able to defend itself. Even when
there is no emergency. a country with military night will be able to assert its

into rests .

America intervened in Vietnam. The Soviet Union is engaged in an invasion of
Afghanistan. China has made incursions into Vietnam. Despite the opposition of
Japan and other Pacific countries, France occasionally carries out nuclear tests in
the Pacific. Ignoring UN prohibitions, Israel continues to hold the territory of

8
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
several Arab countries that it occupied during the third Middle Boat war in 1967.
Iraq may have built a nuclear reactor for producing nuclear weapons but it was de-
stroyed in the recent air raid. These are the realities of international relations.

what about Japan? 'ihe Japanese people, in their constitution, have committed them-
selves to a policy of peace. However, despite Japan's wishes, the current international
climate makes it difficult for us to keep our promises--and maintain our security.

The recent debates on defense have taken place with this changing situation in mind.

The Foreign Ministry, in the face of this situation. in 1979 established a security
pol icy committee in the ministry, drawing members from the vice-ministerial group

in each branch. They went over the questions of security our nation faces in the
first half of the eighties. 'iheir conclusions were published in "An outline of round
one of the. security policy planning committee," which was made public in July 1980.

In it the Foreign Ministry's security policies for tne first half of the eighties are
brought together.

According to the outline, the Foreign Ministry views world peace as being maintained
by the mutual defense capabilities of America and the Soviet Union. However, recently:
1) America has lost strength; 2) in 20 some years the Soviet Union has dramatically
built up its military establishment; 3) backed by its military strength, the Soviet
Union has plans to enter the Third World, and because of this the Third World is
unstable--thus the analysis is that from the Western perspective there is danger in
the East-West military balance.

Accordingly, viewing the maintenance of the East-Nest military balance and the pre-
vention of war as tied together, the outline concludes that it is necessary for Japan
to make up for America's loss of power, and for the Defense Agency quickly to achieve
an interim estimate for such a plan in order to maintain the dominance of the Rest.

'lhc outline. touching on our neutral defense policy, flatly denies that such an

at Iempt would be nearly impossible economically, that it would invite the destabil-
ization of Asia and the cooling of Japanese-American relations, and that Japan would
lose its diplomatic foundations. Moreover, it says a prerequisite to any dafense
move is to take into consideration the Japanese-American peace treaty.

in addition, it proposes cooperative measures to strengthen Japanese-American relations
in order to cement the American comitment to Japanese defense, to encourage
Japanese-American rest-arch cooperative defense based on guidelines in order to create
mmlitiuns whereby it would be easy for America to come to our aid. and to enlarge

uul‘ s:h.1'rn- til the rosl ol' keepiny, American forces in Japan.

'lln- nullinv nl lln‘ fi rsl ruuml cites the following points as necessary for coopera-
lmn :Iimml :ul |Il't’.‘it'l'V'Ln)', pa-m-v: l) a positive contribution to world peace; 2) ('0-
--a~t-r:niun in disarm-«won ’l) investigation of sending needed personnel to parzixipatc

in LN peacekeeping activities; lo) increase-d foreign aid; 5) contributions to
swungthenmg refugee ramps; 6) strengthened cooperation with respect to the political
and economic aspects of support to Korea and the ASl-‘AN countries.

11w Foreign Ministry's peace policies for the first half of the eighties are based
on this type of thinking. A look at the Japanese-American joint agreement demon—
stratus this thinking in several areas.

‘2
FOR OFFIHAI. USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This suggests that the Foreign Ministry and the Defense Agency are taking the same
line with respect to the question of security. Actually, however, they see things
differently. 11le Defense Agency leans toward the implementation of the latest
weapons when the question of defense preparedness arises. 0n the other hand, the
Foreign Ministry seems to believe that it is almost impossible to resist a Soviet
attack while spending the present 1 percent of the GNP on the defense establishment,
without increasing it to 5-6 percent.

'mus. the Foreign Ministry's idea of the best way to protect Japan is to maintain
the military balance between America and the Soviet Union. 'lhe Foreign Ministry
stresses that at the present time, when America is declining in military strength,
Japan as a Western nation must pay for part of its own defense.

If the American-Soviet balance should break down and Japan should be threatened
with attack, what would it do? The Foreign Ministry thinks it important that Japan
strengthen harmonious ties with America and make sure that America would definitely
be able to come to Japan‘s aid in an emergency.

)l' America were to come to Japan's rescue, the blood of American people would be shed.
it is wrong [or Japan to be saying "Yankee go home" and "Kill the peace treaty" when
it expects America to defend it. From the mment America asked that Japan pay more
for its own defense. it has been important that we show a spirit of cooperation.

The Foreign Ministry views America's demand that Japan increase its defense spending
as comparable to raising the insurance premium of a wealthy person. However, the
Japanese people, to whom the peace treaty is as insubstantial as air, do not under-
stand this. If the Foreign Ministry were to say anything, right away people would
call it "diplomacy that blindly obeys the United States" and "weak-kneed diplomacy."
Press reports exacerbate the melancholy of Foreign Ministry bureaucrats.

The Ever-Changing Forecast

Do yen know that collectively the Foreign Ministry reports reveal signs of a de-
terioration in analytic capabilities?

Diplomacy can be described as a war of information. We find out what another country
has found out about us. If it is not good for us, we must fix it so that we reverse
policy decisions ahead of time. If a dictator, from a desire to make hiaself famous,
thinks he wants to upset the economic superpower, Japan, it is necessary to invite
him as a state guest to Japan, welcome him, and in some way appease his delusions

of grandeur.

At all events, people capable of gathering information are crucial. Every country
invnsls great amounts of money and people in information gathering and analysis.
Ilnwewr, although Japan is economically number two in the world, it puts alumst no
money or manpower into obtaining and analyzing information. That Japan is behind

in the information race is less the blame of the Foreign Ministry than of the govern-
ment as a whole-—which up to now has done little to strengthen information facili-
ties.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a- h' vs. luv u" \pallﬂlrl‘ v- uvw use.“ vul- an .1 ‘m V.t---vu 0“ ”new- no u .n. nu..-) a.“

powers are. Every December the Foreign Ministry published "Next year '5 international
forecast." The use of the past tense is deliberate; lasc December it stopped pub-
lishing the forecast. Why did it stop? The head of the investigative bureau ex~
plained: "It is because we are living in unstable times when things happen that can-
not be predicted."

One would expect that we should put all our strength into avoiding situations that
would mean loss of profit for our country and that the more the world changes, the
more necessary it is that we immediately learn of changing conditions. Despite that,
the investigative bureau, whose job it is to carry out research and analysis, will
not publish the forecast in December--and that is due to nothing other than less of
confidence in research and analysis.

It is understandable. If we look at the forecasts the Foreign Ministry published
in the seventies, they were off-base on all major world events. Starting with
President Nixon's big turnaround on China in 1971--the so-called Nixon shock: the
dollar shock that came a month later, the outbreak of the fourth Middle East war in
I973 and the Arab oil embargo; the 1979 revolution in Iran; the Vietnamese invasion

of Cambodia; the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan--all these major events were mis-
judged.

th do the forecasts miss the mark? One reason is that the Foreign Ministry has
neglected its research facilities. But, as I said before. it is not only the
Foreign Ministry that is to blame. Inadequate allocations of money and of people
for strengthening the facilities are also to blame. The prime minister is also
partly to blame.

At any rate, the Foreign Ministry's information facilities are relatively weak when
compared with thoSe of other developed countries. We don‘t match the ".5. CIA, the
Soviet Union's KGB, or England, France, Italy, Israel, Egypt, or Korea. West Germany
has 6,000 people in intelligence work, 700 in analysis alone. Thus, each country
protects its security and gathers information abroad to be used for its own profit,
and looks for any danger to itself. Such efforts pay off; for example, Israel knowing
rhat lraq was building a nuclear reactor.

In Japan's vase. including the women doing office work. all together there are 37
prnplc in lhv Foreign Ministry's lnvustigative office. Of course, this does not

include lutelliuvﬂcw-uuthering personnel abroad. The investigative personnel are
assigned elsewhere after 2 years. The flow of investigation and analysis is in-

rcrrupted. nuns they cannot profit from lessons learned from past mistakes.

at pruﬁuul, Japan's information gathering is left to embassies around the world.
Huwtver, eVery diplonmtic establishment is short of personnel. In the less developed
countries, especially, language experts above all are in short supply. With the

ex rpliun of lndonesia, it is a matter of contention whether there in even one

;rf&0n in the diplomatic establishments who can read the vernacular newspapers and
understand the radio. lhns, it is Impossible to cull haste infatuation lrom
vernacular Iu-wSpapers and mgazim-s.

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR (II-1"“ 'IM. “SI". ONLY

in September 1978 then Prime Minister Pukuda visited Iran at the time Shah Pahlavi
was still in power. However. when Prime Minister Fukuda spoke with Shah Pahlavi,
the city of Tehran was already being torn by antigovernment demonstrations. Around
the time Prime Minister Fukuda left, the revolution was just erupting in full force.
Even so, at the time, there was no one in the Japanese Embassy in Iran who had fore-
seen the shah's downfall. This is due to there being insufficient nurber of embassy
personnel competent in Persian and to the consequent insufficiency of infornntion-
gathering facilities. In the end, Prime Minister Fukuda's visit to Iran was ex-
pensive, but resulted in no profit to Japan..

Investing Money and People in Information Gathering

What should we do to strengthen our information facilities? In the first place, we
must educate many language and country experts. There are many who, pointing to
current international relations, indicate that the world has shrunk. That is true,
but on the other hand the world has grown more complex, and the independent nature
of small and medium-size countries has strengthened. For that reason we are at a
period in history when specialists, strong in the knowledge of their respective
countries, are needed.

len years ago, knowing what was going on in washington, London, Paris, Bonn, and
Moscow was enough. Even if a person who had served in London was transferred to
Singapore or Malaysia, he spoke the same language of the elite wherever he happened
to be--educated as he was at a university in England. However, recently there has
been a remarkable tendency for native-trained people to enter a country's power elite.

if we take the example of Korea, the elite is switching from the Japanese-speaking
to the Korean-speaking generation. Nevertheless, there is only one career diplomat
in the Foreign Ministry learning Korean (English, 306; French, 117; Arabic, 18);
Korean specialists number 13, approximately 15 in all. This being the case, how can
we get quality information from the Korean power elite? Moreover, it is ridiculous
for us to talk about forging closer relations with Korea and do nothing about it.

Up to now our policy toward Korea has been excessively unbending and we have met
with hatred from the Koreans. After we crammed aid down their throats, an in-
sufficiency of experts prevented us from gaining high-level information--and thus

we repeated the same mistakes.

Second. it is necessary for diplomats at foreign posts to have long-term assignments
in order to gather important information. A high-ranking government official will
not uivu information if he does not trust the Japanese Embassy person. Thus, it is
important to lengthen overseas' assignments. for the staff to become friendly with
and win the trust of high-ranking government people. However, the Foreign Ministry
assigns people to developed countries for 2 years and to unhealthy territories for

l and 1/2 years. Just as personal relations are becoming cemented, the person is
transferred. ﬂius, it is impossible to get good information.

in the third place, information gathering requires investing more money. We must
first of all gather basic information from vernacular newspapers, magazines, and so
forth, to find out what is happening in a Country. However, Foreign Ministry ex—
penditures have hardly increased in the past 10 years. There is at present a
spotty budget for foreign newspapers and magazines. Thus, we cannot with certainty
get basic information.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1n the fourth place is the need to strengthen information-gathering facilities. At
present the Foreign Ministry does not have informational materials adequately filed.
And the materials themselves are incomplete. We assume the CIA has complete dossiers
on top Japanese officials--with information rn school records, family, character,
hobbies and interests. even relations with women, friends at school, and whose

advice the person heeds, whether he becomes talkative when he drinks, tines when his
weaknesses are obvious.

if such material is complete, s country is one-up when it comes to negotiations.
lmen Prime Minister Suzuki went to the United States in May, the Americans flew the
Japanese flag across from Blair House, where he stayed, and gave a big dinner for

him. This reading of Suzuki's character is an example of Alerican diplomatic
technique.

However, the Foreign Ministry does not have that kind of basic information on hand.
11ers is a pressing need to get this information on file in a computer.

In the fifth place, we must strengthen our investigative branch; 5 total staff of

37 people is too few. If we look at Chief Akiysma's record, we see: domestic
information head; head of policy; Asian section; attache, Japanese Embassy in China;
ambassador to Mongolia; then head of the investigative branch. He's had a great
deal of culture-related experience, but no experience in America, the Soviet Union,
Korea, or the Middle East. He has never done work in the investigative branch. No
matter how talented Mr Akiyama is, when the Foreign Ministry needs to make an impor-
tant policy decision, how valuable will Mr Akiyama's opinion be?

At present the investigative branch hardly takes part at all in important policy
decisions. It chiefly deals with short- or mid-term questions. Thus, the infor»
mation gathering and analysis power of the Foreign Ministry will never increase.

Pressing Need for Reform

hie Foreign Ministry is at the stage where there is a pressing need for reform.
"Enn‘t rock the boat" has gone too far. Those who tried to stamp out abuse and failed
in the attempt were given demerits and criticized as "lacking in discretion" and

as “ignoring custom." If one goes on defending the actions of those who have gone
before, nothing happens and it is simply said that so-and—so was had and things can't
h" helped. In foreign diplomacy, the safe course is to walk in someone else's
footsteps--even after being extremely cautious, there are many who won't act unless
sunrnnv has done it before them.

fgrlawnolishing of superiors is widespread. In the Home Affairs Ministry, even if
-.urnne's Opinion differs from that of a superior, if the person makes a great

‘f:Jr; others will notice and his future will not be harmed. However. it in rather
different in the Foreign Ministry. If one falls into disfavor with an aubassador

' ' diplomatic establishment abroad, it may be one's downfall. The ambassador has
nhqnln'r say over a person's evaluation.

of course, an investigator costs approximately once every 2 years in hear views.
”n: because it could mean big trouble if something were to get out later, one keeps
silent even if something is not particularly important. Finally. the anmassador

13
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘(IR ()I-‘FK'IAI. USE ONLY

is totally deferred to. Thus, if the ambassador is a don't-rock-the-boat type,
the staff will be, too. Thus, the effectiveness of the euhassy decreases.

As I mentioned, we are at a period when the war-period group diplomats will head up
more than half of the embassies. If they do not choose able assistants, one worries
that Japan's diplomatic capabilities will drop. As long as Vice Minister Sunobe does
not stamp out the abuse in the Foreign Ministry, the melancholy of young diplomats
will not abate.

On the other hand, there is pent-up dissatisfaction of the section chief class with
the young diplomats. it is apparent that the quality of diplomats entering since
the seventies is lower than before.

The current class of section chiefs are people who were trained around the time of

the San Francisco peace conference. At the time, memories of World War II were fresh,
and wherever one went there was an anti-Japanese feeling. Moreover, the cultural
differences between the developed countries and defeated Japan weretﬂainly evident.
lhese are people who now have prospered in an advanced country.

lhe diplruats of the prewar group are now in leading positions. Their language
training meant not just simply being able to speak the language of a country, but

it unant getting the same level of edcuation as the elite of the country. If they
didn't use language that was appropriate and refined for diplomatic use, they were
severely scolded by their seniors. Therefore, the postwar group of diplomats, those
of the fifties and sixties. can use language rather exactly.

We Want To Say: Go Back and Study

However, since the seventies, there have appeared young diplomats who are not per-
fectly literate. They are not subject to culture shock. At school they listened

to their Sony stereos, and they have absolutely no complex about it. They use words
carelessly.

Senior colleagues in the Foreign Ministry on hearing them are startled. Without
giving it a thought they use slang at parties for high-ranking diplomats from other
countries. At the Foreign Ministry itself, when foreign guests arrive in Japan,
they translate for the prime minister and emperor for practice. However. lately
translators are being carefully selected to avoid embarrassing situations.

it's not just the awful words. They have no continuing interest in studying Japan
and other countries. 1 have experienced this myself.

When those assigned abroad speak with diplomats of other countries, the others' in-
terest is in conditions in Japan and in the rest of the Far East and in the relation-
ship between Japan and other countries. However, there are few who can accurately
explain these things. Other countries' diplomats will scorn the Japanese: "This

man only is this much of a human being"—-no matter how friendly we try to get they
will keep us at arm's length. Among the section heads is one who grumbled to the
writer: “1 would have diplomats reread Nicholson's "Diplomacy“ and relearn what it

is to become an ideal diplomat."

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USI-I ONLY
The Lack of workers and the Strain of chronic Overwork

Thus, stories of gloom in the Foreign Ministry pile up. What should be done? Sup-
posing something to alleviate the situation were to be done right away, there are
several ways of doing this. Vice Minister Sunobe, in his position as supervisor,
must see to the details of amending the situation.

However, when it comeatobasic problems such as strengthening information facilities
and enriching the diplomatic organization, nothing will happen unless the staff of
the Foreign Ministry is increased. Compared to the increase in work at the Foreign
Ministry, there is an absolute shortage of staff to do it.

Please look at the following figures: Using 1969 as a base of 100, in 1980 there

were 1,271 cables, 793 overseas travelers (among the ministry officials) 393 treaties
nude, 277 Japanese nationals abroad, and 255 investigations. Even so, thL staff was
increased by only 128. It is a fact that this tremendous load meant overworking the
Foreign Ministry staff. Indeed, the 1.0? has recognized the need to strengthen
diplomatic facilities, and at budget time there have been those who would increase

the Foreign Ministry's appropriations. As a result, if we look over the past 2 years,
the number of personnel has increased. Even so, the rate of increase is 4.6 percent--
not more than 160 people.

Hhat about businesses? In the past 5 years the average increase in business per-
sonnel living abroad has been 17 percent-which means they have put Strength into
their operations. However, the diplomatic staff, which protects the national in-
terests, is not increased. As a result, information gathering is slow. What does
the prime minister think about a situation where there is a loss to the nation's
profits?

Compared to the number of diplomatic personnel of other major countries, Japan has
considerably fewer. In 1980, the United States had 13,601 diplomats, England had
10,037, France had 6,801, West Germany had 6,118, and Italy had 5,156. Even India
had 4,652. However, Japan's number does not exceed 3,580. Developed countries have,
in addition, information gathering centers and so forth.

let's look at the number of embassy personnel of major countries. in Washington, the
center of international politics, England has 442 diplomats assigned, observing the
policies of the United States toward other countries. France has 263, West Germany
has 102. However, Japan, which complains about Japanese-American relations, has 77.

what about in Paris, the center of Europe? The United States has 385 diplomats there.
England has 111, West Germany has 85. Japan has 38 embassy personnel. Those
countries with more personnel assigned to other countries have more eyes with which

to gather and assess information. Nevertheless, the attitude of Japan, an econondc
superpower, is very narrow. Moreover, each country has the ability to dispatch
military forces to these various areas in case of emergency.

'nuwz the Iran-Iraq war broke out, the various Western nations dispatched military
Iorces to get their nationals out of the area. Japan, which had the most personnel
in the area, was the naked king. There was no way to get the Japanese out quickly.
Luckily, there were no casualties, but next time, in a similar emergency, what
responsibility does the Japanese Government intend to take?

15
FOR omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

olplnmncy and Domestic Affairs Are Different

Japan, which does not have any corresponding emergency shelter, must quickly estab-
lish a corresponding policy, to know in advance of danger from other countries.
However, as has been said, embassies, which are the means of getting such advance
warning, are almost nonexistent in the less developed countries.

In this connection, if we take a look at personnel currently assigned to diplomatic
establishmenls abroad: there are 11 with more than 30 people, 15 with 20 to 29
people, 6 wirh 15 to 19 people, and 24 with 10 to 14 people. In other words, there
are 56 diplonmtic establishments abroad with 10 or more people. Almost all the
diplomatic establishments in the developing countries have less than 10 people.
There are 30 with eight or nine, 31 with six or seven, and 608 with less than five.

In diplomatic establishments abroad, the most important people besides the ambassador
are those who speak the language of the country and the experts in the political

and governmental climate. However, in almost all the diplomatic establishments,

only about one person speaks the language of the country--and we would like Prime
Minister Suzuki to be well aware that there are 40 diplomatic establishments con-
sisting of only the ambassador, the telegraph operator, and a typist.

Unlike the Home Affairs Ministry, educating a person to be a talented diplomat takes
10 years. First, the candidate must be sent to school in the country to study the
language. And he must live in the country and study life there. Then he must learn
about the workings of the Foreign Ministry and be taught Japan's diplomatic policies.
To make a real diplomat takes from 10 to 15 years, sometimes 20.

To compensate for the present insufficiency of talent in the Foreign Ministry, the
following steps are under consideration: 1) take personnel from the Home Affairs
Ministry; 2) measure the rate of success of investing personnel in priority diplo-
matic establishments; 3) transfer staff to needed diplomatic establishments and make
more efficient use of personnel; é) do more to train specialists; 5) put more effort
into the training program; 7) reform the appointments system and pay more attention
to noncareer people.

However, if the number of Foreign Ministry personnel is not increased, these things
rannot be accomplished.

Although Prime Minister Suzuki, when conferring with the foreign minister about the
problems of reforming the ministry, said: "I am aware of the troubles you have and
1 know there is much room for reform"—-this year he announced that the number of
Foreign Ministry personnel would not increase much.

Diplomacy is different from domestic affairs. President John F. Kennedy once said:
'ﬂhe big difference between domestic affairs and diplomacy is the difference between
a bill being rejected and a country being obliterate ." We would like Prime Minister
Suzuki to reflect on these words as he maps out the future of our nation.

16
FOR OFFICIAL liSI-Z ONLY
More than being a (my to rid the Foreign Ministry of its melancholy, this is the

only way for Japan-which has rejected web-to survive in today's harsh international
climate.

COPYRIGi'l‘: Chuo Koronshs 1981

9 39 1
(280: 4105/ 29

8

1
FOR OFF“ 11L USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

SUZUKI'S BASIC POSITION RE-EXAMINED
Tokyo SBIKBIJIN in Japanese Dec 81 pp 26-29
[Article by Taro Kamakura. a critic on political affairs]

[Text] Reorganization of a cabinet. if done well. can effectively revitalize
the cabinet but. done poorly. can prove fatal. It is not certain at this point
in which direction the reorganization of the Suzuki cabinet will tend.

Reorganization of the Suzuki cabinet accompanies election of officials to fill
the top three posts in the Liberal Democratic Party. Even if this were not

the case. however. Prime Minister Suzuki would certainly have to have made a
move to clear away the atmosphere of bad feelings caused by those who are
suffering from ministerial fever. This is so because the bad feelings caused

by ministerial fever. following the dynamics of factional squabbling. had become
very intense and were on the verge of inflicting a conspicuous blow on the
vitality of the Liberal Democratic Party.

Even if I attempt to say what will be the new line-up in the Party's three top
posts of what will be the new cabinet, these questions may already be decided
when this magazine is published. Consequently. any demands I make at this point
would have no effect. One thing. however, will worry me to the very last
moment; i.e.. where is Foreign Minister Sonoda going? I think it is about 99.9
percent certain that he will not be able to remain in his post but this. in any
case. is up to Prime Minister Suzuki. That worries me.

The way Foreign Minister Sonoda got into good favor with Prime Minister Suzuki
was rather disagreeable to see than very hard for the average person to under-
stand. From Prime Minister Suzuki's standpoint. however. there was no other
minister as loyal as Foreign Minister Sonoda. According to what journalists
have reported as a remark the prime ministermmdeto those close to him. Suzuki
said. "Mr Sonoda speaks out on what I am thinking and am going to say before I
do. No friend of mine in more trustworthy than he."

Certainly. it would seem that the several statements by Mr Sonoda which have
caused problems were things which Prime Minister Suzuki. who originally came
from the Japan Socialist Party. wanted to think and say. He criticized United
States policy in the United Nations by telling the United States. "Do not try
to tell us what to do." when former United States Ambassador to Japan
Reischauer. acting out of friendship for the Japanese people. made his

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
disclosures regarding the question of calls to Japanese ports by ship: carrying
nuclear weapons, Foreign Minister Sonoda denounced his statement by calling it
“unnecessary meddling." Foreign Minister Sonoda also revealed an ignorance of
international law unbecoming to a foreign minister when he said. "The United
States-Japanese Joint Communique is not binding." These remarks. undoubtably,
were manifestations of a critical perception of the "basic United States-Japan
line" arising from Mr Sonoda's so-called "unidirectional peace diplomacy."

It is probably no exaggeration to say that these statements by Foreign Minister
Sonoda are completely in consonance with the ideas of Prime Minister Suzuki who
personally met with President Reagan and then found fault with the joint United
States-Japanese Communique which was announced after the meeting. Prime Minister
Suzuki not only found fault with the joint communique; after he returned to
Japan, he kept quiet and made no attempt to mention enhancement of Japan's
defense capability which he had promised President Reagan. Basically, an
increase in defense capability which a prime minister promised to the president
of an allied nation was a matter on which the prime minister would have to
actively try to persuade the people even at the price of some adverse reaction.
Prime Minister Suzuki. however. completely abandoned such attempts at persuasion.
He feigned innocence, saying, "Japan has shouldered no new obligations in its
relationship with United States." Later, he dealt with the matter by pushing

it off on his director general of the Defense Agency.

Only such a prime minister would deserve such a foreign minister; Mr Sonoda's
series of "anti-American statements" become understandable if one takes the
view that Prime Minister Susuki is not following Prime Minister Ohira's "basic
Japan-United States line" but is really involved in an "semi-directional pence
diplomacy" and that these remarks heralded that policy. It is also consistent
to take a similar view of the fact that when Mr Sonoda was minister of health,
and welfare, he spoke out loudly at a cabinet meeting to criticize a statement
by Foreign Minister lto which concerned actively building up defense capability
and which stressed the importance of cooperation with the United States.

Because of this relationship between Prime Minister Suzuki and Foreign Minister
Sonoda, there was very early speculation among the people who are knowledgeable
about politics that the prime minister wanted, if possible, to allow Foreign
Minister Sonoda to remain in his post. However. criticism of Foreign Minister
Sonoda surfaced at a meeting of a Liberal Democratic Party joint working group
on foreign policy and defense attended by a large number of the diet members,
more than 100 of the members in all. Consequently, rumors spread even into the
mess conmmnications media that Prime MinisterSuzukiseemed. in spite of himself,
to have given up the idea of letting the foreign minister stay in his position.

It goes without saying that it was Prime Minister Suzuki who made Mr Sonoda the
new foreign minister after Foreign Minister Ito had resigned. Furthermore,
nI-hounh Mr Sonoda was at that time holding the post of minister of health and
,«:¢1re, his coming into the cabinet had been due to the resignation of Mr
’V't-yoshi) Saito, a trusted friend of the prime minister, as minister of health
a.4 welfare because of a scandal involving the Fujimi Hospital of Obstetrics and
Gynetology.

Nearly all of the other members of the cabinet became ministers through the
-an of the leaders of their factions; Mr Sonoda alone became a minister

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of state through the initiative of Prime Minister Suzuki. Accordingly. the
relationship between Prime Minister Suzuki and Foreign Minister Sonoda could

be called inseparable. When the problematic statements by Foreign Minister
Sonoda have dealt no little blow to Japanese-Amencan relations. Prime Minister
Suzuki has shared in the responsibility. For those who more or less understand
the political situation not to mention those who are of sound judgment within the
Liberal Democratic Party, it has been easy to surmise that Foreign Minister
Sonoda has made those "grand" statements because Prime Minister Suzuki had
always taken a position to protect him.

Since Foreign Minister Sonoda's showy behavior was tinged with an "anti-American
coloration." it was welcomed by m: and all of the major newspapers except the
Sankei Shimbun and the Mihon Keizai Shimbun. Since this suited Prime Minister
Suzuki perfectly. he did not caution Foreign Minister Sonoda at all even though
there was criticism of Sonoda‘s statements within the Liberal Democratic Party.

However, the facts have demonstrated that. as stated earlier. there is no small
amount of criticism of Foreign Minister Sonoda within the Liberal Democratic
Party. Had nothing been done at this point. the criticism of Foreign Minister
Sonods could have been expected to flare up sharply into undisguised criticism
of Prime Minister Suzuki. When this is the case, Prime Minister Suzuki. who
consistently looks to his own interests, cannot protect Foreign Minister Sonoda.
Therefore, even the prime minister has. reportedly. resigned himself to a deci-
sion to change his foreign minister.

However, as I said earlier. this is a matter involving Prime Minister Suzuki who
is said to be tone deaf as far as international politics and diplomacy are con-
cerned and. moreover. involving Foreign Minister Sonoda who is. more than any-
thing else, like Mr Suzuki's "faithful dog". One cannot say it is completely
impossible that Mr Suzuki will make clever use of the complicated political
dynamics to retain Mr Sonoda as foreign minister. Therefore. by way of a final
effort before the reorganization of the cabinet. which, judging from the publica-
tion schedule of this magazine, could be tomorrow, I insist that Foreign Minis-
ter Sonoda be moved.

What. then. are the prospects for the reorganized Suzuki cabinet? Surely, if
Mr Yasuhiro Nakasone, who along with Prime Minister Suzuki. aspires to be the
next president of the Liberal Democratic Party. and Mr ‘l'oshio Komoto are allowed
to remain in their posts, this would be a stabilizing factor in its own way.
However. as the end of the presidential term in autum next year gets closer.
unless these two gentlemen abandon their political ambitions. their presence
might turn into a destabilizing factor for the Suzuki cabinet at some time.
The view of common sense would probably be that. when age is considered, it
would not be impossible for Mr Nakasone to let one term go by but this is not
the case for Komoto. what Mr Komoto will do will probably be watched as the
eye of the hurricane. at least as far as the Suzuki cabinet is concerned.

For the Suzuki cabinet the main political tasks ahead will be full-scale
administrational reform which is to be carried out next year and formation of
foreign policy which will be mainly concerned with readjustment of relations
between Japan and the United States. The role of the minister of finance
will be particularly inportant for the former while. for the latter, the big

20
FOR OFFECIAL USE ONLY
question will be who is to take the post of foreign minister. Unfortunately,
because of the publication schedule for the magazine. I cannot discuss this
question at this time.

I would. then. like to ask the prime minister about his basic political attitude.
With what sort of resolution will he, at the head of his reorganized cabinet.
assume responsibility for the nation and the people? "111 he face the tumultuous
and complicated global situation with the same obliviousness to international
politics he has shown so far? will he continue to have an integratiating atti-
tude toward the mass media and the opposition parties as he has up to now?

I will give one further example. This happened prior to the reorganization of
the cabinet but. an article in ASABI SHIHBUN on 11 November said that the govern—
ment "decided not to accept the request for incorporation of the private sector's
Japanese Civil Defense Association (chairman Ringo Machimura) and had reported
this to the Subcommittee on Civil Defense (chaired by Keizo Kobuchi) of the
Liberal Deaocratic Party’s Security Affairs Research Council which was promot;r5
the movement toward incorporation. The question is what were the reasons for
this move.

According to the newspaper article. the reason was that “there is still no
national consensus on civil defense which would include defense against the
disasters of war" and the move was made out of caution against the criticism
that by allowing the incorporation the government was stirring up a sense of
danger among the people and thereby lending impetus to increases in defense
capability.

The problem is that matter of a "national consensus." It would seem that on the
working level the decision on the policy of not permitting incorporation of a
civil defense association was probably made by the prime minister's office and
it would seem that was certainly Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiyazawa who made the
final decision. Without doubt. he asked Prime Minister Suzuki's wishes in this
process.

This is so because the association is not simply an association of private
citizens. It is a known fact that Mr. Kingo Huramachi is the chairman of the
association and that the association has the backing of the Subcommittee on
Civil Defense of the Liberal Democratic Party's Security Affairs Research
Council. In view of this fact. the application for incorporation could not have
been rejected without a political decision by the highest level of government.

If this is so. then it is clear that it was Prime Minister Suzuki and his close
associate Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiyazawa who decided that "there is still no
national consensus on civil defense which would include defense against disasters
of war" and who were therefore afraid of a reaction from the people.

1his is an alarming turnaround. What becomes national consensus is not a
spontaneous product of nature. Points of contention are presented and consensus
is formed in the process of discussion. The ones which provide the points of
contention are the government. the political parties. the mass media and groups
irom the private sector. The entity which is in position to take the initiative
provides the point of contention. In a system of political party government it
is to be expected that the government will provide the points of contention in

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘I-‘K IM. liSI-I ONLY

its discussions with the opposition parties; this has become the usual practice
in Western .‘-I':ope .

Accordingly, if we look at the case of the civil defense question. since the

Liberal Democratic Party initiated the project and applied for incorporation in

order to intensify its propaganda activities to educate the people, the Suzuki

'abinet, which is a Liberal Democratic Party government. should, of course. have
iven permission if the conditions needed for incorporation were satisfied.

”his in itself would have constituted presentation of a point of contention to
the people by the government and the Liberal Democratic Party.

If the people were opposed, the government should try to persuade them. If

the people can by no means be convinced, the government should develop a debate
of basic issues on a national scale. The debate should cover such questions as:
Shall we assume. then. that it is all right to entrust the defense of Japan to
the Self-Defense Forces alone? If so, shall we not at least clearly grant
constitutional existence to the Self—Defense Forces by revising article 9 of

the const itut ion?

0r shall we assume that the security of Japan can be guaranteed by unarmed neu-
trality?

If Prime Minister Suzuki continues in this policy of running away from issues,
his cabinet will do today's Japan much harm and no good at all. I earnestly
hope that the ministers of the reorganized cabinet will rise to the situation.

9111
C80: 4105/36

22
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY
LDP PLAN TO LAUNCH 'SECURITY SATELLITE' DISCUSSED
091051131 Tokyo SANKEI SHIHBUN in Japanese 1 Jan 82 Morning Edition p 1
[Article by Saneyuki Kodachi]

[Excerpts] Now that the lounting international tension in connection with the
Pol Lsh and other developments has made it necessary for Japan to build up its
defense potential, the LDP, in cooperation with the defense agency's

uniformed officers, has decided to begin working out plans from the outset

of the new year to launch a Japanese security satellite.

'lhe decision was born from the notion that Japan, whose national policy is to
defend itself exclusively for the purpose of self-defense, must have a
satellite to promptly monitor military developments in the Far Eastern region
of the Soviet Union, a potential threat to Japan, by taking photographs and
to have at its disposal the "rabbit's long ears" to monitor world developments
without a moment's delay.

The LDP Security Affairs Research Council, headed by chairman Asao Hihara, is
soon to begin a study on the plan and in February Taro Nakayana, former
director general of the prime minister's office and chairman-designate of the
LDP special committee on space development, is scheduled to visit Washington
to feel out the United States about its cooperation.

If this plan materializes, Japan will become the third country to have a security
satellite, after the United States and the Soviet Union, and hence it may create
an international stir.

l’rr-mrntly, whenever Japan wants to know something about Soviet military develop-
ments: such as the development of troops on the four northern islands, Japan
asks the United States for information. However, as a defense agency official
-..Hd, "The United States makes information available to us only when it thinks
rm: doing so is all right: it seldom provides us with photographs."

4 vivil ian official of the defense agency said, "Although no commitment has been
made between Japan and the United States on providing information to each other,
we believe that, in case of an emergency directly affecting Japan's security,

23
FOR OFFICIAL usr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the U.3. side will provide us with. information." However, uniformed members
of the agency believe that "now that the situation changes from moment to
moment, we cannot meet our objectives by only relying on the United States
for information." Against this background, the talk of launching a Japanese
security satellite has gained momentum.

In connection with these moves. Mnkoto Genda, chairman of the LDP Defense
Affairs Council, is eager to promote the satellite launching plan in earnest.
He said: "To possess a security satellite means to prevent war. With its
science and technology Japan can develop by itself both the satellite and the
rocket necessary for its launching. This is a matter of political decision."

Asao Mihara, chairman of the Security Affairs Research Council, made it clear
that his council should begin studying the plan imediately. He said: "Since
other members of the research council have made similar recomendations and
since I believe that this is an important idea, I would like to put the matter
to a study, with the Foreign Ministry also participating in it."

Whether Japan should develop the security satellite domestically, ask the
United States for technical cooperation, or purchase the necessary rocket and
even the satellite itself from the United States remains a question.

Regarding the rocket necessary for the launching, this requirement can be met
by using the “-11 type rocket used by the National Space Development Agency to
launch the meteorological satellite "Himawari-II" to an altitude of 36,000 km
last August. However, this rocket contains only 56 percent of domestically
Droduced parts; the balance is either purchased from the United States or
produced under a licensed production system.

As a result, it appears to he the quickest and simplest way to seek technical
couperat ion from the United States; this will also be a way of reducing Japan's
trade surplus vis-a-vis the United States.

Former prime minister's office director general Nakayama plans to visit the
United States in mid-February and meet congressional leaders in the scientific,
foreign relations and defense areas--including his friend, Don Fuqua, chairman

of the House Science and Technology Comittee--and officials of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration. He will try to find out what the U.S. side
thinks about the plan and also seek the understanding of the U.S. side in the
interpretation of the notes exchanged (in 1969) on cooperation between Japan

and the United States in space development.

After seeing the 11.5. reaction, the defense agency, the science and technology
agency and other pertinent government agencies will establish a comittee for
the study of the security satellite to formally start the necessary survey and
research work. Thus, the LDP wants to make the security satellite one of the
pillars of Japan's security in the period of the post-1981 mid-term defense
estimte.

2h
son OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
Stressing the significance of the satellite, Nakayame said: "the AHAC'e which
the defense agency purchases cost 1" billion yen apiece but a security
satellite can be launched at a cost of 20 billion yen. So, it will lessen
the defense burden of the nation. Besides, if and when Japan possesses a
satellite. the Soviet Union will not easily carry out any rash actions.

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keizai Shinbun Tokyo Honeha 1982

C50: 4120/126

25
ma omnu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

ECONOMIC

NATION'S TRADE FRICTIONS DISCUSSED
0w092346 Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 8 Jan 82 p 2
(Editorial: "Present Stage of Trade Friction and Japan's Response"]

[Text] Given the present vitality of the Japanese economy, the trend toward

an ever increasing trade surplus is unlikely to die down unless it hits some
wall. 80, as in the past, trade friction is bound to increase. Judging from
all indications at hand, it appears that the trend toward a greater surplus

will encounter the wall of protectionism which underlies trade friction.

in predicting how our trade problems will develop this year, we can safely

say that Japan has come to a critical crossroads of having to decide whether

it should take the initiative on its own to curb the growing trend or let things
take their own course until they hit a wall.

European countries and the United States are criticizing Japan more bitterly
than ever before because Japan alone recorded a huge trade surplus while they
suffered economic difficulties in the past year. At times. they made ominous
statements that smacked of a threat of retaliation. In the case of the

United States, these statements may have come in view of the coming off-year
elections in the fall. Many voices warn that this will be a year of more acute
trade friction. Various moves at home and abroad certainly point to that

possibility.

U.S. Ambassador Mansfield sounded a warning at the Foreign Press Club on

6 January, and his warning was couched in a stern tone no one imagined to hear
from the pro-Japanese envoy. Senator John Danforth, chairman of the Inter-
national Trade Subcommittee of the Senate Finance Cmnnittee that is studying

a bill to restrict imports from Japan, arrived on 7 January. His arrival also
suggests something ominous. It is certain that the U.S. congressional hearing
on Japan, that will resume late this month, will become a forum for a chorus
of criticism against Japan. The hearing will coincide with the release of
statistics on U.S. trade with Japan.

There are many important international conferences scheduled for this year,
beginning with a four-nation conference in Miami on 15-16 January, a summit
meeting of leading industrial nations in France in July and GATT ministerial

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
conference in November. It appears inevitable that Japan's trade surplus
will be a major topic at each of these meetings. In this sense, 1982
will be a year of suffering for Japanese trade.

Qualitative Change of Trade Friction

Of course we do not have to be nervous about each tough statement made against
Japan from abroad. but we must note that the present trade friction has changed
considerably in quality from that of before. Take the Japan-v.3. friction,

for example. Owing to the industrial slump in the United States, the automobile
issue still remains a source of U.S. complaints toward Japan even though Japan
has imposed voluntary regulations on its automobile exports. However, the
object of the friction has now spread to the area of ultramodern [sentanteki]
technology--in general involving electronics technology-without being limited
to individual items. Due partly to national defense reasons, the rapid
narrowing of the technological gap in the area of ultramodern technology is
prompting the United States to be more vigilant against Japan.

An important thing to note is that the United States. putting the principle of
reciprocity to the fore as a means of correcting the trade imbalance, is exert-

ing more efforts on opening up the Japanese market than on quantitatively
controlling imports of controversial goods.

The lowering of tariffs on ultramodern technological goods, the removal of non-
tariff barriers, a review of the import quota system for beef and citrus fruits
and the liberalization of banks, the stock exchange and other service trades
are the immediate targets. It is evident that the United States is seeking a
rollback in areas where it is highly competitive. In view of the tenacity of
the 0.5. demands, it may be safe to say that, after experiencing long frictions
over textiles to automobiles, the trade relationship between Japan and the
United States is about to reach its final stage at long last.

At the same time, as criticism of Japan over its closed market now extends to
i1pnn’s import procedures, commercial practices, traditions and other cultural
‘rulLs, the trade friction is now taking on the look of a cultural friction.
fhin might be called a remarkable characteristic of the latest friction.

In a sense, a cultural friction undoubtedly lies at the root of the trade friction.
However, it has been possible thus far to dispose of it before this phenomenon
.nmo to the fore. The fact that this phenomenon is now coming to the fore may
‘. evidence Lhat the trade friction is at a crucial point. A cultural friction

: 1hr rink oi making the issue more cumbersome as it is apt to create wanton

'. "reflexes."
a is morc:uuwying is that Japan is running more and more short of effective

'~ ~upe with its trade frictions with the advanced nations of ﬂurope and
Japan's positive action in carrying out tariff reductions 3 years ahead

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the schedule agreed on at the Tokyo round deserves high evaluation but is
eclipsed by the huge trade surplus. In the area of nontariff barriers,
Japan is preparing to carry out drastic improvements and readjustments, such
as simplifying import procedures strongly urged by other countries. However,
the effect it will have on expanding trade is also not expected to be so
fruitful.

Cooperation Toward Preserving the Free Trade System

But we are not saying that this is a futile effort. Although individually
these measures may not be effective, we should take them to a great extent.

1: is also advisable to advance the proposed review of the import quota system
for farm products. The problem, however, is the possibility that despite all
these measures Europe and the United States would still have deficits in their

trade with Japan and how Japan should cope with steps that they might take
under such circumstances.

U.S. Ambassador Mansfield said that it is important that U.S. commodities be
allowed to enjoy free access to markets in Japan just as Japanese goods are

in the United States. Some high-ranking officials on the U.S. Government

even say that only if Japan opens up its market, it is all right with the
United States if deficits still remain despite the Japanese measures.
Nevertheless, this is a matter of degree. If the economic pinch in the United
States drags on, discontent will naturally resurge, eventually leading the
United States, too, to take the final measure to directly regulate imports from
Japan. Japan should consider such a development to be a possibility.

1f taken, such a protectionist step will surely prompt inflation and hamper the
very revitalization of the 0.8. economy. It is obvious that if the United
States--the standard-bearer for free trade—-takes such a step, it will invite
other countries to take the same action and lead to a reduction of the world
trade. It is easy to talk about demerits of protectionism and argue for free
trade. ﬂaweger, would a country. which supposedly already lost its reason

and ran to protectionism, possibly have an ear to lend to this appeal?

Yet, Japan is in the position to loudly advocate and maintain the free trade
system. This is an indispensable precondition for Japan's survival in the
international community and it should be noted that Japan will suffer the hardest
blow by protectionism. In this sense, it is Japan that should now be most

active in preserving the free trade system. To this end, Japan will require self-
restraint at times and need to offer active economic cooperations to countries
that are in economic difficulties.

It should be noted that the most important thing for Japan to do now is to avoid
creating situations that could force the United States to renounce the principle
of free trade. In this context, now is the most critical moment.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

030: 6120/126

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OPENING OF JAPANESE MARKET ADVOCATE!)

0H060945 Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 4 Jan 82 p 2

[TOHIURI SHIMBUN 4 January editorial: "Open Our Harket"]

[Text] There are good prospects that 1982 will be a much better year than

1981 for the world economy, providing there are no great upheavals in Poland
or the Middle East.

What leads to optimistic forecasts is that the oil supply situation is becoming
stabilized, inflation rates in many countries have been gradually dropping and
high interest rates have been coming down.

But the brighter course for the world economy still depends on relatively stable
political conditions and avoidance of a major confrontation. And if 1982

can be turned into the "year of peace" through progress in disarmament, then
defense expenditures can be trimmed and living standards for the world's

peoples can be lifted.

Hard War on Inflation

Although the second oil shock was not as severe as the first, the world nevertheless
has had to struggle hard to defeat inflation. Inflation appears almost licked,

but high interest rates imposed to combat high prices are still causing serious
problems.

According to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
the economic growth rate in 1981 was minus 0.25 percent in Europe and 1.75 per—
cent in the U.S. However, an economic upturn is expected in the second half

of 1982 and the real economic growth rate for that period will be 2.25 percent
in Europe and four percent in the U.S. The rate for the entire year will be
1.5 percent in Europe and minus 0.5 percent in the u.s.

.t:nn ls expected to fare better with an economic growth rate of 3.75 percent in
I981 and the same in 1982. Also, prices are expected to rise by only about four
percent in 1982 with an unemployment rate of 2.2 percent.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘I-‘K'IAI. "SF. ONLY

Keep Growth Conservative

However, Japan should be careful not overstimulate the economy. He believe

that the government 's goal of attaining a 5.2 percent e-zouonic growth in 1982
is too high. The government should reduce its deficit spending and .ploy
flexible policies.

In 1981, dialog between the north and the south was maintained in Mexico.
However, the question for 1982 will be whether developed and developing
countries can agree to global negotiations in the UN on a new economic order.

Japan's major international task for the new year will be to eliminate trade
friction with the U.S. and Western Europe and this can only be done by
opening Japan's market.

COPYRIGHT: DAILY YOMIURI 1982

CSO: 4120/126

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NATION'S ROLE IN WORLD ECONOMY VIEWED
0H060951 Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 5 Jan 82 p 2
lﬁditorial: "Japan and World Economy"]

[Text] The advanced capitalist countries except for Japan are taking great
pains to overcome the state of an overall economic crisis, while socialist
countries have exposed the defects of their managed economies as evidenced by
the crisis in Poland. In the Third World, the poorest nonpetroleum producing
developing countries are in a far worse plight as shown by the recent UNICEF
report on world children.

The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) made somber
forecasts toward the end of last year regarding the economic climate of its
member countries this year. The OECD predicted that the real economic growth
rate would be a little over 1 percent, as in last year, while the number of
persons out of work would increase from 25,750,000 at the end of last year

to 28,250,000 about the middle of this year. It also stated that the deficits
in current accounts as a whole would reach $27 billion.

Against such a background, Japan's unemployment ratv is expected to stay low
with its current account surplus reaching an estimated $17 billion. Voices in
favor of protectionist trade will gain momentum in Europe and America, and
Japan will find it difficult to parry trade frictions with the United States
and Europe. The situation is particularly serious because the gap in current
accounts is deeplv rooted in strtmtural differences, such as the difference in
economic vitality between Japan and the Western nations.

Hie United States under President Reagan and Britain under Prime Minister Thatcher
have been enforcing economic policies with emphasis placed on the market
mechanism. Hence the unemployment rates in these countries have increased

at a jump. it is the revival of bare, heartless capitalism that prefers
ellicicnvy to justice. How far can they push through such policies at the
sacrifice of the masses?

Another factor threatening to jeopardire President Reagan's economic plan is
his military expansion policy requiring $1,500 billion over five years. As

)1
FOR 0FFIC1AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

| result, the deficit of fiscal 1982 will top $100 billion. This may play a
role of stimulating business to some extent, but it is believed almost certain
that the deficits will total a record $300 billion in fiscal 1983 and 1984
when business is expected to pick up. Escalation of inflation or revival

of high interest rates is unavoidable.

the slack economy of the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries
is largely due to the exhorbitant military spending, more than 10 percent
of the GNP, in addition to the inflexibility of planned economy.

Irrespective of the pattern of the economy. capitalism or socialism. military
spending blocks the accumulation of capital and slows down economic growth.
the low economic growth rates of 2 to 3 percent in real terms in the Soviet
Union are attributable to its huge military spending.

Aside from such structural problems, the Suzuki government should have compiled
a budget for 1982 with emphasis placed on the promotion of domestic demand in
order to avoid intensification of trade frictions. The government has stuck

to its fiscal policy aﬂncd at discontinuing the flotation of deficit-covering
national bonds in three years.

Since this country is championing free trade, we believe that Japan should

drastically open its markets, including those for agricultural products. It
should also take a serious View of the north-south problems.

Low-income developing nations are hard pressed as they depend heavily on the
exports of primary products. Technological cooperation and increased Official
Development Aid (ODA) are essential for the relief of the nonoil producing
developing countries. The Suzuki cabinet in its 1982 budget draft increased
Japan's ODA by 7 percent over the previous year, but at this rate it is next
to impossible for this country to realize the UN target of 0.7 percent of the
GNP by 1985.

The government declaration that Japan, as an economic power, will carry out its
international obligation through economic assistance will sound hollow. It
must be remembered that many Western countries complain that Japan has been
pursuing its own economic interests without sharing international obligations.

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Daily News, 1982

C50: 6120/126

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUTURE COURSE OF TRADE PROBLEMS WITH U.S., EEC VIEUED
Tokyo BUNGBI SHUNJU in Japanese Oct 81 [page numbers unavailable]

[Text] There is a source of anxiety everywhere. Cannot this be said to be the
actual impression concerning the trade problems of Japan? Just at the moment we
thought that the automobile problem has been generally settled, difficult problems
ranging from the IC and LSI to communications computers have arisen, one after
another. However, Japan,which has basic technology which will provide the pivot
for the future renewal of technology, along with the United States, will not be
permitted to make any complaints. How should Japan cope with the situation, as a
leader of the world? we had the Japan-U.S.-Burope trade problems explained through
dialogues between ITI Minister Tanaka, who has returned home after exchanging
frank views with leadersof various European countries and the United States, and
Jlro Tokuyama.

TOKUYAHA: Hr Minister. you very energetically visited five countries, including
EC member nations and Saudi Arabia, in June, didn't you?

In Europe, political instability factors have increasedto a very great extent,
and it is facing various difficult problems. It seems that its attitude toward
the Soviet Union is also very different from that of the United States. What
impressions have you gained through your round of visits this time?

TAMARA: From a short-range viewpoint, will every country not strengthen its prc—
tectionist trend, for the time being?

Anyway. the United States' and the BC member nationa' trade with Japan shows a
large-scale excess of imports. No matter how emphatically we say that we are
carrying out orderly exports, or that we are not suddently increasing our exports,
the trade deficits with Japan are increasing, as a matter of fact. They say this
is different from what Japan has said.... (grim smile)

I
TUKUYAHA: I see.

TANAKA: Therefore, I asserted that the remedy for surmounting this imbalance in
trade is for the nations to expand each other's trade under a free trade set-up.
But I feel that this [argument] was not understood at all.

Therefore, I asked them if they really desire protectionism, and whether they
will go in that direction, from a long-range viewpoint. However, neither Britain,
the Netherland, nor Belgium wants to do that.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That is why there is still hope.
Between Free Trade-First Principle and Protectionism

TOKUYAMA: The problem is how to hold down the protectionist trend and how to
maintain the free trade-first principle, isn't it?

TANAKA: Yes. At the time of my visit to Europe this time, various discussions

were conducted, in order to maintain and develop the free trade-first principle.

As a result, I think that the automobile problem, which was a very big pending prob-
lem, has been settled, for the present. The other party did not say such s thing,
but its stand was that it only saved Japan's face, and that it did not really under-
stand [Japan's position]. I have returned home, gaining such an impression.

TOKUYAHA: If so, do you think that in regard to traderelations between Japan and
various European nations, there is the possibility that difficult problems will
still arise from now, if further efforts are made?

TANAKA: Yes. The situation will be difficult, so long as figures, which show such
a large-scale imbalance as at present, appear, and unless the general depression
mood disappears. won't it? At any rate, both the unemployment rates and thu con-
sumer price rise rates in European countries and the United States are very high,
compared with those in Japan.

As for the situation concerning the economic growth rate rise as of 1980, Japan
registered 4.2 percent, the U.S.--a minus 0.2 percent, Britain--a minus 3 percent.
and Rest Cermany--l.8 percent....

Therefore, Japan must not only carry out coordination in the field of exports,

but must also make efforts to expand its imports of manufactured products on a
large scale, from now. For that purpose, it was decided that large-scale import
missions will be dispatched, and that other countries concerned will also dispatch
missions, while holding trade fairs in a positive way. After returning home,

I have immediately sought the cooperation of industrial circles concerned. I am
thus making efforts in real earnest.

TOKUYAHA: I am grateful for your efforts. When I went to the United States some
time ago, in connection with the Japan-0.8. Businessmen's Conference, I met Mr
Kissinger. I asked him how he views Europe, and he also replied that it is an
undesirable situation. Thus, [the situation in] Europe is very difficult. 0n
the other hand, however, the United States feels that there is no need to take
such a pessimistic view.

The problems of textiles, color TV sets, and iron and steel have already been set-
tled. Also. in regard to the automobile problem which was the most difficult
problem, the situation has passed its climax, due to the efforts by you, Mr Min—
ister, and others. It is also said that the remaining problem concerns the IC
(integrated circuit) and the LSI (large-scale integration). But Japanese industry

circles concerned have taken such forestalling measures as plant advance into
the United States. Therefore. I do not think that such a situation as seen in

the past will occur.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
What ls Difficult Problem To Come Following Automobile Problem?

TANAKA: At present, the United States is carrying out policies, with the revitali-
zation of its econonw as the priority target. It has also formulated a policy under
which the inflation will probably be checked to some extent, at least during the
next 1 year. If this policy proves successful, will it not result in the United
States' quickly recovering self-confidence, particularly because it has potential
power?

On the other hand, however, it is necessary to consider measures, entertaining some
doubts as to whether the situation will develop as mentioned above, isn't it?

The reason for this is that if the situation does not develop as expected, then

the United States may change its policies completely.

TOKUYAHA: He must prepare two or three such scenarios.

TAMARA: Yes. For example, the SEC 11 (Joint Coal-Liquefaction Development Proj—
ect) for the purpose of turning coal into liquefied oil through the processing
thereof has been suddenly suspended under the Reagan Administration. To begin
with, this project had been proposed by the United States.

TOKUYAHA: The Nixon shock-diplomacy with China, going over the head of Japan.
And, as for a recent example, the lifting of the embargo on agricultural-roduct
exports to the Soviet Union is a shock, isn't it? [The United States] looks un-
concerned even after doing such a thing. In the case of Japan, such a situation is
rather inconceivable. In this based on the top-down management formula of the
United States?

TANAKA: 1n the past, it used to be said that if the U.S. coughs, then Japan

will catch cold. However, the structure of Japan has now been strengthened; there-
fore, such a situation will not occur any more. But it is necessary for us to make
constant preparations, at least, in regard to the point that the United States

may change its policies, isn't it?

TOKUYAHA: I an an outsider. When viewing the situaiton from the outside, I think
that the Japan-U.S. trade frictions, that is, the friction over commodities under
the jurisdiction of HITI, has passed its climax, for the present. I want also

the automobile problem settled, somehow or other.

As for future prospects, I think that demand concerning the service industry may
increase. The reason for this is that for example, in the United States, banking
business is recently going quickly in the direction of liberalization, and that
many other types of companies, besides banks, are also conducting business similar
to banking. I think that the United States will reciprocally request Japan to

do thc same thing in such a field. Will not the Japan-U.S. economic friction be
shifted in that directIOu, from now? I returned home from the United States,
entertaining such an impression.

TANAKA: To be sure, it is necessary to make sufficient preparations, in advance,
so as to cope with friction, not only in the field of hardware, including auto-
mobiles and iron and steel, but also in the field of software, as you mentioned
now, isn't it?

3'5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TOKUYAMA: Of course, it is necessary to pay attention also to the communications
computers called the 10, L81 and CC. According to an estimate formed by the U.S.
Department of Commerce, 20 percent to 30 percent of the personal computers to be
used by the United States will be produced by Japan by 1983. It cannot be said,
therefore, that there is no fear that friction may arise in that field.

Basic Problem Concerning Renewal of Technology

TANAKA: Anyway, export-competition society. where technological competition power
or technological power will carry weight, will be established in the future. In
that case, it will be necessary to gather information as to how the world views
Japan, and it will also be necessary for us to consider constantly how to cope
with the situation.

On that point, I am rather like a natural worrier, but there are many headaches.
(grim smile)

TOKUYANA: This may be natural for the supreme responsible person, but I express
my sympathy to you. (laughter)

Frankly speaking, there are interesting figures. The industrial revolution in
the past developed. centering on iron and 011. At this time when we have under-
gone two 011 shocks, the realization of rationalization through the combination
of machinery and electric power has already reached its limit. I think that the
combination of electronics and machinery will be carried out from now, while
communications computers will probably take the place of oil and iron.

However, the 1C market share in the world for 1979 was about 72 percent for the
United States, about 24 percent for Japan, and only 4 percent for West Germany
which was said to have been the biggest technological power in Europe. Moreover,
[west Germany] has been carrying out such a meister system as adopted in the age
of handicraft.

TANAKA: what a country West Germany is! What about the field of mechatronics
industries (including the unified industrial and numerical control machine tools
or industrial-use robots, with LSI's and other electronic appliances built in the
machinery) which are said to trigger industries for the future?

TOKUYAMA: Even when limited to the computer alone, West Germany's share is 10
percent or so. Even when limited only to antibiotic substances which are import-
ant for life science. West Germany stands at 8 percent.

In other words, the market share rates of industries relying on the large-scale

and basic technology to be developed in the 1980's are all one-digit figures. in
the case of Heat Germany. Only Japan and the United States will survive in the

future.

TANAKA: It seems that the IC, LSI and VLSI are monopolized by Japan and the United
States, doesn't it?

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TUKUYAMA: It can also be said, therefore, that there is the possibility that if
wrong measures are taken to cope with the situation, it will cause a different
type of friction between Japan and the United States.

it Is Important To Promote Develo pent of Service Industries

IANAKA: As for the IC, investment exchange among IC-connected mnufacturers is
progressing smoothly. Thirteen U.S. companies have advanced into Japan, while
five Japanese companies have advanced into the United States. If such exchange
on a private basis is maintained and developed, I think that the situation may go
in a rather good direction.

TOKUYAMA: Private-basis exchange is important, isn't it? The renewal of tech—
nology through the development of the IC industry will have effects, not only on
the improvement of productivity and the economization of resources-and energy,
‘mt also more widely on society as a whole.

At any rate. industries will very greatly change, due partly to the development
or' CC‘s. Therefore, it is necessary to define the position of the CC as a prob-
lem concerning the basis of Japan's industrial policy, isn't it?

'i‘OKUYAHA ['l‘N: sic]: Yes. Yes. If costs in the field of CC's decrease on a large
scale, I think it may be effective also in curbing inflation through the promotion
of industrial efficiency. However, that field is connected also with the Trans-
portation and the Postal Services ministries. ['m: From this paragraph on,
Tokuysma obviously should be Tanaka, and Tanaka-Tokuyams.]

1n the United States, coumunication, truck transportation, and air transport
are also going in the direction of liberalization. The same thing can be said
also of the software for computers. They are also service industries like the
banking business as mentioned above, aren't they?

It will become difficult to settle problems, with each nation as the unit, in

the future. For example, there will arise many problems, such as public nui-
sances, unemployment, inflation and international financing, which problems can-
not hc solved under any already-established concept. I think it will become
necessary to try to cope with the situation, from different angles, in the future.
That is why I feel that we must weaken the concept of national border.

TﬁNAKA: Are leisure industry-connected sectors also included in the scope of
service industries?

TOKUYAMA: They are also included. however, they are oriented toward consumers,
Sh to speak. As for a definite direction in industries, the main core is rather
formed by the service industry, including transportation, comunications. and
making, which industry is an industry for the purpose of vitalizing other types
Ol industries.

‘I'ANAKA: You mean that it is a service industry for securing the further expansion

or stimulation of production, rather than a service industry for the same of
consunption, don't you?

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l‘OKUYAHA: I have such a feeling. If the establishment of mutual communications
becomes possible, then one will be able to carry out a rather large amount of
one's tasks at one's our home, even without reporting for work at one's company
aboard a jam-packed train. This is such service that at offices, paper will be-
come unnecessary. It will become connected with higher productivity.... At
present. productivity in offices is met lagging behind. This situation will
change.

TANAKA: If so, the way of administrative guidance in Japan will change very great-
1y, won't it? (laughter)

Let me go back to the original subject. The situation of stagflation has been con-
tinuing in Europe and the United States. The Middle East is also strange. Also,
In the case-of India. Pakistan. and Bangladesh, the development of their respective
economies has not easily put on the correct track. In South America, too, infla-
tion is strong. when viewed this way, there is uneasiness about the point that
whatever good-quality comodities Japan tries to seel at low prices, the world

may not carry out any further purchases, isn't there?

To Prevent Japan's Suffering Prom British Sickness

'l‘OKUYAMA: If this is so, will the problem not be boiled down to the point of what
should be done about relations with ASEAN, which you, Mr Minister, have visited
as often as twice after yOur appointment to your present post, Australia, and
other countries neighboring Japan? IT": Prom this paragraph on, the names
clearly correspond to the respective statements].

TANAKA: The world is maintaining peace to some extent, but there is trouble in any
country. In the midst of this situation, Japan has been fulfilling its role as an
engine country of the world in the economic field. However, the actual situation
in Japan is also very serious. At any rate, from a historical standpoint, too, it
is rather unusual for every country of the world to be in such an age of instabil-
ity as at present, isn't it?

'l'UKUYAHA: when viewed ironically, however, Japan seems to be absolutely strong
and stable, on the surface, but it contains also fragile fields, below the sur-
face. '

For example, when the total area of swiming pools within Tokyo Metropolis is
divided by the number of visitors, the area per capita will become only 50 square
centimeters. Under such circumstances, it is quite impossible to swim there....
(laughter) One gets up early in the morning, to go swiming in the ocean, but

one cannot arrive at one's destination, due to the traffic congestion. One goes
home, without enjoying a swim in the ocean, and arrives at one's homé around

2 o'clock the next morning. There is a funny story, to that effect, isn't there?
This is symbolic of the fragility [of Japan] before the surface. (laughter)

TANAKA: The situation would differ if this were an age of hiya-rate growth, but
if the period of low-rate growth continues, how to support the 117,000,000 people
of Japan, without lowering their standard of living, will become a very big

task.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TOKUYAMA: I really think so. This is all the more difficult, because the people
will not abandon their vested rights.

IANAKA: For example, in Britain, the "cradle-to-grave security" system has been
carried out thoroughgoingly. As a result, however, its economy has become stag-
nant, due to the British sickness. (laughter)

West Germany has also stated to become out of breath.

This is one example, but I think it important for Japan to diagnose comprehensively
the symptoms of various other countries, which symptoms have been developed so

far, and to consider appropriate remedies, thus coping with the situation, in ad-
vance .

To Enhance Awnrenessof "Dialogues and Participation"

TOKUYAMA: In Europe and the United States, education has developed, and welfare
harspread, with the establishment of an affluent society. However, in some re-
spects, the spirit of self-help seems to have been lost. People do not work very
hard. The United States and Heat Germany are having immigrants and foreign work—
ers carry out the dirty jobs. However, Japan is exclusionist, and it does not
permit immigration. In the past, no people, besides middle school graduates or
lower-educated persons, used to want to become super-market employees. At present,
however, some super-markets have university graduates as employees. Such employees,
ranging from higher-grade ones to lower-grade ones, are all skilled persons.

Moreover, industries will come to use extremely high-level technology in the fu-
ture; therefore, tasks concerning such industries cannot be carried out except
by highly-educated persons.

TANAKA: On that point, Japan is far ahead of other countries, isn't it? In

other words, the strong point of Japan is that fine-grained consideration has been
given as to human relations. Another reason is that school education is being
(mrrled out thoroughly.

I think that Japan will be invincible toward the world, so long as it domestically
adopts this system. However, there is the problem of whether it will be accepted
as is, in the case of advance into foreign countries, isn't there?

TOKUYAHA: In regard to the problem of advance into foreign countries, it is neces-
sary for us to focus our attention on the Pacific bloc, including ASEAN, Australia,
and Mexico, instead of leaning toward the United States or the EC alone, as in

the past.

Efforts should be made to manufacture even intermediate products overseas and

to send them to Japan, thus refunding a part of the profits to the local areas
concerned. More Japanese persons should advance into foreign countries and pro-
duce agricultural products there under contracts. They should send such agricul-
tural products to Japan. Thus, they should endeavor to establish friendship with
the peoples of those countries. In particular, I think that young people should
made sufficient preparations, from now, so as to advance overseas. No one wants
to go abroad, because Japan is very affluent.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TANAKA: On that point, costs concerning communications and transportation will be
lowered as you said previously; therefore, it will become possible to manage even
a vast area like the Pacific bloc. For that prupoae, it is necessary to make
positive efforts to "develop human resourdes" as proposed by Prime Minister Suzuki.

Moreover, what is necessary now within our country, is "dialogues and participation.
Efforts should be made to strengthen the domestic view that dialogues should be
conducted in the social, economic and all other fields, and that we should parti-
cipate in such dialogues. After that, this View should be utilized internationally.

Efforts must be made to establish a comprehensive set-up for carrying out this
[plan].

At any rate, it is no longer possible for Japan to advance, while thinking only
of domestic affairs. We must constantly have an awareness of "Japan in the world
and endeavor to cope with the situation."

TOKUYAMA: That is right. However, the ant point, about which we must be cautious,
is that if we try to shift the domestic sense of balance, which the Japanese people
have, to an international sense of balance, then we may suffer a setback. There-
fore, I think that how to coordinate the two kinds of sense of balance, is a prob-
lem.... The next problem is how to correct the trade imbalance.

Hhat Lies Behind Trade Imbalance

TANAKA: In connection with this problem, I think that also, in Japan, there are
still some points which should be improved. However, I wonder whether foreigners
are making greater sales efforts than Japanese quarters concerned. For example,
when compared with the number of trade connected persons, dispatched by the United
States or EC member nations to Japan, who are now staying here, the number oftrad-
ing company resident-employees, dispatched by Japan to those countries, is over-
whelmingly large.

Such efforts, made by Japan from before, are now bearing fruit, to some extent.

It is unreasonable to regard only the commodity items, which are enjoying good
sales, as a target to attacks, without taking this fact into consideration.
(laughter) I want to emphasize that various Nest European countries should under-
stand such an enterprise attitude a little more, and that they should make greater
efforts.

TOKUYAMA: I agree. I was resident in New York early in the 1960's, and I used
to wonder if Japanese automobiles, which were not very smart, would see good
sales in the United States. However, the situation has developed as seen at
present.

The reason for this is that the automobile industry of Japan has repeatedly made
desperate efforts, isn't it? In Europe and the United States, there were no such
efforts. Another reason is that they did not regard Japan as a market.

TANAKA: They noticed that Japan had already become a strong market. They hastily
made sales efforts, but their products did not sell well, because they had not

no
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
repeatedly made such efforts. Moreover, the demand for such products decreased
further, because Japan manufactured better-quality products.

TOKUYAMA: Therefore, in regard to relations with Europe, greater efforts must

be made from now. and the problems will not be settled so easily. 0n the other
hand, the United States still has rather great capability. If the United States
succeeds in using it for revitalizing its industries, then it will come to take

a mentally flexible attitude. In that case, the stiffness of relations with Japan
will decrease, too. Moreover, if the United States promotes also the development
of Europe, as the leader of the world economy, it will leave nothing to be de-
sired.

fANAKA: At any rate, therefore, Japan need not very exaggeratedly cell itself an
economic big power, nor does it have to have an awareness of its position as a

big power, as at the time when it was a military big power. However, it is neces-
sary for the Japanese people to take action, taking quickly the view that they
should fulfill their global responsibility, while awakening to their heavy re-
sponsibility, and that this will result in promoting the interests of Japan.
Furthermore, this is also a good time for the Japanese people to become adults.
The government, academic circles, and the people must all carry out a "spiritual

revolution," in that meaning.

If the Japanese people only burn in their hearts with the sense that in the new
age, they should create something new, then they will probably be able to cope
skillfully with any change inthesituation. The Japanese people have adaptability,
and their long history shows that they eventually succeed in absorbing everything,
though saying this or that, and that they make it their own asset.

TOKUYAMA: I really think so.

TANAKA: The world is very unstable. In the midst of this situation, however, I
think that Japan must continue constant efforts to turn itself into a country,
which will have a high degree of stability, and which will be of excellent quality,
though it is as small as a diamond. Even for that purpose, I have instructed

the officials of my ministry to make strenous efforts, having an awareness of the

orinciples of dialogues and participation.

{gogarison of Nations ConCUrning Imports of Manufactured Products (1979)

   
  
  

     
   

Amount of Prod-

   
 

Total Import Rate of Prod- Per-Capita
i Amount uct Imports uct Imports Amount of Prod-
: ($1 Million) ($1 Million) (%) uct Imports

 

   
 
 
  
   

  
   
   
   
  
 

  
   
   
    
  

k ____________ ($1)
! 5:33-11 110,108 27,090
I vs 217,u62 122.319
!'..'e5: Germany 80,637 u1,656
Britain 60,036 36,621
IPGGCH 53,312 21,978
_111!_, «2 072 12,956

{Snurcv ) OHCU Statistics, etc.
. Trade within the EC area is excluded, in regard to the EC member
31" 10h: .
bl

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Balance of E rts and I rte between Ja an and US and EC
(Clearance Statistics I§1 Million])

US

EC

huGMGmnhhus

   

Jam

US

West Germany
hm“

Britain
Inn
Qua

Asterisks denote minuses.

Rates of Increase in Consumer Prices

JPYRIGHT:

50

me

US

Heat Germany
Hum
Britain
Ray
um“

 

1981 Bungei Shunju Ltd

: 4105/43

M

WRMWGMUﬁOMX

(H

1981 (Jan. to nay)l

 

. o o . .
OOOUGMN

OggHD-‘aﬂ

'4

OHOwUIUm
0.0...

PNOOUIUIO

wnww
JISSAN MOTOR PRESIDENT INTERVIEHED 0N COMPANY PLANS
rokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 17 Dec 81 p 7
anterview with Shun Ishihara by NIHON KEIZAI SHIHBUN reporter Kurama]

[Text] Nissan Motor President Shun lshihara, who is said to be the "busiest" presi-
dent in Japanf'travelled to many places both at home and abroad. this year, too, and
Formulated one bold strategy after another in order to survive the global war over
small-size automobiles. One of them is the plan on the plant advance to England.
After an approximately one-year-long survey, he has finally determined to tackle the
construction of the plant. Next year, the construction of this plant and the con-
struction of the plant in the 0.5. for small-size trucks, which construction started
earlier than the one in England, will make headway simultaneously. 0n the other
hand, Mr Ishihara faced the difficult problem of the self-imposed restrictions on
automobile exports to the 0.8., in his capacity as chairman of the Japan Automobile
Manufacturers Association, and performed such a hard role as to avoid a showdown
between Japan and the United States, while carrying through the reasons held by the
industry.

Friction Surfaced Earlier

.Question] It took a long time for you to firmly determine to construct the plant
actually, after you announced in January the concept of a plant advance to England.
~ma: was the biggest problem?

shiharn: It was the complexity of the labor problem. Because management-worker
elations over there are greatly different from ours. we were highly apprehensive
cont labor practices, in which we have no experience. Until we began our feasi-
-1lity study on the plant construction, our knowledge about English labor circum-
stances was no more than knowledge obtained from reports by media. when we started
ruiying, we came to know that they are not on strike as frequently as reported.

ususclonl Do you mean that you received an impression that the labor problem
1]. not become an obstacle to manufacturing in England?

-uhihara: That is correct, more or less. Our research took a long time because

;ne procurement of parts and investigations on possible plant sites took a long
Ina. At the beginning, we intended to complete the study in about a months. How-

ever, because they did not have to be quickly decided, we tackled them cautiously.

h}
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSI-I ONLY

[Qucxiluu] Did your determination, as to the Construction. firm up as a result of
the study which took approximately a year?

Ishihara: We will present the matter to the management conference to be held be-
fore the year-end, and move on to the next action when the new year begins. Because
the matter is concerned with the other side, too, we cannot say when it will begin.
I think that we will negotiate with the British Government on the problem of sub-
sidies, etc. It seems that we do not have to break the ratio of domestically-
manufactured parts at 60 percent. I would like them to make a decision along

with the industry's common-sense over there. As to EC-make recognition. I would
strongly want us not to be treated unfavorably, compared with other manufacturers
affiliated with foreign capital. such as Ford in England, simply because we are a
newcomer manufacturer.

[Question] You have formulated one international strategy after another, and this
one follows after the construction of a small-size truck plant in the United States,
tie-ups with Motor Iberica (Spain). Alpha Romer (Italy), and Volkswagen. "hat is
there at the foundation? When did you start incubating these concepts?

lshihara: I do not think that the age of completed automobile exports with freedom
will continue forever. No matter how good the quality of Japanese automobiles may
be, and however cheap they may be, and even if there are customers who want our
automobiles. the problem will not be settled by these reasons.

There is a way of living, whereby we stay home. However, I thought that the vitality
of enterprises will be lost and we will walk down the road to becoming an old power
under such circumstances. Therefore. I intended from a long time ago to head toward
internationalization, sowing seeds to that effect. He are arranging stones stra-
tegically even now. However. trade friction came to the surface much earlier than

I had expected. I thought that such a problem (trade friction) would become serious
when various projects blossom, but.... Things are making headway much earlier than
expected.

[Question] Opinions are split as to whether or not Toyota, top-ranking manufac-
turer, is too cautious about overseas strategy. and whether or not Nissan carries
out things too quickly. Would you say that one who plays quickly wins the game?

Ishihara: It is not a matter of being a winner or a loser. It is concerned with
different ways of thinking. I do not think that Toyota is an idle onlooker. "hat
1 have done may be criticized, but I believe that it was good for Nissan. I think
that T will carry out each project skillfully so that they will have a good evalua-
tion in later days.

[Question] Apart from the project of producing Volkswagen's Santana at a Nissan
plant, do you not think that it is too risky to promote the four overseas projects
at the same time, namely the plant constructions in the United States and England,
tie-ups with Motor Iberica, and Alpha Romeo?

Ishihara: The Spanish and Italian projects do not require much funds. It will be

only 2 or 3 billion yen in the case of Alpha Romeo. Also, Nissan does not necessar-
ily have to provide them with our employees with talent, since each company is

his
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Independent. It is not so risky. if one thinks that we will make our models in order
to increase the marketability of goods produced by the companies. All we do is to
think about technology to be supplied to Motor Iberica and Alpha Romeo. 1 do not
intend to plant Japanese-type management.

The problem in the case of the U.S. plant is how much good talent we will be able

to have in the country where labor mobility is very high. whether or not Nissan
has good talent is not a problem. however. it is important for those employed in
the United States to absorb Nissan-style and Japanese-style ways of doing things. as
the buildings will be completed in February or March, next year, and facilities
will be brought into them for installation in autumn.

[Question] He think that you will have difficulties with allowances in the field
of funding, but....

Ishihara: He plan to invest about 100 billion yen in the U.S. plant. We procured
about 82 billion and 20.7 billion yen through the EDR (European -depository receipts)
flotations at market prices in November. last year and in May, this year. and
through the flotation of British pound-based convertible debentures in June. this
year. respectively. This means that we have funding means sufficient to cover our
investment in the United States. Also. in view of the current earnings and de-
preciation by Nissan. the size (of the funds needed by each project) is not so big
for us as to hang ourselves.

[Question] Incidentally. this year. you were forced to take the position of swal-
lowing self-imposed restrictions on exports to the United States, in your capacity
as chairman of the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association. Even now, you are
not quite satisfied with the result. are you?

Ishihara: At that time. I strongly insisted that we should not wind up the matter
in a hurry. That thinking still does not change. The U.S. automobile industry

has difficult management not because of exports from Japan. but because of its in-
ability to produce energy-efficient. good quality. small-size automobiles which
conSumers want. Our way of thinking is that the U.S. manufactures will not re-
nahilitate themselves simply by curtailing Japanese automobile exports. However.
we connived at the self-imposed restrictions because of the intention of government
nfficials that they wanted to wind up the matter by all means by the time of Prime
Minister Suzuki's visit to the United States. Nevertheless, a fire flared up again
in the Congress in only half a year after that.

‘rowth Greater Than now Will Be Difficult

‘Questionl One can say that it cannot be helped that they single out automobiles
:hich one can say is the biggest factor for the surplus. when the Japan—U.S. trade
'mbalance has grown to the current extent. We hear that when the automobile in-
lustry resisted the self-imposed restrictions, the management of other industries
~nld that they would be subjected to a by-blow. if the automobile industry did

it gin" in quickly.

‘shaharn: I do not say that there was pressure. However. I was told the opinion
'lrectly and indirectly that the automobile industry should leave the stage at an

hS

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UPI-ICIAI. USE ONLY

appropriate time. However, as the production of automobiles has been on the de-
crease during the past several loathe, even those people are surprised at the big
effects from the decrease in automobile production. Japan's autonboile production
ranked first in the world, both last year and this year. However, further growth
will be difficult. I think that two-digit growth will be absolutely impossible.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunshe 1981

(ISO: 6105/43

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GOVERNMENT DECIDBS 0M EXTERNAL ECONOMIC MEASURES
Tokyo NIMON KEIZAI SMIMBUN in Japanese 17 Dec 81 p 6

[Text] The government held the Ministerial Conference on Economic Measures on the
16th. and decided on a five-point external economic policy, centering on measures
for reducing the surplus in the current account balance and measures for the li-
beralization of the market. It is aimed at correcting the trade imbalance with
the United States and the EC, and the main contents are (l) the implementationwof
a foreign currency loan system, up to the ceiling of 500 million dollars, for the
promotion of emergency imports, from January 15 of next year, (2) the granting of
interest subsidy for the promotion of the stockpiling of rare metals, such as
nickel and chrome, by private circles, and (3) the tackling of the liberalization
of the market, by improving import inspection procedures, the lowering of tariffs
ahead of schedule, etc. In the formulation of the measures this time, the coordina-
tion of views within the government took time, and though the scale of emergency
imports was reduced, such as the ceiling for the foreign currency loan system
coming to be set at a much lower level than had been initially planned, "all mea-
sures which should be taken for the time being, in regard to matters pointed out
by other countries, have been taken" (EPA Director General Komoto) and from now
on, our country's efforts to tackle the problem will be explained to the advanced
nations, including the United States and Europe.

The government decided on the basic policy for aiming at an expanded balance of
trade by increasing imports, at the Ministerial Conference on Economic Measures held
on October 2, and has been pushing the work of formulating external economic mes-
surcs along this line. The Ministerial Conference on Economic Measures this time
was held on the basis of the studied conducted on November 17, and the decision
reached at the meeting on the 16th will become our country's external economic
measures, for the time being.

The pillars of the measures this time are the foreign currency loan system and the
stockpiling of rare metals, as emergency import measures, and some market liberal—
12stion measures, which are being materialized, based on Prime Minister Suzuki's
instructions. The foreign currency loan system is a system for lending foreign cur-
roncies to import enterprisers and lease companies, through the Export-Import Bank,
and the interest rate for the loans will be a fluctuating rate for every 6 months,
and which will not be lower than the interest rate for 6—month 0.5. Treasury bonds
(11 percent at present). This system will be a measure "limited to emergency,"

and it will be operated while watching the state of the yen market and the trends

h?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

or the trade balance. The objects to come under this system will be worked out from
now on, but for the time being, the purchasing of rare metals by private enter-
prises and the leasing of aircraft, are being considered.

There are five items of rare metals as the objects for stockpiling by private cir—
cles, including nickel (the present stockpile amount is for 7 days) and chrone(for
2 days). The increasing of the stockpiles by 11.5 billion yen to an amount suffi-
cient for 10 days is being considered, and about 500 million yen will be granted an
interest subsidy to the Rare Metals Stockpiling Association, which will carry out
the increasing of stockpiles. As regards stockpiles, the State-stockpiled oil will
also be increased by 1.5 million kiloliters during fiscal 1982. As for measures for
the liberalization of the market, they consist of three measures, that is, the re-
studying of import inspection procedures, the easing of import restrictions and

the lowering of tariffs. As regards the improvement of import procedures, concrete
measures will be formulated by the end of January of next year, and in regard to
those which will require a revision of laws, revision bills will be submitted to
the next regular Diet session.

As for the easing of import restrictions, a restudy will be made in regard to the
27 remaining import restriction items, according to the actual situation, and the
results will be reported to the Ministerial Conference on Economic Measures. In
the lowering of tariffs ahead of schedule, the lowering of tariffs slated-for 1983
and 1984, in regard to about 1,650 commodities, will be lowered uniformly and in a
package, together with the lowering of tariffs scheduled for 1982, in April of next
year. The present tariff rate of 8 percent, as the average for all commodities,
will be lowered to 6.75 percent.

Besides the above measures, wide-range measures, such as the promotion of industrial
cooperation measures and economic cooperation. and the avoiding of the concentration
of exports of specific items to specific area, will be carried out in a fine-grained
way.

In the formulation oftheueasures this time, coordination of views had hard sailing,
with MITI and others, which desired the promotion of the implementation of the for-
eign currency loan system, coming into confrontation with the Finance Ministry, which
was strongly against it, and with the Agriculture-Porestry-Pisheriea Ministry
showing objections to the lowering of tariffs. For this reason, at the Ministerial
Conference on Economic Measures on the 16th. Prime MiniaterSuzuki himself requested
the cooperation of the various Cabinet members concerned, saying as follows: "The
measures this time are emergency measures for the purpose of coping with the trade
friction, and though there are problems domestically, some amount of difficulties
cannot be helped, for coping with the emergence of protectionism. I ask you to

make utmost efforts, so that our country's sincerity and efforts will be understood."

Contents of External Economic Measures

The contents of the external economic measures, which were decided upon by the Min-
isterial Conference on Economic Measures, are as follows:

Concerning the future operation of the economy, the Ministerial Conference on Eco-
nomic Measures decided on the "operation of the economy, for the time being, and

he
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
the tentative calculation of the economic outlook" on October 2, and it decided on
[our basic directions, that is, the stabilization of commodity prices, the recovery
of a balanced domestic demand, the promotion of measures toward the depressed-type
industries and the expanded balance of trade.

However, the moves of our country's economy since then continue to show a stagna—
tion of domestic demand, and the current account balance is also continuing its
surplus-balance trend.

0n the other hand, recovery from the second oil shock has still not made any marked
progress, generally speaking, in various other nations of the world, and especially,
the United States and many of the European nations are faced with the problems of
inflation and unemployment. Standing on the basis of this situation, our country
will devote still greater efforts, as set forth in the following, with the recovery
of domestic demand as the basis, and aiming at an expanded balance of trade, in
order to maintain and strengthen the principle of free trade.

Market Liberalisation Measures
1. Improving of Import Inspection Procedures, etc.

Standing on the basis of the interim report of the Trade Council (Conference for
Measures for the Imports of Manufactured Products), etc., the various ministries
and agencies concerned will carry out the restudying of the testing and inspection
procedures, within the country, etc., with international standards as the basis, in
principle, from the standpoint of promoting imports, and will formulate concrete
improvement measures by the end of January of next year. As for those which re-

quire the revision of laws, necessary revision bills will be submitted to the next
regular Diet session.

In the application of import inspection procedures, etc., full consideration will
be given to the purport of the liberalization of the market and they will be
operated in a proper way.

2. Easing of Import Restrictions

Keeping in mind the items of interest to the various nations, the remaining import
restrictions will be reviewed appropriately, and the results will be reported to
the Ministerial Conference on Economic Measures.

(Note) Lowering of Tariffs

A conclusion will be reached at an early date for the carrying out of the measures
for the lowering of tariffs by stages, based on the Tokyo Round Agreement, uni-
formly and by 2 years ahead of schedule, in a package, and also on the lowering

of the tariff on whisky, etc., in a generally similar way.

import Promotion Measures

1. implementation of Foreign Currency Loans for Emergency Imports

while ascertaining the trends of the yen market, etc., the loaning of foreign
currencies at the international interest rate will be carried out in regard

119
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1M. USP. ONLY

to imports of important mateirals, which will have actual effects on the dis-
solving of the trade friction, as a measure limited to times of emergency.

2. Promotion of Stockpiling, Etc.

(1) As for the state stockpiling of oil, the stockpile amount will be increased by
an additional 1.5 million kiloliters in fiscal 1982.

(2) In order to promote the stockpiling of rare metals by private circles, neces-
sary measures will be taken.

(3) In the execution of the budget for food aid under the Kennedy Round, grains
produced in other countries will also be used.

3. Dispatch of Import Missions, the Holding of Manufactured Products Pairs, Etc.

The dispatch of import missions, the holding of manufactured products fairs, and
the joint sponsoring of international symposiums, etc., through government-private
cooperation will be pushed in a positive way. At the same time, efforts will be
made for the concrete msterislization of the "expansion of the imports of manu-
factured products," through the continued utilization of the Trade Council.

Export Measures

with the expanded balancing of trade as the basis, the concentration of exports of
specific items to specific areas will be avoided. Based on this policy, the future
handling of measures which are now being implemented, will be studied, in a proper

way.
Industrial Cooperation Measures

Industrial cooperation with the BC nations, such as investments exchange. tech-
nological exchange, joint research and development of technology, cooperation in
third nation markets, etc., will be promoted in a positive way.

Economic Cooperation Measures

Efforts will be made for the certain attainment of the medium-term target set for
Official Development Adi (00A), which was decided in January of this year.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Simbunsha 1981

CSO: 4105/43

50
ron OFFICIAL use ONLY
INCREASINGLY LARGE ROYALTIES RECEIVED FOR HIGH TECHNOLOGY
Results of Investigation
Tokyo SHUKAN DAIYMONDO in Japanese 7 Nov 81 pp 18-25

[Text] Income from royalties, which may be referred to as the
second cnshbox, is increasing reaarkably. Nippon Steel Corpor-
ation and Mitsubishi heavy Industries have earned a great sun
of money from technology fees, and are proud of their high tech-
nological standards. The technologies in the iron and steel
industry and the petrochemical industry have already reached the
world's most advanced level. Activities to develop advanced
technologies in semiconductors and industrial robots are being
vigorously pursued. Corporate income from technology fees will
be further raised under this condition. Here is the result of
a factfinding investigation regarding the income from technology
fees for the 60 companies in the leading industries, and a pre-
diction of future possibilities.

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Has Big Earnings Pram Royalties

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries [MEI] 16.7 billion yen
Hitachi Shipbuilding 6 Engineering 11.3 billion yen
Nippon Steel Corporation 9.8 billion yen
Sony 4.9 billion yen
Hitachi, Ltd 4.6 billion yen

The figures shown above are the sum of the income from technology fees earned in
the past year by the above four companies. MRI, number one in income from tech-
nology fees. successfully balanced technology exports (income from technology
fees) and technology imports (payment for the same).

The operational profits of MRI exceeded 22.9 billion yen (March 1981 period). The
ratio of the income from technology fees relative to this profit was 72.8 percent,
or 16.7 billion yen. This contributed greatly to the earnings. Therefore, the
evaluation of the contribution to the earnings was "5" (see the directions for
reading the accompanying table for the grading standard), the highest grade

achievable .

The Japanese economy has enjoyed miraculously high economic growth in the last 20
years. However, it has encountered frequent changes, as exemplified by the sudden

51
ron art-1cm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

revvrso shift to low economic gruwth in the wake of the two oil shocks unnilcstcd
in the latter half of the period.

In particular, in the last 5 years, we have seen industries slow dewn one after
another due to the stagnation in the consumption boom.

Supreme orders for corporate survival were given: manufacture whatever goods can
be sold, and create new needs! Rack your brains for this purpose! Many of the
corporations have reinforced their research. development and planning sectors. As
a result, some corporations have polished both the applied and basic technologies,
and developed unique technologies and commodities which could be readily accepted
throughout the world. These achievements now appear clearly as income from royal-
ties in the statistical figures.

This journal investigated the present and future outlook of the actual state of the

income from technology fees in respect to some 60 noteworthy companies. The inves-

tigation results revealed that there were 35 companies that earned an income of over
500 million yen a year from technology fees. Analyzing this income from the aspect

of contribution to earnings. the following figures were obtained: evaluation grade

5 was given to 14 companies, 25 percent of the total; grade A to 12 companies. 21.1

percent; and grade B to 9 companies, 16 percent. Some companies were graded S as a

result of the overall decline in operating profits.

First, let us look at the graphs in Figures 1 and 2. These are the results of a
probe into the balancing of the income and expenditures regarding technology fees

in 20 different types of industries. The statistical material was obtained from the
"Science and Technology Research and Investigation Report."

According to the report, nine industries amazingly show accounts receivable as far
as the new contracts concluded in the past year are concerned.

Unfortunately, the national technology trade as a whole is still largely overweighted
by imports when continuing deals are included. This is because the level of the
advanced technologies such as those in aircraft and nuclear machinery and equipment
are still low in Japan, and an enormous number of technology fees are being paid
overseas, particularly to corporations in Europe and America.

Now, let us look at some specific cases regarding the actual condition of the tech—
nology [ec balance in leading companies.

NSC Earning a Stable Annual Income of 10 Billion Yen, while Sunitomo Metal Industries
Has Doubled Its Income

Since 1969. when income from technology fees surpassed expenditures for technology
fees. NSC has had more income than expenditures. Furthermore, the income from
technology fees has shown an upward trend, amounting to 9.8 billion yen in 1980.
That figure is 14 times that of expenditures, which amounted to 700 billion yen.
It is predictable that the company will continue to earn a stable annual income of
about 10 billion yen in the years to come.

The income from technology fees is almost all earned by technical guidance fees for
iron manufacture engineering. In many cases. technologies which had been imported
from Europe and America after the war and later improved in Japan and technologies

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
originally developed for the first Line in Japan are offered as u link in the chain
of overseas cooperation. The iron manufacture engineering business of NSC was
initiated with the cooperation with the Usiminas Iron Works of Brazil (construction
started in 1958). and it expanded all over the world--for example. construction of
the Malaya Yahata Iron Works (basic plan started in 1965) in Malaysia; operational
guidance and expansion project engineering for the Tarant Iron Horks of the Italian
italsider; consulting for the Korean Pohang general iron manufacturing project
(1970-80. the first stage completed in 1973); providing a general plan, individual
plant engineering and operational knowhow in connection with the hot strip mill
(annual production capacity 3 million tons) and the electromagnetic steel plate
factory (annual production capacity 70.000 tons) of the Chinese Wuhan Iron Works.

Concerning computer system technology. NSC supplied a comprehensive operation system
for continuous iron manufacturing to the Tarant Iron Works and the Usiminas Iron
Works. In addition. the technology for using process computers to be integrated

in equipment is. for example, provided for a converter factory in cooperation with
the South African ISCOR.

Pertaining to the supplying of licenses and knowhow. for example, the converter
exhaust gas collector (OG device) invented jointly with Kawasaki Heavy Industries
(then Yokoyama industries) in 1962 is now being used in leading iron and steel
makers of the world. such as the American 0.5. Steel and Armco Steel. and the
British BSC (British Steel Corporation).

Combining the iron manufacture engineering. knowhow and licenses, NSC had provided
technologies to 35 countries and 95 companit : for a total of (.17 cases as of the
end of March 1981. Truly. its technological ability compliments its reputation as
the world's greatest iron and steel company.

0n the other hand. in Sumitomo Metal Industries. the income from technology fees
reached 2.229 billion yen (FY-80. while expenditures were 420 million yen), which
is more than double the 952 million yen of the previous year. Of this, more than
2.1 billion yen was income from overseas, reflecting thriving technology exports.

Referring only to the major technological assistance. the company newly acquired
12 contracts in PY-80 and l. contracts in the first half of FY—81. The income from
technology fees after this fiscal year is also expected to grow.

The counterparts are predominantly high-ranking corporations; for instance. in
America. the number one. U.S. Steel; number two. Bethlehem Steel; and number three.
Jones and Lnughlin; and in France. the number one, Usinor. Also. the technologies
provided are diversified: steel plate seamless pipe manufacturing technology. con—
tinuous casting technology. process control technology and operational technology.
‘Inis indicates that Sumitomo Metal industries maintains high technological compe-
tence in all. fields of iron manufacturing technology.

similar statements can be made about Kobe Steel. and Kawasaki Steel Corporation.

hove Steel is characterized by an income predominantly from engineering fees and
operational guidance fees associated with plant exports rather than individual
technologies. Roughly 80 percent of the income from technology fees is attributable
to this. The content also is not only in the field of iron manufacturing tech-
nology. because the company produces various plants.

5 3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Obtaining Good Results in Industrial Robots

"We are no longer a shipbuilding company. but an aspiring general heavy machine
maker." is the proud statement you hear from major shipbuilding companies. so
much so that they have begun to strengthen the setup for sales of software. This

is because attractive hardware alone cannot provide a direct link to business deals
in plant and engineering markets.

It is Hui, the largest of all. that is striving to clarify the income from soft-
ware. "Hith conventional contracts. uniform pricing was preferred, without
separating the price of software from that of hardware. Contrary to this practice,
nowadays we try to set prices for both software and hardware in the list of fees
and costs in drawing up a new contract" (accountant general Fumiharu Date of HMI).
The importance of software is also increasing from the aspect of operational profit,

and the laying of a foundation and structure for a full-scale software business
is in progress.

One example of charging fees for the software is the technological cooperation con-
tract which HHI concluded with the Chiangnan Shipyard in August 1980 in Shanghai.
MHI concluded a 100-million-yen contract for consultation in regard to the equip-
ment improvement plan and for guidance in regard to administrative technology with
the Chiangnan Shipyard for 2 years. This contract is known to be the first case in
which real software was priced and sold to China.

HBI also exported industrial robot technology to an Austrian general heavy machinery
maker, Vost Alpine, in October 1981. Initial fees and royalty income commensurate
with the production will flow into MEI.

In the case of MRI, FY-80 income from software was 16.7 billion yen. That included
royalty, knowhow and consulting income. In FY-75, the income realized based upon
the same standard was 10.4 billion yen, which means that the income increased by 60
percent in 5 years. Reviewing the income realized in FY-BO, according to the pre-
viously described itemization, so-called royalty income claimed 700-800 million yen.
Other items were engineering income such as income from providing knowhow. The
shipbuilding technology exports to the Chinese shipyard belong to the latter. while
the robot technology exports belong to the former.

Classifying the income by field, the big accounts of software income are from chemi-
cal plants. prime movers and ships. This trio claims 80 percent of the total.

"Japanese production technology is advanced and we can hope for technology exports
in that area. With many promising fields such as robots, automatic storage and
plant maintenance systems, software income will be on the rise" (same as above).

Hitachi Uses Patent Disclosure as Attraction

The Japanese electric machinery and equipment industry, although it leads the world
in semiconductors. computers, color TV's and VTR's, is still a growing youngster in
respect to income from technology fees. This is because basic patents are held by
European and American corporations. Japanese electric machinery and equipment
makers have grown up by importing those basic technologies, developing applied
technologies and mass-producing what has been developed. However. it is obvious
that the Japanese makers cannot survive in the future if they maintain the same
pattern.
51:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Acknowledging the implication. Hitachi is showing a positive attitude and has dis-
closed patents in an attempt to increase income from technology fees.

However. even in this company. the accounts are in the red. showing an income of
4.6 billion yen against an expenditure of 7.3 billion yen. Focusing only on the
income. it doubled in 4 years, but the expenditures also doubled at the same time.
The income and expenditure ratio of 63 percent is a big turn for the better com—
pared to the conventional showing. but it is not quite satisfactory yet. Hitachi's
long-term objective is to balance income and expenditures and to earn income equiva-
lent to 10 percent of the operational profits.

Speaking of Hitachi's patents. recently the company obtained a basic patent for a
resin mold type semiconductor manufacturing method which uses multilead frames.

0f the semiconductor production, which is said to amount to 1 trillion yen. half

of it uses this technology. Simple arithmetic gives an annual income of 10 billion
yen if the patent fee is 2 percent. However. in the world of the electric machinery
and equipment industry. each company holds respective patents. and one company can-
not one-sidedly claim all of the income. "Since our invention is estnhlished as a
patent. we ask for what is due to us." they may say. but that does not mean that
they earn the income indicated by the simple arithmetic.

In the case of Sony. a detailed description is given in the securities report. and
following is the itemization.

Patent fee 1.077 billion yen
Patent fee from affiliated companies 3.282 billion yen
Technical guidance fee 175 million yen
Technical guidance fee from affiliated companies 383 million yen

The total income is 4.9 billion yen. but 3.6 billion yen of the income is from
affiliated companies. This comes from giving technology to domestic and foreign
subsidiary manufacturers. When the income from technology fees is actually itemized,
the majority of companies have a considerable number of these cases, which shows an
increase in overseas production and transformation of factories into subsidiaries.

Nevertheless. us a future trend. the income from technology fees appears to be
ever increasing due to VTR and VTR tape manufacturing technologies. which have
promising possibilities of a great future. The Victor Company of Japan which de-
veloped the VHS syStem. although the statistics were not disclosed. stated: "With
the expansion of the VTR market. the income from technology fees is steadily in-
creasing."

As examples of advanced technology exports. there are an industrial robot of Hitachi
to CE and an OCR of NEC to Burroughs. However. on the other hand. there are also
cases of imports. such as nuclear and defense machinery and equipment.

'at company which earns a large income from technology fees and contributes greatly
:0 profits compared to the corporate scale is Aiwa. Aiwa is the maker that "de-
veloped the cassette tape recorder for the first time in Japan." and its income
from technology fees is by and large related to this. The technology to operate
the stop and eject on the cassette deck by using the same button is a wellwknowu
technology developed by Aiwa.

55
FOR OFFICIAL use omtv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:hemical Majors Bold Fast in Manufacturing Technology Exports
Chemical companies are showing unexpected strength in the recession.

At present, they have grown to a point where their original technologies can
practically stand equal to the technologies imported from overseas. Income from
technology fees is also earned at a pace that exceeds expenditures.

Especially notable among the technologies of the chemical companies are the urea
manufacturing technology of Mitsui Toatsu, the PVC manufacturing technology of
Shin-etsu Chemical industry. the polyethylene and polypropylene manufacturing
technologies of Mitsui Petrochemical Industries. the synthetic rubber manufactur-
ing technology of Japan Synthetic Rubber. the butadiene extraction method and the
butadiene separation technology of Japanese Geon. and various agricultural chemi-
cal technologies of Sumitomo Chemical. Many other original technologies have been
invented, although the scale mav be small. The chemical industry is also facing

a transition to the technology export stage from the mutual utilization stage that
graduated from the technology import stage. "Technology export is costless income"
is their slogan. and it also shows great operational merit.

The urea manufacturing equipment of Mitsui Toatsu is called a "complete circulation
method" whereby urea is manufactured from an intermediate product, ammonia, that is
made from a raw material using a continuous process. This technology was recognized
early in its introduction stage as the best technology available in the world, and
it has been exported to various countries which are striving to produce fertilizers.
it is rated as a "virtually perfect process,“ and the company has intensified ac-
tivities for soliciting orders through Toyo Engineering.

Both Japan Synthetic Rubber and Japanese Geon rank at the top in synthetic rubber
technology and butane and butene separation technology respectively. Although the
construction of petrochemical complexes has passed its peak and an oversupply
phenomenon is emerging in Japan, petrochemical complex construction projects are
envisaged at various localities in the world. When these projects are implemented,
it is highly likely that the technologies of both companies will be used. Their
opportunities are very good, since these companies are ahead of others in carrying

out their original technologies.

it is the biochemical field that is expected to get more imports in the future.
Already, in genetic engineering, European and American technologies are being
imported one after another. Japan is left behind in this field. and it appears
that we will go after overseas technologies for a while.

Now. the income from technology fees has become the cashbox at Nippon Paint. In—
come from technology fees reached 1.227 billion yen in the 1981 April term. which
was AS percent of the recurring profit. Of course. the rating is s. The income
from technology fees of Japan Paint is largely divided into two parts.

One part is from providing paint manufacturing technology to joint concerns in
Southeast Asia, Korea and Taiwan. The company has dealings with 10 factories in
these areas. and almost half of the income from technology fees is earned from

this source. Another is from offering rights to manufacture and sell photosensitive

resin printing plates and the rights to use its trademark to Napp [phonetic] Systems
USA.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The companies worthy of special mention in the medical supply world are two.
Fujisawa Pharmaceutical and Toyama Kagaku.

Fujisawa Pharmaceutical developed the antibiotic Cefamezin. and the knowhow has
been purchased by some #0 prominent world medical supply companies. The income
from technology fees centering around Cefamezin is 1.7 billion yen a year. total-
ling 8 billion yen in the last 8 years.

Toyama Kagaku successfully exported a new penicillin formulation. a penicillin
manufacturing technology. 5 years ago to the American general chemical company

ACC, for a total sum of 23 million dollars. Also. 3 years ago. in October 1978.

it exported a new antibiotic. cefoperazin [phonetic]. manufacturing technology to
American Pfizer at 30 million dollars. With the two technologies. it earned roughly
13 billion yen in Japanese currency. Additionally. this April. Toyama Kagaku was
successful in exporting technology for Abobis [phonetic], a digestive canal mechani—
cal function activator. to American SKF, and the ability of the company to develop
technology once again drew attention.

Ups and Downs of Income From Technology Fees

There are other companies which are showing a rapidly growing royalty income.

Asahi Glass and Toray Industries fall into that category. Technologies that can
expect to raise income in the future are: advanced technologies such as electronic
cameras of Canon. new third-generation antibiotics developed by Takeda Chemical
industries and Shionogi using their original technology. and VTR's and VTR tapes

of major home electric appliance makers and industrial robots.

The income realized from technology fees of Asahi Glass was approximately a billion
yen in the 1980 December term. The 1981 December term will see royalty income cut
in half due to the cutback in providing color TV tube and ball glass technology to
China. Now. the company has lined up a contract to export ion-exchange membrane
method sodium hydroxide manufacturing technology to Du Pont. That will be the
feature commodity. and the income from technology fees will once again be on the
rise.

ln FY-80, Toray Industries gained an income from pure technology of 2.303 billion
yen. of which the income from overseas was 1.882 billion yen. In comparison. it
paid out 469 million yen. the majority of which was overseas. So income exceeded
expenditure by approximately 500 million yen [as published]. Incidentally. 5 years
ago, in FY-7ﬁ, the income was 1.2 billion yen while the expenditure was 243 billion
yen. which implies that both income and expenditure inflated on a two-fold scale in
the last 5 years. The technologies show a broadening of use. In the mainstream
are artificial leather called exseine [phonetic]. carbon fiber and polymer-related
technologies. most of which branched out of fibers. However. the income from the
synthetic fiber technology itself appears to have reached the peak for the time
being.

Likewise. Asahi Chemical Industry is focusing on tire cord and ion-exchange resin
technologies bound for China. and its income from technology fees has doubled com-
pared to 5 years ago. Mitsubishi Rayon is characterized by an income predominantly
from its major acrylic fiber technology and MHA resin technology. The pattern of
the transactions show that the acrylic fiber technology has been provided to
developing countries. while the HHA resin has been provided to companies in advanced
countries such as to Du Pont of America.

57
FOR omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contrary to the gigantic stature of the industries. the automobile industry and
the food industry claim an unexpectedly small amount of technology exports. The
automobile industry. unlike the aircraft industry which is among the most advanced
industries, is an assembly industry that assembles 20.000 different parts and an
industry that applies technologies. Because of this. technology export cases are
scarce. and also the technological imports are confined to only very limited parts
such as automatic gears and transaxles.

The Japanese food industry has scarcely developed technologies with original know-
how. Based on the practice observed to date. many of the food companies have ex-
clusively imported technologies from advanced European nations and America, and
have tried to make domestic products. They may have knowhow. but they have hardly
given information to other companies in the true sense, and they characteriStically
stick to a system where the knowhow is given to affiliated subsidiaries through
capital participation and management participation.

Leading others by far is the royalty income of 2 billion yen of Ajinomoto. This
income is primarily related to the use of “Ajinomoto” manufacturing technology by
overseas subsidiaries (joint ventures with local companies). a technology with a
history appreciated throughout the world.

The royalty income scale of other companies is small. The royalty income of Meiji
Seika is almost all from antibiotics. The income from food-related royalties comes
from snack technology ("pickup." etc) given to United Biscuit. This. however, can
be considered a barter trade, since it imports McVities [phonetic] technology from
United Biscuit.

Nisshin Foods is unique. Cup noodle technology is used also by domestic companies,
but the income itself is still at the level of 100 million yen. It can be assumed
that it is anticipating great future possibilities.

Figure 1.

_—'—"-— a (3)

    
   
 
 

—...—.——. ———..——.————_-— ——m

mmmneuntaltsm (1)

 

 

__ ._.__...__ —— —.——_ no
(2) haunts-u)
__._ ._. ....____ _—.— ./~ I\ —- no I
ARIIMIILIKQ)
—---— --—— --— ———-— M

 

I
-- .Mﬂl‘ SO SI 52 $3 54

(5)

Key: (1) New contracts are basically in the black. but....
(2) Technology export (sums received)
(3) 100 million yen
(a) Technology import (sums pnid)
(S) FY-72
58

FOR OFFKJA1.USEGJNLY
Figure 2. Chemical industry number one in excess of technology fees paid

I“gran and steel industry number two in excess of technology fees paid

 

 

 

60
on .
(2)
(1) - IIlrmrhbtltllo‘wtO
w —_._.____ __.___._.___.__— -
I( a f “ ‘ I i ‘
0) _
2° -- — ----—,-——- ---— -"— —l—.-— —o— —-n-
7 a a 0 o E o
‘2 1 I
.u 2 - ' u. a A I I K 8 I
(0-) it. I I : I I I I 5 (12) ‘ :
s . g a (13)(14)<15><16)m,(18)
m -1”- __ _:._ "m ._ _._ wl__u.-___"__________._____
I .
(3) (g) (g) 5%)' (7) (8) (9)(IO)(11) (19)

Note: (1) Transactions realized in FY-80. material from Science and Technology
Research and Investigation Report.
(2) Figures indicate that balance of the export and import from overseas
such as patents. knowhou, technical guidance.
(3) New contracts are those concluded in the designated year.

Key: (1) Million yen
(2) Industries in favorable balance increase
when viewed by new contracts

(3) Chemical industry

(5) Iron and steel industry

(5) Construction

(6) Nonferrous metal industry

(7) Ceramic industry

(8) Fiber and textile industry

(9) Machinery
(10) Transporting machine

(11) Rubber products
(12) Pulp and paper
(l3) Transportation, communications and public services
(lb) Metal products

(15) Other industries

(16) Food

()7) Precision machinery

(18) Oil and coal products

(19) Electric machinery

59
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
35 Companies Achieve Over 500 m

- Chemical Industry

,et accounting. Income from techn
:, etc. Income from technology fe

s for above 102. A for 9.9-51. B
lnology fees to operational profit

.orted more technology imports the
2 companies has been analyzed focL

available.
CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030003-0

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CU—ﬂ ﬁn GGu1—u..£¢u‘u I— Ittitt It 1.1.1

uo_uo~oegoou comuoavoga we susogm «swam-ohm

.uoa-um nou_¢= as» non»

noo_»ou .oucoccoum»co go; »~em-u cs.
nosaumueua-u . mu< «aaoguaom cu ummg-umsn
“Locus voun on unau—sougoa cc. nqonomv
._.oa cos. a“ ouougm guo~o=;uou ~aamu

-cmga .«:o> com—~m- oonv noodocguou Lou
nossumvcoauo uvoouno >oo~ocgoou nesm clenc—

.-gou >2c>o uo>mooos .sn ueaaa 0;.
song «on; one-omao daumggo-u we. .anu>u cm
veg—o; o» vougoaxo an: yen—a nun; _ooam

.cm ocmgnsg . a .293“. -omuae cu uemun~og
momgmaccu .oogo‘ o» nae-a ou_: vmuuoo_o
v:- oun-u Av_omt “may uo yo yucca. cg»
gum: cup-muouua «out «us-cmau aooaocgu-p

as.»

com__m- new ouou02a coma-umgsu_aaou noouo:_t
.om~< .ruwuuagancou ucn~n ca wean—.2 coo;
oucavwan ~aeomuasono can no». ocmgooemoco
uo.. w‘n noewcgoo me now 5—0anuuuounac

w.~n

~.~

a.»

n.¢

n.n

h¢¢.-

mac.o~

Odo.H

noo.¢a

www.nc

oo~.oa

nwn

one

can

oo~.~

momggmaucH >>au= «gumaamqu

WUJ_no:o_=¢
.u:_0d_=oa_=m

cud .auopax

o=_g:uuuuscnz
_.~o .ooum manuuou¢

aumgunaue_ umguuunu ououmuam

_...m .90:

”uos‘uucoo u_oo_H

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ClA-RDP82-00860R000600030003-0

2007702109:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
0.600

1.478

3.960

822

4.917

396

775

117.738

47.072

35.151

136,225

29..363

65.222

1.506

38.163

3.9

4.2

2.9

2.8

7.5-

26.3

2.0

III patents ha
plenty of pate
and casting: I

Priuarily hone
to overseas su

CelluniCItioﬂl
etc. Roccntly
to Alorlcan 8t

Following reh
ZIR to Anerlcl
Anerican Eaglt

doors to Anori
ulcctrolagneti
S.P.A.

Hole electric
nology is prm
3L conponios

lncolo rtlutnt
facturing ted
70! of it is

Surplus in tn
1 large gain
related to ca

Of all. 7L Ii
salon. and th
asslstlnco to
2,700

927

300

231

A 13.687

17.512

17,810

12,076

5.2

1.7

1.9

"Co-plete Cl
Facturing to
top. and pl:
diery Toyo E
on. Probabl
developing n
to produce F

Iajor export
Ienufacturln
0&1. polyeth
featuring te

Iechnologies
States. Euro
and South A-
hexonol and
to Brazil. c
chelistry re
there are nu

Use of paten
relating to
Fill. H85 re
ethylene sun
go: deSulfur
residue crac
manufacturin
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.ogsuau

memumuosn a no: we» mguucou ucudusuo mo coma
nuaumcou ogu o» o—panconmmscm um soauocgouu
vou-aog oc-uao .vcvva on.» one >uo~oc
usooa ace-uaouu goo-x cyan: we. gouogocmo
[am gonna; cans: vanavmanu .ouo .Avoauo-
emu. >oo_o=:uou comuasaaun ocuu=n\ocouaa
.Atoguo- one. vo:uo- somuoqguxo ocousmuso

.vcosu vgnana .5» co um moemcgoo ou
.uo_o:;ooo «one o-oocm mo comusamuucou use
was .ugoaxo xuoyocgoou okays» omnosocm cu
«cu—n acaa-oo og— ._m-sm new garm- on
xooﬁocguou cmuos m¢< .ncmgu cu >oo_o:;uou «am
a;- aomuo_oc:uou Loan: .xao~oc;uou Lonaau
owe-aucsa cm v-gox ogu am one» am ‘—

.onousu ea

nqmgnlmss .Annoooso memtauuauacoo o~a~o
o:o_»;ao>~oa acmovmgn pamueoyon gomgv >uo: um
>mo~ocsuou ogmmmuoga o—naao: .omoosucm

_~ma meow >uo.o=;uou can» ocean. us» go

omua; ogauau ogu .go>oxox .voauoa umsu
o:..:v :cqggn o-ouc_ $9 acao-o co» o;—

.vo:s-o awn-goo» a go»
co-~ma e use.~--o.ou=_ .9 _.>._-so_¢ ¢
.oeo~»aoga»_on van ace—xguua—on >umugou

su_g cm aosaocx so‘ “ago“; ocmacoumg no»;
a” 0.00:“ to .ugao» _ac,o:msa .»-~muoa.u
.nomoodocguou go; «assumueoauo «voouxo
»_o=mc_ossgo»o numoo_o=:uou log. oncog—

.umvu~ o» mh‘ﬂog

lgoou ocmgauu-uacnu Louno>_oa vcn .mouuum
coumcs use o» >oo_oesuou oemgaauauaca-
ou~»gua guano .cowca uom>om cg» was oumxo:
o» >oo~ocgooa acmusuo-uac-u numuocoga.
=m~_ogu¢ .enan» a» xaonocgoou ocmgauuomacau
umu- u->gu« "05¢ vougonxo uoﬁuo_o=gu._

H.nun

w.wH

N.n

m.n~u

a.-

nHH.H

aNo.n

ONw.o

nn~.n

Nom.n

Ono.a

own

ONN

Hmo.¢

“Hm

cu cooc unocaaas o;—

goaaac u_..‘.=>m can.»

>ca cu
_aumuo:uoguo¢ mgnmnaaumx

mowguu=v=_
doom-uguoguoa Mauumz

o>oox
axaonx mnnaxosm coaa_z

6h
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
. .ao ace: snow Mazp on
masomu new—u.“ sen uwoﬁogguuu cmgauuwm

-scnu cau_>oamg can Lomngum gucogu on sue—o:
Icon» ocmgauuahacon ﬂu cmnmum> woun>muua

”o‘o ougoaxo >m0_c::uod emu: .vcogu
vuoxa: aaoza noou goo—oc;uau «5.. unoucu

.uogan co
meow ocean; yeah you“. nu>mouog gang-no
0;“ .A_omuoco‘aﬂ :m_~muogmaua omuomamuea
socv uuumua enumsou« on can Auuo .Homaocogna
caddmouumgoa umuomnmucn neg. cu: cooggou< on
co>mo magma; acne-a cg» gum: comaueaacou an

.uozz sumumgo on gun. “moan-sou .—aom-:u
«mg» a» veg-go; sun nonwouog mo woo u:oaa
van u=ou>un mo non go>o .emgoano_~;nou
o» oun~og goon .gom: eg- A:.» cow__mn
so.~v wagon-m can augeaxu >uo~o=auou sacs

.aemum-oga um agonxo seaﬂoeguou umuoma
I‘ve- OLauau .oomuo—oegoou u=_g:uolwacol
.ouo .uz— v:- vmo- autumn .Aomeou omvguo.
~amgoo nogm am u-ougm ﬁnamuemgm .ouen~ao

anon—u canon.“ vca ausoaxo goo—oesoo—

.nuu-gucou non-n ”saga. we. Asuwoo nouguv
mug-Lucou on: neon-a -=usn ova—9cm nomuou
naguu _-omuoﬂo==uou mac~gu> .co» cm nogau

Imogen.» 9;“ avoooxo noo$ goodocgoou scum

0.99:“ «an .nomoo~o=:oou >ox cm nugoauo
be ..auu gagu ago: .La .ugoa-m to «gang

H.H

N.nMH

m.n

n.H

n.~

aoc.¢~

nmc.H

wan.~n

mco.Nc

OnH.wH

HON

~o~.~

Hun.H

own

one

anoauacu-Igaca 9". n

sxaoux -~»o—

_-omu=uoaugu;a «acummau

nomgunavgu
~aouuosu secs-—

xcao-ou o»x:~m
FORAOF1HCJA1.USE1DNLY

.m~u>u ooe_m

ago.» m cm vodnaov an; u— .v~goa as» go>o
~_~ nomuucsou o» >uo~o=couu oc_gauuut==au
cumuosv»; nausea vegan. .cagn-o- ougasuno
nee. we. sense on xuoaoggoou usou .gmu
memnm>ogn nos; mo-oo x~cmou among“ 0‘—

Hv»:m«_a=a «nu

.oam. um.»gon van ago; an caumg < nu
no..uuo am <:: .u_uov omumo-ou neg; am
v;_gouogo we. aaoago>o uoaﬂ>oga u._ooaoc
uguou can» am 0.09:“ as» we uvuwzuuoa_
.nomoo_o:£oou seam. omuugua veg smug; 4x:
o:_v*>oua lost none» xgcaal clove“ ug—

 

.a~oa a v95unog o>~£ cu «a... v~omm seam»
oemuumuo 0;» .Lo>oao= .ogaaau ogu em Laos
sgo:o ouaogucm sun o-oocm »o_nsou o:u v:-
.uuo cnomgou< cu >oo_ocsuou can“; cognac
uo yuan-o osa a“ o-Q-auo .uomn»u ¢ .coma
-oguno uoacomgonusoaxo an eye“ uo>_o»o an;
mu‘oa-m >oo_ocguoa co osmvcoaov anacmmaa

.uoagoa-o ou~o

«.1 hue—oesoou memccmnn van manage. uno—
go‘ ugh ._ou caumsou¢ v:- .cnuooo enmvcu
ea ausoaxu oegoa~ucm .uoogocgu-u ocmssu
-unuaco- goamw ans—u 2.; cu acmun_og unmxo
u~gon~o soc—oegooa u~omso>o mo guano >=ax

.amo< uaaosaaom cm
nomcnnuou ogauco> acmom Laou cu vuvm>oga
ago: ocmoaooogn wea a=w>aux .ocmccmau
ocm,~o»cm :o‘xocx on. xuo_o¢;oou comuoavogg

.uamo_oo o» ugoauo acodn -_Mu age can
.anm;u cu ugoauo van—o o—aaun Luuao>~on
an »~_g-mga novm>oga on; numuc_o=;uo—

N.QH

h.du

n2:

n.m~

”.6

n.cn

no~.nu

nan.c

ene.ou

con.N

nmw.~

00m.~

8m.n n.“ .839: 13:5 22;
own on co>uz “gumnanum:
nan.~ xngo—
sen mxonoo ovum:
0mm momgua=v=_ oangax

n3 2::

FOR‘OFF1C1AL.USE1DNLY
' 4.000

25 130

83

84

1.337

h3,341

7,034

b.110

6.257

25,796

9.2

2.0

2.0

1.3

5.2

Color F
plant m
In thew
roach U

technic
Facturi
raw lab
it serw

lncone
in l982

lechnic
facturi
world.

east A:

lechnol

Income
paper c
narcent
conpani
lncorpo
Ricoh.
.sou~amu_ucau uM usauau

oemnm-oga - v:- .uooaso>o uoagucsou on

“sea. cm vuau_auoo coca nag cowungaumuo;
acoana .Avo‘uo- news—man :masvxo-a .voguoc
oemv~m=n Lewes-cow >oo_o¢;uou ace-o>o;a-m
ucaogm .oucauncm go. .voao_.>ov coon an;
noun»o comuovm_oucou 0*eogunsuo- a .xgueoooz

.acuuamuuco: ».ucugsso aw uaongu>o cogu unocc—

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.nomcan-ou umauonov cog; »_:o vegan» um
use; acouna cog» o-oucu .comun__-uacm
as; can aucmuﬁman onuslgom; go.
comuuagu-eou vasogugovca cm xu.so;u:-
memv~o~ ogu um sane-cu as» .x_u=og

-Lau .m~a~ cm eoaodo>ov no: voguo- on“
-vH_:a coﬁuusgungou vcsogugov== =m cough:

.voum>osa nomoo_ocguou aeoon mew—nan;
ace-cu van acoua acuuooga gonna cu noun—o;
we. aeomu-goagoo u_anoaov cog; am o on

new .5» $9 «no: .ueouugaaoo ucmgoocuucm
0;» an coco—«>ov nouu»a acme-An uno—

uca- nuancouso-.a cg» mm goes-o emu. u;—
Evaluation of Technological Standards
Tokyo SHUKAN DlAYAHONDO in Japanese 7 Nov 81 pp 20-21

[Article by Hiroo Wakai, Research Division, Planning Bureau. Science and Technology
Agency]

[Text] There are various ways to evaluate technological standards. In this article,
let us try to analyze them on the basis of technology trade statistics from the Prime
Minister's Office and the Bank of Japan.

First is international comparison. According to the statistics from the Bank of
Japan, Japan's technology trade in FY-79 showed expenditure of 276.2 billion yen
for technology imports and income of 75 billion yen for technology exports. Mean-
while, the statistics from the Prime Minister's Office show 241 billion yen and
133.1 billion for the same items.

The figures vary in the statistics, but Japan's technology trade balance is about

at the level of export 40 to import 100. In contrast, West Germany shows a favorable
balance of 100 : 46. France and England show trade deficits of 100 : 143 (1977)

and 100 : 102 (1975) respectively. The United States is totally exceptional and
always enjoys an ample trade surplus such as import 100 : export 1000 as a result

of accumulating rich basic technological knowhow.

In the case of Japan. almost two-thirds of the counterparts for technology exports
are developing nations. It appears that the quality of the technology is slightly
inferior to that of the European nations and the United States.

Second is progress to date. The fees payable for technology increase virtually
parallel with the increase in output, even if they come from the same case of tech—

nology import.

Next, let us divide the expenditures by the shipment of industrial finished products.
The ratio showed a continuous downward trend in the 1970's since the peak of 0.2
percent surplus during 1960-70.

Also, the difference between technology imports and technology exports. according
to the statistics from the Prime Minister's Office, was in the red by a "total“ of
107.8 billion yen, which included continuing accounts as of FY-79. However, "new
contracts” obtained in a l-year period have been in black figures since FY—72. The
FY—79 result showed a surplus of 25.3 billion yen.

Third is the status of individual industries. Industries that showed a favorable
balance in terms of the ”total" which included continuing accounts as of PY—79.

are the iron and steel industry, which claimed a surplus of 11.9 billion yen; the
construction industry. which claimed a surplus of 11.5 billion yen; and the chemical
industry, which realized a surplus of 50 million yen. If the status is viewed only
an the basis of "new contracts," the first on the list of industries showing a
favorable balance is the chemical industry, with a surplus of 14.4 billion yen.
Next comes the iron and steel industry, which showed a surplus of 5.6 billion yen;
and then the construction industry, which showed a surplus of A billion yen. The
iron and steel industry went to black figures even evaluated on the basis of the
"total" starting in 1974, and the general chemical fiber industry. a pan of the
chemical industry, also went to black figures in that year.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICML USE ONLY

The industry that has shown remarkable progress in recent years is the chemical
industry. and the major chemical companies have all shown favorable balances in
technology trades. By comparison. the first on the list of industries with a deficit
in the technology trade balance is the electric machinery and equipment industry.
which showed a deficit of 38.8 billion yen. 0f the deficit. 17.6 billion yen was
incurred by the telecommunications. electronic and electric instrument industry
related technologies. However, the economic status of the telecommunications elec-
tro-electric instrument industry has occasionally been favorable starting from

about 1972. if it is viewed only on the basis of "new contracts." This is probably
the result of the improved technological standards. In this sense. the automobile
industry, which is not in the category of the most advanced industries. has continu-
ously shown deficits from the past to the present both in the "total" and "new
contracts."

The question is the future of technology exports. There are. however. two problems
to consider. One is the technological challenge from the moderately developed
countries. This phenomenon has already been perceived distinctively in the fields
of textiles and shipbuilding. Labor costs in Japan are getting too high to compete
favorably with the moderately developed countries. In order for Japan to grow as

a nation on the basis of technology. it must master the most advanced technology.

The second issue is the trade friction associated with the export of finished
products to European nations and the United States. Automobiles and television

sets are typical examples. Small VTR products. although they are the same electric
products. have not raised trade friction as much as automobiles and TV‘s in spite

of the fact that Japanese companies practically monopolize the world's markets. I
am certain that this owes much to the fact that Japan developed the VTR as a commodity
and opened the market for it. It appears that the future direction to be taken by
the Japanese industries will be found in promoting the refining of the most advanced
technologies and in pioneering highly creative commodities. The new trend is
budding in the fields of carbon fibers. industrial robots and phototelecommunication
systems.

COPYRIGHT: Daiyamondosha 1981

8940
050: 4|06/16

70
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
IDHERINC 0P TARIFF 0N ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS TEEMED UNAVOIDABLE
Tokyo NIKON KDGYO SEIMBUM in Japanese 17 Dec 81 p 1

[Text] ITI Minister Abe held talks with leaders of the computer industry circles.
including NEC, Fujitsu, and Mitsubishi Electric Machinery, at a hotel in Tokyo on
the 16th.

At the talks, ITI Minister Abe referred to the advance lowering of the tariff rate
on computers, and stated that ”At present, we are effecting coordination in the
direction of lowering the tariff rate on computers propo‘er from 9.1 to 7.0 percent L
and that on peripheral equipment from 16.6 to 10.3 percent, effective from next
spring." So saying he sought the cooperation of the industry circles. In re-
sponse to this, Mitsubishi Electric Machinery President Nihachiro Katayama (chair—
man of the Japan Electronic Industry Promotion Association) and others said that
the differential between IBM, which is the biggest manufacturer in the world, and
Japanese enterprises is still wide, and that it will be troublesome if the agree—
ment at the Tokyo Round (multilateral trade negotiations) is changed. However,
they expressed the posture of accepting the ITI minister's statement. saying that
"It will be unavoidable if it is based on a policy judgment for the elimination

of the trade friction."

Also as collateral for accepting the advance lowering of the tariff rate on com-
puters, the industry circle side requested the government's continued support,
and sought the realization of appropriations for the technological development of
fifth-generation computers and super-computers, which appropriations are included
in the estimated budgetary demand for fiscal 1982, and the Development Bank's
loans for-the Japan Electronic Computer Company (JECC). Toward this, ITI Minister
Abe said that "we want to make efforts for budgetary measures, though we are under

difficult financial circumstances."

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kogyo Shimbunshs Tokyo Honsha 1981

CSO: 4106/35

71
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR Ol-‘I-‘K 1M. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

NISSAN To EXPAND PRODUCTION OF DEFENSE EQUIPMENT
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMmUN in Japanese 17 Dec 81 p 7

[Text] Nissan Motors has decided on the policy of aiming at being an enterprise
concluding main contracts for large-size equipment including missiles and also
starting in a positive way licensed domestic production by U.S. enterprises, in
order to expand orders for defense equipment. It has so far been handling only
limited fields including rockets, and therefore, its sales have been as small as
about 12 billion yen. To revise this, it intends to increase its sales greatly
by taking charge of the whole system for main equipment. It has been working out
medium- and long-range strategy by establishing a planning division in the Space
and Aeronautics Department in September, and it aims at "being freed from sub-
contracts" in the field of defense orders.

Hill Cooperate With Hitachi, Etc

Nissan is producing, for the JDA, such weapons as 73-model lO7-mm trench mortar
shells, multi-loaded rockets, and 70-am1rockets. However, its sales amount to
about 12 billion yen (estimate in fiscal 1981), even when the rocket sector in-
cluding the equipment for the Space Development Corporation is included. This is

a slight amount in the said company's total sales exceeding 3 trillion yen. It has
judged that it is necessary to manufacture such products as will become "star
items," now that it is to handle the defense field.

It will aim at increasing its sales by obtaining the status of a main-contract
enterprise for projects to handle rockets, powder, homing devices. launches, and
shell-supplying devices, in the missile system, and the command and order system
as a whole. Enterprises dealing with missiles are now limited to Mitsubishi

Heavy Industries, Toshiba, etc, and Nissan has been only cooperating with them in
limited fields including rockets. However, it wants to play the role of a general
manager of the system in the future.

In the case of products automonously developed, however, there are cases where

the JDA issues orders for individual products, and there are circumstances where
it is difficult to have a trend toward a system immediately. Therefore, Nissan
has started contacts with U.S. enterprises, etc, thinking that if it becomes a
main-contract enterprise for licensed production by foreign enterprises, it will
come to handle everything. This is because it has the self-reflection that it has
made too much effort only for the autonomous development of rockets, etc. It
aims at increasing its sales at one shot through licensed production.

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rrucurunent of equlpurnl by the JDA is decided on the basis of medium-tern plans
Including the Medium-Term Operations Estimate for 5 years. Moreover, a prepara-
tory period of 5 to 10 years is necessary for a decision on and the development
of requipment to be introduced, and therefore, Nissan is scheduled to work out
future strategy as to what field it should handle, under the lead of the Planning
Division in the Space and Aeronatics Department.

Also, this company has decided to cooperate with Hitachi. Fuji Heavy Industry, etc:
in the defense field. It is expected to check into joint projects with the two

companies. too, while firming up concrete projects.
COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981

(:50: 4106/ 35 END

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY