APPROVED FOR RELEASE; 2007/02/00; CIA-RDPOR-OOOCOROOO“00030027-0

ON
I I 779)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030027-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE (“LY

JPRS 1/8324
9 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOU0 7/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030027-8
JPRS publications contain information primarily tram foreign
newspapers, periodicals and hooks. but also (rm: news anenev
transmissions and broadcasts. luterials from (“reign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrnulnﬁ and
other characteristics rrtﬂlnrd.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed In brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no protesslng indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Govern-ent.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGL'IATiOh‘S GOVERNING WSJRSIIIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIR REQUIRE THAT DISSENIXATION
Of This PUBLICATIOS BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
l -|¢

TMNSLATIONS 0N JAPAN , (F000 7/79) ' u. . ' '

_ ‘ “"""‘ °““"“°'
0e

' . Morale. Oneal-nice Neon ead Menu l0. HoIKI/Teekl'eck Uni Ne.

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road II. Connect/Genet No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

I). Speech; Onealudu ﬂue eed Mama I). Em; Report a Period
eve

Ae above

Abeueete

The report contains press and radio coverage on political, economic. military.
eociological. scientific and technological developments.

- v w ere-rec Aaelyue. e. Deeecinen
JAPAN
Political and Sociological

Military
Economic
Science and Technology

I». “calibre/Outlet“ Tet-e

m COSATI ran/cu» sc. so. 5K, 15c. 16!), 181, 191?, 223
vailebilicy Scum-I

For Official Use Only.
Linited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

 

no. ~10.“ "‘10) VICMOC a.)l.""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB 1/8
9 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN

(P000 7/79)
CONTENTS

P011210“. AND 80010111110“.

mam! Urges me To Withdraw boos} Prom Victnon
(mitorial; mm mm ms, 21 Feb 79) ..........

mam mmv on 'Seriouo Twist' to Indochina Situation
(m, 19 Ebb 19)

Muda Revives notional Activities
(numb mm; mm: mm ms, in Feb 79) .

Japanese Show Renewed Interest in Senkaku Islands
(Various nom'ces, various dates) .....................

Boning Radio Ihntion
Japan To mm a Heliport

Perforunnce of Parties in Gubernatorial Elections Critiqued
(Editorial; mm: mm m, 7 Feb 79)

JPS Reports on JCP Central Comittee Plenu- 6-7 rob
(m, 7 Feb 79) 0.00.0000...OCOOIOIOOOIOOOOOII00......

'mmm' Poll sum mbiic Supporto Ohira cabinet
(mm mm mun, 27 Jan 79)

'MAIIIICEI' Count: on First LDP Convention Ihder (mire
(Editorial; MAUICEI mm mos, 26 Jan 79)

'ASABI' Urges Going Slov on 'Inperial m lane' 8111
(Editorial; mm mm ms, 7 Feb 79)

Report on JCP Chairman Miyanoto'o Speech at cc Plenum
(m, 7' 8 Feb 79) ooooooooooeoaoononeeonoooooooooooao

Opening Benz-kn
Conclusion or Speech
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

commas (Continued)

Briers
Jepan-SRV Riendship Association

BOOMC

PRC Wants Jspnese Intermediaries for Trade Hith Taiwan
(mm mayo 33mm, 3 Feb 79)

m1 Se U.8.-Jspsn Trade 'l‘rend Reversing
MICHI My ms, 9 Rb 79) sssscssssasososossss.

'HAINICEI': Japan Concerned About me Trade Policy
(“1“: SM’ahb ”) .OIOOO'OOOOCIIIOOIIQOII

Ksnssi Electric Power Survey on Prospects to Year 2000
(mm mm mm, 9, 10 Jan 79)

Nature and Results of Survey
Minted Responses to have)!

Briers
Iraq Degsssing Plants
Simpsre Refinery kpsnsion

SCIEM'II’IC MD WINE“;

mbble Method Reclaim seabed Metallic Resources
(m:mrm,19hb79) IOOCOCOCO'OOO‘CIOIOCOOOO

Briefs
Light Aircraft Industry

-b-

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

22'

23

25

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASAﬂl' URGES PBS TO HITRDRAH TROOPS PRO“ VIETNAM
Tokyo ASA!!! ammo anus in English 21 m 79 p 2 ow
[Bditorisl: "Peace Up to China")

[Text] It is said that the Chinese invasion of Vietnan is probably no
sure than a limited nilitary action. However, the jolt and the scare

which the Chinese incursion has given the world are big. and tension in
Asia is nounting.

In a statenent reported by the XINHUA on Sunday, Beijing cited Vietnan'a
border violations and acts of provocation as reasons for its intrusion.
whatever the reasons. however. the use of peaceful scans to settle

international disputes is a basic principle upheld in the United Nations
Charter.

Japan. particularly, which has a peace constitution renouncing war, cannot
approve of such a nilitary action.

In their treaty of peace and friendship, Japan and China pledged that they
would oppose attenpts by other countries to establish hegenonisn. If this
spirit of sntihegenonisn is to be taken in a universal sense. restricting
specific countries only as objects of antihegenonisn and attenpting to
control other countries on the argunent that "if you invade. we will do
the sane without fail" will loan a nanifeatation of hegenonisn.

During the Vietnam war. we nsintsined that the withdrawal of u.s. troops
fron Vietnam was a condition essential for peace in the area. Just because
China and Vietnam are socialist countries. there is no reason for one of
then to invade the other. If foreign troops rennin in the three Indo-
chinese states. all of then should withdraw to their hone countries.

In a dispute between two nations, a big power is called upon to exercise
stronger self-control than the other. It is necessary for China first to
halt nilitsry action. pull out its troops and adopt a peaceful stance for
settlesent of the dispute through talks. By doing so, Beijing nay be
able to avert being hit as chauvinistic.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

China is giving "self-defense" as the reason for dispatching its troops to
Vietnam. Discernible in this reason is Beijing's stand that it is not

seriously considering leeving its troops in Vietnam.

If that is so. Beijing will meke it easy for Benoi to sit at the confer-
ence table by taking the lesd in withdrawing its troops from Vietnam.

we wonder if it is not possible, in the course of the hoped-for negotia-
tions. to elieinate one by one the various problems, including the situa-
tion in which Vietnamese troops are said reesining in Cambodia and other
places.

Heanwhile. like the pact between Vietnse and Laos, the treaty of peace.
friendship and cooperation concluded by Hanoi recently with the new .
Csebodisn Governnent under Heng Sserin. there is a clause (Article 2)
hinting that Vietnamese troops will rennin in Cambodia. Hanoi should
refrain from keeping its troops in Cambodia, which will intensify ten-
sion. and from esking impetuous moves, such as concluding "special

relations" like those proposed for the talked-about lndochinese Federa-
tion.

Further, the country which we earnestly hope will act with prudence is
the Soviet Union. Moscow, which concluded a treaty of friendship and
cooperation with Hanoi. has cons out with a ststemsnt that it will
observe the obligations in the Russo-Vietnamese pact. It is because
of this that the u.s. is concerned over possible clashes on the Sine-
Russo border.

If.the Soviet Union. by using armed force, checks the Chinese incursion
into Vietnsn, the conflict may escslste as the two powers, seeking to
"punish" each other, step up their responses to esintain their prestige.

To cope with this new crisis, Japan should strongly demend that the coun-
tries involved mske efforts for peace. muster international endeavors for
long-term stability in Southeast Asia and help shape world public opinion
opposing all military action. If the UN Security Council is to be opened.
we want Japan to cell on China and the Soviet Union not to invoke the
veto right merely for their own convenience, and to mske efforts so that
the permanent members of the council will concur in their views.

Japan should not, even in the slightest degree, lean to one camp. It
should play its international role by promoting peace to settle the
dispute.

COPYRIGRT: Asshi Evening News, 1979

050: #120

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOWICAL

'DAILY YOHIURI' 0N 'SBRIOUS THIST' TO INDOCRINA SITUATION
Hong Kong APP in English 0567 CHI 19 Feb 79 09

[Text] Tokyo. 19 Feb (AFN-4113 DAILY YOHIURI in today's editoriel said
"Chinese nilitery incursion into Vietnam on Saturday has given a serious
twist to the situstion in Indochina as it cones on the heels of Vietnamese
intervention into Cenbodie."

The newspaper aeid "Before the arned actions of the two countries threaten
peace in Asie we urge both Beijing and Henoi to withdrew their forces to
their sides of the borders es soon as possible."

"The Vietnamese Govern-eat hes asked for an energency nesting of the 0.5.5157
Security Council to discuss the Chinese attack and st the use tine
requested the Soviet Union and other socielist countries for eid."

"Chine hes claimed thet its attsck egeinst Vietnen is 'e restricted

defensive counteretteck to check Vietnamese srlsed provocations which
nunbered 700 in the pest six nonthe md which were backed by the Soviet

Union. "'

The deily said. "Considering the nilitery power of the Vietnesese arsed
forces. we (hay) that the China-Vietnam cleshes night develop into a
bigger conflict then the Sine-Indian border cleshes in 1965." "Should
the Chine-Vistas- arned conflict drag on, there is e strong possibility
of Laos end later Theilend being pulled into the deedly drane thet would

eventuelly threaten the security and stability of the neaber ststes of
the Associetion of Southesat Asia Netione (ASBAN)."

"mere is also a possibility that the Chins-Vietnae conflict eight heve
an adverse effect on the just-opened remificetion negotietions between
North and South Koree."

"Ne are now concerned ebout what action the Soviet Union will teke since it

has signed a 15-year friendship and cooperation treety with Vietnsn. The
treaty stipulates that the two nations will consult each other in the event

of either of the two countries being involved in en erned conflict with e
third country."

COPYRIGHT: The Deny Yoduri. 1979

cso: 1.120 3
you omcw. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLQ} ICAL

FUKUDA REVIVBS FAC’I‘IONAL ACTIVITIES

Tokyo HMNICIII. DAILY NEHS in English 116 Feb 79 p 4

[Article by Tokchiku Tokahasht: "Aim of Fukuda Faction's 'Sctvaka1"']

[Tex t]

A view that has become
oommminthapalllieatwtdta
that “the Ohtra ministration
is likely to oonthiua tor a long
time—and the moon is that
there is no areaidmtiai eon-
dtdate- atron; enough to

Concerning this. Chiet
Cabmet Secretary Rolumke
Tanaka remarks that "l have
gr ieiiiu 1:," Minister

in not to complacent
about a lung-continuing ad-
ministration. There is the
usability it next year'a party
preaideotiai election oi a
ohalluuehy'i‘aiteaﬂimdaand
Taken llihi who are hath tor~
merLoPnreaidenia"

Former Prime Kidder litti
am not a candidate in last
year'apresidentlaieieettonhlt
Toahio Konioin oi the Itilti
faction was a candidate. It
iormerPriullioisterEWa
runs in the next party
presidential election. the
possibility exists that this will
We Hill to become a can-
didatealao.

What are tormer Prime
Minister Fuhoda and the
new {action thtntiuahout
atthepmentmoraaat?

it

At the time at the Ohira
Cabinet's -iormaiion. Prime
"ulster Ohira main to ap-
pohttZenkoainNasthechiet
mm.

Becauaeotatrongohjedion
raiaedhythemodataeiiooa
changevasmadetothenreaent
Sum". Since hoth Satto and

poiotnientontheeonditionthat
it wild be "for the time

helm

Pouring the reatpatton oi
Shlaem llori. weaker oi the
Home oi Representatives.
Prime Minister Ohlra
recommended Haiime PM
as successor. The 1akeo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030027-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the tthtra administration has cm Secretary 1-.
trtod to do. For this reatstancc “there I: the m
to be ettecttve. strength to dill/WWW r
wry-Thumb“! mu m next yer
whyMWulldlﬂu- prutdentlaldectton.
11m to common to the Mada “MI n
worth/polities. Irrespective“ W detest h u;
muhworbatlmme OutwafﬂyMBm
MtnlsterOtthwasvetlaware attttude w my.
ot this. When tamer Prune '“Mfa'ﬂvmﬂpp
Mtolotert’ukudaadvocatedthe brutmudlyhctsno‘
duotutlon ot tacttou and toott tndttterent
the lead to doing ao. our: Moreover.th
W NI WI tacttoo l0 my'gWr-jﬂuu
prepare tor the party tsthecatmtottoo tt
presidential chum M be mulmonu
W- some mutated t
tnordertocooevlth thls arrdts/oreedtoreou
attitude ot Prune Ithtater m to settle m
outra. Nada has revived sttoattonvouldheto
tacttonal acttvttlea. thh mm” .1
WWIWO‘ the m. For t
“W" '8 W M W necessarytorl’dmd
"Setvaltatﬁvaohoro. as the ache lat
tectton.
mcmm M the pf
rue Ltberal-Deraoerattc mﬂgﬁg
Partyhasaﬂleaduarterstor taotton to next in
WI Ito/om N Party W” m
W '“h Lop W Chlet Cabinet
0h". II the director. A m A” IS a.
"Hm W Return 0‘ W a an 56"
PortyPolIttu"haaheeuetuo “6“me"
In "I “WM lb. headed by mm.
tormerPrtmeutntsterMuda. Accordtngty. u
Stmllar to the LDP s lacttoomchestmlt
Headquarters tor Promoting that ttme the on
Reform. the Setwakat's PM (in, M!
Headquarters tor rte/om ot mumm
Party Potlttu alao haa two numb
Watt?» on When ' W a
at I: more westbound“
systemattcthananyotthe arettre Dtetmel
other: has come Into hem. In W to I. 11:
“.W‘MWhemmg sake ot alt-deft
as aparty vtthtnaparty. members W
Former Prime Mtalater Madame"
PM was at one the an solidarl
earnest advocate ot the Aﬂtntayithkha
dtsaotuttonotlacttouJVhyhaa "ﬂaw” th:
he now toned a ﬂatly-knit um“ Ohtra mu
tidbit that can be called “I ”WWW
partywtthtnapany"?
't'utatoatthebacttotthe (Therkerlsu
oprntoa expreaoed by Chtet minimum
(«nerd/oleﬁn“

COI’Yttltnt't‘: Hainlchi Daily Ncws, 1979

cso: 1.120 ,

)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100030027-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOWICAL

JAPANESE SM MM!) mans-r IN 3mm ISLANDS
neijing Radio Mention

Tokyo YOMIURI mum in Japanese 28 Jan 79 p 3 01!

[Text] Tokyo (Radio Press)--At 1815 [0315 6111‘] Japan time on 27 January,
Beijing [Peking] Radio in its progress "Various Parts of the Motherland"
introduced Taiwan under the title [beautiful and affluent Taiwan." Touch-
ing on Dieoyudao [Tiaoyutao] (the Chinese name for the Senkaku Islands),
the radio said: "Over 100 large and small islands, including the Pangbu
and Disoyudao Islands, encircle Taiwan like pearls inlaid on a tray."

manual editor's note: Concerning the question of ownership of the
Senkaku Islands, during his visit to Japan last October to attend the
signing ceremony for the Japan-Chins peace and friendship treaty, Vice
Premier Deng Xiaoping [Teng lsiso-ping] expressed the desire to tempo-
rarily shelve the issue for solution by the next generation. The 27 Janu-
ary broadcast is the fir-at official Chinese report to nention the Senksku
Islands since Deng made his reaarks. On 16 January, Transport Minister
Moriyaaa disclosed a Maritime Safety Agency plan to build a heliport in
the Senkaltu Islands. In this context, this reference to Diaoyudao by
Beijing Radio deserves our attention.)

COPYRIGHT: Youiuri Shinbunsha 1979
Japan to Build a Heliport
Tokyo ASA!!! sum in Japanese 16 Jan 79 p 1

[Excerpt] Tokyo, 16 Jan-~0n 16 Jan 79, the Ministry of Transportation
disclosed that the Maritime Safety Agency plans to build facilities that
include a heliport, a light house, and a port of shelter in the Senkaku
Islands. 'lhese facilities are to accouodate those investigators sent by
the goverment, and it will be built strictly for teaporary use. The

Transportation Minister Mariya-a stressed that the goverment has no in-
tention of building fuel storage tanks and other such facilities. Con-
sidering the persistent rough seas surrounding the island during the

6
ton ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

winter, the agency plans to start construction this spring than the ocean
calms down. The minister added that this matter has already been cleared
with the Miniltry of Foreign Affairs.

 

  
 

m at China 8

Umﬁwéw) '

. . .Miyako-Jim

... sgi aki
... :- senate-jinn

. . .Yonaguni-Jlu

IDPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Honlha 1979
:50: 4105

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i-‘utt Iii‘l‘iiZIAl. mil-1 UNLY

l‘l'I.I'I‘II1:\I. ANIl SIKIIilIJKIlC/Il.

l'l-ZRFIIRMANCI-l 0F PARTIES IN (illlII-ZRNATIIRIAI. ELECTIONS CRITIQUE”
‘I'ukyn HAiNIiZIII DAILY III-IVS lit English 7 Feb 79 p 2

Il-laliturinl: "Luv-Key Gubernatorial Iilcctlona"l

IT'"u l The seven gubernatorial elections held recently
have indicated a remarkable recovery of con-
servatlve strength. in contrast with miserable
achievements by the opposition forces. especially the
Japan Socialist Party. A similar trend was seen In
mayoral and other elections in other preleclures.

DI the seven elections (in Aomori. Alchi.
lshikawa. Kumamoto. Ehime. Nara and Yama-
nashi). the ruling party lost Yamanashl due to an
lntraparty lead which saw some oi its members
supporting an opposition candidate.

in Ehime. Aomori. Ishikawa and Kumamoto. the
Liberal-Democratic Party won elections on its own
strength. and the LDP won landslide victories In Nara
with support from the Democratic Socialist Party)
and in Alchiiwith middleoI-the-road support) .

On the contrary. the Socialist Party has sultered
“defaults" In live prelectures In the latest elections.

Such an attitude can be termed apathetic when
compared with the Japan Communist Party. which
ran its own candidates in all oi these elections. As a
result. the Socialist Party will have to iace criticism
that the No. I opposition party “does not exist" in a
sense.

Disorder in the progressive from in the guber-

natorial elections. especially the apathy oi the

Socialist Party. eliminated a sense 0! tension lrom the

election campaign. .resultiasja low IVoter umuu‘ln

many otthesepreiectures.
Ftiit in-‘ICIAI. IISH "NLY

In Ehime. Nara and Aomori. voting rates Were
the lowest in the history oi gubernatorial elections
there. In mayoral elections in Rita-Kyushu and
Tottori held Sunday. new records ior low voter turn-
outs were reported. Except tor the Yamanashl
gubernatorial election. which was believed to have
been rather heated. the tendency toward lower voting
rates was seen in many local elections.

in some areas. candidates have been elected
without competition because they gained supra-
partisan supports. The Shiga gubernatorial election
held last year was an example. A total oi 69 mayors.
or 36 percent oi the total. were elected without
competition last year. and six out oi l9 mayors were
also chosen this way in January oi this year.

Under the prolonged economic recession and
financial straits. local autonomles under progressive
leaders have encountered many diiiicultics. and the
distinction between progressive and conservative
local autonomic: has blurred. We do not believe.
however. that a rapid increase in the number oi local
autonomous heads chosen uncontested is a welcome
trend tor the healthy development at local autonomy.

it is oiten said that we are now living in an “era oi
local autonomy." indicating the importance oi in-
creased participation by the people in local ad-
ministration. ln spite at that. we have witnessed an
abnormal trend in recent elections. The heaviest
responsibility ior causing such a trend must be born
by political parties. which must protect local
autonomy. .

The Liberal-Democratic Party. .in supporting a
candidate who enjoys backing irom the Communist
Party. and the Socialist Party. in not iielding Its own
candidates. are jointly responsible ior these apathetic
local elections.

We call tor local elections in which plural can.
didates. with practical policies to cope with local
administration. will vie in winning support irom the
voters.

We hope that the opposition lorces. especially the
Socialist Party. will not engage in iutlle ideological
conirontation. and will clearly show their anti-
Liberal-Democratle Party stances while engaging in
daily activities aimed at true local autonomy. and in
educating their members who will assume leading
positions intheiuture.

9
For «wrrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The opposition lorceo' Men that conservative-
, prom“ «mum would not!» named to local
'Immm Weapon with the comet-vulva
Jamar um {lut- Iaunutonomy must be «may
5 macaw iuuﬁiul poiltlcl.

A! long as such l concept In accepted. the
progressive ton-cu will Iteadlly Me elections. In the
uniﬁed local elections In April. some 2,700th will
new. Intworomdnolvoung. Wobopoum
"both the Ubeeromocnuc Party and the W
pal-tin will «mostly wpuue with 009mm.

nlnlchl Daily News. 1979

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL ANDSOCIOLDOICAL

JPS REPORTS ON JCP CENTRAL OOHMITTEE PLENUM 6'7 FEB

Tokyo JPS in English 0850 GMT 7 Feb 79 ON

[Text] Tokyo. 7 Feb (JPs)--The sixth Central Committee Plenum of the
Japanese Comauniet Party ended on 7 February. After the two-day session
the Central Committee Secretariat issued that day a communique "0n the
Sixth Central Committee Plenum." the communique says: (GIST)

The plenum was opened by Sanzo Nosaka. chairman of the Central Cos-ittee.

At the beginning of the session. Presidium Chairman Kenji Hiyamoto gave a
speech of greetings and spoke on behalf of the presidium.

On behalf of the presidium. chief of the secretariat Tetsuzo Fuwa presented
the party work report on party activity since the Fifth Plenum and on
immediate tasks. He also explained the decisions of the presidium on the
promotion of the drive for victory in the simultaneous local elections,

centering on the three tasks, including the expansion of the organ paper
readership.

In the plenum. deliberation was held on the presidium chairman's address.
the secretariat chief's party work report and the decisions of the presidium.

After the discussions. Presidium Chairman Kenji Hiyamoto made concluding
remarks in the name of the presidium. The plenum unanimously approved
Presidium Chairman Hiyamoto's speech delivered at the beginning of the
session, the party work report. the decisions of the presidium and the
concluding remarks.

In the plenum. Vice-Presidium Chairman Tomio Nishizawa made a report on
current international problems. “is report was unanimously approved.

The plenum unanimously adopted a resolution "let us take the lead in the

struggle for counterattscks on the reactionary policies of the Ohira
cabinet."

The plenum unanimously adopted a statement. "legislation on the imperial
era name runs counter to people's sovereignty and culture."

680: 6120 11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

'YOHIURI' POLL SHWS PUBLIC SUPPORTS OIIIM CABINET
Tokyo Th8 DAILY YOHIURI in English 27 Jan 79 p 1 0"

[Text] The ohira cabinet had a bl.6 percent rate of support in a YOHIURI
SHINBUN survey conducted on 20-21 January throughout the country.

This is about the sane support rate that the Hiki cabinet. which was foraed
when Kakuei Tanaka stepped down after a aonetary scandal in 1975 had when
his government was newly Earned.

According to the survey conducted on 3.000 people selected at random

throughout the country. nonsupporters of the Ohira cabinet amounted to
31.5 percent.

Past rates of support and nonsupport at the start of former cabinets are
as follows.

The Sato cabinet foraed in 1964 had 33.2 percent for and 16.6 percent
against. Tanaka cabinet in 1972 60.5 percent and 9.1 percent. Niki cabinet
in 1975 62.5 percent and 27.2 percent, and Pukuda cabinet in 1977 27.3 per-
cent and 38.0 percent.

1he Fukuda cabinet. predecessor of the Ohira cabinet, had a rate of non-
support always larger than the rate of support in Yoaiuri shilbun surveys.

Among supporters of the Ohira cabinet. 2A.6 percent of then said they support
it because it is a Liberal-Deaocratic Party (LOP) govern-eat while 19 percent
said they like Ohira.

Only 7 percent and 3.6 percent of then nentioned respectively support for
the economic policy and diploaatic policy of the Ohira cabinet.

Regarding the reasons for nonsupport. 29 percent replied they can expect

nothing fro. this governaent and 17.5 percent expressed their dissatisfaction
with its economic policy.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As the most urgent matters to be tackled by the Ohira cabinet in the
domestic field. 55.7 percent replied the stability of prices. and restor-
ing the econony followed with 64.3 percent.

Diplomatically. efforts by the government for international currency sta-
bility was listed as the most urgent matter with 33.3 percent. while
development of Japan-China friendship took second most urgent position
with 29.5 percent.

Asked about their support for political parties. 63.4 percent listed the
LDP. 10.7 percent the Socialist Party (JSP). 3.6 percent the Kemeito, 2.6
percent the Democratic-Socialist Party (USP), 2.5 percent the Communist
Party (JCP). 1.6 percent the new Liberal club (NLc). and 0.2 percent the
United Social Democratic Party (080).

when these rates are compared with the result of a survey in November last
year. the supporting rates for the LDP, Komoito and the JCP increased
slightly while the other parties had a setback in support.

Imperial Era Bill

Asao Mihara. director-general of the administrative management agency. said
Friday the government would submit a bill for numbering years by names of
eras to the Diet 2 February.

thara told newsmen the government did not want the bill to be an issue
between the ruling and opposition parties.

Opposition parties oppose the proposed legislation on grounds it suggests
the rule of the nation by the enperor.

Government officials said the wording of the bill would be revised to avoid
the impression of imperial rule of the nation.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri shinbunaha, 1979
C50: 4120

13
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIOOICAL

'NAINICNI' COMMENTS ON FIRST LOP CONVENTION UNDER ONIRA

Tokyo NAINXCHI DAILY news in English 26 Jan 79 p 2 0"
[Editorial: "LC? Convention]

[Text] The Liberal-Democratic Party has held its first party convention
under the leadership of Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira. The new action
policy adopted at the convention emphasized "politics based on trust and
consensus." Regarding practical measures, the action policy called for

an "expansion of the party membership to three million." "active imple-
mentation of dialogue with persons in regional areas," and "creation of a
Japanese-style welfare society based on a comfortable life." Such contents
reflect the way of thinking of Prime Minister Ohira.

in his report at the convention, Party Secretary General Kunikichi Saito
emphasized the recent achievements of the ruling party-the election of
the party president by 1.5 million regular and associate members; favor-
able results for the party in the election of local prefectural heads; and
restoration of the LDP's popularity in various public polls.

Isn't it a bit too early for the party to openly rejoice in this favorable
trend, which some party officials term a "restoration of conservatism" in
Japan? Judging from the series of failures in local elections by the
progressive camp, the "restoration" seems to be apparent. It is also clear
that the LDP demonstrated its vitality by winning over a large number of
party members. Nevertheless, we still do not believe that the "favorable"
trend means an active public'trust and support for the ruling party.

It appears that the public supported conservative candidates in local elec-
tions in an effort to seek a relative stability in this age of uncertainty.
highlighted by the prolonged economic recession. At the same time, the
public obviously lost confidence in weak or unreliable opposition parties.
The public has not forgotten the plutocratic predisposition or corrupt struc-
ture of the party which was exposed in the Lockheed scandal.

Under such circumstances, one item of urgency is that the LDP must do its

utmost for party purification and reformation. Another concern is that it
must earnestly respond to the people's needs and concentrate its energy on
party activities in anticipation of new public demands.

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We understand that as a political party. the LDP must win as many party
members as possible. because with the expansion of its strength. the party
can win more elections and gain stronger financial backing. it is some-
times said that the party could win a membership of three or even four mil-
lion because of the strenuous efforts of respective intrapnrty factions to
win as many faction members as possible.

we do not believe that a mere expansion of party membership is a welcome
phenomenon for the party. We do not think that an over-reliance of numeri-
cal strength will lead to a strengthening of the party. It is recalled that
during the campaign to increase the party membership last year. names of
five-year-old children and in some extreme cases, names of cats and other
pets were reportedly registered in the membership lists.

We do believe that an increase in the number of select members will

strengthen the party structure and assist the expansion of party activities
from a long-range viewpoint.

Current activities by factions to increase their membership may harm the

party. and could be interpreted as a power struggle aimed at winning leader-
ship in the party presidential election in the fall of 1980. There is also
the possibility of a split in party opinion as was seen in the disputes over

the revision of the constitution and also on the enactment of laws to cope
with emergencies in the defense of Japan.

Some liberal-democrats adhere to the view that the life of a government
can be prolonged as long as it does nothing. but such a way of thinking
would delay the possible reformation of the party.

President Ohira earlier assumed the chairmanship of the "party reform
promotion headquarters," which will examine the management of the party or
rules on the party presidential election. The group will lose its substance.
however. if it pays too much attention to each faction's opinion.

we believe that President Ohira will do his utmost for party reform by
demonstrating his leadership and putting aside any possible desire to
remain in his post as long as possible. The public hopes that each LDP
member will improve his sense of ethics for the "purification" of the party.

COPYRICNT: Hainichi Daily News. 1979

C50: 6120

15
roe orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASAﬂI' URGES GOING SLO" 0N 'IHPERIAL ERA NAHE' BILL

Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEWS in English 7 Feb 79 p 2 0H
|Editorial: "'CBNGO' System Bill")

[Text] The government has presented to parliament a bill for the "GENGO"
(imperial era name) system which it is feared will create confrontation
between the ruling Liberal-Democratic Party and the opposition parties in
the current Diet. The bill is to give legal endorsement to the GBNGO
system and ensure that it continues.

However. there are intense arguments for and against legalizing the GENGO
system. among the political parties. the Japan Socialist Party and the
Japan Communist Party are opposed to the legislation, claiming that it
"deviates from the spirit of the constitution which says that sovereign
power resides with the people." There are many who are sympathetic to
these parties. It cannot be said that the move to legalize the system has
national concurrence as its foundation. He cannot agree to the attempt to
reach a conclusion in a hurry at such a stage.

The CENGO problem was raised about the time the emergency legislation question
was brought up by the Fukuda cabinet. Strong concern arose among the people
over the way the question was raised and the direction indicated by the

Fukuda Government. which failed to consider the change in the times and the
diverse opinions of the people. In this respect. the efforts made by the
government in connection with the bill to aim for a wider agreement. by
avoiding use of the expression "Issei Ichigen" (one era name for one reign),
which has been deemed the cause of confrontation. indicate the posture of
Prime Minister Ohira. who is hoisting "government through agreement" as his
”ECO.

However, there are virtually no major alterations in the bill, although
much ingenuity has been exerted in its wording. The bill says that the
era name "shall be changed only in case there is a succession to the

_ 16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imperial throne," but this is putting "lssei lchigen“ in another way. It
will not eliminate the contention that the legislation does not meet the
spirit of the constitution which provides that sovereign power resides with
the people.

The government explains that the "era name will be used by the state and
local public entities but will not be forced on the people." It says that
it will consider ways that will not lead to compulsion. even in cases where
people object to inscribing the era name on documents at public office
counters. pointing out that it will not be so different from the present.
However. when we think that laws generally are binding in nature. we cannot
say that there is no fear that the proposed law will be pressed on the
people.

Unless backed by national consent. the era system will not continue in a
practical sense. even if it is decided by law. From this standpoint, those
concerned should be cautious about legislation. Without the maturing of
nationwide discussion. it is not a question that should be left exposed in
the arena of factional strife within the L0? and of confrontation between
political parties.

He say this because the CENGJ system exerts an influence far and wide,

from the present to the future. over the daily life of the people. their
social consciousness. their view of values and Japanese culture that will

be passed on to the next generation. Problems should not be left for the
next generation by legalizing the 03360 system. The problems of culture
that are created age by age do not primarily adapt themselves to legislation.

We feel that. by keeping the change in the times and the change in genera-
tion in mind, we should take time and ascertain the direction the ssuco
question will take. after being picked from diverse choices, before it
settles down. -

Hhat we should be aware of on that occasion are that Japan's adaptation to
international society will be sought increasingly and that the GENGO system
will find its place as a "factual custom." Accordingly. one of the
conceivable prudent choices is the nurturing of a common-age consciousness
by introducing the christian era system-~which is coamonly in use through-
out the world--more in daily life and in the official area and at the same
time using the GBNGO. with which the people have been familiar, in combina-
tion in a natural form.

A "gentle decision" on the GENCO by cabinet notification is possible. Ulti-
mately. the matter could be left to the judgment of a new generation who
have no specific image concerning eras, such as Meiji. Taisho and Shows.

We repeat that we want those concerned to consider the GENGO issue from
historical and international viewpoints in a quiet atmosphere. It cannot
be said yet that the time for that has fully ripened.

COPYRIGRT: Asahi shinbun Tokyo honsha, 1979

17
080: 6120 ron orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

REPORT ON JCP CﬂAIRNAN HIYAHOTO'S SPEECH AT CC PLENUM

Opening Remarks

Tokyo JPS in English 0910 GMT 7 Feb 79 0"

[Text] Tokyo. 7 Feb (JPs)--Kenji Hiysmoto, chairman of the Presidium of
the Japanese Communist Party. gave an address and opening speech at the
Sixth Plenum of the Central Committee of the party, which began on

6 February in Tokyo.

Chairman Miyamoto first said that the aim of the plenum is "to elucidate
main characteristics of the situation and set out tasks after the Ohira
cabinet came to office, and also to elaborate policies for the forthcoming
simultaneous local elections and giro ourselves for victory."

Commenting on the stand of the Ohira cabinet on the investigation into the
aircraft payoff scandals, Chairman Hiyamoto assured again that "a Liberal
Democratic Party government is a reactionary and corrupt government."

Failing to show any countermeasures to overcome the critical economic crisis,
and playing up such abstract phrases as "welfare society of Japanese style,"
the Ohira cabinet is trying to impose low welfare and heavy burdens on the
people, thus proving itself to be "a government destroying the family infra-
structure," said Hiyamoto.

0n the issue of legislation on the imperial era name. Chairman Hiyamoto
denounced the two lies told by the government that "the public wants it"
and that "it is not compulsory." Chairman Miyamoto shed light on the role
being played by the Komei and Democratic Socialist Parties and the New
Liberal Club. which stand for the legislation of the imperial era name. thus
facilitating the reactionary designs.

After referring to party conventions held in January by some political
parties, Chairmen Hiya-oto analysed the so-called recent "recovery of the
conservatives" situation. He concluded that this is not essential [as
received] in history. He elucidated the significance of the formation of
a broad democratic consensus to make a breakthrough from this situation.

18
so: omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this context Chairman Miyamoto pointed out the actual, up—to-date
significance of the arrangement between the Communist Party and Sokagakkai

(a Buddhist religious organization--ed) as part of this national consensus.
Although this agreement has been kept from coming into full play due to the
obstruction created by the Komci Party and the confusion among the

Sokagakkai leadership, the following points agreed upon in the agreement,
that is, "peace and a total ban on nuclear weapons" and "defense of democracy
and against fascism," are correct in the past and at present and will be part
of the national consensus in future.

0n the recent international situation, Chairman Hiyamoto first stressed

that on the Cambodia problem, the party center of the Japanese Communist
Party has taken steps including expression of solidarity with the Cambodian
National United Front for National Salvation and the new government, on the
basis of a correct judgment after investigation and analysis of the situation,
including on-the-spot investigation by AKAHATA correspondents there. Chair-
man Miyamoto criticized the Japanese Government for lack of independent
judgment, as it could not show any ground for the allegation of "Vietnam
being involved." Citing facts, Hiyamoto elucidated the reason why the Pol

Pot regime collapsed so quickly.

0n the recent tension between China and Vietnam on the border. JCP Presidium
Chairman Hiyamoto stressed the importance of the proposal made on 5 February
by the JCP to the government that the government should urge Deng Ziaoping
{Teng hsiao-ping], visiting Chinese Vice Premier, to settle the tension by
negotiations. Pointing out that the cruel administration by the Pol Pot
regime and the situation created by the "Great Cultural Revolution" in
China--which run counter to the idea of socialism--have been used in anti-
communist attacks, Hiyamoto said that problems of socialism and reality
should be elucidated more deeply, based on the viewpoint set out in the

16th Party Congress of the Japanese Communist Party, that is, that "socialism
is in the era of creation."

0n the problem of relations between the Japanese Communist Party and the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the JCP presidium chairman referred to
the issue of the recently reported USSR military bases on Kunashiri and
Etorofu Islands. saying that the JCP will make public its own independent
view and also submit a draft resolution to the Diet. 0n the territorial
question, Hiyamoto clarified the antipeople nature of article 2, clause C,
is the only course to pave the way for the return to Japan of the whole of
Chishima Islands, including Kunashiri and Btorofu Islands.

Chairman Hiyamoto said that the fact that the improvement of relations
between the communist parties of Japan and the Soviet Union is being dis-
cussed does not mean that the Japanese Communist Party will shelve the terri-
torial issue. On the Shiga clique problem, Chairman Hiyamoto said that the
Shiga clique, a holdover from the interference (by the CPSU--ed), has already
degraded to a very tiny group, and thus the Japanese people have already
handed down a judgment, but it constitutes even today obstruction on the way
of improving relations between the communist parties of Japan and the Soviet
Union. The relations cannot advance so long as this issue is left unsolved,
the JCP presidium chairman said. [JPS says "to be continued"]
19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusion of Speech
Tokyo JPS in English 0917 GHT 8 Feb 79 OH

("Chairman Hiyamoto's speech in Sixth cc plenum (continued, second and
final part)"--JPs headline]

[Text] Tokyo. 8 Feb (JPS)--0n the local elections, Chairman Hiyamoto said
the JCP now holds 3,305 seats in local assemblies. the highest number in the
party‘s records. The base of the pyramidal organization is being consoli-
dated. In the off-year elections last year. the JCP increased its assembly
seats by 76, an achievement surpassing that of other parties, and in the
achievements since January this year the JCP increased 10 seats, competing

with the Liberal Democratic Party for the top, and raising the people's
hopes in the JCP.

As to the tasks in the simultaneous local elections, Chairman Miyamoto
raised two points: 1) To increase the number of communist assemblymen;

2) to win victories in the elections of heads of lacal governments.
Referring to the recent seven gubernatorial elections, Chairman Miyamoto
said the characteristic features in them are that except for in the elec—
tion battle in Ishikawa Prefecture, the Japan Socialist Party lost its
fighting spirit and did not contribute sincere efforts for the unity of the
progressive forces. Consequentky, only the JCP stood firmly against the
conservative forces. challenging their reactionary politics. Hiyamoto than
stressed the significance of adherence to the progressive cause.

Chairman Miyamoto referred to the recent party heads conference between the
communist and the socialist parties. Referring to the metropolitan Tokyo
gubernatorial election, he said that the JcP has insisted on holding a meet-
ing of the association for a bright and progressive metropolitan administra-
tion as soon as possible, to discuss the recommendation of a candidate and
the question of a policy agreement. 0n the arguments for reorganization of
the association or for changing its name, being advanced in a new guise,
Chairman Miyamoto said they are the most tenuous and irresponsible arguments
aimed at undoing the gains made in past struggles... they should be brought
forward on the meeting floor of the association to be discussed.

(m the Osaka gubernatorial election. Chairman Hiyamoto said that candidate
Sukae Kishi, backed by the reactionary forces of the LDP, the Komei and

the Democratic Socialist parties, is a possessor of extremely conservative
inclination who had supported the Self-Defense Forces by taking the position
of an adviser of the "Association To Understand the SDF." He said that it
is clearly impossible for the JSP, which stands for unarmed neutrality,

to support him.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chairman Hiyamoto stressed the marked significance of the fifth central
committee plenum, which indicated the way for a new advance by discussing
the fundamental question of the leadership to fresh and invigorate (?the
original) intention and good will of all party members. Chairman Hiyamoto
explained the advances and problems in party activities since the fifth
central committee plenum, including: 1) The introvement in party activities
in the student branches, and the movements of the Democratic Youth League of
Japan and of (?defying) bureaucracy and centralism; 2) the advance in educa-
tional activities; 3) the expansion of the AKAhATA readership since the turn
of the year, and the founding of the periodical PUBLIC SQUARE FOR FEMALES;
and 6) the distribution of pamphlets to fight dirty anticommunist attacks.

By the end of January, the circulation of AKAEATA increased by 70,000 copies,
and the clean-up pamphlets rebuffing the anticommunist attacks by renegade
Satomi hakamadi and others have sold 1,350,000 copies since the fifth central
committee plenum. breaking the level of 5,000,000 copies in all. the chairman
reported. He said further that steps have been taken to increase the
distribution of these pamphlets to meet requirements, taking into account

the fixed number of votes to be obtained in the local elections.

In conclusion, Chairman Miyamoto called on the plenum to achieve a new

height in the simultaneous local elections, and to make continual advances
in the national election expected to be held in the autumn.

C80: 4120

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLNICAL

BRIEFS

JM'AN-SRV FRIENDSIIIP ASSOCIATION-John. S Pebn‘l'he Japan-Vietnam Friend-
ship Association held a standing director meeting on 3 February. confirming
the further strengthening of the movement for solidarity with the Vietnamese
people. The meeting particularly discussed the "new political climate of
nnti-Vietnan. anti-conunist and anti-socialist campaigns carried on by the
Japanese forces of reaction. who are availing themselves of the Cathodian
issue and other issues." The Ieeting decided to actively carry on the
following activities: 1) to make known the truth of the Cambodian issue to
the Japanese people; 2) to oppose the Japanese Govern-eat, which is attempt-
ing to freeze Japan's econooic aid to Vietnas by availing itself of
demagoguery on the Casbodian issue and other issues. [Text] [Tokyo JPS in
English 0900 cm 5 Feb 79 09)

cso: 4120

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

PRC "ANTS JAPANESE INTERMEDIARIES FOR TRADE HlTn TAIHAN
Tokyo NleAN KOGYO SHlNaUN in Japanese 3 Feb 79 p 1

[Text] with PRC Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping's visit to the
United States. the chances for peacefully moving toward
reunification with Taiwan have improved. According to in-
formation from informed sources on 2 February. PRC gov-
ernment personnel have requested Japanese trading com-
panies to try to connect a pipeline between PRC and
Taiwan. Specifically. it is said that Nissho lwai was
asked about a relay trade to handle exports of Taiwanese
chemical products and raw materials to the PRC. This
move. it seems. is based on a decision that. although
normalization of Sino-American relations has created a
political framework for reunification with Taiwan. it
would be appropriate and would promote reunification if
the PRC. as a moderately developed country. were to pro-
ceed with China's internal task of the four moderniza-
tions by making use of the strength of Taiwan's remark-
ably developed economy and not by relying only on the
economic strength of Japan and the United States.

Taiwan chemical products have been produced by a national company (China
Petrochemicals) with the technical cooperation of the very large American
firm UCC (Union Carbide). Consequently. these products are of high quality
and are cost competitive. This. it seems. is the reason for the PRC
request.

The PRC is buying petrochemical related equipment in the form of equipment

to break down ethylene and facilities to handle derived products. Immense
plants capable of producing as much as 1.6 million tons yearly have been pur-
chased from Japanese and European makers; but. even after their completion.
these plants are expected to be operating no earlier than 1982. There is.
consequently. a growing need for Taiwan products which have surplus export
capability.

23
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the long term trade agreement. the relative importance of equipment for
the Shanghai-Baoshen steel mill and setters related to petrochemicals have
overshadowed all else in business talks on plants. The Baoshan steel mill

is scheduled to be conpleted in 1980 at the earliest; and. as e stopgep
measure. the volume of Japan's steel exports to the PRC exceeded the volume
oi exports to the United States. This background. too. seems to lend impetus
to business talks of this kind. but Nissho lwai has taken a cautious approach.
saying that ”there are still many questions unresolved." They recognize. how-
ever, that the PRC's needs are growing and they do not deny that positive
developments in business negotiations could be possible if only an objective
situation is established. It is said that footholds not only for Taiwan
exports to the PRC but for PRC exports to Taiwan as well have been started
aeong the ethnic Chinese in Kong Kong and that Japanese firms have also been
asked to cooperate in this. Reportedly. not only Nissho lwai but other
trading coapsnies as well have been sounded out on a relay for electronics.
steel and other things in which Taiwan is strong. Among Japanese economic
circles as a whole there is a very hopeful feeling that it would be delight-
ful to be able to contribute to a thaw between the PRC and Taiwan and. there-
fore. the spotlight is on the people of Taiwan to see which way they will go.

COPYRIGHT: Rikhan Kogyo Shinbunsha. 1979

9111
CSO: 6105

EB
'03 OFYICIAL USE ONLY
I'ZHINIIN I (?

I-‘tIII lII-‘I"I(I|l\|. IIECI-Z IINIX

NI'I’I SAVES "AL-JAPAN 'I'RAIIF. TREND RHVHRSIN“

‘l‘ukyu MMNlttlll DAILY NI-MS In English 9 Fol) 79 |! 3

I'l‘t-xt I

mine.- mm We
saw with the Wild sum
laud a um 311.57:
million In calendar)?» in 0
mm W cm the man
million am In 1m 139
yarniiu and: W villi
Japan. mu with Wet
mkwmmmu.s..
k W to tile Imitation at
American.

And nor. it ovum-1w I!
mammimdlllm
oi criticism - w Jim
and?! it and to the «hide
arid; the novemmt is
Int-in: a "buy Japanese

allay".- mm are
mum melamine
Walton.

But the (mm nmlly
W by the Ministry at
lnimtlotnl M.” It»
Mammmmtwanw
tuwmwlintllymln
int-Wmttmdm
manned”! UM
Sula. Japan's Import: new
rule mt: ion-led all. or
even mm on m an-
tnvmtalittmmtuuta.
Waundlmwsavl.

'ﬂlsbthepolatnnnito
mmmmm

all the W m cir-
«MNMWWM
melanoma-um:
hmmwaummm
manila-immunity“!
WWan"uH
a top niacin! 0! mm to-
thmm

1»: Win: are mm
M tum mutt m.
"The Mutant mat-
Willi as.” In at: mt. um
«Mme-yum
in the pollen oi Japan-11.3
trade an: m the last

quarter a! m: (Mour-
W).

W

t mew». 034w
ma

sumwmnoummnu
We that that Japan‘s
"pails to the 08‘ MM
stagnated. while Japan‘s in-
ports icon the us. have
studtly mm. This ten-
dency but become more

Wmabym.

:. W at Jw‘n Ex-
pub

The me ot lama: oi
dwnpottstotheus..lo
Imus M yon. to: gradually
act-um; the me: at mm»
in the 3rd quartet (July-
.‘ t and «u mm
mew-December) cm a

y." m m 0. $13.”.

“n.3'1’1I-u. o..m‘tu~
o . n:

cmlatemsoius.“
will W walla “the one
tntcmotmeScetnkti

:. lama: 0t Jon's m
m u

Japan's twat: [tom the

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

US have tron sit-ad") in-
cteuha: h tun at us.
«mumumm
mmmatmmtm
a yet: on m 0 want.
uceedtnathenteotm
outpatimuinthcum
periodJSceubtm

t.Jw’tMMM
To 0.8. Computed Itth
mm

CW: lb! ma oi
Japan's trade with the US. with
that In the W m.
Jm‘tmuttemdus.
muhawduttyw.
0n the out" hand. Juan's
tum have ﬁnally it:-
«Minmmm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m". Japan'a BaianceolPamenia (anon-MM)

   
   

\~

" l H mm W, , l n m.

Japan'a‘h‘ada Balancevilh ihe 0.8. imam-teal

anec-

 

the .w quarter and me «n
quarter. mu. Japan'a cavern
lo ihr us. have already been
increased remartahly. (See
law-:0

5. US IWade Raina m
Japan

1?: deﬁcit oi ihe US. trade
balance will: Japan in um and
ms was $10 bllllon and $11.6
bllllon. reapecilvely iU.S.
SIIIBUK‘S). iiouever. the deficit
iseasonally adiusied) has
demasedalneeinendquuer
at me. and the monthly deficits
decreased in m million in
Oeiober. £655 million in
November. and rm mlllion In
December

 

ii lbe exchange rain oi the
yen miml ihe us. dollar ia
stabiliutht-deﬂdioiiheus.
trade balance with Japan will
decllne remarkably. See table
a»

0. lucraaae Oi Japan'a
WMMW

(I) Toeeiher ulih Ihe rapid
Increase oi Japan's imports
imn ihe US. ii: hum oi

~U.S.maaldacmedmodahave

slmiﬂeanlly increased. Ae-
mm. the rule 0! import;

oi manlﬂadured mods 10 the
imporuhaariaen. (SeeiabIeSI

:2! The increase oi
manulnerured mods haa ap
pared in a wide run oi
www.mm

2")

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

__"/

and iniermedu

eapeeialiy heavy
machinery. wear
equipmenl. iumlll
chemicals. and sou
6)

in) A: ihe rale oi
Japan‘s total in:
mania-timed no:
higher ihan um oi
from the 05.. the a
manuiaeiured goo
J a p a n e a e I In
manufacturedpod

This iaci indlca
possibiliiy [or lhe
iher expand the a:
manuiadured no:
Japanese market i
FUN (II’FICIAI. "SIC UNI."

J 'um “minnows.
mammamm)

 

v
um um— mamm nun
van-vaun- '4' «Mum-nu 0-
u}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘I‘ohlol: nmumuaw‘smuw03 over.
yuruotmu: '

M .MQ‘.“ .00 .

Emmmamocvoom us as an an
5:ch Runyon/dollar) (B) a 30 3 a

E .Intermot . ...-.. ..n .
«Mn"Mufﬁuﬁmntﬂabr’5n?“ . .. i1

fall“: mumdlw'oMod Woven
nonpumn

ms: mumouw'numwmmm
musmmuuswmmmmmmm:

«Myanmar»
lot ..I .au .0. .
Expo“ ........ z: ...... ........... 10% dS 1% 01$
Import ----1 1' I: ll
mammumoumumumu.s.mum)
Export .............................. In IS IS
1mm .............................. 4 M I
TIN. G: humansmmmmum:
(Wyoﬂmwwmﬂym)
«bosom»

Idl. 81.“! (06.) (Nov) (003.)

1.3 8.. 2.. 0407 O.“ 0.7]

mszmmuaw°smuuu.s.m

: ' - " mum-w
I I'll"! mu mo III

MC.) (0. I.)

amumotm

Woman-rm 2 s I? a 03
Rmoﬂocm '
“WM ll C 27 3 $3
mamoymop

Ruloolmmmm

Immobloullnoom :II 3 0 do _4:I

mo: Mala locum MM inputs have My
memo“. (1|:deth 0.3. warmth:

II mmdlﬂunumradm):

can“ M“ mm
Telecommunication “MW Noam

Immanums m ......... as teal: ......... m
Alma“ ------- 5' mum ...... 01 0W
. mu ..... 5|
Integrated am ....... so Wm
circuit: ........ «7 W
m ....... a
Shadow:
mam Wm? ....... Q7 Wm‘im”
Electric “no.” a
“Whig Mal
mm...aa gloom ....... 23
Schumamedkll. um
“W W" 05
....... MW")?
26

FOR OFFICIAL L63 W
Tablﬂzﬂmtemquu'sldemm:

m an mu
Ruled mm o! mum
M Immoral”:
(warm ........................... ”min 0% M
{menus ......................... ..........ll 4 .
Shana the Imago! 0.8. Macaw
mnemmu
memunmm ......... ......:B til at

«mmwmmum.mmuu
Mmmnlllpmldul.)

lniclnl Dally New». I979

239
you ormcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ECONOMIC

'mINICIll': JAPAN comma ABOUT PRC TRADE POLICY
'l'oltyo HAMCIII sum in Japanese 22 Feb 79 morning edition p 7 09

[Text] A govern-ant source on 21 February disclosed that a subtle change
has come about in China‘s attitude toward trade with Japan. This is evi-
denced by the virtual suspension of the large-scale trade negotiations on
exporting equipment for Shanghai's Bsoshsn steel complex. China had been
very eager to import steel mill equipment from Japanese firms . mainly the
Nippon Steel Corporation. The Ministry of International Trade end Industry
[run] and foreign ministry officials are maintaining contact with Japanese
companies in order to determine the Chinese intentions and reasons for any
change. If the change has been brought about by a foreign currency short-
age resulting from increased imports of war neterisledua to tense Sine-
Vietnemese relations, the Chinese banking delegation led by Niu Xuani.
manager of the international department of the People's Bank of China, is
expected to give a clue to the change when it arrives for talks in Japan
on 22 Pebruary. Therefore, Japanese officials are interested in the dele-
gation'e visit to Japan and its attitude in the coming talks.

According to the same government source, China has suddenly suspended im-
port negotiations or has become less eager about signing trade contracts
for the following projects:

1. Port cargo facilities, harbor transportation facilities, the oxygen
generating plant for the Shanghai Baoshsn steel complexuto be exported by
the Japan Steel Corporation.

2. Equipment for the 'l‘sngshsn power plent--to be exported by Hitachi Ltd.

3. A cement planto-to be exported by Ishikswajima-~llarims Heavy Industries
Company.

’0. Coal aining cooperation projects sought by Japanese coal companies.
The government source said, "according to Japanese firms, since early Febru-

ary, China has suddenly become less enthusiastic about negotiations for
Japanese imports. On 17 January in Tokyo, the Chinese delegation virtually

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
suspended negotiations with the Japan Petroleum Company on the development
of undersea petroleum deposits in the Bohni Gulf. This occurred a short
time before an agreement was to be initialed. The Chinese negotiating team
said. "No are returning home upon the instructions from the home government.
He do not know when the negotiations will resume." Commenting on this de-
velopment. the government source said, "The negotiations were nearing the
initialing stage. The only outstanding problem was Japan's conditions for
financing. Re are surprised by the sudden change in the Chinese attitude.
This is not in keeping with international practice."

MIT! and foreign ministry officials have nade the following interpretation
of China's complete change in policy.

1. China is correcting its overreliance on Japan in the wake of the normal-
ization of Sine-0.8. relations.

2. China is trying to apply political pressure because of Japan's reluctance
to advance export loans to China.

3. China is using cash to import urgent war materials, creating a fund
shortage for the import of nonwar materials and equipment. This in turn
has suppressed imports from Japan. These officials will make a further
analysis of the development later.

China's foreign exchange reserve is reportedly about $2.5 billion, of which
81.5 billion will be used to settle import accounts due this year, including:
1) $700 million due to European countries and Japan carried forward from
last year and 2) an $800 million down payment for $3.7 billion worth of im-
port contracts signed under the Japan-Chine long-term trade agreement last
year.

Thus, our foreign exchange banks have firmed up a plan to advance a $2
billion syndicated loan to the People's Bank of China under the following
conditions:

1. A handling charge of 0.625 to 0.5 percent per annum will be added to
the interest (approximately 12 percent a year), which is equivalent to the
interest rate on 3-month loans in the Euromarket.

2. The People's Bank of china will be the borrower and the term will be
for 5 to 7 years.

3. China will use this loan to pay for imports.

Not only exchange bank authorities but also government officials and busi-
ness firms are interested in the talks with the Chinese banking delegation
which is due here on 22 February because the delegation's attitude in the
talks is expected to shed light on the reasons behind the virtual suspension
of trade negotiations and on China's future attitude toward Japan.

OOPYRIGRT: Hainichi Shinbunsha 1979

CSO: 6105 31
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOKIC

KANSAI WHO PWER SURVEY ON PROSPst TO YEAR 2000
Nature and Results of Survey
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHINE!" in Japanese 9 Jan 79 p 8

[Text] Kansai Electric Power (president: Shoichiro
Kobayashi) conducted an opinion poll of a group of

207 "noncompany intellectuals” consisting principally
of men of experience and learning living in the Kinki
[Osaka-Q0130] area. The findings of the survey which
queried Predicted Social Conditions to Year 2000" were
finalized on the 8th.

The survey which was carried out late last year is intended to serve as the
basis for putting together a "long-range plan" on what Kansai Electric Power
and the electric utility industry should be like by the 2m; Century. Recog-
nizing that "the company is a member of society" (president Kobayashi) the
perspectives of noncompany intellectuals on presmned conditions were sought.

The survey concluded that the year 2000 will see such changes as increased
leisure and a more important role for third parties such as consumers and
local society in labor-management relations. Nevertheless, the outlook is
generally “optimistic," forecasting continued steady economic growth at a
rate of about 10.7 percent (between the years 1975 and 2000), with investment
in the living environment providing the impetus for economic development.

A: to the topic of energy, conservation is expected to total only about 10
percent, and in the supply of energy the era of massive and highly advanced
fossil fuel and atomic energy technology (hard path) is expected to continue.

The survey covered six items: (1) the international and domestic litieal
and economic structure; (2) shifts in the social consciousness; (g) shifts
in employee consciousness and ﬁxture labor-management relations; (h) the
mture "vision” for the Kinki area; (5) energy develoment; (6) the elec-
tric power industry.

Under item 1, 1&7 percent of those surveyed gave investment in the living
environment, such as public and housing investment, as the prime mover in

32
you osncm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economic development. Concerning Japanese economic relations with Europe
and America, most anticipate no basic change, with 58 percent predicting
an increase in naneconomic exchanges in such areas as culture, etc.

With respect to item 2, an overshelming majority point to an increase in
leisure, 55 percent anticipating sumsr vacations of 0.5 month. On the
other hand, with respect to item 3, while foreseeing a later retirement
age (62 percent saying age 62), it is noteworthy that most predict a weak-
ening of the lifelong employment system and the rewards according to sen-
iority system (83 percent and 92 percent respectively).

By contrast, under item It, 66 percent see a continuation in the decline of
relative importance of the Kinki region, giving as reasons the lack of a
central information facility and insufficient ties with the central govern-
ment. An overwhelming majority (76 percent propose a new Kansai area air-
port (both as necessary and as feasible) for a mJor project as part of the
solution. Although 59 percent recognize the need to convert the Kii Penin-
sula into an energy base, only an percent see such a proJect as feasible,

a considerable disparity.

As to item 5, energy development, only a very small number-«6 percent see

new energy sources (such as solar or wind powered energy) as feasible. An
overwhelming majority hold the view that the mainstream of primary energy
will change little, 5!: percent predicting it to be oil and 39 percent nuclear
energy. Regarding the timetable for the advent of oil shortages, it is note-
worthy that, while 62 percent expect shortages to occur between 19% and 1990,
39 percent anticipate no shortages. In nuclear energy development, 56 per-
cent expect continued tough going, but only 3 percent forecast failure, and
most expect nuclear energy to step into the leading role.

Relative to item 6, as a desirable corporate stance for the year 2000 %
percent, an overwhelming majority, would support a posture from which the
industry would speak out clearly, oblivious to public opinion, on issues
of concern. Also conspicuously Large is the number who view the current
image of Kansai Electric Power as closed and indifferent.

'me survey polled 207 people in all (ages 30-50 years) including scholars
(100), novelists (10), local government planners (10) people from indus-
try (ho), consumers (10), people in labor circles (10), and Journalists
(10). Replies were received from 159, 77 percent.

33
Iron orricmt use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tabulated Responses To Survey

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUN in Japanese 1.0 Jan 79 p 5

[Original paragraphing not followed]

A.

The international and domestic political and economic structure

1.

a.

The pattern of economic development

*Living environment investment pattern
*Processing trade, manufacturers export pattern
*Capital export pattern

*Heavy and chemical industry dominated pattern
*Cultural industry dominated pattern

Prospects for growth

*Feasible growth rate for 1975-1985--5.10 percent
*Desirable growth rate for same period--6.3 percent
*Feasible growth rate for l985-2000--h.2 percent
*Desirable growth rate for same period--5.2 percent
*Feaaible growth rate for 1975-2000--h.7 percent
*Desirable growth rate for the same period--5.7 percent

The main causes of limited growth

*Rapid increases in the cost of energy and raw materials
*Deterioration of the trade balance and decreased exports
due to advances by moderately developed nations

*Aging of the labor force and stagnation in the rational-
ization of technology to compensate

*Deterioration of the comercial environment through
import regulations, etc.

*Problems in industrial siting

*Environmental problems

The social consequences of slow growth
*Increased unemployment

*Decreased adaptibility to the environment in
energy conversion, etc.

*Decreased social investment

*Inability to cope with the tax burden required
for old age compensation

The market structure

*Continued concentration of enterprises
*Creation of oligopolistic markets
*Intensified competition

*ﬂo change

3“
ran orncm. use ONLY

(percent)
167
23
7
6
h

18

15
10
7.

10.

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Market activities (percent)
*Restriction of corporate activities by goverment

regulation and intervention 36
*Intensification of nonprice competition 30
*Increased cooperative actions between enterprises 25
*Intensification of price competition 17

Leading industries of the year 2000
*Secondary industries: Electronic equipment 32
Home electrical 3
Precision machinery 8
Computers 7
Aircraft h
Plants 3
Automobile 2
Housing related 9
*‘l‘ertiary industries: Information services 21
Knowledge industry 5
Computers (software) 1+
Think tanks 2
Consultants 2
Leisure related 11
Fashion h
Culture h
Education 13
Distribution and comerce 5
Comunication 5

East-Vest relations by the year 2000

*Essentially unchanged from today 58
*Increased tensions but no var 19
*Relaxed tensions with peaceful coexistence 12
Economic relations between Japan, Europe, and America
*Essentially unchanged 1‘7
*lncreased friction 33
*Snoother 15
The Middle East situation by the year 2000
*No solution, but increased compromise 55
*Continued instability 27
*Continued intense confrontation 7
*Reneved Middle East war 6
*Settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict 1
Measures for insuring Japan's survival in such a world environment
*Eneuring energy supplies 26
*Strengthened cooperation with various other nations
in the area of capital 19
35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

llCultural exchange
*Bolstered defense capabilities
*lntensii‘icd research and developaent

12. Lb? monopoly political power
.'Cannot be maintained
*Can be maintained

13. Political control
“A conservative coalition
“A conservative-liberal coalition
*A moderate-right wing coalition

B. Shifts in the social consciousness

1. Weight of consumption and saving
"trend tovard consumption
*l‘rend toward saving
I'No change

2. Household budgetary expenditure objectives
*Bducation and leisure
“Housing related
*Food, including dining out
*Clothing and fashion

3. Participants in consumer and citizen movements
*ﬂousevives
”The elderly
*Salaried wage-earners
*Pnofessional protestors
*Political groups
*Students

10. Individual life style [objectives]
*Psychological mli‘illnent
ﬂinterrelationships uith others
'Vaintenance oi‘ the status quo
*Priority on leisure

5. Future goals of society
*A mnctional society in which the individual can develop
his individuality and abilities
*A society with fair and equal opportunities for an
“A rising living standard
*mll achievement of well-being

36
ton orncm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Percent)
:ihiftn In employee eonnciounneas and labor-management relations

1. Factoro that hnve contributed greatly to stable labor-
management relations in Japan in the past

"he life-long employment system 67
ll‘l‘he enterprise union system 51
'Rank and salary based on seniority 32
*The sense of the union as a part of the company 29
'Daily communication between top labor and management 17
”the employee View of the company as family 17
”he will to place first priority on one's occupation 1|.
2. The life-long employment system
Mill weaken 83
i'ﬂo change 11

3. Reasons for weakening in the life-long employment system
“The inability of corporations to bear the burden of
personnel expenses

38
'Changes in the age structure of the work force 26
i'(Benel'al. adoption of layoffs in the 0.8. style 5

b. The effects of the aging of the work force on firms

”Personnel and organizational stagnation 83
“Business constraints due to increased wages and

retirement compensation 73
“Difficulties in providing Jobs for older employees 60
i'Olcler worker's experience will be made the most of 18
*Increased loyalty 3

5. The retirement system

*Latsr retirement 36
'Reemployment after .retirement (retirement age

unchanged) 29
”A retirement nystem tailored to individuals 13
'Earlier retirement 6
‘No change i.

6. The retirement age in the year 2000

'60 to 62 62
'69 or older 15
‘57 to 59 6
'63 to £5 , 5
‘55 or 56 lo

'I. The effects on the corporatiou of the trend toward
higher education

Worsening conditions for possessors of higher degrees 71
“Intensifies! competition for management positions he
37

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
D.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l-‘ewer pure lnborers
“ImproVed quality in the labor force
*Increased dissatisfaction with wages

Occupational goals in the year 2000
*Securing certain income

i'Realising individual talents

V0

'Increascd enjoyment of life

V0

”to acontrihute to society

‘00

i*ilarmony between interests and occupation

V0

“Upward mohi li ty

Inmads of women into the work world

“Back and forth moVement between home and Job
will become common

‘Nndamental progress will be achieved in
entering the work force

“Not much change

Women will remain in the home

Energy development

1.

The pattern of the energy supply by the year 2000
*Primarily hard path (massive and highly advanced
fossil mel and atomic energy technology)

*Almost exclusively hard path

*Primarily soft path (energy conservation or recycl-
able sources such as solar or wind-powered energy
‘Unatle to say

i'Almost exclusively soft path

Reasons for negating soft path course
'Cost and difficulty of technological development
“Ineffectiveness of energy conservation if discretionary

and strength of resistance to conservation enforced by
law

*Impossibility of centralized control of soft, path,
leading to efficiency and safety problems

”Even if Japan conserves energy, it will merely be
usm by other nations to their advantage

38
son orncm. use ONLY
6.

FOR OFPICIAI. USE ONLY

Reasons for negating hard path course

“Modern civilization, which has run counter to
nature in its massive energy consumption, will

be hit a deadcnd

‘It merely postpones the exhaustion of resources

Whe effect on the environment from such things

as carbon monoxide and thermal pollution is too great

*Difficulty of nmding the deVelopment and utilization
of hard path sources

EffectiVeness of energy conservation aeasures
*Little hope of substantive results even though
some degree of conservation is achieved

i*Sharp reductions are possible through conservation
'ﬂo effect

Rate of energy conservation by the year 2000
“6-10 percent

*16-20 percent

*0-5 percent

'11-15 percent

*26-30 percent

*OVer 30 percent

'21-25 percent

Policies for increasing the effectiveness of energy
conservation

I“legislated incentive and regulatory policies such
as via taxation, etc.

*lncreased cost with increased use

“Dissemination of conservation information and
encouragement of cooperation

Japan's primary energy source by the year 2000
'Oil

i’Atonzic energy

*ﬂydropower, geothermal

‘Coal

'New energy sources, primarily solar energy

Outlook for the construction of coal fired power plants
mot such progress

'Substantial progress, though secondary to nuclear power
'h'o progress
”Sufficient progress to outstrip nuclear power

39
FOR onrcm. use out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE om:

9. Outlook for the development of nuclear energy
I'rough going
*asooth progress
*Developnent will reach a standstill

lo. Reasons for difficulties in [nuclear energy development
I'Iiocal citizen opposition
i'Rapid rises in the cost of development
‘Occurrcncc of accidents harmful to the environment
“International restrictions on development
i*Iidverse public opinion

ll. Outlook for the advent of Oil shortages
“Anticipate shortages
*Anticipate no shortages

l2. Timetable for the occurrence of shortages
*Bstveen 19% and 1990
*Betveen 1981 and 1985
*Betveen 19% and 2000
*Betveen 1991 and 1995
*After 2000
*Betveen 1975 and 1980

13. knifestation of shoruge
*Iarge price increases
*Absolute shortage

1k. Reasons for the advent of shortages
*Slov develoment of alternate sources
*Insufficient new oil discoveries
*Intensified reductions in OPEC production
*Large growth in energy consumption
i"transformation of Soviet Union to an oil importing
nation
*Outbreak of war or such
*Increascd oil imports by the U. S.

15. Prerequisites for the avoidance of oil shortages
*Dcvclopmcnt of alternative energy sources
*Increased production in non-0m areas
itProgress in conservation on internationally
*Blunting of energy oonsmption
*Increased new discoveries
”Decreased U. 8. oil imports
*Maintenance of Soviet Union's oil export capability

1&0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l6.

17.

18.

19 .

20.

21.

23.

2...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mture course of the OPEC nations
*A trend toward disunion
*A trend toward harmony

The OPEC policy of reduced oil production
*Production will be geared to world consumption
*A deliberate policy of reduced production will
be followed

'lhe OPEC pricing policy

*Prices will rise enough to compensate for price rises on
imported goods and declining [value of] foreign currency
holdings

*Prices will match world inflation

*Prices will rise at about the same rate as that of
inmortcd goods

*Prices will rise as greatly as possible

Actions of consumer nations in the event of world

oil shortages

*Each will follow an independent defense policy having
its own interests as first priority

“Consumer nations will band together

Japan's weakness in the event of oil shortages
Weakness in friendly relations with resource countries
*Policies lack consistency

*Insufficient independent development

Weak defense capabilities

iWeak ties with the radon

Method of internal allocation in times of shortages
“Quota system
*A free trade systaa

Oil quota method
*Place priority on industrial use
“Place priority on public welfare

Allocation for industrial use
*Place priority on strategic industries
ﬂuniform system

he tradeoff between energy, developsent and enviromental
protection

'The problem is to determine whether to develop

energy or to protect the environment

151
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(percen‘
1'7
3“

51
M;

19

17
13

59
25.

27 .

POI! OHICIM. USE ONLY

*‘rhc inmortance of energy development requires
it have top priority

*l'op priority should be placed on environmental
protection

The need for citizen involvement pursuant to
energy development

Wore than no»:

"to change

imess than now

'me effect of such citizen involvement
*Delays in construction schedules

“A positive contribution to the developmental progress
i'ﬂardly any effect

Outlook for coumunity electrical generation (small scale
electrical generation utilizing heat produced by garbage
incineration)
*Progress in construction due to the possibility of
constructive use of discarded substances
*Lack of progress in construction due to the high
cost of such electrical generation methods
*Insui‘i‘icient citizen support due to environmental
considerations

*Progress in construction due to the logic of the
rubbish disposal aspect alone

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1979

9369

cso: 131.05

332
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lion orncm. use ONLY

ECONOMIC

BRIEFS

IRAQ DEGASSING PLANTS-Related sources disclosed on 13 February that the

Iraqi National 011 Company's southern oil bureau had recently placed an
order with two Japanese firea-Niigata Tekkosho and Harubeni-—for three

degassing plants worth $25 Iillion. The deal cells for coepletion of
the plants 1 year after signing the contract. [Tokyo NIKON IBIZA! SHINBUN
in Japanese 16 Feb 79 Morning Edition p 5 0H]

SINGAPORﬁ REPTNERY EXPANSION--The Japanese engineering fire Nikki on

15 February signed a lb-billion-yen contract with Singapore Refining Co.

to increase the latter's present oil refining capacity of 70,000 barrels

a day to 170,000 barrels. The project will be coepleted by late Deceaber
1980. The Singapore coepeny'e present facilities were built by Nikki in

1973. [Tokyo ASAHI SHINBUN in Japanese 16 Feb 79 Morning Edition p 8 OH]

C80: 4105

#3
ton orucuu. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENI‘IFIC MD TECKNOLCXJICAL

BUBBLE HETKOD RECLAIMS SEABED METALLIC RESOURCES

Tokyo ma JAPAN mass in anguah 19 Feb 79 p 2

{Text}

COPYRI

CSO:

GHT:

1.120

JIMMHKyum—A

ctluulwchch-nhu ll-
WWW'»
madam-am
human or "I III~tlf be
n:$::::_ tnl : 1.+

' I await»
jlrbnulnlinam::::=:§by
qllrpnnudn‘ \-
momuon Jul-Nd»
m- "‘2'“ '
«~qu

‘Wﬂnﬂm I! hulaum"

lﬁhntlﬂzr=g=ﬂll.ﬂ5=:2:
flu-suqu‘sgmn . u!

-.' mmmm

'II has n It!

untamed-aw

The Japan Tine: 1979

hh

mam-unsure.
'30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

LIGﬂT AIRCMI’T IRDUSTRYuThe Ministry of International Trade and Industry
[KITI] plans to develop a light aircraft nsnufacturing industry so as to
help Jspan catch up with other advanced nations in this field. The HITI
plan calla for initial efforts on davelopnsnt of technology for manufac-
turing snsll passenger planes for up to 20 passengers and later for the
establishment of an annual capacity of 10,000 units in the near future.
The ninistry eventually plane to develop this into an export industry.
To this end. the ministry plans to set up a research and develop-ant
council under the Japan Aeronautics and Space Industry Association. The
council will conduct basic feasibility surveys. [Tokyo TOKYO 38mm in
Japanese ll Feb 79 Morning Edition p 3 OH]

680: 6105 BID

#5
ma orncm. use ONLY