FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10500

7 May 1982

Japan Report

[FOUO 28/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

'ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIG'IT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF IRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/ 10500

7 May 1982

JAPAN REPORT

(POUO 28/82)

CONTENTS
POLITICAL

Upper House LDP Dietmen Are at Odds With Their Counterparts
(THE DAILY YOHIURI, 9 Apr 82) ............................ I

National Priorities, Cold Realities Considered
(Editorial; THE DAILY YOHIURI, 11 Apr 82) . . . . . . .. .. . . 3

Editorial on Administrative Reform, Defense Recoundations
Criticized
(Editorial; HAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 10 Apr 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Decline of Shunto Analyzed
(Hasshiko Ishizuka; TN! JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 20 Apr 82) 7

Depoliticization of Electorate Reported
(Tetsuo Tamra; THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 20 Apr 82) ... 8

MI LITARY

Outline of Fiscal Year 1982 Program Unveiled
(Motohashi; mum sumo snmmm, lo Feb 82) 10

ECONOMIC

‘ Japan Concerned by Trade Friction With ASFAN Countries
(NIKON KEIZAI SHINDUN, various dates) ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lb

Japan-US 'Tax Friction' Becoming Serious
(m JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 7 Apr 82) 20

'NAINICHI ' Views Japanese Economic Prospects
(Editorial; MAINICHI DAILY NEWS, 16 Mar 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

Government To Increase Financial Expenditures To Expand
Domestic Demand
(MAINICNI DAILY ms, 10 Apr 82) 25

- a - [III - ASIA - lll POGO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tax Revenue Deficit in Local Autonomous Entities
(run JAPAN econoutc JOURNAL, 10 Apr 82) .................

Contenta of 'Second Package ' of Harke t-Liberaliution Measures
(DAILY YOHIURI. loApr 82) .00....OOOICCICCDOCO...0.0..OI

Automobile Parts Industry'a Struggle for Existence Reported
(Kawabe; NIKKEI sancvo salmon“, various datea) ..........

Early Farm Import Liberalization Difficult
(THE DAILY YOHIURI, 10 Apr 82) ..........................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UPPER BOUSB LDP DIETH'EN ARE AT ODDS WITH THEIR COUNTBRPAR'B

Tokyo THE DAILY YOMIURI in English 9 Apr 82 p 2

[Text]

Suspicious goingson among Liberal-Democratic House of Councilors members
were observed by the LDP executive during an ordinary Diet session about a year

ago.

The executive was "pus-
sled. ior example, by the
shelving of important bills
toward~ the end oi each
Diet session. and by the
denouncernents made at the
way in which the 1.1)? were
running Diet sessions. Be-
hind such antics were none
other than LOP. upper
house Dietmen. .

True. it is common know-
ledge that. even within the
same political party. the
relationship between the
lower and upper house
members is not always
smooth. -

And disarray within the
LDP is one good example.
Prictiombetween LDP lower
and upper house Dietmen
has become particularly
apparent this spring. The
upper house members, in
tact. have tacitly declared
“war" on their lower house
counterparts. who have an
absolute malorlty and
whose instructions the up-
per house Dietmen are
supposed to cnrry out. Be-
hind the dcclorntlon lurks
a deep-scoted grudge in
the hearts oi the upper
house members.

In almost every world
there exists Jealousy and
prejudice. such is es clai-
ly strong. and cmo onslly
expressed. among chtmen
because theirs is a world in

which the power they wield
has much do to with the
outcome oi elections.

Scrap Upper House

in tact. such is the cur-
rent animosity that in the
view or one L1)? Dietman.
a member or the Somali
cabinet who has been
chairman or the party ex-
ecutive and policy board as
well as LDP secretary-sell-
eral. the upper houseshould
be dismantled and the test
should be the ﬁrst unden-
taken in the reform oi.the
government's finances and
administration.

hundreds oi billions oi yen.
The house was. in any case.
simply doing the job oi the
lower house. Its members
were "just wasting time.”
Their tenure in cities 'w
six years during which time
there was no election. while
lorver house members had
to be prepared ior elections
which cauld be held at any
time. And ii they ieci
mortiiled by his words. the

Dietma'n said. they should

stand in a general election

to become lower house
members.

Special Society

Other upper house mem-

bers. indeed. are rather

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unhappy. They isel dis-
criminated sgninst. At
ceremonies marking Oom-
ing-oi-Ase Day or the con-.
struction oi a new printer!
school. .ior instance. young
iowerf;.house .members get
much better seats than
aged upper house members.
Pride is at stake. inferiority
complexes abound.

Within the LDP there is
a live-year old supra—tac-
tionai ornnintion called
the Religion and ,Politics
study Society. ~ It holds
meetings every Thuraday
and recently its member-
ship has increased rapidly.
Last year the society's mem-
bership was ‘M. [is oi All!“
iitwaletand 16mm
LDP Dietmen are soon to
join. In- terms oi only
membership, the group can
compete with the strongest
iaction which is led by
xakuei Tanaka.

A study of the society's
ranks .ahowa that '14 mem-
bers. .the majority. are
irom the upper. house. Oi
those. so )oined.this year.
There are '130' ID? up
per house members. so
more than but have Join-
ed“ m "In”. the mm“
bership comprises the
“mainstay troops” or those
upper house Dietmen hold-
ing grudoes against the
lower house members. Ac—
cording to the society. no
upper house LDP member
is statisiied with the status
quo.
Kssuo 'mrnski. president
oi the society, reports that
upper house discontent is
widespread. By joining
lorees, he said. the society
could do some good.

LDP upper home mem-
bers. led by Tumult. hsd
persusded the government
to seeept psy hikes {or
government emplom ss
recommended by the No-
tionsi Personnel Authority
iNPA) st the Diet session
lest nil. in eschsnge ior
support oi s lower house
bill on udministrstive re-
iorm. Opposition parties.

too. hsd urged support'o!
the NPA recommendations.
criticism or the LDP upper
house members was strong.
but oi course _ they were
happy Mth the result 0!
their lobbying.

'rsmski's society hes won
the support or vetersn LDP
House of Councilors mem-
bers such ss former
posts snd lei'ecommunles-
tions minister Torsssburo
Shintsni, iormer‘ upper
house president Ken Yssui
and former home sdsirs
minister Yuichi Kori. All
ieel nostalgis tor the good
old dsys when the upper
house hsd power end in-
iluenee.

Shock Treatment

When the Klshi esbinet
was termed during the
tenure of president Tsuru-
hei Mstsuno (lose-mm.
Mstsuo hsd withdrswn all
would-be upper house cabl-
net ministers becsuse he
was dlssstisiled with the si-
lotment oi posts. And when
Yu'so Shigemune was upper
house president (rm-m1),
the then prime ministers
made it s rule to politely
greet the upper house pres-
ident at the stsrt of each
upper house main session.

The society's ﬁrst gosl is
to become iinsnclsily inde-
pendent. At present. the

COPYRIGHT :

CSO: 6120/2410

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060013-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LDP upper house members'
fund umountsio shout m
million o yesr; been mem-
ber donsies #150,000 1
month to the fund. 'no es-
sure nnsneisi independence.
the society estimstes it
needs st least 5'8 billion s
yesr. This csn he obtsined
by holding politiesl recep-.
tions. end by inviting dons-
tions trom prints business.
the society believes.

For shock treshnent, the
society intends to see that
some LDP-origlnsted bills
are shelved st the end 0!
the current Diet session. As
'l‘smski snys. there is no
resson- to unoonditionslly
accept the lower house bills.
'l‘smsirl himself hes s re-
cord of previously thwsrt-
ing two bills.

Dietmen, however, should
be reminded of the feet
thst the supporters of hp-
snese polities ere. in the
end, the people.

The Daily Yomiuri 1982

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060013-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060013-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL

NATIONAL PRIORITIES, COLD REALITIBS CONSIDERED
Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 11 Apr 82 p 2
[Editorial: "National Priorities")

[Text] . The prospect of a revenue shortfall of I2 trillion
in ﬁscal 1981 has prompted debate on whether to
go ahead with plans for administrative reform or

- to concentrate on measures to stimulate business.
Opinion is growing that the govemment might have
to revise its austerity program.

These developments raise the question of Prime
Minister Suzuki's responsibility. '

It is right and proper that economic and ﬁscal
management should he heatcdly debated. But point-
less charges and recriminations will only produce
chaotic policies.

The core of the issue is simply that the govern-
‘ment overestimated the natural increase in tax re-
. venues by calculating national economic growth he-
' ,yond its real power, while acting lackadsisicaliy on

necessary spending cuts.

The government figured that the economy could
maintain a mid-term real growth rate of more than
live percan However, many people in the private
sector estimate the rate at three to four percent.

Three Tasks Necessary

it is wrong to blame the revenue shortfall on such
a transitory phenomenon as a delay in business re-
covcry.

The cold reality is that the revenue shortfall will
total over ¥2 trillion in ﬁscal 1981 and 1'34 trillion
in ﬁscal 1982. We deem that the government has to
tackle three tasks: '

Firstly carry out a thorough review of the seven-
ycsr economic development plan. This will lead to a
drastic revision of the government's mid-range ﬁscal

' prospects and will require the scrapping of the easy-
, going program to reconstruct the national ﬁnances
based on natural increases in tax revenue.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDPS2-00850R000500060013-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060013-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We do not take issue with the government's move

to place orders for 77 percent of public works proj-
- ectsplannedinﬁscallmintheﬁmthalfofthe

year. However, its elects could be extremely limited

and merely psychological. '

It is totally unthinkable that this step will re
charge the economy in one stroke. We should not
repeat the mistakes of 1977 and 1978 when govern-
ment bonds were issued in great quantities. produc-
ing heavy burdens but little economic stimulus.

Slash Spending

The second task is to slash spending by resolutely
reforming the administrative setup. We disagree
with the view that business priming measures should
take precedence over administrative reion'n. On the
contrary, the prospect of a revenue shortfall in-
creasa the urgency of cutting national spending.

All unnecessary expenditures should be ellmina
to bring things in line with economic realities and
also to stop the practice of covering deﬁcits with
government bonds. The cutback should take account
of the revenue shortfalls in ﬁscal 1981 and 1982, as
well as the compilation of the fiscal 1983 budget.

. The third task is to rectify the ratios between di-
rect and indirect taxes. There are cells fol-revising
the ultra progressive tax rate. It is only natural to
lower the rate and income tax rates should be re-
duced at the same time.

_ Such tax cuts can be onset by slashing govern-
ment spending through administrative reform and
by introducing a large indirect tax.

It appears that both the government and the Lib-
eral-Democratic Party are hesitant to tackle this
issue in View of the general elections scheduled next
year. This would mean relinquishment of their polit-
ical responsibility. We urge Prime Minister Suzuki
to have the courage to tell the public the truth.

(April 11)

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Yomiuri 1982
C80: 4120/2104

l.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060013-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL

EDITORIAL ON ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM, DEFERSB RBCOH‘EENDATIONS CRITICIZED

Tokyo MAINICHI DAILY NEWS in English 10 Apr 82 p 2

(Editorial: "Adm. Reform and Defense"]

[Text] " The first section of the Second Ad lioc Council on
Administrative Reiorm is now compiling a draft
recommendation on the “preparation of Japan's own
defense system." This refers to "defense" in the
general security oi Japan but we think it to be in.
compatible with the administrative reiorm which is
under study by the council. We are afraid that the
study by the council section deals with dangerous
aspects which run counter to the real meaning of the
reform. - _ ,

It is quite natural for the council to study the
possible rationalization oi the defense administration.
bu; an attempt to sanctity the expansion oi Japan's
deiense capability should not he made in the name of
administrative reform.

_ Referring to the defense policy, the draft
recommendation said that Japan's own .defenSe
system must be prepared within the framework of the
U.s.-Japan Security Treaty and emphasized the
importance of realizing a general deiense plan and
improving the defense capability from a qualitative
viewpoint to meet an emergency.

2' We believe that the council departed from its task
to.study administrative reiorm when it went into the
plan of national defense which is the basic policy oi
the'Japanese government. .

j in its first recommendation. the council seemed
to have emphasized a “smaller government" but as
far as the defense problem is concerned. the council's
direction is not necessarily toward a f‘smaller"
defense capability. Promotion of the defense
capability's expansion runs counter to the goal of
achieving a smaller government.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060013-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_. People may suspect that the administrative
teﬁorm is being utilized as a means to expand military
capability at the sacl'iilce oi social weliare. We can
. expect ups and downs beiore the iinal recom-

mendation is adopted but we urge the council to draw
. up a recommendation which would not turn its back
_- on the people.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News 1982

cso: 4120/244

alt

_ 6
‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600060013-8
DECLINE O? SHUNTO ANALYZED

Tokyo run JAPAN economc JOURNAL in English 20 Apr 82 p 10

[Article by Mannhtlto Ishizuka]

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

For a foreign observer of the
Japanese economy. shunto -
conveniently , tramlatcd in
somewhat gaudy "spring labor
offensive" — should by now he a
familiar word just as it is to the
too million Japanese people.
But some may he missing it in
the future because this annual
event with 30 years' history
appears to have come to an end
this year as its traditional
pattern and leadership have
apparently broken down.

Shunto. Japan's unique
pattern of concerted wage
settlement bargaining and
campaigns. in the past
depended on synchronized
strikes both by public and
private indtntrial workers.
with transportation strikes
across the nation chmatizing
the whole scene and multi.
plying the elfects to push up
wage increases. Such a pattern

started so years ago when the-

nalion's postwar labor move
ment was burgeoning.

this year. something un-
precedented in history of

4120/244

shunto happened - failure of
transportatiu strum to ma-
terialise. This illustrated more
than anythim else the collapse
of the shunto formula.

Behind such a develqimeut
are variotl factors. but the
most obvious is the decline of
the leadership of public
workers' unions. inclining.
among others. national railway
workers'. which traditionally
dominated the Japanese
organized labor forces. Ptﬂlc
workers. equipped with the
powerful weapon of strikingthe
railways. had been the we
militant «went of the labor
movement. ‘nus milltancy was
capable of ham influence
over the labs; as a whole. cape
eially in concerted action with
private railway workers’
unions which also resort to
strike tactics, actual or
threatened.

One underlying came for the
decline of public worhera’ itﬂu-
ence and strike tactics is the
Ins d sympathy from the
white. which In alliance is

1982 The Nihon Keizai Shimbunehn, Inc.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more and more alienated from
ideology-oriented. atriheprone
laborniovanent.

Moreover. the national
railways under mounting at-
tack tor a stagger“ “.000
billion deitcit and detericated

.joh disciplines resulting in

seriousnandsomeubelievahle.
hinthofaecldentahardlycotdd
affordtogomstrke
Corrasponiingtothedeciine
ofpuhlicworiters'fotesisthe
risiumovetoaldflleadershlp
”Mdmuindmtris.
This year. pirate railway
workers from the hagiming
had no mention of joinilu
forces with rational railway
workersinstrkendiethiia.

ft is eerhin that next yar
and after wage hargairuiriga at
most companies and ultimo-is
will remain concentrated
during March and April. hut
the pattern and iormuia will no
longer be like ohmic in the
past It may already have
oeaaedtnhe“dfansive."

— ”an“. “Hull
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL

DEPOLITICIZATION 0F HECTORATE REPORTED

Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL 111 English 20 Apr 82 p 10

[Article by Tetauo Tamra]

[Text I

Some recent events clearly indicate that a
considerable change is underway in Japan's
political climate. When the rulinu Liberal

victoryintheelectionuoithebothllouaeaheld
simultaneously in June mo.
pointed out the electorate’s trend toward
"reversion to conservatism," but the recent
political phenomena seemed to insinuate a
trend for "accelerated depoliticiration" oi
uie electorate rather than "reversion t
comervatism." .

Firstly. there were two elections recently
which characterised such a trend: the Kyoto
gubernatorial and the Yokohama mayoral
contests. in the Kyoto election. an unea-
pected overwhelming victory at the incum.
bent mayor. backed by conserVatives and
centrista. stunned the ruling LDP ltaeli and
especially. his wide margin over the appal-
tion candidate endorsed by communists and
reia'mista. LDP oiilciala first hinted at the
possibility that the taco t might lose the
election beunnse Kyoto w _ an area where a
reign oi reiormlst lonces had contimed ion at
years before the incumbent mayor came to
power. But the result was an astonishing
margin oi "0.000 votes (500.000 over 380.000).

A similar trend emerged in the Yokohama
mayoral election. The conservative camp
was a naive because Yokohama was a
city where Chairman lchio Astdtata oi the
Japan Socialist'Party had ruled tor a very
long time as mayor. But the outcome was an
overwhelming victory tor the conservative
incumbent. just as in the Kyoto election.

One characteristic common _to the two
elections is that the consewative and centrist
forces which do not have any organization to

speak at won a victory in the (tilt against
communist iorces which boast of a solid
organisational power. From its “location. the
LDP has lacked traits common to political
parties and accordingly. a strong badnin‘
organisation. The JSP tuned to have an
organization iormed mainly by labor union
members. but that mutation ins dsinte-
grated gradually. All this leaves the Japan
Communist Party as the only «pulsed tone
in Japanae politics. but the elections in
Kyoto and Yokohama demonstrated that
even the «united JCP lost out to un-
organized voters whose tdeolodcal identity is
a . Such a situation was evident
monethananythingelseinthelact thatthe
JSPdidnotpickanycandtﬁteoiitsownnor
pvennppattdanycandithtenamin‘lnth‘e
Kyoto electitlt. ' -

Tosum w.itispossibletosaythatthe
Japanoe people are not revertlm to con-
servatism. but are simply depoliticiaed. A
recentsurvey by the PrimeMiniaten'sOiiice
revealed that peoplehavaakeenintoneat in
only local assemblymen’s election; they are
losing their interest in electiuns at [telec-
ttral and nationwide levels. The survey indi-
catedthattheiapaneaepeoplenowtendto
pay little attention to thins. eiectione lu-
cluded. wldch do not have direct influence
with their immediate com.

1hesametrehdcotddbesaidtoconatihnte
the bacliconnd oi this year's spring wage
negotiations which did not have a genieral
railway strike ion the first time in so years.
Aamoreandmorepeopleareinteratedonly
in their own matters. it world have tires-
tened the foundation oi in own existence it
the Cotaicil oi Public Corporation Workens'
Unionwentonalarae-scalestniltebecatse
members oi the unions themselves are just
as turned oil.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02I09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500060013-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The LOP and the Government have already
_ been ruling the nation through politics
geared to the ”amorphous masses" and will
move more and more in that direction in the
future, Their eotstant relusal to take up the
issue at amendirg stems lrom their desire to
prevent “the general public" from splitting
into pros and cons. The same psychology
applies to their eilorls to keep divisive dis-
putes irom erupting on such fundamental
issues of the nation like education. acuity
and delensc

it Japanese polities is to continue to lute-
tion along the same lines in the years to
come. it will be practised more and more
without principles. This will not give rise to
any disputes domestically lor the time being.
but it will not work well externally. Some
symptoms oi "the disease" inherent in such
a trend have already began to show in) in
Japan‘s trade lrictions with the United
States and the issue at $6 billion aid requested
by South Korea.

External problems. it confined to eeo
nomic issua. may be somewhat soluble but
the situation could get really serious it they
are political issues. —

tTetsuo Tomura is a Nikon Keizoi deputy
political editor)

COPYRIGHT: 1982 The Nihon Keizai Shtubunsha. Inc.

cso: 4120/2“.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500060013-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M I L ITARY

OUTLINE OF FISCAL YEAR 1982 PROGRAM UNVEILBD
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 4 Feb 82 p 7

[Article by reporter Motohashi: "Defense Related Industries Excited by 'Fat
Budget ' "]

[Text] The defense budget, which registered a 7.75-percent
increase over the previous fiscal year, is currently the fo-
one of a Diet debate. The defense related industries are
quite satisfied with the "large appropriation" under the
Financial Rehabilitation Plan: 'The amount of the frontal
equipment order is just about right." (Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries Ltd Executive Kenya Ikeda) in the 1980's Interim
Operation Estimate that the Self-Defense Agency is currently
framing (for 1983-1987), the major equipment orders are ex-
pected to expand further; thus the defense related industries
will continue to enjoy the favorable business trend.

At the Japan Weapons Industry Association's New Year gathering, the president
of the organization, Hankichi Kanno (president of Japan Steel works, Ltd),
praised the Self-Defense Agency's "efforts." "Under difficult circumstances,
it framed an unusually favorable defense budget." In response, Self-Defense
Agency Director-General Ito urged "the industry to endeavor to establish
effective defensiVe strength alongside the Self-Defense Agency. Thus went the
mutual exchange of salutations between the civilian and official sectors.

Exchange of Salutes Between Civilians and Officials

Equipment purchase allocation, an item of great relevance to the defense re-
lated industries, in the 1982 defense budget of 2,586,100,000,000 yen, is
580.3 billion yen. This represents a 7.5-percent increase over the previous
year. It is somewhat less than the overall gain in the defense budget, but
that is because the first-year expenditure for major equipment is relatively
low. The order base quantity is close to the full amount.

Appropriations for the main strength fighterplane F-lS (23 planes) and anti—
submarine patrol plane P3C (7) are less than the requested amount (43 F-lS's
and 17 P3C's were requisitioned respectively); but the balance is expected to
be ordered under the FY-83 budget, and the impact on the defense-related

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

industries is not significant. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, which is manufac-
turing the F-15 under a license agreement, says that "the delivery dates for
materials and other imported articles are being extended, and perhaps the
industry ought to defray the cost and order them" (Aircraft and Special Vehi-
cles Project Headquarters), but the company is satisfied that the quantity of
orders is steadily increasing.

Among land equipment, 72 model 74 tanks were ordered--less than requested (80).
However, orders for this model tank have increased from 48 in 1979 to 60 in
1980 to 72 in 1981. Even a Self-Defense Agency Equipment Bureau source com-
mented that "the procurement tempo has been rapid thus far, and a purchase of
80 units would have been impossible at any event."

The Ground Self-Defense Force's anti-tank helicopter AHlS, too, has made its
appearance. Fuji Heavy Industries, Ltd, is slated to obtain a license for pro-
duction from the Bell Corporation of the United States. The Self-Defense
Agency is planning to order at least 54 helicopters in this category (including
12 scheduled for 1982). The cost is nearly 2 billion yen per unit. Although
there is an element in the United States which frowns on furnishing Japan with
defense equipment production licenses, Fuji Heavy Industries, Ltd, Executive
Iwao Shibuya says that "there is no such feeling with regard to AHls itself."

The AHIS will most likely become the mainstay of the firm's Airplane Division.
"Continuous Buildup" Impossible

In the vessels category, three 2,900—ton escort ships--one less than requested--
were ordered. A request for a 1,400-ton escort ship was not approved. The
escort ships are handled by five shipbuilding firms-among them Mitsubishi

Heavy Industries, Ltd, and Ishikawajima—Harima Heavy Industries Co, Ltd. "A
continuous buildup," whereby one vessel per year is ordered, will not be under-
taken in 1982, but that format hopefully will be revived during the 1983-1987
Interim Operation, says the industry.

The attention of defense related industries has already been shifted to the
1983-1987 Interim Operation Plan. The goal is to reach the defense capability
and level set forth broadly in the government's Self-Defense Plan for the
period specified; work to this end is currently underway and is expected to be
completed this summer.

The Self-Defense Agency's investigative operation includes the following
figures: (1) approximately 95 F—lS planes, including 20 carried over from
the 1978 Medium Term Defense Program; (2) 65 PJCs, including 20 carryovers;
(3) 18-19 escort ships. including missile loading DDG's; (4) 7 submarines;
and so on. Also, the number of model 74 tanks is expected to be about 400
units.

Orders Will Increase. But Increase Will Be Small

The 1983-1987 Interim Operation has several large projects, such as the
selection ofthe (SAH—x)-—s successor to surface-to-air missiles such as Hawk
and Nike; and construction of an automatic aerial defense warning/control
system (Badge x).

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is true that defense purchases are steadily increasing under the 1983-1987
Interim Operation Plan. But it is not such a drastic increase as to affect
the defense industry in any significant manner. Mitsubishi Heavy Industry is
producing the F-15 at the rate of one aircraft per month, but "we can double
the current production rate with the existing facility" (Mitsubishi Heavy
Industries Director Yoshio Sasaki), so it is not operating at full capacity.
Even in the case of the model 76 tanks, although the total order during the
1983-1987 Interim Operation Period would be 400, the annual average is 80--
eight more than the 1982 figure (72). "It is not a case of terrific business
and all smiles." (Mitsubishi Heavy Industry, Ltd, Special Vehicles Division
chief Iwao Hayashi) The industry emphasizes that there is not such a "bulge
out" mood as the public at large believes.

Another worry is that with regard to the issue of offering American military
technology to others, the United States is becoming very cautious about giving
Japan the licenses. In the case of the AIM 9L aerial missile (Sidewinder)
(Mitsubishi Heavy Industry) and 203 mm automatic howitzer (Kamatsu Ltd),

which became licensed production items in 1981. the U.S.'s attitude was quite
unyielding. Even though there is licensed :;3duction, if the proportion of
direct imports from the United States is great, a large piece of the pie, that
is slated to become larger as a result of 1983-1987 Interim Operation, may have
to be given up to the United States.

Self-Defense Agency's Main Equipment Budget Breakdown

(Firearms, tanks, etc) 1980 1981 1982
9 mm gun -- 1,800 1,800
Model-6a rifle 5.100 5,000 5,000
Model-62 machinegun 51 51 51
Model-74 tank machinegun 38 38 38
84 mm recoilless mortar 188 219 221
Model-79 antivessel. antitank roving firing

facility 8 set 9 set 8 set
Model-64 81 mm trench mortar 65 44 43
Model-75 155 m automaic howitzer 26 30 34
203 mm automatic howitzer -- 6 13
Model-75 130 an automatic rapid-fire

rocket firing facility 8 8 8
Model-75 automatic surface wind measurement unit 3 —- 3
Model-74 tank 60 72 72
Model—73 armored car 9 9 9
“heeled mount armored car -- -- 10
Model-78 tank recovery vehicle 3 3 5
Model-78 snowmobile 22 22 22
Model-70 automatic pontoon 2 3 3
(Surface-to-air guided missile)
Modified Hawk 1 l 1
Short SAM -— 6 set 9 set
Portable SAM -- 20 set 65 set

12
INJR 0FF1C1AL USEECNHLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500060013-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Aircraft) 1980
Ground Self-Defense Force

Antitank helicopter AHlS --
Reconnaissance helicopter 0H6D 1C
Multipurpose helicopter uu1u 5
Communication]reconnaissance craft LRl 2
Transport helicopter V107A 1

Maritime Self—Defense Force
Antisubmarine patrol plane P3C 1(
Beginner pilot training craft KHZ -u
Instrument flight training craft TC90 I
Antisubmnrine helicopter HSSZB 2

Rescue helicopter $61A -‘
Beginner pilot training helicopter 0H6D —
Rescue aeroboat 051

Air Self-Defense Force

Fighter plane P-15 3
Supportfighter F-l .
Transport Cl30ﬂ -
Advanced training craft T2

Search and rescue craft H02

Rescue helicopter V107A

Early warning craft EZC -

(Vessels)

6,500-ton escort DDG -
2,900—ton escort DD

1,400-ton escort DB

Submarine SS

Medium-size minesweeper NSC

Submarine rescue mother ship AS -
Support vessel

Modernization of boats -

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

I 11460
C50: 4105/59

13
FINR¢>FF1CJAI.[EHE(NVLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600060013-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

JAPAN CONCERNED BY TRADE FRICTIOR WITH ASEAN COUNTRIES
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN in Japanese 18, 19 Mar 82
[18 Mar 82 p 7]

[Text] worsening Market for Primary Products

"We cannot arcept that the United States offers less favorable treatment
for imports fro; ASEAN countries than for those from Caribbean countries."
Thus, Vicente Valdepenas, Philippine Vice Minister for Industry and Trade,
who chaired the conference between the 0.5. and ASBAN governments held in
Washington for 3 days beginning on the 9th, acting as spokesman for

ASEAN, expressed strong concern about the effect on ASEAN of the Reagan
administration's policy concerning assistance to Central America. The
United States is going to lift all taxes on Central American products; if
this happens, major damage will be unavoidable. as it will mean the
cessation of exportsto the United States of Philippine sugar, and so on.

To judge from the expressions of dissatisfaction with American aid to
Central America, the ASEAN countries' prospects for exports will be ruined.
For countries like Thailand and the Philippines. which export primary
products. the value of exports declines with the drop in demand accompanying
a recession in the advanced countries. and starting about the middle of last
year the growth of exports suddenly weakened. Thailand's reduction last
July of the rate of exchange it had maintained for 12 years (8.7 percent).
with the goal of strengthening the competitiveness of exports, had no
significant effect on the lowered value of rice, rubber, tin, and so on.

and last year Thailand recorded its highest deficit ever, 67.6 billion bhat
(about 3 billion dollars).

In the Philippines, also, copper and lumber showed a considerable decline
because of the slump; exports, which in the second quarter of the previous
year had strongly increased by more than 20 percent, decreased 0.4 percent
in the same period last year. Deliverance from the nightmare of drastically
increasing oil prices and the controls on the growth of imports failed to
reduce the trade deficit, and last year it again exceeded 2 billion dollars.

0n the other hand, the oil-producing countries are also gloomy. Indonesia,
for which exports of oil and natural gas make up 80 percent of all exports,

1h
FORIOFTWC1A1.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

maintained the level of income of the previous year through October of last
year, but after that it was forced to cut production, and the situation this
year is even worse. Malaysia was also forced to cut production in the second
half of last year by nearly 20 percent.

For both countries. the most serious situation was the catastrophic drop in
the nonoil portion of their exports. In Indonesia, in addition to coffee,
rubber, and other primary products, the sale of industrial products such as
cloth and chemicals declined greatly, and in the period from April to October
of last year, nonoil products decreased 31.9 percent in comparison to the same
period of the previous year. In Malaysia, also, veneers and textiles slumped
and the trade balance shifted into the red for the first time in 21 years.

Gloom Also in the Newly Industrialized Countries

Also fully suffering from the impact of the wave of recession in the advanced
countries were the NICS [newly industrialized countries]. South Korea, which
last year recorded exports of 20.9 billion dollars, 19.9 percent higher than
the previous year, and which seemed on the road to revolution, is now again
beginning to see clouds. The value of exports for January and February this
year was 3.04 billion dollars. Although this is a 7.3-percent increase over
the same period of last year, it is lower than expected and is not a
circumstance which permits optimism cancerning future prospects for exports.

In Singapore, too, exports to the Middle East of oil rigs and ships, for which
there remain good prospects, and to Europe of electronics and cloth and the
like decreased greatly. In addition, the growth of exports to Indonesia,
Malaysia, and others in ASBAN was weak, and the deficit in the trade balance
for 1981 increased to 6.6 billion U.S. dollars. Taiwan and Hong Kong are in

a similar situation.

This is the first time since the first oil crisis of 1973 that a trend has
appeared for the Asian developing countries, centering on ASBAN, to
simultaneously show increases in trade deficits and large reductions in
surpluses. This is all the more reason for these countries simultaneously

to develop policies to revive exports. Ameliorating the conditions for the
financing of exporters is a policy cannon to all the countries. For example,
in Indonesia in the middle of January there were, among a group of 18 detailed
policies designed to encourage exports, 1) a liberalization of the control

of currency exchange (for 0.5. dollars) for exports, and 2) new systens for
the protection of exports.

At the beginning of January, Thailand too enacted 1) tax relief for the
export of major agricultural products, 2) a reorganization and simplification
of procedures for exporting, and 3) the establiahnent of a special fund for
export assistance. The Thai Government has explained that the 0.5-percent
surcharge levied against all imports (except petroleum products and milk for
infants) at the end of February is intended to provide revenue for this
special fund. It is thus more for the purpose of promoting exports than
restraining imports.

15
IN)R¢DFF1CJAI.I£SE()NL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Missions Aimed at Diversifying Markets

Further, efforts to diversify export markets are being intensified. All of
these countries are studying the dispatch of trade missions, and South Korea
is ready to send a mission at the end of this month to some 20 countries,
chosen mainly in Africa, Central America, and South America, where it has had
little business. Also in the area of opening new markets, Thailand this year
has concluded a long-term contract with the USSR for tapioca. Thailand has
until now been expanding exports of tapioca to the EC (European Common
Market), but the EC has been seeking a voluntary limitation of its exports,
and the future has become insecure, so the Thais are happy to agree to export
2.2 million tons to the USSR over a 5-year period.

Table: Japan's Asian Trade (in millions $08, * - deficit or decrease)

 

1981 1981 1981 Compared to 1980 522
Country Exports Imports Balance Exports Igpgrts
Indonesia 4,123 13.305 *9.182 19.2 1.0
Malaysia 2,424 2,927 *503 17.6 *15.6
Singapore 4,468 1,944 2,524 14.2 28.9
Thailand 2,251 1,061 1,190 17.4 *5.2
Philippines 1,928 1,731 197 14.5 *11.2
ASEAN total 15,194 20,968 *5,774 16.6 *1.1
South Korea 5,658 3,389 2,269 5.3 13.1
Taiwan 5,405 2,523 2,882 5.0 9.9

(Source: JETRO figures)

This no-holds-barred scramble for markets has gradually begun to have its
effect on Japan. A typical example is the shipbuilding industry. Japan's
shipbuilders last year made bids on 13 large international orders totaling
43 ships, but they did not get an order for a single ship. They were
totally defeated by South Korea, asserting its position as "king of the
shipbuilders," and others. The Korean shipbuilders' efforts to overthrow
Japan, with generous assistance from the government, are steadily achieving
results.

[19 Mar 82 p 5]

[Text] "Japan's strength in exports is the proper result of the efforts of its
industry. However, when the surplus of exports passes a certain limit, it
becomes unbearable for [countries] such as Taiwan." Thus a businessman
resident in Taipei-Ch'en Chia-hsin-complained in a letter to his head-
quarters concerning the sudden imposition in the middle of February by the
Taiwanese authorities of a ban on the import of Japanese consular goods.
According to Ch'en, Taiwan's trade with Japan has been in the red for the 29
years from 1952 through last year, with the exception of 1955. Moreover, as
the amount has increased year by year, it has been strongly questioned

whether "Japan is sinking into trade imperialism."

l6
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
Striking Out Due to Irritation

Taiwan thus has banned imports of 1,533 Japanese products-mot only
electrical products such as video recorders and refrigerators. but cosmetics,
foods. and the like. There is no time limit. Moreover, in a later enactment.

it was announced that imports of large trucks, buses, and engines from Japan
have been banned for 1 year.

Among these {items}, the limited ban on truck imports is intended to protect
the automobile manufacturing plant jointly established by the American GM
(General Motors) and Taiwan interests, but the ban on consumer goods is a
direct expression of Taiwan's anger at its growing trade deficit with Japan.

According to the announcement by the Taiwanese authorities, last year's trade
deficit with Japan was 3.4 billion dollars, nearly 300 million dollars greater
than the previous year's, with the total over the last 4 years amounting to

1.1 billion dollars. The Taiwanese have already held several discussions with
Japan aimed at improving trade problem, and they explain that, since nothing
at all has been arranged, they have decided to take this firm step "pending
real cooperation on the part of Japan" (Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs).
Although not explicitly designating Japan as the target, in the manner of
Taiwan, the return export (counterpurchase) system that the Indonesian
Government has just enacted is largely directed at Japanese firms.

Under this system, foreign companies from which the Indonesian Government

has ordered construction projects for national enterprises of more than 500
million rupees (about 800,000 dollars), as well as materials and supplies,
must purchase for their own countries nonpetroleum products from Indonesia
(natural rubber, coffee, veneers, textiles, and the like--a total of 11
designated items) in proportion to their receipts, which makes this a powerful
measure for revitalizing the nonpetroleum sector of exports.

The Indonesian Government says that "projects and supplies ordered fron
foreign companies will amount to about 4.5 billion dollars this year"
(Minister of Trade Radius Prawiro), so this new system, if enforced 100
percent, will by itself increase exports enough to rectify the trade balance.

When this policy was announced, the countries of western Europe--including
West Germany. France, and Britain-«were at first critical, and Japan, too.
did not conceal its doubts. This is because Japan's exports to Indonesia
amount to about 30 percent of Indonesia's total imports, and, in addition,
since most of them are plants and other heavy industrial products. they will
nearly all be subject to the counterpurchsse obligation.

Concern has been expressed that "if this policy produces definite results
for Indonesia, other Southeast Asian cauntries will follow suit. and the
basic conditions of Southeast Asian trade will be changed."

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further Measures in Disregard of Concern

Disregarding such concerns, the Indonesians have designated deals for
developmental imports this year worth some 250 million dollars and amounting
to about 1 milliOn tons as the first phase of the counterpurchase export
system, and are steadily progressing toward its enforcement. Consequently,
first the Europeans but now also Japanese firms have shifted from their
initial protests to a flexible stance of "cooperating with Indonesia's
policies to promote exports." within the Japanese trading companies, the
view has emerged that "if present habits are transformed by a real system

to recognize Third World exports, our own opportunities for business will
increase."

The Thai import surcharge enacted at the end of February will also inevitably
have its greatest impact on Japan. Thailand's adverse trade balance with
Japan has always been large, and the value of imports is almost double that of
exports; this move is also an indication of the dissatisfaction that is rapidly
building up beneath the surface. Very recently a Bangkok economic newspaper,
at the top of its front pages, took up the problem of the imbalance in trade
with Japan and made the ominous prediction: "In the latter half of this year.
groups in the government, in the military, and among businessmen will start

an anti-Japanese movement."

It is impossible to predict at this point whether the growing dissatisfaction
concerning trade with Japan within ASEAN and the “108 will erupt everywhere,
following Taiwan's lead. For example, in Thailand the 9th yen loan, amounting
to 70 billion yen, was tentatively agreed upon just this past February, so
the government's unhappiness with the trade deficit can be termed mild.
Moreover, the Indonesian counterpurchase exports are to enable the Suharto
government, which is anticipating a general election in May, to promote
exports of primary products, and the tendency is growing to see this as a
policy aimed donesticslly-to encourage confidence within the depressed
agricultural villages. to lead to victory for his party in the election, and
to anticipate flexibility in enforcement following the election.

Even in the case of the Taiwanese import ban, the goods covered amount to
only about 1.7 percent (some 100 million dollars) of Taiwan's imports

of Japanese products, and [the ban] is not considered to have any great
immediate impact. It is also true that there are voices in Taiwan which say
that the problem is in the trade structure, in which--in contrast to Japan's
exports to Taiwan being nearly all capital goods and industrial raw materials,
without which Taiwan's industry cannot operate--Taiwan's exports to Japan are
mainly agricultural and marine products and light industrial goods for which
there are alternative sources. Since the Taiwan authorities are fully aware
of this. there are many who see the import ban as a political gesture.

Following the Adjustments with Europe and America

However, one may also observe that the various countries of Asia are
simultaneously coming up with demands upon Japan as an aftermath of the

18
FOI.OFFNJAI.USE£0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

adjustments made with Europe and America, as my be seen in the view of one
knowledgeable Taiwanese that although "Taiwan was not wise to risk Japanese
retaliation by taking the lead in banning imports," yet "when we consider the
effects of Japan's adjustments with Europe and America, we are but following
in their wake." As it is certain that, with the narrowing of the American
and European markets. Asia will become steadily mre important to Japan, it is
safe to say that it is necessary for Japan to hear then out and keep cool.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbuneha 1982

9898
CSO: (0105/ 79

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE?

ECONOMIC

JAPAN-US 'nx mmnon' BECOMING SERIOUS
Tokyo ms JAPAN aoomuc :00th in English 7 Apt 82

[Text]

"Tax friction" has become serious between—Japan and the US, in
addition to the trade imbalance problem, and it is being worried about as
a new cause of friction with foreign countries. Recently, there is one
Japan-affiliated enterprise after another which is subjected to additional
impositions of taxes in the US, due to the difference in the interpretation
of the tax law between Japan and the US. In addition, it is expected that
the taxation under a new formula which the US Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
will carry out from July toward the enterprises in the US, will deal a big
blow to the Japan-affiliated enterprises, the rate of whose own capital is
low. Voices of strong repulsion are being raised from among the Japan-
affiliated enterprises. Therefore, the Finance Ministry and the National
Tax Administration Agency will make the following proposals at the periodic
conference between Japanese and (6 revenue officials, which will be held soon:
(1) When Japan-affiliated enterprises in the US are to be investigated,
Japanese revenue officials also should be present; and (2) Japanese and US
revenue officialsshouldinvestigate Japanese parent companies and their sub-
sidiaries in the US simultaneously by specification of work. Their policy is
to do their utmost so that the problem will not become more serious
than at present.

As to a dispute between Japan and the US over taxes, there is a case
of US Honda, which is a subsidiary of Honda Giken. When a Japanese parent
company declares,for the US corporation,income tax on its subsidiary too
low by intentionally raising the export price for the subsidiary in the US
and compressing the profits of the Subsidiary, the US levies the tax by
applying the "moved price tax system." US Honda was subjected to this
suspicion as to its income for fiscal 1975, and the case is pending in a
US tax court even at present.

According to the Finance Ministry and the National Tax Administration
Agency, similar disputes over taxes are occurring frequently among several
Japan~affiliated enterprises, including the subsidiaries in the US of two
other major automobile-manufacturing companies (Toyota Hotors and Nissan
Motors). Also. the National Tax Administration Agency points out: "Even
when an enterprise is subjected to an irrationaladditionalimposition of taxes,

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it may be made an object of tax investigations by Japanese and US revenue
officials, when it lodges an objection. So, there are increasing cases of
putting up with such a step without receiving a deduction as to the amount of

foreign taxes.

Such disputes arise because the Japanese and US tax laws are basically
different in the handling of the "burden of proof" toward an income which has
arisen, in addition to the moved price tax system. Japan is adopting the
actual amount tax system under which national tax officials, who conduct
investigations,havethe burden of proof, and even when the income of a tax-
payer is suspected to be too low, there is no other way but to levy atax
on the income which is too low, when the tax officials cannot prove it.

In the US, on the other hand, the tax authorities estimate that there ought

to he a certain income if there are certain earnings, and levy a tax on

the amount of these earnings. When the real income is smaller than the amount
estimated by the authorities, the tax-payer himself must prove it. Therefore,
it is usual that the amount of the tax imposed is larger than that under the
actual amount tax formulain Japan.

Furthermore, the excessively small capital tax system, which is to be
carried out in the US from July this year, will deal a big blow to Japan-
affiliated enterprises. Under this system, even borrowed money is regarded
as a part of capital, and a tax is levied without handling the payment of
interest as a loss of money. The view is strong that this is aimed at
Japan-affiliated enterprises which highly depend upon borrowed money and which
are making good showings on the average.

There are many cases where Japan-affiliated enterprises in the US
depend upon money borrowed from their parent companies in Japan. In carrying
out the tax system from July. transactions between parent companies and their
subsidiaries between nations are to be handled separately. However, the '
IRS is hurrying to lay down rules covering international transactions, and
it is likely that one enterprise after another will be pressed for a complete
review of procurement of funds by their subsidiaries in the US. As the
moved price tax and the excessively small capital tax do not exist in Japan,
some Japan-affiliated enterprises point out that "Both are non-tariff barriers
on the US side toward Japanese enterprises."

In the State of California, a unitary tax system is being carried out
under which taxes are levied on the subsidiaries and branch offices of
large enterprises which have advanced into the State, in the light of the
situation of yields as an enterprise group as a whole, even when their settle-
mrnt of accounts shows a deficit. This is presenting a problem among the
enterprises which have advanced. The Japanese authorities concerned are
taking a serious view of the fact that a dispute has begun to arise even with
the iRS, in addition to such moves in each State.

Therefore. the Finance Hinistry and the National Tax Administration
Agency want to request the US side to hold at an early date the periodic
conference between Japanese and US revenue officials, which is scheduled to
be held by this coming summer, and prevent the expansion of the disputes

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N1!

through talks. In concrete terms, their policy is to work upon the US
side to co-ordinate taxation at the actual scenes, with Japanese revenue
personnel also present, when the US side conducts investigations, and
carry out international simultaneous investigations, with Japanese and US
revenue officials conducting revenue investigations by specification of
work. '

As to such moves. there are growing voices from arong Japanese
enterprises, which are a focal point of the tax friction, requesting that the
deduction as to the amount of foreign taxes in Japan (TN: sic) be implemented more
flexibly, and seeking a revision of the Japan-US Tax Treaty, not only for
co-ordination between the officials concerned on the investigation level
but also for the prevention of dual taxation.

However, the Japanese Government, which is suffering from small tax
yields, strongly intends to levy taxes, as much as possible, on the incomes
which Japanese enterprises have earned overseas. 0n the other hand, the US,
which is making desperate efforts to overcome the financial deficit, views
Japan-affiliated enterprises, which are obtaining large amounts of yields
in that country, are a good target for securing tax yields. Therefore,
many people think that the difference of opinions between the Japanese and
US enterprises over taxation on Japan-affiliated enterprises in the US will
continue, for the time being. It is feared that this may become a new
causa which will make the Japan~US economic friction more serious.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

cs0: 4105/99

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLM
'MAINICHI' VIEWS JAPANESE ECONOMIC PROSPECTS
OHl71101 Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEHS in English 16 Mar 82 p 2

[Editorial: "World Economy 'Engine'")

[Text] The economic planning agency has disclosed that Japan's economy
during the October-December period in 1981 recorded a decline of 0.9 percent
from the previous quarter, a 3.5-percent negative growth in annual terms.
This was the first time since the January-March period of 1975 that a nega-
tive quarterly real-term economic growth had been recorded, indicating the
serious economic situation in Japan.

The decline was mainly caused by a considerable drop in exports. However,
there is a bright spot in domestic demand in expanded equipment investment.
Compared with the negative growth inmediately after the first oil shock in
1973, however, there seen to be less pessimistic trends in the current
economic situation.

Firstly, we have stable prices of commodities including oil. Secondly,
individual consumption and equipment investment are not in as bad a condi-
tion as might be. Thirdly, earnings of large business firms are not low.
Accordingly, some people view that the current sluggish economy is just a
temporary phenomenon.

we must, however. watch the overseas economic situation carefully. The
United States and European nations are suffering from high inflation and
unemployment, with increasing numbers of bankruptcies. The 0.8. move
towards protectionism has become more pronounced. Eastern European nations,
including Poland, and nonoil producing developing nations are deeply in
debt, which may invite international financial instability.

The high American interest rates have prompted worldwide economic instability.
Aimed at controlling inflation, the high interest rates have at the same

time caused inactive equipment investment and, Subsequently, declined
earnings for business firms, inadequate tax revenues and expanded fiscal
deficits. In addition, they have helped reduce currencies other than the

0.8. dollar to levels below their actual value.

23
INJR OF"WC1AI.IH§E(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic cause of the 0.5. fiscal deficit is its arms expansion race with
the Soviet Union, which has sharpened East-West tension and curtailed
East-Heat trade. Thus, the arms expansion can be termed the "root cause
of various evils."

Under such circumstances, we have no reason to be optimistic about the
future of the Japanese economy. While Japan has enjoyed exceptionally low
inflation rates and unemployment, what worries the Japanese government is
the fiscal deficits, but the government has taken no drastic action to
cope with this.

Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki has pledged to suspend the issuance of national
bonds which are aimed at covering fiscal deficits by 1984, but this pledge
has prevented him from taking steps to reactivate the economy, except for
advancing the implementation of public works programs in fiscal 1982.

What will become of the world economy if Japan fails to take active measures?
Doing nothing will accelerate a reduced world economy and the trade friction
will remain as it is. Some Western European nations and the United States
have demanded that Japan, a model of economic policy, play a more important
role as an "engine" to boost the world economy. We believe that Japan,

an economic power enjoying 10 percent of the world gross national product
(GNP), must change its policy to come up to world expectations.

For this purpose, we call for an expansion of domestic demand, an increase
in official governmental assistance to developing nations and efforts for
world disarmament. If and when these policies can provide a lift, even a
modest one, to the world economy, criticism leveled at Japan will moderate.

This demand must be realized through the promotion of public works and
housing construction as well as an income tax cut in fiscal 1982. A
revision of the economic structure through these measures will help Japan
remove the trade friction.

The increase in government assistance must be welfare-oriented, aimed at
preventing hunger, for example. The aid to least developed nations will
settle the unstable international fiscal situation. Japan must also urge
the promotion of disarmament because, we believe, Japan should be a pioneer
in this field. After all, Japan achieved its present prosperity by keeping
military expenditures to a minimum.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News 1982

C80: 4120/249

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECMHIC

GOVERNMENT TO INCREASE FINANCIAL EXPENDITURES TO EXPAND DOMESTIC DEMAND
Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEWS in Lnglish 4 Apr 82
[Text]

It became clear on the 3rd that the OBCD, which is a group of
advanced nations, has sought Japan's drastic conversion of its management
of the economy. This was formally conveyed to the Japanese side for the
first time at the meeting of the Secretaries of the OECD Economic Policy
Committee (EPC). which was held in washington late last month. It pressed
Japan to (1) raise the interest rates and (2) bolster business. The
Government is taking the posture of basically rejecting this, saying that
"Raising the interest rates runs counter to business measures." However,
the situation makes it inevitable for the Government to decide on measures
to expand domestic demand further from two fields —- elimination of
the trade friction with Europe and America and bolstering of domestic
business. Therefore, the Government has firmed up the policy of starting
studies on comprehensive economic measures centering on the expansion of
domestic demand, together with measures for opening the market, including
partial liberalization of agricultural products, after the passage of the
fiscal 1982 Budget Bill on the 5th. completing the framework for business
measures led by finances. including the expansion of loans by the housing
Loan Corporation, an increase in the expenses for public works. an increase
in the number of independent local projects, and a tax~reduction, and
announcing the framework by the time of the Versailles Summit (Advanced
Summit Conference) in June.

At the Cabinet meeting on March 16, the Government decided and carried
out the lst round of measures to bolster business, including advance
implementation of public works and housing construction with public funds.
however, as the second round which is to be newly checked into, expansion
of loans by the Housing Loan Corporation and increase in the amount of
electric power facilities investments are_expected to be included, centering
on an addition of expenses for public works in this coming fall and there-

after.

Government leaders including Economic Planning Agency KOMOTO are
already hinting at measures to bolster business. finance Minister
HATANABE. too, who has so far been taking a cautious posture, says that

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY

"we will not cause the Japanese economy to become weak from this coming
fall." Thus, new business measures will be boiled down from early this
week, when the Budget Bill will be passed.

The probability is great that the contents of the business measures
this time will resemble the case of the supplementary budget (enterprise
scale: V2 trillion -- 1.1 percent of the GNP) which was announced after
the London Summit in fiscal 1977. In concrete terms, such measures are
expected as to increase the expenses for public works by more than Y1 trillion
and expand the Housing Loan Corporation loans for tens of thousands of
houses. Hhether or not the tax reduction can be carried out by fiscal 1982'
is fluid. However, there is the following voice: "A tax reduction by
¥300 billion'or ¥uoo billion will be possible by breaking down a part of
the reserve funds for the recovery of subsidiary coins, which amount to
¥l,200 billion at present" (Government source).

0n the other hand, the Economic Policy Committee, where the criticism
against Japan's economic policy was voiced, is an organization to check
into economic situations and policies in the OECD. A secret meeting of
the Secretaries was held in Washington on March 27, with representatives of
major advanced nations participating.

With US Presidential Economic Advisory Committee Chairman HEIDBNBAUH
as Chairman. the representatives of various countries discussed the present
economic situation in the world and economic policies. According to the
Governnwnt source. OCCD Secretary General VAN LENNEP and representatives

of two or three countries expressed opinions to seek a change of Japan‘s
economic policy, at the meeting.

As to the gist of these opinions, they showed the view that the policy
mix of the policy to ease the money situation and the policy to restrain
financial expenditures (combination of financial and monetary policies), which
mix Japan is adopting, is "eventually inducing a lower yen," and sought

the raising of interest rates and the increasing of financial expenditures,
as a measure to improve it.

This is a criticism against Japan's having been holding down financial
expenditures as far as possible for the re-construction of finances, and
depending mainly upon the easing of the money situation as a business
measure. It is said that Secretary General VAN LENNBF clarified the judgment
that Japan's economic policy is linked to a lower yen under the high interest

rates in the US, and is intensifying the trade friction between Japan and
advanced nations.

As to this request for raising the interest rates, there are many who
are of the following opinion: "It is possible to induce a higher yen by
raising the interest rates, but on the other hand, it will drag down on
the feet of business through declines in facilities investments and housing
investments and the worsening of enterprise yields. So, we cannot accept it"

26
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
(Finance Ministry leader). Within the Government, there is rather the
intention that it is-reasonable to request the US to lower the interest rates
and work to lower the domestic interest rates.

However. in regard to the request for bolstering business through the
expansion of domestic demand, the Government has apparently been drivan
into a situation where it cannot but carry it out, in view of the internal
and external situations. Domestic business has bright aspects, too, such
as the fact that inventory adjustment has run its course, and that the
rise in commodity prices has calmed down. In industry circles, however,
there is a growing sense of depression mainly among medium and small
enterprises. and there is a widespread sense of crisis to the effect that if
the situation continues as is, the vitality of the economy will be lost.

As to the trade friction with Europe and America, on the other hand, a
limit has begun to be seen to individual measures, and it has become

indispensable for Japan to change its policy to show its posture of
international co-operation, before the time of the Versailles Summit.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News, 1982

cso: 4105/99

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

ECOIDHIC

TAX REVENUE DEFICIT IN LOCAL AUTOMJmUS ENTITIES
Tokyo THE JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English 10 Apr 82

[Text]

According to the Autonomy Ministry, the—deficit in the tax
revenues of prefectures is expected to reach about ¥3u0 billion, as
against the estimate in the Decal Financial Plan, and the deficit
amount is expected to reach the second highest level ever registered,
after that seen in fiscal 1975. The reason for this is that the amount
of revenues from the corporation business tax, which accounts for
about «0% of the amount of prefectural tax-revenues, will decrease sharply
from the originally estimated level, reflecting the poor business
results of enterprises. The total amount of tax revenues in prefectures up
until the end of February showed a one-digit, low-rate increase,
compared with the corresponding period of the preceding year. The fear
is becoming stronger among the persons concerned that a large-scale lack of
tax revenues may arise in fiscal 1982, too.

This will be the fourth time since fiscal 1977 (¥28.5 billion) for
prefectures to suffer from a lack of tax revenues. The deficit amount
will reach the second highest level, after that (¥7u8.7 billion) seen
in fiscal 1975.

According to the Autonomy Ministry, the amount of tax revenues in
prefectures as of the end of February was ¥6,362.6 billion (excluding
the amount of increase in revenues from non-legal ordinary taxes and
excessive taxation), 6.7% above the level registered in the corresponding
period of the-preceding year. This figure is “.7 points belou the
estimated increase rate (ll.u%) in the Local Financial Plan formulated
by the Autonomy Ministry, as a guideline for the compilation of budgets
by local autonomous entities. It is estimated that if the situation
develops as is, the lack of tax revenues will reach ¥337 billion.

In the case of the State, the corporation tax on companies, which
carry out settlement of accounts in the March term of 1982, will be
included in the tax revenues for fiscal 1981. In the case of local

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE!
autonomous entities, however, the corporation business tax will be included
in the tax revenues for fiscal 1982. Unlike the case of the State,
therefore, there is hardly any room for tax revenues to be affected

by the business results of companies which carry out settlement of
accounts in the March term.

Among the various tax items, it is the corporation business tax
which has become markedly stagnant. The total amount of tax revenues
up until the end of february increased by 3.2%, compared with the
corresponding period of the preceding year. This figure is as much as
lu.6 points below the estimated increase rate (17.8%) in the Local
Financial Plan. when limited to the corporation business tax alone,
it is estimated that the deficit will reach ¥396 billion. It seems that
it will be impossible for even the increase in revenues from the
individual residents' tax and the individual enterprise tax, which are

in a comparatively favorable tone. to offset completely the decrease in
revenues from the corporation business tax.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 The Nihon Keizsi Shimbun, Inc.
csop 4105/99

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N1!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

commas or 'szconn rAchcz' or wm-mzmuzuzm msunzs
Tokyo mm: manna in English 10 Apr 82

[Text]

The contents of the concrete measures which the Government formulated

on the 9th, as the "second round" of market-liberalization measures, are as
follows:

"Various Measures for External Economic Relations, for the Time Being"

In the light of the present international situation, it is considered
that the following measures should be taken, for the time being, in order to

maintain co-operative relations with other countries, and to suppress protec-
tionism and to maintain free trade.

(Those marked with asterisks are measures which should be taken
before the Summit)

I. General Arguments (omitted [TNz by the paper and not by the translator])

II. Concrete Measures

1. Promotion of the liberalization of the market

a (l) Basing and Abolition of the Remaining Import Restrictions -- The
policy for the easing and abolition of the remaining import restrictions will be
firmed up, based on the exchange of views, etc., with the US, at the Japan-US
Agricultural Products working Group (April 12 and 13).

(2) Lowering of Tariffs -- * (a) In regard to items for which the
international competitive power of our country's industries has improved in
recent years (for example, high technology products, including computers),
reciprocal lowering of tariffs will be called for (however, depending on cases,
unilateral lowering will also be studied).

* (b) The intention of a unilateral lowering of tariffs will be expressed
for items which have become symbolic problems (for example, cookies, chocolate,

brandy, wine, whiskey, etc., in regard to the BC, and semi-processed lumber,
such as spruce, pine and fir, in regard to Canada).

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
W (3) Tobacco ~- Concrete plans for a large-scale increasing of tobacco
retail shops and for a large-scale increasing of advertising expenses will be
shown to the US side and talks will be pushed. As regards the monopoly system
itself, expectations will be attached on the promotion of the studies at the
Provisional Administrative Affairs Research Council, in the direction of pro-
moting imports.

(u) Removal of the "invisible barriers" in the distribution structure,
administrative guidance, etc. -- * (a) A general policy to the effect that
"Restrictive actions in regard to transactions, on the enterprise level,will
not be permitted, and there will be no restrictions on imports through adminis-
trative guidance, etc., and depending on circumstances, strict and fair actions
will be taken by the Fair Trade Commission," will be announced. '

* (b) The actual situation in regard to soda-ash, paper and pulp, and
medical instruments, regarding which the US side is showing interest, will be
clarified, and necessary measures will be taken.

(c) Studies will be carried out on concrete measures for the promotion
of imports, centering on manufactured products.

(5) Improvement of import-related procedures, such as standards, etc. --
* (a) As regards the transparency of the process for the establishment of
standards. etc. (including the participation. etc.. of foreign persons, whose
interests are involved, etc.), it will be tackled as a task for the future,
and work in this regard will be started.

* (b) Forward-looking conclusions will be reached on the standards
for automobiles, plywood, medical drugs, cosmetics, etc., on the problems of
cherries and papaya produced in the US, apples produced in France, flower bulbs
in the Netherlands, customs clearance procedures (speeding up of screening
under the laws coming under the jurisdiction of Ministries and Agencies other
than the Finance Ministry, etc.), import procedures for wild rice, the grading

of "sake", tests for the safety of thenmos bottles, sanitation standards for
bacon, etc.

(6) Trade in services and capital transactions -- * (a) A general‘
policy to the effect that "internationalization in the field of services will
be promOtcd, and our country will contribute in a positive way to the establish-
ment of international rules" will be announced.

(b) The problem will be tackled, with emphasis on the problem of

lawyers, and liberalization will also be pushed gradually in regard to the
insurance and banking businesses.

(c) The improving of access to the capital market will be tackled.

* (d) A statement to the effect that investments in Japan will be wel-
comcd, will be issued.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

* (7) Utilization of the Ombudsman system -- (Omitted)

2. Promotion of Positive Co-operation

* (1) Ways for concrete co-operation with the US and the European
nations, such as the establishment of a Japan-US joint working group concerning
high technology, will be explored.

(2) Promotion of overseas investments, centering on the manufacturing
industries.

* (3) Studies will be pushed on the development-imports of US general
coal.

* (a) In connection with our country's food aid, efforts will be made
to utilize US-produced wheat. in addition to the grains produced by the
developing nations.

(5) Purchase of specific products will be promoted (nuclear-energy-

connected machinery, heavy electric machinery [US], automobile parts [US and
Canada]. aircraft, helicopters, ferro-nickel and enriched uranium [france]).

COPYRIGHT: DAILY YOHIURI 1982

cso: 4105/99

32
FOR OPBICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNJA1.USE¢DNLY

ECONOMIC

AUTOMOBILE PARTS INDUSTRY'S STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE REPORTED
Tokyo NIKKEI smcvo smuu in Japanese 3, 9, 10 17 Feb 82
3 Feb 82 p 8]
[Article by reporterKawabe: "Hie Giken Kogyo--Direct Introduction of Robotics"]

[Text] Hie Giken Kogyo is a Honda Motor Company affiliate parts manufacturer
that is considered to have top-ranking capability (main office: Tokyo; presi-
dent: Noboru Hasegawa; capital: 500.5 million yen). The firm's main plant is
the Yasuno plant (about 300 employees) located in Yasuno, Hie Prefecture. Just
this January, Honda Vice President Shigeru Sasamiya, together with representa-
tives from the parts division of BL Corporation (Britain), Honda's partner, as
well as a delegation from BL affiliate parts manufacturers, visited the Yasuno
plant to present an outstanding factory award and observed its ”certified high-
yield production system." (Vice President Sasamiya)

Double-Digit Growth

Let us enumerate Hie Giken's "strengths“: As of June 1981, its sales figure
(35.2 billion yen) exceeded the projected figure by about 3 billion yen. The
profit-loss diverging point was 71.3 percent (3.0 point decline from the pre-
vious period). The monthly per persCJ added value, excluding materials cost,
was 1,302,000 yen (increase of 112,000 yen). In the midst of the "auto reces-
sion," the firm has achieved a double-digit increase in sales. Added to that
is the above detailed financial accomplishment. For these reasons, it far out-
distances others in the Honda group in skillful management. Since last year a
certain work process has been introduced at the Yasuno plant as an energy-
saving, automated operation model. A year ago, three lines of the same work
process occupied eight men and nine women workers--a total of 17 employees.

A partial reorganization of the work procedure and introduction of automated
machines reduced the number of workers to 11 (7 men and 4 women) while main-
taining the same production volume in the same timeframe. Honda is planning
to employ this technique not only at Hie Giken but at other affiliate parts
manufacturing operations.

Thoroughgoing Independent Management
A thoroughgoing total quality control (TQC) system with significant delegation

of authority emphasizing the lower echelon workers has been implemented and
each employee is committed to the "self-management" concept. This has been

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the key to Hie Giken's success in the all-out business competition. None of
Hie Giken plants has full-time inspectors. Rather, the system "infuses"
quality at each manufacturing step. It is said that the executives of Hitsui
Bank-~the firm's main financial bank-~receive "lectures" regarding the unique
management's annual plan frequently.

Hie Giken President Hasegawa, although reserved, is confident: "I believe we
have had considerable positiwe achievements in terms of efficient management."
After making its initial overseas expansion move in Taiwan (September 198», it
pooled capital with Honda and another firm and set up a parts manufacturing
company in the United States last autumn. Its overseas strategy as a member
of the Honda group was launched successfully. Hie Giken appears to be sail-
ing full sail under a favorable wind.

President Hasegawa, however, is fond of saying: "From here on is the new
challenge." He is of the opinion that "the automotive parts industry has left
the era of automated rationalization and has now stepped into a revolutionary
era of robotics." That is, he has decided on a plan to implement an efficient
production mode qualitatively very different from the model work process of
last year. "Traditionally, we have been a small to medium-size operation in
which personal contacts and interresearch were our big assets. Robotics is a
different matter from what we have been used to, but the tide is unmistakable
when we look to the future. If we were to resist the introduction of robotics,
we would endanger our business foundation." There is a sense of urgency in
his speech.

Currently, Hie Giken has approximately 30 processing and assembly robots in-
stalled in all four of its factories. The company is examining a plan to in-
crease this number drastically. to about 100 robots. in another year. Presi-
dent Hasegawa would not disclose the long-range installation plan, but the
firm's operating policy since its inception in 1958 has always been: spare no
expense on equipment!

The firm's capital was 800,000 yen during the early part of the sixties, and
equipment purchases amounting to double. triple, even 10 times the capital
have been implemented more than once. Even now, the annual repayment cost is
over 2 billion yen. Interest in investing in equipment for the future is
extremely high at Hie Giken.

Toughened by Trials

Hie Giken has used increased volume as leverage while investing in equipment
and revolutionary technologies. Although demand for two-wheeled vehicles
will continue to be strong, a large—scale introduction of robots will create
surplus workers among the firm's approximately 500 employees. President
Hasegawa has no intention of cutting back the current work force. Thus,
Honda points out that, "the topic for the future is diversification of pro-
ducts."

But taking over products handled by other parts manufacturers, on the strength
of a high-efficiency production system, would cause friction among the group

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

members. Therefore, President Hasegawa describes the firm's future direction
as "the creation ofa new market in the plastics field, which is just starting
to run smoothly, and expansion into the industrial machinery sector."

The Yasno plant is associated with some 40 subcontractors. Hie Giken admits
that "we ourselves have had close calls three times in the past and we became
stronger as a result of those ordeals." It is likely, therefore, that under
Hie's high-pitched leadership, the subcontracting firms will be asked to
respond expeditiously to shifting needs.

[9 Feb 82 p 9]

[Article by reporter Takahashi: "Nihon Radiator-Finds Solution in Commercial
Sale of Air-Conditioning Units"]

[Text] Nihon Radiator's president, Jukichi Tada, is extremely busy of late.
He is the firm's top salesman in trying to increase the sale of car air-
conditioning units. He is about to celebrate his 70th birthday and yet, he
himself must dash all over the country. Why? Because there is a need to
strengthen the business framework to stave off the rapid decline of the
automotive industry. Although the firm has annual sales figures of 100
billion yen,it is not secure from Unzprevailing tide of stringent business
climate. Thus, he cannot sit idly in the president‘s easy chair.

"Limit to Growth"

Nihon Radiator is an automotive parts manufacturer that is a direct lineal
descendant of Nissan Motors. Nissan supplies 48.5 percent (36.12 billion
shares) of its capital. It has been highly successful as a specialty manufac-
turer of radiators, car heaters, mufflers and so on. However, it decided
that "there would be a limit to growth if the existing operation were pursued
exclusively," so it entered the car air-conditioning market several years ago.
Since then, it has built up a position as Nissan H tors' car air-conditioning
manufacturer, but it has been forced to find other growth avenues as a result
of the lack of growth in the sale of automobiles. That is, the firm is try-
ing not only to maintain its status as the official supplier to Nissan but
also to develop steady sales on the open market.

President Tada's New Year's speech to enployees was as follows: "We must fur-
ther strengthen our business skill. Although we are Nissan's legitimate heir
in the parts manufacturing sector, we cannot take that position for granted.
The circumstances have changed. Concentrate all your energy on strengthening
the operational framework. We have to perform this task ourselves." Up to
now the majority of automotive parts manufacturers directly affiliated with
automakers-~including Nihon Radiator-have only been required to make and
deliver parts in response to the parent company's direction. They have not
been adept at sales. But what is needed for Nihon Radiator now is the "will
to do it (selling)!" For that reason, the president of the firm is leading the
personnel in an all-out sales campaign.

35
FOR 0FFNJAL.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Weakness in the Production Format

The firm has a weakness in its production format. Although last fall, a new
assembly line was completed at its Gunma plant (Yurakucho. Cunma Prefecture)
and a consistent production format capable of producing 100,000 units per
month was established; a vital component of the product--the compressor-—is
not made by Nihon Radiator. The company must purchase it from other Nissan
group affiliate firms such as the Atsugi Automotive Parts Company and so on.
If production from beginning to end--compressor to completed unit--could be
produced in a cohesive operation, it is eminently clear that quality control
and cost management could both be easily accomplished. Nihon Radiator'a weak-
ness lies in the fact that it does not have full control over the entire pro-

duction operation.

When Nihon Radiator decided to undertake car air-conditioning production, it
had planned to make its own compressor. But upon witnessing Atsugi's diffi—
culty at that time, with the decline in propeller shaft demand resulting from
a switch over to FF (front engine, front-wheel drive). Nissan decided to
allocate compressor production to Atsugi, and the subsequent division of labor
format between Nihon Radiator and Atsugi Auto parts was affected.

Technological Exchange Nith Atsugi

In order to survive in the fiercely competitive open commercial market, over-
all cost management and comprehensive, cumulative technology--including after
service--are needed. While the factory installed car air-conditioning market
is demanding, open commercial market competition is fierce. Commercial market
manufacturers, pushed by the made to order makers are beginning to roll back

the tide.

Securing a place in the open commercial market against this backdrop under

such a handicap requires some doing. Nihon Radiator first of all set compre-
hensive technological advancement as its priority objective. First, it scouted
professional technicians at Nissan and began emphasizing technical exchange
with Atsugi Automotive Parts. With the latter, cooperation was pledged at a
top-level conference attended by Nihon Radiator President Tada and Atsugi
President Shigeru Kitamura. The solidarity between the two firms has begun
already.

Moreover, great effort is being expended to gather technicians by means of
mid-career hiring, and the firm is intent on upgrading its comprehensive
technological capability.

In the car air-conditioning market, Toyota Motor group's Nihon Denso has begun
to put its muscle behind expanding its commercial sales volume. Sankyo
Electric Appliance--a top-ranking open commercial market manufacturer--is
counterattacking. In addition, the Nissan group has other "senior" ranking
ear air-conditioning manufacturers besides Nihon Radiator—~Hitachi Works and
Diesel Machinery. With close scrutiny from these quarters, Nihon Radiator's
car air-conditioning unit consolidation policy has many difficult facets. How
effective will the campaign led by President Tada to expand into the open mar-
ket be as the mainstay of the firm's structural improvement? This year will
be the "win or lose year." (President Tada)

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[10 Feb 82 p 8]

[Article by reporter Kawabe: "Nihon Hatsujo~-Development of Nonautomotive
Sector"]

[Text] "Very soon. we will at last begin the second phase construction at the
Komagane plant, with the goal of completing the synthetic products manufactur-
ing plant in October of this year," says Hihon Hatsujo President Hasao Iketani,
demnstrating confidence at having finally translated a long-standing plan

into a new business strategy. The firm's Komagane plant, located in Komagane
city, Nagano Prefecture, is on a site of about 60,000 square meters. The first
phase construction, which was completed toward the close of last year, con-
sisted of a research and development wing which will bring together and house
the firm's development engineer . The second phase construction involves a
building with about 4,000 square meters of floorspace for a synthetic goods
plant (urethane products for industrial machinery use and so on) to be built

at a cost of about 500 million yen. The plan is to develop this site into a
"nonauc' motive goods mecca."

Clear Obj ect ivcs

Nihon Hatsujo is the largest manufacturer of automotive board springs and coil
springs. Its long-term business strategy is "lucidity." The total sales for
1980 was 87.8 billion yen. The plan is to expand that figure to 135 billion
yen over the next 5 years and at the same time to increase the profit margin
from 5 percent to 7 percent. In terms of financial status, over 60 percent
of the capital is company held. The profit-loss diverging point is below 80
percent. The goals thus are set in nmerical terms and are clearly laid out.

Moreover, President Iketani predicts that "demand in the automotive field will
be limited to an annual growth rate of about 2 percent at most." Consequently,
the firm's strategy puts development of new products slated for general indus-
try--other than automtive--as the generating force for sustaining business
growth. Steady growth for automotive spring products and high growth for non-
automotive products, based on application of automotive spring manufacturing
technology, are the company's twin goals. The Komagsne plant's second phase
construction plan is slated to translate these goals into reality, and thus,
President Ikctani is taking great interest in bringing the project to fruition.

In the nonautomotive sector, Nihon Hatsujo's emphasis is on four categories:
(1) precision springs; (2) industrial and (3) processing equipment based on
spring technology; and (’4) mold processing for Synthetic materials. In every
instance techniques accumulated through automotive spring manufacture are
applied to other fields. President Iketani says: "Replenishment of tech-
nological capability is our most important topic up to 1985." In other words,
this really means multifaceted product development.

Even in the field of electronics technology-which has become the quickly
rising star in the automotive parts industry--the firm's Processing Equipment
Division is steadily translating the spring sensor and the NC coiling machine
into finished products. "Although electronics-related products occupy only

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2-3 percent of total sales now, we intend to raise this ratio threefold under
our 5-year plan." (President Iketani) That would mean that Nihon Hatsujo,
with its background of mechanical technology, will have a "new face."

Replenishment Phase for Overseas Ventures

The "Company Objectives for This Year" published internally by Nihon Hatsujo
at the beginning of this year list quality control at production site (QC) as
well as total quality control (TQC), which includes indirectly related depart-
ments, coordinated strengthening of overseas operations and strengthening of
individual firms within the group structure, in addition to consolidation of
technological capability. Among the listed items, overseas strategy is
described as "having entered the second phase-from the development stage to
the replenishment stage."

Nihon Hatsujo has recently provided technological knowhow to an Indonesian
spring manufacturer. It intends to form a technological tie with a Malaysian
automotive parts firm soon. Since 1973 it has been steadily increasing over—
seas ties through capital advancements and technological offers--beginning with
Thailand, then Taiwan, the Philippines, Singapore. Australia, Indonesia and
Malaysia.

President Iketani proclaims the firm's overseas strategy'a repletion phase in
the following words: “The strategic foundation building in the western Paci-
fic rim has now been completed. The goal for this area now is upgrading
business strength and further replenishment of market competitiveness. At the
same time, we will get down to serious business with our overseas strategy in
the as yet uncultivated European/U.S. arena."

In the United States, the mecca of automobile manufacturing, it is working on
a new cooperative tie with the firm's former technological partner, Rockwell
International Corporation. Nihon Hatsujo's international strategy is to feel
out the receptiveness to a basic capital participation proposal among firms
that it already has ties with or expects to have ties with.

Developing Talent

Nihon Hatsujo's sales structure at present is as follows: a little less than
80 percent automotive and the rest general industry. During the 1985-1995
decade, it plans to change the firm's orientation drastically by reducing the
automotive ratio to 60 percent and allocating 40 percent to other fields. The
related firms and subcontractors will be asked to make the necessary shifts,
too. Last year, the Nihon Hatsujo group--25 firms led by Nihon Hatsujo-—
worked toward improving the business and financial status. Starting this year,
the emphasis will be shifted to developing talent and establishing autonomous
technology. President Iketani states: "Hereafter, we will observe the develop-
ment of various enterprises, and if need be, we will think about consolidation
and reorganization." The firm has acquired its present position as the largest
spring manufacturer by absorbing its competitors. That tradition will be car-
ried forward, and it will not shrink from reorganization if need be.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Approximately 50 firms that supply materials and parts to Nihon ﬂatsujo belong
to a cooperative organization called "Shinwa kai [Fraternal Association]."
Nihon Hatsujo's mainstay thus far has been steel (springs). but in the future
it will transform itself to deal with synthetic, electronic and processing
equipments technologies; and the organization of subcontracting businesses
with a slightly different focus than before and with a certain degree of
systems technology will be needed. The reorganization of subsidiary business

groups may very well determine the success or failure of Nihon Hatsujo's
future.

[17 Feb 82 p 9]

[Article by reporter Takahashi: "Sankyo Denki (Sankyo Electric Appliance)--
Unification ofManufacturing and Distribution Operations“] '

[Text] Toward the close of last year, the largest commercial automotive air-
conditioning unit manufacturer--Sankyo Electric Appliance Company--tentatively
decided that its president and founder, Kaihei Ushikubo, would be elevated to
chairman of the board, and his younger brother, Managing Director Shuji
Ushikubo would be promoted to the firm's presidency. This top-level manage-
ment change was formally promulgated on 12 January when everyone was still
aglow from the New Year's festive mood. At the same time. the leadership of
Sanden Sales (main office: Tokyo; capital: 200 million yen), in charge of
Sankyo's sales and distribution was also changed. Sankyo Executive Director
Eijiro Nasagaki became Sanden Sales' president. A move patterned after the
unification of Toyota Motor Manufacturing and Toyota Automotive Sales appears
to signal the beginning of a unified production and sales strategy designed to
strengthen the business framework.

Reduced Volume Is the Only Way

The reason that Hr Kaihei Ushikubo decided to retire from the presidency of
the firm--an office he filled for 40 long years—-is because an expeditious
reworking of the business framework is urgently required, or else the company
may not survive. The Sankyo Electric Appliance group Omade up of Sankyo Elec-
tric Appliance, Sanden Sales, and Sankyo International) showed a significant
decrease in income and profits at the March 1981 settlement of accounts.

The reason for the decline was ovarstocking. The sales amounted to 12.9 per-
cent less than the previousterm, 65.9 billion yen. There was a drastic drop
in profit after tax--1 billion yen or 82.5 percent less than the previous
period. In order to recover the earnings, it was considered that there is no
other way but to unify the manufacturing and distribution phases and to effect
a "volume decrease"; and toward the end of last year this view was translated
into a concrete plan.

Using the retirement of the founder as a turning point, a chain of personnel
changes was made. The new format assigns overseas strategy to chairman of the
board Kaihei Ushikubo, and new President Shuji Ushikubo will concentrate on
strengthening the general business framework. As soon as he assumed office,
the new president initiated action. He told the 60 some subcontractors to
"create a self-reliant operational structure that can survive without depend-
ing on the parent enterprise." President Shuji is at the same time the

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

president of a subsidiary firm, Sanwa Toso Company, and he has long investigated
ways to escape from total dependence on the parent company.

Promotion of Personnel Exchange

Beginning with the top-level management change at Sanden Sales, exchange of
personnel between the manufacturing and sales sectors will become more frequent.
First ofall, Sankyo‘s president's quarters, currently at Isezaki, Gunma Pre-
fecture, will be transferred to the Sanden Sales complex in A ibahara, Tokyo.
The aim ofthis move is: by moving the president's office to Tokyo, Sankyo's
officers will be permanently stationed in Tokyo, thereby removing the barrier
separating manufacturing from sales. It is certain that the eventual inten—
tion is for Sankyo Electric Appliance and Sanden Sales to merge--very much in
the same vein as Toyota’s merger of processing and distribution departments.

Sankyo Electric Appliance Company was started in 1943. Up until 1964 the Ope-
rational Headquarters was in charge of sales; but it was decided that in terms
of capital procurement and so on, the separation of manufacturing from distri-
bution was desirable. So, in 1965, the Operational Headquarters was renamed
Distribution and Sales and given an independent status. Thereafter, riding
the fair wave of “motorizetion,” the company rose to the position of a top
open market automotive air-conditioning unit manufacturer. The rapid decline
of the automobile industry forced it to resume its original organizational
format.

Rushing About All over the World

Although Sankyo Electric Appliance had been hailed as the top commercial auto-
motive air-conditioning unit manufacturer, the circumstances surrounding Sankyo
for the past year or two have become increasingly difficult. The ratio of
factory installed automobile air-conditioning units (that is, instead of instal-
lation of commercially purchased units) is gaining each year. Moreover,

Toyota Motors group affiliates such as Nihon Denso and the Nissan motors

group firm Nihon Radiator have started to commercially market their units in
earnest. In the midst of the stagnating domestic sales of automobiles, it is
not easy to increase commercial sales of automotive air-conditioning units.

Even with manufacturing and distribution departments unified and the produc—
tion volume decreased, the future is fraught with difficulties. Strong mea-
sures are needed to recover profits and turn back the tide to achieve a better
business showing. As a mainstay in that effort Sankyo Electric Appliance has
chosen overseas business development. It was the first in the automotive air-
conditioning equipment industry to establish a plant in Dallas (United States),
which began full-scale production last year. This year, another plant will

be built in Singapore in an attempt to effect rapid enlargement of overseas
production.

Within the main office in Gunma Prefecture, an organization called "Ford Re-
search Room" has been created. It is seeking avenues to open supply routes
to the Ford Motor Company. It is dead serious about its overseas strategy.
The chairman of the board who yielded the presidency to his younger brother

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is busily rushing around the world, for in order to reap maximum benefit from
a strengthened business framework, 8 strong overseas operation is essential.
How successful will be the duo teamwork of President Shuji and Chaimn Kaihei,
entitled "The Shape-Up Strategy?" It is clear that each step taken is directly
tied to the success or failure of the company. The situation is grave indeed.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha 1982

11460
680: 6105/ 60

41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECWGIIC

EARLY FARM IMPORT LIBERALIZATION DIFPICULT

Tokyo THE DAILY YOMIURI in English 10 Apr 82 p 1

[Text] Early liberaliution oi im- necessary ior the agricul-
ports oi iarrn produce is titre industry to work ior
dimcult in the light oi the structural improvement in
present situation iaced by the iuture.

Japan's agriculture and in Faced with the increasing
view oi many problems still severity oi Japan-US trade
remainina to be solved. triction and criticism raised
This ‘1‘ stressed by u" by the second Ad Hoc Ad-
Agriculture, Forestry and ministraiive Reiorm Council
Fisheries mm", in its that the government in
annual white paper on “MW '" °"'°'°"‘“'°
agriculture announced on policy 9“", agriculture.
Friday. twig-ear 31‘1“" papert cited
or er mprovemen o
On "" ”Nb?” oi ""°n’ agricultural productivity
’imtio‘: °'h "”3: WW“? based on structural impro-
:13" i" f 9 ‘ "9 WP" vements as the blunt task
~‘_ ' “u“ important ‘0 iaced by Japan‘s agricul-
tr.l.e appropriate mcaxum turnl industry
on the matter while main- it strong), 'appeaied for
ruining harmony with «ound raising productivity through
dewiopnicnt oi domestic technologital innovation
.icrictiiitire and expanding the mp. 01
at tat: problems exist in agriculture.
to in: arty action on the '
M... “.12” W M d”
The a'hite paper said the 0 since Japan's rate o: R-
countrya agricultural and iianee on imports oi
izirminc villages were iul- {arm produce it higli. even
iillinc their role oi (arming . minimal short." in basic
3 healthy regional society {wrung will pose dancers
and maintaining the na- oi big social coniusion and
turai environment besidea uneasiness. 'rhereiore. a
working ior a stable supply 3t.bﬂ]ud supply oi iood-
oi iotidsiuiic. stuns has become increas-
it aaid labor productivity ingiy important.
in Japan's agriculture rose OJupan'a imports oi iarm
at an annual rate oi 55 products already have
percent between fiscal 1965 "'39th a N3" ""1 and
and 1900. This. it said. was a “MW increase 3‘ I" the
due chieﬂy to [ﬂ'hnologjc.| past cannot be anticipated
innovations and eiiorta to "i "if“ WW" "he" """d
overcome such adverse con- imm ”W'mm“ o‘ ‘°°d’
ditiona as a drop in iarm stun expenditures.
acreage. ii is important to make
it atrcsxcd that it wu import; oi ioodstuiia in
the iuture based on inter-
COPYRIGHT: The Daily Youiuri. 1982
050: 4120/252 END
102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national cooperation. 11
noted that various ad-
vanced countries were tak-
iﬂt imitative menarea on
farm products in accord-
ance with their domestic
situation.
0 Amid mere-sea in the
iood supply-demand attu-
ation since the middle part
oi the lows. the nation's
10°“! will”! structure has
shifted to a dual airueturv
composition with the seli-
sui'ilciency rate inr some
items being high and that
oi other: drastically low.
The overall ,n-ii-suiiirlemy
rate ior iood. excluding
iced. stands at 12 with that
oi grain registering 33 per-
cent
0 Prices in Japan oi such
products at wheat. rice
and heel are aliarpiy
higher than international
levels while those oi chick-
en. en: and pork are lower.
0 The per capita consump-
tion oi rice in iiscal mo
declined 1.1 percent due to
the ei'iects oi a drOp in real
income and the abnormally

cool summer. Rice eon-
sumpiion is still showing a
dfrilnii‘lg trend.

'The number oi iminine

households dt-rlliwd at a
slow ntmiiai raiq- oi )3 pcr~
cent between ilnii anti iiiiil.
'i‘ht-rt- were a total oi l.0i
miliiun huuM-liulds lithntt
males cxc‘usively ctiuupt-d
in iurminc in 1981 ac-
counting ior 2.! percent 0!
the total tanning house-
holds.