FOR OH-N'Ml. I'S‘r'. ONIN

JPRS L/10344
19 February 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 12/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes with in the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OI"
MATERIALS REPRODL'CED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL I'SF. UNI."

JPRS L/lO

19 Pebrua:

JAPAN REPORT
(rouo 12/82)

CONTENTS

ECONOMIC

Autonobiles--Croping for Coexistence
(Shimokava Koichi; JAPAN QUARTERLY, Oct-Dec 81) ........

NIT! Plans To Keep Automobile Exports to v.5. at 1.68 Nillion
(NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN, 20 Jan 82) ..... .................

Dissatisfaction Expressed Over Expansion of Export of
Automobile Parts
(NIRKEI SANGYO sulnnun, 21 Jan 82) .....................
SCIENCE AND TECFNOLOGY

HITI Initiated Full Investigation on Use of 'Stirling Engine'
(TECHNOCRAT, Oct 31) ..... .....................

Super Alloys for Nuclear Steelmsking
(TECENOCRAT, Oct 81) ...................................

Industry in VLSI Production War Reported
(NIKKEI SANCYO SHINBUN, various dates) .................

Plutonium Extracted To Be Used for LHR Nuclear Power Generation
(MAINICHI SRIHBL‘N, 31 Dec 81) ..........................

'DENRI SHIMBUN' Discusses Strengthening Nuclear Fuel Cycle
(DENKY SHIHBUN, 9 Jan 82) ...... ........................

Suzuki Discussed Electronics Revolution, Economic Changes
(Yamamoto Interview; NIHON KEIZA SHINBUN, 11 Jan 82)

General Conditions of Japan's Technology Trade
(DIAMOND'S INDUSTRIA, Jan 82) ............... ........ ...

- a - [III - ASIA - 111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Uranium Enrichment Shelved Pending Solution of Expense-Sharing
(DENKI SHINBUN, 16 Jan 82) ..............................

Constitutional Improvement, Reorganization Efforts Reported

Japan-Australia Negotiations To Revise Nuclear Energy Agreement
(DENKI sxunun, 20 Jan 82) ...............................

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AUTOMBILES--GROPINC FOR COEXISTENCE
Tokyo JAPAN QUARTERLY in English Vol 28 No a. Oct-Dec 81 PP 518-527
(Article by Shimokava Kolchi]

[Text]

Introduction

AKEN together. the auto industries of
the United States. Europe and Japan
account for more than 80 percent of

the world's auto production. In particular.
the Japanese auto industry has strengthened
its competitive position markedly in recent
years. and in terms of production volume it
has forged ahead of the other two production
centers. ln 1980, Japan produced ".04
million units (including tntcks and buses).
This represents an incredibly rapid 5.9ofold
increase in IS years from the 1.87 million
units produced in 1965. More than anything
else. this increase is attributable to the up-to-
date production facﬂities that the Japanese
industry has installed and which have
translated into high labor productivity. high
product quality and good maintenance
service—advantages derived from haVing
started later than the other competing
markers

Also bolstering Japan's competitive posi-
tion have been changes in the domestic as
well as overseas markets which have taken
place to the advantage of the Japanese auto
industry. For instance. from around I960,
when Japanese automakers geared themselves
for mass production, the Japanese economy

began to gather steam. triggering a wave of
motorization throughout the country which.
in turn. boosted the domestic demand for
automobiles. Similarly. the sharp increase
in Us. demand for imported suhcompacts
(l600cc-2000ce piston displacement). espe-
cially those made in Japan, whichoccurredin
the wake of the ﬁrst oil crisis of 1973. coming
as it did when Japan's domestic auto demand
was in the doldrurrs. helped the Japanese
automakers sustain the forward momentum
of their production.

What contributed most to turning the over-
seas market conditions favorably to Japanese
cars. however. were the steep increases in fuel
prices. As OPEC raised its crude prices.
overseas demand. notably in the us. market.
for fuel-efﬁcient cars grew rapidly. This
proved a great boon to .he Japanese auto
industry, which had long been concentrating
on the production of such subcompacts. Fol-
lowing the gasoline panic that erupted in
1979. US. consumer preference shifted ah-
ruptly in favor of subcompacts. So abrupt
was the shift. in fact, that US. automakers
which had traditionally concentrated on the
manufacture of full-size ears had to cut
production drastically because of lack of
demand. By contrast. their Japanese coun-
terparts busied themselves expanding their

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production to meet the growing export
demand.

it is true that good luck—favorable
changes in overseas markets—had a hand in
accelerating the growth of the Japanese auto
industry But much more than sheer luck.
the major reason for its remarkable growth
has been its superior competitiveness—an
overall strength that combines the know-how
of its supportive industries (crude materials.
parts and components and machinery).
improved productivity and dogged marketing
eﬂ’orts.

In the following pages, 1 would like to
survey the current situation and charac-
teristics of the Japanese auto industry.
review the history of its development, examine
the factors which helped it attain a competitive
edge in the world's auto mat...-ts (particularly
those which boosted its productivity). and
ﬁnally discuss its outlook in light of the
competition it faces in the world market for
subcompacts. as dramatized by the trade
frictions which Japanese auto exports have
caused with the United States and Europe.

Current Situation

Along with steel and electrical machinery.
automobiles are a leading industry in Japan.
underpinning the development of the nation’s
economy. in 1979, Japanese auto production
(including automotive parts and components
and car bodies) amounted to $18,307} bil-
lion. more than 10 percent of the nation's
industrial production. This percentage would
be even larger if auto-related services (auto
repairs, marketing and transport of autos for
local distribution) were included.

in addition. the auto industry uses l6.3
percent of the nation's production of ordinary
steel. 20 percent of special steel. 78.9 percent
of aluminum castings, 11.8 percent of
aluminum diecastings. 49.3 percent of rubber
goods. 20 percent of paints and 34.6 percent
of glass. in the area of employment. also.

2

more than i0 percent of the nation's gainfully
employed workers are accounted for by the
auto industry.

0f the 11.04 million units Japan produced
in 1980. light four-wheelers accounted for 1.11
million units. Almost all of the passenger
airs were subcompacts; compact cars ac-
counted for only 10 percent. and eight-
cylinder engine vehicles less than 1 percent.
Trucks accounted for 3.9l million units and
buses 91,000 units.

Overall. passenger tars accounted for 63.1
percent. compared with 79.6 percent in
the United States and 90.8 percent in West
Germany. The lower percentage of pas.
senger as production in Japan is attributable
to the fact that commercial vehicles of the
van type are counted as trucks and also
because the percentage of truck production
has traditionally been high in this country
(in l965. for instance. trucks accounted for
more than 60 percent of the nation's total
auto production).

The heavy concentration of production on
small cars and trucks is a corollary of the
country's physical conditions (narrow streets
—inhcrited from the traditional city layout
—and poor roads) and the high domestic
gasoline tax (inevitable for a country which
relies almost entirely—99 percent—on im-
ported oil).

[n 1976. export sales of Japanese autos
leaped ahead of steel and since then have
become the largest earner of export dollars.
Automobiles account for 21.9 percent of the
nation‘s total exports by value. and their
export sales generate enough dollar receipts
to pay one-half the nation’s oil bills. In
1980. Japan exported 5.96 million units of
cars and trucks. or 54 percent of in annual
auto production of l l.04 million units. This
represents a 15-fold increase in to years in
terms of percentage of exports over the 20
percent it exported in I970. The ratio of
exports is the highest in the case of passenger
cars (66.2 percent). followed by trucks
(32.7 percent) and buses (1.1 percent).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In terms of destinations. the United States
is the largest importer of Japanese cars
(40.3 percent). followed by Europe (20.6
percent). Southeast Asia (9.7 percent). the
Middle East (9.l percent) and Latin America
(6.4 percent).

By contrast. Japan imported a total of
44.87l units of am (80 percent of which
Were from West Germany and the United
States). a mere l.l percent of the cars reg-
istered in Japan. This low level of imports
has become a source of recurring trade fric-
tion with the United States and Europe.
Although the Japanese government has been
trying to encourage auto imports by simplify-
ing import procedures and by abolishing
import duties on foreign ears. no appreciable
increase has taken place yet. largely due to
the stronger yen and the lack of price com-
peritiveness of these imported cars

In 1980. a total of 5.01 million units of
automotive vehicles (including light four-
wheelers) were newly registered, down 2.7
percent from the previous year. This re-
presents the ﬁrst decline in four years. Only
light four-wheelers registered an increase
(l8.3 percent). thanks to the growth in
demand for commercial vehicles; subcom-
pacts and trucks, on the orhcr hand. recorded
a 6.9 percent decrease. This decrease reﬂects
a weakened consumer conﬁdence brought
about by a decline in real income. the
worldwide economic slowdown and the
looming uncertainty cf oil supply accentuated
by the continuing war between Iran and
Iraq.

However. the fact that the nation has
managed to register ﬁve million units of new
automorive vehicles a year bespeaks the
existence of a strong replacement demand.
in I979. the nation owned a total 36.23
million units or Jl2 vehicles per l.000 people.
In the case of passenger cars, 57.2 percent of
households owned cars as against 22.1
percent l0 years ago—an increase quite
remarkable by any standard.

The rate of car ownership varies widely

from one area to another—low (35 percent to
36 percent) in large urban centers (such as
Tokyo. Osaka and Yokohama) where the
rapid transit systems are well-developed. and
high (60 percent to 69 percent) in nasal areas
(such as Tohoku. Shikoku. Kashin‘etsu.
Tokar and Hokuriku).

Characteristic of the recent demand for
cars has been the predominance of replace-
ment demand: 77 percent of new cars bought
were {or replacement purposes. while l8.6
percent represented original purchases. Re-
ﬂecting this structural change in car owner-
ship, sales of used cars have increased in
recent years to a level matching or even
surpassing the number of new cars sold
(104.3 percent in 1980).

In terms of size, automobiles with a piston
displacement of 1.0000c to l.600cc (popular
cars) and those with a piston displacement of
l.60!lce to 2.0000c (subcompacts) accounted
for 41.3 percent and 41.9 percent respectively.
or for a total of more than 80 percent;
compacts (those with a piston displacement
of 2.000cc or more) accounted for 8.5
percent. light cars (those with a piston dis-
placement of 550cc) 6.1 percent and sport
cars and imports accounted for the remaining
2.2 percent.

The Japanese auto industry distinguishes
itself from those of other countries in many
ways. The most outstanding diﬁ'erence is
the multiplicity of automakers. While
there are only two or three—four at the most
—automalters in Western countries. there
are no less than ll makers vying for a
share of the market in Japan. each trying to
out-specialize or out-perform the others.
Hino Motors and Nissan Diesel specialize in
trucks; Suzuki specializes in light ears and
Daihatsu also devotes a major part of its
production to light cars. Of the remaining
seven makers, Toyota and Nissan are
competing ﬁercely with one another for the
leadership positron in the production of
passenger cars. In I980. Toyota commanded
a 37.3 percent share of the market (excluding

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL INF. ("NIX

light cars) and Nissan was pressing close
behind with a market share of 29.2 percent.
The third slot iscontested bemeea Mitsubishi
(9.2 percent) and Toyo Kogyo (8.4 percent).
Isuzu. which is largely devoted to the pro-
duction of trucks. trails next with a market
share of 4.9 percent and is followed by Honda.
which is at 4.3 percent but exports a substan-
tial part of its production.

Some of these leading makers have formed
loose coalitions with each other. e.g.. Toyota
with Him and Daihatsu. and Nissan with
Nissan Diesel and Fuji Heavy Industries.
Members of each group coordinate in the
ﬁelds of production, commission the produc-
tion of certain parts to one another and
conduct joint research and development.
In addition. Japanese makers have entered
cooperative arrangements with overseas
automakers. e.g.. Mitsubishi with Chrysler.
Toyo Kogyo with Ford and Isuzu with
General Motors. Given the intensifying
trade friction and the growing need for the
adjustment of marketing interests among the
auto industries of diﬁerent countries. there
have emerged growing signs of a movement
toward international cooperation. Recent
examples of such efforts include the talks
that are going on between Nissan and
Volkswagen. those between Toyota and
Ford (though currently stalemated) and the
licensed production of Honda vehicles by
British Leyland.

As noted earlier. the Japanese auto industry
has out-performed its competitors in terms
of unit production. However. the dollar
value of its sales lags far behind that of its
Western competitors. largely because of the
low price that its products command. For
instance, Toyota. the largest automaker in
Japan. had sales cl'Sl4 billion in I979. while
GM and Ford had sales 4.7 times and 3.1
times that respectively. In terms of profits.
GM and Ford sales were 5.7 times and 2.3
times larger. respectively. than Toyota. In
terms of size of sales as well. in I979 Fiit.
Peugeot-Citroen. Volkswagen. Renault and

Daimler-Benz all ranked above Toyota. (In
I980. however. Toyota and Nissan sales grew
sharply, while those of Western makers fell.
and consequently the rankings mentioned
above have changed considerably.)

The recent sharp deterioration in perform-
ance of Western automakers and the match~
ing increase in sales of Japanese cars in over-
seas markets have underscored the potential
competitive strength of Japanese cars—far
stronger than the sizes of their sales and
proﬁts would indicate—and this reﬂects the
rapid increase in the labor productivity which
Japanese automakers have achieved in recent
years On the average. Japanese auto~
makers require a far smaller number of man-
hours per unit than their Western competitors.
In I979. GM employed 853.000 workers.
Ford 494.000 workers and Fiat. the leading
automaker in Europe. 360.000 workers; even
lesser European makers employed more than
200.000 workers. By contrast. Toyota em-
pioycd approximately 47.000 workers in I980
(or 52.000 workers when the employees of
Toyota Auto Sales Co. are included) and
Nissan approximately 56,000 workers. In
ether words. GM required 16 times as many
employees as Toyota to achieve sales 4.7
times those of Toyota. and Ford needed
nine times as many employees to achieve
sales 3.1 times those of Toyota. Of course.
allowance must be made for the feet that
both GM and Ford manufacture a much
larger percentage of their own parts than
either Toyota or Nissan and that the number
of employees of GM and Ford cited above
includes those engaged in non-auto business.
Even allowing for such factors though. the
fact remains that the Japanese automakers
employ a far smaller number of workers for
the production of one unit than do their
Western competitors. In terms of value—
added production per employee (recurring
proﬁt plus financial income plus depreciation
plus wages and salaries). Toyota (since 1975)
and Nissan (since I978) have outpaced both
GM and Ford. Despite the fact that the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
scales of production faciliues of Toyota and
Nissan are only a third or a quarter of
those of GM and Ford, per capita capital
equipment ratios of these Japanese makers
are three to four times those of GM and
Ford-and one has to reckon further with
the fact that the Japanese production
facilities are more up-to-date and advanced
than those of their Western competitors.
Another feature of the Japanese auto
industry IS the fact that although the auto-
makers contract out large percentages of
their automotive parts needs. thanks to close
coordination with their contractors and the
availability of a large number of technically
advanced parts manufacturers. they have not
experienced any difficulty in obtaining sup-

A third feature is the highly stabilized
industrial relations and the high morale of
Japanese auto industry workers. Hourly
wages are lower than the UAW's $18 (which
is high even by US. standards) but are equal
to two-thirds of those of US. autoworkers
or on par with those of European auto-
workers. Although hourly wages hate been
rising yearly. the rate of increase has remain—
ed within the scone of incense: in labor
productivity. As. a result. Japanese auto-
makers have been able to strengthen their
competzttve edge on the world market
and consequently increase their equipment
investment.

History

Japan‘s ﬁrst attempt to manufacture an
automobile dates back to I902, when
Yosh:da Shintaro and lichiyama Kumano-
suke built a test model. It was quite some
time later. howeser. that commcrcial produc-
tion of automobiles started in earnest. In
those days. the technological competence of
Japanese Steel mills. rubber factories and
other crude materials manufacturers was not
quite up to the job required. and the level of

L1

technological development of auto manu-
facturers. particularly casting. press, metal
cutting and fabricating, was too backward
to establish a mass-production system. On
top of that. the knockdowncarsassemblcdby
Japanese subsidiaries of the American Big
Three since the Kanto earthquake of I923
same to control the market. leaving little
room for domestic makers to grow. It was
not until l933 that the number of home-
built can reached 1.000 units. Meanwhile.
the number of imported cars continued to
incmse from 15.000 units in I929 to 36,000
units in I933.

In these circumstances. the Japanese auto
industry sought to gain a foothold in the
domestic market by concentrating on the
production of trucks. This move took place
under the acme encouragement and protec-
tion of the military. which attached great
importance to the establishment of a home-
grown auto industry. The military had been
giving active r:sistance to domestic auto-
makers from as far back as i9|8. and in I935
it helped enact an Automouvc Vehicle
Manufacturing Business Law with a view to
protecting the domesuc auto industry by
restricting the import of foreign cats. es-
pecially those from the United States.

Sensing this growing preference on the
part of the political leadership toward the
development of a home-grown auto industry.
ToyodaAutomaticMomWorks,Ltd.(headed
try Toyoda Kiichtro). which had a worldwide
patent on the automatic loom. and Tobata
lmono (foundry) Co. (headed by Ayukawa
Yoslitsuhc), which had acquired the right to
manufacture automobiles from the defunct
Datto Motors. embarked upon the produc-
tion of automotive vehicles. In I934. both
enterprises split from their parent companies
and formed separate entities under the name
of TOyota Motors and Nissan Motors. re-
spectively. In the following year. when the
Automotive Vehicle Manufacturing Business
Law was enacted. they were formally licensed
to produce automobiles.

FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY
FOR OFHUM. use: (IV!)

Given the foreign competition and the
limited technological resources. entry into
the auto industry entailed great risks. So
great were the risks. in fact. that even such
ﬁrmly entrenched :aibatsu (ﬁnancial com-
bines) as Milsui and Mitsubishi had to bow
out of the race. Those which had accepted
government licenses had overcome consider-
able obstacles. despite the generous encour-
agement and protection given by the govem-
meat.

Soon the economy shifted to a war footing.
and the two automakers were busily engaged
in the production of medium-simd trucks for
the military. in the process. parts manu-
facturers proliferated and gained technical
competence. Some time later. Diesel Motors
Corp. (which later changed to its present
name. lsuzu) was licensed to manufacture

trucks powered by diesel engines.

Following the war‘s end. these auto-
makers. battcred by spiraling inﬂation and
deepening recession and plagued by recurring
labor strife. barely managed to keep aﬂoat.
producing a combined total of 20.000 units
of trucks a year with the permission of the
Occupation authorities As the years were
on into 1950, armed conflicts broke out on
the Korean Peninsula and a growing wave
of special procurement orders for military
vehicles come forth from the US. Armed
Forces in Japan. By riding on the forward
momentum that these orders created. the
automakers embarked on the production of
passenger cars around l952.

During the initial years of production. the
bulk of orders came from taxi ﬂeet owners
rather than individuals. As the economy
began to pick up in the wake of the Korean
conﬂict. some of the leading automakers
scrambled to obtain licenses from European
automakers to make up their technological
lag so that they might capture a share in the
growing domestic auto market. Nissan tied
up with Austin. Hino with Renzti-it and
Isuzu with Hillrnan. Such licensing arrange-
ments were not conﬁned to assemblers and a

number of parts manufacturers also worked
out similar arrangements with their European
counterparts—all in an effort to acquire ad-
vanccd basic technology for the designing
and production of automobiles. components
and key parts.

in retrospect. however. one finds that these
licensing arrangements were of a stop-gap
nature mainly relating to the basic technology
for the production of small cars. Toyota.
for one, elected to go it alone without the
beneﬁts of European technology. Nissan.
which had had experience in the mass
production of a mini-car. the Datsun. over—
came its technological lag by drawing upon
import-4 technology. and ﬁve years later it
succeeded in exporting its New Bluebird to
other countries.

In 1955. the Ministry of lntemational
Trade and Industry (Ml‘l‘l) adopted a policy
designed to foster the auto industry as a
strategic industry. Policy guidance for the
industry's development has continued since.
Measures taken by MIT! in I955 included
prior allocation of scarce foreign exchange
to help automakers acquire foreign patents
and import advanced production facilities.
tax incentives, preferential treatment in the
depreciating of plants and equipment and the
enactment of the Law for the Development of
Speciﬁed Kinds of industry. a law designed
to encourage the technological improvement
of small- and medium-sized automotive parts
manufacturers. These measures had the
eﬁ'ect of eliminating the technological lag
suffered by such supportive industries as
casting, metal fabricating and machining.

From around I960. Japan's export and
import markets were progressively liberalized.
Coinciding with this liberalization. the pro-
duction of passenger cars grew dramatically.
stimulated by the rapidly expanding economy
and the growing wave of motorization. in
addition to the big three automakers which
had been operating since prewar years.
Mitsubishi Motors. Prince Motors (formerly
an aircraft maker). Hino (specializing in the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
production of diesel-fueled trucks). TDyo
KOgyo (specialia‘ng in the production of
machine tools and three-wheeled trucks).
Fuji Heavy Industries, Honda (specializing
in the production of motorcycles) and
Daihatsu (specializing in the production of
marine engines) entered the market. jostling
with one another for a piece of the action.
In the ensuing years, the market witnessed
the construction of passenger car plants
capable of producing more than l00.000
units a year. the alignment of parts manu-
facturers and the development of nationwide
sales networks. During this period. Toyota
and Nissan gained the lard tn expanding
their product mix to meet the diversifying
demand ranging from high-class to popular
cars. in establishing mass-production sys-
tems and in developing strategic models for
the mass market. As a result. in this period
disparities in scales of operation began to
widen.

As the government liberalized international
capital transactrons in I965. the auto industry
suddenly found itself exposed to foreign
competition and an industrywide shakeout
was imminent. In an effort to prepare the
auto industry for the inroads which the Big
Three of the United butts were expected to
make. MlTl ﬂoated a plan to realign the
industry into coalianns headed by the three
leading automakers. This plan. however.
met with strong opposition from diﬂ‘erent
automakers and did not materialize in its
original form. In fact. the only merger that
took place along the lines originally conceived
by MIT! was that between Nrssan and
Prince Motors. However. the aborted plan
did play the role of trigger-mg a wave of
business groupings. Both Toyotaand Nissan
formed their on groups based on a loose
coalition among particrpating members for
the purpose of coordinating areas of spe-
cialization. Taken together. these two groups
grew to a scale aceour. ing for about 60
percent of the market—suggesting a growing
tendency of concentration of production ir

the hands of a few automakers.

The three non-aligned automakers sought
to tie up with the Big Three of the United
States. partly at the urging of their afﬁliated
banks. In l969. Mitsubishi Motors signed
up for busineascooperation with Chrysler. and
in the following years Toyo Kdgyo entered
into-a sinular arrangement with Ford and
Isuzu with General Motors. As n result.
the It automakers operating in Japan were
divided into three camps: the two largest
homegrown groups each headed by Toyota
and Nissan, the three foreign-afﬁliated groups
and the two independent automakers
(Honda and Suzuki). In August. Suzuki
announced that it will establish business ties
with General Motors and Isuzu.

Since around I968. unit export sales of
Japanese cars have continued to increase at a
rapid pace. This is attributable to com-
puter-based automauon of mass production.
advanced production technology, improved
know-how of parts manufacturers. close
coordination between auto assemblers and
parts manufacturers and stable industrial
relations and the high morale of workers.
both nurtured by Japanese-style participatory
management.

International Competitive Position

We have seen in the foregoing that the
competiuvenees of Japanese cars. strength-
ened continuously since around I970. has
resulted In an increase in their unit export
sales. What are the factors which boosted
Japan‘s international competitive position
and productivity in the face of the trials
caused by the oil crisis of 1973?

These fact-2's may be divided into internal
(or micro) factors and external {or macro)
factors. First. on the macro level. the
reasons relate to the support given the auto
industry by the government and banks.
There is no gainsaymg the fact that the
industrial policy pursued by the government

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()\I.\'

in the early years played a crucial role in
fostering and strengthening the ﬂedgling
auto industry. The banks also actively
supported this industrial policy. The role
played by the banks was particularly effective
in helping automakers establish mas:-
production systems in the ﬁrst half of the
1960s and in bringing about the reorgani-
ntion of the auto industry. Today. however.
the role played by such macro (or external)
factors has considerably diminished in im-
portance. The automakers are no longer in
need of a massive infusion of funds. either
from the government or from the banks. in
fact. the government has become rather
restrictive toward the auto industry. as is
illustrated by the recall system. pollution
control and the recent export restrictions
imposed on the auto industry.

Another macro factor has to do with the
fact that Japan was a late starter—later than
other countries—in developing its on auto
industry. This enabled Japanese automakers
to reap the beneﬁts of the latest and the most
advanced production technology developed
by others. in addition. their acquisition of
such technology and production fadlities
could not have been better-timed. coinciding
as it did with the rapid growth ot‘the Japanese
economy. which continued till it was braked
by the ﬁrst oil crisis. and then followed by a
booming export demand from the fuel-
conscious overseas market that deveiopcd in
the wake of that oil crisis.

The third macro factor is the competitive
climate that prevailed in the domestic
market. it was because of such a co"-
petitive climate that Japanese automakers
constantly sought to introduce new facilities
and technology and to rationalize their
operations through better quality-control
systems and other control techniques.

A further macro factor, which should not
be overlooked. concerns the constantly
improving production techniques of crude
materials (particularly steel. rubber goods.
aluminum castings and glass) and also those

of the parts manufacturers which fabricate
the crude materials into automotive parts.
An automobile can only be as good as its
supportive industries, and consequently the
qualitative improvement of crude materials
and of the automotive parts made out of
those is of critical importance to the viability
of the auto industry.

Let us now turn to the micro (or internal)
factors. The ﬁrst micro factor which con-
tributed to strengthen the international
competitiveness of the Japanese auto industry
was the excellent industrial relations of the
industry. These industrial relations would
be inconceivable were it not for the company
union. Even in Japan. where the company
union is an established fact of corporate life.
there are few industries other than the auto
industry which can boast a strike-free
record of nearly 30 years. The auto industry‘s
industrial relations are distinguished not
merely by the absence of strikes. but also by
the active contribution of workers to the
business performance of the company
through the instrumentality of quality circles
(a participatory practice unique to Japan).
the continuing improvement of labor produc-
tivity and management-labor cooperation
for the achievement of technological innova-
tions. Thanks to the rationalization of
operations initiated by line workers and the
active cooperation of the union in tapping
collective ingenuity, the company is helped
to improve the quality of its products on a
continuing basis. Such cooperation of the
company union in the improvement of
product quality and labor productivity can
be coaxed only by job security and improved
wages and working conditions. The Japanese
auto industry. thanks to the continuing
growth of its business. has been able to
satisfy these preconditions.

Another factor. no less important than
these harmonious industrial relations. is the
strong cohesion and mutual loyalty that
exist between automakers and their parts
manufacturers. In the United States. where

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
automakers produce the bulk of their
parts requirements themselves. the specialist
parts manufacturers guard their independ-
ence zealously. to the extent that they
insist on an equal footing with automakers
in negotiating contracts. The automakers
thus feel no moral obligation to place orders
with a given parts manufacturer beyond the
contractual obligations they have under-
taken. By contrast. the coalescence that
exists in Japan between an automaker and
its parts manufacturer inherently carries an
assurance of continuing business for the
latter and enables the automaker to reap
systems beneﬁts unknown to US. coun-
terparts. Under such an arrangement. the
automaker supplies its parts manufacturer
with all the necessary technical information
and particulars of its requirements. advises
on the improvement of production know-
how. extends ﬁnancial and technical assist«
ance for the installation of new facilities and
guarantees a steady ﬂow of orders. When
it comes to the question of delivery and
prices, however. a strictly at-arm's-ieagth
relationship is maintained. and the products
and their delivery are thoroughly scrutinind.
As a result. the parts manufacturers are under
constant pressure tc oﬂ'sct rising costs with
increased productivity and to grapple with
technological problems such as pollution
control.

in addition. it must be emphasized that
the introduction of industrial robot; and
other labor-saving devices. the Japanese-style
management techniques as typiﬁed by the
quality circles and the concerted eﬂ’cc's of
management and labor to achieve tech.
nological breakthroughs have cﬂ’ecuvely com—
bined to generate a continuing improvement
of labor productiva and. by extension. a
steady advance in the intemationai com-
petitive position of the Japanese auto
industry.

Conclusion

The auto industries of the world have
come to a crossroads. Recurring oil crises
have shaken to the foundations the premier
position once held by Detroit. and some of
the European automakers have similarly
been driven to the wall. Amidst such
tumultuous change, the Japanese auto in-
dustry has stood head and shoulders above
the rest. unshaken by the oil crises because
of the competitive edge it enjoyed by coming
late to the race. This has given rise to trade
friction which Japan has tried to defuse by
voluntary cutbacks on its exports.

in the meantime. automakers here and
abroad are in for ﬁerce competition in the
development of new technologies capable of
producing fuel-efﬁcient and good-quality
cars. This will entail the development of
new materials. new sources of power.
reduced body are. electronic engine control
and a host of other innovations.

As US. automakers complete their retool-
ing program for the production of sub~
compacts and start producing world cars,
the competition will escalate even more.
For the Japanese auto industry to survive
the forthcoming round of international
competition. it will need to strengthen its
basic research activities with a view to
achieving sweeping and long-term technol-
ogical breakthroughs.

As far as the current trade friction is
concerned, Japanese automakers should not
become preoccupied with putting out the
brush ﬁre by curtailing their exports; instead.
they should pursue a forward-looking inter-
national strategy (overseas production. tech-
nology exports, licensed or joint production
and joint research and development) and
seek to establish a relationship of coexistence
with their foreign competitors.

At present, the world‘s automakers are
largely divided into two classes: those which
are capable of producing a world our on
their own and those which cannot. Given

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IESF ONI Y

the threat of a worldwide shakcout or auto-
makers, major auto-producing countries
my not be averse to martin; to political
means to present: their auto industria.
More, a sumfttl blending of a co-

RIGIIT: 1981 Asahi Shimbun. Tokyo

14120/156

10

operative relationship with foreign nuto~
maker: in international marketing strntcgy.
along with a stntegy for dammit: tachnologo
ital development, will either make or bred:
the future oftbe Jam auto industry.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HITI PLANS TO KEEP AUTOMOBILE EXPORTS T0 U.S. AT 1.68 MILLION
Tokyo NIKKAN KOCYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 20 Jan 82 p 1
[Text]

HITI, which is scheduled to announce in late “arch the limit for the
quantity of automobiles to be exported to the US in fiscal 1982, has
consolidated its plan to fix this limit at 1,680,000, or the quantity
established as a limit for fiscal 1981, plus alpha. The reason is
that there is the growing expectation that the US automobile market,
which made a poor showing in 1980 and in 1981 as well, will recover in
the second half of 1982, with sales reaching the level of nine million
to ten million on an annual basis. within the US Government and in
Congressional circles, however, voices are strong for the reduction of
imports in fiscal 1982 to a level similar to or lower than that for fiscal
1981, partly because of the dissatisfaction with the deficit amounting to
more than $18 billion a year in the trade account with Japan. An official
proposal has not been made until now, but even HITI says that it cannot
foresee the trends of the situation after the opening of the Congressional
session in February. Not a few people fear that the moves to strengthen
restrictions will take concrete shape. In view of such a situation, MITI
is contemplating an additional increase which is not to irritate the US
side. It wants to determine the export quantity smoothly by the end of
harch, without adhering to the decision made in May last year. The final
decision is feared to be delayei, however, if a new request is presented
by the US siie hereafter.

After the automobile war that raged between Japan and the US from
the year before last, the then 111 Minister TAXAKA issued a statement
on Ray 1, last year. to make it clear that Japan has decided to take the.
following steps in the three years until March, 198M: (1) to fix annual
exports at 1,680,000 in fiscal 1981; (2) to add a quantity equal to
16.5 per cent of the increase in sales, in fiscal 1982; and (3) to study.
in fiscal 1983, whether it is proper to continue such quantitative
restrictions, with consideration for the trends of the US market for
passenger cars. The US side, too, recognized that Japan took "appropriate
measures."

11

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If this decision is to be obeyed, it will be reasonable for MITI to
clarify to the public, by the end of March, the total quantity of
automobiles to be exported to the US in fiscal 1982. The export quantity
will be determined, above all, according to the expected sales in the US
as a whole in fiscal 1962. MITI thinks that the US market will recover
more conspicuously than in fiscal 1981. According to the sales records
collectedbyim automobile manufacturers at the beginning of this month,
8,510,000 cars were sold in the US in 1981. Sales in fiscal 1981, too,
are expected to be rather smaller than the original expectation of nine
million. MITI expects, however, that automobile sales in the Us will
recover and amount to more than nine million in fiscal 1982. There is
also the view that the level of ten million will be reached. The reason
for such expectations is that the consumers can no longer postpone their
g-rchaae of new cars in place of old ones, although the trends of business
and interest rates, too, must be taken into consideration.

If sales in the US are to increase by one million, it will become
possible for Japan to make an addition of 165,000 to its automobile
exports in fiscal 1952. However, US Senator DANFORTH, who conferred
with ITI HiniSter $23 at XI?! on the 13th, asked the Japanese side to
keep automobile exports in fiscal 1982 at the level of the previous
fiscal year. He thus made it clear again that the US, which is asking
for the opening of the Japanese market in accordance with the principle
of reciprocity, is taking great interest also in the measures to be
taken by the Japanese side to curb automobile exports. Also, ITI Sinister
ABE, who is visiting the US at present, is said to have been unofficially
requested to strengthen voluntary export controls.

ITI Minister ABE declined the request of the US side, saying that "Re
are prepared to exchange opinions with the US side, but will follow the

formula we established last year." “IT: is scheduled to determine an export
quantity reflecting the increase in sales.

PYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunaha 1982

0:

6105/53

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DISSATISFACTION EXPRESSED OVER EXPANSION OF EXPORT OF AUTOMOBILE PARTS
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SRIHBUN in Japanese 21 Jan 82 p 11
[Text]

At this time when the Japan-US automobile friction is about to
flare up again, Japanese automobile parts industry circles are beginning to
express dissatisfaction, saying that "He are not convinced by the US side's
way of doing things." Criticism against Japan on the export of parts to the
US is also becoming strong, day after day, like in the case of finished cars.
but they say, "The increase in exports to the US is due to the purchases of
Japanese parts by GM (General Motors) and Ford. We will be placed in a tight
corner if we are told by US parts industry circles that 'the expansion of
exports is outrageous,’ in spite of that." Within the industry circles, the
following defiant voice is also heard: "If the national interests of the US
are to be protected. is it not reasonable for US parts manufacturers to
make requests?"

It seems that the exports of automobile parts to the US (on a customs
clearance basis) in l981 were limited to some ¥237,200 million, up 10.2
percent over the preceding year. The exports in 1980 amounted to V215,300
million, up 27.1 percent over the preceding year, and therefore, the increase
rate (in 1981) slowed down greatly. Even so, they were fairly firm when
compared with parts exports as a whole (up 8.5 percent over the preceding
year). This is because the direct supply to US automobile manufacturers
increased, whereas the supply to the main-stay market was sluggish.

US automobile manufacturers' procurement of Japanese parts is tending to
increase further. Following GH's recognition last year of the plant of
Nippon Oil Seal Industry as a top-level designated plant, Ford qualified six
plants of five electric equipment manfacturers, including Toshiba, NBC, and
Nippon Dense, to be permanently designated for the delivery of products.

Chrysler also is recently sending parts-purchasing missions to Japan, one after
another.

if this situation continues. it is expected that exports of parts to
the US will increase to a certain extent,despitethe sluggishness of
those to the market. It is likely that this will rub against the grain of

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLV

US parts manufacturers more sharpLy than ever. “hen the "US Automobile

Parts and Accessories ?rade ﬁission," sponsored by the US Department of
Commerce, came to Japan in November last year, the participating manufacturers
requested Japanese automobile manufactuers to "purchase more US-produce:
parts." In addition. they said to parts manufactuers with a sharp look as
foliows: "we want you to exercise self-control on your exports to the US."

Partly because the rate of internal manufacture by automobile manufacturers
is high in the US. most parts manufacturers are medium and small enterprisers.
with the exception of some manufacturers. Many of these manufacturers
have ties with GM and Ford, with the market as the main body. For such reasons,
it is probably diffic' t. in some respects. for them to tell the automobile
manufacturers. who have overwh Lming power. to stop buying Japanese parts.
Therefore. the criticism against Japanese parts is refracted. and the fear
is gaining Strength that the creak in the parts friction will expand in the
future.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

680: 4105/53

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The “Stirling Engine", an externaloombustion engine. has
higher thermal efﬁciency when compared with currently
available internalcombustion engines. as well as hailing such
advantages as being energy saving. and causing little noise and
pollution. As such. it has been attracting much attention. and
creating a desire for its rapid development and being made
commercially available. First. the Agency of Industrial Science
and Technology. Ministry of International Trade and industry
(MlTi) has initiated full investigation towards making practical
use of the Stirling engine by a large project costing approximate-

ly Y6 billion over a 6 year-period starting in FY1981.

Alter forming the project‘s initial policy. fuilsoale investigao
tion was started. This project aims initially. at using the engine
mainly for cooling and heating. as well as for power generation.
and comes under the “Moonlight Plan". covering research and
development projects on overall energy-saving technology.
sponsored by AlST. Secondly. various industries which have
participated and advanced their technology for the "Marine
Engine Development Project". are now very eager to conuner-
c'nlize their technology obtained during the implementation

of the project. That particular proiect has been sponsored by
the Ministry of Transport (MOT). over a 5-year period from
FYI976. And thirdly. Tokyo Gas Co.'s and Aishin Seilti's
respective projects. subsidized separately by AlST‘ s “Vital
Technology Development lsxpense Subsidizing Plan." have
been verifying the practical future success of their versions in
their respective ﬁelds. There are some other activities as well.
From now on. the Stirling engine will be the focal point. being
highlighted as the new engine to meet a new era's needs. and
as such requires rapid development and commercialization.
l. Short History of Stirling Engine

The story of the Stirling engine begins with the Invention
of a double acting pneumatic engine by Rev. R. Stirling of
England in l8l6. as an alternative to an engine requittng a
boiler. This engine utilized air rather than water vapor and
thus had less dangerous risk or' explosion than wrth steam.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ever since. improvements or theoretical analyses have been
made both in Great Britain and Germany. but the Stirling
engine has been unable to compete with the diesel engine due
to its inferior thermal efﬁciency. weight. and compactness.
and has survived only as a kind of smalloutput engine hand-
made.

However. in l938. Philips of Holland noticed the Stirling
engine as having potential as a portable electric power supply
source for radio. They were also particularly interested in the
low noise and vibration characteristics of the engine, and
initiated further development of a compact Stirling engine
which has been showing some remarkable progress since then.

At present. Philips is the only organization which has both
basic as well as developed technical know-how on the engine.
They invested approximately SlOO million between I938 and
I970. and succeeded in completing ﬁve classes of experimental
engines. Among them. a 30hp engine achieved 38% thermal
efﬁciency and a 200hp engine was installed on a bus for
demonstration. During a 5-year period. between N?! and
1975. a joint research and development project was carried
out by United Stirling of Sweden. Ford Motor Company of
USA. and Philips of Holland. spending approxrrriately $0
million. The project was participated in by more than 200
researchers.

The companies undermentioned. which became licensees.
participated in further development of the Stirling engine.
They are: United Stirling of Sweden. MAN/MWM of West
Germany. and Ford Motor Co. of USA. Among them. United
Stirling of Sweden (US). a joint venture of FW. a Swedish
Government-owned enterprise. and Kocomes Shipbuilding.
became a licensee of Philips in I968. USS is well-known by
its trial production of 3 classes of experimental engines.
namely $4hp/4.000rpm. lOlhp/2.400rpm and 203hr, 2.400rpm.
They are installed on boats. buses. passenger-cars. trucks and
elsewhere.

However. the center of present developments has moved
to the USA. Commissioned by the Department of Energy
(DOE). the following companies. since I979. have joined in
development activities in their respective areas.

(Total commission US$255 million)
Engine: Ford Motors. Mechanical Technology. United
Stirling. American Motors. ll‘l'Rl. Hoster
Miller. and others
Materials: General Electric. Carborundum. and others
Seals: Boeing. Shaker and others

The original target of the project was to develop an engine
for highway use. but it is now aiming to develop a large-scale
stationary generator as its present and revised goal. Hoster
Miller has been developing a l.$00hp class engine for a coal-
ﬁred power generation plant.

2. Moonlight Plan

Research and development of the Stirling engine in Japan

has been selected as the Industrial Science and Technology

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Agency‘s "Leading and Fund'metttal EnergySaving Technology
Research and Development Project" and has been promoted
since I976. The center of this project is located Technology
Research institute of Machutery (TRIM). Tasks for l980
were: i) Trial production and operational test of a Stirling
engine. and 2) Design. trial production. and evaluation test of
sealing detrices.

TRIM has already implemented “Operational Experiment
of Stirling Engine Powered by Electric Heater". The following
isits outline:

The Stirling engine outlined roughly in Fig.1 shows a crank-
drtve displacer type engine which is modiﬁed from commer-
cully available air-liquidizing machinery. This engine is the
same as an operationally cool thermal engine. but naturally
the hot temperature portion. such as cylinder head. heater
and other parts. have been modiﬁed. Displacement volumes
of expansion and compression spaces are vary with a 90degree
phasedii‘i’erence and their scavenging volumes are llScm’ and
242cm’. respectively. The water cooler portion consists of
2|6 small tubes. llmm inside diameter and 59mm long.
The newly-installed hot-temperature portion. SUSJl6. has
20 pairs of heated tubes. 4mm inside diameter. wall thickness
0.5m. and 39lmm overall length. which ccnnect between
the cylinder head and regenerator housing. These heater
portions are indirectly and uniformly heated by a tin bath
heated by two ZitW coiled electric heaters. By deﬁning heater
tube temperature at the cylinder outlet as "heater tempera-
ture". input to the electric heater was controlled at 400'C
in each experiment. This rather low temperature of 400'C
was selected because certain insulation problems occured.

A regenerator. of a thermalenergysaving type heat ex-
changer ts one of the most important components of the
Stirling engine Roughly speaking. a Stirling engine has the
efﬁciency of a Carnot cycle. but it can only be said by perfect
functioning of the regenerator. But. as the regenerator influ-
ences the engine‘s performance via pressure loss. iteat transfer.
thermal capacity ot‘ the matrix and the volumes of empty
and ﬁlled spaces. the task oi optimum engine design ts very
difﬁcult to achieve. Pressure loss measurement. extraction
of a thermal loss at the regeneraror. tegcnerator loss. by the
engine‘s internal energy-ﬂow analyses method and internal
temperature distribution measurements at the regenerator on

4 kinds of matrix materials were performed in attempts to
grasp regenerating characteristics.

Regenerator characteristic's variations versus rpm and mean
pressure tn the case of (A) Mesh :00 metal-net was used as
matrix material are shown in Figs: and 3. 0].. additional
amount of heat. 0c. cooling thermal amount at cooler. We.
indicating expansion work. and wt(W‘=W¢—Wc).mdlcalln3
output. increase proportionally. as either rpm or mean pressure
increases. in a higher speed region beyond 1.000rpm. W0.”-

17

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

shaft horsepower and belongs to a minus motoring region.
This fact ts due to a reason lhat Wigs; (Wrou=Wt-Wout).
mechanical loss. is increasing about I-l/Z power to rpm. Com-
paring such a relationship with rpm and Wt,“ which has less
dependability on mean pressure. shaft horse power increases
as mean pressure increases. as in Fig. 2.

Fig.4 shows energy ﬂow distribution of the engine. Besides
Qr. regenerator loss. Qh loss. thermal loss at heater. Coil.
thermal input by hot temperature holding orl;Oo;;. radiating
loss from crankcase: and Ow heat transfer from crankcase to
cooler. are newly introduced into the chart. Analytical results
of all experimental data revealed that Or. regenerator loss.
maintains a constant value of 500 watts regardless of the
nature of the matrix. rpm. and mean pressure. As heat transfer
loss via the regenerator housing comprises the greater part of
total regenerator loss. all matrix materials have been functioning
to regenerate the heat within the limits of measuring accuracy.
3. R&D of Stirling Engine for Practical Use

Among recent research and development activities in Japan.
“RaD on Stirling Engine as a Marine Engine" has been
implemented by MOT and approximately V6“) million has
been spent over a 5-year period starting in FYI976 The
following have participated in this project: Ship Research
Institute of MOT. lapan Shipbuilding Research Association.
Daihatsu Diesel. Nippon Piston Ring. Mitsubishi Heavy Indus-
tries. as well as Tokyo University. Tokyo Institute of Tech-
nology. and Meiji University. Recently this project has
succeeded in operating an experimental engine with maximum
of 89.2hp at $56rpm. with an integrated efﬁciency of 2m
as tn Fig.5. The Ship Bureau of MOT observes that as all
problematic points concerning components and plans for their
resolution have been found. all participating industries are now
realizing that ways to commercialize the Stirling engine are
now becoming clearer.

In addition to the above. by receiving a “Subsidy on Vital
Technology Development Expense" from AIST. some develop-
ment projects such. as Tokyo Gas Co. for power generation.
fueling. cooltng and heating of buildings (I976-l977). Aishin
Seiki for automobile engines (I978—l979). have been im-
plemented. In Tokyo Gas project under guidance from Tokyo
University. a 7.02lel.l20rpm trial engine. built by Aishin
Setki. attained a thermal efﬁciency of 2i 8%. Through this
achievement. it is now realized that prospects of their endeavors
an be used for home cooling and heating. Tokyo Gas considers
that they just need to wait for "higher efficiency engine
development and a technological break-through on materials“.
Aishin Seiki succeeded in buildinga Stirling engine SHP.4lItW/
2.000rpm with 38% thermal efficiency. If success to rrtake
the engine more compact rs realized. the engine can be
installed in an automobile or small vessel.

As a similar but different news topic. under a subsidy

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
  
   
  
 
 
     
 

ﬂaw-mental engine ’ 7J—
Reooetion our wine
CIVICH

Dav-n. more:

Fig. 5. Ministry of Transport (MOT) Engine Combi-
MIIOH

One-I Manna Alt eomwo-o' to: Sun."
Cvllnoev ' enema nut-n.

Cool-0a wam vac-ate: ‘-

 
  

I‘liﬁg .- "‘ ’. LEI—J

mlﬁtiﬁjummimm-ﬁ‘itﬁﬁéﬁ a“?

"W" Floating tioov Soc-uni
woo coal bum heating DID.

    
  

coal noun

F-g. 6. Goal-Fired 3.000HP Stirling Locomotive
Engine Designed for Canada

from the Canadian Ministry of Transportation. research
lnslll'lles in Japan and Canada have jointly completed the
ﬁrst canoeptional design of a "Coal-Fired Stirling Locomotive
Engine ‘. This locomotive engine is expected to have 3.000hp
with 40% efﬁciency and if so. will be competitive with
current diesel locomOtive engines.

With such background information. MST has been planning
to further promOte the “Moonlight Plan" for FYI982 as an
extension of the similar FYl98l project. They aim to find
prospects on making practical use of the Stirling engine by I981.
For future application areas of the engine. AlS'I‘ is aiming to
apply this technology in the lield of cooling and heating
devices. such as room air-conditioners. stationary type agricul-
tural machinery. and an electric power generator. instead of
the earlier proposed use as an automobile engine.

98]. Fuji Marketing Research (10., Ltd.

l.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUPER ALLOYS FOR NUCLEAR STEELHAKING

Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English Vol 14 No 10, Oct 81 pp (07-49

[Text]

Current steelmaldng adopts a continuous system in which
molten metal from a blast furnace charged with ore. fuel. and
other materials is led to a converter to produce steel by
blowing oxygen through the molten metal. Although rated
high in industry. steelmaktng consumers scarce coke in large
quantities; the total energy used in steelmaking in 1973.
amounted to about 20% of Japan's total use. Moreover.
steelmaldng ts burdened by pollution problems. as More. SOx.
etc. are generated. As a solution to these problems. nuclear
powered reduction of ore has attracted interest as a new

. smelting method.

This method utilizes thermonuclear energy from a high-
temperature gas rea:tor (HTGR) to produce a reducing gas
from asphalt. an abundant petroleum byproduct. and then
the resulting gas ts heated for direct reduction of iron ore. The
method has been expected to save energy and resources. as
well as to help solve environmental difﬁct..ties by adopting a
closed system.

Of high-temperature materials employed in nuclear steel-
meking. heat-transfer tubes (top left in Fig! ) of an intermediate

heat exchanger provrded to ensure safety are exposed to the
severest conditions: uotsrde the tubes from HTGR tlows
lteitum gas (pr-mar). lie) at l.000°C and 40mm pressure. that
heats 45mm secondary lteltum to “ZS’C running inside the
tubes Ptrmazy lle contains H,.C0,.CH..etc. at l-300ppm
because of orl or moisture leaks from HTGR. titus causing
t'aster corrosion than under rtormal atmospheric conditions.
This ts because the oxide film developed on the tube surface
ut'r‘ers less protection compared wrtlt that when tn the air. and
rlns greatly affects its creep rupture property. In addition. a
vartety or" equipment and tubing (center in Fig.” to produce
the reducrng gas usrng 925°C. secondary helium must also
thhstand attack from the reducing gas or steam. Alloys to
survive thrs tntense envrronment were not available originally.
so that novel materials had to be developed.

Consequently. the “Research and Development of Dtrcct
Reduction Using High-Temperature Reductng Gas" was estab-
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-I ONLY

     
  
   

- Much—v «octet I 'rouucnon o! new-no on 0.10:! "Colman-no

 

= Nlllum loop
C: Rm mlIOl-II “mm 1
a 8mm "sum
ﬂocuelno on wnom
C: locum {ton tum

  

"HOII'BOGIOI.

I Mlnchlngm “25°C. “um!

“concur Ho

  
   
  

460°C slum

us. many

wanton,

   
    
  
  
 

   

nooo’c. 40mm

  
  
 
 

mun raucuon

mm 0

"E;

rrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr

'-
Boone-d "on I!

E and:
'umuo

 

  
  

  
   

c Taro" '

- In .II I
win nd-um'

     

Rum-u. mm (M)

6.9. 2. Sltess-Ruptun 'l'lmeCumu 0! MO w Alloy
m Au, Holuum, and Reducmg Gas

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lished in l973 as one of the large-scale projects by Ml‘Tl's
Agency of Industrial Science and Technology.and its subthemes
included study on highly heat-resistant alloys. Performance
targets of the alloys at the time were specified as follows:

(I) Alloys should have a creep rupture strength of l kgf/mm‘
or greater after 50mm: in l.000°C helium.

(2) Alloys should be weldable. workable lnto tubes 25mm
0.0.. 5mm wall thickness and more than 7m long. and be

capable of secondary processing required to manufacture heat
exchangers.

(3) Alloys should exhibit the above creep rupture strength
in actual operation as is or by adequate surface treatment.

This project ended ui fiscal I980. and the Science and
Technology Agency‘s National Research Institute for Metals.
having conducted performance tests for super alloys developed
by interested companies. has recently published the following
suntmary of results.

Each flnn proceeded with alloy development independently
by setting optimum composition. manufacturing process. and
heat treatment for each possible alloy. to select ll materials
of 3 Febases and 8 Ni-bases in fiscal I973 and I975 projects.
These ll alloys were scheduled to undergo the following 3
exanunations:
tll Fabrication tests on melting and drawing.

(2) Workability tests on secondary bending and welding.
(3) Various performance tests. such as creep rupture.
elevated temperature corrosion. hydrogen permeability. con-
duction of heat. thermal expansion. and material deterioration.

The most suitable alloys provrdirig the desired qualities
were then to be chosen by comprehensive evaluation. with
priority given to the institute's performance tests including
creep rapture results.

From among 5 alloys proposed in fiscal 1973. two were

considered to meet the objectives based on creep rupture

data at around l.000°C in normal atmosphere. but one of

them. containing as much as 30% of cobalt. was excluded

because of induced radioactivity that was unavoidable. The .
other. along wrth six cobalt-free alloys suggested in fiscal

l975. was subjected to performance tests for ﬁnal selection.

Fig.2 shows the stress —rupture time curve in air. helium.
and reducing gas of a Ni-Cr-W alloy. of the material found to
have the best creep rupture property among the seven proposed
alloys. The creep rupture strength of the material is clearly
above lkgflmma after $0.000 hours at l.000°C in both air
and helium gas. Additionally. one or two more alloys were
selected as possrble candidates to suit requirements.

These performance tests. the institute claims. have furnished
extremely useful information on the differences of creep
rupture heltavror between each alloy in air and other atmos-
pheres; the effects of oxidation. nttriding. carburizrng.'decar-
hunting. etc. in the presence of sample surfaces on high-
temperature properties; material degradation by stress aging.
and others.

81 Fuji Marketing Research 60., Ltd.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

INDUSTRY IN VLSI PRODUCTION WAR REPORTED

Tokyo NIKXEI SANGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 16, 17, 18, 21 Dec 81
[16 Dec 81 p 5]

[Text]

The Japanese semi-conductor industry will join the new ¥l-trillion
industries as early as fiscal 1981. As if to fall in step with the rapid
expansion of the market scale, the development of ultra-modern technology
is also making rapid progress, and the industry circles are now in the midst
of a VLSI (very large-scale integrated circuits) war. Competition in
the mass production of ultra-modern products is being accelerated, on the
one hand, while on the other, severe struggles among various companies are
being developed for the obtaining of large users. Also, US forces are
eagerly watching for a chance for counter-attacks. The peripheral equipment
industry also is on the alert, in search of business opportunities. The front
line of this VLSI war is reported as follows:

NBC Hastening Monthly Production of One Million 64-Kilo-Bit RAM's

At 10:30 a.m. on November 2, NBC Vice-President Atsuyoshi OUCHI took
out several sheets of data from an inner pocket of his suit, as soon as he
entered the Directors' drawing room on the 22nd floor in the Head Office
building in Tamachi. Tokyo. He said to a reporter who visited him, "Our
company also has decided to produce one million Gu-kilo-bit RAH's
(memories to write in and read out, from time to time), monthly."

In the data which Vice-President OUCHI read. a plan for greatly
increasing the produCtion of éu-kilo-bit RAM's was written. This is a
fresh plan which was decided through talks between Vice-President OUCHI and
President Tadahiro SEKIMOTO, which were held at the end of October, only
several days before. The scale of production of Gu-kilo-bit RAH's by this
company at the end of October was 300,000 RAh's monthly. Under the plan,
this is to be increased by 150,000 RAM's every month from November, and it
is to be brought to a structure to produce 1,050,000 RAH's monthly at the
end of March next year. It is a bullish plan for increased production, to
increase the output by more than three times in half a year. In this

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
company, monthly production of Bu-kilo-bit RAH's has already exceeded 500.000
RAM's in December this year.

NEG has announced the plan for the great increase of production
because it was stimulatedby"Hitachi. a fair competitor" (NBC Board Chairman
Koji KOBAYASHI). On October 26. prior to NEC's announcement of its plan
for increased production, Ritachi Managing Director Yasuo MIYAUCHI said as
follows at the meeting to announce the interim settlement of accounts in
September: "At the end of Narch next year. the monthly output of Su-kilo-bit
RAH's will be increased to one million RAH's." Thus, the plan for increased
production to increase the scale of production at the end of September ~-

500.000 RAM's -- double in half a year was quickly declared internally and
externally.

This news on the increased production by Hitachi promptly spread
to NEC's semi-conductor plants which are scattered throughout Japan. The
newspaper report saying that "Hitachi will produce one million Su-kilo-bit
RAH's monthly" was put up the next day at various places of the plant of
Kyushu NSC, which is the biggest production base. Thus, it was eagerly
waiting for a decision by the top management at the Head Office. saying.
"What on earth will our company do?"

Typical "Industry of Sure-Victory-by-the-Pirst-Hove Type"

Semi-conductors are a typical industry of the sure-victory-by-the-
first—move type. "If ultra-modern products are produced belatedly, there
will arise the vicious cycle of buyers being taken away when the products
appear on the market. and not being able to recover the next investment
because the price falls rapidl‘" (ﬂitachi Board Chairman Hirokichi YCSHIYAMA).
Some semi-conductor manufacturers of the US retreated from or gave up the

production of sk-kilo-bit Rnx's because they firmed up the judgment that
if they start production in the ‘ace of the big offensive by Japanese manu-
facturers, it will be too late.

NBC and Hitachi, which rank first and second in Japanese semi-conductor
industry circles. have started increasing the production of su-kilo-bit RAH's
in competition with each other, simply because they are thinking of securing
a position which is even slightly advantageous. by going ahead. As is often
said, the Su-kilo-bit RAM is the first round of VLSI products. It can be said
that thecompetitionbetween NEC and Hitachi, with an eye on the 256-kilo-bit
RAM, which is the next ultra-modern product, has just been started.

Toshiba, whose development of independent VLSI products has suddenly
become active among the companies engaged in similar business. with a side
glance cast at such moves of NBC and Hitachi. has recently announced that
it has developed 6u-kilo-bit RAM's of the static type and will start full-scale
shipments from Harch next year. NBC and Hitachi are planning to increase

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the production of su-kilo-bit RAM's of the dynamic type. Compared with the
6H-kilo-bit Ram's of the dynamic type. those of the static type require a
degree of integration which is three or four times as high, to obtain the
amount of_memories of the same capacity. however, they have the advantage

that the designing of circuits to be connected with other LSI's is easy,
and that the electric power to be consumed is small, too.

The degree of integration of the Su-kilo-bit RAH's of the static type,
which have been developed by Toshiba, is nearly three times that of the dynamic
type, amounting to “00,000 pieces, and the cost is higher, too. However, it
is thinking of making up for its lag behind NSC and Hitachi by cultivating a
new market for DA (office automation) equipment, measuring instruments,
etc., which are well adaptable to the static type.

Sony and Sharp Mass-Producing CCD's

Sony and Sharp are doing their utmost for the mesa production of CCD's
(charge coupled devices) which are being brought into the limelight
as an eye of new electronics. The scope of application of CCD's is wide,
including facsimiles, video cameras of small size and of light weight, and
magnetic cameras of the future, which do not require film. They are VLSI's
whose rapid growth is expected in the field of public welfare.

In Sony, the development of CCD's is a President project. From the
spring of next year, when the special plant whose construction is being pushed
at present in Kokubu, Kagoshima Prefecture, will be completed, mass production
of CCD's will be started in the unit of l0,000 devices per month. Sharp
also is constructing a CCD mass-production plant at its Tenri Plant in Nara

Prefecture. It will produce 20,000 to 30,000 devices monthly in June Next
year.

it can be said that this is a manifestation of the budding of moves
to survive in the VLSi age throughthedevelopment of independent products,
avoiding frontal competition with NBC and ﬁitachi, which lead the industry
circles by improving the degree of integration of memories.

VLSI's require huge amounts of funds for research and development and
facilities investments. According to tentative calculations by ICE,
which is an influential semi-conductor consultant company of the US. there is
a result of surveys to the effect that the cost for the construction of

a standard VLSI plant will increase from the $23 million in 1980 to a little
more than $50 million in lQE‘.

The amount of facilities investments in the semi-conductor sector of NBC,
which holds top place in the industry circles, in fiscal 1981, is iui billion.
This accounts for 12 percent of the estimated sales in this sector --

V3“? billion. Other companies engaged in similar business criticite 35C,
saying that "“56 makes excessive facilities investments." However, it can be
said that NBC is thinking that it musr make such a huge amount of investments
to live through the VLSI age.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It seems that various semi-conductor companies are being pressed to make
a severe choice -- whether to stand the burden of huge funds and survive
through competition in mass production, or whether to live through the VLSI
age through the development of independent. favorite products.

Na1or Hanufacturers' Plans for Producing Su-Kilo-Bit RAM's

(As of the end of March: 1902; unit: 10,000 RAM's)

NBC: 10-5
Hitachi: 100
Fujitsu: 60
Toshiba: 30
Mitsubishi Electric Machinery: 30
Oki Electric Industry: 30

(Reporter KATO)

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

[17 Dec 81 p 5]

[Text]

The rapid fall in the price of eu-kilo—bit RAH's, which are said to be
the first round of VLSI (very large-scale integrated circuits). was much
in the newspapers in early September this year. At that time, a director
of a certain major semi-conductor-manufacturing company challenged a reporter,
saying as follows: "Do you know how much injury our company suffered because
of the newspaper report on the sharp fall in the price? It is ¥S billion!"
At the Tokyo Securities Exchange, the prices of main-stay electric machinery
shares fell rapidly from the middle of August because of foreign investors'
over-selling. Above all, the worsening of the semi-conductor market,
represented by GH-kilo-bit RAH's, accelerated the lowering of the prices of
major electronic shares of NBC, Fujitsu, etc. In the case of the above-
nentioned manufacturing company, which was scheduled to issue debentures
convertible at the market price in Europe, the plan for procuring funds was
greatly upset because the stock price fell, and this resulted in the "protest"
by the director. '

The trend of the product market is extremely important in grasping the
whole picture of semi-conductor business. The GH-kilo-bit'RAM, in particular,
appeared with 819dt fanfare as a product telling the opening of the VLSI age,
and therefore, the impact when the tremendous speed of the fall in the price
was spotlighted was great.

Since the fall of last year, Japanese and US semi-conductor manufacturers
have begun to deal with this product withultra-moderntechnology unanimously '
and on a full scale. The price of each sample shipped was ¥20,000. However,
it fell to ¥2,000. one-tenth. in September this year. one year later. It is
natural for the persons responsible for sales in various companies to have

turned pale at this sharp fall. However, the worsening of the market was
true.

Mass Production of éd-Kilo-Bit RAM's Runs Ahead Alone

The "learning curve" is a term which has become well-known at a bound
as a result of surveys by the Boston Consulting Group of the US. This is a rule
or experience in semi-conductor business, to the effect that when a
cumulative output increases double, the price falls by about 30 percent.
“Manufacturers with large amounts of production are more capable of lowering
cost, and they are able to increase the profit rate. As a result, they can
have an advantage in share competition. when the share increases, this rebounds
on the increase in the output, and this leads to more favorable conditions."

The Japanese semi-conductor industry caught up with the US forces in

"Silicon Valley." which is a mecca of semi-conductors, because it adopted

the management strategy of giving primary thought to the effect of mass production,
as a faithful adherent of the "learning curve."

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The phenomenon of the fall in the price of the Gu-kilo-bit RAH, which
phenomenon was described even as a "tragic aspect," originated from the
attempt t° carry out this rule of experience intensively for a short time. As
a conclusion. the competition for increased production among various semi-
conductor companies escalated, when it was not accompanied by users' demand, and
only the price ran ahead under the situation where many things did not appear
at the stage of distribution. This brought about the sharp fall in the
market to one-tenth in one year, which fall had not been experienced by
the persons connected with semi-conductor business.

th did the competition overheat to such an extent? As a memory
product, which is the ace in semi-conductor business, the Gu-kilo-bit RAH
has appeared this year, after the golden age of the lG-kilo-bit RAM continued
for four years. It is said that the 256-kilo-bit RAM in the next generation
will appear from 1985. This is an "Olympic item" whose memory capacity
increases by four times and which is replaced by another main-stay item every
fOur years.

"Destruction of Price" Calms Down, at Long Length

"VLSI technology will decide the rise and fall of the electronic
industry in the 1980's." So saying, all the major semi-conductor manu-
facturers of Japan announced themselves as suppliers of Gu-kilo-bit RAH's.
Mitsubishi Electric Machinery. which is a late-comer in the lS-Rilo—bit RAH
market one generation ago, and even Oki Electric Industry, which had no actual
record at all, participated for the first time. It is for this reason that it is
bantered as an "Olympic item on which there is significance in participation."
It is a natural consequencethatthe price will fall rapidly if the amount of
supply increases tremendously when it is not accompanied by actual demand."

This "destruction of prices“ is now calming down, at long length. Even
so, the prospect is strong that the price of the Su-kilo-bit RAH will
become Yi,000 early next year. Correctly, it can be said that such a
downward curve until the beginning of this fall as to "slide down a cliff"
is returning to the "step of the ordinary fall in cost for memory
products at a gradient of us degrees."

?or the various semi-conductor companies, the sharp fall in the price
of the Gu-kilo-bit RAH went against the grain. This is because establishment
of the prices was upset greatly under their sales plans for this year, when
the commercial war as to this product was to be started. However, this
fall in prices caused a "welcome miscalculation.“ on the other hand. The
tremendous competition in the lowering of prices stimulated users' enthusiasm
for purchases, and as a result, it caused the VLSI age to become full-
fledged quickly.

In regard to the circumstances in this connection, Vice-President
Atsuyoshi OUCHI of NEC, which ranks first in the industry circles, did not
change the following prospect, from beginning to end: "It will be from 1982,

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OII OFFICIAL l'SI-f ONLY

that the su-kilo-bit RAH will play the leading role in the semi-conductor

market." Looking askance at other companies engaged in similar business,
which raced ahead in the competition for increased production, NEC did not
readily join this race. The "judgment" based on the marketing research by

the information strategic units which NEC spread both at home and abroad,
served as its self-confidence in the "view that the 6u-kilo-bit RAH will
play the leading role in 1982."

As Vice-President OUCHI read the information strategic units' research
reports which he obtained after the start of November, he is said to have
thought that "The rapid recovery of demand for the Su-kilo-bit RAH exceeds
my expectations." In the reports, the names of about 130 enterprises which
had reported on the passage of the examinations of the samples, which NEC
had shipped to European and American users, were listed. It is said that

among them, "Seven of the ll major computer manufacturers in Europe and
America, such as Honeywell, are included."

Shares will Become Clear From Early Next Year

Even in the light of the single fact that facilities investments
amount to a huge sum. the VLSI war, which was started with the appearance
of the 6u-kilo-bit RAM. is forcing Japanese semi-conductor manufacturers to
engage in a heavy-load race. It can be said that the price competition was
a "test" as to whether theycan stand this race or not. As far as is viewed
at the present time, no companies seem to have dropped out in the offensive-
defensive battle among NSC, hitachi, Fujitsu, Toshiba, Mitsubishi, and
Cki Electric, which battle was developed as to what company will hold
price leadership. however, there are also new moves, such as Toshiba's
deciding to extend the kinds of VLSI products.

The results of the struggles for users will certainly become clear

er early next year, in the situation where users' demand will mount.
c_ntering on computer and communications equipment industry circles. Real
ability is yet to be truly questioned in the load race among the various
companies wnich have outlived the price competition. (Reporter HGSAKA)

[18 Dec 81 p 5]

[Text]

"2 do not adhere to Buy American. He will buy even Japanese products,
if thev are good devices. This is what business should he, isn't it?”
Bcurcfhairmancordon E. MOORE of INTEL. which is an influential semi-
conductor manufacturer of the US, made such a remark recently and surprised

the surrounding people.

INTEL is a well-known US enterprise following the principle of purchasing
home-produced goods. Disco (Head Office in Tokyo), a Japanese wafer-

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cutting device manufacturer holding 80 percent of the world share, is
delivering its products to most influential semi-conductor manufacturers in
the world. Nevertheless. it deplores, "We cannot make an inroad into INTEL."
All the more for this reason, the remark by Board Chairman MOORE is very
interesting. Actually, INTELhas recently started contacts with several

Japanese manufacturers as to devices to manufacture VLSI's, including the
electron beam-exposing device.

Major us Semi-Conductor Manufacturers Adopt Japanese Products, Too

Not only INTEL but also IBM is moving to procure Japanese devices.
At the hiho Plant in Ibaraki Prefecture, which is the VLSI-producing base in
Japan for Texas Instruments (TI) of the US, the biggest semi-conductor manu-
facturer in the world, Japanese devices are introduced in large quantities.
In the device industry circles, the following expectation is mounting: "With

this as a breakthrough, TI itself also will have to introduce large quantities
of Japanese devices, won't it?"

Japan Electronics has recently decided to receive an order for
electron beam-exposing devices from the Bell Research Institute, which is
a leader in the development of semi-conductors in the US, in competition with
European and American manufacturers.

what do such moves show? The semi-conductor-manufacturing device
manufacturers which have so far been noted by foreign countries have been chiefly
manufacturers of devices used for the process of assembling semi-conductors,
such as Disco and Niikawa (Head Office in Kusashi-Murayama City, Tokyo),which
manufacture wire bonders. At present, however, manufacturers of ultra-
modern, nucleus devices to produce VLSI's and inspect their performance,
such as Canon and Japan Optical Industry which manufacture exposing devices,
Nichiden Anelba (in Fuchuiizv, Tckyo) which manufactures etching devices,
and Takeda Riken Kogyo which manufactures LSI testers, are being spotlighted.

"In Japan, there are semi-conductcr-manufacturing device manufacturers
having real abilitv, though they have hardly advanced into Europe and

America. If they advance into Surope, they will he of help to the semi-
conductor industry in Europe, which is lagging behind those in Japan and the
US. but ..." So saying, the Spcnsor of the trade fair and technological

seminar which are tc be held in the Netherlands in January next year, went
round recuesting the attendance of Japanese device manufacturers, when he cane
to Japan recentiy. Eyes have :egun to be directed also toward device
manufacturers, as central figures in the Japanese semi-conductor industry
which is sweeping ever the world with 6u-kilo-bit RAH's (random access
memories), which are the first VLSI products.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SI-I (INI.\'

Hill "in Come-Prom-Behind Victory in One or Two Years

When the semi-conductor-manufactcring device is grasped in the "VLSI
war," it is 03 "another battlefield" which is being developed behind the
battle on the semi-conductor market. The Japanese semi-conductor induStry
started with the introduction of US technology. and it is becoming the
leading actor in the world in the VLSI age. However, as if chasing it several
steps behind, the device industry circles are also trying to find a foothold
toward the world market.

As to the Japanese market, persons connected with the industry circles
take the common view that at present, "The ratio between US and Japanese
devices is about 6 to k, and US devices are superior." However, it is said

to be certain that home-produced goods will win a come-from-behind victory
in the next one of two years.

It is not that major US device manufacturers, who have so far been
controlling the world market, are silent as to this. They are beginning
to move toward large-scale counter-attacks. One of them is their plant
advance into Japan. GCA, a device manufacturer ranking third in the world
has announced that it will start local production jointly with Sumitomo Shoji
from next year, and Applied Materials (AMT)whichranks fourth in the world and
Materials Research (NRC). which is the biggest manufacturer of spattering
devices, have announced the start of local production from l983.

A major device manufacturer of the US says, "As to technology for the
production of VLSI's in the future. comprehensive power to realize micro-
processing by combining various devices from materials is a conclusive factor"
(leader cf Perkin Elmer, the biggest device manufacturer in the world). Its
concept is to put various kinds of devices used for building circuits
in the automation system. For this purpose, it has started the input of
new and efficient devices and systems successively. Japanese manufacturers
do n0t have such comprehensive power. and, moreover, most prototypes of
ultra-modern devices have so far been developed by US forces. This difference
in the power of development has act yet been ironed out.

Therefore, even if the day comes when the ratio of Japanese and US
devices will be reversed on the Japanese market, it will not be very easy.
This is because there are circumstances where the rapid growth of the Japanese
market cannot at all be overlooked by US manufacturers.

Introduction of Highly Efficient Devices Will Be Conclusive Factor

"The semi-conductor industry of the US has brought about the result that
it has been forestalled by Japan as to Su-kilo-bit RAH's, because it held
down research and development and facilities investments during the long-
term depression after the first oil shock. However, it is doing the same
thing again during this depression," says AhT President James C. MORGAN.

US device manufacturers, irritated at the US market which has not improved at
all, are directing their eyes toward the Japanese market, naturally.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nu. Uuhuuel v: ausc-.--uu -u-uuuuvu-v - ..... ' .v..— .v--—-... _“-__--, ,

which is nicknamed "money-eating insect," is heavy. How to introduce highly
efficient devices quickly is a big point of competition for semi-conductor
manufacturers. Hhen limited to the Japanese field of semi-conductors, .
especially IC's. more than 20 percent of sales are set side for facilities
inveStments. In the production of VLSI's, this trend will not become smaller
but will expand.

Under such circumstances, the "VLSI war" among device manufacturers
is presenting an aspect in which Japan is a main battlefield. US device
manufacturers are afraid that if they are defeated on the Japanese market.
this will give an impetus to Japanese manufacturers' advance into the US,
and that their footing may be threatened next time.

[21 Dec 81 p 14]

[Text]

In the VLSI (very large-scale integrated circuits) age, which has just
started this year, it has become clear that Hitachi will ship 256-kilo-bit
RAM's (random access memories) as samples as early as the fall of next year.
For this reason, the VLSI war has flaredluaat one shot, and it has come to
strengthen the aspect of a total war. What is about to occur in the semi-

conductor industry circles? Reporters in charge held a round-table
conference.

Contest in Physical Power Rather Than in Intellectual and Mental Power

Desk: new moves arise in the semi-conductor industry circles, one
after ano-her. This means that conyetition in development and sales is
so tremendous.

A: Toshiba Hanaging Director Teruyuki NISHIJIHA made this interesting
remark: "What is necessary for the persons in charge of semi-conductors at
present is physiCul strength. Intellectual and mental Power is of secondary
importqncc." Atthounh in the ultra-modern technological industry, fairly
uncouth moves are being developed on the front line, centering on sales.
Pecaune of struggles for users and new sales campaigns, the leaders in charge
of sales in all companies return home at mid-night, every day.

C: ?he lega; neriod of depreciation of semi-conductor-manufacturing
devices is fixed a: five years, as an exception, with the severity of renewal
of technology recognized. Actually, however, no devices stand up for five
Vuars. Therefcre. the leader: of various companies are making this appeal:
"Semi-conductor enterprises must recover their investments in three years."
An thev must put their business on a paying basis in such a short period
of time. they cannot but become enthusiastic about mass-production and
competition in the development of new products. when they think that
there are prospects for the mass—production of Su-kilo-bit RAH's, they must

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISF. ONLY

 

work on 256-kilo-bit RAH's next time. Funds for facilities investments
have increased rapidly. and the pain of those in charge of semi-conductors
is communicated even when they are silent.

Desk: Looking back upon the moves of the industry circles this year, we
find that the contest between NBC and Hitachi, which can be said to be a
"Japan-Japan war," seems to have become severer than ever, but ...

B: The "patent dispute" over the method of manufacturing semi-
conductors, too, was the severest in the case of the two companies. Hitachi
President HITA is a gentleman in appearance, but actually he is fairly
unruly. Taking over the tradition of "Hitachi, a wandering samurai," he
has begun to wage an offensive against HEC, which holds top place in the
industry circles. Hitachi has outstanding power as a general electric
machinery manufacturer, but it has few individual products whose shares are
highest in the industry circles. Hithin the company, there is arising the
opinion that this should not he the case, and the semi-conductor sector is
leading the van, in accordance with this opinion.

A: In the semi-conductor industry circles in the future, the trend
toward concentration of high-ranking manufacturers will become increasingly
strong, won't it? As mentioned earlier, the higher the degree of integration
becomes, the more the funds for facilities investments will increase.
The funds necessary for the VLSI plant, the construction of which is being
pushed by Hitachi at its place of business in Sagamihara, Kanagawa Prefecture,
amOunt to ¥27 billion. If competitionbecomes severe, some enterprises
will become unable to stand such a burden.

B: On this point, there is in the industry circles the view that Hitachi,
which is large in scale, has an advantage, though this may be a simple View.
Some people say that the order in the industry circles will be reversed
three years hence, with Hitachi outstripping NBC. A certain director in
IBM Japan said that "He mark Hitachi, first of all, as to semi-conductors,
too."

C: No. As far as semi-conductors are concerned, HEC also will try
not to be beaten. Various companies in the industry circles are surprised at
its posture of continuing facilities investments exceeding 10 percent of its
sales, for the past several years, and carrying them out in the future, too.
In addition to its spending a lot of money for this purpose, special units
for sales are running about various parts of the world in search of informatior
A certain researcher at the Homura Research Institute, who returned home from
the U3 recently, said with surprise. "It was only NBC that came even to
our office to collect information."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Enterprises From Third Place Down Hill Find Ways of Living in Specialization

Desk: Hhat arc the moves of the manufacturers from third place down?

A: I am noting Toshiba's development and sales of su-kilo-bit RAH's of
the static type. Toshiba, looking at the tremendous contest between NBC and
ﬂitachi, feels that if it plunges into it directly, it will be bathed with
"return blood,” doesn't it? I think that it has already firmed up the
intention of becoming foremost in the uncultivated field of static-type
RAM's. Sony's CCD (charge cupped device) specialization is in the same
current.

C: There is Matsushita as an existence like a "dark horse." This time,
Hatsushita has decided to handle personal computers in real earnest, not only
in Hatsushita Communications Industry but also in Hatsushita Electric
itself. As a result. a big semi-conductor market for the future has opened
within that company. The spread of the range of the group is also tremendous.
I observed the 2nd Arai Plant in Niigata Prefencture, which was completed in
ﬂovember this year. In view of its new facilities and large scale, I cannot
but think that it is entertaining a certain ambition for the future.

8: I feel that Mitsubishi, Oki, and so forth are likely to be forced to
stage fairly painful contests, though this may offend the persons concerned.
I feel that multi-polarization, pillared by bipolarization of the industry
circles and their favorite products, will progress to a certain extent next

year.

European and American Enterprises Selling Themselves, One After Another

Desk: what about the moves ofsemi-conductormanufacturers in Europe
and America?

B: In the US, liquidation and Curtailment of industry circles have
already been started. There is n» nch fear in the case of major manufacturers
including Texas Instruments, Motorola, and INTEL, but it is said that
the number of medium and snail manufacturers selling themselves has increased
greatly. There is also the information that Robert Bosch. which is a major
Host German automobile parts manufacturer, is moving to purchase a prominent
svmi-conductnr manufacturer in the US in order to strengthen car electronics.
Luvh forward-lovkinr ran»; an meior manufacturers' plant advance into Japan and
contracts for the exchange of technology will increase, but on the other hand,
the plight of medium and small manufacturers will come to the fore successively
and criticism against Japan will become strong. won't it?

A: The situation in Europe is more serious. Siemens is the only enterprise
that in doing business properly. Leaders of $66, a major Italian semi-
conductor manufacturer. vinitrd Japan and contacted Hitachi and Toshiba.

Thry seem to have sought Japan's co-operation including technological “id.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To Fujitsu. there was a proposal from ICL, a British computer manufacturer
with which it is co-operating, for selling a semi-conductor plant in Britain.
There is also the probablity that some agreement will be reached between Japan
and Europe next year, entangled with the problem of trade friction.

Desk: There is the view that Japan has an advantage as to competition in
the development of ultra-modern technology, but ...

C: When I said this to NEC Board Chairman KOBAYASHI, he turned me down.
saying that "That is far from the truth." He emphasized: "In mass-production
and merchandising technology, Japan is certainly superior to the US, but
in ultra-modern technology, Japan is lagging 10 years behind it." He means
that it is ridiculous to say that Japan's electronic technology is advanced.
when it is unable to launch a single space shuttle. As to manufacturing
devices, too, the US is superior in the power to develop basic technology.

The Japan-US differential in the field of software has not yet been narrowed.
either.

A: In the case of specific LSI's which are being produced for space
and military projects in the US. the production cost per piece is as high as
$50 or so. The cost for those for industrial use is on the $1 level.

I think we must not despise the technological power of the us which is
developing ultra-modern technology by spending that much money.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbusha 1981

cso: 6106/49

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PLUTONIUM EXTRACTED 1‘0 BE USED FOR LWR NUCLEAR Pom GENERATION
Tokyo HAINICHI SHIHBUN in Japanese 31 Dec 81 p 1

[Text]

According to what was clarified by a nuclear energy policy official
on the 30th, Japan has decided to use the plutoniu which is extracted
through the re-processing of spent nuclear fuel at nuclear powenplants, as
fuel for light-water-reactor-type nuclear power generation now in operation,
as early as the first half of 1982, ahead of the rest of the world. for
this purpose, it will resume Japan-US nuclear energy negotiations as early as
Harch and obtain 05 agreement to use plutonium. 0n the other hand, it will
obtain final confirmation on such problems as the construction of a second
re-processing plant in Japan. As a result, commercialization of the
Japanese nuclear energy industry will begin to move on a full scale toward
completion of the nuclear fuel cycle.

Two Committees for Commercialization; HITI's Policy

The fear is strong that use of plutonium as a fuel (pluthermal) in light-water
reactors, which account for nearly 30 percent of the reactors at the nuclear
power plants in the world at present, will make the manufacture of plutonium
atomic bombs easy. Therefore, it has been strictly restricted, from the
Standpoint of preventing nuclear proliferation. However, plutonium is
accumulated every day in nearly 270 reactors in the world, which are already
in operation. Even in the light of the economic feasibility inherent to
nuclear energy, to the effect that fuel once spent can be used again, the
necessity for pluthermal has been pointed out.

I
In Japan. too, pl 'tonium as a fuel for light-water reactors is in a
State where it can be used at two nuclear power plants -- the Nihama Nuclear
Power Plant of Kansai Electric Power and the Tsuruga Nuclear Power Plant '
of the Japan Atomic Power Company -- and a go sign for imports from the US
is being awaited. It is said that an international political decision and
timing as to social environment are the only remaining problems.

In this situation. Japan has a bitter history of being the only A-bomb
victim country, and therefore, both its control and surveillance structures

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are relatively complete in the world, as to nuclear non-proliferation. It
has accumulated actual records as generally the only advanced nation as to
nuclear energy, which has never been suspected of nuclear proliferation to
the Middle East and South America. On such occasions as the INFCE (Inter-
national Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation) Conference, which was held under
the CARTER Administration, Japan opposed the plan of the US, Britain and
France for international monopoly of nuclear energy in the comercial field.
Therefore, Japan has received the international evaluation that at present,
there is no other country except Japan that can start using plutonium-use
light-water reactors. with importance attached to economic feasibility.

Especially, Japan depends upon foreign countries for uranium resources,
too, and when plutonium created through re-processing of spent uranium fuel
is used again as a fuel for reactors. it can be regarded as a semi-home-produced
fuel. Its meaning of security in the fields of economic feasibility and
energy is very big. Therefore, the Science and Technology Agency, HITI, and
electric power industry circles have teen aiming at using plutonium as a
nuclear fuel for nuclear power generation, from early on. In the case
of "E'ugen" (output: 165,000 K"), a prototype reactor for the new-type
converter reactor (ATR -- advanced thermal reactor), the first power generation
with the plutonium-uranium mixed fuel entered a demonstration stage this
fall, and it is being tentatively operated at present. As to "Joyo"
(not used for power generation), an experimental reactor for the fast breeder
reactor (E‘BR), too, experiments will be started within 1982 to increase the
output from the 75,000 K'n' at present to 100,000 KW. Thus. preparations
for that purpose are being completed steadily.

Taking such actual records into account, nuclear energy policy officials
are asserting that nuclear proliferation can be fully prevented, by attaching
the condition that "Only the countries having high-level techmlogy on the
A??., FBR, etc., can use plutonium as a fuel in limited, specific light-water
reactors." They are scheduled to obtain the final agreement of the RSAGAN
AdminiStration, which has already made a nearly lSO-degree policy change

from the prohibition measures under the CARTER Administration to easing
measures.

In pushing comercialization, on the other hand, MITI will inaugurate,
early in January, two committees as advisory organs for the ITI Minister --
a "Plutonium Re-Cycle Committee" (Chairman: Japan Atomic Energy Research
Institute Adviser Eiroshi MURATA) and a "Fast Breeder Reactor Practical Use
Committee" (Chairman: Tokyo University Professor Yoshitsugu HISRIHA). Its

policv is to establish strategy for development and commercialization up till
the year 2000, at these Comm ttees.

These Committees will give long-term prospects for huge amounts of
investments and a plan for constructing nuclear energy-connected facilities,
which will require a period of more than 10 years each. The Hinistry intends to
urge private capital to participate in a positive way in the nuclear energy
industry, which has already become a market amounting to ¥2 trillion annually.

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Shimbunsha 1981

C30: 6106/09
38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tokyo DENKI SHIHBUN in Japanese 9 Jan 82 p 1
[Text]

The Science and Technology Agency on the 8th clarified the details of
its nuclear energy budget for fiscal 1982. According to this. the characteristic
feature of the budget is that emphasis was given to the improvement and
strengthening of the nuclear fuel cycle which is reaching the stage of
demonstration, as well as to the continuation of large-scale projects for
nuclear fusion, multi-purpose high-temperature gas furnaces, etc. As to
downstream, in particular, detailed designing of a high-level waste liquid
solidification pilot plant was approved, and one step forward has been taken
as to the start of construction. In regard to low-level waste liquid, too,
new measures are to be developed. As to upStream, adjusted designing of
a uranium enrichment protOtype plant and other matters were approved by the
Finance Ministry, and the start of construction is to be awaited. Also,
establishment of a Nuclear Energy LocationRegional.Measures Office in the
Agency was approved. This is designed for comprehensive promotion of location
as to nuclear energy facilities from the standpoint of the State. It will
check into PA (public acceptance) as'nalocation at the first stage and what
regional promotion should be, and put it into practice.

Efforts To Be Made for PA at First Stage and Regional Promotion, Too

The said Agency's nuclear energy appropriations amount to ¥l76,200
million (up 0.7 percent over fiscal 1981) in the general account, and to
¥66,800 million (up l2.2 percent over fiscal 1981) in the electric power
special account, totaling ¥2u3 billion (up 3.6 percent). The appropriations
in the general account 2xceeded the demanded amount by ¥l,100 million. This
means a slight increase in the amount of cash, because the limited amount of
liabilities on the Treasury was curtailed on a wide scale. The increase rate
of the demanded amount, including that in the electric power special account,

is 3.8 percent, and the amount of appropriations is somewhat smaller than
that.

The characteristic feature of the contents of the nuclear energy budget
is that new measures were worked out in the field of the nuclear fuel cycle,

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which is reaching the stage of demonstration, in addition to the continuation
of medium- and long-range,large-scale projects for nuclear fusion, multi-
purpose high-temperaturegasfurnaces, FBR's (faSt breeder reactors), etc., as
bef re.

In regard to downstream, detailed designing (V1.500 million) of the
high-level waste liquid solidification pilot plant by the Power Reactor and
Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation was approved, following the basic
designing. The policy of the Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development
Corporation is to push detailed designing in fiscal 1982 and 1983, start the

construction of the plant in fiscal 198“, and start the operation thereof in
fiscal 1987.

The demonstration of glass solidification techniques will be carried out,
following the start of the operation of high-level radioactive materials
research facilities (CPF) in the spring of this year. Development of
techniques on the disposal of radioactive waste (V200 million) and research on
the standards forthe disposal of radioative waSte (¥70 million) are also new
measures. In the case of the former, development of new techniques for the
decrease of low-level waste, elimination of contamination, solidification, etc.
will be publicly invited from private circles, and subsidies will be granted.
In the case of the latter, research on standards will be carried out so that
performance and so forth can be checked, in preparation for the practical use

of new solidified plascics, as well as research on the so-called "bottom cuts"
of low-level waste.

In the field of upstream, the uranium enrichment prototype plant is a
tar item. An appropriation of V960 million, including an adjustment
expense (V500 million) to prepare for the construction, has been earmarked,
the sharing of funds between the Government and private circles has been
decided, and the early start of the construction will be awaited. Also, an
expense (¥lOO million) for publicity measures concerning the nuclear fuel cycle
to promote location as to the nuclear fuel cycle, including the second
re-processing plant for private circles, uranium enrichment, and the "Honiu"
FER. has been newly budgeted, and PR activities will be embarked upon from
the standpoint of the State.

In the field of organization, on the other hand, it has been decided that
a Huclear Energy location Regional Neasures Office will be established. This
Office will check cross-sectionally and comprehensively, from the standpoint
of the State, into the nuclear fuel cycle, PA as to first-stage location
of nuclear energy facilities including new-type reactors, regional promotion,
etc., and put them into practice. Nuclear energy liaison co-ordinators
(numbering 8) under the Office Chief will also be assigned to this 0ffice.and
co-operat-on with local self-governing bodies also will be made close.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1982

CSO: 4106/49

#0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUZUKI DISCUSSES ELECTRONICS REVOLUTION, ECONOMIC CHANGES
Tokyo NIHON KEIZA SHIMBUN in Japanese 11 Jan 82 p 3

[Interview with Fujitsu President Yamsmoto by NIKON KEIZAI SHIHBUN First
Industrial News Section Chief Suzuki; 11 January 1982, place not given]

[Text]

Our country's economy, which came to greet the new year, does not
necessarily have a bright outlook. There can be seen a shadow on exports
which have so far pulled the economy along, and the recovery of the
materials industry is not yet complete. In this situation, the electronics
industry, centering on computers, has been steadily growing. and it is
going to change economic society from its foundation. On this occasion,
Takuma YAHAHOTO, President of Fujitsu, a home-make computer manufacturer,
and Takashi SUZUKI, Chief of the First Industrial News Section of this
paper, talked about the electronics revolution.

ﬂkﬂﬁhkhﬁkﬁﬂ

SUZUKI: This year's industrial world is not bright, from every angle.
There are problems also in exports which have been the motive power up
until now, and personal consumer spending has not recovered satisfactorily.
Because finances are at a deadlock, public works are on the same level as
in the preceding year, and the recovery of the materials industry is not
conspicuOus. Then, we cannot but rely on electronics, especially in the
computer field.

Creation Sector Is Task

YAMAMOTO: The computer industry has a bright outlook. As the
grounds, aside from Government offices. private enterprises are still
enthusiaStic about rationalization. Besides, multiplier effects, created
by electronics and other industries together, are now activating non-elec-
tronics industries. i think that there are two such points.

Use of computers has appeared in some ‘orms, which can be called
office automation (0A). design automation (DA), which can be also called

#1
FOItOFFKJA1.USELONlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

computer aided design (CAD) or factory automation (FA). Especially since
around 1981, some machine plants have begun to save and eliminate human
labor by the thorough-going introduction of robots. Partly because of
this, FA will be further accelerated from 1982.

SUZUKI: When I went to a local district, I said to people there that
the electronics revolution is now under way. Then, many people told me,
"My factory also has introduced 3C (numerically controlled) machine tools.”
There are also statistics which say that, on the level of medium and
small enterprises, NC machine tools have been already introduced by no to
60% of them. From now on, HC (machine complex), robots, and CAD will be
introduced, and the age of factory automation, that is, the age of the
unmanned factory, will arrive, won't it?

YAMAMOTC: FA has no: spread into all industries at all. It is
about to Start ... Ihis expressio: may be correct. In plants, a
tendency toward that has already risen on a full scale. But, the sphere
of white-collar workers still remains. Concerning this, there are two
goints: introduction of CA, and improvement of the efficiency of the
development of design. I call CAD design aut0mation (DA). This will be
the same as 0A. or will become a more important theme.

SUZUKI: Since the first oil shock in 1973, Japanese manufacturing
plants have rapidly promoted rationalization. Meanwhile, however, office
rationalization has not made progress on a marked scale.

YAHAMOTO: Among human brain activities in offices, the repeating of
simple calculations, and troublesome calculations, which take much time,
can be done by computers. and efficiency can be increased. But, very
creative brain activities and judgments must be accomplished by human
beings, after all. Therefore. productivity will not increase so easily.
However, it is true that this is a big sector remaining.

SUZUKI: In the past one or two years, Japanese computer manufacturers
showed not only small-sized computers to be used for rationalization, but
also large-sized computers, one after another. Have they finally caught
IBh, which is the largest manufacturer in the world?

YAHAHOTO: In the field of the manufacturing of hardware, I do not
think that that is saying too much. But, the development of products. from
the beginning, is a rat race. Therefore, even if one manufacturer opens
a lead over other manufacturers for a certain period, this does not mean
that it opens a lead for good. I think that we should be aware that the
heated race will continue from now on too. However, conversely speaking.
we have now acquired power enough to run in a hot race.

SUZUKI: IBM has a 60% share of the computer market of the world, and
IBM has so far surpassed all other computer manufacturers of the advanced

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
countries. People have thought for a long time that the power of IBM is
absolute and that it is impossible for enterprises of our country to

catch up with IBM. If our country's manufacturers catch IBM in the hard-

ware field, does this mean that a day when Japanese computers will conquer the
world is near at hand?

YAMAHOTO: To manufacture a large-sized computer. we need a group
which is able to design it theoretically, we need fast-access LSI (large-
scale integrated) circuits and large-volume storages, and we need various
technOIOgies to join them together. As its base, we need the semi-con-
ductor industry, concerning high-grade silicon, which semi-conductor
industry produces LSI circuits, and we need the cable industry, concerning
precise coaxial cable, etc. That is, we need a wide industrial base.

The same can be said of software. If we gather people. we will be able to
do things ... This is wrong. How many hundred mature software employees
does a computer company have? Like this, it is a question which can be
decided by whether a computer company has a base for that or not. To catch

IBM, and to surpass it, we will still have to pile up efforts from now
on.

SUZUKI: That may be correct. But, as conditions for the computer
industry to have a foothold and to prosper, the country must be big, and
it must have big cities. Further, a country, which is suffering from a
depression at all times, is out of the question. Therefore, I think that
it must have a rather high growth rate. In that sense, computer companies
in our country are provided with conditions for growth. There are reasons
for them to be able to become strong-minded, aren't there?

Japan Provided With Conditions

YAhAMOTO: when viewed from European countries, I think that Japan
has a big market, and has population, industries, and an industrial
base necessary for bringing up computers. The centralization of big cities
is also necessary at the same time. When we are going to establish a
computer sales network, we shOuld not do things in the way of scattering
things in a desert. If we do things in that way, personnel-disposition
efficiency is bad. In this respect, in Japan, mos: big cities are cen-
tralized in the Tokyo area and in the Kinki area. Therefore, I think
that there is obviously an increase in efficiency. But, America is
blessed with more.

SUZUKI: Cne more thing, to establish a computer industry. it is
necessary to strengthen the semi-conductor industry which can produce good
semi-conductors at low cost. however, in the production of RAH (Random
Access hemery) of 6H kilobits, which is said to be the entrance to VLSI
(very-large-scale integrated) circuits, Japan completely surpassed the us
by last year. Technology for the production of semi-conductors has
developed. This point is very big.

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SD-Z ONLY

YAHAMOTO: It is incredible, but that seems to be correct. Computer-
related equipment is also an important factor which we cannot ignore. As
a matter of fact, in the case of small-sized computers, the weight of
price is heavier than the main body itself. The computer industry can
be characterized by two points, that is, semi-conductors and software,
after all. On this point, in Japan, software has been greatly developing.
This fact is encouraging. At the same time, I think that the US has
little actual injury at present, but is making an uproar.

SUZUKI: In American mass media, they have a strong view, to the
effect that "as to software, the United States stands at an advantage
over Japan." Hhat do you think about this point?

YAHAHOTO: "Necessity is the mother of invention." There has been
no case where necessary software was not developed in Japan. If and
when necessity arises, the Japanese will never fail to achieve it. But,
in American society, there is a system where it [software], as well as
hardware, will walk big steps, one after another. Meantime, in Japan, we
do not need grand-scale software, which will accompany the Space Shuttle
Project or the Apollo Project. Therefore, Japan is behind as to that.
But, I think that it is alright for us to be behind as to that. We do
not need unnecessary things. But, I say to Americans, "It would be better
for you not to relax so much."

SUZUKI: If VLSI circuits are developed,one after another, and if
their prices are accordingly lowered, it will become a big plus to the
future computer industry or to the electronics industry, won't it?

YAHANOTO: I think that it will produce various multiple effects also
with other industries, besides electronics, and that it will become a factor
to activate various industries.

SUZUKI: If the price of semi-conductors is half, the price of
computers will also go down on a marked scale, won't it?

YAMAMOTO: That can be said. But, semi-conductors to be used for
computers belong to the production of many types and small quantity. So,
even if the price of general memory equipment goes down, it does not mean
that even LSI circuits, which will be used for the heart of computers,
will also go down markedly.

SUZUKI: f we give a course of growth and development to the
Japanese software indusrry, what is necessary?

YAMAMCTO: The problem, which we are now facing, is that there is a
lack of personnel in the software sector. A university professor says,
"Computers are no longer things of electronics technicians. They are
assiStants for human brain activities. So, while regarding it [software]

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a: a third foreign language, universities should teach students to use
comrutcrs, at their general education courses." Except some talented

people, people in general cannot maSter a second foreign language. Therefore.
I think that instead, they shouldtcach them how to use computers.

SUZUKI: The electronics revolution, centering on computers, will
create society different from the usual Japanese society and from
advanced-country society. we have been carrying a series, titled "new
indu trial Revolution," in the Nikkei Sangyo Shimbun, since last year.
in this, we have been asserting that, as NC machine tools resolved
problems such as the lack of hands in medium and small enterprises,
difficulty cf finding successors, and inferior products, it [electronics
revolution] will create new industries and society in every field. The
ape-men used tools and became men. The invention of the steam locomotive

by James HATT ignited the First Industrial Revolution. They say that,

at present, electronics will make everybody become the master of machine
slaves.

YAHAMOTO: I think that the reform of economic society has begun to
move, little by little. if there is work which people dislike, it can
be assigned to robots. For example, in offices, word processors will
carry out final documentation for secretaries. Accordingly, office
workers will be able to raise productivity on a marked scale. There will
be fewer work hours. But, there has been a marked increase in the number
of people who write software programs to use computers and micro-processors.
I think that there is this kind of industrial base at present. Also,
generally speaking, there will be a decrease in the population of the

secondary induStry. Then, is it not that the weight of the service
industry will increase?

SUZUKI: After the First Industrial Revolution, we have experienced
times of unemployment and crises many times, up until reaching the stable
economy in the 20th century. To enter new computer society in the future,
we will probably need to change our awareness of policies, even when we
take up robot unemployment as an example, won‘t we?

Education System Also To Change

YAMAHOTO: For example, I think that the education system will also
be affected. Actually, there has appeared a change in the foam of the
fact that the rate of going to high schools has increased very much. I
think that there may occur a change when will unavoidably change the
education system. Also, internationally, plants will be constructed in
countries where labor costs are inexpensive, and advanced countries will
also earn profits. At the same time, merits will be brought to developing
countries too. If FA makes progress, it will not become effective. Then,
even the solution of the North-South problem, replacing the usual method,

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

will probably change into a task as to what it will create, and it will
change even the way of division of international economic labor.

SUZUKI: Some people say, "Only science-connected people or
superior people can think about computer things." Therefore, aside
from HITI. most Government officials and politicians do not want to
think about that (laughter). President YAHAHOTO and other computer-company
leaders may have to perform the role of an "evangelist" in the electronics
age.

YAHAHOTO: I am not that excited (laughter). If there appears an
opinion saying that "administrative people also must understand
computers." that is our self-conceit. I think that the reason why
Japanese industries have developed since the end of the Her, is not that
MIT! and politicians completely understand even the contents of technology,
but is that they have been relying on technology and on industries,
adopting our opinions. and guiding us so as to utilize the vitality of
private circles. mutual relations of this kind will not change basically.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1982

C80: 6106/49

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GENERAL CONDITIONS 0!" JAPAN 'S TECHNOLOGY TRADE

[Text]
Royalty
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries ......... ¥l6,700 million
Hitachi Shipbuilding & Engineering . . . . #11300 million
Nippon Steel .................... ¥9,800 million
Sony ........ . ................ ¥4,900 million
Hitachi ........................ V4500 million

The figures mentioned above are royalty incomes the
respective manufacturers earned during ﬁscal l980 ended
March 3i, l98l. in the case of the top earner, Mitsubishi,
the royalty it earned and it paid are balanced. Mitsubishi‘s
ordinary proﬁts for the March l98l term totaled $92,947
million, of which about ¥l6,700 million (72.8%) were
royalty incomes. The ratio of royalty incomes to profits
is quite high.

During the past 20 years the (apanese economy achieved
high growth, which was often described as a miracle.
However, the economy underwent rapid changes during the
latter half of that period, and through two oil crisis it
entered an era of moderate growth. in fact, many industries
have been suffering from sluggish consumer spending for
the past ﬁve years.

The management of businesses issued orders: "Make
whatever products that sell, and create new demand to
survive the recession." Many firms enforced their research,
development and planning divisions. Through a series of
strcneous corporate efforts, they polished their basic and
applied technologies. and as a result, they developed new
technologies and products both competitive in the world
market. Corporate rayalty incomes clearly show this. Of 60
big manufacturers, 35 are earning more titan V500 million
of royalty a year. According to a survey conducted on
royalty earnings by the Science and Technology Research,
nine of the 20 industries surveyed earned more from new

107

contracts for technology exports than they paid for similar
imports in fiscal l980. However, the overall balance of
Japan's technology trade remains in

The top leader of Japan's technological development is
the iron and steel industry, which is headed by Nippon
Steel. in technology trade. Nippon Steel has been earning
more than it has been paying since l969, and their balance
is increasing. In I980 it totaled some V9300 million, that
is, l4 times the amount it paid (about V700 million). The
balance is estimated to total about ¥l0,000 million in
years to come.

Most of its earnings from technology exports is from
payments for technological guidance and supervision in
steel-making engineering The lapanese iron and steel
industry learned much from US. and European countries
War ii. Now it is exporting tech-
nologies it has developed through the innovation of
inported know-how or it has newly developed. The steei~
uniting engineering of Nippon Steel began with its coopera-
tion in the construction of Usiminas Steel Works in Brazil
(launched in 1958). Since then the company has under.
taken a number of engineering projects in various countries.
They include the construction of Malayawata Steel Works
(the basic plan was inaugurated in l965] in Malaysla, con-
sultant work in the Pohang Steel Plant Proiect ll970~
1975: the ﬁrst phase completed in l973) of South Korea
and cooperation in the total planning of the hot strip mill
(annual output 3 million tons) and the electromagnetic
steel plate production plant of Wuhan Steel Works in

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL

China, as well as engineering work for individual production
facilities and operation know-how for these steel plants.

The company has pr0vided :he Usiminas Steel Works
with computer-aided systems engineering for the total
operation of integrated steel production plants. It has also
provided application technology for a process computer
incorporated into a converter in South Africa.

When it comes to licensing and the supply of industrial
knowhow. the converter waste gas recovery system, jointly
developed with Kawasaki Heavy lndustries in I962 (then
Yokoyama Kogyo and later consolidated by Kawasaki), has
been used by US. Steel. Armco Steel (the USA), the
British Steel Corp. and other major steelmakers in the
world. As of the end of March. I981, Nippon Steel, the
world's top steelmaker, had supplied 4]? cases of steel-
making technology, including engineering, expertise and
licensing, to 95 firms in 35 cOuntries.

Meanwhile, Sumitomo Metal industries in fiscal I980
earned V1229 million in royalty incomes (while it paid
$420 million to buy technOIogy from others). compared
with $952 million in the previous year. Of this, more than
*2, mo million were incomes from overseas. The number of
major technological assistance contracted in fiscal I980
totaled l2 cases. Four new similar contracts were made
during the first half of ﬁscal l98l, and royalty incomes
are expected to increase in coming years. The company's
partners are all big enterprises, like us. Steel, Bethlehem
Steel and lones & Laughlin Steel. Technologies exported
by Sumitomo Metal are quite diverse. They include produc-
tion technology for steel plates and seamless pipes. con-
tinuous casting techniques. process control technology
and factory operation technology. These show that
Sumitomo Metal owns high‘standard steel production
technologies.

This is also true of Kobe Steel and Kawasaki Steel. In

the case of Kobe Steel, technology earnings are mostly ‘

engineering fees and operation guidance fees for exported

plant facilities, rather than royalty for individual know- '

how. They account for about 80% of its total technology
earnings. The exported technologies vary, covering not only
steel-making but also other production facilities

Software Income

This company is now expanding the system to market its
expertise. Plant construction and engineering firms can no
longer do business with hardware alone.

48

growth on the mass

USE ONLY

tance from the standpoint of raising earnings. The new
policy of Mitsubishi is a move toward establishing the
system for fullscaie software business. In August, I980,
Mitsubishi concluded a contract with China for technical
cooperation in a plan to expand facilities at the Shanghai
Chiangnan Shipyard. Under the ¥l00 million, 2year
contract Mitsubishi provided advice and management
techniques to carry out the plan. It was Mitsubishi's first
contract with China to supply software expertise.

In October, 1981, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries exported
technology for industrial robots to an Austrian general
heavy nuchinery producer. Mitsubishi would receive an
initial fee and royalties in proportion to output. During
ﬁscal 1980 Mitsubishi had software incomes totaling
¥l6,7m million, which included royalties from industrial
property. earnings from industrial know-how and consult-
ing fees. The figure represents a 60% increase over ﬁscal
l975 incomes of #110,400 million. 0f the software incomes
in ﬁscal I980, the royalty income ranged from #700
million to *800 million. The remainder was incomes relat-
ed to engineering.

in production technology,
and technology exports in this field are expected to

increase in the future. Among promising sectors We robot.
automated warehousing and plant maintenance system.

Opening of Patents

more than it is earning in technology trade, because many
basic patents are held by American and European firms.
japanese electric appliance manufacturers have achieved big
production of products by importing

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
patents to the public. in ﬁscal l980 it paid ¥7,300 million expectedly good performances. in many cases, their incon
for technologies, while earning ¥4,600 million. Both pay. of technology fees is just about balanced with payments ft
ments and earnings doubled in four years. The earnings similar fees or surpassing the payments, though slightly
represent6396 of the payments, although the ratio has been Arming notable technologies are urea production tecl
rising in recent years Hitachi aims to balance technology nology of Mitsui Toatsu Chemicals, vinyl chloride produt
trade and raise its gains to Will of its ordinary profits in lion technology of Shin-Etsu Chemical, the polyethylenr
the future. and polypropylene production technologies of Mitsu
Among patents, Hitachi owns a basic patent named Petrochemical Industries and Mitsubishi Petrochemical
“resin mold type" for the manufacture of semiconductors sythetic rubber DdeUCliOf‘I technolosv 0‘ Japan Sythetit
using a gang lead frame. This technology is employed for Rubber, the butadiene extraction method and butane
about half of the semiconductor output, estimated at separation techniques of lapanese Geon, and Sumitomo
¥l,000,000 million a year. lf the royalty is set at 2%, Chemical's various techniques on farm chemicals. There are
it will reach llfl0,000 million ayear. This ismerelya simple many other techniques developed by different firms,
calculation. Electric equipment makers own many different although they are small in scale. The chemical industry,
patents, which are being used widely by others. Therefore, too, is entering an era of technology export.
even if a patent, like the one of Hitachi, is established, it Mitsui Toatsu’s urea production plant is an integrated
does not mean that its holder can always receive its royalty system in which urea rs produced by processing raw

According to the financial report to its shareholders, best urea production method and exported to many fertiliz-
Sony had the following earnings from technology transfers er producing countries. This is described as a ”mostly

in fiscal I980. perfected process." Toyo Engineering is undertaking plant
Royalty Incomes from NonvAffiliates ,“,077 million construction and engineering business for the system. lapan
Royalty incomes from Afﬁliates ¥3,282 million synthetic Rubber and lapanese Geon are the leading firms
Technical Guidance Fee from Non-Affiliates in sythetic rubber production technology and in the butane

”(I75 million and butaine separation techniques, respectively. The con-
Technical Guidance Fee from Affiliates ¥383 million struction of petrochemical complexes has obviously peaked
0' the low “Ch"OlOSY “1‘0"“ 0‘ *4-9‘7 "mm". out in lapan. However, plans for such plant construction
*3-555 "’"HO" came "0"" ‘he W””-‘“"" “"5““ “m” are still under way in many other countries. and there are
both it home and abroad. This is a result of the policy of many possibilities In“ the technologies of the two rim,
expanding production through subsidiaries. Technology will beused in those complexes.
earnings will continue to increase. since Sony owns promls- ln technology imports, the ﬁeld of biochemistry will
mg industrial know-how for the manufacture ol‘video tape emf“ prominently in the future. in fact, various tech-
recorders and video tapes. Victor Co. of lapan. another niques of genetic engineering are being imported from the
leading electric appliance maker, which developed a VHS United Stale; and Europe, “pan is lagging behind in this
system for VTR, will also gain technology incomes as the field aid needs to rely on foreign techniques at present.
VTR marketexpands in the future. For Nippon Paint, royalty is a major earner. Royalty
Some manufacturers are exporting high technology, incomes during the annual term ended April 30, l98l,

system in which a single push-button operation stops the ,
tape and elects it. any" “d Dark ”0’9“"

Even in the recession, chemical firms are showing un- There are other firms whose royalty incomes are rising

49
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL

sharply. Asahi Glass and Toray industries are among these
ﬁrms. Promisirtg in the future are high technoiogy products,
such as electronic cameras of Canon, "the third generation"
antibiotics developed by Takeda Chemical Industries and
Shionogi Jr 0).. VTRs and VTR tapes of major electric
appliance makers and industrial robots.

During the December I980 term, Asahi Glass earned
about ¥4,000 million from royalties. The similar earnings
for the following term are expected to fall to half. since in
l98| its exports of TV picture tube glass production tech-
niques to China decreased. However, it is expected to make
a contract with Du Pont to export soda production tech-
nology using an ion exchange membrane. Therefore, the
company's royalty incomes will follow an uptrend again.
During fiscal I980 Toray earned ¥2,303 million in royalty
incomes. Of this, V1382 million came from overseas,
while its payments for industrial know-how, mostly to
foreign ﬁrms, were merely V469 million. Similar earnings
in ﬁscal I975 totaled “.200 million, while similar pay-
ments were ¥243 million. Both earnings and payments
almost doubled in five years. Its new technologies are
diversifying, but main lines are those that derived from
ﬁber production technology, such as those for sythetic
leather, carbon fiber and high-molecular products. Earn-
ings from sythetic fiber technology are on the plateau.

Asahi Chemical Industry, too, doubled its royalty
incomes in ﬁve years - mainly with technologies for tire
cords and ion exchange membrane to China. Mitsubishi
Rayon earns mainly from technologies on MMA resisn and
acrylic fiber. The former technologies are exported to Du
Pont and other firms in industrial countries, while the latter
technologies are used in developing countries.

The automobile industry and the food industry have
unexpectedly few technologies to export. although they
have formed gigantic industrial sectors. The auto industry,
unlike the aircraft industry. is more or less an assembly
industry. which puts togther about 20,000 parts, and what
is used there is mostly applied technologies. And tech-
nology imports are also limited to a few. such as those of
automatic transmission and transaxle. The food industry
in Japan owns few monopolistic technologies. Many food
producers built their production systems with foreign
techniques. To be sure, they have developed their own
technologies, but their transfers to other firms are excep-
tionally few. They usually prOvide them only for their
subsidiaries.

The only exception is Aiinornoto. The company annual-
ly earns V1000 million from royalty, which mainly comes
from overseas subsidiaries producing "AJI-NO-MOTO

50

USE ON LY

(monosodium glutamate)," a popular seasoning in the
world. A unique one is Nisshin Food Products, which is
exponing industrial know-how to make instant Oiinese
style noodle in cups. Its income is still in a range of ¥IOO
million a year. But its growth is very much likely.

As regards Japan's technology exports and imports,
Hiroo lwai of the Planning Bureau of the Science and
Technology Agency says: Various ways are conceivable to
assess technological standards. Attempted below is an
evaluation through the analysis of statistical data on tech-
nology trade published by the Prime Minister's Ofﬁce and
the Bank of Japan.

The ﬁrst point is an international comparison. Accord
ing to data by the Bank of Japan, technology imports
during ﬁscal l979 totaled ¥276,200 million. while similar
exports were ”5.000 million. In the data of the Prime
Minister's Office, comparative figures were ¥24L000
million and in 33,! 00 million.

Although there are discrepancies in the data, the com-
parison in indexes between Japan's technology imports
and exports is approximately l00:40. Similar comparisons
for other industrial countries are I00:46 for West Germany,
l00:I43 (I977) for France, l00:lO2 (I975) for Britain
and I00:l,000 for the United States. The US. is far in
excess of technology exports, because it abounds in the
expertise of basic technology. In the case of Japan, about
two-thirds of the technology exports are used in develop-
ing countries. in technological standards. Japan appears
to be somewhat lower than the United States and European
countries.

The second point to look into is changes in royalty
incomes. Royalty payments in a given case of technology
will usually increase in proportion to output. But the ratio
of such payments to the total shipments of manufactured
goods peaked out in the l960~l970 period with 0.2%.
and it showed a downward trend throughout the l970s.

According to statistics of the Prime Minister's Ofﬁce,
royalty payments in fiscal l979 were ¥l07,800 million
more than similar incomes, when all new and old contracts
that had been effective from the past were included.
HOwever, the balance of new contracts for technology
trade turned into the surplus in fiscal 1972, and the figure
reached #25300 million in fiscal I979.

The third concerns the general business trend of
different industries. In the data for fiscal 1979, three
industries registered surpluses in the balance of all newly
concluded contracts and those in effect from the past.
The surpluses were ¥li,900 million for the iron and steel
industry, l$11,500 million for the construction industry

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and ¥500 million for the chemical industry. In the balance
of newly-concluded contracts alone, the chemical industry
topped the list with ¥l-l,400 million, followed by iron
and steel with ¥S,600 million and construction with
¥-l.000 million. The balance of all new and old continuing
contracts turned into the black in 1974 for the iron and
steel industry. The general chemical fiber industry, a
branch of the chemical industry, also registered a surplus
in the same year.

The chemical industry has been making remarkable
advances in technological development in recent years, and
all major chemical companies have registered surpluses in
technology trade. In contrast. the electric machinery
industry is in the biggest deficit of ¥38,800 million in
technology trade. Of this, “7,600 million was drained by
the communications equipment and electronic and ekctric
measuring instrument manufacturers. But even this sector
of the industry has produced surpluses in some years since
I972, as far as the balance of newly-concluded contracts is
concerned. This is an obvious indication of its technological
advancement. 0n th.- odler hand, the automobile industry
- not a high technology industry — has constantly been in
the red.

The problem facing lapanese industry is the future of
its technology exports. It has two major tasks to deal
with. One is the pursuit of middle advanced countries,
which are making rapid technological advances. In fact,
they have already alfeCted the nation's textile and ship-
building industries. Rising labor costs are making Japanese
industry increasingly difﬁcult to compete with middle
advanced countries in various labor-intensive industrial
sectors.

The second task is to eliminate trade frictions arising
from the export of manufactured goods to the United
States and Europe. Typical examples are exports of cars
and television sets. Japan‘s small-size video tape recorders
have generally monopolited the world market but they
have not caused such a serious trade problem as those of
cars of TV sets. This is obviously because lapan developed
VTRs on its own and developed its markets in various
parts or the world. This means that the way left for japa-
nese industry to survive international competition is to
develop highly creative, original products. Signs of such
development appear to be emerging in the field ol carbon
fiber, industrial robots and optical communications system.

ind Lead Co., Ltd. 1982

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

URANIUM EN'RICHHDJT SHELVED PENDING SOLUTION 0F EXPENSE-SHARING

Tokyo DENKI SHIMBUN in Japanese 16 Jan 82 p 1

[Text]

According to what was revealed by electric power industry circles, it
.is likely that a fairly long period of time will be required before a
conclusion is formed as to the problem of sharing (the expenses for the
conStruction of) the uranium enrichment prototype plant between the Government
and private circles. The cause of this is that the 10 electric power
companies including the Atomic Power Company have informally decided to
shoulcer a 25-percent burden, while Government sources including the Science
and Technology Agency are requesting that the rate of the burden to be shouldered
by private circles be a majority. and that therefore, there is a wide
difference in views between the two parties. However, as ¥960 million has
been appropriated for the development of the prototype plant in the budget
for fiscal 1.982. the conclusion has come to be shelved, for the time being.
.-'-.s a result, establishment of a new company by the three centrifugal separator
manufacturers and a new uranium enrichment company by the 10 electric power
companies will inevitably be delayed beyond the initial schedule.

The uranium enrichment prototype plant is to follow the Power Reactor and
Eli-clear Fuel Development Corporation's pilot plant on Ningyo Pass in Okayama
Prefecture. It is scheduled to have a capacity of 200 tons SHU and start
operation in fiscal i956. The construction expenses are tentatively
calculated at about “5 million. however, the sharing of these construction
expenses between the Government and private circles is an immediate task.

In electric power industry circles, the 10 electric power companies
including the Atomic Power Company are showing the intention of bearing about
'25 percent as due co-operation. while Government sources including the Science
and Technology Agency are requesting that the rate of the burden to be
shouldered by private circles be fixed at a majority, for the reason that
the prOtotype plant also will be finally included among commercial plants.

The electric power industry circles are showing Strong reluctance as to the
private circles' bearing a majority, because the development is to be led by

the Covernment (the main body for the development is the Power Reactor and
Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation).

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In some quarters, information was circulated to the effect that an
appropriation for the development of the prototype plant may not be approved
by the Finance hinistry, unless the private circles' bearing of a majority
becomes a premise at the time of the compilation of the fiscal 1982 budget.
Eventually, however, an appropriation of ¥960 million was approved in the
budget for fiscal 1982, as against the budgetary demand for ¥l billion.

as a result, the settlement of the problem of sharing the expenses for
the construction of the prototype plant between the Government and private

cir les has apparently been shelved. The Finance Ministry. however, is
seeking that the settlement of the rate of the share between the Government
“d

an private circles be made a premise as a condition for implementing the

: seal 1982 budget. However, as the fiscal 1982 budget is centered on
ustnent expenses to prepare for the construction, the view is strong in
tne electric power industry circles that even if the problem of the share
between the Government and private circles is not settled, it will not pose
an obstacle to the implementation of the budget.

T‘.s is due partly tc tne electzi: power industry circles' sense of
distrust in the :nformatl:n that no appropriation will be made in the
fiscal 1382 budget unless the problem of the share between the Government and
friVite circles is settled. In relations with the budget, they think that
:nev cannot but decide on the share between the Government and privetc circles
b-EJre the framework for tee fiscal 1983 budget, which will enable the :nncrete
act of construction, is iscicei.

ReverScly speaking, this means that a settlement can be shelved
until the time of the compilation of the 1983 budget, at a maximum. Partly
because the difference in hssertions between the two parties is wide, the

yr:babilitt is strong that the settlement will be carried over to this time
l imit .

The Government sources are ho;ing for private circles' mafority
investments, with investments by centrifugal separator manufacturers added.
however, the centrifugal separator manufacturers also are scheduled to make

joint investments for the establishment of a new company. Prospects are
that much cannot be expected from them.

The electri power industry circles want to settle the share problem
even immediately, if they are to make a 2S-percent investment. It is carrying
through the stand that it is difficult to make any more investment, for the
present. for such reascns as that their accounts from fiscall982 on will become

extremely severe. They have also a sense of wariness that unreasonable

conditions will be forced upon them if they move carelessly toward a settlement
from thei side.

Because of the delay in the settlement of the problem of the share
between the Government and private circles, the probability has become strong

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that the establishment of a new company, which is being planned by the
centrifugal separator manufacturers, and the establishment of a new company for
commercial plants by the 10 electric power companies will be delayed beyond

the initial plan.

The centrifugal separator manufacturers -- Toshiba, Hitachi, and
ﬂitsubishi Heavy Industries -- are planning to establish a new company and
start production from fiscal 1983 to complete a setup to supply 20,000 centri-
fugal separators for the prototype plant. They were scheduled to establish
the new company in April this year, at the earliest.

On the other hand, the 10 electric power companies including the Atomic
Power Company have the policy of constructing a large-scale plant
with an annual enrichment capacity of 3,000 tons SWO, by investing a total of
¥600 billion. In preparation for this, they established a Uranium Enrichment
Preparation Office in the Federation of Electric Power Companies in March
last year. They also drew up a plan for establishing a new company in the
Latter half of this year, with this as the mother-body. In the electric
power industry circles, however, the opinion is gaining strength that the
formulation of a concrete concept for a new company should be refrained from
until the share of the expenses for the construction of the prototype plant
between the Government and private circles becomes clear. It .5 therefore
likely that the establishment of new companies also will be delayed until
the latter half of this year.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunaha 1982

cs0: 4106/49

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONSTITUTIONAL IMPROVEMENT, REORGANIZATION EFFORTS REPORTED
Tokyo SANKEI in Japanese 19 Jan 82 p 7

[Text]
Points:

(1) I will work for constitutional improvement by autonomous efforts.

(2) Re-organization of the industry circles is necessary, and now we
see a chance for it.

(3) I have expectations on the housing policy of the Government.

We Have Reached Second Base Now, at Long Last

-- Can it be said that in the economic environment last year, where the
materials industry was wholly visited by a depression, the aluminum-refining
industry circles managed to have a somewhat bright outlook for 1982, for
such reasons as that they obtained prospects, over the year-end, for

exemption from the import duty (9%) and the lowering of the cost for electric
power?

"As a result of our strenuous efforts, we have somehow reached
second base, when they are compared to those in the case of baseball, but
we did not hit a home run. Therefore, we must lead this to a score in some
way or other, through our efforts from now. Upon reflection at present,
there was the fear that some refiners may cause financial unrest, if there was
a strike-out at that time."

(Aluminum refining consumes such a large amount of electric power
that it is called canned electricity. Therefore, the aluminum-refining
industry circles, which use expensive electric power compared with those
overseas, suffered from the increase incosts,on the one hand, and on the
other, they were driven by the offensive of less expensive imported ingot to
the very limit. The deficits in the six refining companies are estimated at
a total of VlOObillionat the end of this fiscal year. Therefore, as

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concrete measures tosave the difficult situation, they held negotiations with
the Government and electric power industry circles and obtained agreement on
the exemption from the import duty for one year and an actual reduction of

the electricity rate. Due to these two measures, the burden of the aluminum-
refining industry circles is expected to be lightened by about V23 billion
annually.)

-- how will you lead it to a score?

"Various retining companies ought to be able to make rough calculations
to see at what deficit they will stop through the two measures. If so, how
to ccver the deficit will be a problem of management strategy of each
enterprise. At any rate, we have become able to stand at the startin: line as n
how we should consider the proper way of management, and therefore, there is no
other way but to leave matters to the judgment of individual enterprises.
i also will think of things fully until the beginning of spring. as ?resident
of Light hetals industr'."

-- What is your Strategy as President of Japan Light Metals InduStry, as
one reference datum?

Basis for Revitalization Must Be Created

"1 want to create a basis which will enable us to recover somehow within
this year. Japan Light Metals Industry, which has a continuous aluminum-
refining system, has a framework, certainly, but it has also a part of which
it is ashamed, during this depression. Unless it corrects this part now,

it will be unable to make development in a period of prosperity. The
problem of the enterprise constitution must be improved by our autonomous
fforts. If so, luck of the times will come round."

(The luck of the times pointed out by Chairman MATSUNAGA means improvement
of the business cycle as to aluminum, the Japanese economy, and the world
economy. This is because hethinks that although the aluminum industry also
has problems in the refining sector, it is by no means a declining industry,
when viewed as a whole, and that demand (for aluminum) as a material of the
energy-saving type will rather increase stably. He means that "luck of
the times will come around while we are going through hardships and privations.")

-- In regard to the aluminum-refining industry, the recent recommendation
by the Industrial Structure Deliberation Council called for a production
Structurewithan annual output of 700,000 tons. however, if this is to
be {POJUCéd under the six-company structure. is the number not too large?

"If l00,000 tons of aluminum is produced by three companies, for
example, with the unit of one company becoming smaller, it will not pay.

Producing 100,000 tons at one plant is far in accordance with economic
rationality. Therefore. I think that it is necessary to make refining

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
intensive. I emphasize this. too. at every opportunity. I would like to
give advice if there are concrete proposals. However. intensive refining
will not go well even if it materializes under the pressure of the Govern-
ment and banks. After all, a decision must be made on one's own management
judgment."

-- Now you have a chance for the re-organization of the industry
circles. don't you? "ill aluminum refining also not become stable on a
long-range basis through this re-organization?

"I think it is wise to materialize it while (the aluminum industry)
is designated as a structurally-depressed industry. If this period
(until June next year) is missed, the problems connected with the Anti-
honopoly Law will be brought up vociferously, and therefore, I am expecting
that voices calling for making refining intensive will arise not only
from outside but also from inside the industry circles, but ... Concrete
moves? You know about them better. don't you?"

Demand Will Increase. From Medium- and Long-Range Points of View

-- Hhat do you think about the problem of imports through development over-
seas, as part of the measures to ensure the stability of aluminum ingot?

"Is it not very difficult to materialize new projects in the recent
situation where the price of aluminum ingot is lower than the cost? We are
utterly unable to make a ‘go' decision unless we have such timing as to
cause demand and supply to become stringent upon their recovery throughout the
world, and eventually to cause the price to rise, too. however, overseas
refining is not the only way to secure raw materials stably.“

-- The aluminum depression last year was due largely to the depression
in housing construction. in the field of demand. Hhat about your prospects
for demand this year? The chernment also is making efforts to a certain
extent for housing conStructicn. but ...

"I think that demand for aluminum will increase, from medium- and long-
range points of View. This is why I say that aluminum is not a declining
industry. This year. the Government is making certain efforts for housing.
and it is planning to construct 1,200,000 houses. There is also the problem
of the actual income of those who are to purchase dwelling houses.

However, if this plan is carried out. it will have certain effects also on the
improvement of demand for aluminum. won't it? Last year, demand for

aluminim declined greatly because of the stagnation of the Japanese economy and
the world economy. but I twink that demand for aluminum will move toward
imrrcvement this year. with the improvement of business."

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keizai Shimbun Tokyo honeha 1982

C80: 6106/69

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1C Ml. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TBCHNOIDGY

JAPAN-AUSTRALIA NEGOTIATIONS T0 REVISE NUCLEAR ENERGY AGREEMENT
Tokyo DENKI SHIHBUN in Japanese 20 Jan 82 p 1

[Text]

The Japan-éustralianegotiationsto revise the Nuclear Energy Agreement
between the two nations, which negotiations have been pushed for five years
since 1978. have reached agreement. Minister TAJIMA of the Japanese Embassy
in Australia and Australian Deputy Foreign Vice-Minister CURTIS initialed the new
Agreement in Canberra at “:00 p.m. on the 19th (2:00 p.m. on the same time,
Japan time). The biggest point of the revision this time is that a package
prior agreement (program approach), under which re-processing and overseas
movement of spent nuclear fueld are approved by notice, if facilities to use
Australia-produced nuclear fuel materials are decided upon between the two
nations in advance, has been incorporated in the new Agreement. For Japan,
the prccedures in the case of obtaining prior agreement will be eased on a
wide scale. The Government will present the Agreement to the current regular
Diet session after it is officially signed, and seek ratification.

The Japan-Australia Nuclear Energy Agreement came into effect in 1972.
After that, Australia announced a new policy for safeguards in 1977. It
sent a plan for new nuclear energy agreements to 15 countries including Japan,
and sounded them out. On the basis of this, the first round of negotiations
for a revision were conducted in August, 1978, the neXt year.

Thereafter, seven rounds of negotiations were held until last fall, with
the suspension of negotiations due to the operation for International Nuclear
Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) in between. Informal consultations for
negotiations to revise the Agreement were held in November and December, and
as a result of negotiations through diplomatic channels, the new Agreement
was initialed that day. The Agreement will be officially signed between the
two nations after it was examined by the Legislative Bureau, and it will be
presented to the current Diet session for ratification.

The contents of the revision are not to be made public until the
official signing, in principle. However, it is expected that the revision

this time will be fairly extensive. Above all, the biggest point of the
revision is that the program approach was incorporated through the

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
revision this time. This is to the effect that if facilities in which
Australia-produced nuclear fuel materials will possibly be used are decided
"pan between the two nations in advance, processing and overseas movement wil

The application for prior agreement (MB-10) to the US on overseas
movement for re-trocessing requires complex procedures. This became a
subject for discussion in iﬂfct, too In INFCE, it was regarded as desirable
that as to the bilateral agreement on re-processing and overseas movement,
standards be establi hed before the conclusion of a supply contract, as far
as possible, and that a "foreseeable' form be taken. 0n the basis of this,
the AuStralian side proposed the program approach formula. The negot-ations
ha: difficult going at one time, but agreement was reached in outline at the

'l.\-

.tu round of negotiations.

The said formula is to include the re-processing with which the Tokai
Re-?rocessing Plant and electric power industry circles are entrusting
Britain and France. The 2nd re-processing plant for private circles is
not included because it is still at the stage of being planned. However,
it is said that the Australian side has generally agreed to add it at a stage
where it has been materialisei.

Prior agreement on re-rccessing has not so far been specified. However,
as the program approach formula has been introduced, including overseas move-
ment, 3 way has opened to obtain agreement collectively, instead of through
":ase-bv-case" examinations, in cases of re-processing of Australia-produced
uranium in the future, and the procedures will be simplified on a wide scale.
Canada also is sounding out the idea of introducing this formula in the
field of implementation of the ﬂuclear Energy Agreement. It is expected
that bilateral agreements will generally shift to this formula in the future.

Also, as to exports of uranium ore under the "Ranger Project." the

shipment of 120 tons to Shikoku Electric Power has been stopped, suffering a

byblow from the revision of the Agreement. However, the shipment is scheduled
to be made about June.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Denki Kyokai 1982

C80: 6106/69 END

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY