ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPR’S L/10551

28 May 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 33/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

mommomv
MT!

.ms publications contain information primarily fro. foreign
nevspapers. periodicals and books, but also fron news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials free foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- lnglish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, vith the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and eaterial enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
ntion was amused or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanas preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. lines within items are as

given by source .

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 11.3. Goverment.

OOPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 0P
HTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAI DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOR BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
JAPAN REPORT
mono :x3/sz)

Coureurs

POLITICAL AID 80010113016“.
Merging New LIP Leader's Tactics Mined

(“mm mm m, 15 Apr 82) oeeeoeeeeeeooeoeoeeee .1
MILITARY
Coping lath Japan-v.8. nilitary Technology Interchange
(“mmm‘g 2"” 82) 0.0.0....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOIO. 3

Government Agrees To Offer Heapon Technology to 0.8.
(mm mm, 5”” 82)..IQOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00.00.00.00 12

Government mess to Weapon Ban Lift
(mm mm W, 29 Apr 82) ooeesoeoooooooooeesoo 1h

momc . . - u . - n-_ .1-- -— .. .. . ‘—— .g-u .. . _- ‘.—u . ... u- - .4-

Tax Evasion Seen as Significant Factor in Savings
(mm “1":qu m mm mm, 3 Apr 82)ooeeoo 16

Agricultural Cooperatives Oppose Increased Pam Imports
(NWSUMUJHUKAWKOMISCSHIWM
mno rum um, 18 Feb 82) OOIOOOOOOIOOIOOOOOO 26

acme: AND WOW!

use Stops Spot Exports of 6h-Kilo-Bit W's to 0.3.
(mm mm m, 1h m 82) .OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOO 33

Km Plan for 700,000-‘ron Alumnus Ingot Production
Collapsing
(m mm m, 19 Apr 82) ooaoeeeenouooeoooeeeo 35

Japan-0.8. Cooperation in Seniconductors Tar-ed Possible
(Imm m, 18 Am 82) 00.000.00.00...0.0.0.0.... 37

Parliamentarians Scientific, I‘eohnol cal Exchange To Spread
(mm mm m, 3W82 OOOOOOOOOOVOOOOOOOOOOO 39

- l. - [III - ASIA - 111 l'OOO]

mononu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AID MIMIC”;

BENIN!“ LDP mom' nee-roam
Myo arson K312” sum in Japsnese ls Apr 82 p 2

[Text] hie at ”new not sabers by August." The wP'e new
leaders. who are fighting a poet-Suzuki me presidential
race, have eagerly engaged theeselves this year in a
recruitnent canpaign (or new neebers that will close at
the end of August. It Prise Itinieter Suzuki is reelected
in this Novenber'e {DP presidential election. he will

not be running again in 19“ in accordance with the party
rule that prohibits a president tron serving eore than two
terns. Therefore. the 1984 presidential election will

be a decisive battle for the new leeders. Voters who
will be eligible in the 1904 presidential priesry election
are lieited to those neubers m begin paying nenbership
tees this August. Consequently, victory will depend on
how my 'eyepethisers' can be enrolled now. After the
current Diet session ends in lay, a sideshow 'suner
bettle' aieing at the election 2 years hence will be

underway concurrently with the eein stage drama or
Suzuki's reelection this fall.

when sore than tour persons run for president in an 1111’ presidential election.
a priesry election is held. Voters in the prieery are the LDP euberehip and
friends ot the party (labors of the Liberal Rational Council, an auxiliary
organ or the me). In the prinary, three presidential candidates are chosen
on the basis or the nunber or votes received. Then. the w? eedaers or both
houses of the Diet elect the president in a secmd election. In the 1978 we
presidential election. then Prime Hinister rukuda was defeated by then LDP
Secretary General Ohira in the prinery and withdrew his candidacy before the
second election. 80, it is possible that the person who receives the eoet
votes in the prieery can secure "an express ticket" to the presidency.

if a prinry election is held this novenber, the voters will be current
nenbers who renew their neeberehipe this July (1.17 nillicn aenbers). aowever,
since the possibility of the prieery being held this year is elie. no faction
is preparing for this year's prieary election. Instead. every rection is

exclusively engaged in recruiting new eeehers who will be eligible voters in
'the decisive 19“ battle.‘

MWMONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

For this reason. new leaders' interests are also focused on recruiting new
members. The first step in new member recruitmmt strategy is to organise a
supporters' association in various places throughout the country. Deputy
Secretary General 'rakeshita. who has already organised about 20 such asso-
ciations, is trying to increase the nmer to 30 within this year. um
Minister Abe and Science and technology Agency Director uakagawa, who have
about 20 supporters' associations each, are hustling to further expand their
networks of organisations. The new leaders are engaging themselves in a fight
so confusing that 'we are colliding with Iir Abe's caps everywhere" (Hr
Takeshita) . The 'senior' new leader. Chief Cabinet Secretary ﬂiyasawa, who
at one time intended to watch the situation calmly. has now begun organising
his own supporters' associations. starting with the airoshima uiyasawa-kai
inaugurated on 10 April. He is planning to start associations in Kure,
Okayama, Kyoto, Nagoya, and 'hokyo one after another. It seems that “territorial
wars" between the LDP's new leaders are going on throughout the Japan Islands.

Every camp officially declares that these are ”not movements intended for the
primary election' and declines to disclose its strategy. within the party.
however. the following view is widely supported. “If one has a base in various
regions, it is obviously advantageous for recruitment of party members. If one
sets off a small stick of dynamite, it will inediately start a fire' (a high-
ranking member of the we National Organization Couittee) . Administrative
Management Agency Director Hakasone and Economic Planning Agency Director
Komoto who will be challenged by the new leaders say that “competition in
recruiting party members is good because it generates vitality in the party“
(Hr uakasone) or 'we have not started organising yet...." (Hr homoto's staff).
But the situation may not allow them to proceed in as leisurely a manner as
they seem to be doing.

Ibraover. the rules for the primary have been changed from the 'point system“
(two leading vote getters in each prefecture get a point) to a total votes
system. Consequently, one does not need to get many votes in every- prefecture.
One has a chance of becoming one of the three candidates by concentrating
large numbers of votes in just a few prefectures. At the final stage of
recruitment campaign for new members, the result of each cnp’s secret
strategy of concentrating efforts in certain regions will inevitably become
apparent.

0n the other hand. in the case of new leaders who are not formally recognized
as heirs apparent in their factions. such as Hr Takeshita of the 'i'anaka faction
and ur Abe of the i'ulruda faction. their activities aiming at ”1984' may be
criticized within the faction as ”too far out in front.‘I In fact, not a few
elder Diet members in the rukuda faction are coldly watching the 'advancement'
of Mr Abe. Hr Takeshita's situation in the Il'analra faction resembles that of
Mr Abe. ror this reason, the battles among the new leaders are expected to
“develop in a comlicated and active manner.‘l

commas-r: Nihon Keirai Shimbunsha 1982

9896
C80: 4105/89

2
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPING um! JAPAN-0.8. MILITARY TECHNOLOGY Immune:

Tokyo mmsuro in Japanese 2 Mar 82 [no page given]
[Text]

By. Gakuji mum. Chainan of the Defense Production Oomittee or
Keidanren [Federation of Economic Organizations], and Adviser .to
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries.

n- .

The problem of carrying out military technology interchange
between Japan and the US. and the prohlea of Japan's exporting
weapons to the US, have suddenly cons to the surface. Argmsnts
over these two problelss are now being actively conducted at the
present Diet session too. It is said that there was a "request
-for interchange" from theus side at the talks which were held in
June of last year between 0mm (JDA Director General at the time)
and HEIRSRGER. How is the weapons industry side viewing such a
situation? '

HORIYA was born in Okayama Prefecture in 1907. and graduated from
the Tokyo wiversity Engineering Department. he entered Mitsubishi
Aircraft in 1930, because President of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries in
1973, and became Chaimn of the Board of Directors in 1977. Since
June. 1981, he has been in his present post.

Politics Is One Thing; Production Is Mother

ECONGIIST: Recently, the problem of nilitary technology interchange
between Japan and the US has suddenly cone to the surface. Also at the
Diet, this problea is being regarded as an object of argments. It
is said that. as the background of this, there was a request from the US
side for the mutual consolidation of military power through the two
c;:~ntries' technology and through research and development by the two
countries. Won the standpoint of Ur. MORIYA, how do you judge such a
situation?

- 3
"WWW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MORIYA: The Defense Production Comittee is a place where we check
into how we should smoothly carry out our country's defense production.
however, without the Government's judpent, we have no right to detemine
whether we should promote interchange or whet kind of weapons and what
quantity we should produce. Therefore, I went to say that when we talk
about the defense problem, it is necessary to separate political-level
argunents off from defense-production argunents. We must not nix them
together. The Government first decides on something. Next, in accordance
with that, we will provide necessary equipment in an efficient, proper end
appropriate way, while introducing our highest technology. Accordingly,
the defense industry cannot supply things simply because there is demand.
This point is greatly different from other industries.

Therefore, if the Governsent is going to carry out Japan-US interchange,
I think that the two countries should openly carry out research and
develop-ant, as well as technology interchange, on a mutual basis. This
is probably necessary also for imroving our techmlogy. At the present
stage, the Defense Production Comittee is not allowed to assert, at its

own discretion, that things lust be in this way or in that way. It seems
that the Government is also checking into this problen at present.

EOOROHIS‘I‘: There has been yet no conclusion. But, there was a
request from the US side for interchange. Judging from this fact itself,
we can think that the level of Japan's technology for the production of
weapons is on a rather high level. "Japan can co-operete with us." This
is the US side's view, isn't it?

HORIYA: I have no idea how the US side is viewing it I cannot '
say anything about this matter. However, between Japan and the US, there
is the Security Treaty. Besides, the two countries have an alliance
relationship too. Also, the two countries have the view that they should

-do things together. when this view is generalized, there will be a
request to Japan also in the field of technology interchange. This is
rather natural, isn't it?

Also, nilit‘ary technology is frequently talked about. ,But, when we
think about nilitary technology, how much do we have to color "technology"?
How far does military technology range? How far does basic technology
range, and how far does peace technology range? It is difficult to
classify them clearly. Military technology suddenly came to be brought
up. But, when we see the trade friction, we will learn that Japanese
export goods are outstandingly excellent. Therefore, we have various kinds
of excellent technology.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEVI‘V‘T‘UIO ﬂ LL‘\6‘ “II“. -‘V. ’V“ .‘Du'b‘u 5V bll‘e “vu05’ unv-ul

and the alliance relationship between the two countries. In this connection,
you said that the development of interchange between Japan and the US is

a natural trend. But. for exusple. in connection with the production of
weapons, to what extent will the two countries offer their technology as is?
In case a country depends one foreign country for something belonging to

the highest secrets. there are probably some questions. aren't there?

When a country is going to depend on a foreign country's technology which

is related to defense. there will be limits too.

MORIYA: I do not know about that well. But. I think that Japan
and the US have different bases to create technology. In the case of
Japan,military technology will not be developed suddenly. In many cases.
the accumulation of various kinds of technology by private circles is to
be connected with military technology. That is. the private circles are
taking the initiative in developing military technology. In the case of
the US, however, the Government and the private circles bear the burden
of the costs for developing military technology at the ratio of six to
four or at the ratio of seven to three. That is, the Government is taking
the initiative in developing military technology. The US is different from
Japan. Therefore. technology research themes from the Defense Department
become military technology as is. He probably need to become aware of
such a difference. Even when we are going to exchange military technology,
there are difficult sides too. for that reason. It is probably necessary
for' us to think about this problem a little more deeply.

ﬂow to "Connect"?

 

ECONOHIST: In Japan, private enterprises have technology which can
be developed into technology for military purposes. In the US. the
Defense Department is taking the initiative‘in developing military
technology, and private enterprises actually produce weapons. Therefore,

-even if negotiations between the Governments of the two countries are
successful. the private circles of the two countries will have to carry
out the interchange. in fact. In concrete terms. how will they be
connected? '

HORIYA: Unless talks make progress concretely, I cannot say anything.
But. there are various forms. when we see technology in general. licensed
production among private enterprises is very activ‘a. However. in the case
of military technology interchange. interchange between the US Government
and Japanese private enterprises is not so. easy. In the US. the Government
granted money for some of the American military technology items. and '
developed them. Therefore, as I said in the beginning. Government-to-Gover-
ment negotiations are important.

There are various coutinations. General technology? Completed
technology. such as aircraft and missiles? Or. basic technology before
them, such as materials and sew-dynamics? According to each stage, there
could be the most appropriate form of joint research. Re have not yet heard
anything. Besides. we do not know if we can do it.

FOR email. USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOHIST: Re have heard that Japan Electric Company (NRC) exported
optical communication equipment to a company affiliated with AT?
(American Telephone 8 Telegraph Company) and the exported optical
communication equipment was later developed into Iilitary technoloy by
way of the Defense Department.

HORIYA: About that, the IT! Minister announced a view the other
day. He said that it is general commication equipment.

ECONOHIST: But, such a thing will become a daily routine, step
by step Ia such a danger not extremely high? '

HORIYA: that “do you mean "danger?" Possibility?
' ECONOHIST: It could be "possibility" also. (laughter) . .

”ORIYA: Possibility? (laughter) whether it is dangerous or whether
it is possible .. . That will be deternined by the Government's policy.
If we do things which the Government does not approve, it will become
dangerous. If the Government approves, it will be alright.

ECONOHIST: You said that technology interchange has various stages.
But, it seems that what Japan and the US are going to do together is
not only things concerning basic technology but also things in specific
fields, such as electronics ...

7 HORIYA: I do not know about that. I have heard nothing about that.
But, even in the case of electronics, it will be for private deaand _or for
military demand. However, we probably should take it that what is based

on that is general technology.
ECONOHIS‘I': Impossible to classify it by coloring ...

HORIYA: I think so. Who will apply it, and how Also, even
if we do not apply it, for example, if we carry out research as to plastic
materials, something like carbon fiber will be created. Then, this will
be developed into black-shaft golf clubs. They are light and strong.
Then, it can be used for aircraft too.

There are probably some items which are aiming at something from the
beginning. I think that such things will probably become problematical.
If we are going to develop specific things which will not be generally
used, that will probably be military technology. however, it will
probably be alright to think that what can be used as weapons will be

used for general purposes too.

ECONOHIS‘I‘: It is reported that, as a link in technology interchange,
there is also aircraft that cannot be detected on the radar screen ...

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HORIYA: Even that started from technology for private use. As
buildings become taller, there will be radio-wave hazards. If the
surface of buildings is coated with some sort of paint, that can be
prevented. It is an application of that. That was not suddenly
developed.

ECONOHIST: In other words, some technology developed for military
purposes can be used for public purposes, and there could be a reverse
case as well. ,

MORIYA: In other words, that is the technological side-effect.
Therefore, technology in itself has a universal nature to the effect that
if the level goes up at a certain stage, it will spread. So. I cannot
say, "To what level will it go as military technology, after spreading?"
Besides, it does not have any colorsfroe the beginning.

"No Trade Friction"

 

ECONOMIST: Last year, an American aviation magazine, "Aviation Heck,"
carried feature articles. It says that Japan's technology for the
production of aircraft is very advanced. According to the magazine,
[Japan's] aircraft production, which started from licensed production. has
reached a marked level.

HORIYA: My company developed the ”0-300 aircraft (first home-produced
business jet aircraft). The nu—aoo aircraft cleared all inspections by
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) of the US in November of last .
year. Now we are ready to put it on sale. I think that the performance
of this aircraft is markedly superior to American aircraft of that class,
as.to all points including speed, fuel-consumption efficiency, sound, flight
radius, and price. However, it was not developed in a day. Up until now,
my company's aircraft engineers have studied through licensed production and
have studied by themselves. "hat they have so far studied was accumulated.
As a result, that kind of aircraft was developed.

In the case of aircraft, when producing an aircraft which has good fuel-
consumption efficiency and which is economical, the point is the wings.
In the pre-war days, the wings developed by Goettingen of Germany, and the
wings developed by the Aviation Research Institute, were excellent. Re
started it from licensed production. However, while doing so, we cannot
win the race. Then, we succeeded in designing a new wing. That wing
experiences less [air] resistance than ordinary ones do. when it is used
for super-sonic aircraft. That is, it is very economical. It is
probably alright to say that that wing has reached the world level. This

is just an example.

7
FOI'OFFKJALIJSE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOHIST: Recently, Inerica has made requests to Japan. Among
them, for exasple, do they not depend on your company's technology for the
production of the all-300?

HORIYA: Haybe they do; maybe they do not. This is what they should
think about.

BCONOHIST: Does the Defense Production Oulaittee not talk about such
a kind of military technology interchange between Japan and the US?

hORIYA: Probably because the name of the Committee is the Defense
Production Comittee, everybody takes it that the Defense Production
Cosmittee is on top of jobs concerning weapons production and that the
Coastittee controls affiliated companies. for this reason, mistakes will
occur. (laughter) That is mag. He co-ordinate systems that will
enable the defense industry to produce superior things efficiently,
properly. and appropriately. This is the role of the Omittee.

ECONOHIST: Now, we are setting aside the Three Principles on Heapons
Exports, for a while. Assuming that the Government decides to export wea-
pons, will a rather considerable quantity of weapons be exported to the US
and to other countries? '

HORIYA: Hell, I have no idea. I have never thought about that.
(laughter) We are not allowed to think about that. (laughter) Such a case
probably will not appear so rapidly. But, I think that there could be
such a case, concerning parts, on a marked scale. As for why I say such
a thing, the reason why so many products have been exported [to the US]
as to cause trade friction, is that their quality is good. The quality of
[Japanese] military materials is also not inferior to that of theirs. As
to quality and the time limit of delivery, Japanese things are better than
American things. Therefore, Japanese things are purchased. On this point,
military materials are not different from general commodities, are they?

Also, many requests are coming, one after another, for oil mining
equipment, etc. So. we export them. But, even if we export too many
things, we will not be scolded. 0n the contrary, American companies will
not be able to meet the time limit of delivery.if they sub-contract. That
is, when they want to sell, they cannot'sell. Prom Japan, things of good
quality are delivered, one after another, by the delivery tine limit. They
are delighted, and say. "Produce more and more'.” Such a case actually
happens. This is just an example. Therefore, it is probably conceivable
that such a case may happen in various fields. .
ECONOHIST: Occasionally, America's national defense budget has been
' increasing, also when viewed from the amount of money spent. So, we
think that there will be more orders 'of that kind.

POROFFICIALUSEONLY
HUKLYA: wnetner the" ‘71“ De an increase. 0“ 00‘ see MAW says

that it will increase. However. there is no knowing how it will turn out as
a result.

ECONOMIST: Japan's defense production is said to be 10‘ or less, when
viewed from the production rate of various enterprises. Will it be able to
cover the demand of the US?

HORIYA: That depends on quantity. But. now. Japan's technology is
markedly advanced. When I say this, I may be asked how it advances.
(laughter) However, depending on the quantity of orders we receive, it will
be possible to produce them together. and it will also be possible to
mobilize more and more sub-contractor plants. Productive capacity has
marked flexibility. If we are still behind, we will construct new plants,
and then we will be able to do that. In that case, if they show us a .
future prospect for how many years they will give us a guarantee. there will
be some ways of doing things for that case. In the case of one year alone,
we will have to limit productive capacity. and we will have to take
orders. '

ECONOHIST: for the production of parts, do you need reliable sub-
contractors?

HORIYA: The level of Japanese sub-contractors is very high. Even in
the US too, there are something like subrcontractors. So, there is a small
number of main contractors, but there are rather many sub-contractor-
like companies.

Now, I am setting aside defense production. for a while. when the
quali of Japanese products of today is compared with that of American
produ ts of today, Japanese products are superior to Amsrican'products.
There are many reasons. For one thing. the way of relations between a
company and a labor union is one reason. In the case of the US, union
members are laterally connected, and they are connected with a company by
a contract. Meanwhile, in Japan, it is certain that it is also taking the

form of contract, but the company side and the union side strongly
feel that they are unified into one united body. In such a place, QC
(quality control) activities will also be smooth. I doubt whether such a
thing will be smoothly carried out under a system like in the US. as a
matter of fact.

After the War, we went to the US to study aircraft QC. He brought
know-how for that, and we had all employees carry it out thoroughgoingly,
and made it fruitful. we did it enthusiastically. As a result, we became
able to produce products of high'quality. This is natural. I do not
know what will become of the Japan-US friction from now on. But, we can-
not let the quality of our products fall to the level of American

products.

Key Point of Management of Her Industgz

ECONOHIST: It is said that America's military technology development
power cannot be maintained unless new bruins are introduced about once in

9
FOI‘OIIHCJA1.USEIMNLY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE‘0NLY

five years. He hear that the US is lacking talent at present ...

HORIYA: The US spends a lot of money not only for military technology
but also for the Space Shuttle project and other things related to space
technology. There is a possibility where various kinds of technology
will come out from these things. On this point, Japan also can do that,
if Japan spends the money. Therefore. we probably cannot say things
comprehensively, can we? - .

ECONOHIST: After the War, Japan re-started from almost nothing,‘
introduced technology, studied, and had trouble also in the fields of
quality. In this way, Japan has come to here, hasn't it?

HORIYA: If we do not do that. we cannot live.

ECONOHIST: The US opened various patents internationally. So, there
is also the view that the US is now in streitened circumstances, on the
contrary. Now, [military] technology interchange is being called for. The
purpose of that is said to be to improve the levelcﬂ the two countries' technology.
However, will there not be a possibility where the US, this time, may come
to face interchange while preserving its own technology as'a "black box"?

HORIYA: I do not know about that. What is America thinking about...?

ECONOMIST: Aside from how the Government will decide it, if the
joint development and interchange of technology comes to be scheduled, the
side connected with defense production will probably feel that, if it is
compared to golf, the wind was against it, but the wind has changed to
a favorable wind, won't it?

HORIYA: I cannot say anything. (laughter) He work, according to
each stage and each environment. Therefore, if we are told to do something,
we will do it. If we are told not to do something, we will not do it.

ECONOHIST: It seems to us that there will probably be a time when
you will break that wall ...

HORIYA: Setting aside whether I can answer that, or not, I think
that we will always have to nurture our constitution enough to be able to
do so when there is a chance. But, to do so, it will take time both in
the field of piling”up technology and in the field ofnurturingtalent.
Therefore, even if times are bad, or even if there are less jobs, we
must consolidate the fields of both talent and technology. Otherwise, we
will not be able to rise to the occasion, when necessity arises. We will
become "seedless." After all, defense production must be constantly
provided with quantity to some extent and with jobs to some extent.
Otherwise, it will not be good. So, Japan especially has a small quantity

and fewer jobs.

10
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
As I said a little while ago, I think that how wowill deal with it
according to the environment is probably the nest iuportant point of
the management of the Iilitary demand industry.

ECONOHIS‘I': Do you not intend to change the environment ...7

HORIYA: That is not our work. (laughter)

COPYRIGHT: Dhinichi ﬁlibumha 1982

080: 4105/113

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

(”MW AGRBBS 1'0 OFFER WEAPON rooms! ‘10 0.8.

Tokyo ASAHI sanmm in Japanese 5 May 82 p 2

[Text]

In regard to the problem of exchanging weapons technology with
the US, which problem is causing controversy. for example, in connection
with the Three Principles Concerning weapons Exports, which virtually
ban weapons exports to foreign countries. and the policy of strengthening
the Principles. the Government has firmed up its policy to formulate a
unified view. during this month, to the effect that it will respond
to the United States' request for co-operation. as a general principle.
This was clarified by a Government source on the nth. After the series
of holidays, re-co-ordination will start among the Bureau Director General-
and Division Director-level officials of the Foreign Ministry. HITI.

the JDA. and the Cabinet Legislative Bureau. centering on Deputy Chief
Cabinet Secretary IKEDA.

About one year has passed since the Government received the US side's
request at the Japan-US security administrative-level consultations held
in June of last year. The holding of the proposed Japan-US Summit Talks
at the time of the Advanced Nations Summit Conference. slated for June,
and the conducting of security administrative-level consultations in July
are also close at hand. The Government has judged that from the standpoint
of relations with the US, it will be unwise to delay [the formulation of a
unified view] beyond this. During Diet discussions, however. the
dangerous nature [ofthispolicy],which may result in mutilating the
ThreePrinciplesConcerning weapons Exports. and the unclearness of'the
operation thereof, including "joint development,” have been pointed out.
It seems that the re-kindling of controversy will be unavoidable,
accompanying the Government's moves. In some respects, the situation seems
to be fluid, as to whether the problem will develop as expected. .

with regard to this problem. Prime Minister SUZUKI. in his Diet replies
since Februuwy5 has been taking a forward—looking posture. Partly on
the basis of such an intention of the Prime Minister, the Foreign Ministry,

12
FOR‘0IIIC1AI.IE“E(”'LY
the JDA, etc. , have judged as follows: (1) In order to secure the smooth
and effective operation of the Japan-US Security Treaty structure, it is-
necessary to respond to the US side‘s expectations and requests based on
the Security Maty and the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement; and (2)
[Japan] is not obligated to respond to all individual requests. but

if it rejects any request, it will run counter to the spirit of the
Treaty or the Agreement. From the standpoint of attaching importance to
the reciprocity of the Security Treaty structure, they would like to
establish a principle under which the exports of Security Treaty-connected
weapons technology to the US can be treated separately fron the embargo
policy.

On the other hand, HITI has so far been expressing disapproval,
partly from the viewpoint of harmony with the Principles Concerning
weapons Exports, and partly because of problem concerning the actual
operation thereof. Recently. however. the flexible view has started to
arise that such a direction is "inevitable." partly from the standpoint
of the relationships with trade problems with the 08. However.
the Government as a whole thinks it necessary to conduct suffieient
discussions on such problems as the relationships between the interpretation
of the Treaty and the Principles Concerning weapons Exports and the
concrete nethod of operation. Thus. a decision has been reached to carry out

re-co-ordination. including also the opinion of the Cabinet Legislative
Bureau.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shimbun Tokyo Bonsha 1982

680: 6105/11 3

FOIOI'I'ICRLUSEONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KILITARY

GOVW AGREES m UBAPON BA! LIFT

Tokyo NIKON IBIZAI $11130“ in Japanese 29 Apr 82 p 1
[Text]

 

On the problem of nilitary weapons technology exports to the US,
which problem has had hard sailing, the Foreign Ministry. NIT! and the
JDA have finally agreed, by the 28th, to permit exports of weapons
technology. H171, which formerly frowned upon such exports on the
grounds that the Three Principles for weapons Exports will be nullified,
has yielded to the view held by the foreign Ministry and the JDA. More
concretely, the Government is to approve exports of weapons technology,
including such advanced technology as very large-scale integrated circuits
(LS!) and optical fiber, to the US, but not to any other foreign country.
from the standpoint that the Japan-US Security Treaty is prior to the
Three Principles for weapons Experts. The Opposition Parties are opposed
to the lifting of the export ban on weapons technology. It is expected.
however, that Prise hinister SUZUKI will asks a final decision, on the
political level, by the end of hay, with consideration for the US
Government's request for the strengthening of Japan's defense power and
the increasingly serious trade friction between Japan and the US. The
Prime Minister will formally convey-Japan's position to US President
REAGAN at the Japan-US Summit Conference to be held in Paris in early June.

It was in November last year that the us Government strongly rcnuusted
Japan to approve exports of weapons technology to the US. as part of Japan's
sharing of the defense burden with the Us. In accordance with this request,
the Government drew up its basic view on weapons exports, with the Foreign
Ministry and the JDA in charge.

Until now, Japan has disapproved, or has refrained voluntarily from,
weapons exports, in accordance with the Three Principles for weapons
Exports, which Principles were established according to the ideal of
pacifisn mentioned in the Constitution, and the unified policy of the
Government established at the tine of the MIX! Cabinet. However, the
Government has now clarified, by its basic view. that "Exports of
weapons technology to the us should be approved, because the Japan-US
Security Treaty, which calls for nutual co-operation and assistance, is,
prior to the Three Principles and the unified policy."

Explaining the reason for this decision, the Government says that
"The Three Principles and the unified policy represent Japan's policy

.11:
momcmmown
It then
t llin wea s exports and do not have legal force."
351:: gout thgt "ngnSecurity ‘i‘resty is an international agreement which

was concluded to secure the smooth and effective operation of the system

hich has
f the maintenance of the security of Japan and the US and w
13;; binding power, as is stipulated in Article 3 «this Treaty."
' .

‘ ed n this basic view. for the reason that "The Japan-US
Secur'iqgt‘l‘reﬁz‘mty doggonot contain an express provision for Japan's duty to
approve weapons technology exports.“ It contended that the granting of
weapons technology to the US, which is pushing its policy of exporting
military weapons. including technology. in a positive way, without a to
treaty obligation may lead to the sale of Japan's weapons technolzgy
'a third country through the US and virtual nullification of the ree

Principles for Heapons Exports.

Hi the growth of military tension between the US and the Soviet
Union, fuguever, the US Government began to request Japan repeatedly“?
~ strengthen Japan's defense power. Furthermore. the feeling, that e
US should not hesitate to bar Japanese products from the US market,
unless Japan approves exports of weapons technology to the US, has grown
strong. especially within the US Defense Department and Congress onab
circles. As a result. MI?! was compelled to yield to the view held y

the Foreign Ministry and the JDA.

_— ...._.__.—‘ _ ._,,_

Within the Government. however. not a few circles hold then, even if
Japan is to export weapons technology to the us as an exceptional step. the
following principles should be observed: (1) Japan's weapons technology
should be used only in time of peace; (2) It is necessary to ban the resale
of weapons technology to a third country; and (3) private circles should
take the lead in exporting weapons technology to the US, even if the Govern-
ment is to establish a general framework for such exports. So, the two
Ministries and Agency have drawn up. on the basis of the basic view
formulated _in Novenber last year. two different unified views for the
Govemment'. one including the condition that."Exports should be approved
only in time of peace" and that "Resale to a third country should be banned,"
and the other with the condition that "Exports should not necessarily be"
approved in time of peace alone" but that "Resale to a third country should
be banned." They will ask Prime Minister SUZUKI for choice between the two.

The view is influential that Prime Hinister SUZUKI will make a decision,
on the political level. by the end of hay, on the basis of the draft of
unified views drawn up by the two Hinistries and Agency. In accordance
with his decision, the Government will make a formal decision or establish an
understanding at a Cabinet meeting toward the close of the present Diet session.
It wants to settle this problem by formally notifying the US side of the
policy at the SUZUKI-REACH! conference to be held on the occasion of the
Versailles Smit (Advanced Nations Summit Conference) in early June.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shinbunsha 1982

030: 4105/1113
m OFFICIAL us: ONLY

Ti! WASION SEEN AS SIGNIFICANT FACTOR IN SAVINGS
Tokyo SW ‘l’OYO IBIZA! in Japanese 3 Apr 82 pp 38-61

[Article by reporter lasuyuki Hiyasaki]

[Text] Bdginess in the black nney systel [illegal
deposits]. which is said to amount to 30-50 trillion

yen, has becona apparent prior to the start or the green
card system. As if in response to the edginess, the idea
of reconsidering the syst- hes been spreading rapidly
in the political arena. It is very likely that Diet
lac-bets will once again sutilate the green card systen by
legislation. the next nonth or so will be the first
turning point. It is true that the new systen is not
perfect. but is there not a probles in "the reckless
drive" of the green card repeal nova-ant which ignores
the principle of fairness in taxation?

Prior to enforce-ant of the green card systen (snail savings user card
systen) scheduled for January 1984 and issuance of green cards beginning

in January 1983. an attack ained at scrapping the green card systen has been
spreading rapidly.

Expected Counterattach by Underground Honey Networks

It was for-er Prins Minister Tanaka who initiated the repeal ova-ant. At
the 'l’anaka faction's New Conrehensive Policy Study Group nesting held on
27 January, he asserted that "the green card systen is bad. louse neaIbers
should block it by legislation."

At the house of Representatives Budget Co-ittee on 3 Pebruary, Democratic
Socialist Party Secretary General Saburo ‘rsukasoto said that "we should not
hesitate to correct our nistakes." he reversed his previous position of
pronoting the introduction of the green card systen and dashed in the
direction of repealing it. Behind ‘rsukanoto's speech was the boss of the
Denocratic Socialist Party. the party‘s pernsnent counselor. Iklno Kasugs.
Mr Kasuga has written ”a bill to repeal the green card systen." Moreover,
he has distributed to various individuals and groups a leaflet entitled

“WIMONLY
"Appealing for luaediate Repeal of the Green Card Systsa 'l'nlt an we
Deesrits and Only One Merit." Furthermre. he has been vigorously working
on other aiddle-of-the-road parties to go along with the Democratic Socialist
Party.

Hr Kssugs said that "questions and doubts which were not discussed or
predicted when the intone tax law was revised in March 1980 (when the green
card was introduced) have burst out." He strongly asserted the following.
opinion in objection to the aystaa.

First of all, because the green card system is a systen assigning nuabers
to everyone. it violates people's right to privacy. this cannot be
allowed. Second, because noney that people want to shelter from the -
application of the green card will flow into other forms of savings to which
the green card does not apply or be converted into goods, the rate of
saving will decline. This will have an unfavorable influence on various
aspects of the nation's scone-y. Moreover, if a large ascent of individual
savings is shifted to other forms of savings to which the green card does
not apply, the amount of tax revenue fron interest and dividends that the
green card system is intended to increase by a switch to an integrated
taxation systen will likely be very small.

In short, "it is a bad law which has the danger of generating 100 deaerits
although it has one Isrit from the standpoint of the principle of fair
taxation."

A View in Favor of Reconsideration Spreads in Various Directions

Although they are not as tough as most. who insists on repeal of the green
card systsn, the number of people who support substantial disnsntling of

the green card system has certainly been increasing. The Diet Manbere'
League for Green Card Measures. to which 229 Lb? members of both houses
belong (Shin Kaneasru, chair-an), decided on 26 March to present a bill to
repeal the green card systa and started gathering signatures.

HITl Minister Shintsro Abe, who is a leading nsmber of the Pukude faction
and fornerly cheiraan of the Policy Research Council, was against the green
card fron the beginning. therefore. there is a strong possibility that the
repeal of the green card will be an all-faction aovanent. The LDP's
Executive Col-littee has already confirmed the need for "rumination" of
the green card. As soon as opinion progresses within the LDP. steps toward
repeal are expected.

Those who are still in favor of "enforcing the green card as scheduled" are
in the ainority on the party's Tax System Research Council. including Chairman
Sadsnori Nakayams and some others. Although Prise Minister Suzuki and Finance
hinister Vstanabe are saying that "we cannot repeal a law which was passed by
the highest legislative organ. the Diet, even before its enforcement and
therefore will carry it out as scheduled," what their true intentions are

is an extranely delicate asttsr.

1?
”MUSEONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

Among the opposition parties, only the Socialist Party definitely supports
the enforcement of the green card systea. It supports enforcement to correct
unfair taxation. The party that clearly wants repeal is the Denocratic
Socialist Party.

The Konei Party, the New Liberal Club, and the Socialist Dsnocratic League
tilt in the direction of enforcing the green card systel. In the lonei
Party and law Liberal Club, however, there are any neabers who oppose the
enforce-ant of the green card. So, there renains a great possibility that
these three parties nay shift their positions depending on the trend of
public opinion. the future political situation, and the possibility of "a
double election of both houses" next year.

Not only in the political arena but also in the econonic world, the true
intention is ”to not enforce the green card system, if possible.” The reason
for the Denocratic Socialist Party's conplete reversal was pressure fron its
largest voting constituency, the snall- and udiuI-siae business owners

and nerchants. The Tokyo Che-her of Co-srce (Shigeo Hizuno, president).
which are organisations of nerchants and unufacturers. have also expressed
the View that "the influence of the green card should be reennined fron
standpoints other than attain-ant of fairness in taxation."

Hithin the Japan Credit Union Association, Chair-an 'l'etsugoro Obara of the
Jonan Credit Union objected to the green card fron the beginning. Those who
hold the view that enforcenent of the green card should be postponed fora
the najority. Objections fron the snall- and nediun-sise business owners
are stronger than anticipated. Chair-an Shuto Uuramto of the banker‘s
Association of Japan has also for the first tine expressed the opinion that
the green card should be reexanined. although he said that this was his
personal opinion. lie has indicated that he would support "continuation of
the separate-tantion-at-the-source syatan" as advocated by the Federation
of Economic Organizations.

30 Trillion Yen in Black Honey

why are objections coning fron various directions? A leading neaber of the
LDP's Diet Hubers' League for Green Card Measures explains as follows.

”After the Finance Ministry suggested as a conpronise (1) that district

tax offices not strictly inquire as to sources of savings made under false
nanes in the past and (2) that depositors of taxable savings nay substitute
sons other forn of identification such as a driver‘s license for the green
card, the party's Tax Systes lssearch Council approved its enforcsnent last
October.

”Speaking clearly, the council Judged that with the adoption of the Nagoya
systee that ignores past wrongdoings and the easing of identification
requirenenta for depositors of taxable interest savings, the sources of
savings which are the sources of interest and dividend incone could not
conpletely be grasped by the district tax offices. the conpronise see-ed
so to speak. to nutilate the green card system... -

mammomx
MOWIISEONLY

"But it is cleer thet depositors can be nsnuslly identified by district

tsx office uployees insteed of using the cowuters of the Tea: Adninistrstion
Bureeu which are directly connected to the green cerde. If a district tax
office concentrstes its efforts in one region to gein s firn grip on the
sources of sevings, people in other arses will elso becoee nervous, and es

a result. noney will be shifted froe sevings accounts to other for-es of
invest-est.

"Re thOught re could nutilste the green csrd systue, but the truth was thet
we were sieply deceived by the Finance Ministry bureaucrats. Then, the
crisis consciousness thet this is not right erose smug Diet ns-bers.“

The background resson rhy politiciens heve s crisis consciousness is the
existence of so-cslled blsch noney.

Everybody admits the existence of hidden noney arising fron ts: evssion or
sons other source thet the holders do not went to reveel. But the total
aeount of these funds is unborn.

Finance Minister Retensbe gave the following snswsr to the question:

"Honey essentially hes s tendency to go into dsrk pleces,” end "became

the enount is unborn, it is celled black money." Putting eside his "good
ensvers." nsjor holders of bleck money ere the nouveeu riche who sold lend,
susll- snd eediun size business comers end nerchants. doctors, self-elployed
people, politicisns. end orgsnised gengsters.

Finance Hinistry Budget Bureau Director Fukuds said thet es fer es sevings
ere concerned. "black noney reportedly constitutes about half of ell savings
to which sepsrste texation is applied."

however. it is elso s fect that s lotof ssvings is deposited under felse
mass or weeding the ten-free linit for postsl savings. In ”-80 sevings
discovered exceeding the li-it totalled 59 billion yen in 69,000 cases, the
highest on record. This is, however, only the tip of en iceberg. hsny
people conservatively estinste thet the mount of bleck noney in savings
accounts end related invest-eats is epproxinstely 15 trillion yen.

In the United States, the hlsclt noney is seid to be "10 percent of the GE?"
(according to s survey nsde by Professor Gut-en). If this method of
esti-etion is spplied to the Jspsnese cese, black money would enount to

30 trillion yen. If the black mney is 10 percent of all personsl savings,
it would be 33 trillion yen. It is s widely supported vier thet block nonq
easily exceeds 50 trillion yen if the funds of orgsnieed crine are included.

In any case, the scele of bleck noney is certainly not snell. If this noney
is suddenly noved. it will inevitably have a greet effect on the whole

economy .

If blsck noney is the reel power source behind novenents to repeel the
green csrd system. nsny ordinery people who cennot even take full edvsntsge

19
MWWONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the 9 nillion yen allotnent of tax-eatenpt interest savings accounts '(3
nilliOn yen in bank savings. 3 nillion yen in govern-ant bonds, and 3 nillion
yen in postal savings, and in addition salaried workers can have 5 nillion
yen in asset formation savings) cannot accept it.

There are only 80.000 people whose annual income exceeds 20 million yen (it
can be said that the biggest problen is that this nuiaer itself is too
snell). There are a little over 120,000 people who have savings over 20
nillion yen. So what is wrong with enforcing the green card systen? This
is the way ordinary people feel.

Insdiste Target Is To Postpone Enforce-ant

Although the Ministry of Finance pretends to be caln, the shifts of honey
that have occurred in anticipation of the enforce-ent of the green card
system are greater than expected.

The first phase was a shift to postal savings in the spring of 1980. Reacting
to the rumor that the green card would not be applied to postal savings,

the flow increased rapidly. Many depositors shifted their savings fron
banks to post offices. In ”-80 the increase in personal savings in 157
banks throughout the country was 6.621,900,000,000 yen. while postal savings
rose by 9,369.200,000.000 yen. Although depositors' recognition of the merit
of high interest rates on fixed anount savings in postal savings accounts

is one reason for the change. a considerable portion of the increase was a
shift fron bank savings in search of a shelter from the green card system.
Many concerned parties realized the power of the green card for the first
tine because of this big shift.

The second phase was the boon in gold investnent and zero coupon bonds
(discount bonds in foreign currency issued by foreign corporations) last .
year.

The zero coupon bonds that Japanese have bought since the first sales last

April through this Pebruary reached 1.12 billion yen, of which 780 nillion

yen was bought in February alone. Publicity regarding tax savings by stock
brockerage fine contributed to the great popularity of zero coupon bonds.

The Ministry of Pinance suddenly had to tenporize by prohibiting sales and

purchases of zero coupon bonds on 3 March.

Investaeno in gold was heated, too. Imports of gold jumped free 65 tons

in 1980 to 167 tons in 1981. In January gold imports reached 26 tons for

a single nonth. "About half of the total gold inport was due to private
sector investnent denand" (a high-ranking official of the Finance Ministry).
Sons 250 to 300 billion yen of personal noney was invested in the "gold rush."

The personal noney invested in gold and zero coupon bonds is over $00 billion
yen. Although ”gold holding's influence is slight relative to the over 35
trillion yen annual increase in personal financial assets" (a high-ranking
official of the finance Ministry), its significance cannot be ignored.

20
“MUSEONLV
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In relation to the recent 10!: value of the yen. If: Haehava, the president of'
the Bank of Japan, said: "One cause is the difference between donestic and
overseas interest rates, but another reason is that...." He was alluding to
none other than the inﬂuence of personal investnent in gold and 1. .«ro coupon
bonds.

Financial institutions that had supported the green card systen prinsrily to
put the fettsrs of the green card on postal savings accounts have recently
changed their positions conplataly for the sane reason. not a few bankers
have said: "I felt keenly the coldness of financial flows.”

Major city banks and stock brokerage firm are desperately trying to find out
how nuch nosey will nova with the enforce-ant of the green card systn. The
contents of 336 trillion yen in personal financial assets constitute 180
trillion yen in the fore of tax-free interest savings and 1.54 trillion yen

in taxable interest savings.

One city bank estiantes that 26 trillion yen in tax-free interest savings
and 15 trillion yen in tenable interest savings will possibly be shifted to
other ferns of investuent. It predicts that deposits in postal savings.
fined-tern savings, and dusnd deposit accounts will each decrease several
to 20 trillion yen and that the aoney will be shifted to corporate bonds,
stock invest-ant, and asset fornstion savings. This estimtion is ads by
limiting the range of possible shifts to only bonds, stocks, and insurance.
The nejority in the financial world. however, predict that in reality the
portion of the shifted assets invested in goods or flowing to foreign
countries will be fairly substantial.

Discount government bonds have been abnornally popular since the ban on
sales of zero coupon bonds. In spite of a sharp decline, demand for gold
has remained strong. Stock brokerage firms have been developing on a crash
basis for-s of invest-ant to which the green card will not be applied.

As these facts reveal. the nova-ant to scrap the green card systen will
further accelerate.

Nets Spread Several Tiles

Then, how will negotiations over the green card proceed hereafter?

The first possibility is complete repeal, as advocated by Mr Kasuga and
others.

The second is to postpone enforce-ant. In this case. there are various
opinions about the length of the postponenent: 2. 3. or 5 years.

he third is to enforce the systen as scehduled, but to mutilate it once
again by leaving the separate taxation systen in effect rather than
shifting to a conpletely integrated taxation systen. In this case, whether
the current tax rate of 35 percent on intone fron taxable interest savings
account will be unchanged or raised to (:2 percent (which is the tax rate

21
”WNW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for discount government bonds if sold before expiration) or to about 56
percent will be a focus of negotiations.

The fourth possibility is to enforce the green card systen and integrated
taxation syeten as scheduled, but also to offer the public a sweetener

by increasing the allowable limit of tax-free interest savings fron the
current 3 nillion yen each for bank savings, postal savings, and govern-ant
bonds to 5 nillion yen (a total of 15 million yen).

One Diet member cynically criticized the Yinance Ministry, which has held
fast to the green card, with the co-ent: "In the case of bank and postal
savings accounts it is good to increase the current limit of 3 nillion yen
to 5 nillion yen each. But in the case of government bonds, why not increase
the current 3 nillion yen to 10 nillion yen? Because the Finance ninistry
will have to abandon cash redthion of deficit government bonds some day,

it will agree to the idea of an increase to 10 nillion yen. In addition.
banks will start selling government bonds at the window. Isn't this a good
idea that should‘satisfy everybody?"

The fifth possibility is to enforce the systen exactly as scheduled starting
in January 1986.

In any case, if the green card systen is to be revised. there is not such tine
left in the Diet schedule. LDP Secretary General Nikaido said: ”After the
budget bill is passed, we will bring this issue to sons kind of conclusion
within this Diet session" (the session will close on 19 my).

In the case of the first three possibilities. the income tax law must be
revised. It is quite possible to collect the 20 "nonpartisan" big nanes
required for house menbers to propose legislatioa. However, because it
takes almost a truth before deliberations begin, time is lacking if house
nenbers propose revised legislation in April. Therefore, those who support
revision of the income tax law intend to have the bill carried over to the
next session of this Diet and to pass it in the next extraordinary session.

In the worst case. they want to buy time by revising at least Article 9 of
the incone tax law. which specifies a definite date for enforcenent of the
green card systen. “then, it is possible that they will take drastic aeasures
to adjust the interests of various groups. At present, the chance of
complete repeal of the green card systen being the chosen alternative is
snail. The next least likely alternative is the fifth-~conplete enforcement
of the green card systen.

The current green card law undeniably contains items which were not fully
examined or portiOns that will remain "unknown until the law is enforced.”
Nevertheless. this discussion reviewing the green card systen has totally
ignored the principle cf fair taxation instead of guaranteeing it. This is
not a pleasant thing for ordinary people who do not have to worry about
exceeding the limit of tax-free interest savings.

22
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Assets to which the Green Card Is no: Applied

(1) Ordinary savings and notification savings account (separate taxatio --
20 percent tax rate). tax pay-sat reserve savings.

(2) Hutual loans and savings accounts.

(3) Discount bonds and discount sovernnent bonds issued by the end of
1983 (withholding tax rate—16 percent), discount bonds and discount govern-
nent bonds issued after January 1984 and sold before expiration (withholding
tax rate within the first _2 yesrs--3S percent; thereafter—42 percent).

(5) Stock dividends under 100,000 yen per conpsny per year (withholding
tax rste-20 percent).

(5) Profits from sales of securities such as stocks, corporate bonds, and
certificates of beneficial interest.

(6) Nev-type invest-out trusts such as those salable at any tine after
3 years vithoat dividends (withholding ts: rste on capital gains-40
percent).

(7) 0.5. Treasury bills sold before maturation.
(8) Life insurance and individual pension funds.

(9) Gold. jewelery. diamnds, paintings, antiques, land, and other uterial
assets.

(10) Savings tucked away in dresser drawers.

23
WI OFFIGAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICMI. USE ONLY

"111 Black Money Be Disclosed by the Green Card.

KEY

10.

  

(33275 "J 973—13
.ﬁngfruun

     

10) i1)wlﬁuu-QI‘lB-Bﬂvdlnlﬂttﬁ
one~snecme-me-ens-aenamen
0mm tattle-mm Ila-AIRQ
museums-Irene:
caisson-mommy»

 
     
   

Balance of personal savings-438 trillion yen

Black mney?

Bank accounts

Postal savings accounts

Credit unions. agriculturel cooperative association. and other

accounts

Investment trusts

Insurance

Securities

Trillion yen

(Note)

(1) Banksntotal deposits of city banks, local banks. long-ter-
credit banks, and Iutual banks.

(2) Credit unions, agricultural cooperatives, and othersntotal
deposits of credit unions, credit cooperatives, agricultural
cooperatives. fishery cooperatives, sndlaborers' credit
unions.

214
ms m1. us: on“
MWLUSEONLY

(3) Meat-ant truta-waraoual truat aaaeta in my stint
truata and loan truata.

(lo) Insurance-41f: inauranca, nonlifa inauranca. postal
insurance, and agricultural cooperative lutual inauranca.

(5) Securities—individual holding of corporation bonda and
invaatnant trusts.

COPYRIGHT: shukan Toyo Kaiaai 1982

9896
080: 81 29/ 1071

25
maoinauusroum
MWUSEONLY

30030110

AQICULTUIAL (”QPBATIVBS OPPOSB INCREASE) PA!!! MOBTS

Unknown WUWJIMWKDDAI SOSHIUDOUITSUITBID
TAISBO 508811! in Jepeneee 18 Ieb 82 pp 1-7 '

[Peper issued by the Centrel Union of Agriculturel Cooperetives]

[Text] 1. Background end Chsrecterietice of Deesnde for en Open herket
for Agriculturel Products

The 0.8. Government. fecsd with e eerioue deterioretion of its donestic
econony es sydolieed by increesing inflation end mloymt. hes nsde an
issue of the growth of its trede deficit with Jepen, end hes requested the
opening of Jepenese arkets by such nesns es reduction of teriffs, elinine-
tion of nonteriff berriers. end elininetion of residuel import reetrictions.
In doing so. it hse ignored the egreenent in the Tokyo Round. end hes
de-nded thet renegotietion of beef, orange end fruit juice inports be
noved up, with coqlete liberelisetion beginning in 1984.

The present trede friction between Jepen end the United Stetes is not just
e bileterel economic issue: the .10: cherecteristic now is the hsevy
ehedov ceet by politicel fectore.

The besic fectors in trede friction between Jepen end the United Stetes
concern the structure or nenegenent of the 11.3. econoey. including e

reletive decline in coepetitiveneee end the high interest rate policy. Other
factors ere the emceseive growth of exports to the United Stetes of eutombilee

end other industriel products. end the export-dependence of the Jepenese
econoey which mites thet growth necessery: these ere inportent problne
which csmt be overlooked.

2. Suit Thinking end Cleins on Blocking Liberaliretion of Inports end
hpension of Quotes

men one considers the causes of the lerge 0.8. trede deficit with Jepen es
steted shove. it hecones quite cleer thet there is no need for the field of
egriculturel products to beer the leest responsibility for the preeent trede

friction.

”WIMONLY
Accordingly. it is reasonable that the industrial sector rectify the Japanese
trade surplus generated by increased exports of industrial products; to shift
it to the agricultural sector is a couplets reversal of natural order.

The policy task Japan now faces is the resolution of trade friction. The
way to do this is to rectify excessive econonic growth which depends on
exports and to thoroughly apply various policies ained at expansion of
internal denand. thus restraining concentrated surges in exports of certain
industrial products and eating exports orderly. He must prepare our own
proposals to achieve this goal. Otherwise the problen of trade friction will
never be solved.

Here are our assertions in regard to blocking liberalisation of agricultural
goods and expansion of quotes:

(1) The u.s. view that "the closed nature of the agricultural market” is
the cause of the trade idealsnce with Japan is distorted and cleetely
aistakan. That is because Japan is the world's largest net importer of
agricultural products and depends on the United States for a large part of
its inports. chiefly of grain and soybeans ($10.2 billion in faraing.
forestry and fishery products in 1980. a 35.2 percent share); there if no
reason at all to insist that the nsrhet for agricultural products be .pened
even further.

(2) Ignoring this situation. the 11.3. Goveruasnthas taken the closed urhet
as a sywol and has de-snded the elimination of import restrictions on 22
agricultural its-s. including beef and citrus fruit. This is quite
inexplicable to Japan's agricultural producers and will generate intense
distrust. This is not desirable in term of friendship between Japan and
the United States; not only will it turn popular sentinsnt against the
United States. it will tend to shake the foundations of Japan‘s ruling

party. This is a serious latter.

(3) It is absolutely wrong to say that the agricultural narket is closed only
in Japan. and that the United States. the EC and other countries have open
narkets. That is, the Co-on Agricultural Policy of the sc countries gives
noat agricultural products a high degree of protection by providing export
incentives and inport surcharges which have the effect of inport restrictions.
Various pieces of legislation in the United States restrict inorts of dairy
and wheat-related products. and quantitative restrictions are placed on
inports by the Heat Inport Act. Thus all the advanced countries of the world
have adopted policies to protect their own agricultural industries, and the,
barriers protecting Japanese agriculture are not especially excessive.

(A) It is clear that liberalization of agricultural imports if it were to
occur. would not have the effect of rectifying the trade inbalance and
reducing the Japanese surplus. Within Japan's agricultural imports.
incidentally, total inporta of items involved in residual import restrictions
cone to a nere $255 nillion (in 1980).

2?
l-‘OIOI'IICIALUSIONLY
MOMGALUSEONLY

(5) Host of the 73 its-s for which there vere residual inort restrictions
se of Deced’er 1968 (when the cabinet decision to encourage liberalization
of inorts was nsde) have been liberalized now, and the rushing 22 its-e
are principle crops or inportant crops which support regional agriculture.
Japan‘s agriculture would surely euffer a destructive blow if these were
liberalized, and serious political and social probluss would inevitably
develop.

(6) Because of excess production of rice. which is Japan's met iqortant
crop, Japan has continued i-pl-entation of paddy conversion neasures.

Tor-er growth fields like tangerines and livestock face the problen of
overproduction throughout the country. as do tobacco and silkwor- production.
Agricultural production as a whole is undergoing reorganization, and all
Japan's producers are pauring their effort into adjustnsnt of nsrket condi-
tions. we met stress the fact that production sdjustnsnts and the long-tern
stagnation of agricultural prices drove us, in the last half of the 1970's,
into the unusually harsh situation of continued decline of real agricultural
incone. ‘

(7) Even before the "resolution on strengthening self-sufficiency in food-
stuffs" in the Diet in April 1981. Japanese agricultural policy included
establiiheent of a food security syste- ss the prinry nission for the 1980's.
He lust stress that increased self-sufficiency in donestically produced
foodstuffs has becous a basic part of national policy.

3. Establish-ant of the Camaign

(l) Caspeign objectives: We will organize to develop a powerful campaign
to protect Japan's agricultural industry and upgrade our self-sufficiency
in foodstuffs. which is the fundanental task of Japan's agricultural
policy, by blocking liberalisation of agricultural iqons and expansion of
quotes.

(2) Caqaign structure: In order to concentrate our strength and develop
the ca-paign to block liberalisation and import expansion, we will
eateblieh a canaign structure at three levels.

1) Local level

a. The city. town and village agricultural cooperative councils will be
responsible for pronoting the caqaaign.

b. The local cooperatives will establish canpaign policy headquarters (or
co-ittees).

2) Prefectural level

a. The metropolitan and prefectnral agricultural cooperative central
association councils will be responsible for prancing the campaign.

28
”WNW!”
b. The control essocietions will esteblish cespeign policy hoedquerters (or
co-itteee) consisting of hoods of cooperetives end officels of control
sseocietions end leegnes (including epecieliete).

3) Control level

e. The Council of the Control Union of Agricultural Cooperetivee will be
responsible for proeoting the cenpeign. -

b. The Control Union will eeteblish s control ceepeign policy heedqusrters
conpoeed of the cheirnsn end vice choir-en of the policy heedquerters for
esch comdity, together with officels of the control orgenieetion (including
specielists).

(3) Ceepeign expenses: Expenses will be covered by reguler budgets et eech
level, whenever possible; contributions fro. nodaors will be sought when
necessary.

(A) Cooperetion of releted industry end fernere' groups: In order to
achieve capsign objectives. we will develop e brood end positive celpeign
based on contect end cooporetion with ferners' groups. epecielized
egriculturel cooperetives end other rolsted ferning, forestry end fishing
industry groups. '

lo. Concrete Developlent of the Ceqeign

(l) Doesstic policy: To schievo the objectives of the consign, we will
coebine the following nethods to develop e powerful cenpeign through e
responsible structure consisting of officers of the locel cooperetives,
the eetropoliten end prefectursl control essocietions end the netionsl
orgoniretion. choir-on end vice choir-non of the verious co-odity
heedquerters (end co-itteee). end were of stsnding conittees end
cor-ittees.

l) The netionel government, locel goveth leedors, politicel perty
leeders. Diet nsebers end locel council neebers will receive de-snde free
cooperative sedaers by noens of postcerds, petitions, end denends to the Diet
end locel councils. In eddition, ell Diet were will be sent open
questionneires on liberelieetion of egriculturel products, to deter-ins their
intentions end to be used in echieving delends.

2) Officiele of locel cooperetives, prefecturel eeeocistions end leegues,
end the netionel orgsniution will nest with governnent end perty repreeente-
tivee. Diet more. end officiels of locel govern-outs end councils, end
sake active eppeels to bloc]: liberelieetion of egriculturel inorte end
expension of ieports.

3) At criticel points during the consign, rellies end use neetings will
be held at every level to reinforce the will of the orgenieetion to
achieve our deunds. Through visits to Tokyo the csnpeign will he ectively
developed ot the contrel level.

29
FOR OFFICIALUSIONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lo) A policy of overseas advertising will be actively pursued, and there will
be spirited efforts to obtain the understanding of the press, financial
circles, labor and consumers.

(2) Naturally we will make forceful appeals to the Japanese Government to
bear our demands and assertions in mind and uke every effort in inter-
governmental negotiations. Dut it is also necessary that we, as e
producers' organisation. develop an active campaign in the other country,
as follows:

1) He will pursue an active exchange between Japanese and 0.8. producers'
groups (including related industries) to achieve comn purposes and
increase mutual understanding.

2) He will make active appeals to the U.S. Government and Congress to present

the real situation of Japanese agriculture and the frank feelings of
agricultural producers.

5. Major Domestic and Overseas lbves on Demands To Open Markets

15-16 Jan 1982 Japan-U.s. Europe Trilateral Trade Talks

16-21 Jan 1982 Director General Sano of MA?! Econonics Bureau
visits United States

Jan 1982 Series of Congressmen visit Japan

23 Jan - l Teb 1982 Central Union President Ivamochi visits United
States

Late Tel) 1982 Chairman Esaki of 1.0? Special (Jo-ittee on
International Economic Measures visits United
States

Feb 1982 Congressional hearings on opening Japanese
mrkats (scheduled)

Early Mar 1982 U.S.-Japsn Trade Subgroup (2d round) to meet

Late Mar 1982 Foreign Minister Sakurauchi to visit United
States

Apr 1982 U.s.-Japan high working level consultations

May 1982 ID? Secretary General Rikaido and former Foreign

Minister Ito to visit United States
6-6 Jun 1982 Conference of heads of state of advanced

countries (Paris su-it); nesting of Japanese
and U.8. heads of state

POIOFI'ICIALUSBONLY
Jul 1982 luteriu report of Second Ad noc Cor-ittee on
Adainistrstive Refor-

Pall 1982 0.8.-Japau hiﬂI-level consultations on
agricultural products

Nov 1982 0.8. congressional elections: 38th cm
llinisterial Conference

Mar 1983 Piuel report of Second Ad aoc Co-ittee on
Administrative Refor-

Apr 1983 consolidated local elections

Jun 1983 House of Councilors elections

Request to Block Liberialiration of Agricultural Products and Expansion of
lworts

Bven though a number of difficulties have finally been overcone through trade
negotiations between Japan and the United States and through the Tokyo round.
the 0.8. Govern-out has demanded the opening of Japanese sarkets by such
neans as reduction of tariffs. eliniuatiou of nontariff barriers, and
eliuiuation of residual iuport restrictions; the reason cited is the
expansion of the trade deficit with Japan, vhich has resulted fros ‘
deterioration of the 0.8. econoq.

Specifically, the United States has insisted that renegotiation of beef,
orange and fruit juice inorts be uoved up. with couplets liberalization
beginning in 1986.

Japan's agriculturalists are very distrustful of this 0.8. attitude. The
basic factors in trade friction between Japan and the United States are
issues of the structure or neuagenent of the 0.8. scam-y, including a
relative decline in cmetitivmus and the high interest rate policy. Other
factors are the excessive growth of exports of industrial products. and

the export-dependent nanagesent of the Japanese econony which supports that
growth.

Japan's agricultural industry is continuing i-plenentation of paddy

conversion measures because of the rice surplus. and producers faced 91th
extrenely difficult situations in respect to fruit and livestock are asking
i-ense efforts to adjust supply and deuud. The recent frost damage has been
an added difficulty; Japan's agriculturiats have been driven into an

extremely difficult situation. To break out of this situation and to open

up brighter proupects for the future, Japan's agriculturists have codined
their strength in eager study of specific policies to advance agriculture

in Japan.

Accordingly. we earnestly request that the goverment give full consideration
to the harsh situation into which Japan's agricultural industry and farners

31
roe OFFICIALUSEONLY
'0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have been placed, and absolutelysppoae reduction of tariffs and
elininetion of nontariff berriers. of course, end especially liberalization

and expansion of inert quotas for the beef , oranges and fruit juices in which
the United States has a strong interest. and for other itees subject to
residual inert restriction.

18 February 1982

Presidents and Councils, Nations]. and Prefecturel Associations and Leagues
of Agricultural Cooperatives

9601
080: 9029/ 1076

32
FOIOIIICMLUBIWLV
NBC SIOPS SPOT meats 01' “-111.04?! m's 1'0 0.8.
Tokyo mm IBIZA! snmun in Japanese 16 Apr 82 p 8

[Text]

NEG. which is the biggest semi-conductor company (in Japan). clarified
on the 13th that it has cowletely suspended spot exports to the US of
su-kilo-bit W's (randon access nemories). which are iuportant parts for
computers. The policy of this my for the future is to limit exports
of su-kilo-hit W's to the US to shipments to big users, including computer
manufacturers who have concluded long-tern supply contracts. The oh-Rilo-hit
MM is an ultra-modern technological product which provided a clue to re-
kindling the "Japan-US uni-conductor war.” Even on the US market. Japan
has an overwhelmingly high share. The US side is asserting that "Japan is
strong because of its exports at low prices." Especially, it is pointing
out the decline in prices on the spot market in the US. and is also showing
moves to start a lawsuit on a charge of duping. All the more for this
reason, the fact that NBC, the biggest domestic coqany. has clarified the

policy of suspending the spot export of Bu-kilo-hit W's will help also in
containing such moves in US industry circles.

Accordine to 32¢. this comany has so far shipped Gu-kilo-hit W's to
30 personal cosputer and computer Ianufacturers in Europe and America, as
samples. and it received, tron 22 of these manufacturers, reports on their
passing "quality examinations," which are a premise for delivery. It is
said to have started long-term supply of sit-kilo-bit W's to several major
US manufacturing companies including Honeywell, based on a contract for
hundreds of thousands of pieces per annun. ,

On the US semi-conductor distribution whet. the sales conpanies at
the medium stage have'strong power as to sales to final users. In Japanese
semi-conductor nanufacturers' selling IC's (integrated circuits) and LSI's
(large-scale integrated circuits) to the 08. there are two cases -- selling
then to the general market through these sales comanies and supplying them
directly to users. In regard to exports of Bu-kilo-bit W's, NBC adopted

the policy line of attaching importance to direct sales through long-tern
contracts with final mars.

3
POIOI'I'ICIRLUSIONLY
I'OIOFFIGALUSEONLY

During the past year. the average market price of the Gu-kilo-hit RAH
has markedly declined from $50 to $5 per piece, and "US semi-conductor industry
circlea' loves to make the duwing exports of Japanese product: an object .
of criticism are rising suddenly" (REC leader). It is said that sales at a
low price are especially conspicuous on the spot market.

NBC has suspended its sales of su-kilo-bit W's to the spot market,
and at the same time, it is planning to move up largely its plan for local
production of these products at its semi-conductor plants in the 08 (Head
Office in Mountain View. California; the name of the local enterprise:
Electronic Alleys). start lass production on the scale of 100,000 pieces per

month, effective fro- this month, and produce and supply half the amomt under
long-term contracts in the US.

COPYRIQ‘I: Nihon Kauai Shidmnsha 1982

080: 6106/1011

3h
roe omcw. us: ONLY
alminun refining at hone, have cone to the fore. For instance, Showa Light
Metal has established a tie-up with OM of. Australia. so that it can Inset
demand for ingots at hone with ingot supply from abroad alone. Smikei

Aluninu- Industries. too. has decidsd to suspend production totally for two
years to acne. ‘

According to ml's plan, six aluinm-refining companies, whose total
aluminum ingot production capacity is 1.136 .000 tons a war, are to abandon
or freeze production facilities and equipmt accounting for u2u,ooo tons
out of this tonl capacity in two years. or in fiscal 1982 and in fiscal
1983. For the Iaintenance of the mining capacity of 712,000 tons, HI‘I'I
yill offer assistance to the Quinn-refining ccqanies, with aajor esphasis

tation. however, the refining cospanies are decreasing production more and
sore drastically. and are even shoving loves which can be regarded

as preparations for withdrawal. instead of sndcavoring to uintain the
alumina-refining capacity at the MRI-planned level of 712,000 tons a year.

FOIMUSEONLY
--——-——_—— ----_.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First, Shows Light Hetal has established a tie-up with cm of Australia,
and has concluded a contract, whereby it can isport about 100,000 tons of
aluninun ingots free Australia every year, in return for its investnents
amounting to $25 billion. Shows Light Metal has already been planning to
switch to an enterprise not dependent on indigenous ingot supply. Also, it
has been tackling overseas refining projects positively. with the establish-
nent of a tie-up with Cu, it has carried out its switchover. to establish a

structure which will enable it to discontinue refining at hone at any tine.

On the other hand, Sunikei Aluminu- Industries, which is a subsidiary
of Sunitono Light Metal Industries, has decided to suspend totally the
operation of the Sakata Refinery, which is its only plant, by next month.

It says that this plant will be closed for a period of two years, and that
it will continue to aaintain the facilities and equiprent at this plant
during this period. however, there is the extrener shall possibility
that this plant will go into operation again with the lapse of two years
from now, because the present structural depression of the aluminum-refining

industry has its cause in the hi0: cost of electric power necessary for
electrolysis. It can be said that Smikei Aluminu- Industries has virtually

As a result of the decision ends by Susikei Aluninun Industries on

_ total suspension of refining, the indigenous output of aluminum ingots
in fiscal 1982 will demase to about 330,000 tons, or far less than

“00,000 tons, according to the production plans drawn up by the respective
refining cowanies. The asount is even less .than one-half the level of
712,000 tons which nm is planning to naintain. It can be said that
hITI's plan, which sins at naintaining the production capacity at hose at
a certain level and calls for such neasuree as exenption from tariffs. has
been shaken to its foudstions. am is to confine: the existing facilities
and equipnsnt and the plans for their abandon-ant and freezing of the
respective refining cospanies, and receive reports on aluminum ingot imports
during three years from 1979 through 1981, on April 15 and 16. It is
scheduled to determine, on the basis of these reports, the tariff exemption
quotas for the six refining cowanies sons days after April 20. It deserves
attention what decision hI‘l'I will make at this tine.

comtcn'r: Rihon Kauai Snidunshs 1982

C80: 6106/ 10510

MWWONLY
JAPAN-0.5. coormnon n mum-tons Tm POSSIBLE
tokyo mum: 83mm in Japanese 18 Apr 82 p 3
[Text]

At a tin—e-uhen the dapan-US trade friction over uni-conductors is
becoming a problem, Tokyo Shibaura Electric is going to conclude a con-

tract with Xylogics of the us for the exchange of semi-conductor tech-
nology.

The US Governnent and none 03 manufacturers have openly started soves
to secure the invocation of the national security clause of the Trade Act

or file a duping suit. in order to counter Japan's uni-conductor exports
centered on the ou-kilobit random access neuory (ma). .

For the settlenent of trade friction, it is essential for Japanese
and LS manufacturers to establish mutual. coooperative relations between
then. We want to expect that the nanufactursrs will start positive
efforts hereafter, for the inplenentation of such ideas as joint study.

The Japan-US friction over seal-conductors was touched off at Silicon
Valley, California, which is a semi-conductor production base in the US,
at the beginning of last year. In February this year, the US Semi-Conductor
It iustry Association asked the Govern-ant to establish restrictions, saying
that "The US market will be doaineted by Japanese products, if the present
situation continues." As a result, tension has grown even further.

it was only recently that a high official of the US Government warned

that "Japan is planning to expand its production capacity extant”. for
donination of the US uni-conductor mrket."

The Anerican criticisn and apprehensions. however. are not necessarily
reasonable. There is even the iapression that the US is surprised by the
rustle of leaves.

Primarily. the US is an advanced uni-conductor-nanufacturing nation.
Especially, its share is overwhelming in regard to logic integrated
circuits, sicro-processors and nicro-conputere.

37
FORMING“!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present, exports and iuports are virtually balanced in Japan-US
semi-conductor trade. Japan has been expanding exports of memory
integrated circuits, which it developed on the basis of desk computer
production. 0n the other hand. it is importing a similar amount of
products from the US. He think that it is quite possible for the two
countries to establish prospects for the expansion of semi-conductor
trade on a balanced basis. by asking use of the merits of international
division of labor.

It nay be true that the US harbors excessive anxiety about Japan,
because it is irritated for fear that Japan, which has outranked the
US in such fields as automobiles and iron and steel. where the 05 once
held dominant market shares. may deal a blow to the US in the field of
an up-to-date industry as well. As a matter of fact, some politicians
and business leaders have revealed such a view.

The as also thinks, fron the standpoint of military strategy, that
it will be wise for the US to bar Japanese products at once. It is true
that the US semi-conductor technology has been developing in connection
with military requirements. Reliance on military requirements alone.
however, will distort the progress of semi-conductor technology, which
is called the new rice for industries.

...-- ..__.——... — ‘—

Bven with the me of the desk computer, in which Japan is strong,
it is impossible to measure correctly the irritated American feeling
or the American speculation over lilitary strategy. Japan's exports.
even when accounting for a very snall portion of the transactions in

the US, will invite excessive reactions from the US side, if they are
concentrated in a brief period. ‘ ' ’

0

So. it is necessary for the Japanese side to take careful oeasures.
It must be noted, however, that semi-conductors have become indispensable

for all industries, including such up-to-date industries as space develop-
ment, computers and aircraft. lherefore, the

. fields. where Japaness and US manufacturers can join hands together in
pursuit of co-existence and co-proeperity, should be very wide.

we hope that the US will not resort to such tesporising measures as
the establishment of ieport restrictions.

COPYRIGHT: Yoniuti Sainbunsha 1982

C80: 4106/1056

38
summon?
co-operetion in the contraction of space etations. and studies on genetic
engineering and robot technolo . The Japanese side, thinking that pronotion
of co-operetion in the field of space technology will be linked also to the
elinination of the Japan-US econonic friction. intends to pile up frank

The Japanese aide in most enthusiastic about the plan for launching
a hone~produced artificial satellite using the space shuttle. At present, the
Government makes "independent launching" its basic-policy in
accordance with the decision at the Space Development Comittee. However,
such related organs as m (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation)
are hoping to ride in the shuttle together. to reduce the cost. According to
NAKAYAHA, who visited the US recently and held talks with NASA (National
MWWONLY

It intends to work upon the Japanese Government also to realize it. think-
ing that strengthening tie-up and co—operative relations in the form of

Japan's becoming a "customer" for US space technology will result also in easing
the trade imbalance between the two countries.

It is also scheduled to hold a scientific and technological policies

synposium by parliamentarians of the OECD member nations, under the lead of the

Parliamentarians League. taking the contents of discmsions at the Versailles
Smit into account.

On the other hand, the establishment of the "Franco-Japanese Scientific
and Technological Parliamentarians Forum" was decided upon at the talks
between Scientific Research and Technology hinieter m. who came to
Japan recently with French President mm. It is arranged that
the first meeting will be held during September, and that opinions will be
exchanged with "technological development in the Third Hon-1d" through co-opemtion
between the two nations as the central theme. The Japanese slde intends to
show a co-operetive posture in a positive way at this meeting, tco.

COPYRIQT: lihon Keiui Sui-bunch 1982 '

080: 6106/1056 BID