FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10264
19 January 1982

Japan Report

(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also frcm news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS Ila/10264

19 January 1!

JAPAN REPORT
(P000 3 /82)

CONTENTS
MILITARY

0.3. Interest in Japan's Military Buildup Considered Limited
(Obtake Hideo; Asm JANARU, 30 Oct 81)

ECONOMIC

Annual Report: Fiscal 1981 White Paper
(TECHNWRAT, sep 81) IO.......OIOOOOOIOOO.I......OOC....IODOOOOI

Possible Japan Telegraph, Telephone Transformation Examined
(SHUKAN T010 mm, 21 Nov 81)

Toyota Motor Works out Bullish Production Plan for '82
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 22 Dec 81)

Indigenous Companies Join Forces Against American Tax
(JAPAN ”Home JOURNAL, 29 Dec 81) soc-oasesaaoaeoooooeooaeavee

Stronger Home Demand, Slow Growth Forecast for P! '82
(JAPM “Home JON“, muc 81) 0.00.0.........IIOQOCOOGOODO

Hitachi, Europe Tie on Industrial Robot Sales
(JAPAN monomc JOURNAL, 29 Dec 81)

Nissan More Cautious Than Toyota in 1982 Business Plan
(‘1pr Ecmmc JOUMAL, 29 Dec 81) 00000000000000.aoaoeaooeoooe

Domestic Demnd Recovery Seems Uncertain Prospect
(MasahiJo Ishizuka; JAPAN MIMIC JOURHAL, 29 Dec 81) ......"

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Technological Perspective for 1980's Revealed
(ShuJi Tamura; TECHNOCRAT. Aug 81) .............................

- a - [III - ASIA - 1.1]. POU‘

mi OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Materials: 'Progress Toward Technologically-Oriented Ration'
(mauocm’r, A118 81) Doe's-coconoucoooceoocccooseeoeecooococo... 67

Highly Sensitive Photosensitive Resin Development Applauded
(TECHNOCRAT, Aug 81) ooocoocooecocoasoooooeoscecoocooeooooeoceoe 78

Comprehensive Haste Heat Use Systan Completed
(TECHNOCRAT, A08 81) so.esceococosceooeoosees-coeeecssooeceoooo- 82

Toshiba Completes Fully Automated Production or 10‘s
(TMNOCRAT, A“ 81) ......OOOCOIOOC......OOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOUIO... 85

Mechanical Engineering Lab Develops Transfer Robot
(mcmOcRAT’ Aug 81) COOOOOOOOOOOOOJOOOOOOCO‘OOOCODOOIOOOOIODCII w

Semiconductors, Related Industries Reach ll Trillion Level
(TECHNOCMT, sep 81) 0.IIIOCOOOOOOOCOIOIIIO..‘OCOOOIOOOOIIIOOOO0. 92

MT Develops Step-and-Repeat X-Ray Exposure System
(TECHNOCIM‘T, Sep 81) COOOIOObOOOOOOI0.0......OOOCIIIOOIIOOO'OOI 95

Digital Automatic DLTS Measuring Device Developed
(WCMT. Sep 81) coococoon-Iacoo-04000900.... ocsooescoesol 98

Recent Developments in Amorphous Metals Research Reported
(TmHmCRAT’ Sep 81) OO....CIIOOOIIOOI.OCDOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIOOI... 101

Several New Facsimile Machines Appear on Harket
(TmocRAT’ sep 81) CCO'.000.000.00.0000000000000000...DDOOOID 106

1980 Report or NTT Electrical Commication Technoloy Connittee Disclosed
(TEG‘INOCRAT. Sep 81) IC.0000.000........OIUOOOOOOIOUOOOOOOO0'0... 107

USSR-Japan Import, Export Deal Updated
(Various sources, various dates) .... 108

Butadienc Plant

Steel Plate for Large-Diameter Pipe
Horizontal Boring Machine

Sakhalin Crude Oil

Use of Optic Fiber in Tel coo-mication Network Under Study
(NIRKEI ELECTRONICS. 9 Nov 81) 113

Hitachi To Mass Produce 256K RAM Chips in Fall
(Ry‘uichi Kato; JAPAN ECNOMIC JOUMAL, 22 Dec 81) so . .. . ... . .. . . 1210

Toshiba Machine Devises Automatic Plastic InJection Molding System
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOWAL‘ 22 me 81‘ coouse...Deaconess-coceoooeo 125
Japan's Rissan Firm To Produce Defense Equipment
(Peter Hazelburst; THE TIMES, 29 Dec 81) .

Mitsubishi Electric Raises 6hr: RAM Output Target
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURIAL, 29 Dec 81) ............................

Mikuni Eyes Exporting Its 'Papia' Know-How
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 22 Dec 81) ............................

Jaeri Creates Heater To Produce 100 Mil. °C
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURRAL, 22 Dec 81) ............................

Government Institute Uses Ion Beam To Print Extremely Minute Patterns
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 22 Dec 81) ............................

Addition of Titanium Greatly Increases Electro-Hagnetic Power
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 22 Dec 81) ............................

'ASAHI' Views Japan's Space Development Program
(Tetqui Shibata; ASARI EVENING ms, 23 Dec 81) ..............

Nippon Steel, Mitsubishi CI Tie Up To Produce New Materials
(JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL, 29 Dec 81) ............................

Briers
Development of FBR Fuels
Coal Technoloy Cooperation With Shell
Radioactive Waste Reduction
CARI!) Reactor Design
Mitsubishi FBR Control Rods
Captain Service Extended
'Orbit-l' Program Developed
FOR 0F11C1AL.USE¢3NLY

MILITARY

U.S. INTEREST IN JAPAN'S MILITARY BUILDUP CONSIDERED LIMITED
Tokyo ASAHI JANARU in Japanese 30 Oct 81 pp 30-38

[Article by Ohtake Hideo, assistant professor of political science, Tohoku Univer-
sity: "Detente to Military Expansion"]

[Excerpt] with the strengthening of NATO came a full-fledged demand that Japan
increase its defense forces. But with regard to the military buildup of Japan,
the problem is not as simple as that of Western Europe. This is because of the
lingering fear that Japan will again become a military power. It can be said that
America's policy of military alliance (excluding the human rights diplomacy of the
early years of the Carter administration) is based on a principle that differs
depending on whether a dictatorial government is leaning to the left or the right.
Furthermore, it is based on the assumption that whereas leftist dictatorial nations
(communists) can be a great threat to the security of the United States, rightist
dictatorial nations (military dictatorship or fascism), even though undeniably
their policy of internal control contradicts the American philosophy, do not at
least pose any direct threat to its security.

If we follow this line of thought, Japan's existence is unique to America, insofar
as it is believed that it can easily shift to the right and thus become a military
state that can threaten the United States. The one-sidedness of the Japan-U.S.
Security Treaty, which is uniquely different f.om military treaties the United
States has with other countries such as Korea and Taiwan, is nothing more than an
expression of the special way in which Japan is viewed by the United States.
Therefore, in order to demand military cooperation from Japan beyond a certain
limit, the United States needs the assurance that there is no danger (or that the
danger is minimal) that Japan will become a military state. Japan. through its
economic growth, has become a potential military power. Because of this, from the
mid-seventies America's defense policy with regard to Japan began to falter. An

important factor in this lay in America's uncertainty about Japan's move toward
militarism.

In the seventies there were at least two occasions in which American defense
specialists expressed concern about a Japanese trend toward becoming a military
power. The first occasion was in the early seventies, when the ao-called "Theory
of Autonomous Defense" and Fourth Term Defense Planning appeared. During this per-

iod, the Japanese political elite, whenever occasion demanded, provided detailed
explanations of the concept of "domestic control" (national sentiment, Article 9

1

FOR 0510“. USE ONLY
FOR‘0FF“JAI.USEl0NLX

of the constitution) and exchanged criticism on this resurgence of militarism.

This topic has already been discussed in detail in this series and will not be
repeated here: we note only the irony that such arguments not only had the effect.
but also contrarily, of establishing a basis upon which Japan could be asked to
strengthen its military “without any worry." Furthermore, it was also during

this period that the Defense Agency repeatedly offered explanations as to how ill-
prepared and how far removed its military was from making Japan a powerful military
nation. It should be noted that this resulted in the contrary effect of making the
U.s. Department of State and military request extremely concrete improvements on
the part of the Japanese military.

Fear of Japanese Hilitarism Rekindled

After the early seventies controversy over resurgence of Japanese militarism had
quieted down, concern over Japan's move toward the same (more accurately, Japan's
"independence from America") resurfaced during the Miki administration. It may be
that this debate was used politically to counter those in the Congress who advo-
cated American "withdrawal from Asia." However, because Japan at that time was
extremely cautious about ratifying the nuclear defense treaty. it is a fact that the
U.S. Governrsnt was actually concerned about the possibility of Japan arming itself
with nuclear weapons. At this time, with the withdrawal of American forces from
Vietnam and the fall of Saigon, there emerged, among the hawkish faction in Japan.
a sense of danger regarding America's pullout from Asia. At the same time. due

to the Soviet Union achieving nuclear balance with the United States, there was a
widespread conviction that the reliability of America's nuclear umbrella had
deteriorated radically. Especially among the hawkish Liberal Democrats in the
House of Councilors. such as Hinoru Genda and Hasao Hiyaraki, there were those who,
in order to have a "free hand" in nuclear weapons. advocated that the nuclear de-
fense treaty should not be ratified or that Japan should be reassured of America's
defense of Japan in return for the ratification. In the evenly matched House of
Councilors, the few hawkish members held "deciding votes" and greatly influenced
the nuclear policy of the Niki cabinet. It is believed that the United States,
unable to understand fully this peculiar power struggle within Japan. was fearful
that Japan might move in the direction of nuclear weapons.

But this fear was eliminated by the following two methods. First, with the rati-
fication of the nuclear defense treaty, an inspection system was also introduced
in Japan and. furthermore, during the Carter administration. the United States
was able to take an even more severe stance with regard to nuclear proliferation,
and measures were set up to control the supply of nuclear fuel. Because of this,
a system was created whereby Japan's move toward nuclear armament could be checked.
Second, with the consolidation of a structure of strategic cooperation between the
two countries. which was begun by Hands, head of the Defense Agency. the U.S.
military was guaranteed almost free access to the information held by the Defense
Agency. This made it possible for the United States to check even the slightest
move that Japan might take in the direction of military buildup.

These systems were created without any significant debate. but, in fact, could be
said to have greatly influenced the subsequent military relationship between Japan
and the United States. In a word. what these two systems did to the Japanese
Self—Defense Forces was similar to the results of restrictions created by the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

internationally unified command network called NATO, which was assigned the task of
controlling West Germany's resurgence as a military power. Through these two
systems the United States was able to prevent Japan's independent move toward milig
tarism and could demand that Japan strengthen its military forces without the fear
of Japan moving in that direction. It is in this respect that the systems prepared
the way later for America's demand that Japan increase its military strength.

In any case, America's transition in the seventies from a policy of detente to that
of military expansion was completed by 1978. Overlapping with this was the criti-
cisim of a "free ride" voiced against Japan in the Congress. In the spring of 1978,
the demand on Japan first appeared concretely in the form of a request that Japan
shoulder a portion of the expenses required to maintain American forces in Japan.
Since then, the United States has repeatedly asked Japan to increase its share of
defense in various forms. The contents of these requests and Japanese responses

to them will be discussed beginning with the next series. Here, in conclusion, I
would like to comment on the question of what position these American demands on
Japan occupy in that country's total defense structure.

What needs to be pointed out here is that, throughout the seventies, U.S. defense
experts, from the President to the White House staff and Pentagon officials, showed
only limited interest in Japan. This fact has remained basically unchanged from the
end of the seventies, when the United States began to demand strongly that Japan
strengthen its military, into the eighties. Despite straightforward demands that
have often had the appearance of interfering in the internal affairs of Japan, the
manner in which the United States has made demands on Japan has lacked any consis-
tency. America's style is still one of applying pressure when and if it recalls
that pressure is needed. An example of this is the fact that, at present. the
Reagan administration, preoccupied with economic problems and with Soviet expan-
sionism, is silent about making demands on Japan.

The reason is that there is a consensus among U.S. officials that the Far East, in
comparision with other areas, is relatively stable. The troubled areas include the
Persian Gulf, Central and South Africa, and Southeast Asia (Iran-Iraq war, Israeli
issue, Angola war, Ethiopian problem, Cambodian problem, China-Vietnam Her); in
Central Europe, there is the confrontation with the Soviets (deployment of strategic
nuclear weapons, strengthening of NATO, etc), and the nuclear race and limitation
talks also with the Soviets. when the Far East is viewed in comparison with these
serious problems that confront the United States, the view that the Far East is
relatively stable is quite justifiable.

with regard to the military buildup of the Soviet Union, as far as Japan is concerned,
its army is offset by the existence of China, and as for its naVy, even though it

may be effective in checking the U.S. Seventh Fleet from entering the Persian Gulf,

it poses no direct threat to Japan. Thus, the United States, on account of Japan's

economic prosperity and political stability, and because of the U.S.-China "military
alliance" against the Soviet Union, views the Far East as being militarily stable.

Case-by-Case U.S. Demands on Japan To Increase Its Military Strength
It is not an exaggeration to say that America directs its attention to Japan when

it wants to reduce its military strength in the Far East so it can increase else-
where. The military situation in and around Japan is studied as a part of U.S.

3
FOI'0511C1AL.USEIJNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’global military strategy; even in the so-called "second cold war" following the
Afghanistan crisis, the United States is not really interested in the military
situation in the vicinity of Japan. of course. there is the undercurrent of dissatis-
faction flowing through the American political scene that Japan is "getting a free
ride," and such a feeling surfaces abruptly from time to time. However, as long

as the Far East is considered militarily stable, there will not be a continuous U.S.
military interest in Japan. Consequently, the U.S. military demands on Japan, from
the perspective of security, differ radically from those made on other countries

and have never followed a consistent course. In other words, its demands have been
made case by case: if a demand is not met, it retreats, saying it couldn't be
helped; if met, it considers itself lucky. This is the kind of nuance [as published]
that characterizes its actions, and from which it has yet to extricate itself.

However, the Japanese media, through its sensationalima, has exaggerated the U.S.
understanding of the threat in the Far East regarding its demands on Japan and,
along with the Foreign Ministry. the Defense Agnecy, and the hawkish rightist Liberal
Democrats, has created excessive responses to America's demands. Naturally, it
cannot be denied that there is a strong dissatisfaction. principally within Congress.
with Japan's economic policy and that this, frequently in conjunction with the
defense problems, has made things extremely serious between the two countries. How-
ever, it is the view of this writer that, insofar as defense policy is concerned,

it is a mistake to think that the demands which the United States has made on Japan
occupy such a significant position within the total defense structure of that
country.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shimbunsha 1981

9711
C80: 4105/19

h
FOI:0FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

ANNUAL REPORT: FISCAL 1981 WHITE PAPER
Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English Vol 110 No 9, Sept 81 pp 29-06

(Sundry of the Annual Report of the Economy. Economic Planning Agency]

[Text] The Economic Planning Agency has published the “Annual
Report of the Economy—Fiscal l98|”(liconomic White Paper).
which had been approved by the cabinet in a meeting held on
August la. l98|. The White Paper highly appraises the satis-
factory performance (economic results) of the Jmnese econo-
my in fiscal I980 which. it says. surmounted prodigious
adverse effects of the 2nd oil crisis by enhancing the vitality of
the private sector and by implementina appropriate financial.
monetary and price policies. In addition to the vitality to
learn. which has been the principle motivation anablina Japan
to enter the ranks of the advmd countries. and the creative
vitality. the White Paper emplnsiaes that Japan should tackle
the following problems:

(I) Maintain and promote the vitality of the private sector.

(2) Build up an efficient and impartial public sector.

(3) Protect free trade and enan the world‘s economy as well
asJapan's.

(4) Improve national life-which results from. and is the
fountainhead of economic vitality - particularly better
housing and greater leisure time.

Given below is a partial translation of the official summary
of the Annual Report of the Economy - Fiscal l98|. The
summary was published on the same day theEconomic White
Paper was issued.

( ....... indicates skipped passages.)

Part 1. The Japanese Economy during the Period
I980 — l98|

introduction: The Trend of the Japanese Economy
from 1980 to l98| and Factors which
Formulated the Characteristics of the
Trend

Fiscal I080 was tlte year for the Japanese economy when
the adverse economic conditions finally bottomed out from

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

the second oil crisis. The deterioration seen in such areas as
the balance of payments current account and prices. that had
been hard hit by the crisis. came to a halt and the“symptoms of
economic recession" were eliminated.

The Japanese economy in FYI980 can be summarized in
the following three points;

First of all. the effects that the second oil crisis brought
about were conspicuous from the standpoint of the level of
deterioration tn the terms of trade that came from the irtcreased
oil prices. in fact. the deterioration in the terms of trade
resulted in a sharp decline in the rate of increase of real incomes.
causing an appreciable gap between the real economic growth
rate and the real national income growth rate.

Secondly. however. the level of performance of the Japanese
economy proved to be satisfactory despite all of the effects
from the sudden or! price hiltes. This is clear in terms of a
comparison with the situation in the advanced western countries
and also with that at the time of the first oil crisis. Speciﬁcally.
the Japanese economy. which depends on oil imports more
than any other western country. should have suffered more
than those countries in its international balance of payments
and prices. However. Japan‘s international balance of payments
deficit. which peaked in 'the last quarter (January-March) of
FY1980 (approx. SUSSDOO million). showed a quick
improvement. and. in FY1981. it began to show a slight
surplus. Furthermore. as regards the price situation. the rate
of price Increases turned out to be the lowest among all the
major industrialized nations. as wholesale prices remained
nearly unchanged and consumer prices were up only four
percent in the second quarter of calendar year l98l (April—
.lunel. This was due primarily to the fact that the effects of
the import product price hikes did not cause home made
inﬂation. Meanwhile. real gross national product also stowed
a steady rise. in the January-March period in 1981. it rose
3.5% over the same period of the previous year. a higher
growth rate than that of other major advanced countries.

Also. even as compared with the economy during the ﬁrst
oil crisis. its performance at this time is apparently better.
This means that. except the fact that deficits in the balance
of payments current account reached an appreciable level at
the time of the pealt. because of the relative increase in the

amount of oil imports It total imports. the effects from the
worsened terms of trade turned out to be slight in all areas
of the economy.

Thirdiy. although the abovementioned effects were relatively
small. it cannot be denied that signs of an economic setback
were seen in the 1980 economy. These signs were basically
the phenomena that arose from process whemby the effect
of the deteriorated tenns of trade was gradually permeating
the domestic economy. The characteristics of the adverse
economic symptoms at this time were that economic perform-
ance varied in every sector of the economy and was not
uniform. Breaking down the economic sectors of futal demand.
for example. while a favorable performance was_seen in plant

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and equipment investment and exports. housing construction
was stagnant. By industry. a contrast was seen in the per-
t’orrnsnce between the processing industries and the material
producing industries. of which the former fared well while the
latter showed a sluggish trend. In this situation. meanwhile.
inventory adjustment for the material producing industries
progressed. By an of businesses. further. the econonuc setbaclt
to medium- and smalleized enterprises was greater than expect-
ed. It should also be pointed out that economic conditions
varied in each district due to the unusual weather.

in Part I. the abovementioned general synopsis of the
Japanese economy in FY1984“: further broken down. for

deeper analysis.

Chapter I. Effects of the Second Oil Crisis and Its
Terminating Process in the Japanese
Economy

As a result of the sharp oil price increases from the end of
l978 to l980. the Japanese economy experienced once again
deterioration in its terms of trade and a significant decline in
teal income. subsequently. it saw a stagnant trend in domestic
final demand and a need for inventory adjustment. Along
with these came a slowing down in the pace of economic
expansion. the socalled “symptoms of economic recession".
starting in the spring of I980 through to the beginning of l98l.

Meanwhile. the previously worsening terms of trade came
nearly to a halt and began to stabilize in and after the Spring
of I980.

Section I. Terms of Trade and Real Income Trends

Reﬂecting the sharp increase ll'l oil prices and the movement
of the exchange rate. imported product prices showed an
increase of 99% in the six quarters in and after the October—
Deoember quartet of I978. This means that the price increase
for imported products was higher than that in the same length
of time from the October-December quarter in l973 when
it was up 56% after the ﬁrst oil crisis occurred. Export product
prices this time. on the other hand. showed an increase nearly
equivalent to that of the previous crisis.

Consequently. the terms at trade (exports deﬂatorllmports
deﬂator) were down approx. 33% this time compared with
a decrease of approx. 20% in the previous case.

This decline in the terms of trade conditions. which brought
forth a transfer of real purchasing power to the oil exporting
countries. reduced the real income (nominal gross national

income/domestic demand deﬂstor) of the Japanese economy
asa whole.

..........

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 2. Final Demand Resulting in a Slight
Deterioration in Growth Rate and Small
Inventory Adjustment

Reflecting such sluggish trends in real income. domestic
iinal demand also declined. starting in the latter half of I979.
and resulted in only a small overall increase in l980.

lt ts intportant to note. however. that the deterioration in
the terms of trade caused by the oil price increase does not
necessarily directly lead up to deflationary effects. because
there are some other factors that may offset the tendency for
a decline in the growth of domestic final demand. First of all.
for example. exports increased. The oil producing countries
expanded their imports from Japan and other exports also
increased. reﬂecting the strengthened international competitive-
ness in export prices due to the deteriorated yen value as seen
after the first oil crisis. Secondly. investment in energy-saving
areas tncreased also reflecting the otl price hike.

The increase in exports. however, which was also seen in
the ﬁrst oil crisis. does not serve as a major factor that can
account for the situational difference between the first and
second otl crises. Nonetheless. comparing the effects of the
fist oil crisis with those of the second. a difference is seen iii
the conditions of domestic demand.

First of all. all private demand sectors experienced similar
declines tn their rate of growth in the case of the first crisis.
while plant and equipment investment continued to rise this
time. Secondly. regarding the other sectors. the rate of decline
was smaller this tune. In particular. it is noteworthy that the
rate of growth of consumption showed a small decline. This it
because. although the decrease in real incomes was larger this
time. a fall in the propensity to consume did nor occur.
as had been the case in the previous crisis 11tirdiy.the extent of
ﬂuctuation in inventory investment this time was sntailer than
last time.

As for the reasons for the difference in domestic demand
condittons between the two periods. which will be further
discussed L1let in more detail. it may be macroscopically
summarized in the following three points:

First. although in the case of the former crisis corporate
proﬁts were greatly squeezed by the decline in real income
as a result of the worsened terms of trade. they did not suffer
such an extreme effect from it this time. Corporate proﬁts.
which were not so much decreased. on the other hand. actually
served as one of the factors that bolstered the ﬁrm conditions
in investment in plant and equipment at this time (See Chapter
l.3).

Secondly. in the case of the first crisis. the domestic
business conditions a little before the "oil shock" were
overheated due to the excessive slackening of the monetary
measures adopted during the period from I971 to I973.

Subsequently. a tidtt money policy was enforced to cool off

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
  

“n-~t~o-~-d-~t~“
-‘ﬁ~_‘M‘--C~
”Ia—Immune”)

 

g.
l}:

'TFM

:t. gr _

:zllgxlz" wa:
"ili'V

in} W 3""

me“._n~
can...‘ “so...

 

 

—-———

I.” ‘0’) I!" ‘0’. '0'. I." I”. W I‘lv.‘

~0- I Mmmmmmu-awm
"ﬂit-Ir Ink—ss-I—UsWe‘ww
I mug-”.1“..-
l Neil-natMa-nw-e-o-oo—u—n-d-e-u

con—loo Ochoa-aw
pum- .~ In. - noun-KL... “III“!
—_._..__—__
not.

9! tom-- N an“ '. “no-us”.
o In“. I wanna. O. ICC-I. l We"

a he’s-IW—«amwuw
”Ir-um
I ~I-“U~-*F~m~.ﬁilm
m-nrmemiumdmr owe-ed
mﬁ-*~~~.0~*¥*

Fig. l. The Relationship of Chang-sin Terms or
Trade with Real Wages and Producrivity
(increase or decrease compared with previous
veer)

overheated business. and therefore business was already bem-
ning to cool off when the oil shock occurred and afurther
retrenchment policy was enforced. Therefore. the significant
fall in business activity in the ease of the first crisis was brought
about not only by the effect of the oil crisis itself but also
by the monetary reinforcement measures taken at the time.
Looking back on the economic situation of the second oil
crisis. on the other hand. business conditions immediately
before the crisis were not over-heated and monetary policy
remained "neutral". in addition. the rate of money supply
increase immediately after the advent of the or] crisis did not
result in such a sharp fall-off as in the case of the previous
crisis (See Chapter 3.2).

9

FOR omcut. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thirdly. in the case of the first crisis. the estimated rate of
growth of enterprises showed a decline. causing a signiﬁcant
slump ‘m plant and equipment investment. This time. however.
there was no such factor involved; instead an increase in plant

and equipment investment occurred in a more self-sustaining
way.

At the moment. the “symptoms of economic recession"
are being eliminated and economic conditions in general are
gradually improving. This is because of the following two
factors. 1) the rate of increase in real irtcome has been recover-
ing due to domestic prices having been stabilized and 2) the
rate of decrease inventory investment has been shrinking as
inventory adjustment has entered its ﬁnal phase.

Section 3. Income Distribution and Its Effects

..........

Reﬂecting the real income decreases stemming from the
deterioration of trade terms. the rate of real wage increases
that did not change labor's relative share dropped. i.e. an
increase of 2.4% in 1979 and 0.2% in 1980. There was not.
however. seen such‘ a large real wage gap this time as in the
case of the previous oil crisis because the actual rate of real
wage increases also dropped. resulting In an increase of 2.1%
in 1979 and minus 0.6% in 1980 (See Fig.1). Consequently.
labor’s relative share (employee's income/nominal GNP). which
moved up only 0.8% from 53.7% in 1978 to 54.5% in 1980.
showed a stable trend. And this contrasts strongly with the
situation of the previous oil crisis when the same share showed
an increase of 5.8% from 48.1% In 1973 to 53.9% in I975. In
the ease of the previous crisis. corporate proﬁts had to bear
the strain derived from the decline in real income. but this
time the burden of the decline in real income was uniformly
divided between the income of workers and corporate profits.

The incense distribution which showed a difference between
the two cases of oil crisis came about because of the following
two reasons;

I) Since the decline irt production was small this time.
labor's relative share did not increase because employment
adjustment was so small that there was little delayed adjustment
ot‘employment. so it did not pull up labor's relative share.

2) The rate of wage increases remained moderate reﬂecting
the fact that labor supply and demand conditions were not
tight. and the rate of prospective inflation (expected inﬂation
rate) was not large. it also reflected the effect learned from
the severe experiences of the ﬁrst oil crisis.

The stable movement in labor‘s relative share. which was
lead by such a stabilized wage condition. brought about the
following three good effects. First. the decline in real wages
which came from the deterioration of trade terms'was easily
absorbed by reducing the rate of nominal income increases.
and the acceleration of inﬂation could also be averted.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly. the fact that a sharp rise in labor's relative share was
avertedand that the rate ofincrease inwageawasnotrigid
downward. greatly contributed to the stabilization of employ-
ment. Thirdly. the stability in labor's relative share prevented
corporate proﬁts from decreasing sharply. thus serving as a major

factor to maintain a firm basis for plant and equipment immi-
merit.

Section 4. Prices Stabilized from Sharp Hike Phase

The domestic price structure which had drown a powerful
tendency to riaesince l979duetothesharpincreaseinthe
prices of Imported products centered on crude oil. began to
moderate its growth during and after the latter half of 1980.
Then. subsequent to the first half of I981. it went on to
gradually stabllue.

There are three factors that are considered to have
contributed to this stabilization of prices. The ﬁrst factor was
that the previous tendency of imported product prices to
increase began to level off in and after the Spring of l980.and
that the spread of the domino effect of the price hikes caused
by imported products terminated its ﬁrst cycle.

Secondly. the nominal growth in dentand dropped due to
the decline in the yowth rate of money supply.

The third factor which helped to stabilize prices was the
steady wage growth. helping to avert the vicious circle of
wage/price inflation. As stated in Section 3 in this Chapter,
the reason why wage growth was stable was because labor
supply/demand conditions were not tight and also because the
acceleration of the prospective inﬂation rate that occurred
during the previous oil crisis was averted.

Section 5. Balance of International Payments Re-
covering from Huge Deﬁcit

1h: crude oil price (customs cleared) soared from 805.118
per barrel In I978 to 50.5.33 in l980. Consequently. the
payment for imported crude oil in l980 increased by approx.
329.000 million (approx. 2.9% of GNP) compared with the
level of MR.

Reﬂecting this sharp increase in the cost of crude oil and
the trend of the declining yen value until the end of l978. the
balance of payments current account deteriorated acutely,
registering a deﬁcit of SUS.i3.900 million in FYl979 and
SU.S.7.000 million tn FY1980. Since the turn of FYI98I.
however. it has been gradually improving.

A "1310! factor that accounts for this trend is a significant
improvement In the balance of trade whereby exports have
continued to rise steadily while the upward trend of imports
has slowed down.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The long~term capital balance. which showed deﬁcits of
SUSJoJOO million and SU5.8.400 million in FYI978 and
i979 respectively. went into the black in FYl980. registering
a surp'ms of approx. SUSAAOO million. Tltls was due chieﬂy
to the sharp increase in surplus of Japanese securities investment
by non-Japanese investors.

The yen value showed the largest fluctuation among all of
the major currencies during the period from 1978 to i981.
it reached its peak in October. I978 at Vl85 against the dollar.
However. it then gradually sagged. falling to the V252 level in
April. i980. The devaluation in this period was a phenomenon
men only with the yen. and other currencies remained nearly
unchanged in their relative values. Furthermore. from April.
I980 the yen value began to rise. reaching a high at V202
against the dollar in January. 1981. This time. the movement
in the rate of the yen was not parallel but contrary to that of
European currencies.

Chapter 2. Recession “Shadow" and its Causes

in FY1980. business began to decline. Mining and
manufacturing production stagnated in the summer and made
only a very'slow growth thereafter. This time. however.
business did not decline so badly as to be called a recession
' but only to an extent that can be expressed as a recession
“shadow" This is basically because the total demand did not
show as big a drop as occurred after the first oil crisis. and
also may be because of the contribution of experience gained
in enterprises or industry sectors after the first oil crisis.
From the point of view of the ﬁnal phase of demand.hosvever,
trends this time are considerably different from those previous-
ly. in other words. after the first oil crisis. other final demands
generally showed a slower growth. though exports showed a
considerable growth. After the second oil crisis. in contrast.
exports grew and equipment investment remained steady. in
other words. a sort of imbalance was observed in ﬁnal demand
in the form of a siower growth of personal consumption and
housing investment. in contrast to steady exports and equip-
ment investment. This imbalance in the ﬁnal phase of demand
has had a subtle effect on certain sectors of the economy
including industrial production and shipping trends.

Section I. inventory Adjustment Found Slightly
Unbalanced

Features of Current inventory Adjustment

Since inventories increase to an unexpected and unwanted
extent when total demand scarcely grows or stagnates. com-
panies start inventory adjustment by reducing production or

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
promoting sales. This time. inventories started a slow growth
in the latter half of 1978 and continued it until they reached
an adjustment phase in the period between January and March
of 1980.

Evaluation and Progress of inventory Adjustment

How. then. should the current inventory adjustment be
evaluated? in a few words. it may be said that on the whole it
was sllcht.but it was fairly prolonged. eepeically in the materiel
type industries.

0n the Whole. it was slight because (i) the inventory
level and inventory-sales ratio at the start of the inventory
adjustment were lower than before and (2) the problems of
inventory adjustment were confronted prinarily by material
type industries but hardly at all by processing type industries.

0n the other hand. it was fairly prolonged because
material type industries as the authors of inventory adjustment
had as strong a burden of excess inventory as before and could
scarcely get rid of it.

Section 2. Personal Commotion Recovering from
Deoeierated Growth

Real private consumption expenditure (on a GNP base) for
FYI980showeda08$growthover thspreviousyear.a

much lonrfigure ascompared with thesnﬁgrowthfor
the previous ﬁscal year. and the lowest since 1975. This is
because the deﬂation after the second oil crisis hada relatively
stronger effect on the household sector than after the first oil

crisis.
From the point of view of classified households. real con-

sumption for woriters’ households compared with the previous
year gndually reduced its negative value -intha latter half. after
a drop in the first half of the year. wltilcthatforgeneral
households gradually increased its rate of fall and farmers' hotne-
holds also showed actual negative growthover the previous fiscal
year.

Section 3. Housing investment in a Continuous
Slump

Private housing investment (on a real GNPbaais) continued
scant growth following an almost constant level from FYI978.

13

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and showed in FY1980 a 95% decrease. the largest drop since
FY1974. resulting in a contribution to the recession “shadow“.

The number of housing starts. indicating the trend of housing
investment. dropped to 1,210,000 in FY1930 showing an
183% decrease from the previous year. after the period
between FY1976 and 1979 when the number generally
remained at a level around 1.500.000.
0000000000

The above factors caused house-building to decline in
FY1980. How will it'be in the future? From the point of new
of the mediunuerm factors described above. there is no hope
of any large increase in demand for the reconstruction of
owned houses. However, since the ﬂoor space of houses in
stock is smaller than that of houses which have started to be
built. there seems to be a potentially strong demand for new
houses. Under these circumstances. there are s‘gns of a slow
Improvement in house-building. (though there are still restric-
tive factors such as the bottlenedt in supply of housing sites)
in because conditions for house building such as real income.
building costs. and requirements for loans are gradually

improving.

Section 4. Equipment investment Supporting Busi-
nees

Private equipment investment started in the latter half of
1978 to take a recovery course and thereafter played an
important role in supporting business in the period of recesion
“shadow". However. in FY1980. differences in growth were
appearing between industries and sizes of business.

Yearly Changes in Equipment Investment and Their Character-
istics

Private equipment investment (on a real GNP bass)
generally showed a steady growth. though it decelerated to
5.8% tn FY1980 after a l0.1% growth in 1979. Above all.
mufacturing industries mowed a satisfactory growth level.
This may be because (1) enterprins recovered their confidence
and expected growth rates stabilized. (2) wage costs restrained
stable because the elastic determination of wages and profit
rates of enterprises remained at a high leve1,and (3) the supply-
demand gap for manufacturing industries showed a rapid
decrease towards the January-March period of 1980.

Muse of the above factors. equipment investment in
manufacturing industries as a whole showed growth. and
above all. the growth in processing type manufacturing induso
tries manufacturing was particularly prominent. This latter
growth ironed an upturn in 1976 and thereafter continued
steady growth with a significantly hid: rate after 1980. This
was in siarp contrast to material type industries which

lie

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- "I.-.“ﬂ

 

- I“ “m tutu-am“
”Us-m0."

Fig. d. Yearly Oranges in Equipment Investment
and Supply-Demand 6ep In Menu.
lecturing Industrv. bv TYDO

continued :toclt adjustment im the middle or 1978 and crowd
an increase only in 1979 (See Fig.4).

..........

In contrast to theee steady trends of mejor companies. the
growth of equipment investment by smaller companies in manu-
facturing industries decelerated in the latter half of FY1980.

Howemthasgraduallylmprovinsin l98l andthereie
increasing need for investment for technological innovation.
Thus. stagnant equipment investment by snuller companies
seems to have been very temporary.

Under theee circumstances. equipment investment of late
can be characterized by, ﬁrst. the increasing emphasis on
investment in energy-saving and research and development;
secondly. steady continuous investment in rationalization and
labor saving; and thirdly. a graduel increase in investment for
expansion of productive capacity.

Since time investment inducements remain steady and the
investment environments are Improving. private equipment
investment ls expected to grow steadily.

15

POI! OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 5. Exports Remain Steady

Exports (real GNP basis} for FY1980 showed a considerable
growth continuously from FYl979. playing a role. along with
steady private equipment investment. in supporting business.

Exports. in terms of quantity. showed an upturn in the
July-September period of [979 and then yadually accelerated
their growth till the April-June period of [980. hereafter.
though the growth somewhat accelerated, they continued to
remain at a high level. showing in the January-March period
of l98l a l23$ increase over the same period of the previous
year. These increases can be ascribed to the following: i) ptire
factors contributed to increasing exports primarily because
of the devaluation of the yen. and 2) demand factors helped to
promote exports with the aid of growing world trade in
FYt979. but contributed to restructing them in FY1980.

Under the above circumstances. exports retrtained at a high
level for the following reasons:

First, the exports primarily ol’ machinery by processing
type industries continued to show high growth. One of the
reasons for this is the growth of the non-price competitiveness
of goods due to an increase in investment in equipment
embodying technological innovation.

Secondly. "as processing type industries the degree of
machining of goods is very high. This implies that even while
the prices of primary foreign products. particularly crude oil.
are rising. the increased costs of raw materials will have
relatively little effect on goods. and price competitiveness will
hardly decrease unless other factors which increase costs arise
domestically.

For the trends of exports to different areas. on the other
hand. the overall growth of exports from Japan to various
areas almost exceeded that from the OECD (except Japan)
to the same areas. Above all. the growth of exports to Oceania
and Africa was promient.

With generally steady trends in exports. however. products
exported from smaller companies were exceeded by those
from larger companies after the April June period of l980.

Section 6. geoecdon “Shadow" and Corporate Pro-
I!

With business on the upward trend after I978. corporate
profits continued to grow steadily but imbalance was found
between sizes. For example. the proﬁts of smaller manufac-
turing companies turned upwards in the first half of FYI977.
subsequently continuing at a high level till the first half or
I979 but turned downwards. ahead of larger companies. in
the latter half of 1979. In contrast. larger mpanles still
maintained increased profits in the first half of FYl980. only
registeringadeclineintha latterhalfof that year.

16
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. srnalier companies were less active than larger
companies. This was because the imbalance of ﬁnal demand
and the tight monetary policies had a greater effect on mailer
companies. Under these circumstances. bankruptcies increased.

Section 7. Employment at a standstill in Business
Recovery

Employment. on the way to improvement after-1978. was
levelling off when the recession “sludow” gradually appeared.
The ratio of effective labor demand to effective supply was
on the downward trend in the April-June period of FY1980.
with the complete unemployment rate rising to 2.15% in the
January-March period of FY1981. Meanwhile. however. non~
agricultural and forests! labor continued around at an annual 2%
growth rate. while housewife labor also continued to increase.

..........

Althouﬁt this is partly due to stagnancy of production and
marketing activities. the recent relaxation of supply and
demand in the labor market is not likely to become very
serious. This is because companies made considerable employ-
ment adjustment in the period after the first oil crisis and
thus there is no significant excess employment premare within
cornpanles.

Under these circumstances. the number of employed people
(nonauicullural and forestal) still continued steady growth
even at the beginnlna of FY1981.'while business was slowly
improving. Since employment trends generally tend to lag
behind business trends. these facts are expected to have a
favorable effect on the reduction of unemployment. and the
labor supply~demand situation is expected to return to an
improving trend.

Chapter 3. Unfoldin; of Fiscal and Monetary Poll
and the Problems Awaiting Solution cy

ﬁre effective and timely operation of fiscal and monetary
pollcy may be picited out as one of the background factors
allowing the Japanese economy to maintain a good perform-
ance despite the effects of the second oil crisis.

Section 1. Effective and Tinsel Operation of Mone~
tary Policy and the innncial Markets

1. Monetary Conditions Relaxed

Strict monetary restraints have been carried out to cope
with the difﬁculties caused by the second on crisis. These

17
MOMMUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtained good results in preventing homemade inflation.
However. with explicit signs of the deflationary effects of the
raising of the oil price. the tight money policy turned to
relaxation. Reﬂecting the last tight money policy. the following
three features were observed.

1) Interest rates rose at a fairly high tempo in the period
of tight money policy. 1his stabilized prices to create room
to turn quickly toward a relaxation of this policy. As a result.
Japanese interests rates have become the lowest among.the
major countries.

2) in corporate finance. there was seen a situation whereby
the private sector evaluated the process of monetary policy
as having changed from “a tight money policy without a feeling

of tightness" to “a policy of relaxation without a feelirtg of re.
laxation" (See Fig.5). ‘lhia does not mean that the effects of the
monetary policy at that time decreased. although it is true
that the effects of monetary policy on corporate ﬁnance
through the channel of ﬁnancial institutions became small.
as enterprises had multiplied their financing channels. But
liberalization of interests rates. which was another aspect of
the multiplication of ﬁnancing channels. brought about high
interest rates in these channels to inﬂuence the corporate
demand for funds itself. This expansion of channels through
which the effects of monetary policy works brought about
the aboveenentioned phenomenon.

3) The stance of financial institutions on lending money
changed compared with the period after the first oil crisis.
Even If] the period after monetary policy turned to relaxation.
the tncrease rate in bank loading was slow compared with that
in the relaxation period after the ﬁrst oil crisis. In particular.
lending for small and medium-sized enterprises by financial
imitations. such as mutual loan and savings banlts and credit
associations was sluggish. This was a feature of the time and
suggests that the management environment was worsening
for all ﬁnancial institutions so that they had to change their
lending stance to expand loans quantitatively. which had been
the prevailing situation before the last tight money policy.

On the other hand. it seems a noteworthy phenomenon.
which indicates changes in the ﬁnancial market structure. that
the ﬁnancing channels of city banlts had diversified along with
the liberalization of interest rates and their position was
improved.

2. Stabilization lti Money Supply and the Fall in interest Rates

After the slackening of the tight money policy in April
l979. the increase irt the money supply continued to follow
a gradually decelerating trend up to the beginning of l98l.
though the trend was moderate. Under these circumstances.
market interest rates registered a significant increase at the
beginning. but after the middle of I980 they mowed a
favorable decline.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
.|- "~— —
I...“ ”-
--.-v ”Q
_— D--.
0.....- w
”an-.. uh 0..
0—..- IU W"
0..-... "I no.

.- O ~~v
wu- on wai-
up..-

Ibu—

ammo—un- OU-t- o'-
u-a-l l-

 

Fig 6. Chang- in Dammmom o! Cocoon” Financ-
in tho Potiod o! Momurv Relaxation
19

romomau. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when growth in the money supply is suppressed. interest
rates go up to start with because the supply of currency is
decreased. This is followed by a deaeese in norninai incomes
and thus is followed by a decrease in the demand for currency.
ﬁns then functions as a factor to lower brterest ratee.Further.
if suppresion of the money supply makes the growth rate of
prices slow down. the expectation of inﬂation becomes calmer.
and as a remit. nominal interest rates decrease still more. As
seen above. the appropriate control of the money supply results
in lower interest rates in the longoterrn. and we can say that
the Japanese experience after the second oil crisis demonstrated
this hypothesis.
oooooooooo

3. Liberalization of Interest Rates and the Movement of Long-
and Short-term Interest Rates

The evolution of the liberalization and the ﬂexible operation
of interest rates In recent years has been highly significant as a
background to the effective and timely operation of monetary

.. ;
.0.
.e

r
.r

" n 23.....-
:31-lili-P-i-iliiiér‘am

~ 'I re -e u - e-.-
nee.

    

 

‘ 1-, -ca—ueu-I-ev

..._..=:.-_ .... . .l .. A . . _..-...... --. ...... .-._-_

.-.. ~—
ee-el
_-—-—--_-—-————_—.-——'.a

-eu ea -e -e 1 C u n r. O -

~— ”eve-no.5..-

Fig. 6. Yearly Orange of Public Works Expenditure
mi and Contract Rates

policy and its effects since the second oil crisis.

in particular. the following fact is notable. As the call
market and the discount market. where monetary policy has
a direct effect. had been fully liberalized. arbitrage transactions
increased between titeee markets and the open market. including
the Genakisnarket (a market for bond trading with a short-
term repurchase agreenwnt). and the CD. market.resuiting in
stronger interconnectedness between the short-term money
markets. in the process of liberalization of interest rates. it
has been clarified that a normal market mechanism is basically
operating in the Japanese monetary sector. which had conven-
tionally been apt to be regarded as a special Japanese-type of
monetary nutket.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 2. Fiscal Operation Under Tight Condtions

1. Budget Compilation Aiming at Financial Reconstruction

Large-scale ﬁnance up to FYI978 played a large part in
returning the Japanese economy to a stable economic growth
course. in this process. the financial deficit was expanded.
and thus. financial reconstruction has become an urgent
problem. For this purpose. growth rates in the general account
of annual expenditure from I919 to l9Bl have been maintained
at a very low level. On the annual revenue side. income tax
revenue has begun to recover favorably since FYI978 when
business showed a recovery. and in the fiscal 1981 budget.
measures for a tax increase were taken. As a result. the rate of
reliance on public bond lssttes. which had continued to increase
after FYI97S. began to decrease from I979.

2. Fiscal Operation Changing from the Suppression Type

Even under tight constraints. such as the ﬁnancial reconstruc-
tion. fiscal policy after the second oil crisis has been operated
both effectively and opportunely (See Fig. 6).

Looking at the exeartion of the public works budget. the
1979 budget was prlrrnrlly complied to promote business
ncovery. However. it was executed as a neutral type budget
from the beginning. reflecting the fullscale business recovery
and the worsening of the price performance. Furthermore. in
the latter half or the fiscal year. a 5% cutback in public works
was enforced as a part of the measures against price rlses.1'hus.
the ratio of public works contracts (contracted amount/budget)
at the end of the fiscal year remitted at a low level of 93.6%.
which was the lowest since 1974. The public works budget
for FYI980. which was formulated for a very small growth
over the previous year. was executed as a restraining type
budget placing primary importance on price stability.

Such restraining type operation of fiscal policy greatly
contributed to preventing home-made inﬂation. But from
mid-I980. the restraining measures were cancelled to cope
with signs of a recession. And. in the latter half of FYI980.
positive measures were taken to sustain the level of business
activity. As for the I981 budget. the Government decided on
about a 70.5% ratio of public works contracts in the first half
of the fiscal year.

Section 3. Facilitating Measures Against Price Rises.
and Economic Mantra

Analysing the progress of economic measures. which were
taken to cope with the second oil crisis. it is noteworthy that

POIOFHCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

measures against price rises were taiten in good time. and that
importance was placed on stabilization of prices.

Reﬂecting the steady trend of prices and the growing signs
of a recession after the middle of I980. economic measures
were decided upon both in September l980 and March l98l.
The features of these measures were as follows:

i) The economic measures which were implemented were
macroscopic ones composed of two axes. namely the fiscal and
monetary aspects mentioned above.

2) The macroscopic measures were made up of finevgrained
microscopic ones. For instance. measures for small and medium
enterprises. and the promotion measures for house building
were adopted jointly in the two economic measures mentioned
above. In particular. in the economic measures of March l98l.
concrete actions for both smaller businesses and house build-
ing were decided. This was because these sectors were suffering
most under the inﬂuence of the recession “shadow". which
progressed at an unbalanced pace among the sectors.

3) Even during the recession “shadow". actions against
price rises had remained as one of the major supports for the

economic measures. This was because the Government stabilize.
tron of prices was the most importanr requirement for achievtng

sustained economic growth.
Section 4. Oil Crisis and Economic Performance

The Japanese economy. which experienced severe stagﬂation
after the first oil crisis. has shown the most stable performance
among major advanced countries since the second on] crisis
period. Comparing the two crises there is little difference

between them in regard to the deterioration in the terms of
trade. Nevertheless. why did such a difference in the economic
performance of Japan occur? As reasons for this. there were
favorable factors such as stability in the rate of wage increases.
and rational countermeasures of households and enterprises.
Apart frorn this. the economic conditions just before the two
oil crisis (incipient conditions) were substantially different.
which. it seems. inﬂuenced Japan‘s economic performance
fairly greatly. Such differences in incipient conditions include.
and are related to. various factors including the difference in
phases ot'businees activities 0n the other hand. differences in
money supply and fiscal expenditure. which were due to the
differences in the phases of business activities as well as the
differences in economic «realism (that formed the background
to the pluses of business activities). may have had a varying
inﬂuence on economic conditions just before each oil crisis
respectively.

Before the first oil crisis. both money supply and fiscal
disbursements ﬂuctuated widely. inﬂuenced by the Nixon
Shock and the adoption of business stimulation measures to
cope with the undesirable effects of the Shock. Agairsst this.
fiscal expenditure before the second oil crisis recorded a large
increase rate similar to that before the ﬂrst crisis. in this
situation. the growth rate of the money supply increased but

22
FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its movement was much calmer compared with the ﬁrst oil
crisis. From thu we may conclude that the difference between
tlte change in money supply before and after the first oil crisis
was very large. while that before and after tlte second crisis
was small. and that this caused the significant difference
between the two performances of the Japanese economy at
those times. The movements of the money supply during the
ﬁrst and second oil crisis were reversed and simulated simple
econometric time series models. As a result. it was found that
the movements of prices and the real GNP had changed
considerably.

Conclusion of Part I. The Piesent Phase of Prices and
Business

The adjustment process of the Japanese economy in re-
sponse to the second oil crisis is now ending. The prices of
imported goods have come to be stabilized in the event that
the rate of increase of oil prices has levelled off. Thus. the
terms of trade have continued to be unchanged since the
second quarter of l980. and the various effects caused by their
deterioration have been gradually eliminated. in respect to
prices and the international balance of payments. the Japanese
performance has greatly improved its FY1980 as seen earlier.
Also the recession “shadow" which appeared in FY1980 is
coming to an end and. moreover. inventory adjustment in the
material type industries has on the whole nearly ﬁnished to
level off or to continue decreasing. both irt actual amount and
in the inventory—sales ratio. Personal consumption has turned
to increase in real terms atppotted by the stabilization of
consumer prices. There are also signs of recovery in housing
construction. and promotion measures have been taken for the
execution of public works. Equipment investment and exports
are tending upwards. though the growth rate is not as large as
previously. .

in this environment. business activities generally are showing
an upward tendency and the adjustment process is coming to

an end. Thus, with regard to trends of business activity in
future. it is necessary to pay attention to the following five
points:

i) The inﬂuence of the recession "shadow“ is now appearing
in employment with a time lag. and there is an easing in the
labor supplydanand situation.

2) There is a possibility that the recession “shadow" will
partially continue. as sltown in the phenomenon that among
structural-recession industries production cutbacks still con-
tmue.

3) It is necessary to monitor continuously the movement
of prices. while stably controlling the money sttpply.

4) The inﬂuence of the European and American econonties.
which are still in an unstable phase. is teaching to the Japanese
economy in some areas.

5) Uncertainty is increasing throughout the world political
and economic scene.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Part 2. Vitality of the Japanese Economy. Its Fea-
tures and Problems

Introduction. Vitality of the Japanese Economy and
Problems

For some 100 years since the Meiji Restoration. Japan has
learned from Europe and America and. in doing so. it has set
an objective of “catching up" with them. Now. after recovering
from the devastation of World War ll. Japan has reached the
level of the advanced countries in many fields. such as the
size of the economy and technology.

However. the Japanese economy is confronted with new
problems. First. how will the private sector economy. which
is the motive power of economic development. be maintained
and improved?

Second. how will the government perform. efﬁciently and
impartially. its role In the public sector. which cannot be borne
by the private sector economy?

Third. how will the vitality. as seen in the Japanese economy.
be employed efficiently by the world economy and how will it
be accepted?

Fourth. how will the quality of housing. which is indispensa-
ble to the stabilization and promotion of national life. be
improved. and how will lelsttre. which likewise is indispensable.
be employed wisely?

in order to solve these problems, not only the "vitality
to adapt to the environment" but also the “vitality to improve
the environment" are necessary. The “vitality to improve the
environment" indicates the high degree of Japan's creativity
in that success has been made possible by imitation. What Japan.
as a nation. should do today is to make the most of this
creativity and. if possible. to further enhance it.and to manifest
the vitality to improve the environment both at home and
abroad.

Therefore. even if the core of the problem in this chapter
may appear as though the vitality of the economy is. at a
glance. a special feature of Japan. it will be clariﬁed that the
problems are based on universal and rational factors. Thus.
while considering "cultural differences". an analysis will be
made which will make possible "common understanding"
between various countries of the world.

Chapter l. Vitality of the Private Sector and Its
Problems

Although Japan‘s economy was greatly affected by the
second oil crisis. it has developed satisfactorily and is in a better
condition than the Other leading industrialized countries. This
is attributed‘to the rational actions taken by enterprises and
households in response to the economic situation. We would
like to call it the vitality of the private sector.

21s
MWWONLY
FOR OMCIM. USE ONLY

Tattle 7. Comparison of Obiectivos and Organizations
oi Enterprises between Japan and us.

'_‘*m

 

bav- I hut wuwv-v-nvtm'wuln
Ww~OI~MJIﬂ-A~IMC~
mummmmummwu—um
"nut-elm".
I "and” ave-nun.“
hat-a- --|‘m*~-OOI~I~
W~~~UH~IO~Q~
w—umnlﬂtwl
0. sl-m-uﬁumm
~oamwueou-nm
trumnkuws
I lam-"IMIv-e non-‘0.- ”can-.."
Imvua‘wOa-I'va-va ~“-H~U“H~
~~o~tﬁ~—d—.

Section I. High Labor Productivity and its Back-
ground

Labor productivity of the Japanese economy (on a GNP
basis) showed a higt average annual growth rate of about 8.5%
during the period from I960 to l973. After the ﬁrst oil crisiS.
however. the rate dropped to 4—51» but was still the highest
among the major advanced countries. _

As a background to this. ﬁrst. capital equipment registered a
high growth rate due to active capital investment. Second.
technological innovations were unfolded in parallel with
equipment investment. For example. the production of manu-
facturing industry rose by l2.4 times during the period from
I965 to 1980. Of this. it rs estimated that about 30% was due
to technical innovations. in fact. the period up to around l96$
was one of technological innovations based on the introduction
of technology from foreign countries. The subsequent period
up to the oil crisis was a period of largevscale technology in
pursuit of economies of scale. It was also a period for co-
ordrnatrng and diffusing technology. After the oil crisis.
efﬁciencytype technological innovations and mecatronics-type

innovations in manufacturing industry made headway for the

purpose of energy and oil conservation. A representative

example of the latter is industrial robots which have rapidly
come into use recently.

mud. in the process of high economic growth. the signiﬁ-
anoe or the low productivity sector in the industrial sector

25
FOR ommt. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

decreased. That is. the signiﬁcance of primary industries
decreased while that ol‘ the manufacturing industry increased.

Fourth. the way in which enterprises and laborers acted
Spurred technology innovations which were accepted. in viewing
the modes of behaviour of Japanese and American enterprises
on this point. Japanese enterprises apparently make investments
with long-term objectives in mind. On the other hand. American
enterprises are sensitive to making proﬂts within a short period.
and even if investment is deemed indispensable to their growth.
they tend to avoid making investments which do not pay off
in the short run (See Table 7).

As Japanese enterprises grew and employment opportunities
increased. labor tended to take a ﬂexible attitude in accepting
technological innovations. This is ascribed to factors such as
ti) active on-the-iob training within enterprises under the life
employment system. (2) labor unions by industry are aware
that the prosperity or decline of enterprises is closely connected
with the interests of workers. and (3) under the wage system
for long service. changing from one job to another in the same
workshop will not affect wages. Moreover. positive proposals
for raising the efﬁciency of production processes and for
quality control have been made from the labor side.

Section 2. Labor Market Absorbs Oil Shoclt

After the first oil crisis. the rate of svage increases in Japan
was the htytest among the advanced countries. Furthermore.
production dropped appreciably. 0n the other hand. the
adjustment of the number of workers employed was delayed
so that unit labor costs of enterprises rose. However. since
1976 unit labor costs. unlike in Europe and America. have
tended to stabilize. One of the reasons for this is that the pace
of inﬂation slowed down due to the effects of ﬁnancial measures
taken by the government in the midst of the prolonged decline
in employment after the first oil crisis because of the delay in
adjusting employment.

In cases where the earnings of enterprises are expected to
to drop. there is a strong possibility that the labor unions
by industry. in the course of wage negotiations. will opt for
a low wage increase by placing more importance on securing
employment. Moreover. it cannot be denied that ﬂuctuations
in wages have been made ﬂexible by the bonus system.

Section 3. Prom of Energy Conservation

Japan is greatly dependent on oil as a source of energy.and
lacking domestic supply. has no other option but to rely on
imports of this vital commodity from abroad. mainly the
OPEC countnes. Consequently. among the advanced countries.
Japan particularly has been hit hard by increases in the price
tii'till.

The oi price increases ltave brought about three effects
(the Japanese use the word “trilemma” — short for three

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dilemmas — for the three defects). namely. the oil deﬁcit
(unfavorable balance of international payments due to the
increase in payments for oil). oil inflation (imported inflation
due to the increase in the cost of oil). it'd oil deflation (outflow
of revenue to foreign countries due to the increase in oil
charges).

At any rate. the effects of the second oil crisis have been
twice as great as those of the ﬁrst oil crisis. As the oil price
increases have not only produced the “trilemma” but will also
raise their ratio to the sire of the nominal amount of oil
imports. the effect of oil price houses will be heightened
every time the price of oil is raised. In order ultimately to
escape from this vicious circle. drerefore. the only way is to
switch over to alternative energy sources. 0n the other hand.
efforts should also be made to promote the efficient use of oil
and to raise oil productivity (real GNPfoil consumption).

Throughout the first and second oil crisis. Japan's oil
productivity increased sharply. As the home-made inflation
was averted particularly after the second oil aisle. the rise in
the price of oil was higher compared with other commodities.
so that econorrtizing on oil was pushed forward (See Fig.8).
Material-type industries. such as chemicals and iron and steel.
have reduced their basic unit of energy. which has produced a
marked effect on tile economy drive. A switchover of the iron
and steel. ceramic and clay industries from oil to an alternative
energy source has also contributed to the drive.

Enterprises and households are still proceeding with con-
serving energy and oil and invewnents for this purpose are
notable in enterprises which conntme large quantities of
energy. The purposes for which investments are made have
changed from readjusting methods of operation and improve-
ntent of operational control to installing new equipment and
also large-sized equipment to lteep up with the newly-installed

equipment.
in the iron and steel industry..active investment for energy
conservation in the :ontiaucu: testing and rolling sectors "

being made. while the use of furnaces which do not use ori is
spreading. industries such as the paper. pulp.chemical.ceramic
and clay industries. too. are making active moves to invest for
energy conservation.

Households are also econornizing on energy to cope with
the rise in the price. Moreover. in order to propel this form of
energy conservation. efforts are necessary to equip houses
with insulation devices and energyosaving electrical appliances.

Section 4. Future Problems of the Private Sector

Confronted by such issues at the increased limitation of
energy and the ageing of society. the Japanese economy will
be beset with severe problems in the future. in order to secure
stable growth of the economy. it is thus necessary to sustain
the vitality of the private sector and to make it more creative.

2?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Maintenance of a Competitive Environment

in the Japanese economy there is brisk competition among
enterprises. it is because of this that Japan attained high
economic growth and energy conservation after the oil crisis.
However. with the rate of rnarltet powth slacking. enterprises
have come to act more in concert with each other. and it is
feared that this will cause problems in industrial vitality.

"O-v--.-
”com—1....—

0-... —e-a-

 

_ . .-.l_ ___.__.- . ._.._.-

r
e e
. -__ -._..—-. .—_.——..-.—__.—.~_——-‘

One
we a -e -e -e n n lo a n .-

se - u—~-—~—.—u n—noon-uea-u-
-ube o—o—u
a .—--—'—".~~-—u~
—~.~”-.—~

Fig. 8. Yearly Changes in Oil Productivity lteei GNP
devided by oil commotion)

Depending on changes in the economic environment. it
cannot be denied that there is a possibility that government
regulation of industry will bring about distortion of the distribu-
tion at resources. In order to sustain and increase competition
therefore. it is important to review these matters.

Future Technological Development

With the exception of high technology. such as in aircraft.
nuclear power equipment and information processing. the level
or Japanese technology is comparable with that of countries
in Europe and America. in iron. steel and automobile manufac-
turing, Japanese technology leads the world. Although the
process of technologiul development was based on the intro
duction. application and systematization oi'exiatins technology
at home and abroad to meet economic needs. most of the work
has been borne by the private sector. As far as innovations
centering around mecatronics are concerned. applied tech.
nological development is Japan's forte. However. from a long,
range viewpoint. technological development in the basic areas
and a social assessment of scientiﬁc technology are important.

28 .
POI! omcut. use our
eon OFFICIAL use'orvu

Further Promotion of Energy Conservation and Development
of Alternative Energy

Restrictions in oil are .of a continuing nature and efforts
to conserve energy and oil must be made with increased vigor
in the future. But, there are i‘a'nits to conservation. Accordingly.
it is necessary to switch over to other sources of energy. such
as coal and LNG. as well as to stimulate the development of
an eltemative energy to coal. such as atomic energy. so as to
lighten restrictions on energy. Ensuring safety is also a major
prerequisite particularly with regard to atomic energy. And.
in utilizing atomic energy. it ls necessary to promote its
acceptance both at horn: and abroad.

Promotion of Ethciency in Agriculture

In order to sustain the Vitality of the national economy. it
is necessary to raise the productivity oftheagricultural sector.
Japan's aeifeumeiency ratio of farm produce for food dropped
to 72% in I979. Moreover. productivity of labor is lorv due to
the small size of farms and. depending upon the products.
there is a vvide disparity between their prices and international

races.
p Furthermore. the fact that the government‘s pinchase price
of rice is maintained at e hid: level compared with other agri-
cultural products has increased the trend among farmers with
smail~scale plots to cultivate rice.

As the pertains farmers rely greatly on the income from
diehsidejobguieydonothaveastrongtviiltoraiseagri-
cultural productivity. Moreover. there are problem with respect
to effective utilization of farm-land. machinery and facilities. in
particular. thereisahighempha'sisonriceeultivationamongst
part-time farmers whose productivity is relatively low. and this
is hampering the advancement of the entire agricultural sector.

Under these circumstances, moves are being made to improve
the situation. which. in agriculture. means better land utili-
zation. and expanding the scale of management to raise pro-
ductivity. However. buying farm-land is difficult because of its

' ice.
Walshmverapoesbilityofexpmdingthesceieof
practical management by expanding the management of leased
land. Contributing factors are: (I) Against a background where
a rise in the acmai price of rice cannot be anticipated. the
difference in earnings between the various scales of management
will be increased. (2) Under the present situation where the
dependence of part~lime farmers on the income from their side
jobs is increasing. it is anticipated that their will to manage
their farms under unfavorable conditions will decline. (3) The
port-time farmers are ageing.

Thus. in order to expedite the expansion of scale of farm
management. an environment wherein a competitive principle
can be incorporated should be maintained. AccordinalY. it
necessary to induce competent men to tvorit in farming asweil
as to foster men of talent and improve agricultural technology.

FOROI'FICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 2. The Role and Review of the Public Sector

The second problem with respect to maintaining and foster-
ing the vitality of the Japanese economy involves the public
sector and its tevievr.

Section I. The Present Condition of Deficit Financ-
in:

The Japanese Government‘s revenue and expenditure have
greatly worsened since the ﬁrst oil crisis. Moreover. the govern-
ment's dependence on public bonds has pursued an upward
trend since FYl974 and reached 39.6% in 1979. which is ex-
ceptionally hidt in time of peace. in the government's budgets
for FY1980 and l98l. the reliance on public bonds declined.
but it was still at a fairly hUl level of 26.2% in the FYI98J

...........

While carrying such a structural deficit. the national economy
has recovered to a satisfactory performance in respect of prices
ofgoodsaaweﬂasbusinetsandemploynienLThisisincontnst
tocountriesinEuropeandAmericawhiehare compelledto
carry on a painful economic situation in the midst of deficit
ﬁnancing. Japan's condition arose as a rearlt of deﬁcit ﬁnancing
being limited to the area of excess saving of the private sector.
Moreover. if the scale of Japan's deﬁcit ﬁnancing is compared
with those of the United States and ﬁitain. the fouowing is
observed (See Fig.9):

( l) Tits level of dependence on public bonds (relative to the
size of expenditure) is very high.

(2) This level compared with the size of the economy (GNP)
Balsohighbut notashighasﬂ).

(3) The ratio of deﬁcit financing to gross national savings has
risen considerably. but it has a special feature. that is. its level
lsstill low.112degreeofriskofthesoaﬂed"hudeningof
finance” is w. but the relatively small scale of the expenditure
itself has not made compicuous the ill effects of deficit financ-
ing up to now.

However. the balance of savings investment has changed con-
siderably recently. The excea savings of the private sector have
shrunk since I979. and if public bonds continue to be issued in
the future. the private sector's demand for funds will be com.
pressed. Thus. it cannot be said there is no fear that conditions
in the money market will become difficult.

In fact. it is reported that. in the Uniwd States and Britain.
the baneful effects of deficit i'inancim have come to the fore.
Added to this. it should not be overlooked that the feeling of
enduring deficit financing is lighter compared with a tart increase
and is apt to be linked to "big government". In this context, it
cannot but he said that an improvement of the financial balance
is an important problem for the entire Japanese economy.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ic e. in «0.; no 3 .33 .3 :8:
.u. .sziiiati

3101!:
p no...

.1. u.
.8 ....
. n

p...

‘3 No.
.

. ..

b m-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 2. Review of the Public Sector and Raising
lts E fiiciency

A revietv of what the public sector should be has become an
urgent problem. The main points are: l) Avoiding the tendency
for deficit ﬁnancing to continue increasing. (2) Maintaining a
proper size of the public sector. (3) Checking whether there is
wasteful and inefficient spending in the public sector. (4) Secur-
ing a fair share with respect to revenue. (5) Such efforts have
already been ntade iii the other advanced countriea and there are
many points which Japan should learn.

From the standpoint of international comparison. the public
actor in Japan has continued to be limited to relatively small
govemment. However. the public sector raiwd the significance
or the government in the midst of hlﬂ'i growth but was still
able to increase its vitality smoothly. With the economy cott-
tinuing to grow. the weight or“ the public sector ts gradually
rising. In the l960's. government expenditure was around l8!»
or the GNP. while recently the ratio has exceeded 30%.

As a future problem. even if the present expenditure struc-
ture is unchanged. the possibility of the signiﬁcance of the
public sector rising further assumes importance. For inﬂame.
the population of Japan is expected to age rapidly in the future
and. along with this. it is anticipated that the expenditure
related to social insurance will inevitably increase. Moreover. the
ratio of social inwrsnce in Japan is by no means low if the
population composition is talten lttto account. Due to ageing. it

is estimated that social insurance in the year 2000 will rise to
the present level of Western countries (See Flg.l0).

Also. the probability of the national economy owning big
government is not small. On this point. it is believed that the
time has come for the Japanese people to learn afresh from
the experiences of the advanced welfare countries.

..........

Section 3. Vitality and Creativity of the Public Sector

What is the real role of the public sector? Generally “ef.
ficiency" in the national economy has been brought about
solely by free competition in the market. it has often been
thought-that a “failure of the market" is compensated by
securing “fairness" in the public sector. “Small govemment”
regards the public sector as being essentially inefﬁcient. Con.
sequently. people who seelt positive signiﬁcance in the public
sector have a strong sense of distrust of the market economy.
However. with the switchover to stable growth. efficiency in the
public sector has come to he demanded. Even in the public
sector. “efficiency as an organization" has become an important
matter in order to realise economic and social objectives.
0000000000

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3
e- -e--v_

-r-v—v

0‘5;
weae

“Mnm-ﬂa-nmonn—n—n—u
8
e

 

 

Ileeeletwﬂlviarawru

.-C~e-.-.!.
In...

ue. I mmumwa—uumv-u-Mu
-vn-.~

I once-“9" wet-uncoomvn".
mac-0m. ow—du-meﬁum
~.-”~**m~‘ ~0~~M¢
unease-

I Nata—ec-v’eh-o'hﬁ-b-em-ouwm
arm. I‘m-O.“

name-ima- a-em a-one
|-I. I."

0.0“.“ n—a-muvua—ndm-en

Fig. la. Ageing of Poonlatlon and Social Security
Ratio

Section 4. Finance and the Public Sector

Japan's ﬁnancial structure changed greatly after 1975. The
public sectorvat theonewhlchmoetlacked hands.andthe
extent of a menace of fund: in corporate enterprises diminished
considerably. A: rented: the deployment of funds in house-
holds. a changeover from liquidity deposits to income earning
minawaaseenindicatin‘ emceeplaclngmoreimportanceon
proﬁtability.

On the other hand. the market for public bonds and de-
bentures expanded rapidly. and their sales. which amounted to
only 9 trillion yen in I970. exceeded 200 trillion yen in I979.
interest rates gradually came to ﬂuctuate freely. and it became
clear that a market mechanism was basinlly at work in the
money market. It can be said here that Japan ranks with the
United Stages a: the most advanced nation in ﬁnancial markets.
0000000000

33
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Formulation of Japzuneee Economic Vitali-
ty Which Will Be Accepted in the World
Economy

Japan's economic position in the world economy has become
increasingly important. but it has come to face a serious pro-
blem. namely. how the economy can make the best use of its
vitality and be accepted and welcomed by the international
economic community. which is suffering from uncertainity.
There are in fact three issues. .

(1) International trade frictions have begun to take place be-
tween Japan and the advanced countries. The first problem for
Japan is how to cope with these frictions

(2) Differentials in income per capita between the advanced
countries and the nonoﬂ producing developing countries. es.
pecially the LLDC. have become wider. The second problem is
how and in what form Japan should carry out its economic
cooperation with these countries under these circumstances for
their economic development.

(3) The third problem is what monetary role Japan should
seek in the world economic community.

From the latter half of the 1970's. the Japanese money
market has internationalized rapidly but the effect of this de-
veloupment on Japanese monetary policy has not yet revealed
itse .

Section 1. lntensif‘ication of Trade Frictions

With regard to trade frictions between Japan and the ad-
vanced countries. many of them took place in the field of
textﬂesand iron and steel from the i960’s to the ﬁrst half of the
1970's. Entering the l970's. new aspects of friction, such as
those concerning color We. and shipbuilding industries. etc.
because issues. Recently. frictions are focusing on the machinery
industry. including automobiles. machine tools. etc.

There are two features from the viewpoint of the period of
these frictions: a) they became strong in the second half of the
1970's. and b) they eased for a time after [978. but after that
they appeared to start to strengthen again. We can point out
titree factors as a background to these trade friction issues:
(i) Price competitiveness of Japanese products centering
around machinery has become relatively strong against that of
other advanced countries leading to a larger maritet diare for
Japanese goods in the American and European markets.

For example. American unit labor costs increased by 6.1%
annually on everage during 1973-1979. while those of Japan
decreased by 0.8%. Such differentials as these have remarkably
strengthened the price competitivenss of Japanese goods.

In this context. the reason Why the trade friction ime eased
for a time after 1978 was because the increase in the yen ex-
change rate worked as a counterbalance against the increase in
price competitiveness of Japanese goods.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is not correct. however. that increased irnpom from Japan

dldlargedamagetotheeorrespondingindustriesoftheim-
porting countries.AsshowninFig.ll,ananaiysisomuctuation
factors in the 1970's of employment of American manufactur-
ing industry by sector indicates that the effect of imports on
employment wassmali.wltileadecreaseindomesticdernand
andamovernent inproductivity hadamuchiargerinﬂuence.
Therefore. it is largely due to the conditions in the importing
countries that the irtcrease in imports has been linked to trade
frictions.
(2) The second factor is the domestic conditions in Europe
and America as importing countries. arch as the inclination to
intensify protectionism. and uneasiness over employment. As
mentioned. those goods which have experienced trade friction
with Japan visa~vls the advanced countries are textiles. iron and
steel. automobiles. etc.. where the advanced countries are
gradually losing their comparative advantages in the field of
unit labor costs. product cycles. etc.. as seen In the US.

From the viewpoint of the international division of labor. it
is desirable for those countries which are losing their compara-
tive advantage in some speciﬁc Industry to reduce the size of
that indttstry. thereby turning the marltet of the industry over
to those countries where the corresponding industries have
developed comparative advantages. and to assign labor and other
resources to those industries or commodities for which they
have comparative advantages.

As seen lately in the US. and some European countries.

the chances for an industry. which is losing its comparative
advantages. to succeed in developing new products or shift
its industrhl field are becoming less when the
economic growth rate has become small. With these facts. they
are apt to try to sticit to the “status one” as much as they
possibly cart. For example. in the case of textiles and steel in
the US. they attempted to protect their vested interests by
curtailing imports.
(3) The third factor is lacir of mutual understandingbetween
Japan and the U5.. and. Japan .and the EC countries. A inb-
understanding that one's counterpart is strengthening its cont.
petitiveness by unfair measures generates a desire to take
countermeasures Which often leads to movements for pro-
tectionism. e.g. a) Japanese industry is intensifying unfair
export attacks with governmental support and based on a special
financial system. b) the Japanese domestic market is clmd to
overseas industries. c) Japan is trying to grow economical-
ly overly depending on exports. These are typical examples of
such cases.

it is advisable to adopt six major policies for easing inter
national trade frictions:

(I) The first is to rejuvenate the economies of the advanced
countries. This is very important. and along with these measures.
it is necessary to create a good economic environment to cope

with retrogreasive activities aimed at protecting vested interests

by bringing premre to bear on their governments.
(2) it is important for Japan to take leadership with West

Germany to safeguard the free intermtionel trade system.
which is unsettled due to the relative weaken“ of the United

States‘ economic strength.

35
MWWMY
'0 c . Owe. -
LN..." .MJOAOOOM
u Ink-who.
Ammr‘ Inc:
"0 I. Cl C a.
. I «~0- .
Mtge-'0...
Pug. :1. Ohm": uNum owa by
Manuucmnnot
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 2. The Developing Countries' Problem and
the Role of Advanced Countries

The problem of developing countries can no longer be
considered with a simple chart comparing wealthy. advanced
countries with developing countries. Wealthy. capital-surplus
oil producing countries. which were once regarded as developing
countries have come on the stage of the world economy. while.
on the other hand, some of the middle-income countries have
succeeded in their industrial'mtion. Meanwhile there still exist
a number of LLDC countries which are suffering from poverty
and low economic growth.

The abovementioned diversiﬁcation in the economic con-
ditiona of the developing countries has made the NorthSouth
problem complicated. In this diversiﬁed environment. it is
necessary for the advanced countries. including Japan. to im-
plement appropriate economic cooperation which meets with
the economic conditions of the counterpart countries
(i) Regarding Ofﬁcial Development Assistance (ODA). the
Japanese Government set a new ambitious medium term target
of ODA on January 23 of this year. which is very important for
Japan. Thus. it is vital for her to expand ODA positively so
that the target can be mcceaat'ully achieved. But it is also
necessary to carry out accentuated cooperation of ODA which
meets with the conditions and development phases of counter-

part countries.

(2) it is necessary to pay careful attention to the smooth
recycling of oil money to those non-oil producing countries
which are suffering again from enlarged deﬁcits in their current
account balances of payments. and also from accumulated
international debt under the inﬂuence of the second oil crisis.
(3) It is necessary for the advanced countries positively to
create opportunities in their domestic markets so that they can
promote international trade with those developing countries
under industrialization. Those countries which are industrializ-
ing are not limited to the so-called New lndustn'alizing Countries
(NiO‘s). but also industrialization is devel0ping in many
countries in the sectors of labor-intensive light industries. such
as the textile tndustry.Wlth reference to the share of the textile
industry in employment. it displayed an upward trend in many
developing countries after the l970‘s while it decreased in the
advanced countries and the NiC's (Fig.l2)

Hi The promotion of direct investment overseas and tech-
nology transfer Via it to meet the Industrialization and other
conditions of counterpart countries are necessary.

Section 3. lnternationalizing Finance

Along with the expansion in size of the Japanese economy

37
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l‘l

   

ill
.‘

’thee "-9.
~ 3 h~-g:h.-~”

Wat Gummy

 
   

‘0

o- s
I” “-~”’-
/
(“ll I
so; mice) is I
I ’ A
- - a" ‘- .’ "\ Oeeenie
4. teen. Iten. -w’ \.....
O
1.70 7| 72 73 7‘ 73 7. 77 7. 79”.!)

”f
10
sing-om. Notes: i. hovered hem ILO'I “veer Cook et Lever Outlet.“
- """ ~ / 1321-de end “it” new one 3220mm
mien-inn. inductrv oi “IMO'MW 8M
lndvetﬂel Clo-Median“ men do the mm. Induce
3. Sumner lot Jenn m horn “tft's "tneiiarrlei Stet
Your.

 

I970 71 72 73 7‘ 75 76 77 7. "(Veal

Fig. 12. Oranges Textile Industry's Shore oi Employment in
Mamiacturing Industries

end internationalization of its mommy transactions. the role of
Japan in the tvorld money markets will be poster. We have
mentioned eerller that theJapaneee i'mencial and espital markets
are conducting a relatively large roie in the field of overseas
loans and the supply of money for overseas governments end
enterprues. This trend will continue to increase. Especially.
Japan’s role in recyclingoil money to non-oil producing countries
is important from the viewpoint of the world econom.

Chapter 4. Better Housing and Leisme Time

Without a vibrant economy. the stability and betterment of
people‘s livelihood eennot be achieved. Livelihood itself. how-
ever. is the source ot‘economie vitality. It is s goal of the future
therefore both to maintain the economic structure having
vitality and :l the same time to achieve an afﬂuent level of
people's livelihood. thus avoiding the disease of my advanced
countries.

38
POI! 0mm USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusion of Part 2.Searching for the “Vitality to
Create and to Exchange”. along
with the "Vitality to Accept
and to Absorb”

— Vitality to Learn and Creative Vitality -

TheJapanese economy has joined the ranks of the advanced
countries.

A quarter of a century ago (I955). the United Stages ac-
counted for about one-third of the world's GNP and ranked
ﬁrst in the world. Britain was placed neond with 5%. followed
by Japan with 2%. in I977 the United States' ratio dropped to
about one-fifth while Japan accounted for loss of the world's
GNP. The various per capita indicea in Japan indicate the
development of the national economy relative to those of ad-
vanced countries.

However. the Japanese economy was a “participant who
camelate" and was. so to speaks “.neweomer" lnanysocial
relationship the late participant is beset with dii‘iicultiies. First.
immense efforts have to be made to obtain the qualification
or the participant. Even after participating. it will take time to
be treated with camaraderie.

me Japanese economy had a “strong vitality" to learn from
the advanwd countries of Europe and America. Many people
and many enterprises learned. A book entitled "Promotion of
Learning”. which was written by the late Yukichi Fukuzawa.
opens with the famous passage.“God does not create man above
man nor create man below man".

Consisting of 17 volumes. it was published over a period of
several years from 187:. it isestirnated that a total of 3,400,000
. copies were printed. Considering that the population of Japan
at that time was 35 million. one can understand how popular
this enlightening book was.

After World War Ii. the vitality to learn. based on the
“popularization of knowledge". was reborn. The diligence of
theelitein Europe andAmericaisweliknown.butthebase
ot‘mchaclasainJapanwaswideandtheworkinapeopleaaa
whoieaisohad a strong desire toleam.And.handinhandwith
the “free market competition" principle. the vitality to learn
raised the productivity of the national economy and brought
about substantial economic growth.

However. the rapid growth of the national economy and
Japan's good performance after the oil crisis in i973 made the
advanced countries in Europe and America look at the new-
comer and question whether Japan had special features. But
wasit so?

The annual economic report published by the government
in 1976 pointed out that "the confrontation between the two

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systems in the world has changed from nuclear armament com-
petition to peaceful competition. Peaceful competition is a
stniggie to improve the economic growth rate and a contest to
raise productivity. We must adapt ourselves. as soon as possible.
to the technolog of the world which is advancing every day.
and to the world environment which will be changed by tech-
nological advancement.".

Needless to say. even if technological advancement is for
raising productivrty. the way it will be done will vary according
to the state of affairs in each country. in order therefore to
survive the contest to raise productivity in a small country like
Japan. it can be said that the national economy. which lacks
resources. has chosen rational steps which have the most appli-
cability to make the best use of the country's strength to learn
and to compete in world markets.

However. arguing over “special features" and “generalities”
is not considered to be productive. Shouldn't it be recognized
that all the countries of the world have their own characteristics
and are different from each other? After this is recognized.
shouldn't leaming. which will produce good results regardless
of its peculiarity or difference. be regarded as having at its roots
high universality? lt isbelleved that "learning" is to find out its
own universality and to own it. In this context. the Japanese
economy must continue to maintain the "vitality to team". At
the same time. it is hoped that all the countries of the world.
particularly the major advanced countries. will have the vision
to detect this universality.

Be that as it may. the status of the Japanese economy as a
newcomer has changed. The world economy is transforming and
shaking violently in the midst of multi-polarizatlon. Under this
Situation. the Japanese economy is faced with the necessity to
solve a number of problems.

First. as a member of the economies of the advanced
countries. the Japanese economy has to continue maintaining
and increasing the vitality of the private sector. Many of the
advanced countries are attempting to reactivate their economies.
Thus. the vitality of Japan must not be diminished. Second. the
role of the public sector. which cannot be shared by the private
sector. must be fulﬁlled efficiently and fairly. Third. free trade
in the world must be safeguarded and the best use of the world
economy. including the Japanese wonomy. must be made. The
countries which can explain the benefits of free trade. and are
able to share the beneficial results with other countries. have
the responsibility to maintain the free trade system. Fourth. the
promotion of national .life. which is the fountainhead of
economic vitality. is an important matter. Therefore. it is es-
pecially intportant to improve the quality of housim and to
employ leinite wisely.

lnorder to solvetheseproblems.itcanbesaidthatln
addition to the Vitality to learn”. “creative vitality” is needed
more titan reforming oneself and adjusting to others. Not only
should the “posture of another person” be taken as a model
but also a "posture for oneself“ should be created. The basic
thinking for thisisasexpreased inthisannualreport.

Lastly. we wish to emphasise the following two points as

inportant matters. First. Thomas Jefferson. who was one of the

b0
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

6120/10}

draftees of the Declaration of independence of America and was
also the third President of the United States. pointed out: “The
Government undertakes many projects on the pretext of pro-
tecting the irtterests of the people. However. among these
projects there are many which do not serve this purpose. In
undertaking projects. the Government is apt to waste the work
of the people. It is only when it is possible to m: the govem-
ment eliminate this waste that the people can become happy".

it can be said that the role of the public sector will be
fulfilled ifit is based onaichaviewpointﬁoncern isl'eltabout

the economic effects of the “administrative reform" which the

government is pushing forward. While the real decrease in income
muting from the rise in the price of oil will mean a switchover

of Japan's purchasing power to abroad. the curtailment of

government expenditure will mean that resources equivalent to

the curtailed amount will remairt in the private actor. Second.

even may of the countries which achieved the status of a major

power were not necessarily received with camaraderie when

they made their debut in international society and were going

through the stages of becoming a major power. By the same

token. many of the advanced countries came to be tntsted

internationally as a result of efforts made by themselves. Ac-

cordingly. the Japanese economy. which has grown rapidly. is

still in an awkward position internationally. This is unavoidable.

but the situation audit to be overcome through national efforts
as well as efforts made by everyone in every enterprise at

international forums. which are increasing rapidly in number.

1981 Fuji. Marketing Research Co., Ltd.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

POSSIBLE JAPAN WRAP", TELEPHONE TRANSFORMATION EXAMINBD
Tokyo SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI in Japanese 21 Nov 81 pp 38-142

[Text] The Japan National Railways and Japan Telegraph and Telephone Corporation

are drawing attention as possible targets of administrational fiscal reform. Although
some say that "it would be senseless for Japan Telegraph and Telephone to be used as

a tool in fiscal recovery" (Chairman Oyohswa of the All~Japan Telecoulunication
workers Union) it is a fact that inside Japan Telegraph and Telephone and within the
Liberal Daocratic Party there are rapidly increasing rumblings about changing Japan
Telegraph and Telephone free a public corporation into a private enterprise. Policy
will be set in the next month or two, and a gigantic enterprise with capital of

1 trillion yen and authorization for another 3 trillion yen nay be formed.

On 16 October unprecedented labor-managanent negotiations were held at Japan
Telegraph and Telephone in which. according to Secretary Yanagishi of the All-Japan
Teleconnnmications Workers Union, "when one side proposed, the other side accepted."

Bight people including Japan Telegraph and Telephone's President Shindo and Vice
President Kitahara attended for the Public Corporation, while all three meabere of
the Central hecutive Couittee of the headquarters of the All-Japan Telecoe-unica-
tions Workers Union led by Chairnan Oyskawa and Chief Secretary Yanagishi attended
on behalf of the union. Under the usual practice in labor-managaent negotiations
at Japan Telegraph and Telephone prior to President Shindo's assuaing his office,
the president would not have been able to attend labor negotiations. Further-ore.
the eight to three ratio is "collective bargaining" is reportedly unique in the
history of the talks.

The consultations lasted over 2 hours, and in than a heated discussion developed on
the question of turning Japan Telegraph and Telephone into a private enterprise,

a question which is directly confronting the public corporation. It was President
Shindo who touched off the discussion. He expressed his warm appreciation to the
union for "the resolve it has show thus far."

On 7 October, the All-Japan Telecommunications workers Union drafted a resolution
in preparation for the 34th meeting of its Central Comittee. The resolution con-
tained the statement: "We are opposed to conversion to private enterprise, but in
such areas as data comunications, the basics for competition should be actively
adopted." This was unanimously adopted on 12 October.

1‘2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Labor unions in the public corporations have a strong inclination toward maintenance
of the status quo, and it is rare that one of then would go so far as to actively
change its own working conditions by advocating introduction of the principle of
competition. President Shindo applauded the position taken by the All-Japan
Telecommunications workers Union.

In fact, President Shindo said: "The resolution is written in jargon but, if I
read between the lines, it considerably overlaps my own thinking. I am, rather, put
at ease about the union which opposes everthing; I consider it has shouldered its
responsibility."

In the course of his remarks, President Shindo, speaking soberly about the current
situation of Japan Telegraph and Telephone, said: "If we were in the private sector.
we would be near bankruptcy." The union side pressed him on this. It said: ”You
will unduly upset the membership. Withdraw that remark."

President Shindo bowed his head, but then he broke in saying: "Very well, but let

me say something". The "collective bargaining" suddenly became a very quiet oneeman
show.

"It is impossible to achieve what the union is asking for unless we get free of
national budgetary controls. No matter how large Japan Telegraph and Telephone may
be, it is still part of the state apparatus. It cannot be excluded from the across-
the-board regulations which give it the same status as the administrative agencies
and offices. The situation might be different if we could operate according to the
Public Corporation Act, but it is impossible to achieve the union's desires while we
are completely tied up by strong administrative directives and legislation which
supersedes the Public Corporation Act. It is a matter of using the situation, with
its fiscal shortfall and extraordinary board of inquiry, to get free of the confines
of national budgetary controls."

Suddenly the question had been raised. Japan Telegraph and Telephone is the star
performer of the three public corporations and five government enterprises. In 6
years it contributed ‘80 billion yen to the government, and it did this while lower-
ing telephone rates. The question of converting to private enterprise, which had
been smoldering in Japan Telegraph and Telephone, burst out all at once at a
"collective bargaining" session.

After the collective bargaining session, a second hearing was held in the fourth
working group of the special administrational board of inquiry (with Professor
hiroyoshi Kato as chairman of the group). At the hearing, a member of the Mass
Communications Committee said: "Still, Japan Telegraph and Telephone is one of
the public enterprises. Is it not appropriate for it to have the same status?"

In a forceful voice, bristling with anger, President Shindo retorted: "The workers
knock themselves out and get no reward for their effort. Would this be allowed in
the private sector? If you were part of Japan Telegraph and Telephone, what would
you do?“ The All-Japan Telecommunications workers Union was delighted to hear

of this incident. They said: I'The old man (this is what President Shindo is called
in the All-Japan Telecommunications Workers Union) will not be shut up now." All

at once appreciation for Shindo grew, and both labor and management began all at

once to agree to their basic perception of the issue of making Japan Telegraph and
Telephone a private corporation.

1&3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secretary Yamagishi of the All-Japan Telecomunications workers Union said: "In

the earlier proposal we suggested that the corporation would have a monOpoly over
circuits but would compete with the private sector in services as such. Speaking

as a citizen and in light of the way times are changing, it would not do for the
corporation to sit back and do nothing in the current situation. The corporation,
however, has developed a policy of private sector managaaent in the form of ownership
by the people, and it would be strange to convert to private ownership a canon

asset of the citizens of the nation which includes property worth more than 9 trillion
yen. In the last analysis, public ownership must be a prerequisite."

In saying this, Secretary Yamagishi was using the argument for having the form of a
public corporation to put on a show of opposition to a shift to the private sector;
however, since his position as secretary ultimately makes him responsible for an
organization of 290,000 union members, considerable political allowance must be given
to statements he makes.

In fact, Secretary Yamsgishi is flexible; he said: "President Shindo said he would
prepare a response on the question of private managelent in February, but an answer
will develop in the neat three or four sessions if there is give-and-take between
managaent and labor."

Chairman Oyokawa also has somewhat decided views on the matter. he said: "It will

be necessary to have a system in which shares cannot be bought up by certain share-
holders such as large firms. It will be necessary to look at the haropean system

of special citizen's shares, etc., as reference in studying how to devise a public
conversion to private managanent and how to realize the capabilities of those involved.
It will be necessary to study various nethoda such as open accounting and a checking
structure composed of users."

The All-Japan Teleconnunications Workers Union seats to be ready to make a decision
on the question of private management as early as 12 Decalber. Although the simple
term private managaaent is used, various formlas such as completely private manage-
ment or a third sector srranganent could be considered, but in view of the public
nature of Japan Telegraph and Telephone, both labor and management have ruled out
completely private manag-ent. Therefore, the option becomes a third sector formla
of private management answerable to the public.

Furthermore, the Tanaka faction of the Liberal Danocratic Party, which has very
great influence on the Ministry of Posts and Telecommnications and the All—Japan
Telecomnications Workers Union, is said to be encouraging the change; Diet tuber
Kakuei Tanaka himself has reportedly said: "Go ahead with the shift to private
management."

Chairman (ﬂiroyoshi) Harada of the Liberal Democratic Party "Subco-ittee on the
Telegraph and Telephone Enterprise" has also hinted at approval of private nanagnent.
He said: "Even within the Liberal Democratic Party there are people who come from
the bureaucracy and have the view that things are probably all right as they stand.
Because of my position I cannot give my private views, but an organization which
cannot reward people for working hard should not be all right. On top of that,

under the current circumstances, Japan Telegraph and Telephone, which is working
toward a highly informational society, cannot be expected to make full use of its
capabilities. "

hh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Movement toward pri rate management is gaining strength within the public corporation
and among those outside the corporation who are concerned with the question.

The interim report of the special board of inquiry will be given at the and of July
next year, but it scans as though the conclusions of the fourth working group which
will handle the question of Japan Telegraph and Telephone will be made before that
and will be released as early as the end of March. The issue of converting Japan
Telegraph and Telephone to private management will come to a head quickly in the next
month or two.

Even so, the characteristics of a functionary are said to be persistence, regular
attendance and not doing any work. One cannot say that all 330,000 Iaployses fit
this description, but it is a fact that there are many employees of public corpora-
tiona who are enjoying a warm bath in a full tub. Away from Tokyo, to be an aployee
of Japan Telegraph and Telephone is to be elite. The uployees cling to their Japan
Telegraph and Telephone badges, and salary levels are high for those outlying areas.

There are managers in the prefectures who openly declare: "With a change to private
management, things would get tougher and salaries would go up, so rather than that,
it will be just fine to have a public corporation as we have now." Many of the
young technicians at the connunications research center sing the praises of the
"paradise" at Japan Telegraph and Telephone. They say: "If private management were
to come about, cost controls would become strict and research themes would naturally
be subjected to selection or rejection. Japan Telegraph and Telephone would lose its
appeal if the free research system which has existed so far were to change."

According to Director Kojina of the corporation's Personnel Division: "The majority
of the 330,000 employees think that since they are gradually becoming poorer under
the current situation, sone sort of changes will have to be made. However. when it
comes to approving a change to private managanent, only about 30 percent will agree."

Nevertheless, if the current situation is allowed to continue, various problems which
will determine the fate of these 330,000 employees will arise in as little as b to

5 years. These problems could make the corporation lose its drive as an organization
and invite a weakening of its fiscal base. Japan Telegraph and Telephone, the star
perforner, could become another Japan National Railways. This is the background for
the switch to private management.

At present, the budget and the general provisions wirtten into the budget document,
the Public Electricity and Comunications Act, the Japan Telegraph and Telephone
Public Corporation Act, and strong sdninistrational direction from the hiniatry of
Posts and Telecomunicat ions have Japan Telegraph and Telephone completely tied down.

The system of general budgetary rules, in particular, has an effect which is
equivalent to virtually depriving the public corporations of a self-supporting system
of operation. One example of the regulations under the Public Corporation Act is
that whilea private enterprise can apply excess funds to stocks, bonds or savings,

in Japan Telegraph and Telephone's case, all excess funds are deposited in the Bank
of Japan. (Oarrmtly these deposits are 200 billion yen.) No interest is paid on
the first 3 billion yen. Beyond that amount, interest is paid at the rate of only
3-4 percent.

1:5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The greatest restriction is that Japan Telegraph and Telephone has absolutely no
power to set wages independently. Currently, complete implantation of the rulings
of the Public Corporation and the National Buterprise Labor Relations Comission in
arbitration on raising the basic level of governaent employees' salaries has become
a political issue which is bound up in administrational reform; Japan Telegraph _
and Telephone, as is to be expected, has also been drawn into this issue. This is
a public corporation which even in the high growth sector of communications and
information has somehow lowered its rates and still contributed 480 billion yen to
the state.

Considering that Japan Telegraph and Telephone is a company with 1 trillion yen in
capital, it would seem that it is a company which over the next 4 years could pay
dividends of 10 percent in two installments. when the shareholder, which is the state,
gathers up all of the dividends and then says, in regard to wages: "Since the

workers have the same status as public servants, full implanentation...," it is not
unreasonable that there are cries of "foul play."

Furthermore, before 1975, when the corporation made a contribution, Japan Telegraph
and Telephone was experiencing the most difficult period since its founding in 1952.
With the demand for telephones increasing, the difference between income and expendi-
tures was 2 percent per year and there was a deficit of 80 million yen. Redemption of
Japan Telegraph and Telephone bonds peaked at about 60 million yen per year, and
coverage of this debt at somewhat more than 10 percent of proceeds put truendous
pressure on Japan Telegraph and Telephone's fiscal affairs.

Since the average rate of financing for a firm in the private sector is around 3-4
percent, how strong this pressure was can probably be imagined.

As imediate measures to deal with this situation, the corporation developed policies
of rationalization which would not be considered cononeense in a public corporation.
It took steps to eliminate the deficit mainly by holding down the number of its
personnel (a reduction by 81 persons was included in the draft budget request for
1982, the first such reduction since the inauguration of the corporation) and con-
stricting capital investment (20 million yen).

The reality is that even after making contributions and implementing rationalization,
the reward is "equal status" with such entities as Japan National Railways, which
is in the red.

If such a situation continues it is probably inevitable that working seriously will
be considered foolish. Eventually the organization's drive will be lost and, along
with a deterioration of the fiscal base, a "crisis at Japan Telegraph and Telephone"
will develop.

To cope with peak demand for telephone service, Japan Telegraph and Telephone under
the leadership of Vice President Kitahara is moving foward with the concept of an
INS (Information Network System). As nontelephone services such as computer-associ-
ated date communications facsimile and video comunications develop, it will be

the INS which will facilitate exchange of these kinds of information.

Japan Telegraph and Telephone's aim, backed by the use of digital comnications
and optic fibers, is to build a huge demand by eliminating the distance differential
and at the same time to strengthen its fiscal base by greatly cutting costs. The
INS is Japan Telegraph and Telephone's ticket to a new lease on life.

1.6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Currently. the distance differential for the telephone is 1:60. Since this should
shrink to 1:5 or 1:6 in the coming years, duand will probably begin to increase
again. Already, the differential for facsimile is only 1:1.5. The effects of
technological innovation are already beginning to show.

On the other hand, with the introduction of digital coumications, it seeas that a
personnel surplus of more than 100,000 persons will occur in 10 years. however, these
excess personnel cannot mothly and efficiently be put to new use through spinoff,
etc., within the presmt frnework of the public corporation.

The best electronics and communications research center in the world is at Japan
Telegraph and Telephone. The center has more than 3,000 people and spends nearly
60 billion yen a year on research and developnent. It has taken the lead in Japan's
technological revolution in the field of electronics.

In the fields of super LSI, optic conunications and digital comnications in
particular, Japan Telegraph and Telephone boasts the world's most advanced technology.
This is true to such an extent that for the past 10 years IBM itself has been seeking
to conclude a cross license agreement. A contract on this will be signed, possibly
this week.

However, unless the Public Electronic Comunicatione Act and the Public Corporation
Act are revised, it is impossible to extend this highly advanced tecImology to other
areas of industry and to use it extensively in comercial activities.

In short, as long as Japan Telegraph and Telephone is subject to budgetary controls
and other such laws and is subject to administrative direction. it will not, struggle
as it might, break clear of the danger it faces even as it makes progress. Even its
ace in the hole, the INS, is praised upon the aployees' industry and will to work
and upon a stable fiscal base. There is no way to break clear of these restricting
conditions except conversion to private management, whether it is as a third sector
or as official private managenent.

What, then, if Japan Telegraph and Telephone does convert to private nanagenent? Its
proceeds are over 6 trillion yen; profit (difference between income and expenditures),
388.1 billion yen; total capital, 9.4591 trillion yen.

The only enterprise which can rank with this is the public untilities corporation of
Tokyo Electric Power. By comparison with Tokyo Electric Power, it would probably be
appropriate for Japan Telegraph and Telephone's capital to be 1 trillion yen and

its authorized capital to be around 3 trillion yen.

Breathing a heavy sigh, President Hiragishi of Tokyo Electric Power said: "Up to
now Tokyo Electric Power has been the only giant. If an even larger enterprise were
to appear, I would be as confident as possible but, from the viewpoint of capital
procurement and other aspects of corporate operations, I think 1 trillion yen would
be the limit as far as Tokyo Electric Power is concerned. If the corporation were to
start with 1 trillion yen, well...."

President Shindo has said: "We will not use the KDD formula." Therefore, the state
would probably hold about half of the capital and the remaining half would probably
be divided among small stockholders with stringent restrictions on its acquisition.

107 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore, although the move would be called a switch to private management, the
public service character of the corporation and guarantee of security in time of
emergaxcy could not be maintained unless the circuit network were placed under the
control of the state. On top of this, assuming a shift to an approval systa
parallel to the one for Tokyo Electric Power for questions involving rates and so
forth, the current managelent omission would probably have to be reorganized to
include subscribers, employees. the government and nanagaaent and to have stronger
oversight authority.

The leader of a certain securities firm pointed out the tremendous effect a changeover
would have. he said: "If Japan Telegraph and Telephone goes public and half of 1
trillion yen, or 500 billion yen, is absorbed by the public, stocks across the board
will slump."

Furthermore, capital investment to realize the INS as well as for the other purpose
would have to continue at 1.6-1.7 trillion yen per year. Procurement of capital will
naturally be a major these.

Even if the corporation were to change to private management, there would be a limit
to what it would be able to procure by relying on government guaranteed bonds (Japan
Telegraph and Telephone bonds). Therefore, "company bonds" issued independently

by the company, similar to the current "Special Japan Telegraph and Telephone Bands,"
would be necessary. Just 2 or 3 years ago, Tokyo Electric Power issued 100 billion yen
worth of company bonds every month for a year; procuraent of capital in excess of
this amount would cause heavy repercussions in government and other bond issues.

Furthermore, if the corporation were to issue company bonds, it would have to increase
its own capital. If a corporation with 1 trillion yen in capital increased its
capital by even 10 percent at face value, it would draw off 100 billion yen from

the market. Total capital increases this year amounted to a little more than 1
trillion yet. Thus, one capital increase would draw off 10 percent of the money.
There certainly would be a connection as though a nanoth had come into a pond.

0n the other hand, after the switch to private management was realized, would the
union remain solely with the General Council of Trade unions of Japan, the Sohyo,
which adamantly opposes changing public corporations over to private managaaent?
Especially since this involves the All-Japan Telecomunications Workers Union, which
is the largest and most rightwing oriented union in 'SOhyo, conversion of Japan
Telegraph and Telephone to private aanganent would probably cause great repercussions
on the labor front.

COPYRIGHT: Shukan Toyo Keizai 1981

9111
080: 4105/26

148
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BCONGIIC

TOYOTA MOTOR WORKS OUT BULLISH PRODUCTION PLAN FOR '82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in Engltnh V01 19, No 986 22 Dec 81 p 3

[Text]

announced their husinsa plats
tor 1m. in winch the nation's
No. 1. aisomakina coup set
their new production target 5
per cent ﬁsher than this year..

The prodsction goal at Toyota
Motor and its sales arm tor the
new year is 3.300.000 units tex-
cludino knockdown kits (or
overseas assembly). compared
with an estimated 3.2mm to:
this year.

Toyota said it espects its ex-

ports in in: touo almat crab .

wise at about UNA!» units in
view oi the stricter export an-
vironrneot.

Conversely. the company is
bullish toward domestic sale.
which it estimates will climb by
to per cent to 1.050.000 units.
Behind the optimistic outlook
on domestic sales is the reds:-
llon oi the otricial discount rate
enforced by the Bank at Japan
and the Government (torn
Decembertl.

Toyota policy makers believe
tr.‘ hank rate cut will lead to
improving corporate [toms at
large and cause a pickup in
both corporate and individual
demand. They also hope that
unveiling at new cars and

reatyling oi uistiu models
will pump in lresh demand in
thenew yor.

Here is the gist oi Toyota's
outlook on the auto business
trends in Japan in 1002:

W “in: Aramaic
demand tor automobiles at
home in tea will insane to
0.100.000 units (excluding
W vela'clas). the second
taunt nest only to a record
0.80.0ﬂscoi'ed in 1070. (Toyota
initially estimated domotic de
mud in lﬂl at 4.1M.” units
and 50.000 units more or less.
but it will actually remain at
some 3.900.010.)

One lactor underlying the
bullish view is the rebut-id oi
passmgor car sales which be-
an to so over the year-earlier
level from around September.
The other is an anticipated up
turn oi truck sales stemming
lrom themoneyrateuitanda
rsultant business recovery.

Toyota has a target to sell 2
million passemer can. trucln
andbusesat home intm.Asa
step to attain the ambition
goal by stage. the commny
must annually sell its vehicles
at a pace swilter than the
growth at aggregate demand.
Toyota thus expects its share in

COPYRIGHT: 1981, The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.

CSO: 0120/100

£9
Iron omcuat use ONLY

the domestic market
30.3th in 1902 all

37.: per cent in 1000 an
cent in 181.

When midget vehicl
eluded. Wu don

mand in the new yeat
to 5.00.000 units. c
with an estimated it
this year. in this east
wants its share in the
market to rise to 00 pl
100: irorn this year's
cent.

Experts: Overseas
use: will move almai
or rise marginally b
cent over a year earl
ments to the 0.5. t

nations in

will have to try to too
to developini noun:
elsewhere with scrul
torts to cultivate lresl
The company will net
crease production oi 1
00.000 to 140.000.

When KD kits are
the projected induct
Toyota coup in in:
3.530.000 units as:
3.300.000 estimated tot
HCONOH 1C

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDIGENOUS COMPANIES JOIN FORCES AGAINST AMERICAN TAX

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19 No 987, 29 Dec 81 p 5

l?ext]

COPY RIGHT :

Kyoto Ceramic Co. leisu-
shita Electric Industrial Cot.
Sony Corp and others lava
decided to organise-s plaintiff
group for owning the unitary
usintheus. in reistlontoihe
start of proceed“. in the US.
Supreme Court shortly on a
use assinst the tax raised by
anAmerian oomnany. -

Chicano Bridge 6 iron Co. of
Oslt Brook. ill. filed s suit with
the Supreme Court on testing
the legality of the tax from its

View that the tax violates m

of fair taxation set it
me 0.8. Federal Camuhttion.
in the 0.8.. antithetical
enterprises. such as later-
notional Business Iteehioes
Corp and Coca£ola Cannany.
moon the Chicago firnt and
have organized plaintiff

W-

In Japan. opposition to the
ux is on the riseon the
that it impaee e dill tea on
Japanese and m foreign
enterortea in the US. and it

obstructs smooth oonuneroe
betWeen Japan and the us. as
well as obstructs investments
lnihelis.

Thiflyosix firms in the Renal
(Osaka-Kyoto) ares. looming
Kyoto Ceramic and Mststtshita.
became the first in forming a
cooncil for considering
mum: tamer? units:
ta a l" ration
Sammie Orprlutiou (Kei-
(hone) in Tokyo followed by
adopting a resolution again“
thstsx.

The Kauai Economic Ped-
eration iifanlteireni directly
hassppeaietl to the states usinc
the unitary tex swiftly to
abolish the in and also has
drawn up e resohttion asking
the Japanese Government to
talte effective diplomstic
actions

Kyoto Ceramic and other:

nowyplan to seal s ism plain-
tiff com to onus toonpsse
thetaxinrelstiontoiheoomina
SW Court mutilation of
"'m : : n '4

1981. The Nihon Ke1zai. Shinbun, Inc.

($80: 4120/100

50

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC

[Text]
The Japanese economy in
ﬁscal 1 ﬂartlu next A

growth will be somewhat dil-
ierent t‘rorrlil {seal 1”]. First.
exports wi wing at a
ieaser pace heeatae oi inten-
silyiru trade frictions. Secuid.
ﬁscal policy will he playing a
minor role due to budgetary
momma. On the other innd.
however. stability oi prices will
favorably allect personal con-
sumption and. mainly.
will lead to recovery oi cautai
investment by retailer enter-
prises. Fiscal its: economy
thus will be characterized by a
straiger domestic demand than
in fiscal ml. although the eco-
nomic growth rate as a whole
will remain almost

period. 'l'hoe ileum attest if:
moderate expansion oi the
economy.

Prices continued basically
stable throughout the year. Ad-
vances oi Wholesale price re
mained alone. leading to an

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equally calm movement oi con~
sinner prices. which also bene
titted from moderate rise in
labor cost. in November.-
wholesaleprieesatood at Le per
cent and consumer prices (in
Totyo) 3.9 per cent ahead at a
ﬂ.

in the balance of payments.
trade balance kept nainiu a
large surplus each month doe to
strong eaports of machinery
and slow imports of raw mate-
rials. The «merit-account. hal-
anee as a result armed into the
black in the second warter.
aver-aux M million at 'a
monthly rate. which grew to
mo million in the third
quarter. and ".300 milliai in
October.

Despite these seemingly
favorable perimeter com-
pared with other industrialized
economies. the Japanese
ecoriorny in the past year was
not necessarily in
shape.

First or ell. its expansion de-
pended primarily on external
demand in the absence oi
strength in personal consump
tion and corporate capital in-
vestment 0! the real growth
rate of 34 percent duriu the
first nine months it the year.
2.6 per cent was attributable to
exports and other overuse aur-
plus. with domestic private do

5 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ventory adjiatrnent ii
m Istiiootlity I:
y .
imam. m
mater-lab lagged (g1
mutant l
was muonttﬁam
enterprises was cont:
weak. Imbalances el

seems littie'liiielihoi
aharprnarlmponcntd
pan's import price ot
fiscal tan is cape
amaze are a barrel c
sis. up 1.9 per er
iiscaltaei.
Domesticsuy.aiven
data tor iiacal reha

mam
lowing the Deceinbe
count rate cut by 0.7:
tape point. money is
remain relaxed.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON' Y

stunning short e! 5 per cent in
mite-nu.

Prlvete cepIteI Investment
wlich ehnnped In angel tat
owing to W epend-
In by etneller hneIneoa. Ie
anected to an: up In Ilecel
teen ee dorneetlc private de-
mend will eteae e moderete re-
covery. W to alarm
tIon a! mullet bmlnaea' In
veeunult. Inveetlnentellnedet
new product de end
hieher eIIIcIency renteIne
strong In the mentIme. All In
ell. prlvete cepItel Inveetlnent
IntbeellmellrIeebye.dper

cent In reel term.

A: Ier prlvete Inventory In-
veeunent. coneldereble pro
use In edjuetmeu hee been
eeen In heeIc meterhle Indu
' pemleum end
onel mu. end never end
pulp. where Inventory lens-
over wee heevy. In the new
[heel yeer. unv- Inr Inven-
tory buildup. I! undone. wlll
ehow npeellneldemendueb
up.

Overall. minute {er the
mmyin mutilate
nornlmlGNP‘rwthounper
upt' 'nupercentutl-

tmtdnlthcyenlnetoreﬂhelr

53

edveneudlrlnctbeellmwlll

evereu uper murmured
with 1.4 per cent tor Ileeel m1.

Wlhetll pereeuletotell
shorten percent Inrthethlrd
coneeculve yeer. (The thee
yeere' everue will be 3.3 pc
cent). In the eftermeth o! the
two ell erIeee. the Jedeneee

Whppeentohevecm
cleeer to e elow- end
me type of economy ltlte
other ncedcountrleedthe
Wat mnetIntportentchel-
Ienoe n3 Jepen In (heel

In In. edlnetntent to each n
slender» In Wot. For one
thlng. thIewIll require my:
ellmtm o! budget-end ed-
InInIetretIve :meeht? Another
mt centlm
Jfa'te In WWW
rete renew-ea - tec
ly. llnenclelly end otherwlee. -
Another teeIt leclnc Jenen Ie
tomonth out Ite trede reletlone
wlth the 0.8. end Weet Europe
wle‘ch live been bedly etreIned
win; to the eherp rbe In Je-
pen'e exports end emulah Im-
pom With Jepen'e ehened the
internetlnnel my m
eteedlly. melntenenee 0! her-
m n! the world

.113. ' " eeeurelteeteble

growth.

I1, The Nihon 1021281 Shit-bun, Inc.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HITACHI, EUROPE TIE 0N INDUSTRIAL ROBOT SALES

Tokyo JAPAN BCONMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 987, 29 Dec 81 p 7

[Text]

COPYRIGRT:

Hitachi. Ltd. out you will

mmdmw
robotstohmpomdorlto

'mont aaloa agency contract:

ma ‘toin'o WWI.
Wat gormony'a Zone!!!»

loullworle and Prnnce’ a
meek

Under tho uh. Mp.
Hindi will ooppiy It: room.
painting and other robots to
Iartio and lanolin-Mutan-
vorko tor attribution to their
respective countries. blartin in
a machine tool um company.
and Zeppelin lo a major mala-

dcnamlonl ominmeot And

Magnum.

1b tie with the German ﬁrm
may develop into a lunatic
that. mum ten-Wat
know-how «land morn oom-
woltamlve hush. lb-

Laminc. a top cot-Mon
www.mnuady
WNW-Moments.

Hltodti tin boom touport
”Mint”. m
(«European motor two 0.3.
com. mmdwithan
" ' ' bottoms".

two US. firm are
men. ondAuto
muting. withwuchintacﬂ
boron in WI" tutu.-
robot-

ln pddition. iiilacﬂ In boon
7‘73:th with to othot
oro on tum
Britain'o Corral Electric.»
tie upmrdiotoni. orroiatod.
aﬂthppn-ciiu to Hitacti
lave com. (com Sweden. rt»
land. Switnarhnd. Balm.
Motrin. the Soviet (Join and
mes-ammonium

1981, The Nihon Keizal Shinbun. Inc.

050? 61 20/ 100

530

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOMIC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NISSAN MORE CAUTIOUS THAN TOYOTA IN 1982 BUSINESS PLAN

Tokyo JAPAN BCONCMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19 No 987 29 Dec 81 p 7

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

Nibum low: Ca again
mun-1mm
ummmc...u
wanna-mu

1hcnluufsNo.2nuundur
Inuuuned “a hﬂlﬂlll pun-
{almhhumdn
whhh u Id.un now yank

would: Iﬂl a: mono
mimoptﬁmtwlﬂl.

Wampum to

mnm

(or mammal;
awn-rem

Nbuncuvhlmmmm

m uh In In by 1.:

car can: In Inaaun Ilub

>mmm m

Asturaapnunndulnulat
hung Nun-n annulunltnt
«mmnnuuuu.ups nu «ma
whilo Toyota put: I: u
43pr um want

Aha h ouﬂmgluw «and

WIN anu>
spin In Mr
view. though yin-alum

In «quasi»
byllftofbobyl.0|lr
but”. anticipating

€133“ mwuubyu
09139.06. Thom-

1981. The Nihon Keizni Shinbun, Inc.

4120/100

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ECONOM 1C

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DOMESTIC DEMAND RECOVERY SEEMS UNCER’I‘AIN PROSPECT

Tokyo JAPAN ECONIMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 987 29 Dec 81 pp 1,16

[Article by Hasaltilto Islilzukn]

[Excerpt]

As tut gives way to use. the

Jspsnese economy continues to
hecsuchtinstrspwithnoensy
way out in stoit. with weakness
in domestic tbmsnd presenting
the nstien's econotnic mens-
aers with the roost knotty won
lent.
Just s your ego. the Govern-
ment ante up with en outioolt
which put liscsl I”! rest eco
nomic youth rste st 5.3 per
cent. As the yesr progrased.
however. it or: forced to
revise the projection downward
twice - toe? per cent and then
to it per cent The origins!
outlook stood out [or its overt
optimism. cornpsred with [not
of the projections by privste
institutions snticipsting s
Wth rate in the networ-
hoodoupercent.

The Government's relative
hullishness s yesr one was
hosed on an emotion thst
consumption would revive on
the strength at slowdown oi
sdvsnceo (1’ prices. But thing
have not come out thst way.
Despite the success in con-
milling iniletion. prlvste linsl
consumption expenditures
continue swish. tuning out
to he the prime culprit {or the
slower-thsnexpecled economic

COPYRIGHT:

C30: («120/100

growth in iisesl ml es in in
liscsl.

min. the Government's
projection tor fiscal 1m shut
out tor an unmatched a qr
um‘uni — a 53 percent reel
economic crowth witch corn-
psres with most privste institu-
tions' lorecssts falling in the 34
per cent rsnge. And the
assumption is min the some
as s yesr ego — s simmer
domestic demand like perm!
cowuniption and housim.

Policy tenets receiving top
priority sre else the some as s
yesr one - t) sllevlstion a!
trade frictions srising from
Japan's hesvy dependence on
apart; and 2) reduction at
budgetdeﬂcit.

Wllithemyesrhesbleto
me better. lesrunp Inset-
from the pest yesr's perfum-
slice?anme

out. the prospects sre not quite

bright.

The Governnieiit expecu
thst. end that privstrlh
«mm-em to '- val-rho
extent. t persons ammo
tion expenditures will revivein
theconiin‘yesronthsstrunh
oi inersssss in overtime
worked snd hosmes. while
prices remain csltn. Sense

1981. The Nihon Ketzei Shinbun. Inc.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mention this assumption, hov
ever. citing the prospect till
we incruss in I”: to h
negotiated in the spring tsbo
oilensive will ever-ego less ths1
in lat. (The Gmnment itsei
{oresees this possibility.) All
text snd other mount
apenditures will continue tt
sccount tor In lnuesslns
impaction of workers’ them
in the shsence oi persons
income tax cut. which is ab
sohstely ruled out st s tins:
when reduction at fisesl deﬁci
is s sscroesnct policy ohiec
tire. Disposshle “team there
fore is expected to mime ti
9;.

Housin investment is prt
iecled by the Covert-neat i
grow by over to per cent i
ﬂees! m2. compared with tit
ﬂscsl yesr's 0.9 per cent. ‘l‘ll
mumption is most seriousl
challenged in the light 0! st
sence at say diective tum
to spelt cl. The recon low:
it: oi the Bent of Jspsn a
aunt rste. tor maple.
hsvimnoltnpsctstsllontt
cost a! housing (iii-nee by con
merciel linsncisl institution
con OFFICIAL use: ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

TECENOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE FOR 1980's REVEALED
Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English Vol 14 No 8, Aug 81 pp 11-15

[Article by Shuji ‘i‘snura. director. Electric Standards Division, Agency of
Industrial Science and Technology, Ministry of International Trade and Industry]

"”1 LCh-racteristics or Jammie Technological Develop-

l-l. m Strum led Technology

Economic umh in postwar Japan has been makim
progress. making full use of the open economic system. that
istorayimportinanecessaryrawrnsterialsandesportins
nnrrt-i‘aentred products. At the same time, the Japanese
economy has been adapting itself optimally to the world
economic development. making shifts from using coal to oil.
from inland locations to coastal location, from snail-scale
to large-scale plants with neat mass-production effects. Japan
generally owes its economic success throw: this adaptation
and to the high stability of the world economy in the 1960’s
continuing into the first half of the l910's. closely linked
with stable international currencies as a prerequisite to trading

and increasing supplies of energy and resources It is important
from a technological point of View that the postwar period
was the ﬂowering time of tedtnolcgical Innovation in the
mass market symbolized by the mass-production of automobiles
and electronic home apliancea arch as televisions and radio
sets

These circumstances have molded Japan's technological
developments into "end products types" or “downstream
types" which make much of markets, with tendencies toward
limited technological developing capacity in respect of the
supply of energy and raw materials essential to production.
From an lntemationai point of view. such countries as
the U.S.. West Germany. Britain and France show. even
today. high percentages of self-naiﬂct‘ency in energy and
raw materials. having a lot of domestic energy and resource
industries. at home. In contrast. Japan has looked down
at the coal industry as a declining industry. while instead

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cherishng the oil refutery industry even without having
domestic oil felds. reuniting in unmecessful fostering of
energy intensive industries equipped with adequate power
of technological development for scarring new energy sources
1hiswealtnesscan beviasal'cedquiteweilinthefieldsof

energy and resources development. in new oil fields under
development. most excavators and gigantic machines are either
American or European made. More important is the fact
that know-how for resources development has almost been
fully monopolized by specialized companies of Europe and
the US.‘ Japan's present situation might be the natural
outcome of a country. sparce in resources. but it seems
necesary for the country. as one of the largest consumers
of energy and resources in the world. to malte intensive
effort at teciuiological development in these fields.

Another prominent feature of the present industrial structure
is that Japan has been growing on an economy primarily of
civil products. Because technology for defense and military
equipment is often required to show high performance in
very special environments. the technology developed cannot
readily be applied as it is in other fields. However. its effects
on space development. and the aeronautic and electronic
industries are not negligible. Usually the research and develop.
merit of technology for defense and military equipment gives
first importance to- performance while giving little head to
cost. resulting in the effect of widening the frontiers of
technology in specific fields. On the contrary. the research
and development of civil products. is much limited by cost.
conﬁning the pursuit of performance within cost limits.
Consequently. techniques produced in Japan tend to show
good cost-performance balance. though somewhat lacking lrt
technolog'cal creativity. In use the tend. to be multifarious
and highly applicable because of efforts to malte full use
of available techniques which contribute to reducing substantial
development time and costs.

Table l. which shows finance for technological development
in major industrial countries. show clearly Japan's uniqueness
of small government finance for Rab. It shows. that while the
Japanese government shoulders an extremely small 1% of the
expenses for research and development carried out by industry.
American and British governments provide more than 20%
of such expenses. and that this difference applies prirnariiy
to such sectors as aircraft. and electronic and electric machines.
At that period. the research and development related to
energy is not amply budgeted. the role of the government

and universities in each country scents to have been under-
estimated as compared with today.

In Japan. smaller businesses are generally at high levels
of production technology and support large companies primarily
engaged in the assembly and production of final products, by
supplying parts and subcontracting simple or standardized
machining processes This is particularly prominent in the
machin'mg and assembling industries. such as the machinery
industry and durable consumer goods industry. However

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOROFFIGALlJSEONLY

sorneindusttialscctorssuchasthechemlcalinduatryisnot
merited by the nibcontracting system because of the con-
tinuous manufacture up to ﬁnal products udng integrated
processes. in the process of diffum new techniques in
widely spreading smaller companies. subcontract production
systems developed by leading large firms play every important
role. in most cases. master companies give intensive technical
guidance in improvement of production equipment. quality
control. and trainirtg of technicians which results in satisfactory

such guidance. have
workers and drive for competition irt digesting new technology.
These qualiﬁcations of small busineaea have been developed
over a time under domestic conditions. Native industries
traditionally existing in local areas have been a major source
of supply of small firms thus melting important contributions
to the present industrial structure. Foundry. ceramic and
textile industries for example. have frequently developed
special production areas.

Relhbility of parts and semifinished products produced
by small scale industries is an essential prerequisite for Japanese
aibcontracting practices. The American automobile hduatry
shows a lower rate of dependency on subcontract maratt‘acture
than in Japan. and it sometimes suffers labor disputes. melting
it diftiwlt to maintain stable supply. in West Germany.
machinery. precin'on. and chemical industries have been
prevalent historically and technology has been highly advanced
with specialized industries distributed locally. Recently.
however. the country is slipping behind in adapting electronic
technology and is having diffmlty.because it has been arifering
underdevelopment of specialized electronic parts industries

before worldwide trends toward electronic conversion in the
machinery industry or elsewhere. it is one oi‘ the favorable
conditions in following technological changes in an inter
national environment that Japanese smaller businesses are
competitive at high technological levels and are sufficiently
mature to asimilate new technology.

t-z. Role Played by Introduction or Foreign Technology

It is widely known that Japanese industry ins introduced
technologies. from the world over and completed advanced tech»
nology by improving these technologies. From an international
point of view. it is important to know that technologies are
mostly traded simply by themselves with somewhat limited
capital and management participation such as direct investment.
This is partly because restrictions were impowd by Government
on the ’mtroduction of foreign capital till the middle of the
i960‘s but mainly because Japanese 'mdustry had sufficient
technological experience to absorb new technology and years'
of accumulation of productive activities in each technological
sector. For the introduction of technology in those days.

     
  
     

}40.11
I.‘ (0."

1A.! (0.2)
10.. (1 .2)
l1

1 a.o
5.0
on

  

15.4

            
           
  
  

.0 1.2)

7.0 (u)
0..“
1.1

1 CA (0.1)
2.5 (0.7)

10.2 (1 .U)
0.5
2.1
O

1“ (I3)
5.!
9
1 (1 .7) |

11 3 l. 7)
91(03)

 

   

ll ( 0.2)

18.1 (1&1)
llﬂl 3.01
. *1.”

     

            
   
  

   

3“? - s.
:3. 3 :
-...-__~;.__..
pong q 0
dddovu—pu

 

0 (0.21

15.3 (0.1)

    
 
       

ii
.2- iii;
iléiéitiii
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the technological and managerial abilities of industries as
the recipients of the technology were required to be sufﬁcient
to digest the technology introduced. Thus. it me the duty
of major traditional companies which had experience in
production usir; existent technology at home to absorb
and digest new technology. In introducing technology for
the petrochemial industry. for example. it was mostly the
subsidiaries of the traditional Japanese urinatsu chemical
groups. such as Mitsui. Mitsubishi and Sumitomo which were
the predominant industries for coal chemistry in those days
and major oil reﬁning companies that were selected as the
center of a new petrochemical complex. Also. technology
for semiconductors and [C (integrated circuits) elements
which have undergone intensive technological renovation was
introduced primarily by the general electric machinery com-
panies such as Hitachi and Toshiba. Consequently. while in
the us.. which developed technology by itself. smaller
companies spedal'ued in electronic parts appeared trt swarms,
out of which large specialized companies in semiconductor
industry have been growing. In Japan. it was the versatile

large companies which had their own markets for various
final products that developed technology for producing most
advanced electronic parts and integrated circuits. At present.
it is recognized that Japanese electronic parts. except special
items. often exceed American items in cost performance aid
especially in relhbiiity. One of the acknowledged reasons
for this is that the scale of research and development. the
effects of massproduction and capability of quality control
of large versatile companies are very advantageous. in producing
sophisticated mlcroproducts.

[-3. Research and Development for Improvement

Japan. starting with the introduction of technology in
the postwar period. accest‘ully made continuous progress
just because the country favorably made best use of the new
technology and new products introduced. Adaptive efforts
for forem technology gradualy enriched the ground for
improvement. in this process. systems for the development
of improved technology and new products were established.
At present. Japan is recognized as the fastest country in the
world to_absorb new technology. Furthermore. in such eleco
tronics applications as video recorders and robots the reputa-
tion that Japan is advanced in developing new products and
technology for cornmercial’natlon has come to stay.

Currently. Japanese industry has been making a shift from
improving research with limited cost of research and develop-
ment. to applied research with gradually increasing costs.
and at present carrying out "search and development with
a considerably huh cost. as is observed in the development
of new products such as integrated drains and video recorders

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lnczeeee in the onuneliq of lepeneee technology on
pertiybeeeenhythepowthoftechnologenpomtoth:
wotld. In I97! the value of teoeipte ftovn technology «pom
of all industry wee Yen 27,187 million. whidt mounts to
only 20% of peymente for technolog imports. However in
I979 reeeipte weee Yen 133.145 million, which amounts to
55% of the peylnente. During the petlod (too: 197] to 1979

expomthne incteeeedelmoet Stimuwhleinpomhueued
leathenZtltnee.

100e, Introduction
of m

   
   

. ..... ... Autumn: ”We
- " E ‘ "We. Wm M W“
--- Achieved in "00". ”W

l
_3
z! ' eteivuroouete

  

.4
i
i

We“:

Fig. i. Chetecterietice of Induetry end Ooet to:
Reeeercn end Development

The genteel mph: of techmlogy tude in 1979 one
ftorn iton and steel, end commotion industries while the
greeteet deﬁcit come ftotn the electricel end electronice. end
tteneportetion industries. it b interest” to note that there
uncertain tlenehpbetween theperl'omeneeoftpmlcuht
commodity trade and that of technolou tnde for end:
‘ndustn'el eector.

2. Technological Development foe l980’s

Zvl. llnpoetenceclm to ”Science

A: deectlbed whet. the :tntcture of Japanese technology
can be chuectetlzed a being my mtitet otiented and highly
efﬁcient. These chuoctedstlce m illuetteted in Fig.1. where
inteke of new teelmoloo ocean et different eteaet of product
development over e time. in contrast to the flow of typical
technological development whldt stem with e principle and.
via bale end applied research. achieves oommetciellutlon.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japanese technical development has been predominatly via the
back door. “backward engineering". which first introduces
technolog directly necessary for production and alter digesting
it. introduces more advanced technology. in the l980's.
however. it is likely that development of already available
or existstg technology it Japan will be completed but instead.
basicscienceasaseedi‘ortechnologywillbeincreaslngly
more necessary. it is hardly poau‘bie to cover all achievements
of basic science by introduction from foreign countries. like
conventional technological introduction but the country will
be required to make achievements mostly by itself.

Here. "fonvard engineering" type research and development
systems. which. while building up basic science. connect
inventions and discoveries as its fruits to research and develop-
ment. and further. to industrialization are found important.
Studies. for example. 'on the properties of materials under
extreme conditions. arch as ultra-high preaaires and ultra-low
temperatures have lead to the development of superconduc-
tivity and new materials. Also. applied fields of life science.
arch as genie rearrangement. cover unfathomable scope.
Electronic semiconductor devices such as sensors and optical
elements must be made practical and useful as new functional
materials. This requires an increase in public firtance for
research. building up of researchers and improvement of
research environment to permit research activities in the fields
of basic science. It is also important to invite aibstantial
demands for maintaining close relations establidted with
production shops so that the renrlta of research will be
appreciated and util‘ned. While the roles of universities and
government research histltutea will inaease in view of the
creativity of research. the organization of government-
ﬁnanced .basic scientdic research projects advantageous in
making use or industrial experience in productionwill be
promoted as practical systems for organized basic research
and development.

2-2. Advances-cit ot Technological Structure

It is pointed out tint one of the characteristics of the
Japanese technological structure is the laclt of technologies
in special ﬁelds. in the 1980‘s. it will be neceanry to develop
these “missing lhlts". Typical examples of arch development
are technology for developing natural resources and energy.
and space and aeronautlc technology.

For technology for developim oil. coal. and mineral
resources. the predomhant companies are the multinational
majors and it is impractical for Japan to promote its own
research and development because development sites are
located overseas. However. technology indirectly related to

resource development. such as technology for refining crude

materials or technology for transporting energy and raw
materials is at high levels in Iapan.1'hua. developments will

be eagerly promoted in new technoloaical fields. such at

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

development of procesnng losvgrade ores. collection of waste
oilandasclringol'ltsevyoil.vvhiclthsvesonsevvlutmissed
'ltternstionel ettention.

More positively, Japan's efforts at research and development
altstbedkectedinnrchemennerestobeﬁeeofdependency
on existing resources and energy such es oil end coel. thus.
importance should be given to development of renewable
«sources, recycling of resources. research on new energy
sources including nuclear fusion end atomic potver generation.

and development of technology for mving energy. Some
examples of Ispeness technology recently being eppreeiated
in these fields include technology for hidt reliability ofetontlc
meters for pm generation. technology for soles energy
systems for hosting and coolingend for collecting waste heat.
and technology for neutril'zing resources in urban gsrbsgs.

Technology promising kt chemical fields niey include
technology for ﬁtting energy end resources by applying
biochemical reections. developing new materials. developing
tecltniques for energy converdon including fuel cells. end for
improving thermodtemical processes and thermsl energy.

Technologicel development about resources end energy
generally uses Iergeecale systems. requires long yesrs and
involves high risk. In such cases Governmentel reseerch is
cailedfor.Forexsmpls.AgsneyoflndustrialScienceend
Technology hes been promoting its “Sundrine” peopct for
developing new energy sources. and the “Moonlight" project
for developing technolou for roving energy. in October
1980. a semigovernmentel orgenizetlon celled New Energy
Development Organization was sterted. as a development
system to pennit connstent research end development from
basic to eppiied resssrch. end from prototype and demonstre~
tion plant development to prsetlesl use.

In major forebn countries. space and eeronsutic technology
isaspecislﬂsld closelyreleted with the growthofthe
military industry. In Japan. technologies] development in
these ﬁeldsisbeing promoted in the absenceol’enymilitery
industry. However. it is importsnt to isnprove technological
levels in these fields succesn’uliy. hence it is e pressing
necessity to entry out netionel projects niches the development
ofdoneeetlceircreftsuchesYXXeeansheequent toYSll the
first Japeneee turboprop aecreft, correnunications satellites.
resources scorch satellites and jet engines. which out have
a large technological inﬂuence but require enormous amounts
for reseerch com end advanced systems for research and
development.

Ute presence of reseerch and development intensiﬁed
industries end cornpenies ls essentiel to the edvencetnent of
a technological structure. In this respect. it is desirable that
the weight of what is celled “We added" procedng indiu-
tries. such es phennaceuticels. precision mschinery and
electronics. will increese. Beosuse in these industries. it teltes
muchmoneyend time.esittelteslongtotrsinpersonnel.

MWLUSBONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to accumulate technology. they will be highly appreciated
Internationally. They will attccessfully acquire adequate capital
for research and development by achieving high added value
and entrain a favorable circle toward advance when they
exceed certain technological levels. However. they will en-
counter lierce competition on the way. This is why years
of accumulation of efforts are necessary before highly creative

technology with signiﬁcant bargaining power is developed.
2-3. Development of Social Technology

in the most important new: to be dealt with by technology.
are a wide variety of problems concerning society asa gathering
of individuals The urban problem is a typical one. and they
are mostly important problems directly related to daily life.
such as education. medical treatment. culmre and environment.
Technological development in these fields is rather dissimilar
to technological development for commercial individual
products in which Japan ts adept. For example the spplicatton
in social situations rs more important factor rather than
production in plants. and consumption by youps is more
usual rather than individual purchase. Thus. society participates
to a greater extent in the determtnation of the aims of research
and development. and the decision melting by those demanding
depend on the general technologin knowledge and the ability
of society to bear the rislu. For these reasons. it will be an
important problem to train “social enterprisers" who stimulate
and create favorable environments for technologital develop-
ment.

As local systems. for example. attempts primarily by local
governments to promote the development of wind power.
solar heat. geothermal energy and small hydraulic power in
lootl areas. and introduction of local infomiation systems
will become important in elevating the technological ability
of society. Also. medical equipment. and educational and
training systems will be 'snportant.

Technological development concerned with society is hard
to deal with on a short term basis irt the marltet mechanism
and will hardly be successful by individual production tech~
nologles. It will nrcceed only in intention with society and
thus it is hoped that central and local governments will play
an important role in planning and encouragement.

3. Technological Development and international Co-
operation

3-l. heeraatioutiorul Cooperation through Innovation

Since the oil crisis in l973. countries throughout the world.
suffering from stagnant economic growth and increasing
unemployrrrent.inevitably have pressed to sacrifice international
trade in order to defend their domestic economies. Fortunately.
Japan has recovered her economy fairly soon by increasirg

6h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trade with middle and near east markets. and building up its
‘attemational competitiveness in respect of automobiles and
home appliances. It was because the country could malte a
swift response to a changing world economy. Present world
economy is not the same as in tile past when the entire world
economy was in a growing phase. and the economy of each
country was more or less able to grow. Once the world's
economy becomes stagnant, however. countries will be affected

widely and dlil‘erently depending on their economic competing
power. aswasobserved in theoilcrisis.Thisiswhy countries
have been giving serious consideration as to how to maintain
the growth .of the world’s economy.

Such problems as how to attract oil money to the world’s
economy and how to lteep orderly exportation have been
discussed at international meetings and in the course of
such discusdons. the stagtancy worldwide of technological
renovation was one of the problems talten up. In Europe
and America. there are many pessimistic arguments on it
and. world innovation and growth. that there is no longer any
sufﬁciently large technology to start a new industry. In the
past decades. the US. developed most pioneer technological
industries. such as petrochemicals. electronics. and space and
aeronautics. But recently. Japan and European countries are
catching up. and it is apparent that the U5. is somewhat
uneasy about having difficulty in promoting technological
development as the nucleus of an advanud industry to which
the country wishes to retum. As is shown in Fig.1. Japan is
reaching the phase, in the 1980' . in which the input of science
is required. The 05.. on the other hand. was making much
greater efforts to develop new technology throughout the
1960's and 1970's.

Under these circumstances around the world. it is under-
standable that Japan is obliged to make significant efforts in
the l980's to develop technology worldwide and supply it
to the world economy. It is true that the scale of research and
development reaches to an enormous extent. and innovation
becomes much more costly and difllailt. In the fields of
nuclear fusion. it is becoming economically impractical for
individual countries to construct the most advanced accelerators
without asking for worldwide participation. In technolog for
coal liquefaction. joint research by the U..S.. West Germany
and Japan is being carried out to construct experimentally
a demonstration plant with a capacity of 6.000t/day. In this
way. international specialization in gigantic technology is
becoming realistic. In order to provide a basis for such inter-
national cooperation. there is an increasing need for Japan
to develop its own and unique technology and it will be
increasingly important to train personnel to perform leadership
in the world.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂClAL USE ONLY

3-2. World Factory to World laboratory

Another mission of Japan is to ﬁnd the way of promoting
technology transfer primarily by industries to developing
countries. Production know-how developed by Japanese
industries while they. introduced and assimilated a lot of
foreign technologies is unmeasurable. Labor intensiﬁed tech-
nology. in partiatlar, which was developed primarily by labor
power in the postwar restoration periods. has been fully
taken in by Japanese quality control and plant management.

For the quick transfer of technology from advanced
countries to developing countries. only that of highly capital-
intensifted plantbaaed technology will be successful. However,
: look into the way technology is adopted in developing
countries on a long0term basis will make clear that the elevation
of technological abilities of workers is prerequisite to success.

During the 1970‘s Japanese industry has established various
overseas production bases primarily in Southeast Asia. So
far the inﬂuence of such production is rather isolated from
local technological systems. in the future. it should contribute
to the development of these foreign countries by elevating
their technological levels. Production activities will not be
welcomed by society unless they are admitted by the social
values of technology. Transferring technology in arch a manner
as acceptable to society will consolidate the foundations for
munial respect and reliability between donner and recipient
country. It will be the important role of Japan to make plans
for technolodcal transfer in the world. carry out studies on
the improvement of existing manufacturing processes and
lry to improve the ability of woriters at production sites to
perform research and development. while taking into account
the characteristics of foreign countries. it will be an important
task in the I980's to shift the emphasis from the trade of
products to that of technology. Therefore intermtional co-
operation by carrying out technological assistance, and research
and development becomes most important. if it will be
succesful to build up international technoloucal network
for world development. that dtould be exactly the way a
peace-oriented nation should proceed.

1 Fuji. Marketing Research Co., Ltd.

66
FOR omcut. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2CHNOLOGY

ROCRESS TOHARD TBCHNOLOGICALLY-ORIBNTATED NATION
RAT in English Vol. 14 ilo 8, Aug 81 pp 32-37

The Industrial Structure Council of the Ministry of
international Trade and industry (M111) submitted “A Report
on Policies for Trade and industry in the 1980's" in March.
1980. Chapter 6 or tlte report outlines orientation of Japan's
technological policies in the I980”: under the title of “Progms
Toward a TechnologicallyOrientated Nation”.

As a reference for understanding Japan's orientation of tech-
nological policies in the 1980’ . chapter 6 of this report is
outlined below:

“Progress toward aTechnologically-Orientated Nation"

Section 1. Progress of Man and Society and Technol-
ogical innovation

< Technological Innovation Sixth; New Age >

Within recorded history. technological innovation has al-
ways been the key to the future. promoting social and
economical development. Technological innovation in European
agriculture ill the l2th and 13th centuries brought about
rapid increases in population. development of cities. and
economic advance. Use of the menetic compan in Europe
in the l-ith century opened the age of language voyages in
the 15th century. and the invention of steam engines and
similar discoveries in the 18th century triggered the industrial
Revolution.

in this century. technological innovation has advanced over
Wide fields to form today's afﬂuent materialistic civilization.
innovations have emerged successively to include chemical
fertilizers started by the ﬁxation of free nitrogen in air.
high-molecular chemistry started by nylon. automobiles.

6? .
mommuseomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aircraft. transistors. iC‘s and computers. and more recently.
the use of atomic energy and outer space. indeed. civilization
today is supported by technologin innovations so far accu-
rnulated.

< Cureot Feelhgs about Technology >

Looking toward the future. in the i980‘s. we find ourselves
faced with the tasks of maintaining social energies and im-
proving the quality of people's lives under restrictions in
respect of energy. As iteys to their solution. people have great
hope for technological innovations.

Science is knowledge mankind has acquired as an asset by
discovering various laws of nature. Technology creates beneﬁts
by applying accumuhted scientific knowledge to social activi-
ties.

Today. there are not many instances of epochai technological
innovation without which. some fear that the problents
we have today cannot be fully solved. in the I980's. however.
it is possible to develop new aspects in economy and society
by applying or assembling existing technologies. and there ts
much hope that new technologies will prosper by newly applied
scientiﬁc knowledge. And the 1980‘s is a time when we
should prepare for epocltal technoloucal innovations which
are expected to blossom in the coming generation in and after
the i990's.

People usually associate technology with “advances in
society". "affluent life". “hopes toward the future" and
“convenience". On the other hand. however. as technology
advances. becoming complicated and gigantic in size. some
come to feel indifferent to. and apprehensive about technology.
Again. there are increasingly strict demands of technology.
primarily because of safety. Without any measures for such.
people will be disappointed by technological innovations.
possibly halting technological innovations and depressing
society. Thus. it is necessary to take appropriate measures
with strenuous efforts by offering adequate information about
technology. assessing possible effects of technology and
promoting research. and development for improvements in

respect of safety.

Modern technology is characterized by large~scale centralized
techniques. Recently. there has been the idea of community
technology which is of a distributed type on an adequate scale
and which contributes to improving local economy and social
situations. and it should receive attention.

In the l980's. international exchanges in the field of
technology will be further promoted. Joint research projects
among advanced countries and transfer of technology to the
developing countries are important means of solving problems
common to mankind.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 2. Progress Philosophy of a Technolqically-
Orientated Nation

<SittaationofTedinologyiaJapn>

Today when there is much anticipation for technological
innovations. Japan. as an economic power. will actively serve
the world. playing the role of an innovator. while cultivating
its own creative ability.

0n the other hand. Japan stands in the situation of being
caught up by new industrialized countries and in the midst of
fierce competition between advanced countries. Particulaty
the competition among the advanced in the development of
hidi technology is expectad to intensify. Thus. for Japan.
it is very important to malte the best use of brain resources.
which may be called the country's sole resource. and develop
creative and independent technology.

lf Japan acquires independent technology. it will maintain
and promote the advantage of Japan's industry and form the
foundation for longterm economic and social development.
For Japan which is weaker in respect of energy and resources
than other advanced countries. having independent technology
will augment its bargaining power and contribute to acquiring
economic security. Developing the country on the basis of
technology is the way Japan should take in the 1980's.

< Japan's Technologlal level >

Since the end of the war. Japan has been actively introduc-
ing technology from advanced industrial countries in America
and Europe. trying to improve on it and making efforts to
promote independent development. This has elevated the level
of technology in Japan's industry to the world's highest in
almost all fields except for some hidi technological fields.
Japanese goods are internationally well appreciated because
of advanced techniques for production and sales. such as high
quality. reliability. complete serVicing and prompt delivery.
Japan will maintain these features and further elevate tech-
nological levels.

On the other hand. in order to deal with various problems
in the l980's. it is necessary not only to refine existing
technology and raise the competitive power of goods but
also to promote unique and creative technological development.
Some doubt exists about the ability to achieve this. However.
ii is presumed that the potential of technological development

is sufﬁciently enough. by taking into account that Japan
ranks highest in the number of patents registered for foreigners
in the U.S.. new agreements in technological trade showing
an export surplus after I912. the growing number of graduates
from science and technology educational departments. and
current high technological levels.

In the future. Japan should make these features sufﬁciently
effective to achieve good results.

69
non ornmr. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Section 3. Problems in Technological Development of
[980’s

<Socthemandaof'l'echnology)

Social demands of technology are the promotion of
technological innovations. in promoting technological develop.
ment. it is necesary to correctly recognize social needs.
Soutal demands of technology in the l980's could be four,
as follows:

i) To overcome restrictions on energy.
2) To improve life qualitatively and enrich communities.
3) To promote intensiﬁcation of creative knowledge in

industry.

4) To attempt technological innovations for coming genera-
trons.

< Key to Solvir' Energy Problems >

Basially, technological developments are required to solve
energy-related problems. First. technological development of
substitute energy sources for oil. and secondly. that for saving
energy must be promoted rapidly. Again. technology for
developir‘ oil must be further improved.

The technological development of substitute energy sources
for oil can be the following:

(I) Technology for utilizing atomic power

it is necessary to develop new types of reactors designed
to make more effective use of nuclear fuel. establish nuclear
fuel cycles and develop technology for using atomic energy
for various purposes.

I 2) Technology for utilizing coal

It is necessary to develop technology for liquefying and
gasifying coal. and technology for burning mixtures of coal
and oil.

(3) Technology for utilizing solar energy. etc.

Various technological developments must be promoted
including the following:

a) Technology for solar generation and solar space and
water heating.

b) Technology for utilizing terrestrial heat and water.

c) Technology for developing and utilizing new sources of
fuel oil such as oil sands and oil shale.

d) Technology for utilizing small-scale hydraulic power.

e) Technology for utilizing biomass.

(4) Basic research for nuclear fusion for the 21st century

Technological development for energy saving may cover

the following ﬁelds:
(I) industrial sector

it is necessary to develop MHD (nugrieto-hydroodynamic)
generation. hidiefﬂciency gas turbines. new storage cells and

70
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electricity storage systems. fuel cells. and waste heat collection
systems.
(2) Household sector

Energy-saving home appliances and housing systems must
be developed.

(3) Transportation sector

Engines must be made more efﬁcient to reduce fuel con-
sumption.

0n the other hand. for technology for oil. the following
wrll be essential: '

a) Surveying technology for under severe environmental
conditions such as deep seas and iced polar areas.

b) Technology for secondary and third collection.

c) Technology for increasing safety in oil conglomerates
and reserving oil.

d) Technology for treating heavy gas oil.

In general. energy technology involves investigation of
largeecale systems. taking long years and large sums of capital
and risk for development. Thus. a system relying on non-
governmental efforts is insufflcieot for the development of
energy technology. industry. academic circles and the govern-
ment must cooperate under strong leadership of the government
in such development from basic to applied reaearch. and in
making achievements practical. Governmental roles in capital
and the coordination of research. primarily through compre-
hensive new energy development organization which started
in October. l980. must be drastically extended. Again. it is
necessary to complete systems for putting achievements to
practical use.

In addition. where achievements may possibly disperse
before commercialization. after success in technological
development. it is necessary to make it a point to retain supply
facilities and keep them in operation even at some cost. This
can be considered to be the reserving of technology.

<Qttailtative Improvement of Life and Enrich-entome
munitiee)

There are many problems in technological development to
meet a variety of needs by the public who desire qualitative
improvements.

First. it is required to develop products having new and
complex functions and high performance. and designs with
increased safety and endurance. Furthermore. considerate
care and qualitative improvements are desired irt distribution
and the supply of other services.

Secondly. it is likely that there will be increasing social
needs in respect of housing. cities. transportation. medicine.
welfare and education. To meet these needs. it is necessary
to develop and promote the following:

(I) Layer modules to make effective use of land and develop
quality dwelling by making effective use of natural energy.

(2) New transportation systems such as linear motor cars.
traffic control systems and piggy-beck systems.

l3) Social systems for daily life includirtg medical data
systems and life video data systems.

t4) Medical apparatus such. as artificial organs and instru-

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ments for examination. and welfare apparatus such as those
for handicapped persons.

Thirdly. strenuous efforts are also required to develop
technology for environmental preservation. safety and hazard
prevention for improving life environment. Thus. the following
must be developed:

(l) Technology for utilizing reclaimed sewage and drainage
to meet pressing demands for water.

(2) Technology for safety and hazard prevention including
prediction of earthquakes and wide-range protection against
calamities.

(3) Technology for preserving the environment newly re.
quired in consequence of changing energy source types
including technology for treating smoke and ash produced by
direct combustion of coal. technology for treating heavy gas
oil. and technology for treating drainage produwd by processing
biomass.

Fourthly. in order to improve the growth of local economies
and as well as balanced nationwide use of land. it is important
to develop community technology for local energy systems
and resources recycling systems in addition to conventional
large-scale centralized technology. This can be the nucleus
of local industry, promoting efficient use of resources and
meeting needs of residents for employment and the living
environment in local areas. Here. local governments are expected
to play the role of developers of technology. not simply the
users. by improving public experiment and research agencies.
and helping establish linits between national experirrtent and
research agencies. universities and local industry.

<Teclusologial Development for lntendfybg Creative Know-
leﬁe ht industry >

ﬁre intensification of knowledge in industry is supported
by technologral development. In order to exercise creativity.
raising the level of existing industries and to exploit new
industrial fields. continued efforts should be made to develop
technology.

In the l980's. main courses will be the following two:

(Ii Technology for Forming Systems and Incorporating
Software

Although industrial technology in Japan has matured to a
high level in many fields. there are trends towards increasing
importance of technology for forming systems provided with
new functions by combining component units and processes
and technology for incorporating software. including techniques
for application. design and services. in hardware.

For technology for forming systems. it is required. where
productron activities have become huge as we see them today.
to recognize the whuie as a large system and give consideration
to its efﬁciency in addition to the efﬁciencies of individual
processes. The emergence of new systems produced by linits
between different industries is very likely to induce striking
increases in efficiency. new products and new services.

Technology for incorporating software is represented by
melting machines and processes intelligent by incorporating
microcomputers in them. The emergence of VLSI elements

72
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

makes it easier to use microcomputers by reducing costs and
the size of equipment. The application of microcomputers
in production processes. together with advances in sensor
technology. will make industrial robots intelligent. enabling

unmannedplantstobereallzed.‘l‘hiswillrnakepodble(l)
multlilne mull-lot production. (2) energy and resources saving,
(3) uniformity of quality, (4) improvement of the labor
environment. Again. application of equipment will enable
functions to become versatile and advanced.

Software and systems technology will conceivably develop
not independently but interdependency or with melting up
for each other‘s disadvantages.

(2) Technology Based on New Scientific Knowledge

it is necessary to develop the following:

a) New materials. such as amorphous materials. optical
fibers. new ceramics. highly functional resins. composite
materials and ultimate materials.

b) laser-applied technology.

c) VlSl elements and sensors.

d) Advanced software. including pattern recognition and
artificial intelligence.

These will bring new industrial fields into existence in the
1980's. while representing common basic tediniquos for raising
the quality and performance of products and the quality of
production processes.

<Ataeiapt at New Technoloﬂal Innovations for Coming
M)

It taltes much lead time for new scientiﬁc knowledge to
be fully adopted in industry and society. This requires repeated
efforts to search. cultivate and industriallu all tedinological
seeds. The l980’. h particular. will be an important period
for preparations for innovative technological improvements
which are expected to emerge in and after the l990’s.

Seas of technological innovations currently presumed for
the coming generations include the following:

(i) Life Science

It will give limitless dreams to the development ofeconomy
and society to apply life phenomena in medical. chemical.
and dietary analyses whﬂe explaining and giving appropriate
and careful conslsderatlon to them.

.i) The discovery of chemical reactions in live systems and
the advanced use of enzymes will permit the synthesis of.
highly functional materials and chemical processes at normal
room temperature and pressure.

b) The establlslunent of technology for manipulating genes
will bring about epochal development in medical. dietary and
chemical fields by cutting genie diseases. increasing the produc-
tion of food by plant breeding. using biomass and micro-
organisms in line chemistry.

c) For interferon. considered hopeful as a speciﬁc drug
for cancer. commercial production is expected in the mid

73
. “OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1980's. Again. if the generation mechanism of cancer is
explalrted at the molecular-biological level. great progress in
cancer therapy will result.

d) The application of photosynthetic functions after explain~
ing them will enable the production of foodstuffs to be
increased.

e) The use of sensory organs of biological entities will
develop advanced sensors.

(2) Enemy

There is much expectation for nuclear fusion as the in-
exhaustible energy supply of the 2lst century. along with
solar energy. which is coming into practical use. Nuclear

fusion which produces about l00.000|tWh of energy from
deuterium which is contained in seawater at a ratio of about
one g per 251 of seawater wﬂl be Japan's moat hopeful resort
for the supply of energy.
(3) lnforntationProcessing

Josephson elements which make use of the phenomena
of electrons under cryogenic conditions exceed current [.81
elements by a factor of some decades in operational speed
and by a factor of a l000 in power consumption economy.
A Josephson element. a little more than l0cm square. is
expected to provide the same functions as those of a current
large computer. Again. artificial intelligence can be further
developed by developing information processing systems in
which memories and sensory systems in live entities are applied.
(4) Space and Marine Development

it is expected that efforts will be made at technological
innovations in various fields including the supply and trans.
mission of energy. melting use of outer space. space plants.
the development of resources such as manganese nodules h
deep sea bottoms. and the production or‘ food by making use
of the seas.

Section 4. Fields of Technological Development under
Governmental Leadership

(M Fieldaof‘l'acbolodal Developmentundaacm
mama»

As seen above. there are many items of technological

development to be achieved in the l980's. Not a few of tltem
are expected to be developed by nongovernmental efforts.
However. technological developments in fields such as:
(l) those in which developments are likely to have extensive
effects on the economy. society. industry. and tadtnology
from a long-term point of view. will talte a long time to teach
actual use.

FORWUSEONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(2) thoae in which development requires cooperative ryatenu
betweencornpanieabecauaeoftheneceeeityot’combinlng
component technique: from varioua ﬁelda and that also
require Investment of large aunts.
(3) thoee in which economically. society is in great need of
development. requiring appropriate meantrea to be teiten
promptly. and deeiring development to be accelerated. and
(e) thoee in which development isbaaedonpubiic needs
and require to be coordinated with social ayatems.
cannot be entrusted to private enterpritee alone for smooth
achievement and require the government to concentrate its
efforts to promote research and development and organize
PM”.

The» iieide of technological development. in practice.
include the folowing:
(i) Technology for new materiala repreaented by electronic
elemente.
2) Technology for large-scale syrterna represented by
technology for alternative energy sources.
(3) Technology for social systems represented by life-rented

aocialayatenu.

<mtuﬂumuufavmm
nd'l'echlqan)

Technology for new nuteriala can be the bait for new
producer and new production prooeeeaa. and can be applied
very extendvely in industry.

Toby.ltierequiredtodevelopnewmateriala.ntchae
optical fibera. new oer-entice. amorphoue naateriala. highly
functional nettle. ultimate materiale. and compoeite materials.
Theee rmterialecanbebaaea forverlotulnduattiedmchu
chemistry. medical equipment. euctric and electronic devicee.
nucitinea and aircraft. atﬂ'iciently ell‘ective to bring about
new producta. Also. in technological development for tubetitute
energyaowceaandsavingenergy.thedevelopmentoi‘materiair
will be the important key.

Production proceeaea and equipment can be made intelligent
by inoorporatirtg in them. VISI elemnta. aeneora. nun‘nture
batteriea.permitting multiilne amallclot production and improve-
menta in efficiency and functions.

Moat oi theae technologies for new materials cannot
generally aicceed simply by improving existing technologiea
but require qontinuoua basic research over long years. in
reaearch and development in these fields. Japan haa not yet
achieved ample renalta. Such development: involve much in
the way of risk. Tltua. the govermnent should take measures to
stimulate the public to development. Again. the government.
universities and private enterpriaea should improve ayatema
for basic research from the long-term point of view.

75
FOR OFFICIAL “ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

<TMIMWSWMKM>

Hopeful developments may include the liquefaction and
gasiflcation of coal. the establislmsent of nuclear fuel cycles.
new types of reactors. solar generation. deep layer terrestrial
isneration.andnuciearﬁtdonintheﬂeldsofenergyand
those of technology for largeecale systems. such as ultra-high-
speed computers. space developments. marine developments
(developmentofmineralreaouroesondeepscabottomsin
particular)and aircraft.in the fields of new pioneer industries.

These developments regime systemathing engineers and
technolo‘cal information over a wide range, from nutertals
to machines, electronic. inforrmtion processing and system
developments. Also. they are difﬁcult for private enterprises
alone to carry out because of my years' of preparation
and big rislts in terms of capital. Thus. it is necessary for the
government to actively invest capital. complete systems for
development. bear risks to some extent and exercise coord’mato
lng functions.

in addition. it is essential to develop software. includirtg
advanced designing. control and information processing for
combining component techniques over wide areas.

(Ted-elegy for Sochl 8y“ to Acqnbe lhmony with
Society>

Technology for social systems here means not to deal with
systems for producing goods but to supply quality social
services by developing individual units and utilizing techniques
for information processing and communication. Bore. technol.
ogy often involves cases which require not only simple
technological means but also changes in social systems and
customs.

For instance. in developing medical information systems.
it is neuasary to shift from examination and treatment systems
in individual hospitals. to systems for prevention. examination
and treatment in communities. Also. in propagating traffic
control systems. it will be necessary to revise traffic regulations
and change various rules. For social systems relating to develop.
ment of urban areas. it is essential to position them appro-
priately in local developments. Many of these systems assume
the character of being public assets for which it is difficult
to seelt profits and determine prices.

For these reasons. technology for social systems is in the
fields for which development incentives of private enterprises
can hardly beprovided.artdtltegovernmentorthethird
sector should take the lead in development and propagation.
Here. it is essential to provide collaboration and close affiliation
between government ministries in particular and further
between local governments. and this will enable technology to
be established snoothly.

Technology for social systems is closely concerned with
society. life and humanity. in order to elevate its social
acceptance. it will be important to main: additional use of
knowledge In the social sciences and humlties.

76
FOR OHIO“. [BB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I];

Osgooi. SiI I!!!
0 3.36100 ‘3:‘!! 1.31.;

:Lzli‘i!.ili
. III-05,3...- $0.010}! .1.
:51!!!

0}"... gun-.1"!!! 020.33"

‘z‘l it: vii
it’d-$10!! gig;-
‘I 3%}...
.-

.u’“§.1""nlis¢;.i

3’3“; ‘0
‘8..- .ii‘l ‘ii a
if I .
12ft}: Oil-scle- QEO: 0:3,)..103:
8' ‘08
iii-leuoguziiil .6. 2.33033
is: c9333
‘3: it‘oto‘ouinclu I c9“! '33."
1‘53... 90"!!! 10.33003
9:}!1‘13 iéoi‘l v1.1.0.0}. sci;

gigli. Oi £30:
.1; .’:i§g|§il! I! .5

 

         

  

arch Co. , Ltd.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing R232

77

MOIFICIALWEONLY

CSO: 4120/105
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020033-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HIGHLY SENSITIVE PHO'IOSENSI'I‘IVE RESIN DEVELOPMENT APPLAUDED

Tokyo TECHNOC'RAT in English Vol 16 No 8, Aug 81 pp too-1.1

[Text]

Those industries making eXtensive use of [C . LSl's and
other electronic technology are thriving at present. This has
been made possible by development of high-resolution and
highly sensitive photosensitive materials that make it possible
for LSl‘s incorporating tens of thousands of elements to be
quickly printed on a substrate only 5mm square. But realization
of photosensitive materials with higher resolution and sensitivity
is in demand. since development of a super l8! integrating a
million elements on a substrate of the same size is the immediate
target.

To meet this demand. the Resea.ch Institute for Polymers
and Textiles ol‘ the industrial Science and Technology Agency
has started a project to develop a “highly sensitive polymer
material of the screen irrnge type (photosensitive resin)" and.
at the same time. has started similar study using an argon laser.
etc. and study to develop a suitable photosensitive material
for holograms. also using an argon laser.

The object is to develop by 1985 a highly sensitive
photosensitive photo-resist material for printing, with a sensi-
tivity l0 times greater than previous levels. and a photosensitive
material for copying and photography that is more than five
times as sensitive as those presently available.

When realization of these photosensitive materials is made
possible by these studies. the printing of hundreds of thousands
of elements on a single substrate through the appearance of a
photosensitive material sensitive to a laser of lmllcm’ (ASA
approx. ”100) will no longer be a dream. and remarkably
enough. great advances of not only electronic technology but
also information processing will become possible.

This article summarizes recent achievements in development
of highly sensitive photosensitive resists.

i. What Are Photosensitivs Maserhls?

Photosensitive materials are mtet'iais that react chemically
when they receive light. in this category. there are. for example,
silver halides for photographic Him and cinnamic acid for
photosensi'ive resin.

lndustrially. the photo resist for [Si manufacture hyperﬁne
processing. and the photo resist. used for such purposes as

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0005000200334
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for printing and platemalting represent present efforts to
produce [.8] patterns for semiconductors by applying the
photosensitive resist to semiconductor material. exposing the
LSI circuit pattern to light. then dissolving the portion not
exposed to light by a chertucal solution. and finally removing
the resin from the surface of the semiconductor. These resins
are now indispensable to LSI manufacture because they are
inexpensive and easy to handle.

2. To hues. Resolution

However. if the resolution of a photosensitive resin is to be
increased in an attempt to project a fine Lil pattern. the
resln's sensitivity to light inversely becomes lea.

A photosensitive resin with a resolution of hurt to 0.5m.
sufficient to cause light diffraction. has already been manufac-
tured tentatively and at present this degree of resolution
seems to be the limit. Some resins used in mass production
have a resolving power of 2~ 2.5m. A super lSI with 64K bits
can be developed using a photosensitive resin at this level.

Under these circumstances. it is the sensitivity that is the
problem. Different reseﬁch organizations are now studying
to develop materials that will enable an image the size of a
nempaper page to be projected in two minutes by merely
applying energy of lmJ/cm’ to a photosensitive resist. Also.
attempts are being made to increase the photosensitive base
of resins by adding suitable sensitiaers because of poor
sensitivity to light.

The development of highly sensitive photosensitive materials
is. indeed. important enabling resins meeting these requirements
to be produced.

3. New Photoaettsidve MurilsandMCapedﬁes

Present research and development are concerned with the
following:

(i) Development of a photosensitive material that has a
photosensitive capacity 10 tirnea greater than previous
levels without using a sensitizer

This is an effort to develop a highly sensitive resin free from
reduction of se;.sitivity and resolution below their theoretical
values. which is the case of conventional photosensitive resins.
which often show abnormal reactions to light (including the
combination of photosensitive bases).

The method employed consists of taking advantage of
paraisopropyl cinnamic acid which releases electrons when the
photosensitive material receives light. and paracyano cinnamic
acid which absorbs electrons when the photosensitive material
receives ltgitt.

In a photosensitive resin produced by combining these
photosensitive materials separately with polyvinyl and mixing
them together. paratsopropyl cinnamtc acid releasing electrons
and paracyano cinnamtc acid absorbing electrons combine as
soon as the resin receives light.

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since these acids naturally attract each other as positive
and regative. the resin shows satisfactory sensitizing effects and
selectivity. and in the past studies. the sensitivity has reportedly
been increased nearly fin times.

The sensitivity further increases through the addition ol_a
sensatrzer. The Research Institute is trying to develop photo-
sensitive rmteriai with a sensitivity l0 times greater titan
previous level and also by changing the combination of
photosensitive base materials.

a: 4cm?»-
ococrr.crr crr
o : 40.016”)-
clscocrr-cercu’ err,
\CH’
e
3
3
i
s
3
s
C
K
1
o no r
MIA.”

Miller. ratio (sensitizes: Mmmhtnenel

Fig. I. Effect of Mixing on Relative Sensitivity

(2) gerwlopment of photosensitive material using the polymer
ect
This effort is aimed to develop photosensitive material that
has a lovr photosensitive base density and hidi sensitivity. More
specifically. the purpose is to develop a copying and photo-
graphic sensitive material with a sensitivity greater than five
times the present level of similar materials now on sale.
Already. a photosensitive mater'nl with a styrile pyridlum
group and another with a styrlle quinolium group have been
‘ developed. These photosensitive [tutorials have otceilent
characteristics of being sensitive to light with long rvaves of
up to 460nm for styrile pyridium and up to 520nm for styrile
quinolium.
it has reportedly been confirmed that photosensitive resins
made of these mater'nls and polyvinyl alcohol are i0 times
more sensitive than conventional resins of polyvinyi alcohol
and ammonium dichromate. Furthermore. only a moi percent
is sufﬁcient for either photosensitive maten- '. These are
attracting attention as the latest materials available.

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Research lnstitute wants to develop ﬁlm for survey
drawings. design drawings and display by clarifying the mechan-
ism by which photosensitive resins react.

It is also studying an argon laser photosensitive material
and mu dandy dwehpeda aynk quuuuhunipoup unduwe
to argon laser with wavelength of 488nm. produced by
combining a resin with polyvinyl alcohol and has continued
that the resin is photosensitive even at the low energy of
lOml/cm‘. It is said to have also conﬁrmed that a material
unnmu tolow enugy ofjun a hw'nmuﬁouhs am he
developed if a different resin is used in combination with the
photosensitive material. This photosensitive material equals
silver which. at present. is considered best as a photosensitive
material.

The target of the research project is to develop a photo-
sensitive resin with a sensitivity of l mllcm‘.

When this research is completed. it will be posible to print
100.000~i.m0.000 elements on a semiconductor S~1mm
square using low energy and instantaneously. and the appear-
ance of the super LSl seems near at hand.

Much is expected of it also as a material useful for the
information socrety since its function asa material for informa-
tion processing including printing will improve. Indeed. the
public is looking forward to the outcome these research

projects.

l Fuji. Marketing Research 60., Led.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020033-8

l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

COMPREHENSIVE WASTE HEAT USE SYSTEM COMPLETED

Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English Vol M No 8, Aug 81 pp 41-43

[Text]

A comprehensive “waste heat use system" has been complet-
ed under the “Moonlight Plan". and 8&0 project to ﬁnd tech-
niques for large-scale energy conservation that has been promot-
ed by the Agency of industrial Science and Technology.
Ministry of lnternationhl Trade and industry. This is a practical
system developed as the result of a six-year V3 billion project
with participation of lo manufacturers in efforts to conserve
energy by recovering and using by the best methods. large
amounts of waste heat discharged from thermal power plsnts.
steelworits and other factories. Since this is the last fiscal year
of this project. the Agency is planning to consolidate research
results by constructing a single system using a steelworits
with an annual crude steel production of 8 million tons as the
model. A survey and calculation of costs the effect of tenergy
conservation. etc.. will be made. and on this basis. they hope to
pave the way for full-scale use of the new system. Much is
expected of its far-reaching effects. since the development of
enery conservation techniques is even more important to
Japanese industry than the development of new energy sources.

Japan's energy consumption is said to amount to about 400
million itl annually in terms of petroleum products. But about
50% of this is disciurged into the air. rivers and sea as waste
heat. lt‘evert 10%ofthiswaste heat canbe remdandused
effectively. the nation can save energy amounting to about 20

million id of oil annually. Particularly. since the mining and
manufacturing industries reportedly account for 6050f Japanese
energy consumption. efficient recovery and effective use of this
waste heat is paramount to the nation's energy conservation
measures.

Under these circurmtances. the Agency of Industrial Science
and Technology started research and development on a com-
prehensive “waste heat use system" from FYI976 as squasi-
giant project. and with the start of the Moonlight Pian.stepped
up research efforts to malte the system practical.

A waste heat use system consists generally of developing.
basic techniques for (l) heat recovery and exchange. and (2)
heat transport and storage. As techniques for heat recovery and
exchange. (i) techniques to recover heat by compressive heat

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020033-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pumps.(2) techniques to recover heat by absorptive heat pumps.
(3) techniques to recover heat from solid materials. i.e.. of
coke by dry quenching using an inert gas. (4) techniques to
generate highpressure gas from waste heat. (5) a technique to
use a small hidtefl'lciency rotary heat exchanger. and (6)a
technique of using a movingbed type heat exchanger using non-
corrosive heat pipes have been developed and are already in a
stage of actual use. In parallel with these techniques. the
development of a large low-temperature heat pipe to recover
low-temperature dischamd heat 30-60'C. a heat exchanger
for him-temperature gas. an automatic circulating heat recover-
ing urtit for industrial furnaces. and a direct contact heat ex-
changer have been undertaken by the Government Mechanical
Engineering Laboratory. the National Research Institute for
Pollution and Resources. and the National Chemical Research
Laboratory for Industry.

As for heat transport and heat storage. techniques for hot

water transport by thermosiphon and heat transport by chemi-
cal energy may well become’practical.

The following are the technical achievements accomplished
under this research project: First, there is the “waste heat re-
covering mit-temperature heat pump system” has been pro-
duced on a commercial basis as a method for compresdve heat
pump heat recovery. It can recover heat from waste hot water
of relatively low temperature Bil-60°C and efﬁciently generate
high-temperature water loo-160°C. Miereas. by using a con-
ventional heat pump. hot water only $0-60’C. at the most. can
be obtained. As the new system produces hot water two to
three times this. it can be us:d not only for local hearing as at
present but also for regional heating and heat used by nearby
industries.

The method of heat recovery using an absorptive heat pump
is that. though it also uses low-temperature waste hot water
30-60'C. high-temperature hot water 10-90'C and cooling
water (7- —lo'C) are freely obtained by using lithium bromide
at normal air pressure. This technique is most suitable for
factories and regional air-conditioning.

For recovering heat from solid materials. such as colte. a
rotary system to recover the heat of redhot colte. 900—
l.m0°C produced in making coke. adopts dry quenching using
nitrogen gas. Conventionally. the heat from redhot colte is
released into the air by dousing with water. Use of the new
system not only makes effective use of the heat possible but
also contributes to preventing pollution by eliminating dust.
It is designed to move redhot coke from a hopper to a closed
rotary plate (cooler grate) as the coke leaves the coke oven.
and thus obtain cooled coke. by using nitrogen gas as the
cooling medium to recover the heat. 750'C. The recovered heat
is convened by a waste heat boiler into steam. 180°C. pressure

l0ltg/cm‘
The moving-bed heat exchanger is a system to remove waste
and corrosive gases and dust from :i steelworks converter and.

at the same time. recover heat by combining a moving-bed
dust «sham and a heat exchanger. Since a heat exchanger of

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this type. that combines dust collecttng and heat storing func-
tions. never previously crusted. much is expected of it as a
method for use in steeiworlts and cement mills.

M for results of research on methods to generate high-
preasure gas using waste heat. an “oil-Freon-electric generating
system" has been developed. it recovers waste heat at first
by oil. an immediate hear medium. and then uses this heat to
evaporate Freon. the turbine medium. and to generate electri-
city by a turbine generator. It is estimated that. if waste gas in a
cement mill‘s clinker cooler is used. 480.000Nm’ of waste gas
at 250°C gernerates 3000kw.enabling I93 million kWh annual-
ly to be recovered. which is equivalent to 5.300lti of oil annual-
ly.

In the development of toury heat exchangers. a “rotary heat
pipe heat exchanger“ has been completed with the object of
recovering heat from medium- and low-temperature waste gas
l50~300 C and generating hot air or steam for cornbustlon
puposes. it is a snail heat exchanger capable of efficiently re-
covering heat frorn medium- and low-temperature dirty waste
gas. which previously has been impossible to use. it involves
rotating a number of noncorrosive heat pipes attached to a
parting strip in the form of a drum. It is claimed that. ina
plant test. 2tlh of l30°C steam was obtained from l00,000 Nrn’
ol' colte oven waste gas at 200‘C.

Apart from those heat recovery and exchange techniques.
the development of methods to transport or store heat that has
been recovered have been conducted under the same project.

As a thermosiphon heat transwrt system. an energy-saving
unit to move hot water without using a mechanical pump or
other form of power has been developed for actual use. The
principle is to use a thermoaiphon that can cause a two-phue

flow of gas and liquid by using part of the waste heat l20~
400 C. and its merit consists in being able to move large

amounts of heat in the form of hot water. in this research. a
thermosiphon test plant with a riser l5cm in diameter and
more than 20m high. and a pilot plant comprising a 300m
circulating loop were completed; much test data were gained
from this experiment. thoudi when the ﬂow decreased some-
What. the amount of available hear decreased accordingly.but
the result showed that the system is quite tactical.

Fifty-four Japanese patents and uti ty models and three
overseas patents have been applied for in connection with the
development of the various waste hut use systems. Many of
these techniques have been made practical by comng not
only mIiﬂiJl techniques but also most up-todate techniques.
Now that development of all the basic techniques concerning
the project has been completed. the Agency of Industrial
Science and Technology. as mentioned earlier. is planning to
design a single system composed of all these elementary tech.
niques using a steelworlts with an annual crude steel pro-
ductron of 8 million tons as the model. and use this system to
continue further research on actual energy conservation effects
and to check costing oi' the techniques. The whole project will
be completed by the end of the current fiscal year.

’81 Fuji Marketing Research Co. , Ltd.

i

8%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TOSRIBA CMLETES FULLY AUTOMATED PRODUCTION OF IC'S

Tokyo TBCIiliOCRA‘r in English Vol 14 No 8, Aug 81 pp 57-68

[Text]

Toshiba Corp.. at its Kitaltyushu plant. has completed a
fully automated fabrication system under computer control for
bipolar integrated circuits. and the system is now in full opera-
tion. This is a 3-stage control system with a TOSBAC 7/40
computer at its core. under which. three minicomputets and
74 our microcomputers are interconnected. All pteprooessing.
such as lithography. diffusion. ion injection. and CVD. is con-
trolled bawd on throng: control information.

Toshiba has decided to introduce automated production of
bipolar lC‘s eariler than for MOS lC's. because of greater
beneﬁts. Toshiba is said to have spent five years and 8'3 billion
for development.

Three points have greatly contributed to system develop.
ment as follows:

(i) There were so many control elements that a thorough
investigttion was necessary to allow a test pattern on a wafer to
be read accurately.

(2) interface to fwely connect each unit was newly developed.
(3) An online monitor to measure film thickness was de-

veloped.

The system has brought about the following effects:

(i) Production losses between lots have been reduced to
half by process control of each production proces under an
optimum condition while providing feedback control status of
any other process stage.

(2) Time lost between processes has been reduced and overall
production time has been shortened.

(3) Quality variations and operational errors caused by human
factors have been eliminated.

(4) Operation with human intervention has been reduced and
the degree of cleanliness overall has been vastly improved.

f S) Centralized monitoring of production processes has im-
proved operationai efficiency of facilities and ﬂexibility in
production planning.

These effects have improved production yields l0 to 15
percent better than previously and production time has been
reduced by 20 to 40 percent. in addition. only three persons are
required in the photo resist process. one-third of that previously.
Production has doubled in volume over the previous year with
the some staff. Configuration of the entire system is as shown
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in FiaJ and the total line is managed centrally. For example.
a CRT terminal is placed at each group of devices such as dif-
fusion. lithography, ion injection. and etchina.

Control for each proeeaa is as indicated in Fig.2. and con-
ditions in the previous process are taken into consideration in

the next stage to obtain optimum accuracy.
The new lines can Iteep yields of current ampliﬁcation. a

factor that is a problem for bipolar integrated circuits. within

the range of two for a given value. against three or four
previously.

At present. 60 percent of the Kitakyushu plant has been
automated and in future Toshiba intends to apply the new
system to the remaining lines. It also intends to include the
system in the new lines for super 1.51 M05 that were completed
at its Oita plant.

 
 
   
   
   
 

Level 1

"m" e Integration 00 proceea data
0 Corrective calculation or aroeeea data

  

o Analvara oi o'oooaa date
card reader I ‘ “MW"! 0' ore-wort statue
J 0 Alarm obllv

TOOIAC 7/00
(mun 'nomo'vo
5.2: one»

Level 2

0 Backup '0' contra! m at counting
0 Control par-Inter mltorlna

0 Alarm avatem

  
   

ﬂoor controuar
(microcomputer;

Lever: ‘

0 Convene. control
a 'roeaaa control
0 Alarm display

Fig i. Toshiba's Automated Production of lC's

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON] '!

sun "“06“!” c°‘"'°' °'

hon-hm ouulno «emu- "“‘mm

 

“gm".

/'\

CV0 1’ oar-mu.
“”0“" ﬂung, I

“"0.“ How mo
\ I

A
Nam 04
vouuom.
can! \ um. ’

wgtm
Imam o!
Our-0' lllumimﬂon.

\ ““ /
mow ‘rmwn.
\ J
Yamaha".

m l lm.‘
I! now an.

\ «c/
A
fwwmn.
cvo l um. |
now an.
\ we. I
YWOIUM
O‘Wobn .1 um. \ '
w. "on nu

\ “-1

Food More ham

ow
om

Wm

° m
°--

CW 0' MNQMO
mm”! '0'
m «an no.

  
 
    
   
 

  

m mum

Fig. 2. oncm Comm Comma! Diagram

RIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing Research Co., Ltd.

6120/105

8'!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600020033-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MECHANICAL ENGINEERING LAB DBVEIDPS TRANSFER ROBOT

Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English Vol 16 No 8, Aug 81 pp 50-52

{Text}

The Mechanical Engineering uhoratory.Agency of industrial
Science and Technology. has developed a robot that travels
along a path by followmg three kinds of instructions. of posture
angle. position and judgment. from merits corresponding to
trafﬁc signs posted intermittently alortg the route.

At present. conveyance of goods in a manufacturing plant
is mostly done by belt conveyors. A belt conveyor is best

attired for conveying large quantities of goods continuously but
it suits only an exclusive route. thus melting it impossible to

malte best use of ﬂoor space. With the system. usually the
the path cannot be easily changr“.

The transter robot was developed with a view to making
better use of ﬂoor ”‘09 as well as providing for changes of
route. The following it an outline of the robot.

Towedtemfumbotmnnlmfunctiongntchaeto
proceed straidttahead on estraidtt path.ntalte aleftorright
turn. or to proceed straight ahead an intersection. malre a stop
at a designated point — functions which are required for the
robot to travel along a predetermined path. I6 kinds of symbols
each corresponding to a trafﬁc sign. are used. These marks
have varying features. and they are roughly classiﬁed according
to the size of their surface areas. Merit l and Merit 92' have an
identical area ratio of 4. To tell the difference between the
ttvu marks. shown in Fig.l. the different values of the specific
sitapea calculated from Formula (1). are given by three features
- the extent of maximum width 4, in x direction. maximum
height A, in Y direction andareaA, — lit the projection
drawing drawn by a projection incident on the base lists. are
verified for judgment.

A
s- ‘ (oSs<t) (l)
l 7
From width 4, in x direction that becomes the largest in Y
direction and maximum width .4, in X direction. in the pro-
jection drawing irt Fig.l. the posture angle is obtained from the

measured values given by Formula (2).

 

- -:—' (0505 l) (2)

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020033-8
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘I’able 1. Various Marks

”uufg Wool igg Function
5
m |
n ' a me as
PW”, a on I tow-anon

. 'gn: ! "i
; lassreot l

' . .

ou H mo .

 

 

A! : We'mmmmm

‘r -. foweﬁuleaaaoﬂaevrmtm

Eff : memumaﬁuaWn
”I“

P ' emonofooamon

I foMummatnee-remetmmon

Fig.2 draws the relationship between the posture angle
measuredvalueand postureangieinanisosceleatriangle.
Using this value. the posture angle is determined to be in the
range of 450$: ifaisgtvenasthesemiangteofthevertlcal
angle of an equilateral triangle.

The transfer robot (Fig.3) is about 70cm across and about
l30crn long. and weighs 200“ It can carry a maximum load
of ZSOkg. Comprising a three-wheeled tar. a front wheel and
two rear wheels. it is battery powered. Rear-wheel driven. it
runs at constant speed. 7.5mlmtn. and it is steered by the front
wheel. it has an [TV camera for marl: recognition mounted
vertically and facing downward. For controls. the transfer robot
employs rnt'rticomputers to perform mark recognition and
steering.

In running the transfer robot. instructions are input using a
typewriter to instruct which path to use. "ten the start button
is pressed. the robot proceeds straight if the marlt is a straight
sign. and makes corrections in its direction by judging which

MOMMUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig 2. Mouwmm M Poetute We

direction it 13 MM to Item which my the mark indicates.
At the entunoe to an intersection m posted sud) marks a
“Stop,“ “Turn right.” “ham left” or “Proceed stteUtt" so that
the tobot can determine the dttection In which It can advance.
end then ptoceedt es intttucted. In earthen It no (UH-tum
mm: although it has been instructed to make 1 Mt mm. the
robot automatically stops at that position. Upon arming at the
inttntcted destination. the robot stop; there to: t pedodend
then mums its advance to the next destination.

In the cttmntly developed transfer robot. «3me used to

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE “Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

connect the robot proper with a minioomputer. However. since
a microcomputer has ample capacity to provide control, this
new robot with a microcomputer mounted is a'ble to travel
without cables. Furthermore. if the rohot is equipped with a
manipulator, it will be able to perform loading and unloading
of cargo.

A: future research tasks. the Laboratory is considering the:
robot's application to operations in environments inaccessible
to humans. such as nuclear reactors. and to unmanned tramport
can in plants.

81 Fuji. Marketing Research 00.. Ltd.

91
momentum»!
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500020033-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

SEMICONDUCTORS, RELATED INDUSTRIES REACH Ill TRILLION LEVEL

[Text]

Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English Vol 16 No 9, Sep 81 pp 69-50

According to the "Production Forecast of the Electronics in-
dustry in i981“ prepared by the Electronics Industries Asso-
ciation of Japan at the end of I980. in i98l. Japan's semi-
conductor industry wili reach the trillion-yen level for the ﬁrst
time. If electron tubes. such as cathode-ray tubes. are excluded
from "Production Forecast of Active Parts in i98l" based on
MiTi's statistics of production. the remaining are semiconductor
devices and integrated circuits. and the total value exceeds vi
trillion.

Let us look at the actual ﬁgures. For integrated circuits.
they have grown from an estimated V5683 billion in 955 to
V7259 billion in l98l. a 27.7% increase. For semico tductor
devices. the growth rate is l2.l% of V29l.3 billion it: i980.
amounting to V3266 billion ir. l98l. Both put togethe.‘ show
a 32.4% increase. amounting to Vi .0525 billion (after the 1980
results were announced. the growth rates of integrated circuits
and semiconductor devices showed 27.3% and ”9% respective.
lyj. '

When this forecast was announced last year. the US. semi-
conductor market was in the middle of a depression and it was
predicted that the US. semiconductor industry would maintain
bipolar devices in good growth condition for l98l . but it could
not expect MOS to grow. considering growth would be 5%
including discrete devices. though in total. integrated circuits
would he 6']: up. Some' in Japanese industry. thought it
dttl‘tcuit to expect a growth ot‘ 22%. and that the ﬁgure was too
high to achieve. However. according to a recent survey made by
the Daily industrial Newspaper for l98l (partly the calender
year). production plans show that it is almost certain that the
industry will enter the VI trillion industrial group this year.
That is. NEC. Hitachi. Toshiba. Matsushita Electronics ln-
dustrtes. Fujitsu. Mitsubishi. Sharp. Tokyo Sanyo Electric. and
Dirt - with only these nute major semiconductor suppliers. the
results will be Vi.093 billion according to their i981 produc-
tion plans. at the same time showing a 27% increase over last
year's level. Thus. together they will leap over the VI trillion
hurdle. In addition to these companies. if middle class. inahouse.
attd t'oretgnowned suppliers. such as Sony. Fuji Electric. Tl
Japan. Suwa Seiko-Sha. Toyo Electrical Tool Manufacturing.
Tolto. New lapan Radio. and Saniten Electric. are included

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000500020033-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production will surely reach the VI trillion level plus several
hundred billion within 1981 or the ﬁscal year.

It is thirty-ﬁve years since domestlc production of transistors
started and [Cs have only a us or I7 year history. Nevertheless.
it should bc noted that the semiconductor industry will soon
be a member of the VI trillion industr'ul group with its high
growth rate. particulary. the natable is the growui of IC pro.
duction over the lost three years. The production of 32085
billion in I977 grew to V28l.4 billion in I978. to 3382.9

billion in 1979. and to V5701 billion in I980. Production has
doubled in the three years since I978. The growth over the
previous year was a 35% increase in 1978. 36% in I979, and
49% in I980. The high growth rate of over 35% shows in suc-
cession and It is outstanding progress.

This reveals that production of lC‘s is a rapidly growing
industry. Indeed it has high growth. but this industry has not
always enjoyed such a rosy path The semiconductor deport-
ments of mosts etctric companies have connnonly been thought
of as: "Not pro itable“ or “Moneryeatmg bugs." History re-
peatedly shewed two-or three-years of prosperity and then one-
year’s depression.

For example. in I970. the IC industry produced MOS
devwes. but then dropped to minus growth in l97l. lt tided
over this situation with [SI technology used in electronic
calculators. then rapidly grew again from 1972 to 1974. It also
dropped to minus growth in 1975 because electronic calculators
reached saturation. Afterwards. it was restored by applying lC‘s
to consumer products such as TV‘s. the rapid increase of exports
and MOS devices used in lC’s for memories. It showed a 68%

(Ml‘l’l Stem)

lUmt: --.- one,"
too mlllron "M -.-._ Integrated em"!
I Total
10.000 ‘

 

 

"76 10 11 7O 79 so (I You

Fig. I. Production Value of Semiconductors in Japan

93
FOR OFHCIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increase in l976. but the growth was only 6% in 1977 because
of the second oil shock. The above are the ﬁgures of the IC
industry for the three years before. For such a history. the
industry is not only pleased to reach the VI trillion level. How-
ever. IC‘ s have been used mainly for consumer products and
now it is the growing industrial sue. such as in computers and
controls. With this trend. microcomputers are being widely
used and lC's have rapidly penetrated our society. They have
now become completely indispensable. so. therefore. not much
influenced by economical changes. As labor saving. energy
saving. and new product development are Mcoming more active
in depression years. the demand is found to grow. This has
lead to the higher stable growth over the past three years.

However. one big wave that swallows the industry in a
difﬁcult situation does not easily disappear. The rapid drop of
I6-k memories is a recent example. Until spring last year. l6-k
memories had been in short supply worldwide and Japanese
suppliers had been quick to earn good proﬁts with increased
production. But after the spring in I980. the situation com-
pletely changed to over-supply. and prices started to drop.
suddenly. A unit had cost from five to sot dollars. but con~
tinued to fall in price at the rate of one oilar every two
months. Six months later. at the year-end. the price had fallen
to two dollars or less. ll} of the original price. With this. the
US. semiconductor industry entered a state of depression. it
was told to require one year for recovery.

The Japanese semiconductor industry was directly affected
by this depression in the United States. because the US.
market held a 60% share of the demand worldwide for semi-
conductors and particularly. over 65% of the demand for the
memories that Japan was good at fabricating. and was thus de-
pendent upon the US. market. Each company here took a
prudent attitude towards this year.

However. Japan's domestic market is still in good condition.
mainly for consumer products. and it has the advantage that
mtcroeomputers. linear iC's for TV's and audio equipment. and
small signal transistors for WW: and video disks can be ex.
pected to continue to grow this year. The Japanese market
will not go down as has the US. market.

The 8/8 ratio (ratio of orders received to shipments) that
was the preceding guideline for business conditions has improved
in the US. market from the beginning of this year. and there
have been some hopeful signs of recovery since last April.Thus.
IC's for industrial use in the United States that were :educed
in production can alter the summer. be expected to grow
rapidly. including those new devices such as M memories.
Some signs have begun to appear of revival of sales both for
industrial and consumer use in the same way as at the best time
in the previous year.

If so. over a 30% increase of lC's sales can be forecast for
four years III succession. The semiconductor industry can be
end to be enioying a prosperous year in l98 l.

981 Fuji. Marketing Research Co., Ltd.

3

9':
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NT DBVELOPS STEP-AN‘D-REPEAT X-RAY EXPOSURE SYSTDi

Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English V01 16 No 9, Sep 81 pp 50-51

[Text]

The Electrical Communication Laboratory of NT! (Nippon
Telephone and Telegraph) has been developing a new X-ray
exposure system in order to narrow the minimum line width
of patterns for the manufacture of VLSl‘s. Recently they
successfully concluded development of a practical step~and-
repeat type X-ray exposure system named SR-l. which can
transfer patterns ol‘O.5um width.

It is necessary that iirte width in VLSl's become narrower
and narrower to make high performance VLSi's. and at present
it is necessary to establish a technique to obtain a pattern of
submicron width below lum. This new system. SR-l. which
can transfer submicton patterns by X-ray exposure. heretofore
considered to be difﬁcult. will from now considerably promote
the development of VLSi's by high-speed transfer.

Pattern formation in the X-ray exposure method is to
transfer the pattern of a mask to a wafer using x.rays. the
pattern of which is formed by electron beam exposure. The
method has two merits: one is minor scattering and good
resolution. enabling narrowing of pattern width. bemuse the
energy of X-rays is les than that of an electron beam; and the
other is low loss in the production of Vle wafers and good

reproduction because their resist over 0.5m can be used.
These merits all h lp to form ﬁne patterns in the submicron
range.

However. there arises one important problem. that to
maintain precise positioning of the mask and wafer. “15611 has
to he repeated many times in the manufacturing process.

In practice. it is necessary to have an accuracy less than
:0.lum in position alignment. and an accuracy of IOumelum
ot' the space between mask and wafer. in order to transfer a
multiple mask pattern with line width of about 0.5um. But.
the wafer to be irradiated. becomes distorted in various ways
(expansion. shrinkage. and bending) during the manufacturing
process. This distortion makes it difﬁcult to maintain high
accuracy by previous transfer methods. which adjust simultane-
ously all positions over the whole wafer. and so previously
there had been no development of X-ray exposure equipment
for VLSl's suitable for transferring suhmtcron patterns. SR-l.
is a step-arid-repeat type X-ray exposure system which is quite
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l Spec-iiuﬁans oi the $temnd~Repeat Type x-ray
Exposure System SR~l

- _.____——
Performance Reactor-on i 0.5um
Alignment accurazv ' 20.1 urn
Water use I 3 inch. 4 men
_—_——— ———e—— _———_

Constructive in" menu» E 7J3 (st-KO)
IWWU distance : nan m

Mano“! woe-r. ' iota": lam

Envwonmanr E Lonesome

—..—_ —T———_-_
X-wv some. Wetumu rotuv wool 100mm diam.

 

I eooomm
le-euatton worms - ~2oav
i loom current ~ , A
____._.____
AI-ener i'taertiori caution I Video atrial

. I momma
I i Method (resolution

Sana and recent mechanism ; Moving coil typo lunar

| Motor tar-van

I Arr Wm. 90-606 at...
I I Stroke IMMI \DOMM

I Alignment mechanism E Resolution 0.0“!»

practical In transferring submicron patterns. A pattern. with a
nunimurn line width of 0.5m. can be transferred by SR-i
with an :ecuracy of mask alignment of :0.lurn on wafers 3
inches in diameter. and it can handle more than ﬁve wafers
an hour.

An outline of the new technique mentioned above. is as
follows:

Working accuracy in position alignment is determined by
the object area on the wafer for alignment. accuracy of moving
the wafer. accuracy of the space between the mask surface
and wafer. and the accuracy of meaatremant. As for the object
area for position aligtment. the area of the wafer to be
irradiated is divtded. and the wafer is moved for each division
and aligrunent of the wafer to mask is with high accuracy for
each move. Then the wafer is irradiated. and the process is
repeated. This is the step-and-repeat method. in developing
this method. a moving cod type linear motor is used to drive
an air~driven stage. serving both mechanism of moving and
positioning. Because this mechanism has no mechanical contact
in the drtve and bearings. it is possible to achieve high accuracy.
both for moving and that of the space between mask and wafer.
and thus that of alignment of the mask. As for the mask. it is
desirable to have a large diameter. as long as high accuracy
can be maintained. but it is necessary to have a thin film of
2 to Jim for high transparency of the X-rays. Heretot‘ore. a
large mask with a diameter ot‘ lOmm was easily distorted or
broken. and so. it had been considered to be difficult to
prepare and adjust masks with large diameters. in developing
SR-i. a silicon nitride mask. having increased strength. was
adopted as the mask plate. and so. even if it is large in size with
a diameter of 30mm. a mask with lesa distortion and good
reproduction was available. and it became easy to maintain the
space hetween mask and water at ioum.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To improve further the accuracies of aligning mask and
wafer. and determining the space between them. the laboratory
ins developed an optical system for detecting position no
space at the same time. In this system. the ﬁtting marlcs of the
maslt and wafer are projected simultaneously and enlarged on
an imaging tube by a microscope having a double focused lens.
Then. by treating electrically the video signal. the position
marks of malt and wafer are detected simultaneously. 0n
the other hand. as the conditions of adjusting focusing of both
marlts from the above video signal. both marlts of the mask
and wafer are focused to both focuses of the double focused
lens. thus determining the space distance. By this method.
it has been possible to provide high accuracy for detecting
the fit of positions less than 2005m. and detecting the space
at less than 20.3um.

To obtain high speed. an X-ray source having high brightness
has been used. A small diameter electron beam radiated to the
X-tay target. 3mm. and exciting voltage of ZOltV. have been
ascd. As for the exposure atmosphere. the method of exposing
in :'.r has been adopted to maintain good operatutg conditions
and to shorten exposure time. Besides. the time for moving
position by the aforementioned new mechanism. within an
accuracy less than :0.lum. is less than 0.5 see each exposure.
The large size of the mask also contnbutes to the high-speed
operation. And the success of the maslt suggests the possibility
ot‘exposute to a larger chip Wllh a side longer than 10mm.

Specifications of SR-l are shown in the table.

This system can handle more than ﬁve wafers of 3 inches
diameter per hour besides a 4 inch diameter wafer. and it is the
ﬁrst system in the world as a practical X-ray exposure method
for transferring submicron patterns. and so. will be expected
to be a povnrﬁu toolin um duehpnnntof VLSls.The
laboratory will extend its research to obtain further high-speed
operation.

:1 Fuji Marketing Research Co., Ltd.

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP8240850R000500020033-8

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

DIGITAL AUTWATIC DLTS MEASURING DEVICE DEVELOPED

Tokyo TBCllNOCRA‘l‘ in English Vol 14 No 9, Sep 81 pp 52-53

[Text]

A research group. headed by Professor Kanno. MLAsada and
others. of the College of Engineering. Tokyo University.
currently has succeeded in developing the “Digital Automatic
DLTS Measuring Device." The device. which utilizes a time
sharing type control method based on various parameter
measurements. with help of a microcomputer. has succeeded in
reducing current DLTS measuring time to approximately llSO.
DLTS is an effective method to measure deep traps in silicon
and chemical compound smiconductors. A trap means an
energy level in the prohibitive zone which delays a carrier
temporarily.

Naturally. any help to determine a semiconductor's citat-
actenstics and improve yield rates is welcomed. In the past.
measurements were processed by such artalog devices as a "box
avenger.” an integrator which utilizes box-type functions. In
addition. analysis was rather lengthy. approximately one week.
because it required several temperature sweeps for analysis.
News of this development for automated measuring technology
is attracting much attention from waifer and LS] manufacturers
who will be able to use the new DLTS measuring device as an
impr vement to their production processes.

DLTS measuring principle is as follows:

When a deep trap exists and a pulse is applied. hourly
variations appear as a trap's capacitance value. In actual measure-
ment operation. sample components such as Ni and combina.
tions. and various MOS diodes are placed in a cryostat. When a
constant wave full?! of an applied pulse is added to the samples.
capacitance variations are measured repeatedly by a capacitance
meter. then ﬁnal averaging and reducing of the measurements
into usable data are performed.

Formerly. all of such measurements. as well as data pro-
cessing, were perforated by analog devices only. One measure-
ment required approximately I to 2h. the time necessary to
raise the temperature up to 200K in the absolute temperature
scale. During measurement. a sample point on the applied
voltage and capacitance must be listed at a certain value then
temperatures of the cryostat are slowly swept. Usually one
temperature sweep is insufficient to obtain all necessary data for
analyzing trap energy levels. catching crosssectional areas of the
arriers. analyzing depth distance distribution from the trap

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I0ﬂ09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600020033-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1. Outline of Digital DLTS System

200
(In
100
mean Mluiaaoood

0
2”

“312% g
0 ll! 32) Mill-neon

we (‘I
(I')

too} 4% _:Q I E
o I. I6) Mill-neon.)

200 its)

':::.:;"II% :3:

§§§§§ES§EM

Fig. 2. Example of Spectrum bv OLTS (Analyzing a deep
a deco trap by inclination of the line connect
ing ajorning mountains.)

(K)

%?

boundary surface. and others. As this procedure often requires
changing the voltage wave forms and sample times of the «pa-
cttance. several temperature sweeptngs are necessary and it takes
a very long time to perform. Moreover. basic characteristics of
the analog devices are very difﬁcult to retain in constant eon-
ditton.

In order to overcome such difﬁculties. the research group
succeeded in obtaining all the necessary data on a DLTS by
single temperature sweeping. In order to achieve such results.
the devrce has been utilizing advanced control capability of a
microcomputer which is able to supervise any variation of
applied pulse. bias voltage. time. and other various parameters.
by the time sharing method. These sequential parameter groups
also include such three sweep schemes of hourly sweep (Multi-
pornt sampling). voltage sweep lmultitype applied pulse). and
temperature sweep. As quick sweeps are able to disregard any
temperature variation during such a short time of the experi-
ment. all necessary measurements are taken under rigid control
of various complicated parameter ﬂuctuations by the micro-

99
FOI OWL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

computer. These sweep parameters are multipot'nt samplings ot
the capacitance response (hourly sweeping) and multi type
applied pulses which vary the applied pulse heights and bias
values under a certain relationship (voltage sweeping.)

As all of these measured values are stored in the memory
of the micmcomputer. the difference of the capaci'anoes of two
adjoinim sample points are calculated sequentially and integrat.
ed instead of the former boxcar's averaged calculation. then it
actuate: the integration counter. In addition. the necessary ab-
solute capacitanoe measurement of a sample for space distribu-
tion calculation of trap levels along with ordinary DLTS data is
performed by the DLTS device. The absolute capacitance

measurement is separated from the basic capacitance measure-
ment system by a relay and inserted into the DLTS measuring
operation. Thus. the system is now able to acquire all necessary
data for DLTS and is capable of processing their following
analyses and comparison of data with the theoretical values and
others by simply being integrated with a host computer.

31 Fuji Marketing Research Co. . Ltd.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RECENT DEVELOPHENTS IN WRPHOUS ETALS RESEARCH REPORTED

'l'oltyo TBC'HNOCRAT in English Vol 14 No 9. Sep 81 pp 53-55

[Text]

Research on amorphous metals. known to many as “dream
magnetic alloys." is underway. and the companies that have
been entrusted with this research by the New Technology
Developmt Foundation. and who have recently had success.
are as follows:

a) Matmshita Electric industrial Co.. Ltd. — “Applied Tech-
nology for Amorphous Metals" (such as high-permeability
materials)"

b) Hitachi. Ltd. and Hitachi Metals. Ltd. - “Production
Technology for Amorphous Metals for Electromagnetic Ma-
terials"

c) Sony Corp. — "Applied Technology for Amorphous
Metals (such as maimagrietostrictive materials.)"

1. “Applied Technology for Amorphous Metals (such
as high-permeability materials)" - Matsushita
Electric Industrial Co.. Ltd.

Until now. for magnetic heads such as in taperecorders. etc..
ferrite and permalioy have been used. but since ferrite is inferior
in magnetic characteristics. while petmalloy is inferior in wear
resistance. neither material is suitable for forming into a metal
strip that later. can be formed into heads capable of carrying
out high-density recording. As to what current material is
suitable for this purpose. there is “Sendust”. at present used in
magnetic heads. which is obtained by forming the material
Sendust. into sheets. laminating the sheets. then using the
laminate as the magnetic core of such heads. However. because
Sendust I! very brittle. there have been problems. such as the
diff why of processing the material into sheets.

On the other hand. an amorphous metal obtained by quench-
ing}: metal while molten. is irregular in molecular structure and
wit out grain boundaries. Therefore. it has excellent char-
acteristics unseen in conventional metallic materials.

These characteristics are much affected by any alloy com-
ponents of an amorphous metal. but by properly selecting the
alloy components. a material high in both permeability and
electric resistivity an be obtained. Therefore. a magnetic head
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formed of this amorphous metal has excellent characteristics. in
that it has low high-frequency loss.

However. tor an amorphous metal having such characteristics
as being unstable to heat and high hardness. many factors need
to be solved to make it practical and development of tech-
nology to overcome arch undersirable factors has been strongly
required.

Technology that has been recently develowd. comprises
producing a strip of an amorphous metal having high permea-
brlity. then processing such a strip into a magnetic head. at-
cellent in high-frequency magnetic durscteristics While off-
setting its shortcomings as an amorphous metal.

In this technology. many steps are taken in order to meet
the conditions for the material to be suitable for magnetic
heads. Namely. in order to impart low mauletostrictive re-
tentivity at high permeability to such an amorphous metal. a
material of the cobalt-lron-sillcon-boron series has been adopted.
To raise saturated magnetic flux density. manganese is mixed.
then to prevent rust caused by humidity and heat. chromium
is also added. resulting in an amorphous meta! strip having
permeability of 20.000. a saturated magnetic flux density of
9.000 gauss (G) and a mametic coercive force of 0.005 oersted.
This strip is Sam wide and 30-50um thick. and when it is
made into a laminated magnetic core. the surface roughness is
controlled to withtn slum in order to decrease volume of the
laminate and make bandwidth occupancy at least 90%.

However. in its present states. the magnetic characteirstlcs age
and thermally it is unstable. therefore. the amorphous metal is
albjected to heat treatment at _400~450°C to prevent the
magnetic characteristics from aging. or changes made because
of heat.

A number of strips of this amorphous metal are laminated to
form the magnetic core of a magnetic head. This amorphous

metal has a hardness of 900 Vickers. or being very hard. but in
spite of this. it issrillinferiorinwearresistance.audasmuchaa
20am is worn away when in contact with a sliding tape for
1000 hours. Therefore. as an adhesive for laminating. as for a
magnetic head. hard oxidized particles. such as iron and alumi-
nium oxides. are mixed with a binder to improve wear re-
sistance. reailting in reducing west by abrasion to 4pm] l000h.

In mass production of these magnetic heads. in order to
produce the laminates to size from the amorphous metal strip.
it is desirable to adopt punching. However. because the metal
strip is hard. a die is easily deformed thus tending to generate
burrs. and therefore. punching is Lnsuitable. To overcome this
weakness. chemical etching is used to cut the necessary lamina-
lions.

And so the magnetic head of amorphous metal is excellent in
magnetic diameteristics. which when compared with those of
the wmentional magnetic heads. the results are shown in
Table I.

An amorphous metal magnetic head having far superior
magnetic characteristics to “Sendust” is now available and can
be used as magnetic heads for audio use besides that for V'I'R‘s
and computers. and in future is expected to develop usefulness
far high-density recordm.

102
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Comparison oi Magnetic Head ot Amorphous
Metal with Conventional Magnetic Heads

    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    

ﬂavoring

aanaltMtv -13 d
(3‘. ml

Regeneration

eharaocarlotlea "' ﬂ
(1‘ Kiel/33 Ha)

Lorne». “CL 0 ea
'00-me - g g.
2..., 3%

ﬂat current

wound-up mph-u w Ian.

Fig I. Conceptual Drawing of Equipmant for
Producing an Amorphous Metal Strip
(the monoroil method)

2. “Production Technology for Amorphous Metals for
Electromagnetic Materials" - Hitachi. Ltd. and
Hitachi Metals. Ltd.

In order to produce commercially. an amorphous metal. a
roll quenching method is effective. and such a method has been
developed by the Hitachi group and is called the “monorail
method." This method comprises releasing molten metal from a
slit-shaped nozzle onto the surface of a high-speed rotating
cooling roll to form the metal into a thin strip. while quenching
and solidifying the metal.

In this method of directly producing an amorphous metal
strip from a metal in the molten state without it passing
through a rolling stage. the main endeavor has been to develop
control technology. especially for minimizing variation of thick-
ness or the amorphous metal strip and to obtain the best

103
POI OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possible surface. In this development. a hidtprecssion control
system has been developed for this purpose.

A second point in production technology of this amorphous
metal strip. has been development of technology for simul-
taneously producing and winding the strip automatically which
had been. regarded as difﬁcult. in this development. a special
winding system has been adopted. whereby this amorphous
strip. produced at the high speed of about 30mls. is caught
Instantly and taken up on winding roll.

In addition. mother important point in respect of com-
mercial production. is to establish an alloy composition easily
handled bv the production method while being excellent In
electromagnetic characteristics. and for this. variotrs alloy com-
positions exhibiting desired characteristics according to their
use and method of manufacture have been established.

By this. technology capable of stably producing an amorhpus
metal strip 20~S$urn thick. IOOmrn Wide and at least 300m
long desired as industrial material has been established. As to
applications of this ribbon in the electromagnetic field. "on
cores for windings. transformer cores for high frequency.
magnetic heads. a”! magnetrostrictive applications are con-
ceivable. and by establishing this technology. a great expansion
infrelds related to the use of amorphous metal strip can be
expected.

3. "Applied Technology for Amorphous Metals (such
as high magnetostrictive materials. etc)” — Sony
Corp.

In recent years, along with the progress and increased use
of digital technology. such as in microcomputers. demands for
handling material recorded graphically. are increasing and for
input of such. Wally a coordinate reader is used.

Most coordinate readers are of the type using a magneto.
strictive delay line and as a material for a delay line. a thin alloy
line composed mainly of iron and cobalt. sold under the trade
name “Vicltalloy,” is used. This Vickalloy line is a poly-
crystalline werenrictlve alloy. which has mooted points in
damping ol‘ a mechanical signal (sound wave) in the grain
boundary with the occurrence of noise giving a limit to develop-

ment of larger size. bids-perfomtance coordinate readers having
a him-disassembling capacity. As to the production of a
Viclulloy line. it fails to meet the dimension and coordinate
reading precidon required by users. In addition. a production
method capable of carrying out large-scale production has not
been established. therefore. it has become an obstacle to ex-
panding the use of coordinate readers.

Recently developed technology uses a newly developed
amorphous high-maretostrictive delay thin line instead of
that using Vickalloy. whereby the difﬁculties motioned are
solved. thus making it possible to expand the use of coordinate
readers.

10b ,
ma omcur. uscom
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The amorphous high-rmgnetostrictive thin ﬁne line has. as
compared with conventional Vickalloy. the following char-
acteristics:

(I) Because it has a large electromechanical coupling coef-
ficient. it has excellent drive detecting efﬁciency of ultrasonic
vans

(2) Becauv. .t is amorphous. it has no grain boundaries and
thus ﬁid' damping dissemination of sound waves and causing
noise.

(3) 'lecause itisathinsuipwithhighelectricalresistance.
slip cumt losstvhen disseminatingsoundwavesissmalland
damping is small up to high-frequencies.

As the material has these characteristics. it is possible to
produce a largeasize coordinate reader having high analyzing
cuneuy

As to producing such a material. a triple roll method. ti:-
veloped by Sony Corp.. appliet pressure of the roll surfaces
between each other. to molten metal ﬂowing in the form of a
thin band from a nozzle. The metal passes between two rolls
rotating at a high speed. quenching and rolling the metal. and
stibnquentiy coolim it by a third roll to produce an amor-
phous metal strip. By this it is possible to produce on a large
scale. a strip whose both surfaces are smooth and which has
dimensional precision of l:0.0$mrn in width and 032ml in
tluckneas. melting it possible to use the strip for a coordinate
reader requiring almost no post-procesung.

As a result of this development. it is Mb to establish the:
basic technology. making it is possible to develop a large-size.
high-performance coordiate reader having an effective area of
800 x 800mm. analyzing capacity of 005mm (podbly down to
less than (i. l mm).

Fuji. Marketing Research Co. , Ltd.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

SEVERAL NEW FACSIHILE MACHINES APPEAR ON MARKET

Tokyo TBCHNOCRAT in English Vol 14 No 9, Sep 81 p 72

[Text]

' N'ppon lite-mu: Co no: unnounoed six new
facsimih machines. talled Reudem Facsimile
Wu]. which snould be apptoptute to: local
[over-Inna! me. men a. wooing copies of
t'unily Rpﬂllllon records and or otnot cutt-
ﬁutu. Their ttanunuuoo speeds m twice
that of conventional machines and they an
tnnntt white. bbdt and .m tntotmodtate tone.
my. ‘l‘hett ptlces tau: l‘tottt V2445 to WI
million.

Hamil: Den» Company has announced
Pam-lax ‘800. which n a medium-speed nu-
cntno and an tnnonlt copies automatic-11y. It
is «nail and compact. and an exhibit block.
wnite and an intettnedhto tone. my. and is or
the tnetmotonsttive teootdln; type. It: price a
V730 tnoumnn. .

summit: nu also announced a calm
l‘mb tot computet output. which has seven
on": colon and eint twain; tons. The com-
pany has told It to foltyo Electric Co. at about
U! million. including connections.

TOIIIIINI has announced a new ptotluct.
conx 11mm. ntwugaded tnmnosnuuve
lauitmle. lti nutn features an: antiqued

tnetntosennttve With me: - [m «mansion.
lot-let running costs due to halo; the memo-
nnntive type. adjustabb to tun-Int papnt nae.
my automatic and onto: miuelanooutoptial
functions. The pace is “.95 tndloo.

much! has announced I'D new type: of
{anionic tn tn: l'llFAX‘Ios tern. Then (atom
on: moving tne numbet o! the called potty
on a LED indie-tot. "cardiac date. time.
tender: numb". and tilt auction of pow on
the op ot copies mm. and teem au
nlevnnt dot: for hand“ on ll output ptlntet.
The other tetnntkable point is to apply a
modiﬁed lend system. which can realize I
{met tnnsmhtion spend. WI a to to 20%
tom. Their prices on 82.3 and 2.7mil1loo.

A malls: and note compact botanic tot
use on ships not wowed on tho whet.
Fumno Elncttic Co. not announced FAX-NO.
the depth of which is only "an. Its aunt
and tin axe about one-tum of conventional
units. The uoe or a tyntneumJnsmd ol the

ctyttnl system. is nelpM to teduoo in mum
and mo. The price in 8650 thou-ad.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing Research (20., Ltd.
C30: 4120/103

106
FOR OFFIOAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

1980 REPOKI OF NTT ELBCI'RICAL COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY CWTTBB DISCLOSED

Tokyo TBCHNOCRAT in English Vol 110 No 9, Sep

[Text]

' MT: (Nippon Tacoma and Tolupttooe
Publlc Corporattoo) Electtial Communication
Technology Commo- has recently tubmltted
to ill ptutldottt In following six lms as a
tepott tot I980: (lt ullahluty cvaluouoo lech-
uology for outdoor fadllliea; l2) emu“? and
economlutlott ltcttnoloﬂ {at an undetyowd
matttbutlon mum: (3) ﬁnal prom“ tech-
noloﬂ for outdoor tadll :u) emclncy ml
automation tecttoolou tot an unduuouod
data communications; (5) "ambit-3| P'°'
blunts of tta pottabl: ubpuom mum and
I6) otmiutloo of an nus: mmmunlatton
mum: in the tututu.

Mot: weaﬁcallymonumm itcttt (4) above.
"Fututo own the Manual attenuation
meaning In data commwcatioaafﬂt moves:
that pttontiea mould ho we» to (at me
dculopmcnt ot‘ technoloota tot ioduatttu ap-
plicant-m 0! vote: :yntm «cotton or
vorcc ﬁles. and «tabla-taut of ayttthanud-

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing Research

C50 :

4120/103

107

81p72

voice quallty evaluation methods. and (b)
town: ymnottoo of «ontology tot vo'ta
tlcoultloo till the ulepmm mtvott.

Constanta; the {acdutult ammonium
network «latest to ttcttt (6) noon. "0th-
tatloo at an Imago commuolatloo «not:
to the futon“ It. upon tutu tttat ttu tott-
pttottc oetvotlt fodllty would be and between
tennlml: and the subscdbet's um SW“
and mat tttu digital tnmutim'on notwott should
It: uacd bum» the atom: switchbouda.
tttttuby pmldin; lawn” organization lot
the that bolus. and as the union “MIX
expands. the dual Mtcnln: mm be pro-
vidod lot at. canonization and Vida «to!
the mm. Aa lot the lamp commutation
network. it also status that disclaim mm
b: tad otl ootitnal coding manolou. the bond
communion canola”. and Mutual func-
tloot.

Co., Ltd.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TBCHNOWCY

USSR-JAPAN IMPORT. EXPORT DEAL UPDATED
Butadiene Plant
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in Japanese 7 Oct 81 p 7

[Text] Toyo Engineering (T23) and Mitsui 5 Co., Ltd. disclosed on the 6th that

they have succeeded in obtaining from the Soviet Union's All Soviet Technical Mach-
ine Import Corporation (TECIHACHINEPORT) an order for a butadiene plant. The amount
of the order is 25 billion yen. The Export-Import Bank of Japan has approved
financing in the form of a bank loan (interbank loan). This is the first commit-
ment for the export of a large scale plant to the Soviet Union since the imposition
by the Japanese Government of economic sanctions against the Soviet Union that accom-
panied the invasion of Afghanistan. This commitment indicates the relaxing of
sanctions against the Soviet Union; those in the plant industry are hoping that

this will put the export of plants back on track.

This butadisne plant is to be included in the petrochemical complex that the

Soviet Union's 011 Refineries and Petrochemical Industries Corporation has under
construction in the western Siberia region. The plant's annual production capacity
is 180,000 tons (two machines producing 90,000 tons each). The plant will produce
synthetic rubber, using butane that is produced in the Tobolsk region of western
Siberia. The plant is scheduled for completion in 1986.

This deal includes as a premise the use of the manufacturing process called the
catadyne (7) process," which is owned by the U.S. Foodley [phonetic] Company. and
for a time it was feared that the deal would not be made because of the need for
U.S. Government approval. However. since there are precedents for exporting this
process to the Soviet Union, the tacit approval of the U.S. was recently obtained.
Since the Soviet Union indicated its final specifications this sumer, intense
competition for the order has ensured among four groups of Western European and
Japanese companies: T80 and Hitsui, Italy's Burotechnica,‘?rance's ProCon, Hirsu-
bishi Heavy Industries and Nisaho—Iwai as participants. Particularly after the
Export-Import Bank of Japan financing firmed up in the latter half of September,
the Japanese corporate powers, gained in strength and completed with each other

in the final race. With respect to its success in obtaining the order. TEE inter-
preted that it was because the Soviet Union highly evaluated TEC's fertilizer plant
exports to the Soviet Union. It has been 11 years since TEE exported a petrochem-
ical plant to the Soviet Union, Tic exported a large scale ethylene plant in 1970.

108

ms omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan's export of plants to the Soviet Union has conspicuously decreased since

the electromagnetic steel plating plant deal (approximately 80 billion yen) by the
Nippon Steel Corporation in combination with Amco (U.S.) failed in the beginning

of 1980 due to the impact of sanctions against the Soviet Union. In fiscal year
1980, there were only two or three small scale exports for less than 1 billion yen
per item. The Export-Import Bank of Japan made a large scale loan to the Siberia
Forest Development Project as a special case, and that was the only case. Recently,
however. the Bank has begin to move at last to approve natural gas development and
other projects.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Steel Plate for Large-Diameter Pipe

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 27 Oct 81 p 6

[Text] Steel plate exports to the USSR have shown a trend toward rapid increases.
At this summer's business talks, which encompassed negotiations on large diameter
steel pipe, it was initially agreed that exports of steel plate to the Soviet Union
will be 300,000 tons, to be delivered in shipments over the period between October
of this year and July of next year. Subsequently. there was an additional order

for 60,000 tons, and recently there has been another increase in the quantity re-
quested. Ultimately the total amount has reached 400,000 tone, that is, 40,000

tons per month. All of this steel plate is a highly specialized manufactured
product used for the large diameter steel pipe. Since the Soviet Union has increased
production capacity of its pipe manufacturing facilities, there is a strong possi-
bility of further increases in the volume of exports. For this reason, various
steel companies are planning to send missions consisting of technicians to the
Soviet Union as early as November, to discuss technical problems in pipe manufactur-
ing and other subjects. They hope that thr ugh this process, they will gain a feel-
ing for future trends in exports of heavy sheet metal to the Soviet Union. Thus,
they are carefully observing the attitudes of the Soviet Union.

Following the conclusion of the large'diameter pipe exports negotiations, five
compsnies--Nippon Corporation. Nihon Koksn K.K., Kawasaki Steel Corporation,
Sumitomo Metal Industries, Ltd., and Kobe Steel, Ltd.--have made the steel plate
deal and started exporting to the Soviet Union. Initially, the Soviet Union pur-
chased only large diameter steel pipe. However, since transportation costs by

sea from Japan are lower when steel plate is combined with the large-diameter steel

pipe, the Soviet Union Began making periodic purchases of steel plate 2 or 3 years
ago.

In contrast to large diameter steel pipe which is plant-related, steel plate is not
eligible for Export-Import Bank of Japan financing, so a trading firm is providing
financing for this deal. Their plan is to proceed with the large diameter steel
pipe first. when those negotiations are concluded, they will begin negotiations
on steel plate, using as a reference the negotiated price of large diameter steel

pipe.

Initially, export volume of steel plate was less than 200,000 tons, or about the
level of 15,000 tons per month. However, last year volume increased to 300,000
tons with the additional orders. In addition, the volume of the shipments from
October of this year through July of next year, increased to 400,000 tons, 40,000
tons per month, reaching an annual rate of 500,000 tons.

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Union does not particularly explain the reason for this increase, but
steel industry sources say that the Soviet Union's large diameter steel pipe pro-
duction capacity has increased because it improved productions systems. Since pipe
transportation costs are extremely high because it is bulky, it is natural for the
Soviet Union to try to raise domestic pipe production capacity. Since steel plate
is a highly specialized product, it is unthinkable to increase purchases if there
were not any room for it in production capacity. However, the circumstances of the
Soviet Union's increased orders are not known in detail.

Since exports of steel plate have increased, each company intends to send techni-
cians on missions to the Soviet Union, and the Soviet Union is fundamentally in
agreement. Negotiations on timing, etc. are underway. The technicians are plan—
ning to depart in the latter half of next month, and to exchange ideas on the
technical problems of pipe manufacturing and on other topics with the All-Soviet
Union Minerals and Industrial Products Export-Import Corporation, while they are
going to observe pipe manufacturing plants. It is expected that at that time the
Soviet Union's purchasing policies will become clear.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbunsha 1981
Horizontal Boring Machine
Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 7 Nov 81

[Text] The foremost maker of boring machinery, Tone Boring (Main Office Tokyo,
President Mr Tatsuyoshi Numata. capital 230,000,000 yen) has received orders for
sixteen horizontal boring machines from the Soviet Union's Transportation Con-
atruction Corporation (MINTRANSTROI). The full amount of the order is approximately
2,100,000,000 yen, a large scale order for machinery of this type. Shipments will
begin this month by sea. The company's boring machinery is suitable for excava-
tions in so-called "bad" strata (where it is extremely difficult to do excavations).
In addition to the machinery for the Soviet Union. the Company has been approached
with deals from Rest Germany and other places. Because the Company is attracting
international attention, it appears that export negotiations will continue to the
future.

The machinery to be exported to the Soviet Union is used in preliminary boring done
in order to survey the strata at a drilling site. The Company developed the
machinery for use in construction of the Seikan tunnel (from Aomori to Hakodate)
using a shield drilling method with two heavy pipes. The interior pipe for use

in excavation is wrapped in an exterior protective pipe, and has the capability

of drilling into the broken ground and of withstanding pressure in the so-called
"bad" strata. The machinery is said to have made the world record for the longest
horizontal boring of 2,150 meters in the construction of the Aomori-Hakodate tunnel.

MINTRANSTROI, which oversees all railroad construction in the entire Soviet Union,
has ordered from Tone Boring this time as a result of repeated technical investi-
gations by delegations visiting Japan. The machinery will be used in mountainous
sections of the Second Siberian Railroad (Baikal-Amur). The Soviet Union's export-
import contract "window" is the Soviet Union Government Metallurgy and Mining
Machinery Export-Import Corporation, and payment conditions are quotations in
dollars and payment in dollars. This deal has absolutely no tie to inter-government

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9

based financing or loans. It is said that payments will be made in full with the
HINTRANSTROI's own fund.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha 1981
Sakhalin Crude Oil
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHIHBUN in Japanese 10 Nov 1981

[Text] Asia Petroleum (President Mr Kotaro Hasegawa) is increasing imports of
crude oil from the Soviet Union. Asia Petroleum has been importing Sakhalin light
crude and Efabi crude oil under contracts for direct deals (DD) for nearly 10 years
with the Soviet Union's Petroleum Export Corporation. This year also, Asia
Petroleum imported 10,000 tons (daily volume approximately 1,900 barrels) doubling
last year's imports. From the standpoint of shipping costs, geographical proximity
makes Sakhalin crude oil more profitable than middle eastern crude oil. In addition,
since the price is almost equal to the price of Saudi Arabian light crude oil,
petroleum products made from refined Sakhalin crude oil are extremely competitive.
Thus, Asia Petroleum has set a policy of increasing the volume of imports from the
Soviet Union to the fullest extent possible next year and thereafter. Because the
Soviet Union is the largest oil producing country in the world, and is continuously
discovering and developing new oil fields located in Siberia, it has an appeal for
Japan as a future source of crude oil supplies. There may be a movement in the
industry to follow in the wake of Asia Petroleum.

Asia Petroleum has been in fortunate circumstance in terms of crude oil acquisition.
Although Asia Petroleum is a purely Japanese company, it has a special non-aligned
supply contract (third party) with Hobil's international petroleum capital (major).
For example, in fiscal 1980, Asia Petroleum'a imports of discounted Saudi crude

oil reached 54 percent of its total compared to Japan's overall discounted Saudi
crude oil imports on the level of 30 percent of its total, and the import price
(0!?) per barrel of Asia petroleum was also on the average $32.37 while the CIP

of the other oil companies with pure domestic capital was $33.53.

However, this year Asia Petroleum withdrew from the Kyodo Petroleum Group and formed
a new group with Daikyo Oil Company, Limited, and since that time circumstances

have changed. At the October special meeting of OPEC, a standard uniform price

was reinstituted, and the price of Arabian light was raised by $2.00 per barrel.
Thus, the price differnetial between Aramco and non-Aramco crude oil procurement
costs is expected to disappear. However, it is still a clear advantage for all of
the oil companies to maintain a high ratio of Saudi crude imports, in terms of

price and stability of supply.

However, Daikyo Oil Company, Limited's Saudi crude oil ratio is only about 10
percent, the lowest even among the native Japanese oil companies. Moreover, it
tends to be leaning toward the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Kuwait. In order to
advance cooperative business in such broad areas as refining and crude oil supplies,
Asia Petroleum, which formed the new group, made the judgment that there is a need
to assist in the improvement of Daikyo's crude oil acquisition situation. The
increase in imports from the Soviet Union can also be seen as one indication of

its efforts.

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The purchase of Sakhalin produced crude oil was already initiated in the latter
half of the mid 1960s, and heretofore 50,000 tons were imported annually on the
condition that shipment be made between June and October when tankers can enter the
port. This year Company President ﬂasegawa went to Moscow and negotiated with the
head of the Petroleum Export Corporation. As a result, the Hasegawa doubles the
volume of imports. In addition. both parties have agreed to study future in-
creases.

Efabi crude has an API rating of 33-34, as light as ordinary Arabian light. Also.
the price is geared to that of Arabian light. In addition, shipping costs are in-
expensive hecause of Sakhalin's geographical proximity. Since these and other
advantages are numerous. current thinking holds that the new group wants to develop

the Sakhalin deal as a future supply source.
COPYRIGHT, Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1981

9921
680: 6106/26

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SC I ENCB AND TECHNOLOGY

USE OF OPTIC FIBER IN TELECOMMUNICATION NETNORK UNDER STUDY
Tokyo NIKKEI ELECTRONICS in Japanese 9 Nov 81 pp 265-252

[Text] Abstract: The Telegraph and Telephone Public Corpora-
tion (TTPC) has begun investigation of the technical feasibil-
ity of introducing optic fiber to the subscriber system. It is
conceivable that in the future, in addition to nontelephone
services such as data. facsimile and captain. the subscriber
system will be able to have other services such as ultra-high-
speed data. ultra-high-speed facsimile, ITV, TV conference,
image information. TV lecture. and TV telephone. Technolog-
ical preparations have been started to meet these challenges.
The first onsite experiment has been completed in the Yokosuka
area in Kanagaua Prefecture. Moreover. as a link in the drive
to popularize the information network system. a model experi-
ment is soon to be carried out in the Husashino and Hitaka
areas of the city of Tokyo. This experiment will be centered
around digital communications technology. but optic fiber is
expected to be involved also.

Investigation into the application of optic fiber communication to the subscriber
line has begun. The Yokosuka Electric OmIIunications Research Center of the TTPC
has already completed the first onsite experiment. 0n the other hand. under the
powerful leadership of Vice President Yasusada Kitahara, investigation of the in-
formation network system (lNS) has also begun. A model experiment using optic
fiber scheduled to begin in 1983 is to be carried out in the Husashino and Hitaka
areas of the city of Tokyo. For this project and the construction cost of the
fourth electric communications research center which is under consideration, the
TTPC has decided to increase its 1982 investigation and research expenditures by
12 percent over the previous year. to 90 billion yen (approximate figure request-
ed). This amounts to approximately 2.2 percent of the business income, exceeding
the 2-percent level which is considered a standard for investigation and research

expenditure.

Figure 1 shows those services that are expected to be introduced to the subscriber
system in the future. There are a number of nontelephone services having an in-

formation volume comparable to that of telephone service. such as data. facsimile.
and captain. Moreover, broad band services in the range of 1-4 MHz such as ultra-
high-speed data, ultra-high-speed facsimile. ITV [industrial TV]. TV conference,

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

,.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

image information. TV lecture and TV telephone, or high grade TV service in the
range of 3 HM: may also be contemplated.

Introduction of optic fiber has special significance for the economics of broad
band transmission routes.2 Furthermore, flexibility and expansibility are neces-
sary in order to be able to cope with the movement of new services. For this
purpose, investigation of wavelength-splitting multiplex bilateral transmission
has been carried out. It is highly desirable that the subscriber system be of a
nonrelay type from the viewpoint of economy and maintainability. At present, the
nationwide average distance of the subscriber lines is 2 km, with 95 percent of
the lines less than 5 km in length. "hen nonrelay transmission distance can be
extended to 5-7 km through the use of optic fiber, almost all subscribers will be
able to be connected without relay.

An outline of the experiments carried out in the Yokosuka area is summarized in
Table l. The trial system can be divided roughly into four groups. The primary
group transmission system is one in which the application of PBX multiplex office
lines and high-speed data to the subscriber line is investigated. The broad band
subscriber system is suitable for big subscribers such as business offices con-
taining PBX multiplex office lines, ultra-high-speed facsimile, ultra-high-speed
data. and TV conference. The general subscriber system is aimed at the household
application of 4 MHz TV in addition to providing services of the digital primary
including facsimile. captain and data. The CATV system was introduced to ascer-
tain the basic technology related to multiplex transmission of VBF band TV and
high-grade TV transmission. The longest experiment section is 8.5 km long with a
turn, and the shortest is 1.2 km. The experiment sections consist of various types
of subsections, including pipe line section, overhead section and tunnel section.

Multiplexing is accomplished by means of wavelength splitting using two waves in
the primary group transmission system as shown in Figure 2(a); four waves in the
broad band subscriber system as shown in Figure 2(b); five waves (with one wave
for either high grade TV or UHF TV) for the general subscriber system as shown in
Figure 3(a); and two waves in the CATV systems as shown in Figure 3(b).

Taking into consideration the initial deviation, thermal variation, and changes
due to aging of the elements, the wavelength intervals chosen were 30 nm (semi-
conductor laser) for the short wavelength band and 150 nm (light emitting diode)
for the long wavelength band. Three types of wave mixers and separators were
prepared in accordance with the number of multiplexing. The insertion loss was
3.5-4.3 dB for the two wavelengths multiplexing (interference film filter). It
was less than 10 dB for the four wavelengths multiplexing (concave diffraction
grid). and it was less than 11.7 dB for the five wavelengths multiplexing (a comr
bination between interference film filter and plain diffraction grid).

When direct analog modulation format involving semiconductor laser was used, the
interference between the propagation modes was found to take place within the

fiber due to the nature of laser. and speckle noise (model noise) was generated.
As a result, deterioration of the wave form and a reduction in 8/“ were experi-

enced. The high frequency superposed modulation method6 was used as the main
measure for solving this problem. The opticalsfeedback method was also experi-

mented with in the high grade TV transmission.

11h
FOR 0F1NCIAI.US£40NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The station equipment was all accommodated in subracks. Equipment for the general
subscriber system and the broad band subscriber system was packed two subscribers
per subrack. The CATV system was packed with four high grade TV systems or four
VHF TV systems per subrack. while the primary group transmission system was packed
with an active system and a standby system per subrack. Each rack contained three
subracks (four subracks in case of the primary group transmission system).

Taking into consideration its application in the subscriber system. a new type of
optical connector consisting of9an all-ceramic plug core was developed with a
view to economy and simplicity. The average connection loss (of 180 terminalsl
assembled onsite was found to be 0.74 dB. with a standard deviation of 0.16 dB. 0

Table 2 summarizes the major experimental results obtained from the tests carried
out on the optic fiber transmission system. The minimum light reception power of
the 7 km analog channel was -36 dBm when the SIR was 42 dB. The differential
gain was 6.1 percent for the 860 nm band and 3.5 percent (the standard is less
than 5 percent) for the 890 nm band. The differential phases were, respectively,
2.6 degrees and 1 degree (ditto, less than 3 degrees); the frame slopes were,
respectively, less than 1‘ 2 percent and less than t 2 percent (ditto. less than
10 percent); and the line slopes were, respectively. less than i 1 percent and
less than t 1 percent (ditto. less than 5 percent). The standard for the image
transmission was also satisfied, and no significant deterioration in the image
quality was detected even after it was transmitted by an overhead cable over a
distance of 5.6 km.

The average light reception power corresponding to a signal error rate of 10-9

was found to be -65 dBm in the case of digital transmission. It was found through
this experiment that the actual loss due to optic fiber was less than the design
standard. Therefore. nonrelsy transmission over a distance of 7 km could be ac-
complished even when system margins of 2 dB for the analog channel and 3 dB for
the digital channel were used. The themes for future study should include prac-
tical application of the power supply method, supervisory control method using
optical transmission line. and testing method for the wavelength multiplexing
system. Apart from the general household applications, the broad band services
for the big subscribers such as business offices can be expected to be realized

fairly soon.

The INS model experiment will be carried out in 1982 in the Husashino and Hitaka
areas of the city of Tokyo.

The INS idea concerns digitization of the conventional analog telephone network
(including digitalization of subscriber lines) and then utilizing this digital
network for various services.11 In addition. the transmission charge for all
services is said to be computed on the basis of the bit number (quantity of in—
formation) (a charging format based on the quantity of information). In this
way there will be no contradictions as far as charges are concerned even if dif-
forent types of services are intermixed. For example. the telephone service
charge will be computed on the basis of 60 kbits/second multiplied by the dura-
tion of conversation. Telephone services using a compressed band of 32 kbits/
second can also be contemplated.

115
F13RI0F11C1AL USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The TTPC has firmly drawn up a plan to carry out a series of model experiments

in the Husashino and Hitaka areas of the city of Tokyo starting in 1982. Approxi-
mately 10,000 general subscriber telephones, approximately 250 digital telephone
terminals and approximately 750 nontelephone terminals will be installed free of
charge in homes and offices in the designated area in order to carry out the ex-
periments. Figure 6 shows the block diagram of this model system.

The services that will be provided include: 1) those services in which the digit-
a1 effects are most significant (such as digital facsimile, digital still picture,
compound PBX, document communication and processing, and multimedia services);

2) those services introduced mainly for the purpose of confirming the technolog-
ical feasibility of digitization (such as digital telephone and digital scanned
image communication service); 3) those services introduced for the purpose of con-
firming the effectiveness of optic fiber utilization (such as ultra-high-speed
facsimile and image circuit service); and 6) those services introduced mainly for
the purpose of confirming the technology related to the unification of the digital
networks (such as digital data exchange and facsimile communications network).

However, matters related to budgeting are not yet quite settled. The estimated
request for the 1982 budget includes 90 billion yen for investigation and research
expenditures, which amounts to an increase of 12 percent over the previous year.
This significant increase in the budget is considered to be due in part to a de-
sire to realize the IRS idea. However, on the other hand, President Tsune Shindo
declared that he would apply a brake to the annual 1.7 trillion equipment invest-
ment (construction investment) at present because of uneasiness over a trend of
declining business income. It appears, therefore, that some operational adjust-
ment will have to be made even on such items as investment in new business activi—
ties.

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[3

N
‘0
v

I
L
i
I.
1
b\

I:
9
I
K
1‘
L
E
h
6
.b
I:

(22)Tvtllnrrvr)\\\

‘23-
(30

Wk“: Mill: INN: 10M": INN“! l0": 7"9 7"

mural/j 1:426” Ioueq” ‘ nmnewn,“ “(595. ”"5353?

m mm m. .‘....t.72("')**7~ wan-H32)
m (31.) " '

(36) 35) .....

II ”I. .Lﬂﬁ'ﬁﬂkb' flittb‘F-KX"

Figure 1. Services expected to be introduced to the subscriber system in the

Key:

future.1

(1) Service network (2) More (3) User number (6) Less (5) Service
format (6) Public network (7) Broadcast type (8) Nonpublic network
(9) Special line (10) Data, facsimile (ll) Telemetering (12) Captain.
still image service (13) Radio (16) Data, facsimile (15) Ultra-high-
spced data, ultra-high-speed facsimile (16) TV telephone (17) TV con-
ference (18) TV lecture (19) VSR (video response service) (20) Pay TV
(21) TV conference (22) ITV (industrial TV) (23) Ultra-high-speed data,
ultra-high-speed facsimile (26) High grade TV service (25) High grade
TV broadcast (26) Objects of the public corporation's conventional ser-
vices (27) High grade TV special line service (28)-(26) (29) Those
services already implemented or growing smoothly (30) Analog band

(31) Digital bit rate (32) Transmission medium (33) Optic fiber cable
(3‘) Physical network (35) Coaxial cable (36) Pair line

117
FOI.0F?1C1AI.USE()NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

(1 )muuu-ru)

     
        
    
     
  

(2) tnanuauuu»
m 03m [.0

'0‘" W 3) . m 4 mu) POI-u
£7)? 7” i "x 750-11; 7v(6) 152)

   
 

     
  

Lo.- Muv—f- LED: urn—r ._ ”-1” (It)
B tam nus Erma. 9n WM“

'2 (aH-‘kﬂlliiizlfl-M‘t. (NIL'CIIAﬂa 191.0"

Figure 2. (a) Construction of primary group transmission system.
(b) Construction of broad band subscriber system.

Key: (1) Yokosuka controlled telephone relay station (2) Yokosuka Electric Com-
munications Research Center (3) Station (lo) Subscriber (5) High-speed
facsimile (6) Multiplexer (7) To L8 (8) To TV conference network
(9) To telephone (10) Lb: Semiconductor laser. LED: Light emitting diode,

-—: Optic cable, I: Optic transmitter, optic receiver, I: Optic
mixer. optic separator

mane-an (9)
(CATV~1F-.x>r) Vﬂrﬂrell

----_---_---

L_._:.J
la)

(4')”

( )0 2 'FIK» —1-—

1”” m "an (1,)
» Bums. tens ton. on

I) (a) -ImAr.> “1.0.1.2. Mcnv Hum"

Figure 3; (a) Construction of general subscriber systea.
(b) Construction of CATV system.

Key: (1) High grade TV camera (CATV headend) (2) High grade TV (3) Multiplexer
(lo) Relay distributer board (5) Subscriber (6) TV telephone (7) Pac-
ainile (8) Telephone (9) VHF TV broadcast (10) TV (11) Station
(12) Lb: Semiconductor laser. LED: Light emitting diode, —: Optic cable,
a: Optic transmitter, optic receiver, E: Optic mixer, optic separator

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Outline of optic fiber transmission experimental system in Yokosuka area.

'1 I'llﬂt‘ﬂt"? {“53"} 1’5“.

 

   

IT) LI): f'ﬂﬁvnf- -

CATV 92,1.

T-rnI-‘s 7+9"!
-a.,«~,r Ian-um

  

LEI):Q£7(1"-F API): ’a'ltll'la F74 f-F

(9)?» mm. p rn—r nu: maxim lamina

(A) Primary group transmission group (8) Broad band subscriber system

(C) General subscriber system (D) CATV system (1) Transmitted signal

(2) Applicable distance (target value) (3) Applicable optic cable

(4) Transmitted code (signal) (5) Light source (6) Wavelength (pm)

(7) Light receiving element (8) Example of service (9) Note: LD: Semi-
conductor laser, LED: Light emitting diode, APD: Avalanche photodiode
PD: pin-type photodiode (A1) Digital primary group (A3) Graded index
type multimode optic fiber (A6) Down 0.83, Up 0.89 (A8) PBX. ultra-high-
speed data (El) Digital secondary group (83)-(A3) (36) Down 0.8,

Up 0.83 (38) PBX, ultra-high-speed facsimile. ultra-high-speed data

(P1) Color TV signal...1 ch, Audio signal...l ch (P3)-(A3) (Pb) Analog
base band (F6) Down 0.86, Up 0.89 (F8) 6 MHz TV (TV conference) (61)
Digital primary group (G3)-(A3) (C6) Down 0.89, Up 1.15 (G8) Facsimile,
Captain. Data (H1) Color TV signal...1 ch, Audio signal...l ch (H3)-(A3)
(H4) Analog base band (H6) Down 0.86. Up 1.3 (H8) 4 MHz TV (image infor-
mation service) (11) High grade color TV signal (13)-(A3) (16) Analog
base band (18) High grade TV (J1) VHF band color TV signal (J4) Analog
direct brightness modulation (1H) (J8) VHF TV broadcast

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Major test results of trial facilities for optical transmission systea.

I 2 III! IhtﬁiltIﬂl I

    

 
 
     

'El‘l- nun)“

-: ' - ' . .;..-:" -' j. .» '1 7' . EMAIL." Ms.
(D mm Mﬁwwaws-a .. ~
(a mum m we.

tam—W

(a mm was» '-

msaa ’) nun 1

  
     
    
   
 

    

(I )i
(J am “3 i ' r. '
(K as "

  
   

mm := u—m
7—7p" _ . . -. . _
7-97 ‘

—n:-:—

I (0) an n zm-nmua-xmo"
T-rci- -h- Imus/NAM"

 
   

Key: (A) channel (B) Transnitted signal ((2) Modulation format (D) Light
source (E) Central wavelength (F) Light output power inside fiber
(G) Light receiving eleaent (H) Minimum light reception power (see note)
(I) Mixing/separation loss (including bandpass filter) (.1) Connector loss

(K) Allowable line loss (L) Optic cable loss (including splice) (H) Margin

(N) Nonrelay transmission distance (0) Note: Digital channel error rate
10'9, Analog channel SIN - (.2 as (1a) 6.3" bit/sec (down) (1») mm
semiconductor laser (16) Si pin-type photodiode (23) 6.3“ bit/sec (up)
(20)-(1D) (zc)-(1c) (33) a HR: color TV (down) (3c) Direct DI (36)
Avalanche photodiode (43) lo as: color 1’)! (up) (hm-(36) (MD-(36)

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nowaa maaaoHHOu :0 >3:
.0805 can! 05 8:00:93 non—«m owuno ecu acuuaauuuuuwuvII-Uuahn Haves m5 «0 69.836 «.003 .q «and:

rlfcllv‘v srﬂuuzma .L. .83 >o\.€4sx\. . 3+va— pl

   

A vulix. I IISIII... IlqusxAé‘: MD
A My ha: I as :3 n ins-ltnjﬁb .
“IQIM 2*th “ II£I¢ﬁb§w..xz A v
.88.; pa I m (can... noun—[munch
a ...... As ...-”3 a m. "E ...E. .I .. uh v
a I IL Isl 2:5 I ﬂ #:1an
A :55. I I I. sou.
\
. 88
n: :3 Icsgﬁom
a: no I «ti:
- nun ' liiauss v
“an " «I‘ln‘AQS
m 3
... ... I I ul.+ 4""
... .M Inns; 3...:- who...“ a m.“
. edema in!- o I .32an
. Aﬁﬁmv¥ I va
..‘ kn. ~.§\ Rev “SIEQR. vL'
“ A3
L ko+rih ..u‘ H Iaoﬁﬂw

121
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

5.

6.

l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1) Analog telephone (2) Metallic (analog) (3) Existing analog exchange
(A)-(3) (5) Digital telephone (6) Metallic (digital) (7) Circuit
terminal at station (8) Nontelephone terminals (digital facsimile, still
image terminals, data terminal) (9) Circuit terminal, terminal control
(10) Havelength multiplexing optic transceiver equipment (11) Image
terminal (12) Optic fiber (13) Digital exchange (14) Exchange, com-
munication processing mode interface (15) Facsimile communication process-
ing equipment (16) To other network (17) Communication processing

(18) Data terminal (19) Facsimile terminal (20) Station-controlled
processing equipment (21) Compound PBX or CES (22) Optic terminal sta-
tion equipment (23) Image terminal (2b) Ultra-high-speed facsimile
terminal (25) Remote junction equipment (26) Broad band exchange

(27) DDX-CS: DDX circuit exchange, PMX: Packet multiplex equipment,

CBS: Group telephone for business offices, [:::]: Equipment related to

the model system

FOOTNOTES

Asaya. Mosu, Matsumoto: "Construction and Characteristics of Optic Subscriber
System in Yokosuka Area." Technical Report (Communication Format) of Electronic
Communications Society. CS8l-62, July 1981.

Nikei, Yamaguchi, Kajima, Hatano: "Construction and Characteristics of Optic
Subscriber Experimental line," ibid, 0881-63, July 1981.

Miki: "Optic Fiber Multiplex Transmission Using Wavelength Splitting," HIKREI
ELECTRONICS. 28 May 1979 issue, No 213, pp 118-151.

Hatanabe, Asaya. Onishi, Sato, Hosu, Pujiyama. Hishimura: "The Characteristics
of Experimental Broad Band Subscriber Optic Transmission Facilities in Yokosuka
Area." ibid, CSBl-lll, August 1981.

Asaya, Onishi, Watanabe, Sato. Mochida. Futoda: "Investigation of Optic Sub—
scriber Transmission System With Consideration to Include Broadcast Image Ser-
vice," ibid. 6881-109. August 1981.

Sara, Asaya, Hatanabe. Hayashida. Suzuki, Hamano. Fukugauara: "Overhead Optic
Cable Transmission Experiment of High Grade TV and VHF Band TV Signals," ibid,
C581-110, August 1981.

Asaya, Sato, Haysshida: "Characteristics of High Grade TV Transmission Equip-
ment Using Direct IM Modulation of LD," ibid, 0881-81, July 1981.

Arai: "High Grade TV System Having A Variety of Practical Applications."
NIKKEI ELECTRONICS, 28 September 1981 issue. No 274, pp 226-232.

Suzuki, Matsumoto, Sugavara, Masuko: ”Trial Construction of Simple Optical
Connectors," ibid, C881-107, August 1981.

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. Suzuki, Matsumoto, Atogawa. Sugawara: "High Density Mounted Optical Con-
nectors," ibid, 270, October 1981.

11. Kitahara: "A Road To INS." Proceedings of Advanced Information Communica-
tions System Lecture Series, TTPC of Japan, August 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-HeGraw-Hill, Inc 1981

9113
C50: 6106/22

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HITACHI T0 MASS PRODUCE 256K RAH CHIPS IN FALL

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 987, 22 Dec 81 p 1

[Article by Ryuichi Kate]

[Text]

Hitachi. Ltd. disclosed last
week that it “glam“ begin mass
production at t ran.
dom acceae memory (RAH)
china ih‘the auttnun at out
year. ahead at all other acol-
coocluctor mandamus-atom
world.
mutt, wie'ch acmallyhas
32.144 memory cells on a tiny
silicon wintrate several mini-
meters square. is {Mamas
large in memory capacity as
the preceding “it. ot which
M induction started only
receuly.

IndichapamaodAner-

inn aetnicooductor maker:
lave been fiercely racing to
comnlerdaIlu the my large
eoale inboateddraotttnsn.
Hitachi has emerged (ran the
carpet-Malayalam
the practical mum stage,
cum ita arch rivab -

Nippon Electric Co. (NECI and,

Fujitsu Liam

The amt is expected to 86
oelerate the walled "micro
under way. The tiny silicon
dlip will make it unable to

COPYRIGHT :

C80: 4120/100

Me: a TV-ain NM
winter. a WWW
blot-trial robot and many
other. innovation! lath-trial

who-Ham.
Hitachi‘s Idlievement h
flooded to an a denote
mpact on talcum
rivalry between Jamandthe
over high~techoology

t

Hitachi. the vorld's («3th

198).. The Hilton Kauai. Shinbun. Inc.

lohavealreatbvataﬁ

Wm
linea'itﬂntheutluhi
Hitachi'amovehaadi
the viev
vitiln momma
sex wouldbeeomepq
no. The compare I
tom-mandala:
3561‘ we”: advance
pedicted te to an
attainment
MMatamebe
entryotrivalmten.
With Hitachi's an
meatJtmaeetnacut
otherJamhm
European aemicon
maker: willnuhluol
marketaoooerclate.
tinder. 03. meters!
tightlu a Icing ham
«It market are an:
earryouttnuatverell
tetnpta aulaat J1
mam. Sane oi 1hr
ow to criticiam aa
analog lumen
mmnaum
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

TOSHIBA MACHINE DEVISBS AUTGIATIC PLASTIC INJECTION MOLDING SYSTEM

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19. No 986, 22 Dec 81 p 7

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

A computerized control aya-
tem to automatically operate
mum plastic W
moldam simultaneouly with
the totalled ﬂexible mamttac-
turit; ayatam (HIS) or to
widen-take many «titty-small
quantity production has boan
developed by Toatttha machine
Co

The leadim ‘l‘oltyo maclune
tool maker an it is alrody
Minotaucally m ot rod»

in a lull-nudged commmial

mm oi the oyatom with a
apaclty to simultaneously
handle :ll plaatlc moldara at the
maximum. Up to a total at 32
mum varieties ot plaatlc
material is unable with ao
many moiders.

Tradenamed lniccttvioor-
350. tho new ryamm team a
annual comm that works
just like human ban; in not-
changing molden and aattin'c

material annulus.

The automation also is said to
ensure wtect quality unnum-
tty and bin: Minn ol the
women.

Such an ”(S type plants:
goods reduction automation

many Japanmo indium in
eluding electric-electronic.
mile camera and onion
moment WWW but

canto! rmmremodolhnc
and

mentaJhmhaabocn an
M trend toward the
mwdntchplaadcmamr
factm

—Demand lot Mimi oi
Itch injection-molded putt:
“Mmmmm
lubonnalao growing. am
it; natural damand {or com-
nloteplantautomationandhi‘h
WM

Aalorinjootlonplaatlcmold»

it; plants taunted {or automa-
tion. Niaani Plastic Industrial
CootSaltaltl. NamPrdec-
unhancaitlycomaupvith
itaPutureSyatommodoLwliile
Japan Steel Wotan. Ltd and
Sumltomo Heavy luduatric.
Lid. bothot'l‘okyo. anlﬂnly
toldlow upvlththeirrupnc-
tive canoetitive prom-eta dur-
lunutyoar.

1981, The Hilton Kauai Shtmbun, Inc.

C80: 4120/100

125

FOR OFFICIAL LBS ONLY
FOR¢DHHCJAI.USEIDNLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

JAPAN'S NISSAN FIRM TO PRODUCE DEFENSE EQUIPMENT
PM291327 London THE TIMES in English 29 Dec 81 p 7
[Peter Haaelburst dispatch: "Japanese Car Firm Goes Into Missile Business"]

[Text] Tokyo, 28 Dec--The Nissan Motor Company of Japan is to diversify its
business and produce missiles, ammunition. rockets. cannon shells and other
weapons.

The company, which has already been manufacturing 107mm trench mortar shells

and 70mm rockets for the Japan Defence Agency, has drawn up plans to manufacture
arms on a wider scale "in line with the government's policy of spending more on
defence." Mr Mitsuya Gets. a spokesman for Nissan told THE TIMES.

"At present arms sales are small. and represent 0.04 percent of the total turn-
over of the company. He intend to expand our manufacturing facilities but only
for equipment for the Defence Agency. Under the terms of the constitution we
are prohibited from exporting arms," Mr Goto said.

Under the constitution laid down by the American occupation forces three decades
ago, Japan is prohibited from exporting arms or building up "a defence force in
terms of an offensive power."

The Nissan Motor Company. which makes Dataun cars, is cooperating with arms
manufacturers, such as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and the Toshiba Corporation.
in producing parts for rockets and weapons systems for the Defence Agency and
the Space Development Corporation.

Nissan disclosed that it was manufacturing arms and completing subcontract work
for the Defence Agency and Space Development Agency in a local plant in Ogikubo,
Tokyo. It is already producing rockets for Japan's weather satellites. and multi-
stage rockets. Nissan's total arms sales will amount only to 28 m pounds this
year. A senior source said the company was no longer prepared to remain a sub—
contractor and had prepared plans to build complete weapons and rockets systems.
Company executives have already approached American arms manufacturers to obtain
licenses to produce weapons and missiles in Japan. Nissan may soon be producing
coamsnd and order systems for nissiles, rockets. launchers, homing devices and
explosive heads.

126
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mr Goto confirmed reports that Nissan also plans to cooperate with Hitachi, the
Electronics Company and Fuji Heavy Industries in the defence field. He also
confirmed rumours that the company had decided to establish a planning division
within its space and aeronautics development department to develop an arms
manufacturing strategy.

COPYRIGIT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1981

(50: 1:120/107

127

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

HITSUBISRI ELECTRIC RAISES 66K RAH OUTPUT TARGET

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 987, 29 Dec 81 p 8

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

nitsuhiehi Electric Corp. has
neviud upward its mean
uroet of u-kiiuhit ramiem
accme menaci- tm) to
500.000 clip monthly as d the
end a next lurch {run “.000
dtiparisinaily need

Brisk deem tor the that
generation oi very
large-ewe integrated circuits
(VLSli has led the Tokyo
company to accelerate its
mammm

As at that larch-end. Mitsu-
hiahi will become Japan's
(mirth brunt eupplier at «it
RAMs. mum Nippon Eiee
tric Co. (m million chip).
Hitachi. Ltd (1 million) and
“mama. mono). It will
wind Toahiba Corn and Old
Electric industry 00.. both a
wla‘ch plan to turn out mom
3;: matthiy an d the same

te.

According to mum «K
ealea lave been rising elnrpiy.
Salee in the 05.. the world’s
hiss-t market. in the third
marter at at: mehed 310.000
chip. a tuna larger than in
the aeemd marten Mitau
hiahi'e «K marketing ahare in
the US. accordingly advanced
in 92 per cent in the third
garter (run 0 per cent in the
preceding quarter. Among
Japaneae semiconductor
makers. Ititatbiahi was the
third tar-amt supplier d «it: to
US. anteater: in the third
garter after Bitaeiti and [Mi-
an

Purchase orders [or «its
contimie brink in the tenth
quarter. Iiiuuhiahl said Also.
thecetnpany hasheenactiveiy
manila «Kt on its out»
putert and «(ice automation

autumn

1981, The Nihon Keizai. Slit-bun, Inc.

4120/100

128

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOIDGY

MIIGINI

'i‘okyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 986, 22 Dec 81 p 9

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

CSO:

Amunimellmweishiand
strong automobile part
material made trom a mixture
of old paper and plastic and
Meibie at hall or lees than
haltthecoetdoednaryplutic
equivalents. developed by a
leading Japanese a . new
matter. is moving Phi; tilt.
both domestically and inter-
nationally.

litilmnl Selena-be 0n. de-
velopet ot the new malerhl.
says it has been receiving a
rush of demand tot the new
paint. tradenamed "Pavia".
since its development in m
from many big mac and
toteip automaken.

The Tokyo titm plane to
lieune its [inﬂiction tech
noloo becauseauehtechmlo‘y
exports are mote prtﬂtnble
than expats ot the product
itaett.

Mikani Seiaahteho believe
It: Papta has attracted am
uon ot the world's automobile
makers aa an ideal low-coat
and liattweidit part ot new
mil tuel-ettlcieni can all

EYES EXPORTING ITS 'PAPIA' KNOW-HO"

Mbmakenareraeincto

'llnne’vmwucream

by 31M polypropylene
withaometindotwaatepapet
0f othat, inehdlu printiu
matrix WW. old nowa-
pam. matinee. and the
like. it team a “ably et-
tecttve combination ot the
characteristics at liaaiic'and
ll". inchdtlu “M in
weight and easineaa to mold.
andtmbt-lttlesmthl’apiais
am to make com-
puted: othet mocline
covua u velludoorlinin.
andtloonhaetima.

emanated with the con-
ventional maintay euto pert
elastic material. A38 (acry-
lonitrlle-buiatl ) re
MItMmmM'Mltto
m.

The menu It. alaned a
Month litoubtahi
ammonium»
ellpeteot Wand other
“manna! attain m

”New
tomattieeteanieommiuion
wiotmalwleveoua.

1981, The N1hon Keizai Shinbun, Inc.

4120/100

129

l-‘OllOWICIAllBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

JAERI CREATES HEATER T0 PRODUCE 100 NIL. °C

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 986, 22 Dec 81 p 13

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

680:

(0120/ 100

A mype oi plume
heater: for Jenna's Tith-
malt tent inclllty he: been
completed by the tank
pvernmemllepen Atomic
Energy Reeeerch liltinite
(JAERI).

It be: opened the way for
development «1 one oi two
types oi int breeder
renctonJheinetitutehopo
loetteintheloquttimelc
plume hating,

The plume heating
device. believed to he the
world's first if its act lobe
built on e practical huts.
um built et its Naked».
[berm Fret. unerltnent
station site at it: J'r-oo
Tokemelt plume critic-my
experimental n

The heat to only 0.1
second ln heating been:-
genentln; time. but the
time will be steadily length-
ened to at least to m
compared with is to 5

seconds with equivalent
American. Soviet and Euro-
pean Atomlc Energy Oun-

munlty (Etntoin) experi-
mental facilities of the
Totem-It type still under

t.

Every such facility is
intended to etuin the least
neceenry condition. or
critical plume reintro-
meat. to mum in
the m amount or the
energy met! for causing
atomic imion (or dirty
generation. M l.“ I”
million degrees C. is

the lecility — en lmnumely
hot condition oi replay lly-
in¢ atomic motel and elec-
trons 0! hydrogen etorns.
The facility loeli an
ettein only 30 million
In plume

Hater.

1981. The Nihon Kauai Stu-bun, Inc.

130

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTE USES ION BEAM T0 PRIIIT WLY MINUTE PATTERNS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English Vol 19 No 986, 22 Dec 81 p 13

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

A Jepaneee aovernmernal
electronic laboratory has
mentally printed. by ion
beam method. enmely tine
eerniconductor circuitry
averagim 0.l micron in line
width A ﬁmllar mecca w-
new about two yenra
before by lht Roearch
Laboratories Malibu. Call-
iornla.

The time in; does not neco
eerily mean lint Japnn in
falling behind the US. in
developiru VLSi (very large-
scale Integration) reini-
conductor circuitry. ‘l'he new
poverunent ilntihite Job. like
the preceding Amer-inn indu-
triel one. is in the aren oi
printing electronic
circuitrybyaninter-
nationally known
new ion beam
method It is yet to
be commercially de
veloped to replace
established optical
and electron beam
methods. The Japa-
new electronic in-
dustry end cooperat-
ing Nippon Telegraph and Tele
phone Public Corporation
cN’l'l‘) are Itnwn to he as
sophisticated as my (only
mmpetitor in such technology.
NIT is reported to be develop
in: surprising V151 circuit
printing "explosion" and
"chemical motion" methods to
«in web jobs illianlly.

41 20/ 100

All such eiiorta ore to
ectieve the normeet possible
ciraiit line width 'at "dub
mlu'oo" level or ice then I
micron mm d '. milli-
meter) for miniaturiaing
futile wrnder compiler: and
eernieoodhotordevieee.

indium. all in liquid in. The
needle-like atmcturea are
heeted to diluent

tors between too and moo
new c. to keep the metals

1931,1'he Nlhon Keizni Slit-bun, Inc.

131

l-‘OIOI-‘FIGALUSBONLY

melted and liquid aim opera.
tion.

A aecond oi the electrodes.
a power aource. is placed 17
millimeters away trolnthe ion
heamaouce.Anelectricpree-
molaokilovoltalsapplled
irom thepoweraourcetothe
hibeemmuceandvariotn
metaliolniumpoutottheion
mrce'e working tip.

A third electmdetocontrol
lhelonelaplacedneartluttip.
1hie"hiae"eleetrodeproperty
adjust: the cinch-rue oi the
Ian into a content. miiorm
and been. It alao

5

. if if

ifégifgz

“an;
55:53::

3
E
a
E

El
§s
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

ADDITION OF TITANIUM GREATLY INCREASES ELECTRO-MAGNETIC PWER

Tokyo JAPAN ECONMIC JOURNAL 111 English Vol 19 No 986, 22 Dec 81 p 13

[Text]

COPYRIGHT :

C80:

4120/100

A Japanese governmental
laboratory has developed a
anaemia electromec-
net ueetul in developlm im-
portam enerw ii- and
nuclear ecienea acilittee.
Thee: might include unclear
{mien reactors. cups-electric
ant-raters. electric power
storage eyetenie. and aper-
hich energ necleer particle

The cement
nimedded material-a m
tin t by the National Re
search institute tor Metah in
Tokyo: oi the Government‘s
Science and Technology
Agency. has apparently
widenedthevaytorcreatiatet
amluh-etiiciencymnmpaeta
sized tive electro-
magnet eeeential tor the
development at punitive
enemy and mcieerpartideeu
cineeriu tactlitiee.

According to the inetittite. an
ailo etniebandtitadnmntade
in tern: at a thin wire rod
hae eo tar been med to ntaha
Win electron“
material tar wealth and

'deveiepmtnnpeeee.3tit.the

niche-tin h- reeedly
been ae a hater
eiioytoritecapacivtecnatea
metahleniapeticlleid.

mmunwireredba
cunpiex Mire - every
thlnmultinie-cm itia
wincinanyevire dbreue
(an etioyofcwnerendttn)
We tee: millimeter!
acreea. wherein new one

lines (1 niobai'e buried. Each
nieb line is ae elenderm :‘e 5
mm (5!). I
tniliimnntlaneeter. When
thewheievireredieheatedtor
sowloohntmateteenperehn-e
nthetwenMandmdeueae
C.. the ireernal niob linee
become covered with
ﬂint at (dob-Minna

eietnenietothattnaterial. [tine
aleo deroped two waye ct do-

l1”.
3!
mini: the nlnb lin- d a
muuuum alloy and adding
per cent titanium to the

the institute has
low we a ma-
terial with a eiiditly titanhnn-
minim covering at each
enteiinee.

The mutant wire red hee
attain at Teela in the
critical tnaainitan )

1981. The Nihon Keizni Shit-bun, Inc.

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

0

'ASAHI' VIEWS JAPAH'S SPACE DEVEDDPMERT PROGRAM
09261803 Tokyo ASAHI EVENING NEHS in English 23 Dec 81 p 3

["Today's Science" column by Tetsuji Shibsts, ASAEI SEIHBUN science editor:
"Scientific Satellites"]

[Text] There are two main institutions promoting Japan's space development.

The National Space Development Agency (NASDA) launches so-called "practical use"
satellites for clinstic, studies, broadcasting and other communication activities,
while the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) oversees research
on satellites for purely scientific research.

The NASDA failed to successfully launch an experissntal stationary communication
satellite in 1979 and 1980, but it successfully sent the meteorological satellite,
the No 2 Himawari (Sunflower), into orbit this past summer. It was a big relief
for the agency.

The ISAS is in a cheerful mood, having successfully launched on schedule all of
its scientific satellites in recent years. In addition. the satellites are
enabling the institute to nake new discoveries one after another and to thereby
become known internationally.

The ISAS was a part of Tokyo University before becoming independent in April this
year. Its forner name was Tokyo University's Space and Aeronautics Research
Institute. Now the institute is under the jurisdiction of the Education Ministry
and all national universities are entitled to use the institute's facilities.

The scale of the institute had become too large to remain a part of a university
and it was reorganized into the current form.

The first scientific satellite successfully launched in Japan was the Ohsumi,
which was sent into orbit in February 1970. It was a small satellite weighing
only 24 kilograms, but the first four attespts to launch it failed.

A series of successes followed, however, and sent into orbits as scheduled were:
an experimental satellite Tansei, the first scientific satellite Shinsei, the
second scientific satellite Despa (electric wave) and the third satellite Taiyo
(the sun).

133
IIIICIHNCIAI.UEIUONIM
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'hree scientific satellites are now in orbit. They are Jikeken (magnetic sphere) ,
a satellite for observation of electron density launched in September 1979, an
x-ray planet observation satellite Hakucho (swan) sent into orbit in February 1979
and Hinotori (fire bird) for observation of the sun launched in February 1981.

Among them, Hakucho is drawing the most attention. It senses x—rays which come
fron deep space and analyzes the rays. It is said that the sources of the cosmic
x-rays are neutron stars—very heavy planets of ultra high density. Scientists
now know of various x-ray starts, including pulsers that regularly emit x-rays
and bursters that explosively emit x-rays from tine to time.

It is very hard to capture faint x-ray that may come at any time and from any
angle and to determine the source. Prof Hinoru Ode of the ISAS overcame this
difficulty by developing "baaboo screen collimator," even earlier than foreign
scientists. A number of new bursters were found one after another.

The institute has also found a pattern of bursting for the first time in the
world and collected many valuable data to lead the world's x-ray astronomy. It
is fresh in our senory that the Asahi award was given to the Hakucho research
group earlier this year.

The scientific satellite Jikiken is rounding the earth on an oval orbit with

an apogee of 30.000 kilometers and a perigee of 200 kilometers. During the past
three years the satellite collected many data on electron density and plassa
waves around the earth.

The latest satellite Hinotori. which is also called Aatro-A, is successfully
observing in detail the sun's flare. The sun's activities are reaching their
peak this year. The satellite features capability of catching and analyzing
quickly the x-ray from the sun's flare that changes ascent to moment. Many new
discoveries are said to have been made.

The ISAS plans to launch Astra-B for observation of x-ray starts in 1983. ons-C
for observation around the earth in 1986. Planet-A for observation of the Halley's
coast in 1985 and Astro-c for precision observation of x-ray planets in 1987.

All of these satellites are planned to be launched with the three—stage H-3s

rockets using solid fuel.

Many people abroad show keen interest in these Japanese scientific satellites
and hope for further successes. In the United States and other countries the
scale of scientific satellite programs is being cut down because of financial
problems. Because of this and past successes, Japan's scientific satellites
are beginning to be watched with interest.

Scientists of Britain and the 0.8. have asked the ISAS to allow them to join the
Astro-c project and the Japanese institute is studying the request. It is likely
to approve the foreign researchers participation. Japan lags behind in easy
aspects of space development. but in the field of scientific satellites, the
country may be among the world's soat advanced.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1981
cso: hlao/lo'r

1310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

NIPPON STEEL, MITSUBISHI CI TIE UP TO PRODUCE NB" MATERIALS

Tokyo JAPAN ECONOMIC JOURNAL in English V01 19 No 987, 29 Dec 81 p 9

[Text]

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

Nippon Steel Corp. and
Mitsubishi Chemical Indus-
tries. Ltd.. the largest mallet-s
ot steel and chemicals. have
agreed to tie up (or develop
men! at ceramics and otlier
new materials. The ageement
is tor development by the two
groups. including Nippon Steel
Chemical Co. and Mitsubishi
Light Metal industries. Ltd.

The cooperation was planned
at a time when steel. chemical

.and aluminium industries are

threatened by comptition with
developing countries indus-
tries and ceramic and material
revolution is progressing.

The initial development el-
lorts will center around
ceramic and alumina fibers.

Nippon Steel will induct
ceramic liber technology .lrom
Manville Corp. Denver-based
maker 0! inorganic materials.

Until the world‘s largest
steelmaker starts prediction at
its Sakai works in the spring at
t”). Manville products will be
marketed in damn by both the
steel company‘s chemical sub
sideary and Mibnuliishi (‘he
must

Mitsulsshi Chemical and
Mitsuhnshi lulhl Metal will try

to develop alumina fibers with
technical cooperation m 0..
steelmaker. Production will be
landled by the aluminunn
maker at Naoetsu. with the two

chemical compania slated to
market them.

Alumna ﬁber is a poly-
crystal llber which can with-
stand high temperatura (about
Letltldegreescentigradel.

Vutalta Talleda. who was
named NSC president in July.
mt. intent to foster chemi-
cals as a major business alter
steel and engineering. To
realize the pat. he chose the
largest Japanese chemical
company and its group as its
partner.

On its part. Mitsubishi Lian
Metal sullers a problem 11
international competition. In
September. I”). it suspended
operation 11 aluminun produc-
tion at Naoetsu. The smelter
was translerned to a new firm
capitalized at in billion. wla'ch
is trying to develop new [rod-
ucts to make up tor sluggish
aluminum business.

Alumina liber will become its
major promct alter aluminun
mirror materials. solar system
and hignpurily aluminum.

1981, The Nihon Kauai Shimbun, Inc.

Ill 20/ 100

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI omcm. USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BRIEFS

DEVELOPMENT OF FBR FUELS--Aiming at developing fuels for FBR's, the Power Reac-
tor and Nuclear Fuel Corporation (PRC) and the Department of Energy, U.S.
Government, have decided to conduct joint Japanese-American research using the
American—made high-speed material test reactor ”FFTF" (thermal output 400,000 k")
and the highspeed test reactor "ERR-2" (thermal output 62,500 k"). In develop-
ment of an PER, PNC has cooperated extensively with the U.S., Britain and France,
and based on the FBR cooperation agreement for development, that PNC concluded
with the U.S. in 1969, the Corporation's efforts, especially with the U.S., have
ranged over wide areas of activity during the past 12 years, including exchanges
of information and dispatching of engineers on a long-term stay basis. The
objective of the current joint research is to conduct tests that cannot be con-
ducted by using PNC's test reactor "Joyo," such as neutron irradiation tests of
fuel assemblies and fuel cladding tubes by using FFTF, and operation tests of
damaged fuels by using BER-2. The share of the cost to be borne by PNC is

about U3.1 billion. PNC hopes the results gained from the tests will be re-
flected in the construction of the FDR prototype reactor "Honju" (electrical
output 280,000 k") that is at present on the drawing board. [Text] [Tokyo
TEChNOCRAT in English Vol 15 No 9, Sep 81 p 56] (COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Market-
ing Research Co., Ltd.]

COAL TECHNOLOGY COOPERATION HIT“ SHELL--The Electric Power Development Co. (EPDC)
and Royal Dutch Shell, an oil major, have agreed to cooperate in developing coal
utilization technology. Last year, the two firms concluded a cooperative agree-
ment to produce coal—oil-mixture (COM) on a-commercial basis, and the current
agreement further expands this activity to the entire scope of technical devel-
opnent related to use of coal including (1) combustion technology of coal, such
as by fluid-bed boilers, and (2) technology to prevent spontaneous combustion.
Shell, the most keenly interested of major oil firms in the development of coal
and in techniques for its use, is holding negotiations on the supply of steam
coal, in technical cooperation with BPDC that has the most experience with coal-
fired power generation in Japan. Last March, the two firms concluded an agree-
ment that covered such matters as (1) feasibility of commercial use of COM, and
(2) use of CO! in Pan-Pacific areas. Thereafter, the two firms have been prob-
ing the feasibility of technical cooperation that covers not only CD“ but also
all aspects of coal utilization technology, and both sides have agreed basically
that such cooperation is possible. As for fluid-bed boilers, Shell is expected
to extend cooperation in the developnent of a pilot plant that BPDC has been
promoting at its "akamatsu Thermal Power Station. [Text] [Tokyo TBCHNOCRAT in
English Vol 14 No 9, Sep 81 p 56] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing Research Co.,
Ltd.]

lt”!(lﬂﬂ(1a1.l§ﬂi¢l'l¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RADIOACTIVE WASTE RBDUCTION--The Tokyo Electric Power Co. is developing new
methods to reduce the volume of low-level radioactive waste from nuclear power
plants, such as an "acid decomposition process" and "melting using microwaves."
The projects are underway in cooperation with nuclear equipment makers, and the
company expects that the success of these developaents in addition to the exist-
ing technology will complete the whole system to deal with low-level nuclear
waste. It intends to complete practical tests of these techniques by FY 1983
at the latest for full-scale actual use in the first half of the 1980's. The
projects being developed by the Tokyo Electric Power Co. to cut solid waste volume
are four as follows: (1) acid decomposition of various inconbustible solids, such
as used resin and sludge; (2) incineration of used resin and activated carbon;
(3) applying microwave heat for melting ash; and (6) volume reduction by plasma
are melting. Among them, the acid decomposition process seems most hopeful in
practice. It dissolves and carbonizes ion exchange resin or other materials in
concentrated sulfuric acid, thereby converting the solids into powder by means
of nitric acid. A nuclear power station in the 1000M" range usually discharges
low level waste equivalent to more than 3000 druls (2009. each) per yearly. With
the new reduction techniques, as well as plastics solidification that the company
decided earlier to adopt for drum packing, the annual quantity will be lowered
to 500 drums or less. [Text] [Tokyo TBCHNOCRAT in English Vol 110 No 9, Sep 81
p 58] [COPYRIGlsz 1981 Fuji Marketing Research Co., Ltd.]

CANDU REACTOR DESIGN--The Electric Power Developsent Company has decided to
start conceptual designing for CANDU, a Canadian heavy water reactor, and will
seek a budget of more than ill billion out of treasury loans and investments. At
the same time, the company will conduct comprehensive evaluation of the overall
system on the basis of a technical survey made so far. Hitachi, Ltd. and Toshiba
Corporation, which are expected to extrusted with designing have sent engineers
to ABCL for about one year's training. The introduction of CANDU reactors was
rejected by the Japan Atomic Energy Commission in August, 1979, for reasons

that the decision is subject to further review if a change in the nuclear power
situation is encountered, and that it requires a shift in Japanese policy. The
company's intention is to be responsive to any switch in the future by estab-
lishing the technical basis for possible CANDU introduction. [Text] [Tokyo
TECHNOCRAT in English Vol 16 No 9, Sep 81 p 58] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing
Research Co., Ltd.]

MITSUBISHI FBR CONTROL RODS—The Mitsubishi Metal Corporation has recently
established a complete process for making enriched boron carbide to be employed
for nuclear reactor control rods. This will enable domestic production of con-
trol rods for fast breeder reactors, which are now dependent on imported mater-
ials. Advanced countries in nuclear energy, such as France and the 0.5. , regard
know-how to produce FDR control rod materials as "sensitive technology", and are
trying to prevent it spreading abroad. Mitsubishi Metal will shortly start pro-
duction of enriched boric acid, an intermediate, for light water reactors, as
well as for FBR's. The process developed by Mitsubishi first converts natural
boron fluoride into an enriched compound (90!) with a solvent by precise dis-
tillation, and then into enriched boric acid by scans of hydrolysis. The mater-
ial is reduced with magnesium and carbonated in an electric furnace to form en-
riched boron carbide powder and then pelleted. [Text] [Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in
English Vol ll: No 9, Sep 81 p 58] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing Research Co. ,
Ltd.] '

137
FOR OFFICIAL IRON“
FOR OFTHCLAL USE2CNHLY

CAPTAIN SERVICE EXTENDED—-The Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications has
started to extend the CAPTAIN service, Character and Pattern Information Net-
work. It intends to include access to external online network services, such
as referring bank accounting positions and making seat reservations for air-
planes and trains. [Text] [Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English Vol 14 No 9, Sep 81

p 72] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing Research Co., Ltd.]

'ORBIT-l' PROGRAM DBVBLOPBD--Kokusai Denshin Denwa Co., Ltd. (KDD) has recently
developed a program "ORBIT-1," which optimizes the orbit positions of a number
of stationary satellites. They have offered it to the International Telecom-
munication Union (ITU). "ORBIT-1" is a program which enables optimizing the
positions of several hundred satellites by adopting an optimization method
known as nonlinear programing and a method of "determining the optimal posi-
tions of satellites in launching order" referred to as evolutional modelling.
It is also provided with such function as to indicate the orbit position of a
satellite, when launching the new one, that minimizes the mutual interference
between satellites and makes more efficient use of orbits. That is to say, it
gives such satellite position that the sum of the orbit lengths of all satel-
lites is minimized within a certain range of a standard value of total inter-
ference between each satellite, thereby providing the maximum margin for future
demands. KDD says that the program, using the 6/4 GB: frequency band, can cope
sufficiently with the situation in ten years time when about 200 satellites

may be orbiting. [Text] [Tokyo TECHNOCRAT in English Vol 14 No 9, Sep 81 p 72]
[COPYRIGHT: 1981 Fuji Marketing Research Co., Ltd.)

cso: «120/103 m

138
IIIRCNﬂﬂCJAI.USI:0%ﬂJV