APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02100: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOR0001 00020002-0

:. _ 1979 I I v
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020002-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRs 13/8257
1 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON LAW OF THE SEA
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE WLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020002-6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items‘are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no wsy represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAHS AND REGULATIOﬂS WERNIRG WASH?! OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD RERBIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? 11118 PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED MOPPICIAL USE ONLY.
anauooumc own I- Rm" "0- "u I / 8257 _3.R«io-m'mm.m 5.3“.
mm -

Tmsmnous on LAN or Tm: SEA. (P000 1/79)

‘ open ' m

' J

_‘ “W”
0.

O. Potion-ling ouaairuiea Nan no Menu 10. PrekCI/Teeil'orl Una No.

Joint Publication Research Service 7

1000 North Globe load
Arlington, Virginia 22201
It Mauls. Ouaelaauoe Nam aeo Mean 13, 1-". el I”... I: Pnioo
Covered

As above I

 

    
     
   

 

1!. Sunk-«my Neue
. temele

This report contains infatuation from the world press and radio coverage of the
Law of the Sea conferences and negotiations, territorial seas and strnits,

coastal and international seabed econoaic areas, marine pollution, scientific
research and fisheries.

. 'ey e - newer eayeae. e. - actuate

  
   
 
   
        

Worldwide I
Pollution

Environmental Control '
Biological Oceanography
Petroleu-

Fishery

lﬂ- MomﬂlccaIOpeo-lede‘ Tet-e

m. COSATI Field/Goon.

1“...“
Por Official Use Only y.
Sold by arts

lprinafield. Virginia 22lSl

1c. 6F, PM, 8.:

  
    
 
      

—...a ----. Ieaoo q- .I-eee- annals-ea
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8257
1 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N LAW OF THE SEA
(rouo 1/79)
CONTENTS PAGE
wommn minus

USSR-Japan Fishing Talks Continue
(Various sources. various dates)............................ 1

USSR Refuses To Discuss Salmon
'JAPAN ‘l‘lﬂES' on Talks. editorial '
'ASABI' Reports Ponoserev Rourke on Fishing, by Clues
Official Hails Outcome
ASIA
INTER-ASIAN AFFAIRS

Japsn-ROK Continental Shelf Talks llit Snag
(YMWI sﬂrnw. 25 RV 78)....0000......OOIOIOIIIOOOOOOIIO ‘

JAPAN

Keidaaren Urges Government Push for Ocean Exploitation
(“1“ “Yo sntm“. zmc 78)..OIOOOICIOIIOOIOIOOOOOOODOO 6

Maritime Safety Agency Marks Reaote Islands, Reefs
(m3 JAPAN TIES, Ame 78)....000000OIOOIOOOOOUOOOIOOOOOOO. 8

LATIN AMERICA
-_ INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

Cuban-Mexican Fishing Relations Described as Friendly
(Victor M. Cops; PM. 9 Nov 78) 9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WORLDWIDE AFFAIRS

USSR-JAPAN FISHING TALKS CONTINUE

USSR Refuses To Discuss Salmon

Tokyo NIHON KBIZAI SRINSUN in Japanese 23 Nov 78 Morning Bdition p lo 09

[Text] sources oonocrned with Japan-Soviet fishery noptiotiono disclosed on 22 Nov-tor
that. at tho i‘ishory tone: now underway in the Foreign hinistry in Tokyo. the Soviet side
has refused Jepen'e proposal to hold the first session or the “pen-Soviet tishc‘y omittoe

as pert oi‘ the current rekyo fishery negotiation.

under en nascent reached between Jspon end the Soviet union on fishery oooperetion this
April. the upon-Soviet fishery ooI-ittee will hold emel looting elterneting between
Tokyo end uoeoov to discuss oetoh quotes for eel-on fishery in the northwestu-n resins.

Refusing to accept J’spsn's propoosl to open the ooeeittoe's first nesting in Nye es pert
or the ourrmtxishsry negotiations. the Soviet side seid: "his delesution use not
instruotod to discuss the ouittee issue."

is s result or this rci‘ussl. prospects hsve dis-ed for opening tslks on next yeer's eel-on
fishing in the northwestern Pseii'ic this yeer in Tokyo. Ii'h'us, Jspen (sees the possibility
that there talks any to hold in houses! solsotiise next yesr.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Keisai Shinbunshe 1978
'JAPAN TIHBS' on Tell“

“2113‘!” Tokyo 118 JAPAN em in 821311611 20 lov 78 p 2 mum MICIAL 033 OIL!

[Editorielz “usher! Talks with Russie'q

[Text] Jspen end the Soviet Union opened this pest weekend uhst is nest likely to be
tough prolonged negotiations over fisheries. After the two oountries deolered 200 silos
or their oft-shore voters es exclusive rishery oonservetion zones lest yeer, toreiy: fish-
ing in the edJeoent ooes have beetle lore en obieot oi‘ netionel poliey then or tree enter-
prise. snd rAvon the sell-know: Soviet displeasure stout the upon-chine treety oi' lest
septa-her. the politioel clients is less then s Joviel one.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1hc current telltc concern the allowable lovclu or rich haul in 1979 for the two countriee
in each other'c zoo-wile zone. For thie year. the Soviet Union conceded Japan a quota of
850.000 tone. on 29 percent from the 1977 level. Japan. in return. peraitted the Soviet
tiching fleet to haul up to 650.000 tone or rich in the Japaneee zoo-mo zone. or 19
percent lece then in 1977.

Mac the Japanoec i‘iching induatry peeled a rich haul of up to 1.? million tone a year
in the northern Pacii‘ic arcac now enelceod by Ruaeia'e zoo-pile limit. The 1978 ceiling.
then. ancunte to a halving oi the previous peak. The chiete are being eeeured nearly
ac auch rich haul in the Japaneae coaetal eeae ae before the arrival of the zoo-nu.
riahcry linitaticne.

The present i‘iehcry negotiations will neat certainly eee a repeat of the confrontation
between the Japanecc-advoceted principle uphaaiaing hietorical intereate and paet i‘iehery
reeordc. on the one hand. and the Soviet arouent tor a etrict parity in the two oountriee'
rich haul in the restricted ecnec. on the other.

In the proviouc negotiatione over the 1918 quotae. Japan aanaged to make a call dent on
the Soviete' reciprocity principle. by eecuring euething nore in the Soviet ZOO-lilo some
that it ave to the soviet i'iehing tleete in the JIpaneee zoo-en. acne. aloe aaain thie
tine, we will have to fall back on "thc hietorical intereeta" end eel: the Soviet Union
for pcraiacion to tieh acre in Soviet wetare. while att-pting to liait the level or
Soviet i‘iah catch in Japanese waters.

in increace in the Jepaneae quota for north Pacific i‘iehciee. according to the Soviet
parity principle. is expected to be reciprocated with a aatching increaee in the Soviet
catch in the Japanese ctr-ewe watere. Such a bergain would add to the enguieh or halt
a nillicn all Japanese riahenen living on coaetal i‘iehing.

Clearly. Japan ie the acre dicadvantagcd party in the preemt neptietione. In addition

to a favorable deal in fishing quotas. Japan seeks a longer-tern opulent with the Rueeiene
to reduce uneartainticc or the preemt one-year arreng-ut. ‘lhie ie an oeeaeicn to find
out the extent of avowed Soviet willinmeac to develop pod neidxba-ly relaticne with thie
country, in cpite oi' the dines-emcee over the nature at our reletionehip with china.

COPYRIGR‘I': THE JAPAN TIRES, 1978

'ASAHI' Reporte Pcncnarev React-kc on Fiehing

Tokyo ASAHI SHINBU'N in Japaneee 21 Dec 78 Morning Edition p 2 0W

[correspondent m]

[me] new“, 20 coca“. zo Deeeaber the Jepaneee Socialiet Party [JSP] delegation
currently viaitinc the 0881! held another energetic round or talke with Soviet officials on
fishery problem between the two ccuntriea. including gathering eee tangle in the northern
wetera arm Kaigara Inland. he 20 Decanter eeeeion wee pro-pted by critioien i‘rca
concerned quartere that conclusion: reached at the previous neeting with Pith Industry
IUnieter lelkov on 19 Decenber were anbiguoue. Pint, at its eecond political eeeeicn
with Suolov on 20 Decewer, the JSP delegation entrusted hin with a letter or requeet
adds-eaten to Pith lnductry luniater laﬂtov. in thie letter. the J8? delegation etated
that 'fiu order to extend a heipire hand to cull ruheraen and Iodine-end eaall-eiae

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fiuherieu in our country. we will nuke pouitive

efforts to forms now oranniantion or snail

fisher-en, median-amt :w-ll-ulae Munoz-lea and mediu- and :mnll-aize trade firm in place

01' the m-enent “renter .mpun i’iaherie: Auuocihti
to defend the interest: of it; heaters from a po
"llegardinc the gathering: of hen tangle in untera
"we will strive to receive the problem fro: the
proposed Japan-USSR Joint projects inside the So
the Soviet side. separately i‘rou intergoverment
early date. allowing the organization we redo-late
Soviet trade association as an internediery.“ A
meeting. Ponenarev. candidate Isaber oi‘ the ran

on. The new ornamiauticn will endeavor
uition favoring Japan-088R friendship."
around Kaicara island.“ it continued.
sane position. Mthernore, as for the
viet 200~niie limit. we propose that
negotiations, agree to begin the: at an
nd to participate in then using the Japan-
”or the JSP letter was read at today's
tburo. said that I'the Soviet leadership

will see to i‘: that the Soviet rich industry uninter sensiders the interests or the J8?
and fishernen or liotdtaido.‘ I'onouarev's renark has been interpreted by the J8? delegation

as meaning that "the new proposal or the .18? has

been mlly accepted.ll Based on this

development. the J8? is expected to set” a new organization to replace the Greater Japan

Fisheries Aoooeiation. Nevertheless, the deleca
'e obtain mrther assurances. The up has long

tion requested another neeting vith Ismov
been working tor a new organization to

replace the fisheries association. However. the assoeiation has a long history and

eurrently runs extensive and diversified bdaims
:an farts a new organization to take its place re

sneeses. Accordingly. Vhother the J8?
mains to be seen.

COPYRIGHT: Aeehi Shinbun Tokyo Honsha 1978

official Hails Outcome

Tokyo THE DAILY YWIURI in English 16 Dec

The negotiations in i'okyo since uovcnber 18 were
quotas in each other”: zoo-sue zone.

78plOH

nori said the 750.000-tcn quote was very simirieant because it ruoved Japanese fish.»
Itcn’a tears that they must be obliged to reduce the neuter or their fishing vessels

COPYRIGHT: Yoniuri Shinbunaha 1978

(ISO: 5200
3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ASIAN AFFAIRS

JAPAN-ROI OOHML 8W TAM 311' SIM

“”0600! Tokyo roam: sum in Jeeenese 25 Nov 78 homing Edition 9 8 (VI--
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!

[feet] which enterprise ohould underteke exploration and wcepectiu in the Joint depen-
non continental shelf develop-ant project in the loot Chine See rennin to be deternined
as both Japan and the no: inoiet on undentekin; it thenulvee. An inter-ed source on 2%
Neva-be:- seid that unleae e settle-ant is reached in private-level negotiations. the
latter will hewe to be settled WM seem-ent-te-sovex'nent negotiation. I: end men
this happens. rm going in foreseen einoe notional weetioe will be effected.

lime, the Jepeneee tine involved in the private talks-Jim Oil Develoynent co, Ltd..
a suoeidiery or the linon Oil co. Lulu-view the letter with mansion.

Under an moment between the two seven-meats. Japan end the one eeek to develop oil

and neturel see in m 83.000-ecuere-neter area in the Best mine doe in the Joint develop-
nent wojmt. Japan hee picked tve eininc conceesicneriee tor the prodeetnthe Nippon
Oil Denice-ant to end the reikcku Oil Co. Ltd. «end is now in the wooeee or ohocein;

an operator. or e tire to undertake exploration and woepeetinc.

In the beaming :epen thouwt that there would be no proble- in pickiu e Jeoeneee ti:-
ee the operator in View of the rect thet the Iippon oil Develop-ant do has e teehnicel tie-
in with en enericen user. However. the private-level negotiations held tine m» have
shown that a South Korean enterprise in nice keenly enthueieetic about beet-in; he oper-

ator for tho benefit of acquiring lining technolog and he: no intention of yieldiu.
no a result. the continental shelf develupuat reject hae hit a em.

whichever aide heccneo the operator. the two countries will hove equal ricate over mde
oil to be diocovored and. therefore. there will he no horn to either s’.de. However, the

linen oil Develop-eat Co eaye Jepen should not concede in the ecepetLtion. It em:

'Ie need to acquire teehnoleg for future eontmentel the-1: develovtunt end by ell Item
we went to undertake it.II

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under the bilateral sacrament, men an operator cannot be oelootod in private negotiation
3 nontho utter lining concessions are wanted. the matter is to be put to government-to-
soverment motiationn. It wont come to vorat. it would have to he decided by lottery.
Ilouever, it it requires sovermnt-to-goverment negotiations). factors other than the
principle of economy and teohnioal standards will intrude into the develop-ant proJeot.

mien he: already been need as a political tool. limo. there is no guarantee that the
project lay not beeona a ooeplicated problon again.

COPYRIGHT: Yoniuri Shinbunshn 1978

C80: 5200

5

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

KEIDANRBN URGES GOVERNMENT PUSH FOR OCEAN EXPLOITATION

Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUN in Japanese 2 Dec 78 p 1

[Text] In the near future the Federation of Economic
Organizations (Chairman Toshio Doko) will make recom-
mendations to the government regarding the establish-
ment of a body to promote the exploitation of the ocean
in order to move forward with oceanic development.

These recommendations will probably press the govern-
ment to establish a basic promotional system on the
grounds that even though use of the ocean's resources

is an important problem for Japan there are many
deficiencies in its system for promoting oceanic devel-
opment. such as reliance on the private sector. At the
same time, the recommendations will be intended to

serve as counter-recessionary measures for such indus-
tries as steel and shipbuilding which are struggling with
a structural recession. At present, the recomaendation
incorporates such items as (l) tackling the exploitation
of the ocean as a national project by establishing an
"Oceanic Development Commission" which, like the Atomic
Energy Commission would be directl, under the prime
minister and would be entitled to budgetary allocations;
(2) putting effort into the technology of exploiting the
ocean in order to cope with the era of the ZOO-mile terri-
torial limit; and (3) promoting the exploitation of
manganese and other mineral resources.

While Japan talks about an haportance of exploiting the ocean, thus far,
the private sector has taken the lead in Japan with the government
following. Because the risks in developing the ocean are great, there
are increasing demands from the private sector that the government put
more effort into this area.

The Keidanren had been wrestling with this problem mainly in its round-
table on the exploitation of the ocean (chaired by lsamu Yamaahita.
president of Hitsui shipbuilding). with a basic policy of changing from

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

private sector initiative to a public sector initiative. and proceeding
with this as a national project, the Keidanren put together a new policy
that a system be established for promoting the exploitation of the
oceans, and it decided to recomend this policy to the government shortly.

The first item in the recouendation is the establish-eat of a consolidated
agency to promote the exploitation of the ocean; the Keidanren holds that
an "Oceanic-Development Couission" should be established which, like the
Atomic Energy Commission and the Space Activities Comission. would be
directly under the prime minister and would be entitled to budgetary
allocations. In the Ksidanren's judgment it is necessary to promote

exploitation through this organ as a national project and on a national
scale.

Furthermore, the reco-endations maintain that with the advent of the
ZOO-mile territorial limit, adjustments in oceanic exploitation and fishing
will be necessary and measures such as greater funding should be taken

to encourage the advancement of technology in oceanic exploitation which
will take these adjustments fully into account and will respond to the
advent of the 200-mile territorial liuit.

Further-ore. since there are abundant nineral resources on the ocean floor,
a recommendation is being considered that, for the present. every effort
should be put into the exploitation of manganese.

COPYRIGR‘r: Nikken Kogyo Shinbunshe 1978

9111
680: 5200

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MARITIME SAFETY AGENCY MARKS REMOTE ISLANDS, RBI-IFS

Tokyo 11m JAPAN TIMES in English a Dec 73 p 2

[Text]

YOKOHMM (Kyodon — The
Maritime Salety w iMSM
is now piecing station marks on
moot: islands and reels when

has assumed new
dim with advent oi the
ﬂmiieterrltoriallimli.

The work Is aimed at w
curately locating remote
Islands and new. But Its true
«elective is to muster than as
national propertlco and to late
stepstoshovtouieworidthat
Japan etleetively controls
them.
mutant: stageotm.
about to station merits will be
erected on islands and reels
main: to 27 island W
located around ammo In the
north to the Senluku islands in
them.

Most of them are Isolated and
rocky. and dliiicuit to ap-
proach. MSA olilciois are
reaching them «and smell
boat: or landing on them lrorn

taken to the island by a
helicopter and descended onto
the island by a rope ladder.

The helicopter had to matte
repeated attempts belore
aieceniuuy landing all, the
three men beceose ot alr hir-
bulenceoverthe island.

Alter lendinit on the island.
the oitlclolii dog a hole no cm
deep and about 5» cm In
diameter and then set a station
mart In the hole with the words
the "llSA ilyrogrophy
Department" inscribed on it.
Theytheniilitdlntheholewith
conci ate.

The station mark is a
demonstretlon oi Japanese
territorial claim over the
island.

Mention morbhaveheen
placed on about [.200 places in
various parts oi the M
since the Meiji era lor
meanirins locetions oi islands
and conﬁgurations oi
shorelines.

The NBA has begun putting
more oi them since August this
year to cope with problem
arising out oi the ”mile
territorial limit and the Sloo-

Jlm 4390“ W W

Seniialtuisiandsiast simmer. .

Since August. it has solar set
up merits at it places including
Oshlma island west 0! the

COPYRIGIT:

650:

5200

THE JAPAN TIMES 1978

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

Maisumae Peninsula in
Hokkaido. Nanotsiiiiina Island
north oi the Noto Pullman.
Malta and Verne islands in the
Oguawora islands. Kilo
lwojirna island. and
Yokooteliotl in the Masai!
islands.

The “SA pills to eunpiete
the tlrst stap‘ot satin: to
marksaieliptaoesoymeeodot
theyear. :

Jutaro Anna. proteseor I!
Trude College. aid under in-
iernatlonaiimJtlsnaeeoan'!
to have some kind oi natloael
administrative W mete
territorial claims to
umhahdedtalands

In this respect. it is
slmliicant to set up ”SA
station mm on manned
islands to mate territorial
claimstotheut.heaode¢ ‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

WEAR-IEXIOMI usum RELATIONS menus!) A3 PRIRNDLY
”[022!” lhnna FIRM in Spanish 2030 our 9 lbw “(8 [Mo-FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[By Victor h. cope)

(Text) Ibvana. 9 low (PlJ-‘mbon-hexican tithing relations reflect the tica or triandahip
and cooperation that have hictorieally prevailed between the pcoplea and govermenta of
thc two ccuntrica. it was revealed today in thin city.

In on exoluaive interview with man. Rafael Cebrern. tho Nban Pilhins Industry hinictry'a
director or International relationa. aaid that the “chin; asreeaent between the two
countriea doet not have an expiration deto.

cabrera explained that the document ataten that it will be in effect until either or
the two partiea enda it by rornel notification precented 6 aontha prior to the tuna!
bilateral until-3.

he added that hexico annually deteraineo the anount or the catch. the umber or veaaela
and the concerveticn anacuree that the mban fleet amt i-pleaent.

in MI opinion theae aeaaure: are designed to prevent haranIl aethoda or exploitation
that could affect the rinhing reserves to the dctrinent or noxioana.

The (”ban i‘leeta. he eaphatimi. strictly abide by then reulationa which are auperwiaad
Dy reoponoible Milo-n authoritiec.

cabru-ra paid that Gabon veaeola operate in hexican watera together with factory ahipa or
support veeeelo that aloe have the reapeotive operating peruita.

he explained that all mm veaaelo operate legally in union: watera uaing the corrupcndin;
riahine pcraitc iaeumi in accordance with the axreeacnt between the two countriea.

I'or this reaaon. he paid. it in iapouible for the amber or Ouban vessels operating in
hcxicen waters to exceed the nuaber authorized by Mexico.

barium the riahina oeatom prior to the timing or the agree-lent. that in. curing the yeara
WIS-l9” and 1911-1918. the moan riahing fleet: have elven operated fewer than the n-ber or
authorized thipa.

9
ron orrtcuu. use om!
FOR Oﬂ’ICIM. USE ONLY

debrere eeid thet no when fishing veeeei hee ever opereted in Nexioen vetere without
the proper i‘iehins per-it.

in the tiehinc induetry. Oohrere eeid. reietione ere beeed on the urea-one between both

eountriee on the eovereim right to nee nature: reeoureee for the benefit or their reepeetive
peepiee ee «on no on the min retionel utiiieetion of eeid reeouroee.

lie eIphuieed thet Gabe and Mexico ere et preeent cooperating with other utin herioen

ooutntriee in the intesretion or their efforte to eohieve her-onion development or their
reepeotive fiehin‘ inouetriee.

C80: 5200 880

10
M omcw. US! OILY