FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

|PRS L/10550

28 May 1982

USSR RepOrt

TRANSPORTATION

(FOUO. 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

ms publications contain information primarily from foreign
newepapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
ate transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarised or extracted.

unfamiliar naues rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ites originate with the source. rises within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGi'l' [ANS AND REGUIA‘IIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP OP
MERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
TRANSPORTATION

(1000 3/82)

Cameras

RAILROAD

Overvicv of Railroad Syneni' Develops”. Problm
(VuiIiy Serunin; 01mm WV. No 11, 1981) ......

Book Diucuuu Loconotivu, Rolling Stock
(Vitaliy Alchundrovich Rim; 1“le I
WWW MW SUSTAV mm mm
mm 80% 1966-1975. 1979) ooouoaoooooooooooooo

Photograph of manic-Hold-Driven Davin Publiahed
(80m? man,"°‘. 1982) 0..OCOOOOIOOOOOOOODOOOCOO0.0

_-a-- tux-ossa-a

FOR Oman. us: ONLY
roommate“

RAILROAD

OVERVIEW 0? RAILROAD SYSM' Dav-man, ram

Hosea! DMHBA NARODOV in Russian lb 11, 1981 pp 178-192

[Article by Vasiliy ISelyunin: "The lone Center of tho Econonic 8ystea"]
[Text] The Very sane

Our railroad transport is truly the living nerve center of the national
econony. May the railroad workers can be criticised and blaned for nsny.

if not all, of our individual economic failures. According to the experts,
the loss resulting froa unsatisfied deaand for transport in industry alone
has reached sore than 6.5 billion rubles a year. Agriculture's losses froa
the sure cause are sort then 4 billion rubles. And in general there is now
hardly an econooic functionary who does not have cleaints against transport.
Md the cflticiﬂl 1. ju‘tifi.de “d yeteoee

Along with you we are justifiably proud when our country reaches the level
of the United States or surpasses it in respect to as inportant indicators.
So it is when our railroads are ahead of the Asericane in their developssnt
during an entire era. I think that the railroad workers of the United States
scarcely ever attain our paramtere. Per kilo-ster of track we transport
more than six tines the anount of freight the Americans do. The total extent
of the nainlines in our country is only 5/12 as such but the freight turnover
is 2.8 tines as Inch. With only ll percent of all the world's steel tracks
at their disposal our railroad personnel carry out sore than 50 percent of
the world's freight turnover. Insofar as these estronoaicel figures on
shipments are legitinte then in this case the conplaints can be directed not
against transport but its custoners.

Our railroad transport is siraculous in one are respect. It is incredibly
ecObOIical true the standpoint of capital outlays. It is those outlays which
conceal the profound reasons for the very hid: rates of increase of shipnnts
and are at the root of the current difficulties.

Although freight ransport legitisstely refers to the reels of physical pro-
duction it clearly does not create any new output. therefore, during any
period the scone-ice of any country is considered the more effective the lesser
the proportion of expenditures for transport and there is a corresponding in-
crease in the assets directed into the construction of plants. factories and

1
momma!“
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

housing and into agriculture. 0f caurse. this rule holds true only until the
shipnents begin to deter the developaent of the whole econow.

What assets has the country invested in this key sector? In the prewu five-
year plans fron 10.2 to 10.7 percent of all the capital invest-ants went for
the developnent of the railroads. In the 1966-1950 period this proportion
fell to 7.7 percent; in the next, the fifth five-year plan, it was 4.9; in
the sixth 3.4; in the seventh 3.2; in the eighth 2.7; in the ninth 2.6; and
in the 10th 2.7. It is something to think about that of every thousand rubles

released for the development of the econony only 26-27 rubles go to the rail-
roads.

Hhereas before the war the investnsnta were approximately equal to the invest-
ments in all of agriculture, now the railroads obtain only a fraction of the
funds that the rural areas get. In the 36 postwar years the railroads ab-
sorbed 57.3 billion rubles-agriculture spent approxiaately the same amount
in the last 2 years.

It would be hard to even describe the state our economics would be in if the
railroads always "devoured" the prewar proportion of the investments. As we
know, in the 1976-1980 period 634.1 billion rubles were invested in construc-
tion. 0n the basis of the prewar norn about 67 billion rubles of this amount
would accrue to the railroads but in actuality they obtained approxi-ately 17
billion. The saving amounts to about 50 billion. I would point out by way
of comparison that this is approximately the amount of the state outlays in
1975-1979 for all the housing construction. We will therefore be correct in
saying that it is to a considerable extent due to the fact that the railroad
workers nade do with modest funds that 80 percent of the urban population
will now live in separate apartnents.

However, under these conditions the traditional methods of development of
transport were hardly acceptable for us. After all, throaghout the world s
simle nethod predominated: construction of ever newer railroads. hell,
what about us? It may appear paradoxical but 100 years ago there were more
railroads built in our country than there are now. here are the figures.

In the 1866-1876 period the average yearly growth of the railroad network
was 2,760 kilomters and fron 1976-1980 the increase, also in yearly average.
was 700 kiloneters. In the last 8 years of last century (1893-1900) the
length of the railroads increased by 2,760 kilometers yearly. This record
has never been surpassed. In our nost recent history we see a rather con-
stant decline of railroad construction fron average yearly figures of 1,593
kiloaeters in the 1919-1965 period to 829 kilo-eters in the 1966-1979 period.
The rates of construction showed an especially sharp decline in the postwar
period. we have already ascertained with you the reason for this: it was
precisely in this period that the proportion of the total volume of invest-
nents assigned to railroad transport fell off rapidly.

I would like to unequivocally caution against a superficial view of the com-
parisons cited. It was precisely in the period of decline of railroad con-
struction that there were achieved fantastic increases in the productive work
of railroad transport; whereas in 1950 the freight turnover of the railroads

FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
amounted to 602 billion ton-kilometers, in 1980 it was 3 trillion. 63$ bil-
lion. A 5.7-fold increase!

An essentially new solution was found which made possible a nnifold increase
in shipments with minimum costs. I am referring to the general plan for
converting the railroads to electric and diesel locomotive traction in place
of the steam locomotive traction. We have already discussed the colossal
saving in capital investments. But as far as transport costs are concerned,
our railroads can safely be considered the world's most efficient. ‘lhus,

the savings in operational expenditures in the 1955-1975 period amounted to
80 billion rubles.

However, sooner or later the easily accessible reserve for the increase of
transport had to come to an end. We approached this point in the 10th Five-
Year Plan, although, to be perfectly frank, the program for the replenishment
of transport could have been carried out more energetically than was the
case. In the last five-year plans the planners almost made it a rule not to
satisfy the urgent needs for the national economy in this sector: from year
to year they eliminated funds not just for the construction of railroads but
for the relatively inexpensive program for the development of transport.

wereas in the seventh five-year plan 11,000 kilometers of railroads were
electrified, in the eighth five-year plan it was 9,000 kilometers, in the
ninth 5,000, and in the 10th 10,800 kilometers. Don't think that the need
for them fell off. As it is, less than one-third of the tracks were electri-
fled and, if we count only the overloaded lines, only about 50 percent of
them anyway. There was also a gradual decline in the rates of replenishment
of rolling stock. Production of diesel locomotives fell from 1,485 sections
in 1965 to 1378 in 1980 and production of electric locomotives from 661 to
429 respectively. In 1973 there were 71,800 freight cars made; in 1980 the
number was 63,000.

'lhe results did not keep us waiting. In the Ninth Five-Year Plan the freight
turnover cf the railroads increased by almost 30 percent and in the 10th Five-
Year Plan by only a little over 6 percent. In the 1979-1980 period we saw a
direct regression: we shipped less freight than in 1978. Transport began to
retard the whole national economy. I believe that it would not be an exag-
geration to say that it is today the country's No 1 problem.

Even if we choose the correct course of action, the situation can by no means
be normalized sooner than after two five-year plans. Some other solutions are
needed--quick and definitive ones. Hhat specifically are they?

We are trying to approach the problem from another angle-“how to reduce the
very need for the movement of freight without doing damage to the national
economy.

Our railroads transport more than the entire rest of the world and nearly
three times as much as the United States. In this good or bad? I dareeay
that it is a superiority we need not be proud of. You do not smear all the
ton-kilometers on bread instead of butter and you do not use them in place of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

metal in the production of equipment. In principle, it is desirable to reduce
the shipments to e minimum. In this possible?

In this area it is first necessary to destroy some existing myths. ‘lhere is,
for example, an opinion such as the following. It is mt surprising that in
the United States the amount of railroad transport is somewhat less then
ours—they have developed mtor vehicle transport to an extraordinary extent
and this will assume the excess load. Is this so? I added up the freight
turnover for the two types of transport (according to the 1978 data). In

the United States the railroads and motor vehicles handled about 2.3 trillion
ton-kilometers and ours more than 3.8 trillion. I my add this: pipeline
transport is better developed in the USSR and that, of course, relieves the
railroads of some of. the load.

Another plausible myth is that the territories of our country are, they say,
enormous and freight has to be hauled for distances which are inconceivable
in the United States. Let us again consult the statistical handbooks. In
1977, the avenge distance of railroad shipments in the USSR reached 895
kilometers; in the United States it was 906 kilometers. "c are now trying
to compare not the ton-kilometers but simply the tons of freight transported,
no matter for what distanze.

According to this statistic, in 1950 the railroads in the USSR transported
834.3 million tons and those in the United States 1320 million. mat's how
it was. By 1977 the picture had changed radically. Our figures were 3.7
billion tons and the United States 1.38 billion. He had 2.7 times as much.
If we take into account the fact that our gross national product is still
less than the Aaerican, then it comes out that for every unit of output
produced we have to have many times greater volume of transport than the
United States. And not just the United States.

On the basis of the statistical handbooks it is easy to compute the yearly
volume of transport per capita. The picture is this: in the USSR—14.10
tons, in the United States—6.3 tons, in the countries of the European
Economic Calamity—3.6 tons, which includes England-3.1 tons, France 4.6,
and the PKG-5.7 tons. Why is it we are always transporting and transporting
and are unable to call a halt.

And the point is this. Although recent years have seen the beginning of a
marked turn of the economic system toward effectiveness, there are being
generated definite changes for the better in the use of the resources which
can be felt with the hands, so to speaknraw materials, materials, manpower.
For transport resOurces, however, the savings are still not tangible ones.
he attitude of the operational workers toward transport resources is still
indifferent in respect to something almost gratuitous like the air. This
kind of psychology developed over the decades and the conditions which rein-
force it continue today. This phenomenon merits a fundamental examination.

A simple example. In the United States the cost of coal doubles when it is

transported 600 kilometers. Before applying to a distant supplier, the cus-
tomer correctly considers, not whether to buy the fuel at a greater cost, but

MWMMY
FOR OFT-10“. USE ONLY

at a nearer source. With us the cost of the coal doubles when it is trans-
ported 5,000 kilometers. The payment for the transport is essentially
figurative: the rate is 1/6-1/7 of the American rate. And the result, for
example, is that the electric power stations find it more advantageous to
bring in SibErisn coal from the Donate Basin than to consume local coal. And
they bring it in.

Some consumers suggest a tenptingly simple solution: it is necessary to raise
the rates and to incorporate in the economic mechanism the rule expressed by
the adage: "Beyond the sea a heifer is a quarter kopeck, but a ruble for
transport." Doing this involves no labor at all. After all, in the planning
operation the cost of goods and services is determined, not by the market-
it is generated, according to Marx. by the state. I am sure. however.
that whatever the price for the transport, the planners did not assign it

and the consumer is not disturbed by it. The increased costs will be in-
corporated in the consumer's plan. His profit will obviously be lower but so
be it, the plan for profit will reinstate it to include the new transport
costs. In short, the enterprise is completely indifferent as to the size of
the Outlays for transporting the materials and finished products to be con-
sumed.

Very well. but how abOut the state? It is not a matter of indifference to it!
However. what does the state represent in its capacity as a user of the rail-
roads? To plan millions and millions of shipments from above is as realistic
as to establish in a single economic organ a products list for all the output
produced in the country, a list which numbers 12 million types of products.
Nor has a task like that gotten to be suitable for transport. But in that
case the real directors of the transport resource are the departments. In
this instance the manager of any of these can rightly say "The state is I."

Unjust Communications

Our administration of the economy is structured in the form of a vertical
hierarchy: enterprise--industrial association-ministry. The top links issue
the orders, the lower ones carry them out. The couand function is only con-
ceivable within one's unit; in the "foreign" ones there are other commanders.
There are no dependable methods of influencing the partners of a "foreign"
eparchy. Each department therefore tries as such as possible to lock the
economic relationships within its own ranks and to eliminate or at least to
limit the contacts beyond the confines of the system. A plant in Vladivaetok
would rather conclude a contract for the delivery of cast material, for ex-
ample, not with a neighbor who is just an enclosure away but with a Minsk
enterprise of its own ministry. It is safer this way--in which case one can
complain to the ministry but one can't expect anything from a neighbor. In
perhaps no other sector of the national economy can bureaucratism inflict as
much harm as this does on transport.

Let us consider the shipments-well, at least prefabricated ferroconcrete.
The enterprises of 200 departments manufacture it. each for itself with de-
liveries organized according to the rule: "From a particular supplier to his
own consumer."

FOI.OIF1C1AI.IEHB(HULY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The outcome of this I determined from the reports of the Sverdlovsk Railroad.
Construction materials occupy first place sung the products shipped. lbre
than 2,000 cars with prefabricated ferroconcrete go forth from there every
month to all the krays and oblasts of the country. Does the Central Ural
perhaps have surplus capacities for this output? “0. In turn, the customers
who use the services of the Sverdlovsk Railroad obtain more than 3,000 cars of
reinforced concrete a month. From where? From all the country's regions—
from the Amur to the Kubsn' and from Arkhangel'sk to Central Asia, that is,
precisely from the areas to which prefabricated structures are shipped from
the Central Ural. In one year the average distance of the shipments of
reinforced concrete increased from 720 to 906 kilometers. And for the en-
tire network of railroads it increased during the five-year plan period

from 597 to 756 kilometers.

Attached to Gosplan USSR is an interdepartmental omission for the rational-
ization of shipments. For 10 years the associates of the comission advised
the manufacturers of prefabricated ferroconcrete to exchange the output with
their neighbors and not drag it through the whole country. But it was a
voice crying in the wilderness. In May 1980 the cousission shifted from
persuasion to action: it forbade the shipment of reinforced concrete for a
distance more than 800 kilometers. You would not by any means call this
limitation harsh. If, let us say, one department ships floor slabs from
Moscow to Leningrad and another departunt ships precisely the same slabs in
the opposite direction from Leningrad to Moscow, then under this rule these
actims do not come under the control.

However, see what has been started here! In the transport department of
Gosplan, I got hold of a batch of protests. They were literally cries from
the departmnt 80u18. The management of the Glevtyumenneftegaz [Hain Ad-
ministration of the Tyumen' Oil and Gas Industry] telegraphed as follows:
"All the associations of the main administration are located more than 800
kilometers distant from the suppliers of reinforced concrete." All! This
is the substance of the col-sunications. And they went on with threats:
Don't rescind your decision, they say; it would disrupt the construction pro-
gram in the most important oil region. There are scores of protests like
these. Listen, for example, to V. Gusev, the deputy minister of industrial
construction of the Ukraine. He tells how the world will collapse if there
is a halt to the transport of prefabricated structures from the Ukraine to
the Far East and the zone of the MM [Baykal-Amur Mainline],

And we are after all not talking about an unusual products. No, but about
the most cos-on or specific structures and authorization was given in advance
to ship them any distances. The deputy minister of the coal industry, Ye.
Krol', took advantage of this clause in the new regulations. He did not
dispute the limitation set up. The deputy minister simply included it in the
list of exceptions, that is, structures which you do not exchange at the
neighbors-all the most important products which are now being shipped on the
comsnd of the Ministry of the Coal Indmtry--crosspieces, railroad slabs and
foundation blocks for forest marshlands and platforms.

0n the ministry's col-sand they transport prefabricated structures from
Vorkuta—to whereever do you think?-even to the southeastern part of Yakutiya.

l-‘OIOI‘HCIALIBEONLY
FOit0F11C1AL.USE(MNLY

I happened to be in the final points of the itinerary. The raw material for
the production of reinforced concrete is in general inexpensive; it is the
labor which is mainly the basis on which it is rated. And in polar Vorkuta
the labor is exclusively the labor of the rsilrosds--they have set up there
a regional coefficient for wages and northern additions. ehis means that
structures become ”golden" even before they are shipped.

Let us now take a look at the station of destination. In southern Yakutiya
the Hinugleprom [Ministry of the Coal Industry] is building a high-productiv-
ity coal pit and the new city of Neryungri. According to the recent plan,
the project entails approximately 3 billion rubles, including nearly 2
billion assigned to construction and installation work. You don't have to

be a specialist to understand that setting up such a.colossal complex in an
uninhabited distant land is inconceivable withOut a solid construction in-
dustry base. As it is, I found in the archives of the Minlegprom two sur-
prising documents. In March 197k Deputy Minister V. Belyy approved an agree-
ment which prescribed the investment of 80.5 million rubles in a production
base for the future construction project. Apparently this amount seemed ex-
cessive and in June 1974 when the same V. Belyy signed the assignment for the
planning of the base he ordered the planners to limit the amount to 65 million
rubles. To what extent were these crucial decisions justified? You do not
deceive life; it has always arranged things according to their places. Ac-
cording to the current plans, the cost of the base will reach nearly .5
billion rubles. I asked the deputy minister to explain this niacalculation.

"He did not intend to set up a base for the entire volume of work," was
Vladimir Vasil'yevich's confident reply. "Otherwise the construction people
would have fussed with it and there would have been no tine left for the basic
projects. To save time, it is better to supply the materials from other re-
gions.‘

As you see, they are supplying them.

And shortly thereafter, opposite the flow of structures proceeding to

Yakutiya precisely the same products began going in the opposite direction.

I learned about this from the article by v. Kamenev, the chief of the Neryungri
GRES Construction Administration, in the local newspaper INDUSTRIYA SBVBRA.
This administration is subordinate to the Minenergo [Ministry of Electric
Power] an along with the Yakutuglestroy [Yakut Coal Construction Administra-
tion]. it is taking part in the development of the Southern Yakutsk couple:
and is building precisely this large electric power station. It is taking

part in this all right but, as can be seen from the article, it does not want
to know the neighbor nor equally the connnn interests of the region.

lhe regional electric power station is being built 13 kilometers from the
future Neryungri. However, the power engineers do not plan to live in it

and they are expediting the construction of the temporary settlement of
Serebryanyy Bor close by the GEES. "Without our own base," writes V. Kamenev,
"it will be difficult for us to develop large-panel home construction, which
offers the most effective solution for the housing problem. hinenergo is now

INJI‘OFFICJAI.IIEE2(NVLY
l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY

"reviewing the matter of constructing in the settlement of Serebryanyy Bor a
hose construction plant to be put into operation in 1981."

And this despite the fact that Yakutsk party obkom first secretary G.
atiryayev several times argued in the central press that there is no need
for the coal people and the electric power people to erect two hon con-
struction combines side by side; they need to set up one large combine in
parts. It is as if everything was decided and bureaucratism turned up and
climbed over the same gates.

At the time of my meeting with him personally, the chief of Neryungrigresstroy,
the author of the article which took me by outright surprise, explained the
position of his department to m. According to him, the electric power people
did not in general oppose cooperation. At the outset of the construction in

a joint agreement the deputy ministers of the coal industry and of electric
power engineering declared their intention to set up a comon production base
and they stipulated shared participation in the expenses and the sharing of

the future output. But the time limits passed and nothing was done—the coal
people did not build anything. And the codine had to install its own home
construction unit.

So that the position is an uncoordinated one. It is not difficult, however,
to predict the future course of events: the power engineering builders will
finish the electric power station and will depart for another place. They

will, of course, not yield the production base to anyone else and they will

begin to ship parts from Neryungri to somewhere at the other end of the
earth.

As we see, the timid attempt of the planners to bring efficiency to one of the
most massive-scale freight transport operations encountered—let us call
things by their names-«the obstruction of the departments. Do not therefore
be in any hurry to rejoice over the figures on the increase of shipmnts as
shown in the summaries of the ‘rsSU [Central Statistical Administrationlnthey
indicate payment for bureaucratism rather than success in the economy program.
Let us look now at the shipments of another large-volume freight—timber. I
will again begin with a history in which I was a witness und to some degree a
participant.

Timber and the MPS or the Tactics of the Ostrich Wings

As many as 353,000 cubic meters of wood are going to waste in Chunskiy Rayon,
Irkutskaya (blast. For the most part this is the best timber in the world-
the celebrated Angers pine. It has been written off as wood and is now
rotting, poisoning the natural environment. Back in 1976 the newspaper
SO‘l‘SIALISTICHESKAYA INDUSTRIYA, where I work, twice wrote about the barbaric
destruction of timber in the Chuna basin. At the site the then Minister of
the Timber Industry N. Timofeyev was visited by responsible workers of Gosplan
and Gossnab USSR. The minister issued several orders and assumed personal
control of the matter. And whereas, despite this, nothing was done to allevi-
ate the trouble, the events therefore ceased to be under his control.

l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
thy did the wood becane superfluous? For whom was it really earmarked? But,
of course. The former minister attached a large woodworking contine to
besogorsk and assigned a group of timber organizations to it as suppliers.
But putting the timber procurement capacities into operation was now not so
difficult. Building a modern enterprise for processing the wood was a mre
difficult latter. And it turned out that the starting of the basic shops
was delayed for 6 years and during all these years the procurement workers
duly felled tidaer.

‘lhe coubine was finally put into operation. There were new capacities for the
production of shavings: the latest cutting nachines, conveyers. autonotic
machines. All this in addition to the output. Because what kind of output
will there be if the shavings valued at 16.58 rubles per cubic aster go an-
tirely into the boiler furnaces?

"There is no other solution." V. Holdavchuk, the general director of the com-
bine explained. “According to the plan, the staking mat be done with saw-
dust and there is not enough of it."

In the meantime the combine is literally swamped with mountains of sawdust.
I stayed for a while at one dump. Dusp trucks kept coming and throwing off
the amber-colored freight and the bulldozer efficiently punches out new ap-
proaches. And two combines can be heated by this product!

However, it is apparently simpler for the codiine to feed the valuable shav-
ings to the furnaces and, although it is as lidlt as fluff, the output will
scarcely yield more energy than is expended for the production of it. In
general the combine remembers well the celebrated tugboat on which all the
‘ steam we:.t into the horn. Actually. only the production of shavings is even
in operation. 0f the four woodworking shops one is in operation. An eight-
frane plant has been started up but there has been no increase in output.
The reason is the same-~there are not enough people. Take note that the sup-
pliers of the conbinenthe titer organizations of the besogorskles timber as-
sociation--are speeding up procure-ant precisely so as not to lose the lumber-
jack personnel. But there is no one to remind then and the Irkutsk timber as-
sociation Irkutsklesprom has not found any better way to reduce the plan for
the conbine. The enterprise requires just half of the wood procured for it.

In short, the knot around the Chuna center is being drawn ever tighter.

One other example. In Ust'-Ilinak the Minlesbtmprom [Ministry of Timber and
Paper Industry] USSR is setting up a timber industry complex. The first
capacities have gone into operation. Years and years have gone by and the ac-
count for reprocessed wood is mounting to millions of cubic enters. In the
meantime the ministry 5 years ago developed timber felling unite here for the
supporting coupler—nine tiwer organizations procure yearly about 3 million
cubic neters of output. The upper and lower warehouses, the roadsteads, and
the transshipnent bases are clogged with old wood and hundreds of thousands
of cubic meters of tinber are lying along the Ust' Ilimsk—Sratsk routes.

FOIOFHGALMONLY
FOR 05110“. USE ONLY

'me timber is rotting and the number of new procurement projects is increas-
ing: according to the plan the Ilimaklee [Ilimek Timber Association] is sup-
posed to increase the procurement to 3.05 million cubic meters; of these 2
million cubic meters have not been distributed either formally or on paper-
no consumers have been found for them. In short, the Ust'-Ilimsk center has
now been added to the Chuna group.

my the procurement of wood which is definitely superfluous? Or to ask in
another way: what method is being employed to coordinate the plans for the
felling and consumption of timber?

Let us say we are planners with you and we are faced with the following al-
lotment: The Irkutsk timber organization Irkutsklesprom in 1980 was obliged
to deliver to the consumers 21.5 million cubic meters of timber and by the
beginning of the year the above-norm reserves there reached 10 million cubic
meters. This output should be shipped out without fail; otherwise it will
rot. How much new wood must be procured? Very simply, the difference
between the deliveries and the balances, that is 17.5 million cubic meters,
isn't that so? No. This means that about 4 million cubic meters will be
procured beforehand to no purpose. The Irkutskles association is now unable
to prevent this absurdity. V. Pilippov, the chief of the planning division,
says sadly:

"I was visited by Leontiy Yevtushok, the general director if Iliaskles. He
asked that we reduce the plan for felling. This timber is rotting and soon
we will be converting into firewood there 200,000 cubic teeters of select saw
logs. And I explain to him that this is our plan for the year and I am
obliged to divide it precisely to a T. Let's say I reduce your assignment.
Hhose do I increase? The Chuna basin? Thm the situation there is no better
than yours._

From 1976 on the executives of the industry began sending every year to
Gosplan of the Union requests to reduce the procurement amounts. In October
1979 then First Deputy Minister G. Stupnev suggested that the titer felling
in Irkutskaya Oblast and for the ministry as a whole be reduced by 1.5 million
cubic meters. The request was a mdest one-as we determined with you, it
necessitated in this regard reducing the felling by precisely lo million cubic
meters. G. Stupnev's suggestion was all the more sensible in that no one
would Suffer: the industry as a whole was obliged to fulfill the plan for
deliveries to consumers by shipping wood which has accumulated on the Chuna
and at Ust'-Ilimsk.

The letter got to the timber industry division of Gosplan USSR. And, as V.
Shabatura, a responsible worker of this division, informed me, they even re-
joiced there: it seems that in Irkutskaya (blast there are reserves of wood
which have not been counted in the plan. Very good! Let's include them in
the plan of deliveries and we will not begin to reduce the volume of new
cutting; on the whole, we will have more resources and after all, the national
economy does not have enough of this very timber. To put it more simply, we
added another 1.5 million cubic meters to the plan for the shipment of wood
from the Chuna and Ust'-Ilimsk without making it unrealistic. And with the
best intentions.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The distribution and deliveries of wood are being managed by the Soyuzglavles
[Main Administration for Interrepublic Deliveries of ‘l‘imberl—a subdivision
of Gossnab USSR. I visited P. Reutov, the chief engineer of this main admin-
istration. He dropped hints to each other and Pavel Grigor'yevich hisself
made a visitto the Chuna. In short. the conversation took place in a
friendly. warn atmosphere and yet I made no mistake as I showed him a Zero:
copy of the wood balance sheet for Irkutsklesprom. It was apparent from this
docmnent that the 3.7 nillion cubic meters of timber which are to be procured
have in general not been distributed; there are no consumers for them and
this output can be removed from the felling plan without causing any pain.

'lhe speaker's eyes glittered with greed.

"Give me your paper. So -0, it was signed by Balkin, the deputy chief of
Irkutsklesprom. An official document. 'lhank you. we. will look for the re-
scurces; there are millions of cubic meters of undistributed tinber there.
Now we will get them into the record."

"For heaven's sake," I tried to reason with the chief engineer, who was dial-

ing the telephone vigorously. ”Sure, it's easy to distribute the resources on
paper. But after all, the wood will have to be shipped on the railroad. Over
the year you will be able to ship less than 4 million cubic meters from here.

Not a progressive assipment. mat sort of miracle are you counting on?"

"The timber is needed. We will write it into the plan for the railroad people.

Let them fulfill it. One must have faith in the plan," the speaker snapped
out.

Faith is from the field of religion. And the plan would do better based on
judicious calculations. But let's get back to the Chuna business. “ten the
Story of the spoilage of the timber came to light. the ministry found a solu-
tion of sorts: since the local coubine is not able to process the wood we
will send it to the west by railroad. we have set up for this purpose a
special office in the besogorskles tinber association and over it the as-
sociation Chunales. But throughout the years the railroad has supplied at
best 80 percent of the planned railroad cars. Since the plans for procurement
of tinber are being fulfilled more accurately, thereserves of wood are con-
tinuing to increase in volume.

‘Ihe failure at the Chuna is not an exception. In front of me is a batch of
letters which came in to the ainistry. It is distressing to read than.
"Irkutskaya Oblsst is clogged with timber, which is becoming wholly unsuit-
able. 0n the Iya River in places the sunken logs are lying faur deep. It is
essential to stop procurement until the perishing goods have been shipped out."
So writes Irkutsk resident B. Tsvetkov. "'lhe tidaer procured is being made
into firewood. th should I push it if they are sawing the tiaber, floating it
and unloading it at the coast,and here it's rotting." This is written by 20
lumberjacks from the Yenisey timber transshipmsnt base. "The timber which has
grown for more than 100 years has been cut by us, divided up and thrown into
the scrap heap." mic is reported to the ministry by 32 workers of the tilter
point Splavnoy in Arkhangel'skaya Oblast.

ll
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe reason is the same everywhere-mo cars.

I got hold of the data for the period beginning in 1970: not once were the
railroad people able to carry out the plan for shipments. Whereas in 1975
the amount transported conprised 162.5 million tons of output which were

distributed via Soyusglavles, in 1979 the amount was only 110 million
tons.

And how is the transport division of the Union Gosplan handling the matter
under these circumstances? In 1980 it approved an assignment for the ship-
ment of timber with an outridxt increase of 30 percent as against the pre-

ceding year. What does this nean and how do you account for the miracle
there?

"No," Yu. Polyanskiy, a specialist of the division which supervises the ship-
ments of timber, explained to me. "The executives of HPS have actually been
pressing for a reduced plan but we showed them that the carrying and traf-
fic capacity of the roads will enable us to fulfill the stepped-up variant

of the assigzment.

"He argued," V. Zubarev, the chief of the transport planning administration of
“PS declares dejectedly. "The plan is realistic if we are diverted from the
actual situation. We will not transport a single leg but the requirements for
other freight are also increasing. Horeover, the plan is realistic if the
locomotives don't break down, if the custaars stop delaying the cars above
the norm, and if there are no disruptions in the repair of the tracks.

And the speaker went on listing "ifs" for several minutes more. Of course,
life changed everything to suit itself: for Soyuzglsvles there was even less
freight transported in 1980 than in unsuccessful 1979. let's trace further
the position of the transport division of the Union Gosplan. In 1981 for the
shipment of tidaer it established an assignment with a 34 percent increase
over the preceding year. According to the appraisals of the MPS planners,
they will actually only be able to transport to the customers of Soyusglavles,
not 1100, but only 110 million tons. The draft plan for 1982 again calls for
the transport of 1‘0 million tons. I believe it is evident that as in the
past the spoilage of output is predetermined. The woodman's ax has still

not been concerned with the trunk and the mod is still stretched out to the
sun by the treetop, but the tree is already doomed to perish without any bene-
fit to the people. And the better the procurement workers begin to fulfill
the plan the greater the proportion of the output that will rot.

No. I repeat: the figures, dreadful as they are, do not snake much of an im-
pression. You have to see it with your own eyes. I traveled by railroad fron
Irkutsk to Tayshet and from 'rayshet to Bratsk. On each siding where there is
a point for separating the switches from the window of the car the heaped up
millions which somehow lose their reality in the ausmaries of the reports.

For kilometers on both sides of the dividing point there stretch the stacks

of wood. Near the point the wood is black and rotted—even 10 and more years
ago they could not ship it because there was already no place for it nearby.
The further away from the point. the fresher the abandoned wood. he

12
MWWONLY
Novochunka siding. The gigantic piles of abandoned goods. As far as the
eyes can see there are stupe. Among the stage the fence of a transformer
substation.

In the settlement of Veseloye not far from hesogorsk I met with lumberjack
brigade leader Viktor Tkschev. a aremsrkable figure of a man—at that time
(the winter of 1980) the tisber industry had only six brigades which fulfilled
their five-year plan and one of them was his, Thachev'e. Yoa do not say
anything; he had achieved his fame by his own efforts. He talked when he had
just come in from his shift (and the shift meant time on the road. 12 hours in
all, no less. Near besogorek the timber had already been cut and they had to
carry out procurement 200 kilometers from the railroad line). Completely
fatigued, the brigade leader nodded with sleep and surely must have thought:
When will this darned correspondent leave me alone. But I put one more un-
usual question to him and, let's face it, not a good one. Why was he in a
hurry to fulfill the five-year plan. lie had cut more timber than all the
rest; was he now going to undertake to procure even more, and why? Be cannot
answer and he does not see what they see and talk about in every household:
this felling is unnecessary; the goods will sell just the same.

The conversation produced no results. Viktor had other concerns—he was pre-
paring a triumphant report for the newspaper. Moreover, Takchev sensibly ad-
vised that I meet with driver Nikolay Goralov; he, he said, will send the re-
ports on the spoilage of national goods to all quarters. I looked for Gorelov
at the meeting of the settlement soviet (he is a deputy). when the deputies
learned what it was about they interrupted the meeting to talk with the
roving correspondentnhe would suddenly come to their aid. But what could I-
do to help? They told me that at Ratdol'noye settlement the floated tider
had accumulated in a boom and the logs could not be floated further to the
loading place on the railroad—the lower warehouses were clogged with wood
and there was no place to unload any new product. The timber in the boon
rots within the hour-the stench remains even though the lichen has been re-
moved. From time to time they open the water gate and discharge the rot into
the water to let it float somewhere. And so for him, Gorelov, there was the
memory of the floated timber rotting three times and being replaced here and
this is no trifling matter—the storehOuae holds about 100,000 cubic utere
of wood. Gorelov is one of the natives. He remembers that the depth of the
Chuna River goes to 5 meters. Now there is not even half a Inter-the. silt-
covered logs are lying there in several rows. How about the fish? Better
not ask.

The reader may object: but is there narrow administrative authority there?
Yes and, not having from year to year obtained the wood earmarked for them
by the plan, the consumers begin to cut it themselves and to haul the tider
for themselves. In the Chuna region. where the sawed Angara pine is rotting,
the so-called self-procurement workers practice their trade. The rural con-
struction workers of Kazakhstan maintain three timber organizations; the
Crimean and Poltava organizations sand logs to the Ukraine, Mintransetroy
[Ministry of Transport Construction], Bratskenergoetroy [Bratsk Electric
Power Construction], Roseel'khoztekhnika [All-Russian Association for the
Sale of Agricultural Equipment]. etc., have their own procurement

l3
“WIMONLY
FOR OWCIAI. USE ONLY

organizations. Every year they stock as much as a million cubic meters. which
is comparable with the program of the specialized association lesogorsklea.
This is one region. And on the basis of the map of lrkutskaya (blast as a
whole one can study the geography of the country-there is hardly any ob-
last, kray or republic which is not represented in the Baykal region by its
own procurenent organizations.

As a rule these organizations operate in a wasteful manner. 0n the same
Chuna the cost of production of a cubic meter of wood goes up to 65 rubles
anong the self-procurement people while it is 8 rubles less at the enter-
prises of Lasogorskles. Their production is one-third that of the enter-
prises. But the wages there are much higher and understandably the Inter-
Jacks flock to them free the subdivisions of the specialized ministry. One-
third of the apartments of the hesogorsk woodworking eonbina are occupied by
residents who have gone over to work for the "coapetitors."

It is hard to inagine a nore preposterous pictures all over lrkutskaya 0b-
last there are stacks of timber which they have not been able to ship. So
why are the self-procurement workers cutting note? my not give them the
finished product? The timber people have nade this suggestion for nany years
in a row but it gets stuck in the supply links. "he is putting the spoke in
the wheel?

"I an opposed to this." Soyusglavles chief engineer 1’. heutov bravely con-
fessed in his conversation with In," and you can so record it. Last year the
consumers received two-thirds of the amount due then on the funds. And no one
here will raise a hand to deliver the finished wood over and above the funds
when the legitimate consumers have not been satisfied."

As the ancients said, the world may crusble but the law nust prevail. A mil-
lion cubic meters of Chuna timber have already been reduced to rot and the
next million will take its turn. The customers who have funds will not care
about these rescurces- -they cannot be transported. Sinilarly, the supply
people will not in general look out for the conswers but for their own peace
of mind. In truth, if no one takes the responsibility, who will be to blane
for disruptions of deliveries? The railroad. It is not fulfilling the
shipment plan and you should inquire of it. And if the tisber is sold
locally? Then the output is not getting to the legitimate customers through
the fault of the supply people—they have ”squandered” the resources.

Objectivity pronpts us to note that in the Chuna region the self-procurement
people nevertheless once sold nore than 300,000 cubic meters of wood. But
which wood? ‘lhat which had been lying there not less than 2 years.

“It is not suitable as cider," explains one of the purchasers, chief engi-
neer of the Yesil' sector A. Oshkin. "Still we shipped it to Kazakhstan;
perhaps they can use it for fence boards. Of course, they did not reduce the
procurement for themselves."

What happens is interesting: sons years they are unable to transport excel-
lent timber and other years they have been shipped rotted timber. How did
they manage this? Did they drag the goods by the neck?

16
mmusemv
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

"For us this is no problem," Oshikin reassured ee. "Every self-procuremt
organization is a rich proprietor. He, for example. belong to the Turgay ob-
last agricultural administration. It has its own railroad car quote—I get
as many as I need. They will refuse soneone else and give them to as; you
cannot manage without timber. "

It's easy to understand how all this self-activity disorganizes the trans-
port work. Soyuzglavles does its best with the transport of the wood procured
by the timber industry. It may have its flaws but it tries to introduce
rational routing schemes and to prevent cross hauls. But, in addition, ap-
proximately 60 departments procure about 100 million cubic teeters of output
for themselves and they sometimes transfer it according to the most absurd,
irrational transport scheme. These ship-ants are alien to Soyusglevles;

it takes no part in then.

Let us try to get the generalized data. Let's look at the monthly plan for
the delivery of railroad cars for timber. Sverdlovsk Railroad sends timber
freight to all the other railroads of the country; this includes 72 cars
which go out every mnth to the Urals and all the way to the Far East. In
turn Sverdlovsk Railroad receives 15 cars of timber a day from Siberia. In
the course of a day 633 cars with timber arrive at Moscow Railroad but this
railroad itself sends more than 150 cars with similar freight to areas out-
side its confines, including even the BAR. And so it is for each railroad.
Of course, no two types of timber are alike and son grades also have to be
shipped in the direction of the flow. However. tell me, if you please. what
kind of eucalyptus-bonuses grow in the lbscow forests that you can't get
more of anywhere else. With this kind of arrangement there will always be an
insufficient number of cars.

The only true solution of the problem lies in elimination of unnecessary ship-
ments whenever transport is unable to keep up with the deliveries. In the
meantime the timber shipment plan evolves spontaneously-«with minor correc-
tions it absorbs the suggestions of a hundred departnents each of which is
preoccupied with its owu interests. The planning principle is manifested
only in the fact that the interdepartmental emission for the rationalize-
tion of transport, by antedating, tries to eliminate obvious absurdities.
Practically nothing comes of this—the plan has taken shape and how do you
bring order into deliberate anarchy? And who will listen to the emission?
In 1980 its timid assignments for curtailing unnecessary shipments were 1.0.2
percent fulfilled. Commission Chaim V. Biryukov recently frankly
acknowledged in the press: "1118 experience of the USSR Gosplan's co-is-
sion for the rationalization of freight shipments indicates that in the
yearly planning there has been relatively little Curtailunt of irrational
shipments." Why? It's very simple-wthe departments are stronger than the
emission.

, Is it Necessary to Transport Coal to the Donbass?

Ihe situation on the railroads is complicated by another circumstances in
the econonic system there are needs that are so compelling that satisfying

15
mmussomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

then requires that we dissipate the already scarce transport resources. In
this regard we have to scrutinize the transport of another nass-scele
freight—coal.

Fro- the supply plans and from the shipment reports I extracted docens of
routings which. from a connon sense standpoint are iapossible to explain.

In 1980, for example, 16.7 nillion tons of Kuznetsk, l’echora and Karegande
coal were brought in to the Ukraine and at the sane tine 13.9 million tons of
Donetsk coal were shipped out to other republics. Fuel fron the Kuzbess is
being brought into Arkhangel'skaya (blast and Pechora and Inta coal extracted
nearby is being sent to the southern part of the country. Coal fron nibastus
is delivered to the Serov CRIBS in Sverdlovekeya Oblast end fuel extracted #3
kilometers from the GRES in the Bogoslovskiy deposit is shipped to We',
Tanbov and Kirov. In 1980 they shipped 4 million tons of coal from the basin
near lbscow to various points along the way no the Donetsk Basin and instead
Karagande, nibsstuz and Kuznetsk coal was shipped to the center of the
country. railings free the concentration of Pechora coal are shipped fron
Cherepovets to the Kurakhovo 6838 (near Donetsk)-oppoeite the direction of
the flow of the Donetsk fuel. I could continm with other crannies like
these.

I recorded only the shipnents which are officially deemed inadmissible; for
the nost part they are even forbidden by this sane interdepartnentel cos-ais-
eion attached to Gosplan USSR. However, those forbidden by one subdivision
of Gosplan are authorized by another link of it. nanely the division of fuel
balances and distribution plans. In the distribution of allocations this
division indicates every year precisely what coal is to be shipped where.
May is this? Ya. Gamlitskiy, the chief specialist of this division. began
the conversation with a question almost philosophical in nature. '

”What are these irrational shipments? Take note that they are shipnents
which one could dispense with under these specific circumstances."

And he went on to make the sinple point even more simle. Is it possible
today to eliminate the delivery of Donetsk coal-well, let's say to the
Center, the Igumovskiy GRES opposite the flow of Siberian coal going to the
Donetsk Basin? Not in any case! Kuznetsk coal is luapy and there are no
crushers at the electric power station. Neither the Donetsk nor the Kuznetsk
coal can be sold for everyday needs—the first is too fine and the chunks of
the second are excessively large. At the sane tine the Moscow area produces
coal; it is transported to the European regions and in its place they of
course have to bring another fuel to the Moscow ares basin. And so in each
case withoat fail there are found reasons why nothing can be changed under
"these specific circumstances" and the irrational automatically becones
rational.

In line with the rantings formally banned, the division of balance sheets in
1980 authorised anew transport for neither nuch nor little but for 95 nillion
tons of coal or one-seventh of the total. In 1981 the picture was the seas.
Authorization was in the form of an exception, as stated in the docunents.
But what kind of exception is this if it is repeated 10 years running and the
rule is not observed even once?

16
momenuseolmr
"Yes, you will ultimately grasp the fact," Ya. Gamlitskiy explains, ”that in
supply they proceed from the real situation. One can and should ask the

power engineers why they did not receive the crushers at this Igumnovskiy'
GRES although a decision to this effect was taken back in 1965 and why they
disrupted many other assignments for curtailment of unnecessary shipments.
However, it is a necessity today to provide the enterprises with the fuel
which they are capable of consuming the most economically. We are the
division of balances. And in the balance sheets the receipts and expenditures
must jibe not simply with respect to the number of tons but also as to the
types of coal."

I understand. How can one help understanding? But then we will pose another
question: are the balance sheets being adhered to? Not by any means. In
1980 underdeliveries to the consumers comprised 16 million tons of coal.
Isn't this because transport, already overloaded, is dragging 95 million tons
of a certain coal on the forbidden routes?

This would be good even though the consumer obtains the fuel he wants. But
after all this is not the way it happens. A recent survey by the specialists
of the Energoset/proyekt [All-"wins State Planning and Scientific Research
Institute of Electric Power Networks] produced the following statement:

"Only a negligible number of coal electric power stations regularly burn the
planned fuel." It went on to give examples: The Zaporozh'ye 6235 uses 17
types of coal, the Partiaansk GRES 19 types from 12 deposits, the Kurakhovo
GEES 26 types from all the basins, etc. Indeed, the operating schedule would
have to be changed daily. And the cause is again to be fOund in transport:
it does not have to wait till the station is on the verge of a shutdown to

be meticulous in this regard.

Well, the balance sheets are for you too!

A long time ago Gosplan and Goasnab USSR became aware of the anomoly pertain-
ing to the shipments. Three years ago in a joint order they directed that a
schedule be drawn up for a normal freight flow for coal to replace the hope-
lessly outmoded one which is bogged down by innumerable exceptions. Since
that time the Soyuzglavugol [Main Administration for Interrepublic Deliveries
of Coal], the organization responsible for fulfillment (this supply main ad-
ministration plans the delivery of practically all of the coal in the country)
has already suggested three variants for such a document but the quality of
these variants leaves something to be desired. The draft of the schedule, for
example, fails to count the average distance of the shipments. '

It is not Surprising that the last, the third, variant was also turned down

by the HPS. Professor Ye. Nesterov, the head of a sector of the NIIHS
[Scientific Research Institute for Communications] checked the plan against
the orders of Gosplan and found that the scheme for rational freight flows
included all the forbidden routes. The specialist also wrote about this in
his report. The official in charge of the preparation of the plan, chief en-
gineer A. Soldatenkov, took offense. In the complaint he addressed to Gossnab
he writes: "The remarks are set forth in an insulting tone which is inad-
missible for business correspondence. In unjustifiably derogating the

17
FIHI(HNHCJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"intensive work of the collective of Soyurglavugol' on the freight flow
schemes T. Nesterov uses such expressions as 'they ship where they want to,’
'the ink was not even dry,’ 'for 3 years in a row Soyuzglavugol' has con-
tinued its inferior preparation of schemes for normal freight flows,‘

etc."

This is the truth. The old professor has the unpleasant habit of calling
things by their names, as for examle calling bureaucratism red tape and
not a profound study of the issue, as it_ is referred to in the rules of re-
fined philologv. In short, the stylistic comlaints of the chief engineer
of Soyuzglavugol' are justified. As for any slanderOus criticism of the
main administration collective's intensive work on the freight flow
schedules, they are definitely not true. _ In general, no work like this has
been done by either this busy collective or any other renowned collective
of Soyuzglavugol'. Consequently, there was mom to blame.

Hy conversation with A. Soldstenkov took place in June when expenditure of
fuel is of course not as great as in the winter. Aleksandr Petrovich opened
the amber book with the daily record of reserves at the major consumers.

The Barnaul TETs had a fuel reserve for 12 hours and the Tolyatti TETo for
18 hours. Nearly all the electric power stations of the Center had reserves,
not for days, but for hours of operation. The electric power stations and
coke-chemical plants of the Ukraine have been operating "from wheels." And
what if the train with coal does not arrive on time? Today the enterprises
will shut down. And what about the extinguishing of the coke furnace bat-
teries? Tomorrow the metallurgical plants will be next.

Fortunately. Soyuzglavugol' has not allowed anything like this. But at what
price? Without regard for the distances they transported coal for the cur-
rent needs and for the reserve. All summer, until the time came for ship-
ping the harvest, cara for coal were shipped out of turn while neglecting

the delivery of many other national economic goods. There was simply no
other solution—if they do not establish winter reserves of fuel in the warm
months, then there will not be any before then. And nonetheless they will
not fully succeed in the undertaking. Does this mean that the railroad people
have blundered again? No. Simply that while there are unnecessary shipments
there will always be a shortage of cars. After all, coal constitutes one-
fifth of the number of tons of freight transported on the railroads.

The Institute of Complex Transportation Problems under Gosplan USSR compiled

a broad program for the rationalization of shipments of coal and many of the
suggestions can be iaplemented without substantial costs. The scientists of
the NIIMS worked out their own draft schedules: with deliveries of 523
million tons-~this is the bulk of the coal extracted in the country in a year--
the average distance for the shipments may be reduced by 108 kilometers, that
is one-seventh of the current figure. Some forward-looking ideas were ad-
vanced by the specialists of RPS. And there are some other plans. But all
the practical suggestions were turned down by Soyuzglavugol'. In the official
document the chief of this main administration, I. Ul'yanov, explains his
position in this way: "The various avenues for the use of coal and the di-
versity of quality and assortment generate the need for transport even in the

18
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
"context of the difficulties connected with transportation. Heating capacity
cannot be a criterion for the interchangeability of coal products."

Undoubtedly the consumers (and specifically some electric power station: be-
cause the controversy mainly concerns then) would have to have some new type
of fuel devised for them although after all, even today they obtain any fuel
they like, only not that prescribed in the plan. But the system, which is
oriented for lessening the distance of the shipments, would have made the
consumers toe the maria-they probably would not have dragged out for 15
years the futile talks about the installation of crushers at the Igullnovsk
CRES. The variant suggested by Soyusglavugol' definitely relieves the cus-
tomers of such cares.

After examining the draft of the scheme, the interdepartmental commission
eliminated some of the irrational routes. But only some of then. The final
variant retained many dozens of nevertheless rather wasteful coal roates. In
them, as in the song, train after train will go off.

What Day Lies Ahead

We have reviewed the shipments of the three busiest types of freight--bui1d-
ing materials, timber and coal. We can still analyze the routes involving
ore, pig iron, steel billets and oil. The conclusion will be the same. As
many case of wasteful use of transport resources as we took the
reason is either bureaucratism or favoritism and anything more.

I think that, as a first step, the following measure would be useful: the
central planning organs would establish transport quotas for the departments
and the latter in turn for the enterprises. Indeed it is hard to understand
why the planning organization, on the basis of harsh allocations, distributes
electricity and metal under shorter limits and employs no measure or norm
only for the transport resource, which is most in short supply at the
present time. It would be better to set the quotas off against bureaucratism
than against the current bans on irrational routings and the yearly plans for
rationalization of the shipments. Let' s say Minugleproa [Ministry of the Coal
Industry] wants to deliver to Yakutiya structures from Vorkutenfor health
purposes but it then has to economize on other shipments because it must

stay strictly within the limit: the transport resources have been dis-
tributed and there is no place to get the additional ampunts. It is wonder-
ful that the movement for econosv of the transport resource has already be-
gun and has begun from below, so to speak, with the customers themselves:

the CPSU Central Comittee recently approved the L'vov system for effective
utilization of railroad cars. 'Ihe work of the L'vov enterprises would get
universal support if quotas were established for shipments.

A year ago the idea of this kind of limiting was also expressed by many other
letters written to the newspaper SOTSIALISTICHESKAYA INDUSTRIYA. We here re-
ceived some sharp criticisms and, as is not strange, not from the ministry
workers. but from the planners. Ihe director of the Planning Institute for
Complex Transportation Problem (lK'l'P), B. Rosin, considered our idea wrong:
the result, he said, will be that the plans of the industry sectors will be

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subordinated to the potentialities of the railroads whenever it is necessary
to develop transport to an extent calculated for full satisfaction of the re-
quirements of the national economy. ‘mis opinion was expressed in a letter
to the editors sent by A. Zotov, the director of the Gosplan transport
division.

lt wOuld not be bad, of course, to also increase the shipments in the forth-
coming period but after all there was practically no increase all through the
10th Five-Year Plan period. Can it be that the specialists have a plan which
would change the situation for the better?

Yes, they do. This document in front of me is the plan for development of
railroad transport in the 11th Five-Year Plan (1981-1985) . In due course the
HPS board approved the plan worked out.

Among the great number of measures the one that can be considered the key one
in the plan is the construction of second tracks and two-track additions on
the mainlines with heavy freight loads. It would have been wrong to at-
tribute this strategy to the HPS management as a mole. No, this is the pre-
dominant direction of the minds at work in the transport subdivisions of
Gosplan of the Union and in science. The IK‘l'P is functioning as the ideolo-
gist there—Director B. Kozin and his deputy A. Hitaishvili wrote as follows
in the journal PLANOVOYE KHOZYAYS‘NO (No 5 dated 1979): "The operation of
the major portion of the shipments in the future requires the building of
new lines and second tracks." This idea the 108 board also developed as part
of the draft for the five-year plan.

So, this business as outlined is correct and reliable. The second tracks are
increasing the traffic capacity of the road three-fold and even more. The
new lines are so much better. However, what does all this come to? It re-
veals in this regard the coordinated character of the planned program. The
development of railroad transport in accordance with the 11th Five-Year Plan
requires 60.5 billion rubles even if we do not count the outlays for the BA)!
and the metros. He will say outright that this amount is unrealistic. If
such funds were assigned to other industries they would hardly be able to put
them in operation: there would not be sufficient either construction
capacities or equipment. Actually approximately half of the MPS requisition
has been satisfied in the 11th Five-Year Plan. And to go about this cor-
rectly it is not necessary to clutter the plan with assignments which will
absolutely not be fulfilled.

But let us assume for a minute that the original UPS intentions have been
realized. will the transport situation then be radically improved? Let us
consider this. According to the data of the MPS. 80,000 kilometers of the
network are now being used with an increased permissible load level. And ac-
cording to this ministry's plan, 10,000 kilometers of second tracks are
slated to be built. Of the 80,000 kilometers 10,000 are urgently needed!

If they adhere to this strategy, the transport situation will be normalized
in eight five-year plans. If we consider that they will actually be able to
lay only 5,000 kilometers of second tracks in the 1981-1985 period, then it
comes out that the entire program will be realised sonstia‘e in the middle of
the 21st century.

20 «
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Such historical periods will not serve us. As far as the building of new
lines is concerned, they will after all be laid primarily in the for- of
sidings with an exit for the existing overloaded mainlines. 'ihe new rail-
roads will not only fail to relieve the existing network but will actually
complicate its operation even more.

Inhere, however, lies the solution? I suggest that we listen to the opinion
of the distinguished specialist who has studied the problems of transport
for many years, the previously mentioned Professor Ya. Nesterov, a doctor
of economic sciences. In 1976 we published with Nesterov an article en-
titled ”‘rransportnoye Obespecheniye Pyatiletki [Transport Provisions for
the Five-Year Plan]." In all honesty, my personal participation was modest-
but the neticulous professor felt that it involved more than simple proof-
reading and he placed two signatures -under the published article. Tue
article predicted difficulties in the fulfilleent of the 10th Five-Year Plan
because it was based on an unsatisfactory estimate of the transport factor.
Nesterov's prediction proved to be correctly oriented in that it confirmed
an important decree on transport already adopted in the course of the five-
year plan--this key economic sector received additional resources.

0n the threshold of the llth Five-Year Plan I briefed Professor Nesterov on
the HPS plan and expressed my doubts about the effectiveness and practicabil-
ity of the proposed program. ‘Ihe specialist coafirned ny misgivings but in
his opinion the situation is by no means hopeless. Nesterov proposes his
own variant for a solution of the problem. Here is the crux of it, briefly
stated.

Transport can be increased either by running mre trains on the mainline or by
increasing the weight of each train. In the aforementioned article from
PLANOVOYE KHOZYAYSTVO IK'i'P executives B. Rosie and A.'Mitaishvili declare:

"At the present time on the railroads there are limited reserves for increas-
ing the traffic capacities of the railway network through increased weight of
the trains." The HPS is in full agreement with this opinion: the ministry '
has projected for the next five-year plan an increase of only 60 tons in the
average weight of a train.

‘Ihis does not amount to anything. The average train weight is now hardly
more than 2,800 tons. By world standards this indicator is unsatisfactory.
Horeover, even in our country back in 1935 the Kurgsn branch line ran a train
weighing 11,400 tons and successful tests were carri’ed out on other railroads.
Quite recently two locomotives brought a "ten thousander” from Ryazan' to the
capital and in the last few months the moveaent of such trains on the Moscow
Railroad has become acre or less regular. This work was approved by the
party Central Comittee.

And yet this initiative has not obtained the desired proliferation smug us.
The conditions are not suitable for it. A weight of 64,000 tons requires a
station track 1,700 meters long and a weight of 9-10.500 tons a length of

2,550 meters. And the station track length we have adopted is 850 and 1,050
meters. Obviously, the "heavyweight" will not- fit into any one station; its
head and tail occupy the Iain track and consequently no train, be it freight

21 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or passenger, can pass it. The operation of every "heavyweight" requires ex-
ceptional efforts on the part of all the traffic services. Hhen there is
hooking or unhooking of cars on such a train at the stations of dispatch and
arrival they have to use the main track so that the losses of time for
switching operations may eat up all the profit. If a breakdown occurs en
route all the lines will be clogged.

The difficulties can be eliminated if we lengthen the station tracks to 1700
meters to adapt them for the operation of double trains and to 2,550 meters
when we run triple trains. It is in this and in the development of the entire
station operation that we will find the chief transport reserve. Let us con-
sider this again briefly. We will assume that the next five-year plan will,
as the HPS contemplates, encompasses the building of 10,000 kilometers of
line but not in the form of second tracks but rather in the form of lengthen-
ing of the station tracks and augmenting of the outer of them. Then, by
virtue primarily of a sharp increase in the weight of the trains we will be
able to eliminate the excessive load from the yards of the railroads with an
overall extent of 80-100,000 kilometers. In other words, we would evolve a
normal situation on all the currently overloaded mainlines. Not on one-
eighth of them, as would ensue from the MPS variant, but on all of them.

Of course, 10,000 kilometers of lines in the five-year plan constitute an un-
realistic nount both in this and in the other variant. But half of this can
and should be attained. If that is done, the situation will be normalized on
loo-50,000 kilometers of mainlines out of the 80,000 now operating with over-
loads. This means that a fundamental improvement in transport will be
achieved in a maximum of two five-year plans and not over many five-year plans
as would be the case if we depend on the construction of second tracks.

There is a relationship between the overall length of the station tracks and
the traffic capacity of the road. Stemming from this relationship is a strict
mathematical correlation. The more cars applicable per kilomter of station
track the lower the sector speed of the trains on the road and the less the
average run of the locomotives. And, what is more disagreeable, the greater
the saturation of the stations with cars the more marked the reduction of

the speed and run. Thus, in the 10th Five-Year Plan the sector speed showed
a decline of 2.8 kilometers per hour and the run of the locomotives a de-
cline of 60.2 kilometers a day. On the roads with electric traction these
indicators fell off even more drastically. At a certain point of this satur-
ation we see the onset of the so-called paralysis of the road—the stations be-
come clogged, they are unable to either receive or dispatch trains, and ship-
ments cease.

This is by no means hypothetical. The scientific figures are confirmed by ex-
perience. In 1979 a critical level of congestion was reached on a nudier of
roads—16.5 cars per kilometer of station track. The amounts of traffic be-
gan to fall off rapidly there. They succeeded in remedying the situation when
they removed the unnecessary cars from the overloaded roads and brought the
stations' saturation with them to a permissible level. However. we all know
the consequences of the congestion from the summary compiled by the T1330 [Cen-
tﬁl Statistical Administration] USSR: in 1979 shipments on the railroads de-
c ned. .

22 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
what guarantee is there that something like this will not be repeated? In-
deed, from 1970 to 1979 the congestion of the station tracks increased by 35
percent. If this rate is maintained then in 10 years it will reach 110.5

cars per kilometer, that is, the amount which led to the 1979 paralysis of
the overloaded roads. This is an average for the railroad network. But the
congestion is not distributed evenly. The transport bottleneck may arise in
less than 10 years. It is quite plain that if the key lines are clogged, the
others will of course not ship.

Nesterov correctly predicted the transport difficulties in the 10th Five-Year
Plan. I'm afraid that he is also correct now in his current alarming
prognosis. It looks like the stoppages on the railroadS, which made their
first appearance in 1979, will become a chronic thing. We said above that in
the 1980-81 fall-winter season the consuaers obtained far less coal than us-
ual. Where did the fuel go? Part of it was "on wheels": against a norm of
10.8 million tons for train trips, in September of last year the consumption
came to 18.3 million. If you consider that the daily delivery comprises .
about 2 million tons, then it's easy to arrive at the fact that the freight
was en route an average of 9 days instead of 5. In other words, the cars and
locomotives required a year ago for the transport of fuel were already 1.7
times the amount called for by the norm.

Let us compare the average daily loading of cars in the country during the
last years. In January 1980 the number of cars loaded was 5,000 less than
in January 1978, in February the decline reached 7,500, in March 9,600, in
April 5,700, in May 7,300, in June 9,500 and in July 8,900 cars. These are
the dynamics for 2 years. But the negative processes operate so rapidly
that they are now in evidence in shorter periods. For example, in July of
last year (1980) the daily average shipment was 7,700 cars less than in
February. Abundant July proved to be less successful than snow-plagued
February!

Nesterov's idea is clear: discontinue construction of second tracks (except
for sectors with large slopes) and emloy the manpower and means made avail-
able for the lengthening of station tracks and for development of the sta-
tions. This variant is patently not one of the easy ones. In many cases the
stations are located within the confines of a city and there is no room to
expand them. This means that they will have to be dismantled and relocated.
However, there is at any rate no alternative solution.

The strategy suggested by the Ministry of Railways does not prevent these -
troubles and for this reason alone cannot be adopted.

The idea of first-priority development of the station operation received di-
rect and vigorous support at the 26th Party Congress. In the review report
of the Central Conittee L. I. Brezhnev declared with special emphasis: "It
is important to concentrate on the development of the station tracks--they

. provide an economical and rapid mans of increasing the traffic capacity of
the railroads."

23 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11st solution is, I believe, a crucial one for the next five-year plan. But
the matter is of course not limited to this one unsure. 'In accordance with
L. I. Brezhnev's suggestion we have begun the preparation of a long—term com-
prehensive program for the development of transport.. Even before this program
was approved by the CPSU Central Counittee a decree was adopted on "Measures
for improving the work and for the full development of railroad transport in
the 1981-1985 period." The ongoing five-year plan provides--among other
fundamental measures—for a rational distribution of the productive forces,
the introduction of optimum schemes of freight traffic flows and the
elimination of crosshauls. The increase in average distance of freight trans-

port is to be brought to a halt.

me transport problem must be resolved and undoubtedly will be resolved. It
is already evident that we are on the right track in this regard.

COPYRIGHT: "Druzhba narodov", No 11, 1981 g.

7962
650: 1829 /86-A

21o .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BOOK DISCUSSBS LOCMTIVBS. ROLLING STOCK

Moscow wxomuw I WVAOONNXY POINIZW SOSTAV 2W nonoc
SOVBTSKOGO SOYUZA 1966-1975 in Russian 1979 (aimed to press 28 lov 79)
pp 2-4, 212-214

[Annotation and table of contents from book "Loco-nine and Motor Coach
Rolling Stock of the Soviet Union's leilroads, 1966-1975" by Viteliy

Aleksandrovich Bakov, chstel'stvo "Transport”, 8,000 copies, 213 pages.
with tables and illustrations]

[Text] unc 629.42(47457)

‘lhis book describes the desip peculiarities and charac-
teristics of direct and alternating current electric
loco-otives. diesel engines used with electric and
diesel notor coach trains, plus wide-gags railway notor
cars, built by domestic and foreip plants fro. 1966
through 1975. 1111s book can be considered to be a con-
tinustion (part three) of the previously published (in
1955 and 1966) books WWW! 2mm DOIDG
SOVETSKOGO SOYUZA and WHY I mum

PODVIZHNOY SOS‘IAV mam DONG sovmroco SOYUZA.

This book is intended for engineers end technicians
involved in operating, building and iqroving locomo-
tives, as well as for readers interested in the
history of railroad technology.

Table of Contents

From the Author.....ou..n...........................o.o.....o......u

Introductioneoooaeeeoeeeeeeaseaseeseeeeaeeaelaaeeeaeesesseeeeeeseeeseee

Chapter 1. Main Line Alternating Current Blectric Loco-otives

l. VL60k, VL60r Electric locomotives and their Hodifications..........
2. MOk, VL80t, V1.80: Electric Loconotim...........................

3. Nov “chric Incontin‘seeseeeeeseoeeeeeeeeeoess.eaaeeeeeeeesooo
[.0 mos Electric mmttwsaeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeaeseaaeoeeeeeleeeeeeaee

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. VLbO Electric Locomotives..........................................
6. ChSé and Ctht Electric locomotives................................
7o Sr1'3000 Eme‘1unu1 Electric MCOWUNB....u...............o....

Chapter II. Main Line Direct and Direct-Alternating Current Electric
loco-otives

l. VLB Electric Loco-ntives...........................................
2. VLlO and VLll Electric locomotives.................................
3. “12 Electric “cowt1ve8.00COOOOOOUOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOCOOQCOOI.
“I 0‘82 Ehctric ucmtivesi.OOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOQO'O...
S. “52‘ Electric “mutiw’OOOOO0.0IIOCOOOOOOOOO00.00.000.000..00...
6' chszm thtric Locomtive‘OOOOCOOQOOOOOO0.0.0000000COQOOOOOOOOIOOO
7. VLBZ end VLEZn Electric Loconotives................................

8. VLBv-OOl Experi-entsl Electric Locosotive..........................
9. V1221 Experimental Electric Locosotives............................

Chapter 111. Main Line Diesel Engines

10 183 0.198%]. Engines-sees-.ooeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesee-see-eeeeeeeee
2. ZTElOL, ZTE10V, TEPlO and TlPloL Diesel Engines....................
30 “2916821Engines.ono..-..o.u-...o...o.ooo..u..o..u.o.o...o...

be TGIOZk “a T616 018.81 mim‘eeeeeooseeeeoseeoeeeseeeeseeoetsesees
5. 2TB“) Diesel “stages...-seesneeoseeeeeeeeeeeeoeeesseeestoeeeeoeos
60 T3109 018891 Engines-9....eeeeeoesoeeeeeeseoeeoeesectors-eee-eesooe
7o 21.3116D1389].3081088......-..o.....o..o.o.......o.....o.o...oo..o.
80 T3114 me.el “stage...oeeceeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeseeeeooeeseeeeeeo
9- TBPGO M98213081033..o..o..-.oo.o......o...o..ou.o.....o.o.u.ooo

10. “P70 Diesel usineal.0.0.0.000....0...‘........O..........'...O.C.
ll. "Kestrel" Diesel Engine............................................

Chapter IV. Electric Trains

l. ERZ Electric Trains and Their Hodificstions........................

2. ER22 Electric Trains and Their Hodificatiens.......................
3. ER9p Electric Trsins...............................................

6. ER9s Experi-entsl Electric Train...................................
St 53200 High-Speed Electric nanosecooeooesoeeossss-eo00.000.000.00.
6O sru6ualectr1c TramOOCCOOOOI...‘OOOOOOOOOOOO0.000......0'00'0000

Chapter V. Electric Motor Cars for Subways

l. Ye Electric Motor Cars and Their Modifications.....................
2. Islectric but “r300...9.00.00.00.00....OOOOOOOOOOIOOOQ.00......

Chapter VI. Diesel Trains and Railway Motor Cars

19 D1b18821Trains...o.............o......o.oo...u...o..-......o...o
2. DR]. 012821 n81”.eeeeeeeeoeeeeeoeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeoeseeeeeeoone-sees
3v D32918891”01118........o..o......o..o...o........................
‘9 AR]. Railway ”to: “taseeeneeeoeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeessence-eeeoeeeeeseee

26
FORCNﬂﬂCIALIIﬂEONlN

29
32

60
43
49
$1
55
56
59

72
78
80
83
8b
86

89

93
96

98
106
111
116
115
118

122
136

138
141
143
155
50 Emrimul mtbojet “:00saesssesssooe'ooaeases...aeooooaoossesae
60 A318 hilvay W80! c‘r.oeaaseaosaeoeoeosaasseeseseooeasoeossoeeaosa

Chapter VII. Switching and Industrial Diesel Engines With an
Electrical Transmission

1. ml, Tm, ms010.01“Monsanto...aaaaseooaaoeaoaseaasasssas
20 mme.e1 using“.-osooeeoseaoeseoeeoaeaaooaoaaasoooeaoaoooone...
30 m7 01.881 8081818000....sosaoeeeeeaoooooeoooeeeoaooaooaoooea00a.a.
‘0 “1 019.891 “81“..eooeeoooeessaossooooaseosose'oso.oeeooeoasoaasao
50 Gina Diesel 8n81nuoseaesos000assess...00.000000aoosoosossosoeooat

Chapter VIII. Industrial Diesel Engines With a Hydraulic Trans-ission

1. Tm me.°1Businessoott0..0.0..OOOOIOOOOOOOOOIOOOO...00.00.0000...
2. 161423 Diesel Engines...............................................
3. Tm me‘al Engine....0.0.0.00....I'OOOOICOOOOOOOOOO0.00000000IOOIU
6. Tm mammeael mm.00000.00.0000...OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOQOOOOO
5. Tm m...1 ”sinuooaooaosuse.sseaoesoeseeeoeeeaeaoae00.000.000.00
6. Tm Diesel mme......GOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOCIOOO0.00.000.00.000...

Chapter Ix. Switching and Industrial Electric locomotives

l. YeLl Electric Incomtives..........................................

2. Yea Electric “contimaoseaeoseeassooooassoc-00000.0coaaosoaaoaoo
30 m6 Blﬁctric “contiwassaasoooososoosossaasooooeoaoeoeooosaaoeoo

‘0 m‘ Electric ucomtivusoeosoooaooesaoaesooooasoenaae000000000000n
50 ETC-001 nectt‘Otheml mwtiwooaeoeoosaooseooaaeaeasooeoeoesaet

60 EK13 Electric uco’tiw‘soo0.000000000000000...noesaooooassaaasoos
7a 8K1“ Electric ucowtive...sotoeoseeesaseaooosee0000.000.000.000.00

Chapter X. Traction Units

10 YGUO Traction mics-aceeooooooaoa0000000000000...00000000000000...
20 OPE]. Traction “11:80.00...soaeaeasessoaoooeoe'soeosaosooa0.00.00so.
3. P32 Tractﬂﬂl wit...eoceaneooooeeaeoeeeoeoeeaasoososaeaootoasso-soe

6. 0982 Traction unitsoosoaeosI...o.aseseonoasooeoooseseeeeooeaeone...
5. OPE“ Traction micsea-oasoleoaooooesoooassosoon-aooeooaeoaaosoaeea

mmlu’ionoeosoaoaoaoococoon...ones-aeoseseseseaaasesaosoooseaooooeeseo

Bibliography and Recs-ended Reading...................................

Vinny Aleksandrovich Rakov [DWIVY I 10103va
PODVIZHNOY SOSTAV 2mm nosoc SOVE‘ISKOGO SOYUZA
(1966-1975gg.)

Reviewers: 3.". ‘l‘ikh-snsv, A.8. Nsstrakhov, 3.0. Nikiforov,
2.“. Rubchinskiy. v.s. Vladinirov. 2.1!. Dubrovskiy. HA.
Kostyukovakiy, A.I. Karolav, I..I. hashinakiy. Ye. ll.
Rogova. 1.1.. Timfeyev, 3.8. Shvaynahteyn. 0.3. Shibayev.
1.3. Shreder

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1‘6
1‘8

150
155

1'38

161

166
166
169
171
176
175

177

179
180

182
186

185
187

189
191
196

-197

199

200
206
Editor: II .9. 11301.“

Technical Editors: L.V. Vorob'yevo and LI. Shirokogogovo
Proof load“: AJI. “new
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Transport". 1979

988 7
CSO: 1829/ 196
[Caption] Bork hes continued in the USSR on the develop-eat of e lane of
transport driven by e negnetic field. In the photoareph: e pilot node]. of
the Iagnetoplene deeigned at the USSR Reeeerch, Development end Technological
Institute of Electric; locomtive Building in the town of Novocherkeeek.

The designers will continue work on the project end hope to neke e 500 kph
inter-urban ground service eveileble on thie buie.

COPYRIGHT: "Soviet Union". 1982

CSO: 1812/“ m

29
I0! OFFICIAL USE OIL?