FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/10682
23 July 1982

USSR Report.

TRANSPORTATION

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted,

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS FUELICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
TRANS‘ORTATION
(rooo 6/82)

Coutaurs

All
New Rules of Airport Construction Specifications
(MOITBL'IWYB m1 1 PIAVILA: mun PROIZWA 1
Pat“! m; “mm. 1981) .0....'...C....OOOOOCOOOOOOU
HISCIWS

Icon. of Incrcccing Efficiency of Energy 000 in Transportation

Diccucccd
(Holynrchnk, V.8.; IZVBSTIYA AIADBHII NAB! 8888. Jun-Fob 82).

New Type. of chipulctorc Exhibited in Hoccov
(pmmm TRANSPOIT, No 3, 1982) ........................

- I - [III - 088R - 38d

FM nmnu HQ“ ONIV
NEH RULES OF AIRPORT WSWCTIOR SPECIFICATIONS

Hoecov s‘l'ROIm'NYYE NOW I PIAVILA: PRAVILA PROIZVODS‘IVA I ”MI RAM;
ARROW in Rueeian 1981 (eigned to preee 9 Apr 81) inei'de front cover. pp 1-2

[Annotation and table of contente of book "Conetrnction “one end Rnlee; Rulee for
Performing and Accepting Work; Airiielde". "Stroyizdat". 36,000 copiee, 112 pagee]

[Text] Annotation

This booklet vea developed by the State All-Union Scientific Research Institute
of Roads (Soyuzdornii) of the Hinietry of Transportetion Construction with

participation by the Aeroproyekt Planning-Surveying and Scientific Reeearch
Institute of the Miniatry of Civil Aviation.

with the introduction of the present chapter into effect the Butt-action on Per-
[ounce and Acceptance of Airfield Construction Work (8!! 121-73) loeea its
force.

The booklet is intended for engineering-technical ewloyeee of commotion and
planning orgenizetione. The editore of the booklet were engineer V. I. Seregina

(USSR Goeetroy) and candidates of technicel eciencea B. s. Maryehev and A. H.
Sheynin (Soyuzdornii) and B. I. Snirnov (Aeroproyekt).

Table of Contenta Page
1. GenerelPrinciplea............................ 3

2. Preparatoryiork ............................6

3o ﬁrth-Havinguork............................8
Grading Dork. Digging Pita. and Building “when“ . . . . . . . . 10
Barth-Moving work Under Vinter Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Berth-loving Work Under Special Ground Conditions . . . . . . . . . . 17
Earth-Hovingvorkinl’emfroat Ground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

la. lnetalletion of the Water Runoff-Drainage Syaten . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

5. Installation of Artificiel Suhetructnree oi Sand. Sand-Gravel, Grevel
cru‘md “ck. md 81‘: mt‘n‘l‘ O O O O 0 0 O O f O O O O 0 O I I O O Q 0 25

MOFHQALISEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Installation of Substructure. llade of Sand llateriale . . . . . .
Installation of Substructursa of Gravel. Crushed Bock,
andGravel (Crushedlock)-Sandlii'xture . . . . . . . . . . .

Installation of Crushed lock Substructurea by the lodging llathod

Pastures of work in winter and the Spring Muddy Season . . -. . .

6. Installation of Artificial Substructures and Surfaces of Large-Chunk
Sand and Clay Ground Reinforced by Honorgsnic and Organic Binding

mtcrul.eOoeaaoeseesasoaoaeeoeooeeee

Installation of Substructurea Hade of Gromd Reinforced

byllonorganiclindingﬂateriala..............

Installation of Substructures fron Grounds Reinforced by

Organicbindingﬂsterials... ... ..........

Installation of Substructures fron Grounds Reinforced by
Nonorganic Binding Materials at Low Air Teqsraturea

and Heightened Ground Moisture

7. Installation of Substructures from Crushed Bock. Gravel, and Sand

Materials Treated with Nonorganic Binding listerials . . . . . . .
Features of Work at Lou Positive and NegatiVe Teneratures . .

8. Installation of Cast-in-Situ Reinforced and Perro Concrete Surfaces
and Cast-in-Situ Concrete .Iubstructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Preparation and Transportation of Concrete nix

Setting Up Copying String and Rail Por- .
Reinforcenentﬂork. . . . . ., . . . . .
Laying theConcretelIix . . . . . . . . .
CareoftheConcrete....... .....
Installation of Deformation Sea-a

Reinforcing Existing Surfaces with Cement-Concrete

Concrete work in Uinter

9. Installing Cast-in—Situ Prestressed (Piano Hire) Surfaces

10. Installation of Prefabricated Preatreseed Reinforced Concrete

00..

eeeeseee

eeaeeoossooaa

o
O
o
e
e
a
e

aeoeaao

Surfaces

oooeesa

aoeeeeOea

TransportingandStoringSlabs..................
lnstallationofSurfacea.....................

ll. Installation of Surfaces Hsde of Asphalt-Concrete Mixtures and Artificial
Substructures of Tar-Concrete Mixtures and Sorted Crushed Rock Treated

vithBirunenalackCrushedlock)...................

Proparation of Asphalt-Concrete and Tar-Concrete Mixtures

and Black Crushed Bock

Cruehedllock.................

eeoeoooeDCooeoOOOOO

Laying Asphalt-Concrete and Tar-Concrete mixtures and Mack

oaoovoee

lzeuorkrohc‘blt.h.sodcowreaeeaeeeeooeeaeeeeeet

LUSEONLY

Page

25
26

27
29

32

39

60
52

lo!
69
‘9
59
66
65
68
73

76
75

79
81

96
MWLIJSEONLY

1"”
l3. AccoptnncnofConplctchobn...................... 98

Appendix. lhthodology for Sclncttna the Cognition of concrntn
by‘ronnueStrmthUhnnlcnt ............... ... 107

.mPYRIGll‘l': Stroyltdnt. 1981

11.176
680: 1829/2137

MWMONLY
mmnmonu

HISCILIAIBGB

M 0? IN!” MICImY 0' MY USS Ill MW?!” DISCUSSSD

lineal 12mm MIMI! “K SS” in Mum lo 1, Jan-Pol? 82. pp 77-05

[Article by lblyerchuk. V.S.: "Hey. to Increaae the Bfficiency of Energy the.
in franaport"]

[Text] the preateet importance ie currently ettached to the problem of the
development of the fuel and enerpy couple: end no energy coneervetion policy.
In the eolution of theee problena a greet role is played by traneport. vhich
ie one of the buic canon-ere of the energy reeourcee, ueing ae it doee
about 12 percent of the total wt of theee reeourcea expended in the
national econo-y.

The proportion of; the expenditure of fuel and energy by the trnneport naana
is in our comtry aonevhet lower than it ie in the other induetrially de-
veloped countries. For eagle. in the United Statee the expendituree cou-
priee l7 percent of the energ reeonircee, in trance 16.7 percent and in
England l5 percent. this in due to the higher level of the use in theae
countriee' transport eyete-a of the noet energy-inteneive notor vehicle ehip-
eente, which handle 80 percent of the total value of work in the United
Staten, about 70 percent in trance end ehout 50 percent in Bnplend.

In the 1960’e, with etaen traction, the ratio of treneport to the enount of
conemption of the country'e energy reeourcee mounted to more than 20
percent.

With a nearly 50 percent reduction in the proportion of traneport in the
belance eheet of the notional econon the 2.7 increaee in turnover of goode
of ell typee vee pri-rily the reeult of the renodelin; of the traneport
neane on the beeie of repleceunt oi the reciproceting etean engine of the

traction tacilitiee and pater inetallationa with internal cduation end
electric enginee.

In the put the conetruction of the country'e fuel end energy balance eheet
was dependent chiefly on the eveilebility of reeourcee and the level of de-
velop-eat of the technology, the intereete of vhich have aleo been Oubordin’
eted to the energy policy. At preeent. and thin will he even lore true in

the future. the reeourcee, trenda and atratexiee relevant to the develop-eat
of the fuel and energy base in nany respects deternine the basic directions
of the technical progress of the country's productive forces.

It is this letter circumstance, along with the high level of donestic nchine
building, which has enabled us to effect a technical restructuring of
transport, including the supplying of it with up-to-date equipent and the
provision of the appropriate energy resources.

One of the basic trends in world economics in the last 10 years hes been the
widespread use of oil and gas in the fuel balance sheets of ell the countries
of the world and the gradual supplanting of solid fuels.

This trend also operated in the economics of the Soviet Union, which were
characterised by even higher rates than those in world economics. Thus, in
the period fro. 1950 to 1975 the world's oil extraction increased five-fold
but the USSI's increased 15-fold. extraction of gas increased 6.7-fold and
“Jo-fold respectively, and extraction of mineral coal increased 1.3-fold
in the world and 2.4-fold in 1883.

The facts of the so-called energy crisis encerbated in the countries of
the Heat the problem of cutting down the expenditure of liquid organic fuel.

Table l .

Expenditure of Conventional tusl,
Type of Transport kg/looo ton/Ina

1960 1965 1970 1975 1980

Railroad 35.610 18.0 11.65 8.94 8.50
National Boone-y Truck Transport 237.0 263 .7 202.3 173.1 163 .8
Ihrititso 18.35 12.30 11.10 11.310 10.0
River 29.60 18.90 15.40 12.70 11.3

Despite the fact that the USSR is the world's only industrially developed
country fully provided with fuel resources, this problen is also a very pres-
sing one for Soviet econonics. Even at present the rates of increase of the
felt needs of all the types of transport for crude oil-converted oil fuel are
approximtely double the rates of increase of extraction of this product.

Consequently, whereas in 1975 transport consumed about one-third of the ex-
tracted oil (crude oil-converted), if the evolved norms for fuel utilisation
are retained, then the transport consmption proportion will reach loO percent
and even nore, resulting in a considerably strained situation in respect to
the balance sheet of the country and transport.

Thus, a first-priority task in the future will be the organisation of energy

use in transport. The role of this activity will grow and will consist of
all possible reduction of the expenditure of liquid petroleu- fuels.

mmmonu
POI m1. USE ONLY

However, the urgency of the letter of econouical expenditure of fuel in-
volves not only econouy in the use of the varioue types of fuel. The in-
portance of this problem is determined by the ever increasing sceles of the
mnemption of energy resourcee. This engenders e stete problem with re-
spect to the conservation of these resources, a problee which is cleerly
indicated in the "Beeic Directions of the Country's Boone-1c end Sociel
Development in the 1981-185 hriod and in the bong-Tern up to 1990.”

In hie speech et the Novoﬁer (1979) plenu of the CPSU Central Co-ittee
Comrade l... 1. Brezhnev pointed out that the difficulties in the supplying
of fuel stee prinrily from the sharp increase in the expenditure of the
fuel. Thie process, the reeult of the rapid growth of the voices of pro-
duction, ney et the one tine be eseocieted with the increase in the rele-

tive (per unit of output) energy consuption.

The technical reetructuring of transport, which deter-ined the trensition
to more powerful, progressive end econoeical power installations eeploying
liquid fuel and electric energy, enabled ue et the one tile to effect e
coneidereble reduction in the energy intensivenees of the transport output
(See ‘l‘eble 1).

In 20 yeere--froe 1960 to 1980--the relative expenditures of energy resources
for shipping work fell off by 86.2 percent in reilroed transport work,
including 76 percent reeulting from technical progress. In neriti- trans-
port of e totel reduction of 65.5 percent 62.5 percent wee obtained by re-
nodeling of the power inetelletione; in river trensport the figures were
61.8 and “.5 percent respectively; in notor vehicle trensport, with e

totel reduction of 38.5 percent, neerly 10 percent resulted fro- the intro-
duction of diesel engines.

A sharp increase in the cepacity of the energy instelletions of trensport
hae enebled no to inrove ell the indicetors and to step up the economicel
qualities of the transport process es a whole.

The prinery develop-ant was e substantial increese in the freight capacity

of the rolling stock of railroed, notor vehicle, eeritiee and river transport.
i.e.. e buildup of one of the beeic fectors which determine the efficiency.
the fuel conservation potentiel, end the lowering of the cost of the trans-

port procesa .

mmmouur
mWLMONLY

Table 2
Change in Oonsuption
Type of Transport bane of lnergy Resources. 1
1960-1970 l910-1980

Electric locomotives -lb.2 - 6.3
Diesel locomotives - 0.2 + 8.0
Motor ships - 3 - 2.8
Stea- vessels -53.7 ~3l.5
Freight trucks -16.5 46.9

There has also been a fundamental inprovemnt in other indicators for the
transport process. The engineering and routing speed of novenent has been
increased; a reduction has been ends in the layovers of trains and ships for
the coaplex and labor-intensive servicing by the ates- power stations; there
has been an increase in the extent of utilization of the rolling stock and
tonnage of the fleet; etc.

Successful work has been done to reduce the resistance in the aoveaent of
the rolling stock in all tte types of transport.

In railroad transport this was achieved by converting from the use of gliding
hearings to ro1ler hearings for the car fleet. This has enabled us to effect
a 7-10 percent reduction in the resistance in the covenant (the amber of
cars with these hearings has already reached 50 percent of their total mn-

her), and also by increasing the stability of the track roedbed through con-
version to reinforced concrete ties and seaaless track, etc.

In notor vehicle transport the average resistance in novenent was reduced by

virtue of an increase from 2l.6 to 55 percent in the proportion of roads
with a firm covering.

In water transport further iaproveaent of the hydrodynanic qualities of the
ships has continued along with the introduction of deflectors and special
noerles for the screw propellers. In river transport there has been a re-
duction of the resistance in meant and, in addition, a deepening of the
waterway and the use of push“ instead of towed units.

hproveeent of the equipaent and organization pertaining to the loading and
unloading operations along with the introduction of container carriers and
ships with the horizontal means of carrying out freight operations have an-

abled us to effect additional econoniaing of fuel in cutting down the lay-
over of ships with operating auxiliary mechanism.

"Will“?
FOR OFFICIAL I58 ONLY

Analysis of the consuption of fuel and electric energy, the prospects for
further technical progress, and the requirements for operation of operation
of all the types of transportuthis analysis has shown that the 1975 come'
pletion of the mass renovation of the electric power stations of transport
exhausted the reserves for the radical increase of energy conservation

in the transport process, an increase which took place in the 1960-1970

period .

Further reduction of the consuption of fuel is primily the result of im-
prmnt and noderniaation of the now new transport means which operate on
a new power basis; also a factor in this connection is movement of the in-
dicators for the use of these transport facilities. And the rates of reduc-
tion of this fuel consmption have been appreciably less, a fact which is
supported by the Table 2 data which describes the change in expenditures of
energy resources according to the types of energy-ensuing transport means
(i.e., not counting the change in the structure of the fleet of traction
units).

when we examine the various consolidated directions for further reduction of
the relative expenditures of energy resources. we can point to the following
changes in the conditions of operation of the transport equipment.

There will be some diminution of the increase of the rates of further reduc-
tion of the relative expenditures of electric energy and fuel as a result of
increasing the weight of the trains and the freight capacity of the rolling
stock. For example, in railroad transport the increase is expected to be
only 9-10 percent as compared to 30 percent in the last five-year period; in
naritiu transport instead of a two-fold increase in the average freight
capacity of ships, as happened in the 1960-1915 period, this increase is
expected to be only 30 percent; in motor vehicle transport the increase in
the freight capacity of the truck has been to all intents and purposes quite
negligible.

Remaining substantial will be the insect of organizational and technical
factors, i.e., improvement of the conditions of operation as a whole, measures
for reducing the resistance in movement, the most significant of which is
apparently the construction of hard-surface motor roads, the use of more ef-
ficient designs of truck tires, further equipping of the railroad care with
roller bearings, the change to eight-axle cars which have 12-15 percent less
resistance than the four-axle cars currently in use, further remodeling of

the railroad track, etc.

Considrmble effect can be obtained froa the measures for further increase of
the propulsion coefficient of the ships, increasing the proportion of the work
done by ships which are not self-propelled, etc.

The nest important aspect of the work for stepping up the level of the energy
utilization is iqrovement of the existing power stations and the search for

new, more econalical ones as well as inroveaent of the propelling and energy
coaplms as a whole.

MWMONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following principal directions will apparently be the basis for further
modernization of the power stations for the transport means and rolling

stock; this modernization will provide for curtailment of the energy capacity
in use. The directions are the following:

The developent of new high-powered traction facilities and power stations
which make for more economical fuel utilization processes based on four-cycle
diesels of progressive designs with iaproved pressure feed characteristics
and combustion chambers of the appropriate designs to provide for pipe con-
veyance of the charge and improvement of its ignition and combustion;

Increase of the degree of compression in carburetor motors, the use of elec-
tronics for control of the fuel inspection systems (Tables 1 and 2), in:.rease
of the power and duration of the electric sparkplugs (Table 3), and the jet
ignition process in motor vehicles which use gasoline fuels;

Broadening of the scope of use of diesels in motor vehicle transport by re-
ducing the lower level of the freight capacity of motor vehicles from the
current six tons to 2.6 tons and also by installing diesels on all buses of
medium and higher passenger capacity and on truck tractors in the process
of being built;

Reduction of the power level of the auxiliary machines of the transport power
system; this power is considerably greater than on "8138003 foreign models;
automation of the regulation of their operating schedules in accordance with
the heat status of the chief machines and the traction motors and trans--
missions and in particular automatic regulation and switching off of the

motor vehicle ventilators with provision for high-temperature cooling of the
motors;

Improvement of the transmissions and motor complexes, the use of specialized
nozzles for ship propellers, and the use of propellers of variable pitch,
coaxial propellers and other systems which produce an increase in the
propulsion coefficient of the ships (Table to);

Use of rolling stock which provides for the consolidation of items shipped by
mans of increased freight capacity of the transport means; through increase
of the proportion of rolling stock of higher freight capacity, particularly
motor vehicles of large freight capacity, eight-axle railroad cars, large-
tonnage ships, etc.; the preparation of measures for widespread introduction

of advanced, experience in the use of motor vehicle trains and pushed units
in water transport;

The use of such scientifically substantiated methods of control of the trans-

port process es will insure operation of the traction facilities with maxi-n
utilization of their capacities and traction forces, minimu- layovers while
in operating condition and runs without load, and rationalization of all the
auxiliary operations in the form of all possible consolidation of them.

summon!“
1960
35.640
18.35
29.60

237.0
(01.25
7.06

Commotion of (bmnttml P1101
(kg/1000 ton-h)

1910 1900
11.43 0.3
11.32 10.3
15.00 11.1.
202.30 11.4.1
51.90 66.5
5.01 5.5

Proportion of Total Energy Conan-puma, 1

1960
63.6
3.9
3.3

1965 1970 1915 1980
(03.2 31.2 25.9 21.3
6.6 6.6 5.5 10.5
3.5 3.0 2.3 1.9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

Table 5
Change in Expenditure
of Conventional Fuel,
Reason for Change in millions of tons, in
Expenditures of Energy Resources the 1969-1980 Period
In all 697 .6
including change resulting from increase in
the volume of work +260.5
Change in the structure of the transport 61.0
Technical progress _ -180
Organizational and technical measures - 64.0

Table 3 presents the actual relative expenditures.“ conventional fuel in
shipments carried out by the various types of transport delineated to allow
for the implementation of the relevant measures.

The change in the energy consumption of the shipments by the various types of
transport and in the structure of the shipments leads to a curtailment of
their shared participation in the overall energy consmption of the transport
system. Evidence of this is furnished by Table 4, which sets forth the

data on the participation of each the types of transport in the overall
energy consumption, counting the expenditures for auxiliary needs.

The change in the structure of the work is very strikingly reflected in the
overall consumption in the energy resources of the transport system as a

whole for the accomplishment of the shipments. Analysis proves that with a
3.5 increase in the shipment by all the types of mainline land transport in
the period from 1960 to l980, the overall consumption of energy resources

converted for the expenditure of conventional fuel went from 101.3 to 198.9
million tons, i.e., only 1.96-fold. The structure of the change is deline-
ated in Table 5. Thus, were it not for the fact that the transport work has
been changed with an increase of the relative weight of the most energy-

intensive types, then technical remodeling and implementation of the organ-
izational and technical measures for increasing the efficiency of the energy
utilization would compensate for virtually 85 percent of the increase of ex-
penditure of conventional fuel stoning from the increased amount of trans-

port.

However, the continued surpassing increase of the most energy-intensive types
of transport, particularly motor vehicle and air’and the increase in the
volume of work of gas line transport, will in the future generate energy eon-
sumpr. ion growth of such dimensions that it vill be impossible to cover than

by means of the predicted measures for improving the efficiency of the energy
consumption.

ll
summon“
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, when there is the anount of grouth of the transport systen's consu-ption
of energy resources by virtue of increased volme of work as aseu-ed on the
basis of the retrospective data, when this ensues there takes place a
si-ultaneous increase in the expenditure of these resources as a result of
the continuous change in the structure of the shipments in transport, a
change of 36-30 percent with a possible reduction of the consi-ption of fuel
and electric power by virtue of a 30-35 percent increase in the efficiency
of the use of these resources. ‘l'hus, even all possible increase of the ef-
ficiency of the energ utilisation cannot cowensste for the negative conse-
quences of the redistribution of the shipments enong the types of transport
we are examining.

l'his circmtsnce generates the third strategic direction of the work for re-
duction of the transport systea's energy intensiveness--ali possible ration-
alization of the structure of the shipents, i.e., achieve-ant of the opti-
use distribution of the work among the types of transport and the transport
neans with due consideration for the efficiency in the use of the energy re-
sources and their constnption of the types of fuel in short supply.

The following can be cited under the measures which pro-eta the solution of
the overall problen of reduction of the energy intensiveness of the transport
leans:

1. Concentration of the neterial and financial resources to provide for a
reduction of the expenditure of fuel particularly by notor vehicle transport
which is characterized as having the greatest energy int-:nsiveness among all
the types of land transport. In this regard the nest effective neasures are
the most widespread introduction of diesels , nodernisation of the notors.
inproveaent'of the structure of the transport fleets and increase of the
extent of participation of public transport.

2. A substantial increase of the fuel economy of air transport by the intro-
duction of wide-fuselage aircraft of large passenger capacity and the use of
actors with a high degree of dual contour capacity.

3. 0n parallel routes which have a length up to 1000 kilometers and expend
about ?0 kilogram of conventional fuel per 1,000 passenger-kiloneters partial
replacenent of air transport with high-speed railroad transport (counsnnption
l-’o kilogram of conventional fuel); the establisheent of optimum favorable
conditions of operation and coafort for public urban transport for the purpose
of cutting down the travel of personal motor vehicles within the citaes (pub-

lic transport consumes 112 to 2/5 of the fuel per passenger in conparison with
personal notor vehicles).

6. Swipe-mien of the electrification of the traction facilities of all the
types of transport; this will enable us not only to replace the scarce oil

f-nel but also to economize on the primry energy resources through a reduction
of expenditures for fuel for the production of a kilowatt-hour .of electric
energy. 1'1e electrification work can take on the following directions:

12
. MY
ROI OﬂlCIAI. [BE ONLY

The development of electrified traction in railroad transport to replace a
part of the diesel locomotive traction and the development of electrified
switching traction facilities. The figures shou that further electrifica-
tion of the railroads will enable us in the very near future to save over
and above the l980 level 2.2 million tons of conventional fuel and to re-
duce the expenditure of energy resources converted from conventional fuel

by nearly one million tons and more and in the distant future to achieve an
even greater saving of energy resources.as a whole (counting the necessary
outlay: of electric energy);

The use of clectromobiles; at present in our country and especially abroad
(United States, England, France, Japan and P116) they have developed research,
planning and design, and experimental vork for the establishment of efficient
chemical current sources which possess a high energy capacity and do not re-
quire the use of scarce materials. The future current sources of this type
he lude sodium sulfur sources and sources similar to them, which possess a
relative energy capacity of 100-150 watt hours per kilogram, and a service
life of 1000-1300 cycles and provide an electromobile current reserve of 200
kilometers and more instead of the 60-105 kilometers for electromobiles based
on lead and ferrous-nickel chemical current sources (energy capacity of 20-26
and 30.35 watt-hours per kilogram respectively) (Bibliography Items 5 and 6).

We are now already providing for the development and manufacture of electro-
mobiles and electrobuses and we are also providing for the organization of

experimental operation of them in Moscow (for the time being on the basis of
lead and ferrous-nickel current sources).

The widespread introduction of efficient current sources and special electro-
mobile designs will enable us in the near future to save about 3 million tons
and more of gasoline and in the distant future up to 17 million tons;

For the traffic capacity of the street network and the conditions of ongoing
construction the replacement of bus transport with trolley bus and high-speed

tramway where this is possible will enable us to save about 1.5-2.0!) million
tons of gasoline;

Reduction of the expenditure of petroleum fuels can be achieved in the more
distant future by the use of substitutes (Bibliography Item 7), as for ex-
ample synthetic liquid fuels obtained on the basis of coal, lignite and
combustible shales, natural and side-recovery gases in condensed and lique-
fied form, alcohols, hydrogen, etc. It is believed that improvement of cer-
tain methods of gasification of coal, lignite and combustible shales with

subsequent obtaining of methanol and motor fuel based on it will enable us to
begin using this group of substitutes in 1990.

Liquid fuel derived from coal products can be obtained by the hydrogenation
methods employed rather extensively in prevar Germany and now in Arabia. In
the United States they expect by 1985 to bring the production of liquid fuel

derived from combustible shales to 2 million tons and by the year 2,000 to so
million tons a year.

13
”IMHO“?
MWLMONLY

A-ong the direct gesoline substitutes we can eleo list nethenol, the produc-
tion of which hes reeched lo willion tons e yeer in the United States. The
countries of western Europe predict thet they will bring the voluae of pro.
duction of nethenol to 110 willion tons by the 1985-1990 period. Nethenol
will epperently be used in e eixture with gasoline.

Dork is now in progress for the use in internel cowbustion engines of hydro-
gen both in liquid fore end in the for: of netel hydrides. however, pretti-
cel extensive use of hydrogen es s fuel will only be possible on the besis
of the develop-out of etoeic energy.

The problem of conserving energy resources in trensport is e letter of greet
netionel econowic ieportence end for its solution requires the developsnt of
funde-entel scientific, theoreticel end experimentel-design work in the fol-
lowing directions: The working out of theoreticsl principles for ieprove-ent
of the therwodyneeic cycle end the designing of treditionel diesel end stee-
turbine power instelletions for the purpose of stepping up the LED. [ef-
ficiency factor], including this fector in the pertiel loed regi-es; '

The development of highly economicel nonstetionery turbine units using very
sturdy heet-resistent neteriels for the venes of the stetore end rotors of
the gas turbines. neterisls geered for continuous operetion in a working ele-
sent teepereture of 1100-1200 degrees Celsius;

The develop-ent of highly economicel trensport installations (power) on nu-
cleer fuel with e cepecity of 10-60 negewetts;

Investigetion of the extent of ieprovenent of the process of coubustion of
the fuel of the internel conbustion trensport engines end pteperetion of the

appropriete usesures (leyer ignition, jet combustion, intensificetion of the
electric discharge ignition, etc.),

Developeent for the electrowobiles of new electrochemicel current sources

with e high electricel cepecity and'e long service life, current sources
based on the use of Inter-isle not in short supply;

For extensive applicetion in the trensport facilities the developuent of fuel
ele-ents besed on the use of et-ospheric oxygen;

lnvestigetion of the possibilities of using new types of fuel in internel
conbustion transport engines (hydrogen in the for. of en eddition to the
gasoline end eir working nixture end in pure form, nethenol, etc). Also, the
use of netel hydrides end their conbinetions for the trensportetion of hydro-

gen on noerd the eotor vehicles when using the best of the eotor exhaust geses
for extrecting hydrogen;

The developent of stebilizers for the coqounds of the mixtures of petroleu-
fuels end nethenol end other possible types of fuels;

Prediction of the optim- fuel end energy provision for trensport in co-bin-
etion with the over-ell develop-eat of the country's fuel end energy coupler;
FOI‘OFWKJALIﬂﬂEONLN

Study of the negative effects of each of the types of transport on the an-
vironnent and the working out of measures which require the accomplishment
oi fundamental research;

Theoretical research to determine the movement resistance of the rolling
stock, including noncontact transport (on air cushion and on magnetic sus-
pension).

Conclusions: 1. Transport is a large consumer of the energy resources of
the national economy and it is therefore a problem of state importance to
pursue a well-planned energy-saving policy in this transport.

2. Analysis of the basic trends in the development of transport and its
power installations as well as its national economic requirements in respect
to rationalization of the use of the fuel and energy resources suggests that
the most important tasks are those pertaining to a substantial reduction of
the relative expenditure of fuel by each of the types of transport with a
maximum economy of liquid organic fuel, particularly by replacing it with
other energy carriers and by the fullest possible optimization of the struc-

ture of the shipments so as to take advantage of the energy capacity of each
type of transport.

3. Further increase of the efficiency of the use of energy resources requires
the widespread introduction of diesels in motor transport, increase of the ex-
tent of dual-contour gas turbine aircraft engines, electrification of the
transport means, the supplying of more economical units, improvement of the

auxiliary installations, and modernization of the power stations and the
propelling systems.

More economical use of fuel and electric energy will be achieved as a result
of further measures for reduction of the movement resistance of the rolling
stock of all the types of transport by improvement of its aerodynamic and
hydrodynamic qualities and by improvement of the road conditions, particular-
ly expansion of the scale of motor road construction, increased use of the

stability of the railroad track, improvement of the waterway of the water
msinlines, etc.

5. Economizing on energy resources is also the result of improvement of the
organization of the transport process in the direction of the fullest possible
use of the traction means and power stations in accordance with their capacity
and time of operation (increase of the carrying capacity of the rolling

stock, the weight of the trains and motor vehicle trains, the barge units,

and the coefficients for full use of the freight capacity, the time of pro-
ductiVe transport work, etc.).

The problem of increasing the efficiency in the use of the fuel and energy
resources in transport is a matter of extreme urgency for the national econ-
any, is quite urgent in a scientific-technical regard, requires further funda-
mental scientific and planning design exploration and for a rapid and effec-

tive solution deserves to be included among the most important national econ-
omic problems.

15
IOI10IFKJAI.USIIIULY
2.

7.

nos OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

BIBLIWBAPHY

Methin.1. 6. "he Development of Systene for feeding Gesoline Motors."
In the book: "Investipstions in the Field of lb'to: Vehicle Design."
Mew: ”BROWN!“ 1970, 73 pp.

Myko, D. N. ”Anelysis of Trends in the Develop-sot of Light Fuel Jet
Appentus"--Horks of the mun [Central Scientific Reseerch Institute
of Fuel Apperetus], 1979. No 74. 103 pp.

[in Rnglish] Givens, 1.. ”Engineering highlights of the 1981 Auto-
mbiles"-'AWWI'IVB ENGINEERING, 1980, Vol 88, he 10, p 51.

beach“. 8. I. “The runsport Ships of the Future." Leninsred:
summm, 1976. 1975 pp.

Steyq. rev. 0. A. 'Mectrombiles" in the book: "l'he Results of Science
end technology. Motor Vehicle Design." Vol 1, Moscow: Isdetel'stvo
VIN!!! [All- -Union Institute of Scientific end technicel tutor-scion],
1973. 262 pp.

Steyetoye, 0. A. "Blectrouobiles" in the book "the Results of Science

end technology “etc: Vehicle Design," Vol 2. Roscoe: Isdstel'stvo
VINI'II, 1976. 160 pp.

Stal', V. F. and Arsenov, Ye. 'Ys. "the Prospects in Fuel for Motor
Vehicles." Moscow: IMHSPORI, 1979. 150 pp.

Received in the Bditoriel Office.
3 lurch 1981

Moscow

COPYRIGHI‘: Izdetel'stvo "New", "Izvestiye All 888R. Bngergetihe i
treneport”, 1982.

7962
cso:

182 9/ 178

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MISCELLANEOUS

NEH TYPES OF WIPUIA‘I'ORS WIKITBD 11! WSW
ﬂoacow Pmsm TRANSPORT in Rustin No 3, 1982 pp 25-26
[Art ic 1e: "Boiat ing-Tranaport Hanipulatore"]

[Text] Several modela of new nachinea that will be of
interest to epecialinta in induatrial tranaportation
have been displayed in the permanent exhibit "Automatic
Manipulator" in the "Machine Building" pavilion of the
Exhibition of the Achievementa of the USSR Economy.

The Kompleka Science-Production Aaeociation (60085, Volgograd, Proepekt V. I.
Lenina, 98) is exhibiting the KSh63 manipulator with automatic load Balancing.
This manipulator has a load capacity of 63 kilograma and ie deeigned for inter-
operation. assembly, loading-unloading, and warehouee joba. lte operating zone
is 1,600 nillinetere high with a radiua of 300-3.000 millimetera. The force
of diaplacenent of parts on the vertical in 50 newton and 20 newton on the
horizontal. Air preaaure in the pneumatic eyaten ie at leaat 0.35 megapaecal.
The weight of the unit proper ia 326 kilograms and its dimensions are

2.655 x 600 x 3,006 aillimetere.

The sane aeeociation also exhibited the einilar KSh-louu manipulator with a
load capacity of 125 kilograms. With the name eervice zone the force required
to move a part with this manipulation ia loo newton on the horizontal and 60
newton on the vertical. The air preaaure fed iron the compreaaor to the manipu-
lator is 0.55-0.63 megapaacal. The nanipulator itself weighs 665 kilogram

and its dimensions are 3,870 x 2.735 x 720 millimetere.

Fully turning aeriea HP 100 balanced-type loading nanipulatore with electro-
mechanin action are ale~ diaplayed at the exhibit (addreaa to requeet documen-
tntion la 107005, Volna Cectral Scientific Technical Inatitute). These manipu-
lntora have a load capacity of 100 kilograms in detachable grapplee.

The HP 100-1 loading manipulator can be mounted on the floor. on a calm. or
overhanging arm attached to the wall or ceiling of a production area. Ite
eervice zone is 1,500 millimeters on the vertical and horizontal. with a rate

of vertical dieplecement of 200 millimetere per eecond. The area of the loading
trolley ia 1.260 x 1,050 millimetere. and the weight of the unit without the
trolley ie 200 kilograma. The annual econonic impact from introduction of one
nanipulator ia 2,500 rubles.

l7
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The HP 100-8 overhead loading nanipulator has a rate of vertical displace-eat
or the detachable grappling element of 250 sillinetere a second and a rate of
horizontal. longitudinal displecenent along a suspended been of $00 silliseters
a second. The weight of the nobile part of the unipulstor proper is 600 kilo-
grass. Its dinensions are 8,000 I! 6,000 X 5.100 silli-eters. The annual eco-
noeic inset fro- its introduction is 6.000 rubles.

The overhead transportation systea vith a manipulator based on a sonoreil is es-
pec tally interesting (see photograph [not reproduced] on the inside cover of
this issue of the journal). It sas developed by one of the ﬁnance scientific-
research institutes. The system can operate as a «about. of a shop auto-eted
control systes for industrial processes or as a self-contained actuated trans-
portation-etorage systes. This consists of e nnipulator and a set of devices
that carry out centralized control of sovensnt. The manipulator has a load
capacity of 23 kilogram and a precision of positioning of 210 ailliasters.

The eaxinus umber of control Isnipnlators on an overhead track is 32 with a
sexist. umber of service points of 512. The diaensions of the senipnlator are
5.000 I ‘.500 x 2.700 silliaeters. The elenents of the overhead line are nde
of lightened tubular shaped netal pieces. The annual econosic ispact tron in-
troduction of the senipuletor is 115,000 rubles.

COPYRIGHT: Iulatel'stvo "Transport", "Proayshlennyy transport". 1982

ll . 176
680: 1829/262 3ND

18
POI OFFICIALIBIONLY