FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10026
5 October 1981

USSR Report

TRANSPORTATION

[FOUO 6/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[J are.supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
TRANSPORTATION
(Pouo 6/81)

CONTENTS

AIR

French Press: The New Soviet Helicopter Nit-26
(AIR & COSMOS, 13 Jun 81)..ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo

MISCELLANEOUS

Pilot Pneumatic Container Transport System Outlined
(A. H. Aleksandrov, Yu. A. Tsilbler; PROHYSHLENNYY TRANSPORT,

Mar 81)oooooooo¢tooooo09.000000.0:0003000cocoooooooooooooo:00.

- a - [III - USSR - 38d Ft

FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AIR

FRENCH PRESS: THE NEW SOVIET HELICOPTER “1-26
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French No 864. 13 Jun 81 pp 67-68
[Article by J.H.: "The Hi-26, New Giant Soviet Helicopter"]

[Text] AIR ET COSMOS was able to examine in detail the Mi—26, a new giant Soviet
helicopter, one of the great new productions in this 36th Exhibition.

In 1975, presence of the huge twin-engineHi-IZumde a sensation, both because of the
impressive dimensions of the aircraft and because of itsweight,its payload and its
installed power (26,000 horsepower).

But that mastodon did not go beyond the prototype stage, in spite of the possibili-
ties that it offered for transporting heavy unit loads. That double “1-6 must not
have been easy to operate, especially in a turbulent atmosphere. After its presen-
tation at Le Bourget, no more mention was heard of it. The Hi-6 (presented for the
first time at Le Bourget in 1967) and its derivatives--Mi-10 and Hi-lOK, on the
other hand--were mass produced (700 units, according toﬁreliable sources). But a ma-
chine that is now ancient is involved and the appearance of a successor is normal,
but a definitely heavier and more powerful successor, a bit more modern also, al-
though its inspection, certainly too rapid, was at times somewhat deceptive from the
point of view of modernness and an examination of performance.

Composite Materials on the Main Blades

The rotor has eight traditionally constructed blades. Each blade consists of a
metal spar to which segmented boxes made of composite materials are attached (this
is something new. at least on a Soviet helicopter). These blades are completely
connected on a traditional, but compact. rotor head. having. nevertheless, the good
feature of taking eight blades. The main transmission box is power cooled by a
front blower clearly visible on the photographs.

The two turboshaft engines are Soloviev Dhl36, directly derived from the D—36 dual-
flow turboshaft engine, which equips the Yak-42 tri-jet and the Antonev-72 twin-jet.
The 0-36 is a three-shaft engine, as is the 0—136 also, but with a different arch-
tecture. The front blower and its low-pressure turbine are gone to the benefit of
a free turbine responsible for recovering power.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11,A00 Horsepower per Engine

At maximum takeoff speed (8,300 rpm), power increases to 11,400 horsepower in a
standard atmosphere (2 = 0, t - 15°C). At ISA [International Standard Atmosphere]
+ 15, that is to say at 30°C, it is still 11,000 horsepower.

The corresponding fuel consumption is slightly less than 200 gramsper'horsepower/hour
or 220 grams at half-power.

0n the Mi-26, the two D-126 engines, placed forward of the BTP [main rotor shaft],
are equipped with deicing ring~shaped intakes preventing snow from entering. In
fact, the Mi-26 is presented as an all-weather machine.

The anticouple rotor (7.61 meters in diameter!) is also deiced. Its horizontal tail
structure has variable pitch.

The tricycle landing gear has a moderate apparent travel.

Access to the fuselage is had both by means of side doors (front and rear) and by
means of a a rear axial ramp, making it possible to load large vehicles. tanks,
trucks, and so on). The dimensions of the cabin, impressive because of its
height, are quite larger than for the Mi-6 (2.50 X 2.65 X 12 meters, or 80 cubic
meters), but they were not given. A very large hatch is provided in the floor

in the center, under the BTP, making it possible to pass the sling (in case of a
load hung under the fuselage) and the cable of a rescue winch.

In addition, two electric winches slide on inside rails. They facilitate handling
loads in the cabin. The control rods for the piloting system and pitch, as well as
the transmission shaft to the anticouple rotor. run on the ceiling.

Forward, a ladder and a hatchway make easy access possible, on the outside, to the
engines.

Like On a Ship

Because of its dimensions and its large almost vertical windows, the flight deck
makes one think of the bridge of a ship. Provision is made for a crew of four or
five persons: two pilots, a flight engineer (on the right), a mechanical engineer
(on the left), then, in the center, a fifth member of the flight crew. Instrumen-
tation is very traditional, but it is reminiscent of the cockpit of an aircraft
(or of a helicopter) in the 1960's.

The announced performance does not exceed a reasonable average. The machine brought

to Le Bourget is a prototype. The degree of vibration is said to be very satis-
factory, owiag to the 8-b1aded rotor.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060003-8

2007/02/09:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can
.oon.o

man

now
ooo.o~
ooo.o~
ooo.on
con.oe
oo~.m~

uo¢.~H x N

0.5
us.nn
a
cow
Nn

 

o~uuz

oco.nn
can

oom.n
oe~
ooa

ooo.mn
ooo.no~
coo.hm

cow.o x ¢

0:0:
oo.nn
m x a
o~o.H
N x mm

«Aida

nan

ooc.n
own

ooo.na

ooo.wn
owo.e~
oon.o x ~
m.o
ca.~n
n
coo
an

 

sauna:
unannouﬁnoz

oco.~H
on“
coo.n
on”
can
coo.”
ooo.n~
oo~.ne
ooo.on
con.-
con.n x a
n.o
ou.~n
m
com
mm

 

Gala:

.uuouua cow.a

ona.~
ooo.o
o~o
con.¢
onN
can
coo.o
ooo.~H
con.~«
con.oq
oq~.h~
oom.n x N

"noouuo vasouw ovaauao .mu«u¢>om «

 

Annouulo~asv owed» hunch
Anﬁnnuouaxv vuoahua

nu“: Annouoaoawxv «mans

Annouuav wauuaou oua>uom

AmpaonxauouQEOHHsv coon» wcuausuu

AuuaosxnuOuuaoHuxv voonu aaaanuz

Aaaaumoﬂﬁxv maﬁa» gag: “swan:

Auaauuoaaxv vooaaum

Aqauuwoauxv uzwwu: Hugo» luauxn:

Aneuuwoaasv gnaw»: Hauou guano:

AuaaumoHuxv hunﬁu u£mw03

Anonoaomuonv nose; vanaaumun

n6 A3385 A325 355 02:33.8. no .3333.—

mH.nn
n
ooo
nn

Ola!

A3385 gunned. vacuum...“—
nooug «0 non—3:2

A332. 3363 noun 2.03m
Auhﬂugv hOuOh NO humus-”HO

now>0m quwo mo occaBuOMHum vcw nuuuuwnOuuano

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060003-8

2007/02109:

APPROVEDFORRELEASE
FOR OFFICIAL USL ONLY

 

Above, primary 2-dinensiona1 plan of the new helicopter; below, the pilot's
cabin offers remarkable visibility, thanks to its large vertical windows.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

The Mi-26 prototype photographed at Le Bourget. There it unloaded a
nousetrailer, used day and night.

 

Detail of the system of variable pitch of the anticouplc rotors.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Above the fuselage: inspection of the main rotor
shaft and the engine installation.

A.& C.,1980

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HISUELLANHJUS

PILOT PNEUMATIC CONTAINER TRANSPORT SYSTDI OUTLINE)
Moscow PRCMYSHLENNYY TRANSPWT in Russian No 3, Her 81 p 15

[Article by A. H. Aleksandrov and Yu. A. Tsinbler ("Tranwrogresf Special Design
Bureau, Moscow): "The 'Lilo-Z' In Action")

[Text] Re have already written in our magazine (No 9, 1977)
of scientific research and experimental design work in the
field of pneunatic pipe container transport (:91) carried
out by the "Transprogress" m [Special Design Bureau] in
the 10th Five-Year Plan. Since then tests have been con-
ducted at test sites and on stands which have made it pos-
sible to finalize the design and basic technological solu-
tions of elements of the first generation pf pneunatic
container transport systems for carrying bulk freight
through pipelines 1.220 millineters in diameter. The
theoretical basis for gas dynsnic computation of the new
transport systena and methods to be employed have been
verified.

M types of experinental pneumtic container transport (m) installations have.-
been developed over the last few years:

One is 600 In in dianeter and is meant to be used to transport parts and other
freight packaged in containers capable of carrying 1.00 kilograms each snd of
being handled in trains of several units;

The other system he a cross section of 200 X 600 m and is intended for deliver-
ing books,_ documents. small parts, tools, netsl items. samples, and to on, in con-
tainers with a capacity of up to 25 kg.

Currently two machine-building plants are operating 600-1]. pneunstic container
systems designed by the ”kansprogress" special design bureau.

The KPTZB system went into operation in Tul' skaya Oblast in 1979. The first sec-
tion of the m2 ("Lilo-2") system went into operation in the Georgian SSR at the
end of 1980. It is the world's largest dual-pipe pneunstic container transport
systen. Its pipes are 1,220 millimeters in diameter. and they are used to haul
gravel over a distance of 17.5 kilometers free a quarry in Shulsveri settlement to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a plant which manufactures reinforced concrete structural elements in the town of
Marneuli. There are three trains running on the line, each made up of eight con-
tainers and two pneumatic locomotives. The number of trains will be gradually
increased to 12. The loaded trains are driven to Harneuli by two air impeller
stations, and the empty trains are returned back to the quarry by one station.

The stations are equipped with TV175-1.6 air impellers built by the “Uzbekkhimmash”
plant in Chirchik. Each station has five ZSO-Rilowatt units. Distance between the
trains is regulated by means of bypass devices built into the pipeline.

Maintenance and repairs of the rolling stock are carried out at a technical main-
tenance section at the loading station, equipped with special ducts to position
the trains for repairs and with pipe sections to house them when not in operation.

New techniques and methods of cleaning trash, dirt and scale from inside the pipes
were successfully employed in the first section of the pipeline.

When the second section goes into operation the system's handling capacity will
increase to 2 million tons, with 1.8 million tons of gravel being hauled over a
distance of 37.7 kilometers to Tbilisi, and 0.22 million tons going to the Harneuli
plants. The project, which was developed jointly with the "Gruzgiprovodkhoz"
institute, provides for a third section of the system, which will incorporate a
new quarry at Imiri settlement. The total length of the "Lilo-2" will reach 41.3
kilometers. It will eventually have 26 trains in operation (one train delivering
30 tons of gravel to the unloading station every 6.6 minutes).

The pneumatic container transport system will yield an economic effect of 3.5
million rubles per year. and it will free 265 dump—trucks for other purposes.
Haulage costs will be 1.05 rubles per ton (as compared with 3.3 rubles per ton by
motor transport).

The system will operate in an automatic mode at all stages. Processes are moni-
tored and controlled by a special telemechanical system developed by the
"Promavtonatika" Scientific Production Association in Groznyy.

Extensive introduction of pneumatic container transport systems in the economy
continues to be a difficult problem. Costs and construction time have been pushed
up considerably by the persistent practice of contracting nonspecialized machine-
building plants and construction and installation organizations to carry out the
necessary work. The experience acquired in setting up the KPT 28 and "Lilo-2"
systems also confirms this.

The "Transprogress" Special Design Bureau is expanding its operations as a
specialized design and development agency. As such it is already engaging, albeit
on a small scale, in building and installing specialized equipment for pneumatic
container transport systems. In the future it is planned to set up a building.
installation and starting-up administration under the auspices of the Special
Design Bureau. It would have local sections as well as a central repair depot and
a production training center. This will make it possible to accelerate the intro-
duction of pneumatic container transport systems.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE; ONLY

 

Schematic Diagram of the ”Lilo-2" Pneumatic Container Transport System.

1. Air impeller station. 2. Unloading station in Tbilisi. 3. Unloading station
at Harneuli plant. 4. Pipeline for empty trains. S. Bypass devices. 6. Sliding
gates. 7. Shunting points. 8. Pipeline for loaded trains. 9.Loading station

at Shulaveri quarry. 10. Moveable ducts. 11. Pipe sections for parking trains.

12. Repair ducts. 13. Loading station at Imiri quarry.
Key:
1. First section

2. Second section
3. Third Section

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Transport," "Promyshlennyy transport," 1981

9681
cso: 1829/337

END

10

INJR‘OF1WC1AI.IJSEZ(MNLN